p3640 11893410 50471
THE HISTORY of the WARRES of the Emperour IƲSTINIAN in VIII. Bookes Of the Persian. II Vandall. II Gothicke. IV Written in Greeke by PROCOPIƲS OF CAESAREA. & Englished by HEN: HOLCROFT KT.
THE HISTORY OF THE VVARRES Of the Emperour JUSTINIAN IN EIGHT BOOKS. Of the Persian, II. Vandall, II. Gothicke, IV. Written in Greek by PROCOPIƲS OF CAESAREA. AND Englished by Henry Holcroft, Knight. LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the Prince's Armes in St Pauls Church-yard. 1653.
The Preface. AMidst the throng of Historians, we have very few who were personally concerned in the actions they write of: few having, like Caesar, wrote their own Commentaries: Nay, the greatest part were not then in be∣ing; and so their Reports are but Conjectures, and their Books, transmitted to Posterity, are their Divination ra∣ther than their History. And, alass, those few who were Contemporary to their own story, how biased are their Traditions! how are they commonly so faction'd and sided, that their Relations are but their Interests; deliver∣ing downwards not what they knew; but what they in∣clined to. And if any one amongst them be so unbiased, that he have no partial bent of his own, yet the awe which Princes or Generals have upon him, makes him many times fear, that his Truth shall be his Gaol, or Exile; all which considering, the wary Author writes not a History, but his own Safety. But Procopius (as every one knows) was not onely alive in the times which he wrote of, but did for many yeares survive not onely the finishing of his History, but the publication also; and was a very material concer∣ned Agent in all these Wars. And for his Impartial writing, take first his own word for it, where he saies about the be∣ginning of all, , &c. He conceived indeed that Elo∣quence was decent in an Oratour, and that Poets might be excu∣sed for their Fables, but an Historian must vent nothing but Truth: And then he goes on; Wherefore he hath not spared his dearest friends, and be their faults committed upon what terms they will, he fails not to charge them home with them. But if his own assertion will not serve the turn, goe but along
with him in his History, and thou shalt see, that (while Agathias and Epiphanensis, two learned Writers, about the same time with Procopius, who if they chance to let any thing fall to the discredit of Justinian, or the Senators, they do it with exceeding great temper and caution, were yet fain to conceal their Commentaries with Mauritius the Emperour) Procopius freely layes about him, sweetens no mans vices, cloaks no mans miscarriage, but impartially di∣scoursing of Justinian, and the great ones, doth as much ar∣raign, as relate them to posterity. He severely indites John the Pretorian Prosect of flat impiety, Tribomanus the Questor of grating avarice, Arethas the General for his deceitfull and faithless wit; and then he recounts the particular Bands of Souldiers, the several Garrisons and Cities, which became either a prey to the enemy, or were utterly de∣stroyed by the base and unworthy demeanour of Bessas, A∣cacius, and the other Questor. He solemnly rebukes Verus for his intemperance, Sergius for his haughty disdain and effeminacy, Maximinus for his sloth, and his general igno∣rance in Martial affairs. And which is yet much more than all the rest, the gallant Belisarius, whose wise and valiant conduct (to omit his many other glorious atchievements) did reduce two Kings, and brought them captives to Con∣stantinople, and to whose fame and renown the whole Hi∣story seems to be one entire Sacrifice, did but once manage his affairs amiss, and he hears sharply of it from Procopius; , &c. Belisarius then returned to Constantinople with disrepute; for during five whole years together, he could gain no footing in Italy, but in all that time was forced to waft himself by stealth from one Port-town to ano∣ther; whereupon the enemy did subdue both Rome her self, & all other places with greater security. And as for Perusia, a chief City in Tuscany, he left it straitly besieged, and it was after∣wards taken by the enemy, whilst he marcht for Constantino∣ple. Nor doth Justinian himself escape his chastisement; for he often inculcates his unworthy deteining the Souldi∣ers pay, his sleepy neglect of Military preparations, and his profuse reception of the vilest Barbarian, Isdigunas the Persian Ambassadour. How he handles his vices else∣where, concerns not our present purpose; but evident it is,
that all the countenance and indulgence, all the promo∣tions and advancements (hereafter mentioned) bestowed upon him by the Emperour, were looked upon by Proco∣pius, as encouragements to serve, not slatter his Prince; and as the rewards of his Loyalty, not the bribes of his Secre∣sie. And all this did Procopius publish, the parties them∣selves being then alive. Which severity of his, as it cannot chuse but reconcile a great opinion and commendation of his veracity, so is it no emergency of hatred or calumny, but of clear dealing and integrity; not his Satyr against the Persons, but his just remorse for the Vices. But though Procopius did publish this History in his own life time, yet it hath since been the fate of this (as Nicolaus Alemannus observes, not of this onely, but of all the other writings of this worthy Author) to be exposed maime, and mangled to the world. For though it was at first presented to Justinian the Roman Emperour by Procopius himself, and by him also dispersed in its native integrity, whereby it became the delight and darling of the whole Empire; Yet this happiness befell it for many hundred years before Printing was known. For the first man that committed it to the Press, was Leonardus Aretinus, who published that part of it which doth relate to the Gothick Wars; and in that also he put a trick upon the World, much misbeseem∣ing so learned a man; for he quite suppressed the Greek copy, and concealing the right Authors name, set forth a Latine Translation of his own, pretending it to be a Col∣lection compiled by himself out of several Writers, and stiling it De Bello Italico, A Tract concerning the Wars of Italy. Now the Greek Copy of this Translation of Aretinus doth Blondus Flavius recount to have been by his indu∣stry first brought into Italy. But he for his part, since his copy wants some passages, of which we are now provi∣ded, and seeing he inveighs against some things which we find to be currante and justifiable, in those Editions which are abroad; was either deluded by the old Manuscript which he had by him, or else by the person who translated it for him. For he might very wel have forborn his censure, seeing he confesses himself to be altogether ignorant in the Greek Tongue. Christophorus Persona resenting the injury
done to Procopius by that Addition of Leonardus, did in∣deed restore him to his right again, calling the Book by his name, and translating it out of the Original Greek. And yet his Edition also is lame and infirm, being deprived of many parts. After all these, Raphael Volateranus did publish in Latine the remaining Books, namely of the Vandal and Per∣sian Wars; but he also made use of as imperfect a Copy as Persona did. So that neither of them, though they were both Library-keepers of the Vatican in Rome, did translate out of the Vatican Copy. And now, Reader, since the imposture of some, and the ignorance or misfortune of others, hath till of late deliver∣ed this Author to posterity either as a spurious issue, or at best a cripple; Consider how much thou art indebted to the memory of the deceased Knight, the learned Transla∣tor; who hath been so carefull to hand it over to thee, not onely rendred in thy own language, that so thou mayest the better understand it; but also conferred and examined by the most Authentick Copies, that so thou mayst the safer credit it. The Greek Edition which he hath transla∣ted for thee, is that of David Hoeschelius, who being about to set forth this History, did first furnish himself with three several Manuscripts of the same Book; one out of the Duke of Bavaria's Librarie, the other two sent him by Joseph Scaliger, and Isaac Casaubon, both which had undergone their judicious Masters Castigations before. Hoeschelius made choice of the Bavarian Copy, finding it the most per∣fect and entire of the three. But so, as where ever he met with any various Readings in the other two, he hath pla∣ced them in the Margin. In the Translation of these Books of Procopius into Eng∣lish, Sir Henry Holcroft doth exercise the same judicious li∣berty which Alemannus takes to himself, in rendring the Arcana Historia, written by the same Author, into Latine; not confining himself to the strict words of the Author (a course taken even by St. Jerom himself) but giving faith∣fully his sense and meaning: Well knowing, that all Lan∣guages have their peculiar Idioms, which being rendred word by word, would make a strange confusion, and im∣propriety in that Language into which they are cast. And
though the Learned Knight be not (as I have sayd) so im∣pertinently punctual to match the Author word by word, yet the Reader may be assured, that he hath most severely pursued his intentions; so that if Procopius were now alive, and skilled in our Language, it would never repent him, that his Book speakes English. And though I shall not (with Alemannus) charge Procopius himself with the impu∣tation of Tautologies, and too prodigal Periphrases (al∣lowing much to the luxuriance of the Greek tongue) yet I can safely ascertain the Reader, he shall find this discourse far more contract and close, than in the Author himself; and so his expectation shall not linger so long, e'r it be sa∣tisfied with the Events: And that nevertheless, he shall perceive no Material, nor Circumstance omitted: As the Logicians confined Fist doth strike as smart, and as tho∣rough a blow, as the diffused Orators expanded Palm. Where the injury of Time, or neglect of Transcribers hath left any breach, or Chasm in the Greek Copy (which in several places of this History doth unhappily befall) the knowing Translator hath supplyed the defect out of the Latine copies. And where the Translator himself hath suffered any impair, or casually committed some mistakes, they are both relieved by the able pen of Mr. Edmund Chil∣mead, by his exact comparing of the English with the Greek. I shall now proceed to acquaint the Reader with some farther account of the Author, and this History. Procopius was born in Caesarea, a City of Palestine, and in the reign of Anastasius the Emperour came to Constaminople; where approving himself a person of excellent parts, general Learning, and exceeding great Prudence, he soon turned the eyes of the chiefest Romans upon him. Insomuch that Justine the elder, when his Empire was in very great streights (the Persians being then Victors over the Romans in War) did prefer Procopius to Belisarius the General, to be of his Counsel. Suidas stiles him , Secretary to Beli∣sarius; but He himself, who best knew his own employ∣ment, tels us about the beginning of the Persian History; that he was , Belisarius his Assessor. What profession he was of before he arrived at this, and other places of trust and honour, is variously delivered by several Au∣thors.
Evagrius, and Agathias call him , Oratorem; Suidas, . To explain which words, saith Hoesche∣lius, Ille est Orator, qui causas in concione, in foro, in senatu agit; hic Latinis Rhetor, qui in scholis docet artem Oratori∣am. Him the Latines call an Orator, who pleads at the Barre; and him a Rhetorician, who teaches the art of Rhetorick in the Schooles. Blondus, and Sabellicus conceit he was a Physitian: But the three former are doubtless so far in the right, as they all agree that he was , an Orator, or Lawyer, and that by reason of his employment under Belisarius. For, as Alemannus judiciously observes, Ex eo ordine  Consi∣liarii, &  Assessores, exercitus ducibus summisque Magi∣stratibus dabantur. Counsellors and Assessors were preferred to the Generals of Armies, and chief Magistrates, out of that Profession. The reason why some Authors are of so diffe∣rent judgment in their opinions concerning the Profession of Procopius, may possibly be, because there were three of that name, Procopius Gazaeus, Procopius Sophista, and our Procopius Caesariensis: Now the truth is, the two for∣mer are both called Sophistae, Rhetoricians, and Gazaei too, being both of Gaza; and all three were likewise Country∣men; both Gaza, and Caesarea being in Palestine. The first of these, and ours, lived both in Justinians time; by whom Procopius, our Author, was not only continued in his em∣ployment under Belisarius, being never permitted upon any terms, either in the expeditions into Italy or Africa, to be removed from the General, but was prized at so high a rate, that Justinian did conceive the Roman Territories were as much established, and propagated by the integrity and advise of Procopius, as by the valour and prowess of Belisarius. And no sooner was Belisarius called out of A∣frica, upon his late Victories compleated there, but Proco∣pius was sent to Carthage to Solomon, the then General, to secure those parts; which being but newly subdued, were therefore capable of Revolt and Rebellion against the Roman subjection. What employments he had in Persia, I∣taly, Rome, Naples, and Syracuse, himself discovers in this History; which several actions of his, though he mentions very modestly, and by the by onely, as if he reputed them scarce worthy the relation; yet sure we are, they purchased
for him so great renown in the Common-wealth, that Ju∣stinian did thereupon advance him to the dignity of those persons who the Romans did call Illustres; & hence it is that Suidas begins his account of Procopius, , &c. Procopius Illustris of Caesarea in Palestine. After this he was preferred to be a Senator also, & at last having put forth all this History, he arrived at the highest dignity that can befall any Senator, namely ad Ʋrbanam Praefecturam, to be Prefect of the City; and this was about the 25. of Justi∣nians Reign. About which time he finished that Book, which he durst not then publish, and therefore calls it, , his Secret History. And now Justinian, having for (near upon) seventeen years together delighted himself in having this History of his Wars divulged, and read by all the Na∣tions subject to the Roman Scepter, enjoyned our Author to write that Book which he calls , Of the Buildings erected by the Emperour Justinian. These are the known Books of Procopius, two whereof being not to our present purpose (though Sir Henry hath (as I am informed by those that should know) translated the , or Secret History (a book which none of the Anci∣ents met with, but Suidas only, as appears by Evagrius, A∣gathias, Epiphanensis, Simeon Metaphrastes in vita S. Sabae, Porphyrius, and Photius in his Bibliothecâ as neither many other Learned men who wrote since Suidas, as Zonaras, Ce∣drenus, Anonymus in his Chronicon Vatican. & others, amongst whom was Cardinal Baronius, who could never attain the sight of it, though he much desired it & to my own know∣ledge, Agathias his History, who takes up the story, where Procopius leavs off: All which may see the light, kind Reader, if thy acceptation of this encourage their Impression) that is, the , and that , we shall not here ren∣der an account of. This History was by the Author divi∣ded into 8 books; 7 of them, namely those two concerning the Persian, those other two of the Vandal, & the three first of the Gothick War, as himself affirms in the fourth book, , were already divul∣ged and known throughout all the Roman Dominions. But as to the certain time wherein they were severally publish∣ed, Writers afford us no certainty. Yet this is most certain,
that the books of the Persian and Vandal Wars, and a great part of the books of the Gothick, were finished before the death of Theodora the Empress, that is, before the 22 year of Justinians reign: for in his  he writes, that he was enforced in this History to conceal the trains which Theodo∣ra laid to destroy Amalasuntha, Queen of the Goths, for fear of Theodora. And likewise our Author makes mention of the publication of all the first seven books, before the 26 of Justinians Reign, in his eighth book of these Wars; which book was written in the 27 of Justinians Reign. But this eight book is not so properly called the fourth of the Gothick Wars, because it is indeed Historia quaedam , Miscella, as Alemannus stiles it; or as the Author him∣self, , Varia, a Miscellanie, or History conteining the Wars of Justinian with divers Nations. And this eighth book was published about the very time wherein it was written, viz. in the 27 of Justinians Reign. To conclude, what great profit and delight is like to arise to the Reader in perusing this History, let himself imagine, when he shal meet here with Prudent Letters & Dispatches from Princes and Generals; Wise Laws and Provisions for the publique Safety; Politick Leagues and Confederacies to secure Interests; Elegant Speeches and Exhortations to animate the Souldier; Notable Examples of Vices and Vir∣tures; Inevitable Stratagems to circumvent Adversaries: Lively Descriptions of the Scituations of Countries, Cities, Buildings, Hils, Seas, Rivers, and Fountains; Various and In∣terchangeable Turns and Inconstancies of Wars and For∣tunes; in a word, all the Treasury and Wardrobe that can inrich and beautifie a History. Take one only remarkable passage concerning the last, in that City, which had been long the aim and envy of the world, Rome her self. Alaricus the Goth gains her from the Romans; Genserick the Vandal doth force her from the Goths; Theodorick the Goth regains her to the Goths; Belisarius the Roman General from the Goths: Totilas the Goth from the Romans again: Belisarius receives her sackt and forsaken by the Goths: Totilas tri∣umphs in her second Conquest: Narses the Eunuch sub∣dues both Tolilas and her. So that in this very History, she is eight several times lost, and recovered.
The Contents of the Chapters of the first Book of the PERSIAN Warre. CHAP. I. THe preamble of the Author, and of the Roman Archery then. CHAP. II. Theodosius the second left to the protection of Isdegerdes, King of Persia. The warre of Vararanes, King of Persia, accorded by Anatolius; That neither build fortifications upon the others frontier. Perozes, King of Persia, makes warre upon the Ephthalite Hunnes, and is beaten. CHAP. III. Perozes breaking his oath, is destroyed in a pit with his 29. Sonns by the Eph∣thalites. Of a strange pearle. His Son Cabades succeeds; is deposed for making women common by a Law: and imprisoned in the tower of Oblivion. CHAP. IV. A digression of the breach of the law of the tower of Oblivion once, and the tra∣gicall death of Arsaces King of Armenia, in the reigne of Pacurius. Cabades es∣capes by the meanes of his wife and Seoses; Recovers the Kingdom by the aid of the Ephthalites. CHAP. VI. Captaines sent by Anastasius. By their negligence and disunion, the Romans are overthrown. The plot upon Glones, Governour of Amida, and his killing. The re∣covery of Amida for money. CHAP. VII. Anastasius refuses the Caspian gates for the charge. The Persians take them, and maintain the Garrison against the Hunnes. Anastasius builds Datas, and forti∣fies Theodosiopolis, contrary to the accord with Anatolius. Justine is Emperour, whom Cabades would have to adopt Chosroes. Photius the Quaestor opposes it. A treatie of peace without effect. Stoses ungratefully ruined. CHAP. VIII. Cabades warring against the Iberians, Christians; Their King flies into Lazica; And some Iberians to Constantinople. Belisarius and Sittas invade Persarme∣nia. Justinian is Emperour alone. CHAP. IX. Belisarius, Generall of the East, is Commander of the Army, with Hermogenes. The duells of Andrew, master of a Wrestling Schoole in Constantinople, and his vi∣ctories; Letters between Belisarius and Hermogenes, and Mirranes the Persian Generall. CHAP. X. The battell of Daras, and the overthrow of the Persians, by Belisarius and Her∣mogenes. CHAP. XI. A Persian army under Mermeroes invades Armenia. The victory of Sittas against 30000. Persians. Pharangium delivered to the Romans by Simeones, to get the Persians gold mine there; And Bolus by Isaac a Persarmenian, brother to Narses and Aratius, lately revolted to the Romans, Sittas subdues the Tzani∣ans, a Nation by Mount Taurus and Armenia.
CHAP. XII. Expostulation of Cabades with Rufinus the Roman Ambassador. The Persi∣ans invade the Romans hy Comagena, called uphratesia; ever formerly having invaded by Mesopotamia. The heads and courses of the Euphrates and Tigris. The golden Comana in Cappadocia built by Orestes, and the Temple of Diana in Tauri. CHAP. XIII. This invasion by Comagena, is by the counsell of Alamundarus, a Saracen King, who perswades to set upon Syria and Antioch: The description of Alamundarus. CHAP. XIV. Belisarius in Comagena is overthrown by Azarethes, the Persian Generall. Ca∣bades reviles Azarethes, for his victory. The Persian custom to know their lost men by arrowes in baskets. CHAP. XV. Justinian would associate the Homerites, and Ethiopians against the Persians. Of the red Sea; Country of Palme-trees. The Auxomites, Blemmyes, Nobates, Ethiopian Nations. CHAP. XVI. A digression of some warrs between the Ethiopians, Christians, and the Home∣rits. Aspevedes, and Mermeroes invade the Romans. Sittas defends. They be∣siege Martyropolis. CHAP. XVI. Cabades dyes. Chosroes his yongest Son succeeds by the help of Mebodes. The siege of Martyropolis is raised. The perpetuall peace is made Anno 6. Justiniani; for which Justinian gives 110. Centenaries of gold. CHAP. XVIII. A conspiracy against Chosroes by his brother Zames withone eye, who perishes in the plot. The saving of yong Cabades by Adergudunbades, is the cause of his ruine. Mebodes, by Chosroes sent to the Tripos, and after slaine. CHAP. XIX. The Mutiny in Constantinople of the Veneti, and Prasini, called Nica, sup∣pressed by Belisarius. The character of John the Cappadocian, Prefect of the Pa∣lace, and Tribonianus, the Quaestor. CHAP. XX. John the Cappadocian is ruined by the plot of Antonina in the tenth yeare of his office. Is banisht to Cyzicum, made Priest; them absolutely undone, and sent to Antinoë in Egypt. And about this time another John, usurping at Daras, is slaine by the Souldiers.
THE HISTORY Of the Wars of the EMPEROƲR JUSTINIAN, Written by Procopius of CAESAREA. Of the Persian Wars. The First Book. CHAP. I. PROCOPIUS of CAESAREA wrote the History of the wars that the Emperour Justinian had with the Barbarians, both Easterne and Westerne, and what the issue of them was; that the memory of so great Actions might not, through Tract of Time, be buried in Oblivi∣on, and lost to the Word; The preservation whereof he conceived might be of very great use, both to those that are now living, and to those that shall come after; in case that time should againe bring about the necessity of the like actions in any part of the World. For, the knowledge of a like History, suiting with that of any other Age, is of great advantage to those that shall have to doe with any Wars; in that it informes, what the success in the like former Actions hath been, and intimates withall what issue the present, (supposing the best Coun∣sells being taken) in all probability shall have. He was conscious also to himselfe, that He was the best able to write this History; though for no other reason, yet because He was chosen to be Assessor to Belisarius, the Emperours Generall, and so was present, in a manner, at all that was done in these Wars. He conceived further, that as Eloquence became an Oratour, & Fables were proper for Poets, so Truth was that an Historiographer ought chiefely to look at. Therefore he spared not to note the Failings even of his nearest Friends, but gave an exact Account of all their Actions, whether they were well, or ill done. Neither will the Actions of any other Age appeare either of more use, or more Gallant, (to him that shall but duely consider them) then those that have passed in these Wars; for in most of them, as wee have been informed, almost Miracles have been done. Ʋnless a man will needes give the preemi∣nence to former Ages, and will not vouchsafe to allow his owne to be able to doe any thing.
And therefore as in our Armies now we have some Archers, others Sword and Buckler-men, and the like names of Souldiers that the Ancients had; yet will not some allow any of the Ancient Prowess and Valour to have descend∣ed down to our Age; shewing herein how pittifully ignorant they are of the Practise of those times. For they doe not at all consider, that the Archers in Homer's time (whose Profession grew to be a tearm of reproach) had neither Horse, nor Javelin, nor Buckler, nor any thing else to defend themselves, but went on foot into the field, and were forced to find shelter for themselves some other way, sheltering themselves (instead of a Buckler) either behind some Tomb-stone, or Pillar, where neither if they were put to flight, they could be safe; nor, if their Enemies fled, could they do them any harm: Nei∣ther did they ever fight in open field, but alwaies, as it were, by stealth did, what ever they did. Besides, the way of their Archery was so lamentable, as that drawing their Bow-string to their breast, they so let their Arrow fly, which, in all probability, could not doe any execution at all, wheresoever it fell. And this was the manner of the ancient Archery. But our Archers now adaies go into the field, armed with Habergeons, and Greaves that come up as high as their knees. They have besides their Quiver of Arrows on their right side, and a Sword on their left; and some of them have a Javelin also fast∣ned about them, and a kind of short Buckler, as it were, but without any handle, made fast to their shoulders, which serves to defend their head and neck. They are also excellently well horsed; and though their horses run never so fast, they can with case shoot either way, and annoy their Enemies, either pursuing them, or flying. Besides, they draw their Bow-string toward their Forehead, up to the right Ear, which gives such force to the Arrow, that where it lights it kils, no Shield nor Corslet being able to resist the violence. Some, considering none of these things, onely reverence and ad∣mire the old times, not allowing any advantage to succeeding inventions. But all can be no impediment, but that in these Wars great exploits, and most famous have been done. First therefore, beginning a little higher, shall be declared, what happened between the Romans and Persians, in reference both to their Victories and Losses in these Wars. CHAP. II. WHen the Roman Emperour Arcadius drew near his decease in Constan∣tinople, having a Son, Theodosius, not yet weaned from the breast: He was troubled both for him, and his Empire, how to provide for both. If he should give Theodosius a companion in the Empire, he feared in effect he might prove his Sons Murtherer, setting an Enemy upon him armed with soveraign power; and if he should leave him alone in it, it was likely some taking ad∣vantage of his desolate condition might usurp the Empire, and destroy him. In Constantinople he had none of his blood to be his Protector; and in Hono∣rius the Uncle, he had no hope he could suffice for it; the Affairs of Italy be∣ing in so ill terms. The Persians no less troubled him, lest despising the Em∣perors childhood, they should ruin the Roman Provinces. Arcadius in this perplexity, though none of the quickest Wits, yet lighted upon a Counsell which preserved him and his State, whether it were by communication with Wisemen, which an Emperour cannot want, or by divine Inspiration. For by his Testament he declared his Son his Successor, and Isdegerdes, K. of Persia, his Protector; whom he besought with his whole power and providence, to preserve both his Empire and Son. And thus Arcadius having disposed of the Empire, and his private Affairs,Anno Domini 398. died. Isdegerdes, before renowned for Nobleness, now shewed it more than ever, to deserve wonder and praise: For not neglecting the Injunctions of Ar∣cadius, he kept perfect peace with the Romans, and preserved the Empire to Theodosius: by his Letters to the Roman Senate accepting the Protectorship, and threatning War against any that should rise against Theodosius: Who
grown a man, and Isdegerdes dead,Vararanes begin  in Anno Dom. 423. Vararanes King of Persia invaded the Roman Territories with a great Army; but did no hurt, returning in this manner. Anatolius was sent the Emperors Ambassador to the Persian, who being come near the Army, leaped from his Horse, and alone, and afoot, went towards Vararanes, who demanded of the company, who this was; they said, it was the Roman General. The King amazed at the excessive ho∣nour, turned his horse, and rode away, and after him his Army. Being in his Country, he entertained the Ambassador with much curtesie, and yeelded to the terms of peace he desired, That neither should erect any new Fortification near the others boders; which if it were done, gave either side opportunity of doing what they pleased. Afterwards Perozes, King of Persia,Perozes be∣gan in Anno 457. with a great Army warred against the Ephthalites (a Nation of Hunnes, called white Hunnes) about their Boun∣daries. These Ephthalites are a Hunnish Nation, but not mingled with o∣ther Hunnes, having no part of their Country bordering upon them; their dwelling being to the North of Persia, where is a City called Gorgo; and some skirmishing about bounds they have, being no , so called because they have no fixt habitation, but move from place to place, carrying their families in waggons, and driving their flocks & heards before them, as the need of fresh pasture requires. Creaghters, as other Hunnes; but are seated in a good Land; Neither make they any Inroads in∣to the Roman Territories, but onely with the Persian Armies. These onely Hunnes have white bodies, and visages not uncomely; and their course of life is not as of the rest, brutish; being under one King in a lawfull govern∣ment, and dealing justly with themselves and neighbours, no less than the Romans, or any other people. Their Rich men have each twenty or more companions, to be their perpetual Camerades, and to partake in a commu∣nity of their goods. When any Principals die, the Retainers use to be put into the same grave with them. Perozes invading these Ephthalites, Eusebius then Ambassador from the Emperor Zeno was with him. The Ephthalites made shew to be much affraid, and betook themselves to flight, and with much hast ran into a place compassed with steep mountains, and covered with thickets; between the mountains is a broad way, reaching far, with no way out, but still continuing in the same circle. Perozes suspecting no fraud, nor considering he went in a strange Country, pursued without looking a∣fore him; some few of them flying before him, but the most hiding them∣selves in the Fastnesses, who now had the back of the Enemy; and would not yet appear, that the Persians might be so far engaged within their Ambushes, and the Mountains, that they should not be able to retreat. Which the Per∣sians apprehending (the danger now beginning to appear) were silent for fear of Perozes, but they desired Eusebius to admonish the King (who saw not the ill terms he was come to) rather to advise upon some way to escape, than to hazard thus impertinently. Eusebius told not Perozes the danger, but this tale; That a Lion once spyed a Goat bleating, and tyed upon a bank, and ran to make his dinner of him, but fell into a deep hole, which had in it a round narrow path without any way out, framed purposely by the owners of the Goat, which they set over it, to bait the Lion into a snare. Perozes at this tale grew affraid, lest the Persians pursued their own mischief, and so went no further, but called a Council what to doe. The Hunnes now in sight, had guarded the entrance, that none might goe out. The Persians then cleer∣ly seeing the disaster, lamented; no hope appearing to avoid the danger. The King of the Ephthalites sent to reproach Perozes for his sensless rashness, in thus foolishly ruining himself and his people; but promised the Hunnes should grant them their lives, if Perozes would adore him (being now his Lord) and swear his Country oath, that the Persians should no more invade the Ephthalites. Perozes consulted with the Magi, whether these conditions were to be yeelded to; Who answered, that for the Oath he might doe what he pleased, but in the other he should delude the Enemy by a trick: They had a custom each morning to adore the rising Sun; that he observing duly the hour, should meet the King of the Ephthalites, with his face to the rising Sun, and so adore, avoyding by this the disgrace. Perozes accordingly swore the peace, and adored his Enemy, and then went home with his Army.
CHAP. III. BUt not long after Perozes, neglecting his Oath, resolved to revenge this scorn; and assembling from all his Dominions both Persians and Confe∣derates, he went against these Hunnes; of his thirty Sons leaving onely Caba∣des behind him, then grown a man. The Ephthalites hearing of it, and grie∣ving to be so deceived, reviled their King, for betraying their Affairs to the Persians. He smiling, demanded, what Affairs he had betrayed? whether their Country, or Arms, or Goods? They replyed, Nothing, but our oppor∣tunity, upon which all other things depend; urging him presently to goe meet the Enemy. But the refused, the Invasion being yet not certain, and the Persians still in their own Country; and staying where he was, he did this. Upon a Plain, through which the Persians were to enter his Country, he digg'd in a great space of ground a deep pit, extreme broad, leaving in the middle a narrow passage, for ten Horse a breast; over the pit he laid Reeds, and upon the Reeds Turfs, which concealed the superficies: And he directed his peo∣ple, running from the Enemy, to keep close, and few in rank upon the firm ground, and to beware of the pit. On his Royal Palace also he hung out his Halas, or Gods, by whom Perozes swore, and breaking his Oath, invaded now the Hunnes. While the Enemy were in their own Country, he stirred not, but hearing by his Scouts, they were come to Gorgo (being in the ut∣most border of Persia) and marching toward him; himself with most of his Army stayd short of the pit, sending out some to shew themselves upon the Plain at a good distance, and no sooner seen by the Enemy, but to retreat a∣main, remembring the pit. They did so, and (at the pit going few in rank) came clear to the Army. The Persians not imagining the plot, pursued fu∣riously upon full speed, it being in an open Plain, and so fell into the pit, not onely the foremost of them, but the rear also; for pursuing furiously, they perceived not the mischief of those in the front, but falling on them with Horses and Lances, killed them, and were destroyed for company. A∣mong whom was Perozes, and all his Sons. They say, being ready to fall in∣to this pit, he took a Pearl hanging at his ear, a most fair one, and of infinite value, and cast it away, that none might hereafter wear so beautifull a Piece, as no King was ever master of the like; but to me the report seems not pro∣bable, for one in such a suddain distress to have his mind upon ought else. I rather think his car was cut off, and the Pearl conveighed away. The Roman Emperor endeavoured to buy it of the Ephthalites, but they could not find it, though they took much pains in the search. Some say, they found it, and sold another to Cabades for it. The Persians story of this Pearl is remarkable, and not altogether incredible. They report, that this Pearl lying in a Scallop∣fish, not far from the Sea-shore in Persia, both the shels opened, and in the midst lay the Pearl, a most goodly spectacle: No where was found any thing to resemble it in bigness, or beauty, since the world was. Upon this beauty doted a huge fierce Dog-fish, following without quitting it day or night: Being to seek his food he would hunt for it, and having found it, snatch it up, and hastily devour it; then to his Scallop-fish again, to fill himself with that beloved sight. Which a Fisherman once observing, but fearing the Fish, he durst not venture on it, but made the relation to King Perozes, who there∣upon long'd to have the Pearl, importuning the Fisherman with fair words, and great hopes; and he yeelding to the requests of his Lord, is reported to have sayd to him; O my Liege, 'tis true, Wealth is desirable, and life more; but above all a mans children are precious; for whose sake nature forces a man to do any thing. I will venture upon this fish, and hope to make you master of this Peal. If I come off victorious, 'tis likely I shall be ranked a∣mong the happy men of the time. Doubtless you, being a King of Kings, will bestow great wealth on me. And should I get no reward, it is enough I have been my Prince's benefactor. If I be devoured, be it your part, Sir, to recom∣pence my children for their fathers death: So shall I have my reward
in those nearest to me; and your glory will be greater, doing good to me in my children, for which I cannot give you thanks. That onely is pure gratitude, which is shewen to the dead. Having thus said, he departed. Be∣ing at the place where the Scallop used to swim, and the Dog-fish to follow, he sate upon a Rock, watching to get the Pearl alone from her Lover. At last the Dog-fish finding a fish for his repast, fell aboard. The Fisherman left those who attended him, and making after the Scallop, caught it, and hasted to shore; which the Dog-fish perceiving, came to the rescue: The Fisherman, though not far from shore, finding he should be surprised, threw the Scallop on land, and presently was caught and devoured. His atten∣dants ashore took the Pearl, and brought it to the King, relating what hap∣pened. Thus the Persians report of this Pearl. But to return to my former discourse. Perozes and his Army thus overthrown (for who escaped the pit, fell into the enemies hand) the Persians made a Law; Not to follow the chase upon the full speed, though the enemy run away in that kind. As for the rest, that went not in this expedition, they chose for their King,Cabades be∣gan in Anno Domini 486. Cabades, the yong∣gest Son of Perozes, onely surviving. And they were under the Ephthalites two yeares, and paid them tribute; untill Cabades, more confirmed in his kingdome, refused it: who afterwards governed Tyrannically, and made ma∣ny Alterations, and a Law; That the Persians should have their women in common: which the Commons misliked, and taking arns deposed him, and kept him in prison, and chose Blasses King, the brother of Perozes, all his other Sons being dead: For of a private race the Persians might not chuse a King, if the blood Royal were not quite extinct. Blasses succeeding, assem∣bled the chief men of Persia, and propounded in counsell touching Cabades, whom the multitude would not endure to be put to death. Many severall opinions being spoken, Gusanastades, a principall man, and by Office a Chanaranges (which with them is a Generall) who had his govern∣ment bordering upon the Ephthalites, shewing his knife, such as the Persians use to pare their nails with, as long as a mans finger, and the third part of an inch thick; See this knife, said he, a very short one; yet can it doe that now, which within a while twenty thousand armed men will not be able: Intimating, that if they did not kill Cabades now, he would get abroad, and trouble them again. But they thought it not fit to kill one of the blood Royall, but rather to keep him in the Tower of Obli∣vion; where if a man be imprisoned, it is not lawfull to mention him; once to name him, is death; from whence the Persians gave it that name. CHAP. IV. THe Armenian Histories report, that once this Law of the Tower of Obli∣vion was broken, thus. There was a cruel War between the Persians and Armenians, for thirty two years, in the Reigns of Pacurius King of Persia, and Arsaces King of Armenia, of the race of the Arsacides. This war con∣tinuing, both were brought low, especially the Armenians. But being both distrustfull, neither sent Heralds to his adversary. In the mean time the Per∣sians fell into a war with other Barbarians, inhabiting near the Armenians; who to make demonstration of their affections to a peace, invaded those people, acquainting the Persians therewith; and coming unexpected, slew most of their men. Pacurius pleased with the proceeding, sent to invite Arsaces, giving him his faith. And being come, he entertained him with much curtesie, and as a brother, used him with all terms of equality: and having mutually sworn amity and confederacy between the Persians and Ar∣menians, he dismist him. A while after, Arsaces was accused to attempt innovations, and Pacurius beleeving it, again sent for him, to communicate of their common affairs. He without delay went, and with him the gal∣lantest Armenians, and Basicius his chief Captain and Counsellor, emi∣nent
for valour and wisdom. Pacurius reproached them both, for forgetting their Oath, and plotting a revolt. They denyed constantly with oaths, never to have any such thought. At first Pacurius, put them in hold with disgrace; but after demanded of the Magi what was to be done. They thought it not fit to condemn men denying, and not evidently convinced; but advised him a way, to bring Arsaces openly to accuse himself. They directed the Kings Pavillion to be floored with earth, half of Persia, and the other half of Arme∣nia; and having used some spel upon the Pavillion, they prayed the King to walk some turns with Arsaces in their presence, to be witnesses of what passed, and to charge Arsaces with violation of the league and his oath. Ac∣cordingly Pacurius sent for Arsaces, and walkt his turns with him in the pa∣villion, demanding, why neglecting his oath, he sought again to ruin the Persians and Armenians with a war. Arsaces (the conference being upon Per∣sian earth) denyed, and protested himself his faithfull servant: But when he came upon the Armenian ground, suddenly, I know not upon what compul∣sion, he changes into a bolder stile, menacing Pacurius to punish this base u∣sage. With these high terms he went, till he turned again upon the Persian ground; where recanting, he became an humble suppliant to Pacurius. But no sooner again upon Armenian ground, but he returned to his threats; and by turning thus oft both waies, he concealed not his secretest counsels. Upon this the Magi condemned him to have violated the truce, and his oath. Pa∣curius caused Basicius to be stript of his skin, and the same filled with chaf to be hanged on a high tree. Arsaces he would not kill, being of Royall blood, but imprisoned him in the Tower of Oblivion. Not long after an Ar∣menian, a favourite of Arsaces (who followed him this last journey into Per∣sia) accompanied the Persians in a war against some Barbarians, wherein he demeaned himself valiantly, and was a great means of the victory. Whom Pacurius bade demand what he pleased, and he should not fail of it. He de∣manded onely to doe service to Arsaces one day he would make choice of. The King was troubled to break a Law so ancient, but to keep his word, granted his request, who by the Kings permission being in the Tower, adored Arsaces; and both embracing each other, made a kind of sweet lamentation of their fortunes, with much adoe untwining themselves. Having had their fill of mourning, the Armenian bathed Arsaces, drest him, and put on him the Royall habit, and placed him upon a couch; where Arsaces feasted the company Princely, as he used before. Many discourses past in their cups, and things happened delighting Arsaces; and the drinking lasting till night, and much joying in each others company, they parted overwhelmed with contentment. Then they report that Arsaces said; That having spent this the merriest day he ever had, with him he loved most, he would no more return to the miseries of life, and then he stabbed himself with a knife purposely taken up at the Feast. Thus the Armenian Histories relate of Arsaces, and that Law of the Tower of Oblivion so broken. But to return to my matter. While Cabades was in prison, his Wife attended on him, bringing him necessaries, whom the Captain of the Tower tempted, being exceeding beau∣tifull. Which Cabades understanding from her, bade her yeeld to him. And the Captain getting her to his bed, became doting in love with her; giving her free access to her Husband, and to retire without impediment. There was also a Nobleman named Seoses, a great friend of Cabades, who watcht near the Tower for an opportunity to get Cabades out; who by his Wife ad∣vertised him of horses and men ready for him not far from the prison, and In what place. Cabades perswaded his Wife to let him have her garments, and to put on his, and stay in his lodging. So Cabades got clear of the pri∣son, the Keepers seeing him, but taking him for his Wife, and so they nei∣ther stayd, nor troubled him. In the morning finding the Wife in the Hus∣bands chamber and apparel, they took her for him; and the mistaking pre∣vailed some dayes, till Cabades was got far away. What became of the Lady, (the plot being discovered) and how they punisht her, I have no certainty,
the Persians therein not agreeing. But Cabades secretly with Seoses went to the Ephthalite Hunnes, and marrying their Kings daughter, brought an Army against the Persians; who finding themselves too weak, fled from the Hunns. Cabades coming where Gusanastades was Governour, said to some, that that Persian, which that day first came to offer his service, he would make Chana∣ranges. But he repented him of his words, remembring the Persian Law, for no Government to be conferr'd upon strangers in blood; but such onely to have the place, to whose race it did belong; and he feared, if any presented himself not of the kindred of the Chanaranges, that to keep his word he might violate the Law. But by chance his word was kept without injury to the Law; Adergudunbades appearing first, a young man, cosen to Gusanastades, and very expert in Martial affairs; who first saluted Cabades his Lord, adored him as King, and besought him to command him as his slave. *So Cabades en∣tring the Palace, and finding Blases unguarded, put out his eyes,Cabades re∣stored began Anno Domi∣ni 501. as the Per∣sians use to malefactors (pouring into them, being kept wide open, boyling oyle; or with a bodkin red hot melting an ointment into the inside of the eye) and ever after kept him in prison, after two years reigning Gusanastades he put to death, and made Adergudunbades General. Seoses he made the Adra∣sta-daras Salanes; that is, Superintendant over all Offices and Armies; an office first held by Seoses in Persia; None before nor after ever had it. Cabades also established and secured his Empire, being witty and valiant, no man more. CHAP. V. AFfterward Cabades became in debt to the King of the Ephthalites, which not being able to pay, he prayed the Emperour Anastasius to lend him the money. The Emperour consulting with some about him, they disswaded him from it; shewing what the inconvenience would be, if he should confirm with his money the Barbarians friendship among themselves; telling him withall. It were better for him they should ever clash with one another. * Upon this pretence onely, Cabades resolved to invad the Romans;This War began in Anno Dom. 503. and into Armenia he brought the first news himself with an Army, forraging the Country. Then, though in the Winter, he sate down before Amida, a City of Mesopotamia. The Amidenses, though having no Garrison (as having lived before peaceably and quietly) and wanting all manner of provision, yet stood out against the dangers and inconveniencies of the Siege. At that time one James, a Syrian, a just, and a very religious man, had for many years been a Recluse at Endielon, a Town distant from Amida a dayes journey, that so he might not be interrupted in his godly contemplations: And the neighbours, to help his good intent, had pitcht a pale about him, with spaces wide enough onely to see, and conferre with such as came to him; and a roof over him to keep off rain and snow. And there he had long continued, not yeelding to heats nor colds, and feeding on roots, and on them not every day, but fasting sometimes a good while together. Some Ephthalites scouring the Country, espyed this James, offered to shoot at him; but their hands sud∣dainly benummed, could not draw their bows. Cabades, hearing the report of it in the Camp, would be an eye-witness of the miracle; and seeing it, was astonisht, and all the Persians with him: he humbly therefore besought James to remit his mens offence; which he doing at the first word, they were instantly freed of their fears. Cabades then bade him demand something, thinking he would have askt some great sum. But he prayed him only to be∣stow on him such men, as in this war should come to him for protection: Which Cabades granted, and left him Letters for their assurance. And it be∣ing divulged, many from all parts came, and were preserved. But Cabades with his Rams battered Amida on every side, the defendants avoyding the stroak of the Engine with cross beams: And he gave not over, till he found the wall that way impregnable; as not falling, nor so much as
shaking at so many stroaks: So strong their buildings were in ancient times. Failing therefore this way, he raised a Mount, so high that it commanded the wall. To which the defendants drew a Mine from the Town, and by carrying out the earth from within the Mount, made it hollow, the outside keeping the form it had, giving no suspition of any thing to the Enemy. The Persians mounted it, thinking as upon firm ground to shoot into the Town; But company pressing in, the Mount sunk, and almost all perisht. Cabades, at this despairing, resolved to raise the siege, commanding the Army the next day to retire. But the Townsmen now secure, flouted the Barbarians from their walls; and some common women drew up their clothes, shewing Ca∣bades the parts which should not be seen by men. Upon this the Magi for∣bade his retreat, assuring the King that ere long the Amidenses would shew him all their secret and hidden things: So the Camp lay still. Some dayes after, a Persian found near one of the Turrets the mouth of an old Vault, onely with a few small stones covering it. He entered it a lone in the night, and got within the wall, and when 'twas day, came and told it Cabades; who the next night went with some of his Army, and scaling ladders to the place: where he had a favourable chance. The said Turret was guarded by Monks (the strictest kind of Christians) who that day observed an Annual Feast, and at night wearied in their solemn assembly, having taken a greater proportion of meat and drink than usuall, they perceived not the Enemy; who entring the Town by few at a time, ascended the Turret, and killed the Monks being fast asleep. Then Cabades set scaling ladders to the wall next the Turret; and day appearing, the Amidenses, who guarded the next Turret, perceiving their danger, came hastily to the rescue. Where after a hot conflict on both sides, at last they got the better, killed many of the men already come up, kept off those upon the ladders, and were very near quit of the danger. But Cabades drawing his Cimeter, forced his men up the ladders, threatning death to the comers down: And so having much the advantage in numbers, they got the better, and took the Town after eighty dayes siege. Much slaughter was done, till Cabades riding into the Town, an old Priest of Ami∣da came to him, and told him; That it was not Kingly to kill men that were at his mercy. Cabades yet angry, answered, Why then would they stand out against me? Because, Sir (replyed the Priest) God would give you Amida, not by our wills, but your own valour. Cabades pleased with this reply, suffered no more execution to be done, but bad the Persians sack the City, and take prisoners, selecting the principall for himself. Then leaving a thousand Persians in garrison, under one Glones, and some few wretched Ci∣tizens to serve them in their necessaries, with the rest of his army and pri∣soners he went home. To these prisoners Cabades used a princely courtesie; he let them all goe home free, and gave out they ran away. The Emperour Anastasius also dealt liberally with them, remitting the Citties tribute for seven years, and destowing many benefits upon their City in publique▪ and on particular men; so that they soon forgot their miseries. But this was after∣wards. CHAP. VI. BUt Anastasius hearing of the siege of Amida, immediately sent forth an Army against the Enemy: In which, besides the Commanders of compa∣nies, were Generals, Areobindus (who married the daughter of Olybrius, late Emperour of the West) Generall of the East; and Celer, Commander of the Palatine Cohorts, called by the Romans Magister; and the two Gene∣rals of the Legions in Constantinople, Patritius the Phrygian, and Hypatius the Emperours Sisters Son. These were the four Generals; and with them went also Justine, who was Emperour after Anastasius, and Patriciolus, with Vitalianus his son, who afterward rebelled against Anastasius; & Paresmanes of Colchis, an excellent good souldier, with Godidasclus and Sbesas, Goths, who
followed not Theodorick into Italy out of Thrace, both gallant men, and ex∣pert Souldiers: others followed of the best. So brave an Army went not a∣gainst the Persians before it, nor since. They marcht not together: Every General led his own forces. The Praefect, or Commissary of Provision for the Army, was Appion an Egyptian, a principal Patrician, and valiant, whom the Emperour declared his partner in the Empire by a Patent, that he might have absolute authority in the expense of the army: which being long in levying, & marching but slowly, found the Persians, after this cursory invasion, gone home with their spoils. The Generals would not besiege Amida, hearing it to be abundantly provided with all necessaries; but were earnest to make an im∣pression into the Enemies Country. And they marcht not in one body, but encamped severally. Cabades being near, and knowing this, entred the Ro∣man borders. They, not informed of his being there with his whole army, supposed it to be some small party. Areobindus encamped in a town called Arzaméne; being distant two dayes journey from the City of Constantina. And Patricius and Hypatius in a town called Siphris, about 44 miles distant from Amida. Celer was not yet come up to them. But Areobindus heaing Cabades came with his whole army, quitted his camp, and ran to Constantina.The Author reckons by fur∣longs; and sayes here 350 fur∣longs. An Itali∣an mile contains 8 furlongs. The Enemy took the camp and baggage, but no men in it; and from thence with speed marcht to the other. But Patricius and Hypatius, having met eight hundred Ephthalites marching before the Persian army, had killed them all; and not dreaming of the army with Cabades, were passing their time merrily like Conquerors, laying down their arms and preparing for dinner. And they were washing their meat in the brook there, and some troubled with heat were bathing, which made the water run foul. Cabades having heard the fortune of his Ephthalites, marcht apace toward the Enemy, and by the thick∣ning of the brook guest at the matter, and that the enemy was unprepared. So commanding to drive on with full speed, suddainly he surprised them at dinner, and unarmed. The Romans not able to abide their charge, ran away without striking stroak. Some were overtaken and slain, others fled to the Mountain there, and for fear leapt down the rocks, not one of them esca∣ping. Bat Cabades fearing his enemies, the Hunnes, who now invaded his country, went home with his whole Army, and had a long war with them on the Northern borders thereof. In the mean time the other Roman army came, but did nothing, having no Commander in chief, and the Generals with their equality of power ever crossing one anothers opinions. Celer past the river Nymphius, and invaded Arzaméne, (This river runs by Martyropolis, and is distant from Amida thirty five miles) and having forraged the country, soon went home. Areobindus, the Emperour sent for to Constantinople, and the o∣thers sate down before Amida in the winter. Who failing in their endeavours to force the place, resolved to take it by famine: And the besieged then wanted provisions; but the Generals not knowing it, and seeing the souldier weary of a winter siege; imagining also, the Persian army would ere long come a∣gainst them, they made hast in some way to rise from thence. And the Per∣sians also doubtful in these difficulties, though they concealed their wants, and made shew of plenty, yet gladly they would make a handsome retreat. In the end a capitulation was made, for the Persians to have aAre ten Cen∣tenaries of gold. If there be but ten ounces and a half to te Roman pound; then is a Cente∣nary 3150. l. sterling And 10 Centenaries here 31500. l. sterling. thousand pound weight of Gold, and so to render the City. The articles were perfor∣med, and the Son of Glones receiving the money, gave up Amida. For Glones himself was slain in this manner. The Romans being not yet set down before Amida, but not far from it, a peasant who frequented the City, and used secretly to sell to Glones at great rates, poultery, bread, and ripe fruits, promised the Generall Patricius for reward to put Glones and two hundred Persians into his hands. He promised him his demand, and sent him away. The man rent his garments, and came weeping into the town; went to Glones; and tearing his hair, My Lord, quoth he, I was bringing you of my best provisions; but I was met, beaten, and had all taken from me, by these rogues whose custome it is to rob the poor peasants (being old Roman souldiers) rambling in small parties; and who fly before
the Persians, and robb the poore Countryman. Thinck Sir I how you may avenge us and the Persians. It is but hunting without the suburbes, and you will find good game: For they go prolling about not above foure of five in a company. Glones askt, how many would suffice for the business; He said fifty was enough, being to meet not above five together; but whatsoe∣ver should happen, it would be good to have 100. and if it were 200. 'twere the better; Store hurts no man. Glones chose 200. horse, and bad the man guide them. But he said, 'twas better, to send him before to discover these Roman free booters, and to bring the Persians word, who then might take their best orportunity. Glones approved of his counsell; and then he went to the Ge∣nerall Patricius, and acquainted him with all the proceedings, who sent 1000. Souldiers, and two of his own Life-guard with him. These he laid in ambush, neer a village called Thialasamum, five miles from Amida, within a vally of coppices and bushes. Then he ran, and told Glones, his game was ready, and guided him and his 200. men into the enemies ambush. Being past a good space within it, unseen by Glones or his Company, he ran and called up the Romans ambush, and shewed them the enemy. The Persians seing them, were amazed at the suddain accident; Retire they could not (the enemy having their backs) nor being in an enemies Country knew any other way to runne. As they could therefore, they put in order to receave the assailants, but over∣matcht in numbers were broken, and all killed with Glones, which vexed his Son, that he could not stay to revenge his Fathers death, so that he burnt the Church of St. Simeon, where he lodged. Other buildings neither Glones, nor Cabades, nor any Persian, destroyed nor defaced in Amida, nor without it. But to returne to my former discourse. Thus the Romans recovered Amida for mony, two yeares after the taking. Being within it, their own negligence appeared, and the Persians abstemiousness, finding, by comparing the quanti∣tity of the victuall left, and the Barbarians that went out, not above seven dayes provision remaining, though Glones & his son had long issued it out to the Per∣sians more scarcely, then need could well endure; and to the Romans in the Town nothing, from the beginning of the siege; So that they were forced to eat unu∣suall food, and abominable, and at last one another. The Generalls, finding themselves thus deceaved by the Barbarians, reproached the Souldiers intem∣perance, and disobedience, who having it in their power to take the Town with all the Persians in it at mercy, had dishonorably transported the Roman treasure to Barbarians, and gotten Amida, as a merchandize for mony. Af∣terward the Persians (their warre with the Hunnes growing long) made a Truce with the Romans for seven yeares, concluded by Celer the Roman Ge∣nerall, and Aspevedes for the Persian. Thus I have told the beginning and con∣clusion of these warrs with the Persians. CHAP. VII. BUt what happened concerning the Caspian Gates I will now relate. Mount Taurus of Cilicia passes first by Cappadocia; then Armenia, and Per∣sarmenia, and then Albania and Iberia, and the other nations that way, free, or subject to the Persians, extending thus through many Countryes, and the further it goes, growing to a greater bredth and height. Beyond Iberie, you come to a narrow way, reaching some six miles, and ending at a steep place unpassable; where for the way out, nature hath built a kind of Gate, ancient∣ly called the Caspian gates, or streights. Beyond which are faire champions well watred, and large plaines for horse pastures; where are seated the nations of the Hunnes, and extend to the Lake of Maeotis, who passing by the streights in their inroads into Roman or Persian provinces, come with their horses lustie, going not about, nor nor being engaged in ragged Countries, save onely those six miles into Iberia; whereas by other passages they arrive with much toile, and cannot make use of the same horses, having been forced to many circuits and craggie wayes: which Alander the great considering, built Gates indeed
there, and by them a Fort; which through many owners, at last came to Am∣bazuces a Hunne, a friend of the Emperor Anastasius. This man growne old, and neer his end, offered Anastasius for mony to put the Romans in possession of the Caspian Gates, and the Fort. But the Emperour (who used not to doe things unadvisedly) considering that it was not possible to maintaine a garri∣son in that place, wanting all commodities, and having no nation neer it subject to the Romans, he thanckt the man much for his good will, but would not meddle with the thing. Ambazuces soone after died, and Cabades forcing out his sonnes, possessed himselfe of the Gates. Anastasius also, after the truce with Cabades, at a place called Daras, built a very strong City, and named it then Anastasia, being distant from Nisibis about twelve miles, and from the Persian frontier three miles and a halfe at most. This building the Persian de∣siring to hinder, could not, having his hands full with the Hunnes. But having dispatcht that warre, he expostulated with the Romans for this building so neer his confines, and contrary to the Articles of Peace. Anastasius, partly threatning, partly pretending friendship, and with large presents, put it off. Another City also this Emperor built upon the frontier of Persarmema, which had been before a village, and from Theodosius his name was called Theodosia. But Anastasius compassed it with a strong wall, which no lesse then the other troubled the Persians, being both as Rampires upon his Country. Not long after Anastasius deceasing, Justine succeeded in the Empire, the others kind∣red being rejected, though many of them very eminent men. Cabades was also troubled, fearing innovation upon his house after his de∣cease; For upon his Sonnes he could not transferre the Kingdom, without some question. His eldest, Caoses, the law invited, but him he could not abide; the fathers opinion therein overruling nature, and the ancient Lawes. His second Sonne Zames, having lost an eye, the Law excluded, prohibiting to make a King having but one eye, or any other maime. But Chosroes, borne of the sister of Aspevedes, he chiefly affected. But seeing the Persians admire the va∣lour of Zames, as being a good Souldier, and a favourer of vertue, he feared least taking armes against Chosroes, they might ruine his house, and Kingdom. Hereupon he resolved to make a peace with the Romans, by procuring his Son Chosroes to be adopted by the Emperour Justine; which he conceaved the one∣ly way to preserve the security of his Empire. To this purpose he dispatcht Ambassadors to Constantinople, with letters to Justine, to this purpose. Your selfe know, that the Romans have done us wrongs, which I am resolved not to urge; knowing that those in reason ought to have the Victory,He was Son of Vigilantia, si∣ster of Justine, by a very obscure man, one Saba∣tius, and Illyri∣an. This Quae∣stor, or Assessor Imperatoris di∣clated all Laws and Edicts, and subscribed them. Which war war∣rant to the Prae∣sectus Praeto∣rio to publish them. He judg∣ed a pales to the Emperours person; and in summe had the care of the whole Empire committed to him. vid. No∣titiam utrius{que} Imperij. who having the right on their side, are yet willingly put to the worst, to gratisie their friends. But for this I must demand a favour, which binding our selves, and subjects by kindred, and the consequent thereof, good affection, may for ever settle to us the blessings of peace. It is that you would adopt my Son Chosroes, who is to succeed me in my Kingdom, for your Son. Justine was glad at the proposition, and so was Justinian, his sisters son, and successor designed, urging the speedy perfection, and drawing up of the adoption after the Roman forme. But Proclus crost it: who was assessor to the Emperor (the Romans call this officer, Quaestor) and a knowne just man, not to be bribed, nor hastily passing Edicts, or altring things setled: He opposing it, spake thus. I use not to meddle with novelties, which of all things I feare most knowing that they cannot possibly stand with safety. But were I a very daring man, I think I should shrinck and tremble at the storme that is to be expected from this Act. For I cannot conceave any thing now in consulation, but with a faire pretence to betray our State to the Persians; who in plaine words, without disguising, or modeslie, pray us to let them take our Empire from us; covering their grosse deceipt with simplicity, and their impudent proposition with a pretended desire of quietnesse. But you both had need to oppose this designe of the Bar∣barians, to the utmost of your power; you Sir I least you prove the last Roman Emperour; and you the General, least you block up your own way to the Em∣pire. Some tricks coverel with faire pretences, need an interpreter to the common sort. But this Ambassage bluntly, at first dash, will have this Chos∣roes
heire to the Roman Emperour. Consider it thus, I pray. By nature is due to children their fathers estates: All Lawes, though differing in other things, do yet in this agree, both among Romans, and Barbarians, that children are to inherit their fathers estates. So that yeilding to this their first request, the rest you must consequently grant. The Emperour and his Nephew approved this speech, consulting what was to be done. In the meane time came other letters from Cabades to Justine, to send to him men of experience, for conclud∣ing of a peace, and to signifie the forme that was to be observed in the adopti∣on. Upon this Proclus more eagerly opposed the Persians proposall, and urged that they should rather adopt to themselves the Roman power and dominion; declaring his opinion, that it was fit they, as speedily as might be, should conclude a peace; and withall that some chief men should be sent; who being demanded by Cabades, in what manner the adoption should be, should answer, as is fit for a Barbarian; For the Barbarians adopt sons, not by writings, but by arming them. Accordingly Ambassadors were sent by Justine, and promise of some greater men to follow, for consummating all touching the peace, and Chosroes. There were therefore shortly after sent Hypatius a patrician, Nephew to the late Emperour Anastasius, and Generall of the East; and Rufinus, sonne of Silvanus, a principall patrician, and one well knowne to Cabades. From the Persians came Seoses, their most powerfull man, who had the chief power over all armies and offices; and with him Mebodes, who was Master of the Pa∣lace in Persia. These meeting upon the frontier, treated concerning an accord∣ing of the differences, and concluding a peace. And Chosroes came down to the Tigris, two dayes journy from Nisibis, that the peace being concluded, he might go to Constantinople. Many discourses past about their differences; and Seoses alledged, that Colchis, now called Lazica, antiently belonged to the Persians, and that the Romans held it from them unjustly. The Romans took it very ill that their title to Lazica should be questioned; But when they said, that the Adoption must be performed in a form fit for a Barbarian, the Persians thought this insufferable. So both broke off, and they severally went home. And Chosroës returned to his father, vowing to revenge this scorn upon the Romans. Mebodes afterward accused Seoses for mentioning Lazica without their Master direction, purposely to break the Treaty, and for communicating therein first with Hypatius, who bare the King least affection, and crost the conclusion of the Peace, and the Adoption. Seoses being charged by his Ene∣mies with many other things, was called to a judiciall tryall before the Per∣sian Senate, who were all displeased with his new Office, and offended at his behaviour. He was a man free from corruption, and very just; but extremely arrogant. Which, though a vice naturall to the great Officers of Persia, yet in Seoses, themselves thought it to reign in extremity. His accusers charged him with the matters afore mentioned; and for not contenting himself with the ancient customes of the Persians, worshipping new Gods; and that lately he had buryed his Wife; the Persian Laws prohibiting the burying of dead bodies in the earth. So the Judges condemned him to dye. And Cabades seemed to grieve as for a friend, but would not pardon him; professing that he was not offended with him, but he must not infringe the Laws: And yet he owed his life Seoses, who was the chiefest cause of his living and reigning; and being thus condemned, he was put to death. His office as it began so it ended with him, none after him having ever the like Generall power over all offices and armies. Rufinus also accused Hypatius to the Emperour, who upon it discharged him of his Office; but after torturing some about him, he found no truth in the accusation, and so did no other harm to him. CHAP. VIII. CAbades then desired to invade the Romans, but found this impediment. The Iberians of Asia, who are seated by the Caspian Gates to the South∣ward,
have next them to the West, Lazica, and to the East, part of Persia. This people are Christians, as devout as any, and have alwayes been subject to the King of Persia. These Cabades would inforce to his Religion, writing to their King Gurgents to do all things as the Persians did, and not to bury their dead bodies in the earth, but to throw them out to the dogs and birds. Where∣upon Gurgenes revolted to the Emperour Justine, requesting assurance of him, that he should not leave him to the mercy of the Persians. Which he granted willingly, and sent Probus, Sisters son to the late Emperour Anastasius, a Patritian, with money to raise an army of Hunnes for his ayd, to Bosporus, a Maritime City lying on the left hand as you sail toward the Euxine Sea, 20 days journey distant from Cherson, which is the farthest Roman City that way; all between being possessed by Hunnes. These Bosporians were formerly a free people, but lately they submitted to the Emperour Justine. But Probus re∣turning without doing any thing, the Emperour sent Peter Generall into Lazica, with some Hunnes to ayd Gurgenes. And at t same time Cabades sent an army against Gurgenes and the Iberians, under Boës a Persian, his Gene∣rall. But Gurgenes finding himself too weak for the Persian, and the Roman succours not competent, fled into Lazica with his wife and children, and chief men of Iberia, and his brothers, whereof Peranius was the eldest: and in the confines of Lazica stayd, fortifying in the fastnesses against the Enemy: Which hindred the Persians that pursued them, from doing any thing to pur∣pose. Afterward some Iberians came to Constantinople, and Peter was remand∣ed home. The Lazians also refusing to help to guard the Province, the Em∣perour sent an army commanded by Irenaeus. Formerly the guard of two Forts at the entrance of Lazica from Iberia was carefully maintained by the Provincials, though enduring much: For no Corn nor Wine grows near, nor other commodity; nor for the fastnesses can be brought thither, but upon mens backs; and they lived (being used to it) upon Panicum, or Mill-seed, there growing. But the Emperour taking thence those Warders, put Roman Garrisons to keep the places; whom at first the Lazians supplyed with pro∣visions, though hardly; but after refused the service, and the Romans abando∣ned the Forts, which the Persians seised on. In the mean time, the Romans led by Sittas and Belisarius, invaded Persar∣menia, and having forraged much country, and taken many prisoners, they retired. They were youths then, their beards first springing, and Lanciers of the guard to Justinian the chief Generall, who soon after held the Empire with his Uncle Justine. In another inroad into Armenia by Sittas and Belisarius, they were suddenly met, and put to the worst by Narses and Aratius, who not long after revolted to the Romans, and served under Belisarius in Italy. Licelarius also a Thracian invaded about Nisibis with another Army of Ro∣mans, who retreated running away, and none charging them. Whereupon the Emperour discharged Licelarius, and gave Belisarius the command of the forces in Daras: And then was Procopius the Writer of this history chosen his Con∣sellour.Anno Dom. 527. Justinia∣ni 1. who was declared Empe∣rour with Ju∣stine on good friday being then the first of April, Anno Dom. 527. And Justine di∣ed the first of August after. See Alemannus Historicall notes pag 43. Shortly after Justine died, having before declared Justinian his Sisters Sonne Emperour with him. Justinian being sole Emperour; directed Belisarius, to build a Fort at Mindon, upon the confines of Per∣sia, on the left hand of the way to Nisibis: who having raised it to a good height, the Persians sent to forbid him, threatning to hinder it, not with words onely, but deeds. The Emperour hereof informed, and how Belisarius was not able with the Forces he had, to beat off the Persians; he com∣manded Cutzes and Buzes, Captaines of the Forces inThis was one of the fif∣teene Provinces subordinate to the Governour of the Orient: And these were there Duces li∣mitanei; The Country border∣ing with Ara∣bia, and the Sa∣racens. Phoenicia Libani, to repaire thither with another Army. These were Thracians, and brethren, yong men, and rash in their encounters; They march't together to the building; where the Persians hindred, and the Romans assisted the workmen, all they could. In the fight the Romans had the worst, and lost many men; Cutzes and some other were taken: whom the Persians shut up in a cave perpetuall pri∣soners; and no Forces defending the building, they cast it down.Anno Domi∣ni. 528. Justiniani 2.
CHAP. IX. AFterward Justinian made Belisarius Generall of the East, and directed him to make an expedition against Persia: who levying an Army of good importance, came to Daras. With him was joined in the command, Hermogenes, Captain of the Emperours Guard, and sometime Quaestor to Vita∣lianus, when he rebelled against the Emperour Anastasius. Rusinus also he sent his Ambassador, with direction to stay at Hierapolis upon the Euphrates, till he should signifie his pleasure, there being some discourses on both sides for a peace. But Belisarius and Hermogenes had newes, that a Persian invasion was feared, to take Daras. Whereupon they provided to sight, in this manner. Neer to the gate toward Nisibis, a stones cast off, they drew a deep trench, with many passages through it; not dig'd in a right line, but thus. In the midst was a short Line: on either end whereof went out two streight horn-works, and from both ends of the horn-works, the trenches ran in right lines a great space of ground. The Persians soon after came with their army, and encamped at Amodis, a Village two miles and a half from Daras, where were Pituazes and Baresmanas with one eye, and other Commanders; the Generall of the whole Army being Perozes, by office a Mirranes, so called in Persia, who sent to command Belisarius, to make ready the bath, for the next day he meant to bathe in Daras. The Romans upon this provided strongly for the en∣counter, as being the next day to fight. The Sun up, and seeing the enemy come on, they put in order of battell, thus. The farthest point of their left-hand Line, which ran from the horn-work there, to a hillock, Buzes possest with store of Horse, and Pharas the Herulian with three hundred of his Coun∣trymen. To the right hand of these, on the outside of the trench, in the Angle made by the Line and the horn-work, stood Sunica, and Augan, by birth Massagets, with 600 Horse; that if Buzes and Pharas should be routed, they wheeling about, and getting the backs of the enemy, might readily second the Romans on that side. On the other hand they were embattel'd in the same manner: The point of the Line that way was made good with store of Horse, commanded by John the son of Nicetas, Cyrillus, Marcellus, Germanus, and Doro∣theus; & at the right hand angle were placed 600 Horse, commanded by Simas and Ascan, Massagetes; who were likewise (if John should be routed) to fall on from thence, upon the backs of the enemy. All about the trench stood the rest of the Horse, and the Infantery; behind whom toward the middle, stood Belisarius and Hermogenes. Thus were the Romans ordered, a∣mounting to 25000; the Persian being 40000 Horse and Foot. They stood both in rank (their Fronts against each other) striving to make it as deep, as might be. Neither began the fight; but the Persians seemed to wonder at the Romans order, musing what they would doe. Towards evening some Horse from their right wing charged the Troupes of Buzes and Pharas; who retreating fair and softly, the Persians did not pursue them, but stood still; fearing to be compast by the Enemy. The retiring Romans then of a suddain charged them; who staid it not, but gallopt home to the Batallion; and Buzes and Pharas put themselves into the same place and order again. Seven Persians in this encounter were slain, whose bodies the Romans carryed off. As their battels stood thus, a young man, a Persian, spurred up to the Roman army, challenging any to fight with him. No man daring to undertake him; one Andrew, a follower of Buzes, no souldier, nor trained to the wars, but the master of a Wrestling school in Constantinople, and following the army to attend Buzes in the bath, being a Constantinopolitan born, without provoca∣tion by Buzes, or any other, adventured the combat. And the Barbarian looking about him which way to assault him, Andrew prevented, and with his Lance hit him on the right pap, so strong a blow, that the Persian fell from his horse, and Andrew, as he lay, with a short knife cut his throat. At which, from the Town-wall, and the Roman army was a huge shout. But the Persians being grieved at it, sent out another horsman, valiant, and very
tall, no youth, but with some gray hairs. Who approaching the Romans, and slashing with his whip often, made his challenge also. None presenting themselves, Andrew, though prohibited by Hermogenes, stole into the field; and both with their Lances made a furious charge. Their Lances broke upon their Corslets; and their horses heads meeting, down they fell with their riders; both falling neer each other. And striving to rise, the Persians heavy body could not so easily: But Andrew by the advantage of his practise in the Wrestling school, first got up, and struck the other as he was upon one knee, and having him down killed him. Upon which a greater shout than before was made from the town and Roman army; and the Persians loosing their bataillion, retired within their trenches, it growing dark. The next day came 10000 men from Nisibis to the Persians. But Belisarius and Hermogenes wrote this Letter to Mirranes. All men confess peace to be the chiefest of blessings, and consequently a Peace∣breaker to be guilty of his own and other mens mischiefs. So that that Generall is best, who is apt to end awar in a peace; whereas you bring a causless war upon us, while all stands well between the Persians and us, and our Princes are consulting upon terms of peace, and our Ambassadors near at hand to accord all differences, if some desperate effect of this your invasion choak not our hopes. Draw home your Army therefore, and be not an obstacle to so great a blessing, least you prove authour of the mischiefs likely to fall on your own Nation. To these Letters Mirranes return∣ed this answer. I should be perswaded by your letters to doe what you desire, if it were not a Let∣ter from Romans; who can easily promise, but their performance is not to be hoped; though you confirme your agreements with oath. So that tired with your deceipts, we are forced to come armed; and expect nothing, my deare Romans! now, but war with us. For here will we die, or grow gray, till you have done us right. Belisarius wrote againe unto him. Good Mirranes! you must not humour your own arrogance, nor lay false imputati∣ons upon others; we have said it, and truly, that Rufinus is coming in Ambassage, and not farre hence: Which shortly your selfe will know. But since you desire warre, with Gods help we shall oppose you; who will assist our peaceableness, against your ar∣rogance; who being by us invited to peace, reject it. The Letters we have written both, we shall hang up upon our Ensignes in the battell. Mirranes to this replies againe. Neither are we entred into this warr without Gods; but with them shall come up∣on you; who we hope to morrow will put us in possession of Daras. Let there be made ready therefore for me the best bath in the town. Belisarius then prepared for the battell. CHAP. X. ANd the next day, Mirranes about Sun rising, calling his Souldiers, made a speech to them; That he knew Persians in dangers, not to take their courage from their Captains orations, but from their own vertue, and awe of one another. But seing them dispute, how the Romans, not using without tumult and disorder to come to fight, receaved the Persians now with an order so little belonging to them: Least upon a false conceipt they should commit error, he warned them, not to suppose the Romans upon the suddaine grown more valiant, and expert Souldiers, but ra∣ther cowards more then ever; being so affraid of Persians, that they dare not embat∣tle without making a trench to defend them; nor with it begin a fight, but are glad, and thinck their business spedd above their hopes, if they are able to retire to their walls, the Persians not charging them: Hence were they in no disorder, not coming to the hazard of a battell. But if the fight come to handy blows, then their cowar∣dize and want of experience will put them into their wonted disorder. And for them∣selves he bad them have their thoughts upon the judgement of their King of Kings, expecting a base punishment, if they doe not now fight as becomes the valour of Per∣sians.
Mirranes having thus encouraged his Souldiers, led on against the enemy. Belisarius also and Hermogenes, drawing out their troupes from their trench; ex∣horted them to consider by the former fight, that the Persians are not invincible, nor immortall; and that they were beaten by them formerly through their own diso∣bedience to their commanders, not by any advantage of valour or strong bodies in the enemy. Which fault they may easily amend. Indeed the crosses of fortune no industry can cure, but of a mans faults; his own will may be the Physician. So that if they resolve to obey directions; the day will be theirs: and the enemy failing in their one∣ly confidence, (the Romans disorder) will goe off, as they did in the former encoun∣ter. And for the enemies nombers (their greatesh scare-crow) he bad them despise it: Seing their foot was nothing els, but a multitude of miserable peasants, who come to the warre onely to sappe a wall, or riffle a dead body, and other things to serve the Souldier: having no armes to trouble much an enemy; and their bucklers no big∣ger then to ward a shot onely. So that if they fight bravely this day, they will both vanquish the Persians now, and restraine their insolence from invading the Ro∣mans. Belisarius and Hermogenes having made this exhortation, and seing the Persians coming on, ordred the Army, as before. The Persians stood oppo∣site in front; Mirranes, not placing so the whole Army, but the one halle one∣ly, the other shood behind him, to receave men from the fight, and to give on fresh, and so in their turnes to come all to fight. The band onely, named Im∣mortall, he commanded to stand still, till himself gave the signall: Who stood in the front, giving the command of the right wing to Pityazes, and of the left to Baresmanas. The Armies being thus embattell'd Charas came to Belisarius and Hermogenes; and said thus: I see no great service I can doe upon the enemy, staying here with my Herulians: But if covering our selves under yonder ris∣ing ground, when the fight is begun, we shall suddainly from the hillock charge, shooting the enemies backs, in likelyhood we shall ruine them. Bel∣sarius approved it, and accordingly it was done. Neither side began the fight till noone, which being past, the Persians gave on: Who put it off to that time of the day, because themselves use to eat about evening, and the Romans at noone; and if they charged them fasting, they thought they would not endure the fight so well. At first the arrowes slew from both sides, and with their mul∣titude made a kind of duskiness a long time, and slew many. The Persians arrowes came much thicker, by reason of their fresh men still renewing, which the Romans did not marke: Who notwithstanding had not the worse, a strong wind blowing upon the Persians, and not suffering their shot to do much effect. The Arrowes being spent, they used their Lances, on both sides, and came up closer. The Romans left wing was in most distress, where the Cadisens, with Pityazes charging suddamely and furiously, routed them & kill'd many in the execution. Which Sunicas and Algas perceaving, gallopt amaine to them: But first the three hundred Herulians under Pharas came down from the hill upon the enemies backs, and did wonders, specially upon the Cadisens: who when they saw Sunicas too giving on upon their flanck, ran away. And there the overthrow being cleer, the Romans on that side joining, made a great slaughter among the Barbarians; so that of their right wing they lost about 3000. The residue escaped hardly to the Bataillion; and the Romans chasing no farther, both parts stood still in their orders; And such was the successe on that side. But Mirranes sent the Immortall band, and many others closely to the left side: which Belisarius, and Hermogenes perceaving, sent Sunicas and Algas, with their six hundred horse, to the angle of their right hand line, where Simas and Ascas stood, and behind them many troupers of Belisarius. The Persians left wing commanded by Baresmanas, with the Immortalls, charged the Ro∣mans with full career: who not abiding it, fled. Then from the Angle, the Romans, and those behind them gave on hotly upon the Barbarians slnck, as they pursued, and cut their Army in two, leaving the most to their right hand; the rest to the left, among whom was the Ensigne-bearer of Baresmana, whom Sunicas with his lance wounded. The Persians, who pursued foremost, seing their ill case, turned about, and leaving the chase, rode against these; and so came to be charged both wayes by the Romans; For they that fledd,
knowing what happened, turned head. The Immortall band, and the other Persians there, seing the great Ensigne taken down, and lying upon the ground; they with Beresmanas, presently charged the Romans; who receaved them; and first Sunicas kill'd Baresmanas, and threw him from his horse. Then the Bar∣barians struck with feare, thought no more of fighting, but ran away in con∣fusion. The Romans compassing them, as they could, kill'd about 5000. So the Armies moved, the Persians to their retreat, the Romans to the pursuit. The Persians foot in the overthrow threw away their bucklers, and surprized in confusion were cut in pieces! The chafe lasted not long, Belisarius and Hermogenes not suffering them to follow further, least the Persians might turn head, and rout them pursueing without order. They thought it enough to keep the victory entire: For before that day, t'was long since the Persians were overthrown by the Romans. Thus they parted then; nor would the Persians come to any more battells. Some skirmishings there were upon inroads, wherein the Romans had not the worst. And this was the success of the Ar∣mies in Mesopotamia. CHAP. XI. BUt Cabades sent another Army into the Roman Armenia, consisting of Persarmenians,Anno Domi∣ni. 529. Justiniani 3. and Sunites (who border upon the Alans) and three thou∣sand Sabirian Hunnes, a very warlike Nation. The Generall was Mermeroes, a Persian, who encamped in Persarmenia, three dayes journey from Theodosio∣polis, preparing for the invasion. Dorotheus was then Generall of Armenia, a wise man, and who had seen many warrs; but Sittas, Generall of the Forces in Constantinople commanded the Armenian Army in cheif. These hearing of Forces levyed in Prsarmenia, sent two Lanciers to discover the enemies power. To whose Army they came, and having observed all, and returning, met in a village some of the enemies Hunnes, who took one of them named Dagaris, the other got away and brought newes to the Generalls. Who instantly armed their Forces, and suddainely set upon the enemies campe; who frighted with the suddaineness, ran away without striking stroak. The Romans killed many and rifled their Camp, and then rode back again. But not long after Merme∣roes with his Army entred the Roman territory, and finding the enemy neer the City of Sattala, he encamped in a village called Octabe, seven miles from Sattala. Sittas behind a hill (whereof are many about that City, though sci∣tuate in a plaine) with 1000. men lay close, directing Dorotheus with the rest to keep within their trenches, seing they were not able to stand the enemy being 30000. strong, and themselves not half the number. But the next day the Barbarians came to their trenches, and were compassing them, when suddain∣ly seing Sittas coming down from the hill, and not being able to judge the number, because of the dust, then great in the Summer time, they thought them more then they were, and so left compassing, and made hast to draw together into lesse ground; which Sittas to prevent, divided his men into two Troupes, and charged them coming from the trenches. Which the Romans therein per∣ceaving, took courage, and sallyed all upon the gallop, and charged the ene∣my also; and having them thus in the midst of their Troupes, they routed them. But the enemy exceeding them in numbers, made head; and the fight was fierce, and at handy stroakes, and some short chases upon one another, be∣ing all Horsemen. Then Florentius a Thracian, Captain of a Troupe of Horse, rusht into the midst of the enemy, and took away the Generalls ensigne, and throwing it down to the ground, gallopt back, but was over-taken and cut in pieces in the place, and so was the greatest canse of the Romans victory. For the Barbarians losing sight of the chiefe Ensigne, fell into feare and disorder, and retired within their Camp, having lost many in the fight. The next day they march't home, and none followed them; The Romans thinking it much, first to beat so many of them in their own Country; and now when they invaded them, to send them home vanquisht by a lesse number, and with nothing done.
The Romans then also took in some townes of the Persians in Persarmenia, and two Forts called Bolus and Pharangium, where the King hath a revenue out of gold mines. A little before also they had subdued the Tzanians, who lived formerly within the Roman land, a free people: Concerning all which thus it was. In the way out of Armenia into Persarmenia to the right hand is Mount Taurus, reaching to Iberia, and the nations before named. To the left hand the way is steep with ragged Mountaines over head, covered with perpetuall clouds and snow, whence the Phasis springing runns into Lasica. Here anciently have dwelt these Tzanians subject to none, formerly called Sa∣ni, using to robb the neighbouring Romans, and living hardly and upon what they could steale, their own Country bringing forth nothing good to feed on. The Emperour therefore gave them a pension in gold, not to robb those parts. For which they tooke their Country Oath, and broke it, coming still unlookt for, and mischieving the Armenians, and other Romans beyond them, even to the sea. They made short inroads, going quickly home; and if they met a Roman Army, were beaten, but impossible to be taken, by reason of their strong Country. But Sittas before this warre overcoming them in fight, and using many allurements both by words and deeds, gained them absolutely, that they became Civill men; and were enrolled in Roman bands, and marcht with their Armies, and turned Christians also. Beyond these Tzanians Coun∣try, a deep rockie vally runns, as farr as Mount Cauasus; wherein are popu∣lous villages, and vines, and other fruits in abundance. For three dayes journy, it is tributary to the Romans; but further begin the marches of Persar∣menia, where is that mine of gold, by Cabades committed to the charge of one Simeones: Who seing the King in the heat of a warre, cosened him of the re∣venue thus. He yeilded himself, and the Fort of Pharangium to the Romans, who demanded not the gold of the Mine, being contented, if the Persian lost the benefit; and the Persians could not force away the Romans; the Country was so fast and strong. About the same time also Narses and Aratius, who had some blowes with Sittas and Belisarius, (as I said before) revolted to the Romans, with their Mother, whom Narses, the Emperours peculiar Treasurer entertained, (being also a Persarmenian) and gave them great gifts. Which Isaac their yonger brother hearing, got secret conference with the Romans, and delivered them the Fort of Bolus, standing not farr from Theodosiopolis, by causing them to hide Souldiers neer, whom he in the night time closely let into the Fort by a Posterne; and thus he came to Constantinople too. CHAP. XII. IN the meane time the Persians overthrown by Belisarius at Daras,Anno Domi∣ni. 530. Justiniani 4. kept to∣gether about those parts, till Rusinus coming to Cabades told him, That Justinian his brother, had sent him to him with a just complaint, against the Per∣sians, for entring his Country in Armes. That it would become so great a King, and so prudent, rather to procure peace, then a troublesome war to himself and his neighbours. In which hope, he said, he was come to him, that for the futur both of them might enjoy the benefit of peace. Cabades replied; O Son of Silvanus! Doe not recrimi∣nate; knowing, (no man better) that you Romans are the chief cause of these trou∣bles. Wee for the common benefit of us both, took the Caspian Gates, forcing thence the Barbarians. The Emperour Anastasius, (you know) might have purchased them, but would not, least he should be put to a great expense for us both, by main∣taining there forces continually. And from that time we have lodged a Garrison there, and maintained it; and you thereby have dwelt in your own Country, unspoiled by Barbarians on that side, and possessing quietly your estates. But as if this were nothing, you have fortified at Daras, and made it a great City, and a rampier a∣gainst Persia; a thing expresly prohibited in the treaty with Anatolius: And hereby our affaires have been ruined with toyles, ana the expense of two Armies, the one to hinder the Massagetes from forraging both our Countries, the other to restraine your incursions; wee complaining hereof and demanding either your joint Forces at the
Caspian Gates, or Daras to be dismantell'd, you have slighted it; nay advanced your desigue with a greter injury, (if I remember) your fortisieing at Mindon. So that the Romans may chase peace, and they may chuse warre, either by righting us, or proceeding in the contrary. For the Persians shall not lay down their armes, till the Romans (as they ought) either joyne in the Guard of the Caspian Gates, or dismantle Daras. Cabades having thus said, dismiss't the Ambassadour, intimating to him, that for a summe of mony he would be content to lay aside all his quarrells to the Romans. Wherewith Rusinus acquainted the Emperour at his returne to Constantinople; whither soon after came Hermogenes. And so the Winter ended, andAnno Domi∣ni. 530. Justimani 5. the fourth yeare of Justinians raigne. Anno Domi∣ni. 531. Justiniani 5. In the beginning of the Spring, 15000. Persians all horse, under the com∣mand of Azarethes a Persian, invaded the Romans; and among them Alamun∣darus the Saracen, with great numbers of Saracens. In this invasion, they did not as they were wont, enter by Mesopotamia, but by Comagena, now called Euphratesia. The reason of forbearing Mesopotamia now, and why it is so cal∣led is thus. From a Mountaine of Armenia not very steep, being five miles to the North of Theodosiopolis, issue two springs, presently making, the right hand spring, Euphrates, and the left, Tigris. Tigris without winding, goes strait on to Amida, taking in no waters by the way, and by the North-side of it passes into Assyria. But the Euphrates, running not farr, vanishes, not sinking under ground but with a kind of miracle. Over the water lyes a bogg, deep and six miles long, and two miles and a half broad, wherein much reed growes, and the mudd is so stiffe, that to passengers it seemes firme ground. Horse and Foot and Waggons passe upon it every day, and stirr not the ground, nor discover it for a bogge. The inhabitants every yeare burn off the reed, that it stop not the way: and sometime a strong wind blowing, the fire pierces to the roots, and discovers the river in a small channell: And the mudd landing up againe soon after, restores to the place the forme it had. Hence this river runs to the Country of Ecelesa, where was the Temple of Diana in Tauri; Iphigenia, Agamemnons daughter, with Orestes, and Pilades, flying thither with the image of Diana. The other Temple standing to this day at Comana, is not that of Tau∣ri. But thus it was. Orestes stealing with his sister from Tauri, fell into a great sickness; and enquiring of the Oracle for cure, was answered, that he should have no help, till he had built a Temple to Diana, like that in Tauri, and there should shave off his haire, and call the City by it. Orestes hereupon tra∣velling in these parts, saw the river Iris, springing from a steep Mountaine, and supposing it to be the place designed by the Oracle, built there a faire Ci∣ty, and a Temple to Diana, and shaving his haire, called it Comana, which continues to this day. But this abated not the disease, which raged rather more. So that travelling, and seeking yet further, he found a place in Cappa∣docia, very like Tauri, and I have wondred seing it, taking it for Tauri it self. The Mountaine there is absolutely like Taurus, and so called also, and the river Sarus there very like the river Euphrates. So there Orestes built a goodly City, with two Temples in it, the one to Diana, the other to his sister Iphi∣genid, which the Christians have made Churches, not altring the buildings at all. This City is called the Golden Comana, where he cut off his haire, and recovered of his disease. Which some hold to be no other, but the madness he fell into, for killing his own Mother. But the Euphrates from this Tauri in Ecelesa of Armenia, runs Southward by much Country, and takes in many rivers, and among the rest Arsinus, (which comes down from Persarmenia) then grown large, passes into Leucosyria, now called the lesser Armenia, the Metropolis whereof is Melitene, a faire City. From thence it runs by Samosa∣ta, and Hierapolis, and many other townes, to Assyria; where both rivers meeting, end in one name of Tigris. The Country from Samosata beyond the river was anciently called Comagena, but now Euphratesia from the river. The Country on this side, between it and the Tigris, is called Mesopotamia: Some part of which hath severall other names, as Armenia, unto Amida: Edessa al∣so, with the towns about it: And Osrhoêne, from Osrhoês, who anciently raign∣ed there, when they were confederates of the Persians. The Persians therefore
having taken Nisibis, and other places in Mesopotamia from the Romans, when they invaded their country, ever neglected the Province beyond the Euphrates, being without water and wast, and there drew together, being their own coun∣try, & near an enemies inhabited, & from thence used to make their invasions. CHAP. XIII. MIrranes also upon his return with his Army overthrown, having lost most of his men, had a sharp punishment from the King, who took from him his Head-tire of gold and pearl, which tied up his hair; a mark of the greatest honour in Persia, next to the King: where none may wear gold, ring, nor belt, nor buckle, nor any thing of gold, but by the Kings grant. Cabades then being in doubt how to invade the Romans; for Mirranes failing thus, he could not presume upon any other; Alamundarus, King of the Sara∣cens, advised him thus, In all things not to trust to Fortune, nor in all wars to expect the better; being neither reasonable, nor mans condition; but the conceit of it prejudicial. For mens unreasonable hopes of success, failing sometimes, (as they may) prove their vexation. That men having not ever Fortune to presume on, put not war bluntly upon hazards, though they have the advantage of their enemies, but study to deceive them with stratagemes. In a danger upon equal terms is no assurance of victory. That therefore he should not grieve for the misfortunes of Mirranes, nor tempt Fortune again. If he enter by Mesopotamia and Osroëne, where the Cities were never stronger, nor better guarded with souldiers, that he will have no sure bar∣gain of it. That the Country beyond the Euphrates, and Syria next it, hath no fortified City, nor considerable Forces; but he shall find Antioch the chief Roman City of the East for wealth, bignes, and populousnes, with no souldiers in it; and a common people thinking upon nothing but Holy-daies, and Feasts, their perpetual quarrels with one another in the Theaters. Which he may take by surprise, and return home, without meeting an Enemy, and before the Forces of Mesopotamia can have the news of him. That he should take no thought about water, or provisions: himself would guide the Army the best way. Cabades neither disputed against this advise, nor distrusted it; knowing Alamundarus a wiseman, an experienced souldier, and faithfull to the Persians, and very valiant; who for fifty years, had brought the Romans into low case, from Egypt to Mesopotamia forraging their country, and dri∣ving all afore him, burning cities, and making innumerable slaves, whom he kill'd, or sold for a great deal of money. He made his inroads so suddainly, and advantageously, that none encountred him: The Com∣manders seldome hearing of him, before he was gone with his booty. And when any overtook him, he defeated them, either charging them unprepared, or pursuing disorderly. Once he took prisoners Demostra∣tus, brother of Rufinus, and John the sonne of Lucas, with all their men, and got a great sum of money for their ransom. In a word, he was the sharpest enemy the Romans had. The reason was, because onely Alamundarus had command of the Saracens under the Persians, with authority and title of a King; whereby he could invade the Romans when and where he pleased. Nei∣ther were the Roman Captains, called Duces Limitanei, nor the Phylarchi, or chieftains of the Saracen-tribes in league with the Romans, able to oppose him, being too weak to fight with him single in their severall countries. Whereupon the Emperour Justinian put many of those Tribes under Arethas, the sonne of Gabâlas, chieftain of the Saracens in Arabia, giving him the title of a King; a thing not used by the Romans. But Alamundarus rather more ruined the Romans; Arethas in the inroads or fights, either ha∣ving ill fortune, or betraying the business; we have no certainty of him. And so Alamundarus (none opposing) forraged the East furthest of any, and long∣est, being a very old man; and Cabades liking his counsell, sent 15000 men under the command of Azarethes (as I have said) whom Alamundarus was to guide the way.
CHAP. XIV. THese passing the Euphrates into Comagena unlookt for, and being the first Persians that ever invaded us that way, that we can learn, it amazed the Romans, and at first perplexed Belisarius, when he heard it. But he soon resol∣ved upon resistance, and having left competent garrisons in the places, of Me∣sopotamia, that Cabades with the rest of his army might not find them un∣guarded; he went with speed against the Enemy, compassing the Euphrates, and having about 20000 horse and foot, 2000 of them Isaurians. The Cap∣tains of horse were the same that fought at Daras with Mirranes. Of the In∣fantery was Peter commander, a Lancier of the guard to Justinian; and of the Isaurians, Longinus and Stephanacius. At the City of Colchis they encamped, hearing the Enemy were at Gabbula, a place almost fourteen miles from it. Alamundarus, and Azarethes hearing thereof, stayd their journey, resolving to march homeward, fearing to hazard; and they retired, keeping the Euphra∣tes to their left hand. The Roman army followed; and where the Enemy lod∣ged, sate down the night after: Belisarius purposely not suffering the Army to march greater journeys, having no mind to fight, and thinking it suffici∣ent if Alamundarus and the Persians retired home without effect. The army at this murmured at him, both Commanders and Souldiers, but not yet to his face. The Persians at last lodged upon the shore of Euphrates, opposite to the City of Callinicum, resolving from thence to march through a desert country, and so out of Roman ground, and not as before by the rivers side. The Romans from the City Sura, where they lodg'd, rose, and overtook the Enemy trussing up their baggage. The Feast of Easter was to be the next day, which Christians observe above all others; the day before it, and much of the night abstaining from all meats and drinks. And Belisarius seeing them eager upon the enemy, and willing to withdraw them from the opinion, (Hermo∣genes being of the same mind, sent newly Ambassador from the Emperour) he called them together, and spake thus; Whether are you transported fellow souldiers! to chuse thus a needless danger? That onely is pure victory, that comes off without damage from the Enemy: and that now fortune, and the fear of us amazing them, gives us; which advantage it is better to en∣joy, having it, than to seek it when it is gone. The Persians invited with hopes, invaded us, and now failing, run away. If we force them to change their course, and fight; overcoming, we gain nothing, but to rout an ene∣my flying already. But having the worst, we lose our present victory (not forced from it, but giving it away) and leave the Emperours land to the spoil of the Enemy, with none to defend it. Consider also, that God doth co∣operate with mens necessary, not wilfull actions; how men stopt from fly∣ing will fight, though unwillingly; and how many disadvantages there are to us for a battell, many being marcht hither afoot, and all of us fast∣ing, and some of us not yet come up: The Army reproached Belisarius for this speech, not muttering now, but with open clamour to his face, calling him faint-hearted man, and a discourager of them. And this errour some Commanders ran into with the souldier, onely to shew their valour. Be∣lisarius amazed at this impudence, turned his discourse to encourage them, and to order them to the encounter, saying that he knew not their alacrity before, but now he took courage, and went against the enemy with more hopes. So he set his Batallion in front, and his foot in the left wing towards the river, and to the right hand, where there was a steep peece of ground, A∣rethas with his Saracens: himself with the horse stood in the middle. Aza∣rethes seeing the Romans embattell'd, and ready for the encounter, said to his men; That being Persians, certainly they will never change their honour for life, if they might have the choice. But that now, if they would, they could make no such choice. They who can by running from a danger, live disho∣nourable, if they can so resolve, chuse yet instead of the best, the most pleasant thing. But they who must die either honourably by an enemy, or basely by
a superiour, dradg'd to execution, are mad if they chuse not the best condi∣tion, instead of the basest. He bad them therefore, not thinking onely upon the enemy, but upon their Lord and Master, so to fight that day. Having ex∣horted them, he placed his Batallion opposite to the Enemy, and gave the right wing to the Persians. and the lest to the Saracens. The battell then joy∣ned, and was stifly fought. The arrows flew thick from both sides, and killed many. Some single encounters were between the Battallions, with much va∣lour performed. The Persians fell more by the shot, though they shot thicker, and are almost all Archers, and the most dextrous living; but from weak bowes little beut, the shaft lighting upon the Romans corslet, head-peece, or sheild, crackt without hurt doing. The Romans shot is slower, being from stiff bowes much bent, and hardly; but coming from stronger men than Persians, they speed where they light, no armour resisting the force. Two thirds of the day were past, and the fight yet equall. When the Persians best men com∣bining, charged the right wing, where was Arethas and his Saracens. They opened their Battallion, and not abiding the charge ranne a∣way, suspected that day to betray the Romans. The Persians thus breaking through the ranks, had the backs of the Romans horse, who weary with their journey and toyl in fight, being fasting too, and prest both wayes by the ene∣my, gave it over, and ran into small Ilands in the river near them. Some staid and did bravely; among whom Ascas, having slain many chief Persians, was with much adoe cut in pieces, leaving a noble story to his enemies; and with him eight hundred more fell, good men; and all the Isaurians, with their Commanders, using no resistance: Men unexperienced, newly taken from the plough, and who knew not what a battell meant; yet hotter than any upon the fight, they reproached Belisarius with cowardize a little before. Indeed they were not all Isaurians, but most Lycaonians. Belisarius staying with some few, while Ascas and his company stood, resisted also: But seeing them slain, he fled into the battallion of foot, where Peter their leader maintained the fight, with some with him, the most being run away. Then Belisarius quitted his horse, causing his followers to doe the like, and with the rest re∣ceived the enemy. Who after a short execution came back, and gave on upon Belisarius; who to prevent the enemies compass, kept his mens backs to the river, and stood their charge; where was a fierce fight, though with unequall powers, a few footmen fighting with all the Persian horse, and yet not routed by them. For standing close, and fencing with their shields, they shot the e∣nemy to more purpose, than they were shot. And the Barbarians to break them, riding oft against them, rode back again without effect; their horses being skittish upon the clashing of the shields, and the riders in confusion. And at night they retired to their camp. Belisarius also with some few got into a ship, and past into an Iland, whether some came after swimming. The next day the Romans were transported to Callinicum in ships, sent from thence. The Persians having spoyled the dead bodies, went home; finding their own not fewer in number than their enemies. Azarethes at his come∣ing home had no thanks from Cabades, though he wanne this battell; and upon this reason. When an Army is levyed in Persia the King uses to sit upon his Throne, and by him stand baskets, and the General designed for the army; which is to pass man by man before the King, and each to throw an arrow into the baskets; and they to be sealed with the Kings own seal. When the army comes home, every souldier takes his arrow out of the panniers, and some Commissioners number the arrows remaining, and so report to the King the number of the souldiers come home; whereby it is known how many are perished in that war. This custom is ancient in Persia; and Azarethes pre∣senting himself to the King, he askt him what place he had conquered, ha∣ving invaded the Romans with Alamundarus, with design to take Antioch? Azarethes answered, that he had taken no place, but had vanquisht Bellisarius in battell. Then Cabades willed the army to come in, and take out their arrows, whereof many being left in the baskets, the King reviled Azarethes, and after hold him in disgrace.
CHAP. XV. THe Emperour Justinian then bethought himself of associating the Home∣rites, and Ethiopians against the Persians: Who, where they inhabite, and wherein the Emperour thought them usefull to the Romans, I will tell you. The Homerites are to the East of Palestina, upon the red sea, which beginning from India, ends in that part of the Roman Empire; having upon the coast where it ends, in a narrow straight, the City AElas, and the mountains of E∣gypt to the South, and a desart country, reaching far to the North. As you sayl in, the land from both fides is seen, till the Iland of Jotabeé, which is from Aelas some hundred and five and twenty miles; where are seated the Hebrews, anciently free, but in Justinians reign made subject to the Romans. From hence a large sea opening, no land is to be seen to the right hand, as you sayl in, but at night you cast anchor on the left hand shore, the sea being full of shelfes, and in the dark not to be meddled with. There are many harbours made by the nature of the places, and safe to put in at. The coast from Palestina the Saracens possese, who are anciently seated in the country of Palm-trees, being in the midland, spacious, and having no∣thing growing but Date-trees. Which Abocharabus, Governour of the Saracens there, gave to Justinian, who made him Chieftain of the Saracens in Palestina, thereby preserving that Province from spoyl, Abocharabus being terrible to his subjects and enemies; and very valiant. This country of Palm-trees being desert, and in the middle without water, for ten dayes journey, is of no use to us. Abocharabus gave us the name of a present only, which the Emperour knowing well, yet took it of him. Next to the Sara∣cens in Palestina, are other upon the same coast, called Maadeni, subject to the Homerites. Upon the coast nextbeyond are the Homerites, and beyond them many other nations are seated, to the Man-eating Saracens. Beyond whom are the Indians. Opposite to the Homerites on the other shore are Ethiopians; called Auxomites, of the City of Auxomis, where is their Kings court. The sea between them is five dayes and nights sayl over, with a reasonable wind, keeping there the sea all night, by reason there are no slielves. This some call the Red sea; and the rest as you sail out to AElas, the Arabian gulf. For all the country from thence to Gaza was formerly called Arabia, and their King held his Court at Petra. The Homerites haven from whence they sayl into Ethiopia is called Boulicas, and they land at a haven of the Adulites, from whence, the City of Adulis is onely two miles and a half, and from Auxomis twelve dayes journey. The vassels of India, and on these seas, are not built like other ships, nor trimmed with pitch or such like, nor are the planks fastned with iron through them, but tyed together with cords. Not because of Iron-drawing Rocks (as is vulgarly thought) the Romans ships upon that sea coming from AElas, though built with Iron, finding no such matter; but be∣cause neither Indians, nor Ethiopians have. Iron, nor other materials for that use: Nor can they buy any of the Romans; who forbid it upon pain of death. From Auxomis aforesaid, to the Roman Frontiers in Egypt, is thirty dayes journey; where are the Blemmyes, and Nobates, and other numerous people. The Blemmyes are seated in the midland, but the Nobates upon the Nile. This was not formerly the Roman frontier, which was seven dayes journey beyond. But Dioclesian finding their tribute a trifle, and their country nar∣row, being most taken up with the rocks of Nile; and the garrisons in it (being many) burdening his Treasury with the charge: And considering how these Nobates then dwelling about the City of Oäsis, spoyled the Towns near them, he drew them to rise from that place, that they might no more trouble the country about Oästs, by giving them fair Roman Cities, and a large country, all from Elephantina on both sides the Nile, which he thought they would now guard, and beat off the Blemmyes (as being their own land) and other barbarous Nations. He gave them also, and to the Blemmyes, a pension in Gold, not to prey upon the Roman territories; which they still receive, yet over-run the Provinces. So impossible it is for Barbarians to keep,
faith with Romans, but for feare of the Souldier. Yet the said Emperour, in an Iland of the Nile neer Elephantina, built a strong Castle, with Temples, and Altars for the Romans, and these people; appointing Priests of each Nation, and thinking by a participation in the same devotions, to make a sure amity be∣tween them. And upon this he called the place Philae, Both the Blemmyes, and the Nobates worship the Gods esteemed by the Graecians, and Isis and Osiris and Priapus too; and the Blemmyes sacrifice men to the Sunne. The Temples in Philae these Barbarians held to my time, but by direction of the Emperour Justinian, Narses the Persarmenian, who revolted to the Romans, (as I said) commanding the forces in those parts, demolished them, keeping the Priests in restraint, and sending the Images to Constantinople. CHAP. XVI. BUt during this warre with Persia Hellisthaeus King of Ethiopia, a very devout Christian, hearing how the said Homerites of the opposite con∣tinent were many of them Jewes, and many Heathen, and laid excessive bur∣dens upon the Christians, he sent out a Navy and Army against them, and fighting with them, routed them, and slew their King and much people. And having made Esimiphaeus King of them, a Homerite, and a Christian, and im∣posed a tribute upon them, he went home. In the Ethiopian Army were many, both slaves and leud persons, that would not follow the King home, but staid with the Homerites, being in love with the Country, as being very good land. But not long after, the people imprisoned Esimiphaeus, and made one Abramus their King, a Christian, who had been a slave to a Roman Merchant, residing for his traffique, in the Ethiopian City of Adulis. Hellisthaus, to punish Abra∣mus, and his complices, for the wrong done to Esimiphaeus, sent against them under the command of a kinsman, 3000. men. These also desiring to remaine in that good land, liad secret conference with Abramus, unknown to their Commander, and in the battell kill'd him, and joyned with the enemies, and continued there. Hellisthaeus angry, sent another Army, which coming to a battell returned with much losse; and then afraid to meddle any more with Abramus, he forbare warr. But he being dead, Abramus was content to pay the tribute to his successour, and so confirmed his governement. These things happened afterward. But then during the raignes of Hellisthae∣us, and Esimiphaeus, Justinian sent his Ambassadour Julian, to desire their con∣federacie against the Persians (the Romans, and they consenting in one religi∣on) and that the Ethiopians would make themselves masters of a rich trade, by dealing with the Indians for their silke, and selling it to the Romans, who should have this onely advantage therein, that they should carry out their mony to their enemies for it. Of this silke are made the anciently called Persian, now Serick, or silke garments. The Homerites were prayed also to make chiefetaine of the Maadeni Saracens, one Caisus, a banisht man (who having kill'd a kins∣man of Esimiphaeus, was fled into a wilderness, being of the race of the Phy∣larchi, and a very good Souldier) and that together with those Saracens, they would invade the Persians. Both dimist the Ambassador with promise to effect the Emperours desires, but neither performed; the Ethiopians not being able to buy the silke; because the Persian Merchants ever come first to the havens, where the Indians unlade, being their next borderers, and buy up all. And the Homerites thought it hard, to travell through a desert, many dayes journy, to fight with a people more warlike then themselves. Afterward Abramus having setled his Kingdome, promised oft to Justinian, but onely once began the journey, and turned home againe. Thus the Romans spedd with these people. In the meane time Hermogenes came to Cabades in Ambassage after the bat∣tell of Euphrates, but could not effect the peace, finding him much enraged, and so came away. Belisarius also the Emperour sent for, discharging him of that command, to make warre upon the Vandales; and Sittas was sent to guard
the East. The Persian Army, led by Chanaranges, Aspevedes and Mermeroes, againe entred Mesopotamia, and (none encountring them) sate downe before Martyropolis, where were garrison'd Buzes, and Bessas; It stands in the Pro∣vince of Sophanene, thirty miles to the North of Amida, upon the river of Nymphius, which bounds the Roman and Persian territories. The Persians as∣saulted, and were valiantly receaved by the besieged, who could not thinke long to hold out, the walls being very assaultable, and easie for the Persians works, and they having neither provisions, nor engines, nor any other thing within of importance to defend. Sittas with the Roman army came to Attachas, twelve miles from Martyropolis; where he encamped, not daring to march further: with him was Hermogenes in another Ambassage. In the meane time this happened. The Romans and Persians have anciently had spies, defrayed at the publique charge, who secretly passe among the enemy; informing them∣selves of all occurrences, and advertising their owne Princes. Many of these, as affectionate Patriots, doe their best, some betray their Countries secrets to the enemy. One of the Persian spies then discovered to Justinian much of their affaires, and how a Nation of Massagetes was coming into Persia, and from thence were to invade the Romans, with the Persian army. The Emperour had experience of the mans truth, and persuades him with mony, to goe and report to the Persians before Martyropolis, that these Massagetes were hired by the Emperour, and instantly to come against them. Who according went to the Persian Camp, and told them that an armie of Hunnes their enemies were coming to ayde the Romans: which made them afraid, and doubtfull what to doe. CHAP. XVII. IN the meane time Cabades fell mortally sicke, and calling to him Mebodes, a Persian, his chief favourite, opened his resolution concerning Chosroes, and the Kingdom, and that he feared, the Persians would seek to frustrate it. Me∣bodes prayed him to leave his resolution in writing, and to assure himself, the Persians would not disrespect it. Cabades thereupon declared Chosroes King by his testament, written by Mebodes himself, and soon after died. His usuall funerall ceremonies being performed, Caoses presuming upon the Law, took upon him the dignity. Mebodes forbad him, alledging that none of himself might take the Kingdome, but by the votes of the principall Persians, Caoses referred to the great Officers the cognisance of the matter, not suspecting op∣position from thence. So the principall Persians being assembled, and set down; Mebodes, by reading the testament, manifested the determination of Cabades:Anno Domi∣ni 531. & Justiniani 5. whose great vertues they all remembring, forthwith declared Chosroes King of Persia. And thus Chosroes got the Kingdom. But Sittas and Hermogenes, having no meanes to relieve Martyropolis, sent to the enemies Generalls to tell them; That they were hinderanoes to the King their master, to the blessings of peace, and to both their common-wealths. That Ambassadors are sent from the Emperour to their King, to end all differences, and to make a truce; That therefore they should quit the Roman territory, and give the Ambassadours leave to negotiate for the good of both parties; and that they are ready for what they say to give good hostages, that it will shortly be effected. There chanced to be there at the same time a messenger with the newes of the death of Cabades, and that Chosroes was King, and the affaires in Persia yet tottering. Which caused the Generalls to heare gladly the Romans propositions, earing also the invasion of the Hunnes. So that the Romans declared for hostages Martinus and Sone∣cius, one of Sittas his Lifeguard: and the Persians raised their siege, and went home. The Hunnes not long after entred the Roman territory, and finding no Persian army, after some few dayes, retired home also. And Hermogenes with his fellow Ambassadors, Rufinus, Alexander, and Thomas, repaired to the Ti∣gris, where was the King of Persia; who upon their coming, released the ho∣stages. The Ambassadors, to make Chosroes tractable, used flatteries little be∣coming
Roman Ambassadors, which so pacified him, that a perpetual peace was concluded for 110. Centenaries,346500 l. sterl. to be given him, and the Commanders of the Forces in Mesopotamia to reside no more at Daras, but at Constantina, as they did formerly: The forts in Lazica he denied to restore, and yet demanded of the Romans restitution of Bolus, and Pharangium. A Centenary weighes 100. pound weight, so called of Centum in Latin: and this gold he demanded to quit the Romans from demolishing Daras, and sharing in the charge of the Garrison at the Caspian Gates. The Ambassadors liked all, but the Forts; alledging they could not deliver them without the Emperours express pleasure. So it was resolved, to send Rufinus to Constantinople, concerning these particulars, pre∣fixing him seventy dayes for his journey; and the rest to stay till his returne. The Emperour hearing what Chosroes stood upon, directed the peace to be con∣cluded upon those tearmes. But Chosroes, upon a false rumour that Justinian, offended with Rufinus, had put him to death, being troubled, and angry at it, he invaded the Romans with his army. But Rufinus returned, and overtok him neer Nisibis, where they resolved to consummate the peace, and the mony was brought into the town by the Ambassadors. But Justinian repenting the quit∣ting the two Forts in Lazica, wrote to his Ambassadors, absolutely forbidding to part with them. So Chosroes refused to conclude the treatie, and then Rufinus considered how more hastily then safely he had brought the mony into the Persian dominion, and casting himselfe prostrate before Chosroes, besought him to safe conduct the mony, and to deferr the present bringing an Army upon the Romans. Chosroes bad him rise, and promised to grant all for his sake. So the Ambassadors came to Daras with the mony, and the Persian Army marcht back. His fellow Ambassadors were jealous of Rufinus, and accused him to the Emperour, because Chosroes yeilded upon his perswasions to every thing. But the Emperour did him no hurt, sending him againe shortly after, and Hermogenes to Chosroes; when they concluded the accord, That each should restore what was taken in this warre; That there should be no more any Com∣mander of Forces residing in Daras; And for the Iberians now in Constantino∣ple, they were to have their choice, either to stay there, or returne home. Upon which many of them staid, and many went into their own Country. Thus was concluded the Perpetual Peace (as they called it) in the * sixt yeare of Justinians raigne,Anno Domi∣ni 532. Iustiniani 6. the Romans, delivering up the Forts of Bolus and Pharan∣gium, and the Persians the places in Lazica: Who then also sent home Dagaris, to the Romans, for another Persian of quality. Dagaris did often after expell the Hunnes, and he overcame them in severall battells, being an extraordina∣ry good Souldier. CHAP. XVIII. THe peace being thus ratified by both parts, two Rebells of their owne subjects fell upon both these Emperours, in this manner. Chosroes was of an unruly spirit, a great undertaker, troublesome; full of tumult himselfe, and an extreame troubler of others. So that the Persians being weary of his governement, such of them, as were stirrers, consulted to make another King of the house of Cabades. Zames they had a mind to, but the Law excluded him, for his mayme of an eye: In the end they resolved to advance to the King∣dome the son of Zames; and he, as his sons protector, to manage the affaires. This resolution they revealed to Zames, and with their many encourage∣ments, perswaded him to the business; and a fit time was appointed to sur∣prize the King. But the plot being discovered to the King, he prevented it, and put Zames to death, and the rest of his brother, and their male issue, and all such men of quality, as contrived, or were accessory to the conspiracy; among whom was Aspevedes, his mothers brother. Cabades, the son of Zames, (be∣ing fostered with the Generall Adergudunbades) he directed the said Generall to kill, (though his own foster child) trusting the man neither indeed could he force him, not without him kill the child. The Generall much grieved at
this dismall Injunction, acquainted his wife with it, and the childs nurse. The wife weeping, took him by the knees, and besought him not to kill Ca∣bades. So they consulted together, and concluded to breed the child closely, and to write to Chosroes, that he was dead. This they did accordingly, and so concealed the young Cabades, that none had any suspition, but his own son Varames, and one of his trustiest servants. But Cabades being come of age, the Generall fearing discovery, gave him money, and bad him save his life in ba∣nishment. And all this he kept from the knowledge of Chosroes: till Chosroes went with his army into Lazica (as shall be related hereafter) and Varames with him, who had waiting on him the servant privy to the business of Ca∣bades, and revealed all to the King, producing his servant who agreed in all points. Chosroes raged, and thought it unsufferable, to beare such things from one of his own slaves; and he bethought himselfe of this way to get the man into his hands. When he was coming home out of Lazica he wrote to the Generall, that he resolved to invade the Romans, and not at one entry, but dividing his army, that he might make his invasion both on this side, and be∣yond the Euphrates. One part himselfe must lead, and he would upon no ser∣vant bestow an equality in honour with himself, but on him the Generall, in regard of his valour. So that he should doe well, with speed to meet him in his journey, that he might communicate, and direct what should concern the expedition, leaving his traine to follow fair and foftly after. The Ge∣nerall overjoyed with this honour from the King, and farr from guessing his own mischief, did as he was commanded. But spent with hard travell, (being an old man) he slipt his bridle, and fell from his Horse; wherewith his legg being broken, he was forced to stay to be cured. Chosroes arriving at the same place, he was brought to the Kings presence; who told him he could not go the expedition appointed, with his legg in that case; but bad him at some Castle there get the help of Surgeons. And so he sent him the way to his death, and after him men to kill him; An invincible Generall, and so reputed by the Persians; having subdued twelve Nations to Cabades. Being dead, his son Varames was made Generall. Long afterward Cabades the son of Zames, or one usurping his name, came to Constantinople. He was in his face like King Cabades, and Justinian used him honourably, as the grandchild of that King. Mebodes also Chosroes killed upon this ground. Being upon earnest bu∣sinesse, he bad Zaberganes call Mebodes to him: who found him training his Souldiers, and told him, the King called him in hast. He said, he would come presently, when he had dispatcht the businesse he was about. The other hating him, reported to the King, that Mebodes would not come as yet, alledging business. The King enraged, sent one to him, to command him to the Tripos, or three-footed table. Which is thus. An iron three footed table stands ever at the Court-gate, and when any Persian understands the King to be offended with him, he may not fly to Temple, or elsewhere; but sitting by this table must expect the Kings sentence, none being to guard him. Here Mebodes sate many dayes in a pittifull habit, till one by the command of Chosroes, took him away, and killed him. To this came the good services he had done Chosroes. CHAP. XIX. ABout the same time happened in Constantinople a suddaine mutiny, which grew high, and ended in much mischief, both to the Senate, and peo∣ple. The Commons of every City anciently have been divided into the Veneti and Prasini, the Blews, and the Greens. But it is not long, since about these names and clours, (wherein they stand to see sights) they consume their estates, abandon their bodies to tortures, and refuse not the most shamefull death. They run the danger of fighting with their opposites, being sure, (should they get the better) to be haled to prison, and after extreame torturing, to be put to death. There growes in them a hatred without ground, and lasts un∣determinable, not yeilding to allyance, kinred, or any law of friendship; be
it brother, or son, that dotes upon the contrary Colour. Nothing human, or divine they regard, in comparison of the victory in these, be it impietie a∣gainst God, or violation of lawes, or of the Commonwealth by subjects or enemies: nay themselves wanting necessaries, and their Country receaving in∣jury in the most important things, they are not sensible of it, so this their por∣tion may prosper: So they call their fellow Factionists. Nay the very wo∣men partake in this abomination, not onely as their husbands followers, but often their opposites; though they never goe to the Theaters, nor have other inducements. That I know not what to say, but that it is a meer disease of the mind: and thus it is in every City, and Corporation. But at that timePraefectus Ubi, next in dignity to the Prefect: Prae∣torio. The Au∣thour in his old age held this of∣fice. the Governour of the Citizens of Constantinople, led some Factionists to execution. Both parties then making peace, and conspir∣ing, first took away the men led to punishment, then let out of prison all who lay either for sedition, or any other crime; and without respect, slew the said Governours ministers. The Citizens who were of neither faction fled to the opposite continent; and the City, (as if under an enemy) was set afire. The Temple of Saint Sophie, and the Bath of Zeuxippus, and the Emperours Court from the porch to the Temple of Mars was consumed. Moreover the great Portions, reaching to Constantines market place; and many great means houses, end much wealth. The Emperour and Empress with some Senators shut them∣selves up in the Palace, without stirring. The peoples word to one another was, Nica, overcome; From whence to this day that Mutiny is called Nica. John the Cappadocian was thenPraefectus Praetorio of the Orient; There was another of Illyrium, both belonging to the Easterne Em∣pire. Prefect of the Court; and Tribonianus, a Pam∣phylian, Assessor to the Emperour, by the Romans called Quaestor. John was a man vnbred in any liberall science (having learn't at the Grammar Schoole onely poore letters, to write as poorely) but in naturall abilities, the most powerfull man we ever knew, both to discerne fit things, and in doubtfull to find a resolution; but the wickedest man alive: wherein he employed the strength of his nature, without respect of God or men; for gaine studying the ruine of mens estates, and of whole Cities. Quickly growing to a great wealth, he fell into boundless gluttony, preying upon the subject till dinner time, and the rest of the day spending in drunkennesse, and wanton abusing his bo∣dy, eating till he vomited. A man ready to catch mony, and more ready to la∣vish it. Such was John the Cappadocian. But Tribonianus, beside a great naturall ability, had attained to an excellence in learning, inferiour to no man of his time: But in the wayes of Covetousness most industrious, and ever ready to sell right for gaine; making, and repealing Edicts every day, ever selling them to any who had occasion to use them. During the peoples quarrells about those names, and colours, there was little speech of these mens misgoverne∣ments. But when they consented, and were now formed into a mutiny; open∣ly in the City they rail'd upon them, and sought occasions to kill them. The Emperour to reconcile the people, put them both out of their places, and made Phocas a Patrician, Prefect of the Palace; a wise man, and naturally ad∣dicted to justice, and Basilides a Patrician he made Quaestor, a famous honest man. But the mutiny raged nothing lesse. The fift day of the same, about evening, the Emperour commanded Hypatius and Pompeius, Nephewes of the late Emperour Anastasius, to retire to their houses; either suspecting some attempt of theirs upon his person, or afraid that they were driven thereto by destiny. They fearing what came to passe, that the people would force them to the Empire, said, that it was not honest to leave their Emperour in so great danger. Justinian at this was more suspitious, and bad them instantly be gone home. They went, and it being night, were quiet; but the Sun no sooner up, but it was divulged, how these Lords were retired from the palace: and all the multitude ran to them, and salute Hypatius Emperour, and con∣ducted him to the market place, to take the affaires upon him; Maria his wife, a wise and sober Matrone, crying, and lamenting, and protesting to her friends, that the people were leading her husband to his death; and hanging upon him to stay him, till the people forced him from her. And when he was un∣willingly come to Constantines market-place, they proclaimed him Emperour
of the Romans, binding about his head a golden wreath, for Diademe they had none, nor other thing usuall to invest the Emperour. The Senators, as many as were not in the Palace, joyned; and the opinions of many were, to try their fortune at the Palace. But Origen a Senator admonished them; That indeed the case they were in, could not be decided without warr, and that warr and Empire are confest the greatest things among men. But great actions are not managed in an instant, but with advises and labours, which must have longer time for their exe∣cution. That if they march now to the Enemy, their affaires will be upon the edge of a razour; and in a little plece of time they shall adventure all, and then for what happens, either adore or revile Fortune; into whose hands the hastiest businesses com∣monly fall. But that if they carry it leysurely, they shall not take Justinian in the Palace, if they would; who will thinck it well, if he may run away. Soveraignty des∣pised, totters downeward, the strength of it daily consuming: That there are other Palaces, Placillianae, and that of Helena, from whence this Emperour may issue, and manage the warr, and other matters. The multitude embraced this advice, and Hypatius, (who was to have a mischief) bad them lead on to the Circus. Some say he went thither purposely, being well affected to the Emperour: Who held a Counsell, whether he should stay, or fly by Sea: Many discourses were; but the Empress Theodora spake thus. I suppose this no time to enquire, whether a woman should be bold among men, or may be valiant, when they are afraid. They, whose affaires are come into extreamest perill, must attend nothing, but how to settle best, that which lyes before them. I hold flying (if ever, certainely now, though it would preserve us) not expedient. For a man born into this light, not to dy, is im∣possible: But for one that hath been an Emperour, to become a Exile, is not to be en∣dured: For let me never come to be without this purple robe, nor live that day, in which they that speak to me, call me not their Lady and Mistress. If Sir! you have a mind to escape, 'tis no hard matter. We have store of money; and there's the sea; and yonder are shipps: But consider, whether you may not have cause, most willingly to exchange your safety, for death. For me, I like the old saying; How breave a Se∣pulcher a Kingdom is! At this speech they took courage to stand it out, and consulted of meanes of opposition, if any should set upon them. All the Souldiers, both quartered about the Emperours Palace and else∣where, neither affected the Emperour, nor durst openly joyne in this action, but expected the event. But Justinians whole hope was in Belisarius and Mun∣dus. The first newly come from the Persian warr, had brought a strong reti∣nue with him, of Lanciers and Targettiers, and others, all old Souldiers. And Mundus, beingThere was another cal'd Generall of all of the Orient; and two Gene∣ralls of the Le∣gions in Byzan∣tium: In La∣tin their name was Magistri militum. Generall of Illyrium, chanced, being sent for to Constantinople, to bring with him a Troop of Herulians. But Hypatius in the Circus, went up directly, and sate him down in the Emperours Seat, where he uses to see the horse races and other exercises. Then out of the Palace came Mundus, by the gate called Cochlea, from the round forme like a shell-snaile. But Belisarius went first toward Hypatius, and the Imperiall Seat, and at a hall where uses to be a guard of Souldiers, he called, willing the Souldiers to open the doores for him to goe against the Usurper. The Souldiers resolving to stand for nei∣ther, till one were cleerly the Conquerour, made as if they heard him not. Belisarius returning to the Emperour, affirmed they were all undone; the Soul∣diers revolting, who guarded the Palace. The Emperour bad him goe in by the Brazen gate, and the portall there; and he passing with much danger and toile, through rubbish, and places halfe burn't, got to the Circus. Being come to the Gallery of the Veneti, which is to the right hand of the Emperours Seat, he was thinking to set upon Hypatius; but the gate there was narrow, and he feared the people, seing him pestred in a narrow passage, might cut in pieces himselfe and his company, and then easily set upon the Emperour. So re∣solving to give on upon the innumerable multitude, which stood confusedly and crowded in the Circus, he drew his sword, and bad the rest doe the like, and ran upon them, with a great shout. The people being crouded together, and seing corselets, and Souldiers of approved valour and experience, unmer∣cifully hewing them with their swords, fell to running away. A fearfull cry was made, and Mundus standing neer, and desirous to have his share in the
action (being a daring man) when he saw Belisarius in fight, he rusht into the Circus also at the gate called Necra. And so the Mutineers between them both were cut in peeces. And the overthrow being clear, and much slaughter of the Commons, Boraides and Justus, the Emperours Nephews, pulled Hypatius out of his seat (none resisting) and led him with Pompeius to the Emperour; (of the common people there being slain that day more than 30000.) The Emperour commanded them to prison; and Pompeius wept, being a man little versed in business; but Hypatius chid him, saying, That none ought to lament for men perishing unjustly; forced at the first by the people, and then coming to the Circus for no hurt to the Emperour: But the next day the souldiers killed them both, and threw their bodies into the sea. The Emperour confisca∣ted their estates, and of all the other Senators of their faction; but afterward restored to them, and to the sonnes of Hypatius, and Pompeius, their former dignities, and so much of their estates, as he had notBut he gave away all their best lands and goods first. See the Secr. Hist. given away. And thus the mutiny ended. CHAP. XX. TRibonianus and John the Cappadocian had their Offices restored to them a∣gain. Tribonianus lived many yeares in the same, and dyed in his bed, without receiving other disgrace, being a faire spoken man, pleasant, and able to vail his Covetousness with abundance of Learning. But John was irksome to all the world, threatning the whip to all men, and sharking all kind of booty. In the tenth year of his Office he paid the just penalty of his lawless life in this manner.This story be∣gins 8 years af∣ter the Mutiny, and ends tenne years after it, when Iohn was stript of all, and sent begging to Alexandria. As appears in the end of the Chapter. The Empresse Theodora hated him of all men; and he being fallen foul with her by some errors, sought not to gain her with flattery and good turnes, but openly plotted against her, and accused her to the Emperour; neither respecting her fortune, nor the Emperours extreame affection to her. She perceiving his doings, desired to kill him, but could not, the Emperour so much esteemed him. But John knowing the Empresses mind, was terribly affraid, suspecting every night in his bed, some Barbarian should rush in to kill him; and still peeping out, and searching the entries, that he could not sleep, though he had about him some thousands of Lanciers and Targetiers; a thing never used by any Praefect. But no sooner day; but again, forgetting all fear of God, or man, he became a common destruction to all Romans, frequenting Sorcerers, and hearkning to impious South-sayings, vainly foretelling to him the Imperiall dignity; that one might see his thoughts in the air, transported with hopes of the Empire: And in his wicked course of life he bated nothing, nor was God in any of his thoughts. If he went to Church to pray, or watch all night, he observed not the Christian Rites; but having on a course garment, like a Heathen Priest, he mumbled all the night some ungodly spels, to captivate more the Emperours mind, and to preserve himself from mischief. In the mean time Belisarius, after the conquest of Italy, came to Constantino∣ple with his wife Antonina, to manage the war against the Persian, being pre∣cious to all men, and indeed deserving much estimation. Yet this John was harsh to him, and still plotting against him; onely because himself was generally hated, and Belisarius of all men the most renowned. And the hope of the Romans being upon him, again he made an expedition into Persia, leaving his wife Antonina in Constantinople, who (being the ablest woman a∣live to effect things hard to be effected) to gratifie the Empresse, devised this. John had a daughter, his onely child, named Euphemia, whom he extreamely loued, very modest, but young, and so easily caught. This mayd, Antonina, by much soothing, and assiduity, at last gained to her lure; not disdaining to impart her secrets to her. And once having her above in a chamber, she feigned to lament her own fortune, That Belisarius (after so much enlarging the Roman Empire, and two Kings brought prisoners to Constantinople, and so vast a wealth) found Justinian ungratefull; and in other things she accused
the Government, as unjust. Euphemia overjoyed at this discourse, being trou∣bled too with the Government, and fear of the Empress; Truly, dear Lady! (quoth she) you are the causes, who having power, will not use it. We are not able, daughter (replyed Antonina) to stirre in the Camp, if some in the Court concurre not in the action: But if your Father would, wee should easily (being once in the business) effect, whatsoever it should please God. Euphemia confidently promised, that this should be done; and departing, re∣lated the matter to her father. Who pleased with it, and conceiving it to lead him the way to his Prophesies, and the Empire, without pausing upon it, consented: Willing his daughter to treat for a meeting the next day, and that he might give her his oath. Antonina knowing his mind, and desirous to draw him from suspecting the truth: To give him a meeting now (quoth she) will doe hurt; it will cause suspition, and hinder all: But she was in∣stantly to goe into the East to Belisarius; being departed from Constantinople, and in her house in the suburbs (which is called Rufinianae, a house of Belisa∣rius) there John should come to take leave, and bring her on her way; where they might conferre, and give oath, and take it. John liked this, and a day was assigned accordingly. The Empresse informed of all from Antonina, com∣mended the plot, and encouraged her in it. And at the day appointed, Anto∣nina took leave of the Empress, and came to Rufinianae, and the next day was to begin her journey. Thither at night came John, to finish the agreement. The Empresse had informed her husband of these attempts of John to usurp, and so sent to Rufinianae Narses the Eunuch, and Marcellus, Commander of the Palatine guards, with many souldiers, and direction to search out the business, and if they found John in any plot, to kill him, and come away. They say the Emperour advertised of this proceeding, sent one to John, not to meet Anto∣nina secretly. Which advise John neglecting (it being his fate to be ruined) about midnight met Antonina near a hedge, behind which she had placed Narses, and Marcellus, to hear what was said. There did John consent in plain words to the conspiracy, and confirmed it with most terrible oaths. Then did Narses and Marcellus, break in upon him. But at the noise, Johns Lanciers (who were at hand) came presently in. One of them wounded Marcellus with his sword, not knowing who it was; whereby John with them escaped, and ran to the City. If he had had the heart to goe immediately to the Em∣perour, he had had no hurt, I verily think: But by flying to the Temple, he gave the Empresse full scope to advance her design against him. So that of a Praefect made a private man, and removed from that Church, he was brought to another, standing in a suburb of Cyzicum, called Artâce, and there made a Priest, naming himself Peter. He was not made a Bishop, but a Priest: Neither would he execute the function of a Priest, lest it should hinder his promotion to greater offices. For he would not lay down his hopes. His estate being con∣fiscate, the Emperour remitted much of it, being still inclined to spare him. There had John the means (secure from dangers, and rich, both by what he had collected himself, and what he had by the Emperours grace) to use his pleasures without controlement, and with moderation to esteem his estate happy. At which all men repined, that being the wickedest devil in the world, he should thus live happyer than he did before. But God would not suffer his punishment to stay there, but prepared this greater scourge for him. Eusebius, the bishop of Cyzicum, was as harsh a man as John himself. And him the Cyzicenians accused to the Emperour in a judi∣ciall way; but not prevailing (Eusebius being too strong for them) some young men laid wait, and killed him in the Market-place of Cyzicum. With this Eusebius John had great differences, which cast a suspition of the fact upon him. So that some Senators being sent to examine it, first put him in the common prison, setting him naked like a robber, or some pilfering rogue (one who had been so powerfull a Praefect, enrolled among the Patricians, and had sate in the Consuls chair, then which dignity none is greater in the Roman state) and tearing his back with many stripes, they forced him to re∣veal his own life. There was no great argument of his guilt of the murder;
but the justice of God exacted from him a revenge, for abusing the whole world. They took then all his estate from him, and put him naked into a ship, save with one course coat, which cost not much. His conductors, where∣soever the ship put in, made him beg his bread, and small moneys for his subsistence. And so begging all the way to Egypt, he was brought to Antinoë and this is the third year of his being there a prisoner. Yet in all this affliction, he quitted not his hope of the Empire; but fell to accuse some Alexandrians: for Arrears to the Treasury. This just vengeance fell upon John the Cappadocian, ten years after this time. But then the Emperour made Belisarius Generall of the East again, and sending him into Africa,Anno Domi∣ni 533. & Iustiniani 7. recovered the country, as shall be hereafter declared; which much vexed Chosroes and the Persians, repenting they had made a peace, when he saw the Romans power so augmented. And sending an Ambassadour to Constantinople, he congratulated with the Emperour, and in merriment de∣manded his share of the spoyles of Africa, seeing he had not vanquished the Vandales, if the Persians had not made peace with him. But Justinian sent Chos∣roës a present in money, and dismissed the Ambassadour. In the mean time at Daras one John, a souldier of the Garrison (some few of his fellow souldiers conspiring) usurped, and possessed the City. In the Pa∣lace there, as in a Cittadell) he sate, confirming dayly his tyranny: And had not there been peace then with the Persians, some desperate mischief had fallen out. The fourth day of this tyranny, some other souldiers, by the direction of Mamas Bishop of Daras, and Anastasius a principall Citizen, went to the Pa∣lace at noon, each having under his cassock a short sword. And first at the inner court, finding some few Lanciers of the guard, they killed them; then going into the Hall, layd hold on the usurper. Some say the souldiers did not begin with him; but that (they demurring upon it in the inner court, afraid of the danger) a pudding seller in their company rusht in suddainly upon John, and with his knife wounded him; not mortally. But flying in haste, he fell among the souldiers, and then (they say) they laid hold on him; and ha∣ving set the place on fire, that it might not encourage any hereafter to rebell, they put him fettred in the common prison. Where one among them, fearing, that the souldiers knowing him to be living, might trouble the City again, killed him, and so appeased the mutiny, and the said tyranny in Daras. Finis Lib. 1. Bell. Pers.
The Contents of the Chapters of the Second Book of the Persian War. CHAP. I. CHosroes seeks occasions of war; causes Alamundarus to pick quarrels, and invade; excepts against Justinian for seeking to gain Alamundarus, and for provoking the Hunnes to invade Persia. Ambassadours from Viti∣gis, King of the Goths, perswade him unto it. CHAP. II. The War in Armenia; where Sittas, a brave Generall, is unfortunately slain. Buzes succeeds. Upon the killing of John they revolt to Chrosroes, and perswade him to break the Perpetuall Peace. CHAP. III. A Comet. A cruell invasion of Hunnes into Thrace and Illyrium. Justinian dehorts Chosroes from war. Chosroes first invasion. His cunning taking of Sura; and destroying it. He causes, Candidus Bishop of Sergiopolis to redeeme their captives. CHAP. IV. Buzes abandons Hierapolis with a speech. Germanus is sent to Antioch: Hie∣rapolis compounds. Berrhoea is taken: Of their Bishop Megas. CHAP. V. The Antiochians refuse composition. In the absence of Megas their Bishop, Berrhoea is taken. He obtains their bodies of Chosroes, who had sackt the City before. CHAP. VI. Antiochia is assaulted; and presently takes. The Souldiers run away at another gate. Zaberganes disswades mercy. The cruel execution. Two Ladies drown them∣selves. Chosroes his vaunting dissimulation; and his character. CHAP. VII. Chosroes having robbed the Church of great treasures, and sackt the City, burnt it all, save the Church, and some few buildings. He spares the walls. The Ambas∣sadors get a promise of peace for a great summe in hand, and a yearly pension. CHAP. VIII. He burns the Church of St Michael the Archangel in Daphne, by a mistake: Enters Apamea, which had a piece of the true Cross; and takes all their treasures. Chosroes will be for the Prasini, Justinian being for the Veneti. Col∣chis redeems it self. CHAP. IX. Chosroes attempts Edessa. A digression of Augarus and Augustus, and Christs Letter, that the town should never be taken. Edessa gives a little money, and is let alone. CHAP. X. The redemption of the Antiochian captives hindred by Buzes. A digression why Chosroes claimed Constantina. Daras besieged, and saved by a counter-mine. Antioch of Chosroes. A Prodigy foreshewing the destruction of Antioch. Beli∣sarius having brought Vitigis prisoner, King of the Goths, is appointed General against Chosroes. CHAP. XI. Colchis, called Lazica, revolts to the Persian; and invites him thither with an army; being angered by John Tzibus, the Generall there. Belisarius resolves with the advise of his Captains to invade Persia. CHAP. XII. Chosroes his second invasion of the Romans in Lazica. Petra is taken by com∣position, after the killing of John Tzibus.
CHAP. XIII. Belisarius at Nisibis fights with Nabedes, without much advantage: Sends A∣rethas to spoyl Assyria, who returns another way. Belisarius takes Sisabranum, and 800 Persians in it; then wisely returns in safety: and Chosroes comes out of Lazica. CHAP. XIV. Chosroes his third Invasion. Sergiopolis escapes; but their Bishop Candidus is made a captive, Belisarius comes post into the East, and gathers the scattered forces to Europus. CHAP. XV. Belisarius rids away Chosroes with a bravado. A Truce is agreed, yet Cul∣linicum destroyed by Chosroes. CHAP. XVI. An universall Pestilence: And how it raged in Constantinople, where dyed 10000 a day. CHAP. XVII. The peace is not concluded, through Justinians default. His Captains invade Persarmenia disorderly, and are overthrown at Anglon, and shamefully run away. CHAP. XVIII. Chosroes his fourth Invasion against the God of the Christians, and Edessa. He raises a mount. Stephanus, a Physitian, perswades peace, but cannot prevail. CHAP. XIX. The entreaties of Martinus for a peace are rejected. The Romans burn the Mount. The Persians are beaten back from their assaults. A truce for five years is accorded. Alamundarus hath a war. CHAP. XX. Chosroes plots: the possession of Lazica: And by his Ambassador Isdigunas the surprise of Daras; who failed in that design; but is magnificently entertained by Justinian at Constantinople. CHAP. XXI. Chosroes sends Fabrizus to kill Gubazes, who fails in his plot. Gubazes re∣volts to Justinian. Dagisthaeus besieges the Persians in Petra. The description of Phasis. Dagisthaeus by absurdly dallying, misses the taking Petra. CHAP. XXII. Mermeroe, with an Army of Persians, forces his way through the passage. Whereupon Dagisthaeus runs basely from Petra, Mermeroes, having relieved Petra, retires home, leaving 5000, who are cut in pieces by Gubazes. John the Cappa∣docian, after Theodora's death, returns to Constantinople, a priest onely; and how he wore the habit of Augustus.
THE HISTORY Of the Wars of the EMPEROƲR JUSTINIAN, Of the Persian War. The Second Book. CHAP. I. CHosroes hearing how Belisarius was recovering Italy for the Emperour Justinian, could hold no longer, but would find some specious pretext to break the peace: Alamundarus he directed to procure causes of a warr. Who charging Arethas for encroaching on him, with that colour forraged the Romans; alledging it no breach of peace between them and the Persians; neither having included him. Indeed in no treaties was any mention of the Saracens; being comprehended in the names of the Romans and Persians. The Country these Saracens disputed, is called Strata, and lies to the South of the City of Palmyra. Trees nor Corne it hath none, (being parcht with Sun,) onely it affoards some flocks of Sheep. Arethas claimed it for the Romans from the name it had (Strata in Latin being a paved way) and producing testimonies of ancient men: But Alamun∣darus would not dispute about names, alledging the owners to have anciently paid him rent for the pasturage. Justinian committed the arbitration of these differences to Strategius, a Patrician, superintendent of his treasures, a wise man, and nobly born, and to Summus late Captain of the Forces in Palestine, and brother to Julian, (who was Ambassador to the Ethiopians and Homerits) who thought it not sit the Romans should quit the Country. But Strategius prayed the Emperour, not to give the Persians, (now quarrelling,) occasion for a warr, about such a poore barren Country. Who consulted about it, and much time was spent in the Arbitration. But Chosroes said the peace was bro∣ken, in that Justinian during the same had manifested a great designe upon his house, by endeavouring to gaine from him Alamundarus; Summus at the Ar∣bitration having importuned him with great offers of money to revolt. Chos∣roes also produced the Emperours letters written to Alamundarus; And he alledged, that he had also written to the Hunnes to invade and forrage the Per∣sians,
and that the Hunnes had sent him the Letters. Chosroes with these obje∣ctions, (true, or false, I know not) resolved to break the peace. Then also Vitigis King of the Goths, brought low with the warr there, sent two Ambassadours to him, to persuade his invading the Romans; being not Goths, (for feare of spoiling the business being discovered) but Ligurian priests, won to this negotiation by large gifts. He that seemed the better man, and called himself a Bishop, went for the Ambassadour, and the other for his ser∣vant. Being come into Thrace, they took in an Interpreter for the Syrian and Greek tongues; and so came into Persia undiscovered; the Romans keeping no exact guards because of the peace: And having accesse to Chosroes, they spake thus; Other men, O King! employ Ambassadors for ends of their own: But Vitigis King of the Goths and Italians, having sent us to advise you concerning your Em∣pire, thinck him, as present, to say thus. In a word, O King! you abandon your owne Empire, and all men besides, to Justinian; who being naturally pragmaticall, am∣bitious, and restlesse, hath strong desires to conquer every Land and Dominion. But finding himself unable to deale singly with the Persians, nor during their opposition, to assaile others; he resolved to blind you with a Peace, and to compell others to joyne their powers to his, against your Dominions. The Vandales and Moores he hath al∣ready ruined, by removing us out of his way with a title of friendship: And now fully stored with money, and men, he invades us: shewing, that if he can subdue the Goths; with us, and the slaves he hath already made, he will bring his Army up∣on the Persians, respecting no name of friendship, nor his Oath. So that while there is yet hope, doe us no more hurt, nor suffer any your selfe; but in our misfortunes, see what may happen to the Persians. Thinck the Romans never your friends, but once above you in power, that they will consummate their hatred. Use your power in the due time, least you seek it, when 'tis gone. The point of opportunity once blunted, never recovers. 'Tis better to prevent and be safe; then coming short of the opportu∣nity, to suffer the basest things from an Enemy. Chosroes esteemed this Counsell of Vitigis to be good; and studied more the breaking the peace; in his envy of Justinian, not considering these discourses to come from the Emperours Ene∣mies. He had a mind to it, and so like a willing fugitive he yeilded himself: which happened also to him upon the discourses of the Armenians and Lazi∣ans afterward. They imputed to Justinian that, which is the high praise of a generous Emperour, the making his Empire greater and more glorious; which they might aswell object to Cyrus the Persian, or Alexander the Mace∣donian. But envious men know no right: And thus Chorsroes resolved to breake the peace. CHAP. II. BUt in the meane time this happened. Simeones (who gave up Pharangium to the Romans) in the heat of the warr obtained of Justinian some Arme∣nian villages; and having them, he was slaine by some of the ancient possessors; the murtherers being two brothers, the sons of Perozes, fled into ersia; and the Emperour Justinian gave the villages to Amazaspes, sisters son to Simeones, and made him governour of Armenia. After this a follower of Justinian, one Acacius, accused Amazaspes of confederacy, and plotting to deliver Theodo∣siopolis to the Persian, and other Townes, and by the Emperours direction put him to death treacherously, and was made Governour of Amenia: He was a wicked man, and so appeared, and most cruell to the Armenians, by unreasonable rapines,12600 li. slerl. and by taxing them with a new tribute of foure Centenaries. The Armenians not able to endure him longer, conspired and killed him, then seized upon Pharangium: Against whom the Empe∣rour sent Sittas from Constantinople, where he had remained ever since the peace. He at first made a slow warr, striving to appease, and reduce them to their former affections; promising to get their new tribute remitted. But the Emperour, at the instigation of Adolius, the son of Acacius, reproach't him for dallying. Then he prepared to give battell, endeavouring with faire
promises to joyne some, to have the rest better cheape. The Apetians, a great and populous people, willing to submit, sent to him for assurance; that turn∣ing to the Roman Army from their own Countrey-men, they should enjoy their own estates, free from grievance. He gladly made an Instrument of their assurances, and sent it them signed; and confident upon this to winne the bat∣tell without striking stroke, he marcht to the Oenochalaces, where the Arme∣nians encamped. But the bearers of the Instrument could not meet the Apeti∣ans; and part of the Roman Army, not knowing of the accord, killed some few of them they met. And Sittas finding some children and women in a cave, an∣gry for the Apetians not joining according to promise, or not knowing them, killed them. So they stood in battell with the rest, offended with all this. The fight could not be in one place, but was scattered in ragged ground, and pre∣cipices, and bottomes of hills. So that Sittas not with many, and some few Armenians, came neer each other, with a deep vally between them; being both sides horse-men: Sittas past the vally, and charged the enemy; who re∣tiring, stood still, and Sittas stopt there too. By chance an Herulian of the Roman army came back in fury from the chase of an enemy, passing by Sittas, who had struck his lance into the ground, The Herulians horse rushing main∣ly against it, brake it; which much troubled Sittas. For an Armenian who knew him (having his helmet off) assured the rest it was Sittas. Who hearing what the Armenian said, and seeing his lance crackt upon the ground, drew his sword, and would have retreated over the vally. The Enemy rode eagerly after him, and one overtook him in the vally with a sword, which cut off the crown of his head, not hurting the scull. Sittas spurr'd on; but Artabanes, the son of John, of the race of the Arsacides, kill'd him with a thrust of his lance behind. Thus was Sittas lost impertinently, and not sutably to his for∣mer actions; A goodly man he was, valiant, and an excellent Commander, inferiour to none of his time. Some say one Solomon killed him, an obscure fel∣low, and not Artabanes. Sittas being dead, the Emperour sent Buzes against the Armenians. Who be∣ing neer them, promised to reconcile them, desiring conference with some of their chief men. None would give credit to Buzes, nor hearken to his offers, save John, the father of Artabanes his friend, of the race of the Arsacides, who presuming upon Buzes, as his friend, came to him with his son in law Bas∣saces, and some others. These the next day lodged where they were to meet Buzes, and perceaved themselves compass't with the Roman army. Bassaces, when he could not perswade John to flie, rode back, leaving him all alone; whom Buzes kill'd. The Armenians having no hope of reconciliation, and unable to maintaine the warr; under the conduct of Bassaces, a valiant man, betook themselves to the Persian King: To whom some of their Chiefs being admitted, spake thus. There are amongst us, Sir! many Arsacides, descendants of that Arsaces, who no stranger to the Persian Empire, when it was under the Parthians, was a famous King in his time, inferiour to none. But we now stand before you, become slaves and fugitives, not willingly, but forced; in apparance by the Romans, but indeed, O King! by your resolution. For who gives power to the wrong doer, justly beares the blame of the wrong. To deduce it higher, and through the severall occurrents, Ar∣saces, our last King, quitted his Royalty, it seemes, willingly to Theodosius the Ro∣man Emperour, with condition for those of his blood, to enjoy libertie, and not to be subject to Tribute. Which we preserved till your famous Peace, or rather common ca∣lamitie. For now not regarding friends nor enemies, this friend of yours, O King! in words, and enemy in deeds, hath troubled all the world. Which your selfe will know ere long, when he hath subdued the Western Nations. What thing prohibited hath he not done! what well settled not stirred? Hath he not taxed us with unusuall tri∣butes? made slaves of the Tzanians our borderers, a free people? set a Governour over the King of the wretched Lazians, a thing not incident to the nature of things? not to be exprest? Hath he not with his Generalls unjustly surprized the Bosporites, subjects of the Hunnes? made league with the Ethiopians, never heard of by the Romans? added the Homerits, red Sea, and Country of Palme-trees to the Roman
Empire? not to speak of the Affricans and Italians. The whole world not containing the man, he searches gulfes beyond the Ocean, and another world. Why doe you delay, O King! respecting this wicked ruinous peace? Is it, after all the rest, to be his last dish? To know what man Justinian is to them that yeild to him, you have us for a Precedent, and the poore Lazians: how he uses men unknown, as well as them that wrong him; consider the Vandales, Goths and Moores. But the maine of all: stu∣dies he not during the peace to draw Alamundarus your servant to revolt from you? to associate the Hunnes against you, men unknown to him? But a shrewder act then this was never: Now he perceaves his Westerne conquests ready for conclusion, he seeks to circumvent the East, having none now to wrestle with left, but the Persians. So that himself hath broken the Perpetuall Peace. They break peace, not who arme first, but who plot against their allies in time of peace, and the crime is acted by him that goes about to do it, though the success faile. And not they who cause the warr, but they who oppose them, use to conquer. Nor will the match be equall; their best Souldiers being in the utmost parts of the world; and of their two best Generalls, we have lately slaine Sittas; and Belisarius Justinian will not look on. Which he slight∣ing, holds in his hands the dominion of Italy: So that you will have none to oppose your invasion; and us you shall have with our best affections, and long experi∣ence of the Countrey, the guides of your Army. Chosroes liked these reasons, and imparted to his trustiest subjects, what Vitigis and the Armenians had said; propounding in Counsell what was to be done; where the conclusion was, to make warr on the Romans in the beginning of the spring, it being then Au∣tumne;Anno Domi∣ni 539. & Anno 13. Ju∣stiniani. and Justinian in the thirtenth yeare of his raigne; the Romans the while not suspecting the breach of the Perpetuall Peace; but hearing onely that Chos∣roes murmured against the Emperours successes in the West, and charged him, as I have mentioned. CHAP. III. THen also appeared a Comet, at first about the length of a tall man, after∣ward much longer: The taile was toward the East, and the head to the West; and being in Capricorne, kept behind the Sun in Sagittary. Some called it (being long with a sharp head) gladiata, some barbata. It was seen more then forty dayes. The learned in these things, made severall repugnant prae∣dictions upon this starr: But what hath fallen out since, I will relate. Imme∣diatly a great army of Hunnes passing the river Ister overran all Europe; a thing often done, but never with so much mischief to people. * From the Jonian gulfe, to the suburbs of Constantinople, they spoiled all in their way; in Illy∣rium they took 32. Castles; destroyed Cassandria (anciently Potidaea) having never, (that we know) attempted before a walled Town; and with much boo∣ty, and some 120. thousand captives retired home, meeting no opposition: Af∣terward they did many mischiefs to the Romans in their inroads.He calls the Jonian Gulfe that which is called the A∣driatique Sea. They as∣saulted the wall in Chersonesus, and forcing the Guards, and at full Sea (being upon the Gulf called Melas) getting over it, entred within it, fell suddainly upon the Roman inhabitants in Chersonesus, slew many, and made almost all the rest slaves. Some cross't the Strait between Sestus and Abidus, spoiled the towns of Asia Minor, and then returning to Chersonesus, went home with the rest of their army and their booty. In another inroad having spoyled Illy∣rium and Thessaly, they assaulted the wall at Thermopylae; where the Garrison defending stoutly, they unluckily found the path up the mountaine, and so wasted all Greece, save Peloponesus; and then retired. Not long after the Persians breaking the peace, did much infest the Romans of the East; Belisarius having newly subdued Vitigis, and brought him to Con∣stantinople. Before the Persian invasion, Justinian, who saw Chosroes (as I have said) quarrelling, sent a remonstrance to him by Anastasius, a prudent man, who lately had suppressed the Rebellion at Daras, and wrote letters to this effect. Wise men, who know God, strive to root up the occasions of warr, especially with their best friends. But men unadvised, and rashly affecting even God for their enemy,
contrive causes, which are no causes, of sights and troubles. To break a peace, and run into a warr, is an easie matter. The nature of things makes the worst courses easiest to worthless men. But to finish a warr to ones mind, and to get peace againe, is not so easie. You complaine of letters, which by me were written with no all pur∣pose; but by you are interpreted with a sense, such as conduces to the execution of your own counsells with some pretence. But we can alledge your Alamundarus his forraging our countryes, and acting desperate things during the peace; sucking our Towns, ransacking, killing, enslaving our people; so that you are not to complaine, but to excuse. The complaints of wrong doers are proved by actions, not discourses. And we, notwithstanding all this, resolved to observe the peace; while you seek warr, and coine complaints, which concerne not us. Men seriously embracing quiet, shake off complaints against friends, though they presse hard: But such, whom the articles of their friendship displease, study for pretexts: A thing not becoming ordinary men, much lesse Kings. Lay then these things by; and consider the multitudes to perish in this warr; and who shall beare the blame of what shall happen in it. Consider the oath you took when you receaved your money, which you slight now, but can with no so∣phistry evade. God is of a more excellent nature, then to be cosened by all the men living. Chosroes would not answer any thing to this Letter, nor dismisse Anastasius. But in the end of the Winter, and of theChosroes first Invasion. thirteenth yeare of Justinians raigne; Chosroes entred the Roman territories with a great army, and so cleer∣ly brake the Perpetuall Peace. He marcht not through the midland,Justinians reigne ended with the Win∣ter almost; For he was declared Emperour with his Ʋncle the third day before Easter. See Se∣cret. History. So this first In∣vasion of Chos∣roes was Anno Iustimani 14. Anno Dom. 540. but with the Euphrates to his right hand. Beyond the river stands Circesium, the furthest castle the Romans have, and a very strong one. The river Aborras, being great, meetes the Euphrates there, and the castle stands in the neck of land between the two rivers; and a long wall from each river, taking in the ground with∣out the castle, makes it a triangle. Chosroes would not attempt so strong a place, nor passe the river; his designe being for Syria and Cilicia; so he marcht on; and being gone so much way, as would amount to about three ordinary dayes journey, by the bancks of Euphrates, he came to Zenobia; a City built by Zenobia the wife of Odenatus; who anciently being a Prince of the Saracens, and in amity with the Romans, recovered for them the Easterne Empire, sub∣dued by the Persians. This Zenobia Chosroes considering to be no place of im∣portance, and the Countrey about it desert, and barren; not to take time from his greater affaires, he attempted to get it by composition; and not prevailing, march't on as much way more, and came to the City of the Surenians upon the Euphrates. Staying before it, the horse he rode on neighed, and pawed with his foot; from which Omen the Magi pronounced the Town would be taken. So he encamped, and from his Camp drew his Army to assault: where an Ar∣menian, one Arsaces, who was Captain of the Garrison brought his men up to the battlements, and after a brave fight, and many enemies slaine, was kill'd by a shot; and the Persians (it being late) retired to their Camp, meaning the next day to renew the assault. But the Romans, despairing upon the death of their Commander, sent out the next day the Bishop of their City, to suppli∣cate Chosroes for the sparing themselves & the Town. Who with some attend∣ing him, and a present of fowle, wine, and fine manchets, cast himselfe downe before Chosroes, weeping, and beseeching hm to spare miserable men, and a City of little estimation with the Romans, or Persians hitherto, and promising to pay reasonable ransome for their persons and city. Chosroes was offended with the Surenians; the first Roman subjects in his way, and refusing to re∣ceave him; nay taking armes and killing many principall Persians: but he hid his anger under a faire countenance, that by these mens chastisement he might terrify all in his way, and bring them to yeild without fighting. So he took up the Bishop very courteously, receaved his present, and pretended to com∣municate with some chief men about the ransome, and then to satisfie his re∣quest; and so sent him away without the least jealousie of his designe. With him he sent a convoy of Persians, whom he instructed to go to the Town, com∣forting the Bishop with hopes; that himself and company might be seen by the Townsmen cheerfull without feare, and when the guards opened the gate for
him, to cast a stone or piece of wood between, and himder their shutting it awhile; presently his army should follow; which he presently made ready, with command to ride full speed to the town upon signall given. The Persi∣ans came close to the town, and took leave of the Bishop, whom the Sureni∣ans seeing over-joyed, and honourably conducted by the enemy, apprehended no mischief, but set their gate wide open, and caught the bishop in their arms, applauding him. Being in, the Guards thrust the gate to shut it, but the Per∣sians having thrown a stone between, they could not get it together; and they durst not open it again, perceiving it possest by the enemy. Some report, that it was not a stone, but a piece of wood that the Persians threw down. But before the townsmen could perceive it, Chosroës came with the army, and quickly forced open the gate, and entred the town, and being in a fury, ran∣sackt the houses, kill'd most of the men, and making the rest slaves, burnt the City to the ground; and then he sent away Anastasius, willing him to carry the news to Justinian, in what part of the world he left Chosroës the sonne of Cabades. But either for covetousnesse, or kindnesse to Euphemia (whom, be∣ing one of these captives, and very beautifull, he made his wife, and infinite∣ly doted on her) he was pleased to doe the poor Surenians some good. He sent to Sergiopolis, a Roman City (bearing the name of Sergius, a famous Saint, and distant from this ruined City fifteen miles to the Southward, in the Bar∣barian plains) and directed that Candidus the bishop thereof, should ransome them, being twelve thousand captives, for two Centenaries. But he not having the money, refused it. Chosroës willed him to send him a bond to pay it hereafter,6300. l. sterl. which is but 10. s. a man. and so with a small summe to redeeme a multitude of Captives. Candidus did so, promising to pay the money within a year, confirming it by oath, and upon penalty, if it were not payd by the day, to pay it double, and to be no more a Priest for breaking his oath. This was drawn up in wri∣ting, and so he had the Surenians delivered to him: of whom the most part, not enduring the misery fallen on them, perished. CHAP. IV. CHosroës, this done, marcht forward. The Generall-ship of the East the Emperour had so divided, as that all to the Euphrates was left to Belisa∣rius (who formerly had the whole command) and from thence to the Persian frontier, all was under Buzes, and till Belisarius should returne out of Italy, he had the charge of the whole East; who first lay at Hierapolis with all the army. But understanding what happened to the Surenians, he called to him the chief men of Hierapolis, and told them; That when the match is equall, there is reason to fight quickly with an enemy invading; but to men much weaker than their enemy, it is more expedient to circumvent him with stratagems, then to run into an evident danger: What forces Chosroës hath, they have heard. That if they make the war from the walls, the Persians will block them up; and furnish themselves with provisions out of their country (none opposing) while they want within; and that the siege lasting, their walls cannot hold out, being very assaultable, nor can the Romans but fall into some desperate estate. But that guarding the City with part of the army, and lodging the rest in the bottoms of the mountaines near the City, infesting the enemies camp, and his forragers with suddain courses, they will force him to raise his siege, unable to make his assaults at his ease, nor to provide food for so great an army. The advise of Euzes seemed pertinent, but he did nothing; but went away with the choicest men of the army; and in what part of the world he was, neither the Romans in Hierapolis, nor the e∣nemy could learn. Justinian, hearing of the invasion, dispatcht Germanus, his brothers sonne, in much haste with three hundred men, promising to send a great army soon after. Who came to Antioch, visited the walls, and found much of them of good strength; the plain ground was compast by the river Orontes, and the hill was steep, craggy, and unapproachable; onely at the top
of mount Casius, he found the wall very assaultable, from a rock stretching far in bredth, and as high as the wall. He directed therefore, either to cut the rock from the wall, that none from it might get up, or else to joyn it to the wall by a tower upon it. But workmen found both these impossible, in so short time with an enemy so near, and to beginne and not perfect it, would but shew the enemy where to make their war. Germanus failing in this, and after long time seeing no army from the Emperour, nor likelyhood of any, fearing Chosroës might make it his chiefe business to take Antioch, hearing the Emperours Nephew to be within it; and the Antiochians having the same thoughts, resolved all in counsell to buy their safety with money. And to Chosroës they sent Megas, Bishop of Berrhoea, a prudent man; who finding the Persians not far from Hierapolis, and being admitted to Chosroës, besought him to pitty men who never offended him, nor were in case to resist him. That it is not fit for a King to use violence against yeelding men; nor ge∣nerous to give the Emperour no time to consult, either for rectifying the peace, or for preparations to war, by a mutuall consent; and to invade thus without warning; their Emperour not knowing in what case they are. The rude nature of Chosroës could not be put in tune by discreet words; they rather more swell'd him with pride and folly; threatning to destroy all the Syrians and Cilicians; and he bade Megas follow him. Then he encamped before Hierapolis; which finding strong, and a good garrison within, he sent Paul his interpreter to demand money of them; Paul was bred up in the Ro∣man Territory, and went to a Grammar-school in Antioch, and was thought to be descended of Romans. The citizens fearing their walls, which embra∣ced a great circuit to the mountaine; and willing to save their country from spoyling, agreed to give two thousand pound weight of silver.5250. l'. sterl. And Megas obtained of Chosroës with much intreating,31500. l'. sterl. to accept * ten Centenaries of gold for all the Easterne provinces, and so to leave them. Megas returned to An∣tioch; and Chosroës having his money for Hierapolis, marcht to Berrhoea, stand∣ing between Antioch and Hierapolis, from either two dayes journey. But the fourth day, Megas, with few in company, came to Antioch; and the Persian army to the suburbs of Berrhoea. Chosroës urged the Berrhoeans by Paul the in∣terpreter, for twice as much money as Hierapolis gave, because their walls were weak, nor could they trust to them. They yeelded to his demand, pay∣ing down 2000 l. weight of silver, but the other 2000 l. alledging they could not pay down; and he urging them, they fled by night to the Castle in the high town. The next day, they that came from him to receive the rest of the money, found the gates shut, and could speak with none. The King under∣standing it, by his command they entred the Citie with scaling ladders, none resisting; and opening the gates let in all the army. Chosroës in a rage would have burnt the City; but first he would take in the Castle; where some Ro∣man souldiers defended valiantly, and killed some enemies. But the Berrhoe∣ans flying to the castle with all their horses and cattell, by that niggardly trick were undone; for there being but one spring, and all the cattell suffred improvidently to drink up the water, the spring became dry; and in such e∣state they were. CHAP. V. BUt Megas could not perswade the Antiochians to the agreement he had made with Chosroës. For the Emperour had sent to him Ambassadours, who then abode at Antioch, Iohn the sonne of Rufinus, and Iulian his Secre∣tary; which Iulian forbade expresly to give money to the enemy; or to buy hus the Emperours towns. They accused also Ephraim, the Bishop of Antioch, to Germanus, of attempting to betray the City to Chosroës. So Megas depart∣ed, nothing done; and the Bishop of Antioch, fearing the Persians coming, went into Cilicia, whether soon after came Germanus with some few, leaving there most of his company. But Megas arrived at Berrhoea; and much afflicted
with what happened, complained to Chosroes for this perfideous usage, to send him to Antioch about truce, and in the mean time to ransack his coun∣trymen, who never wrong'd him; to block them up thus in the Castle, and burn and ruin their city. Your self, Sir (answered Chosroës) are too blame, making me lose my time here, and returning so long after the day appoint∣ed. For your countrymen; they contracted to pay money, which as yet they cannot think of performing; but presumptuous in their strong Castle, they put us, as you see, to the necessity of a siege: Whom I hope with the help of the Gods shortly to chastise for it, and for my Persians here lost. Megas re∣plyed; If all must be silent, while you, a King, accuse wretched men; then am I bound to confesse without disputing; absolute power, as in all the rest, must overcome in words. But if one may (laying aside respects) stand for truth; O King! you have nothing justly to charge us with. I went the messen∣ger of your propositions to Antioch, and returning the seventh day (then which what can be more speedy) I find my country thus used by you. Who having abandoned all that is most precious, have nothing now left, but to fight for their lives; and the advantage of not paying the rest of the mony; it being impossible for men to pay what they have not. Names are ancient∣ly defined for things; Disability is one thing, and Ingratitude another. In∣deed, he that wantonly refuses, is with reason hated; but one by disability driven to the same point, is to be pittyed rather. Though the worst things are befallen us, yet, Sir! leave us with this comfort, not to have been au∣thours of our own misfortunes. Think what you have received, to be the whole summe; and enough; not weighing it by your own greatnesse, but by the the Berrhoeans ability. Force us no further; least at last you seem to want power; seeing excessive undertakings ever are rewarded with unfaisi∣bleness. The most powerfull way is to attempt no Impossibles. Let this be our apology for the present: But if I might speak with the poor men; I might say something, now not thought of. Chosroës permitted him to goe to the Castle; who finding there what happened to their spring, weeping, he came back to Chosroës, and falling flat upon the ground, protested, the Berrhoeans had no money; and besought him to bestow the bodies of the poor men upon him. Which Chosroës granted upon his lamentable crying, and gave his faith to all in the Castle. Who being so near lost, thus came out; and went whe∣ther they pleased; and among them some of the souldiers; but the most re∣volted to Chosroës; complaining of the state to be behind in their Pay for ma∣ny years; and they went with him into Persia afterward. CHAP. VI. BUt then, hearing from Megas, that the Antiochians would give no mony, he marcht against them, where some were fled the City with their goods, and the rest resolved the like, if Theoctistus and Molathes, Captains of the forces in Phoenicia Libani, had not with a supply of 6000 old souldiers en∣couraged them, and stayd their flight. Shortly after came the Persian army, and encamped near the river Orontes. Chosroës sent Paul his Interpreter to de∣mand money of the city, and for ten Centenaries of Gold, or lesse, if it were payd presently, he appeared willing to have been gone. Then came to him the Ambassadours, and after much expostulation on both sides, about the break∣ing the peace, returned. The next day the common people of Antioch, who are not used to serious matters, but still to merriments and debauches, put scorns upon Chosroës, and derided him from the battlements; and had al∣most stoned Paul, if he had not foreseen and avoyded it, for exhorting them to redeem their persons and city for a little money. Chosroës incensed here∣with, resolved upon the assault; and the next day he commanded part of the army to give on by the river sind himself went against the top of the hill, where the wall is most assaue. Here the Romans finding the places they were to stand and fight on, narrow, tied long beams between the turrets
fast together; and enlarged the standings for more bodies to oppose the as∣sailants. The Persians came on valiantly, and their arrows flew to the very top of the hill. The Romans, both souldiers, and many of the boldest citizens defended stoutly; the great bredth and height of the rock commanding the wall, and bringing the fight to be equall, as upon even ground. If the Ro∣mans had put out but three hundred men, and possest the rock first, and thence kept off the assailants, I doe not think the town had been endanger'd; for the Barbarians had no means from whence to assault, being beaten perpendicular from the rock and the walls both. But this was not thought of; the Antiochi∣ans being to perish by this army. The Persians having Chosroës present, and crying loud unto them, strove beyond power, giving no space to the other to spie or ward their shot. But the Romans pressing up to defend, the ropes under them which tyed the beames suddainly brake, and down they all fell: They who made good the next Turret, hearing the noise, thinking the wall to be thrown down there, ran away. Some young citizens only, who used to quar∣rell in the Circus, would run no further; being come down from the wall. But the old souldiers, with Theoctistus and Molatzes, lept on their horses, which stood ready, and rode to the gate, giving out that they went to receive in Buzes with an army with him. Thither ran also the Antiochians, men, wo∣men and children, and the place being narrow, they tumbled over one ano∣ther, overborn with the horses; and the souldiers sparing none, but rather urging on faster, that there was a great slaughter made. But the Persians set their scaling ladders, and mounted, none opposing; and a while stayd upon the battlements, as if doubtful, and discovering; lest there might be ambushes in the rough waste ground, among rocks and precipices, which is within the walls, upon the descent from the hill. Some say it was upon the advise of Chosroës, who perceiving the bad ground, and the souldiers running away, feared to necessitate their turning head upon him, which might hinder him from taking the greatest, fairest, most populous, richest, and happiest Roman City in the East; than which esteeming lesse all things else, he resolved to give the souldiers fair leisure to run away: so that the Persians pointed with their hands to them, and bade them make haste away. And they did so, with their Commanders, going out of the gate of Daphne, a suburbe of Antioch, with some few of the common people; the Persians having onely not medled with that gate, who when they saw the souldiers gone far, they descended, and from the hill fell into the midst of the City. Some young men en∣countred them, some armed with corslets, but most unarmed; onely throw∣ing stones, and driving them off a little, they seemed to have the better, and sung their Paeans, and cryed Emperour Justinian, Callinicus, or the fair Con∣querour, as it they had the victory indeed. In the mean time Chosroës sent for the Ambassadours to speak with them, sitting upon the Turret by the top of the hill; when Zaberganes, one of his commanders, conceiving the conference would be for a composition, came to him hastily, and sayd: O Master! you differ from the Romans themselves, to think to preserve these men, who before the danger flout your Majesty, and being beaten, dare im∣possibilities and desperate acts upon the Persians; as if they feared your hu∣manity should pitty men, scorning preservation, and spare them, that will not be spared; such as lay ambushes for, and kill their Conquerours in a town taken, their own garrison having forsaken them. Chosroës at this, sent many of his best men against them; who brought him word, that all was well; the Persians having by their numbers routed the Antiochians, with much slaughter, sparing no age. Two wives of Noblemen of Antioch are reported to have gotten without the walls, and that seeing the enemies coming to∣wards them on all sides, and fearing to be taken, and abused, they ran to the river Orontes, and covering their faces with their veils, lept into it, and were drowned. So every species of misery fell upon the Antiochians. Then did Chosroës speak thus to the Ambassadours. The old saying, I see, is true; God ever gives the good mingled with the evill; so that we have not so much as laughter, which we repent not of. Good fortune is attended with
some cross, and pleasure with grief, suffering no prosperity untainted. This city, the most renowned of the Roman dominion, I have taken without la∣bour; God hath given me, (you see) a suddaine victory. Yet to behold the slaughter of such multitudes, & my trophy died with so much blood, it takes away the pleasure: And hereof are the miserable Antiochians guilty; who being not able to beat off the Persians, have yet with senceless rashness sought their own deaths, strugling under the yoak against men conquering them so easily. My chief men importune me to compass the city, and destroy every man in it: But I, to preserve them, direct rather to drive them on that fly; as being impious to insult on men under my power. This Chosroes spake in a vaunt∣ing affected way to the Ambassadours; who saw for what reasons he gave the Romans leysure to run away. He was the shrewdest man living to speak things that were not; to conceale the truth; and to lay the blame upon men he wrong'd, for the faults done by himself; Ever ready to agree to any thing, and sweare to it; but more ready to forget both agreement and oath; skillfull to a∣base his mind to any abomination for money, and yet in his countenance to pretend piety, and in words to detest the action. As when he so treacherously ruined the Surenians, who never wrong'd him. Espying a principall matrone (the town being taken) drag'd violently by her left hand by a Barbarian, and with the other haling after her her little child newly weaned, and fallen to the ground, which she would not let goe, it being not able to keep pace; Here he shewed his very humour; Groaning, and seeming to the stand∣ers by, specially Anastasius the Ambassadour to weep, he pray'd God to punish the Authors of those things; intimating the Emperour; though he knew well himself to be the onely authour. With this strange bad na∣ture he became King of Persia, after rejection of the gallant Zames, for his one eye; and of the eldest Caoses, for his Fathers reasonless hatred; and he prevailed easily against his oppugners; and to the Romans did even as much mischief, as he desired. Thus Fortune, resolving to make a man great, ever acts her resolution in the fit time (none opposing the strong current of her will,) she regards not the worth of the man, nor avoids things seeming unfit, nor cares for the worlds rayling for having advanced one not deserving her grace; In brief, not thinking upon any thing, but how to bring her purpose to effect. CHAP. VII. CHosroes commanded his army to make slaves of the Antiochians surviving, and to ransack their estates; and himself with the Ambassadors went down from the Hill to the Church. Here he found so great treasures of gold and sil∣ver, that had he taken no other spoile, he had gone away with a huge wealth. He took down many admirable pieces of marble, which he Commanded to lay without the walls, to be carried into Persia; and then gave order to burne the City. The Ambassadours requested him, to spare the Church onely, for which he had receaved a sufficient ransome. This he granted, and commanded to set fire to all the rest; for which leaving some few, he retired to his camp. God had foreshewn a while before this calamitie to this city. The Ensignes of the Cohorts residing there, standing to the West-ward, of themselves turned to the East, and then returned where they were before, none touching them. This the Souldiers shewed, among many others,This Officer he calls before Praefect of the Camp. to the Pourveyor of the expence of the army, one Tatianus, born at Mopsuestia in Cilicia, a discreet man. They seeing the prodigie, knew not then how the dominion of the city would be transfer'd from the Western to the Eastern Emperour, that being appointed to suffer what fell out, they might have no means to avoid it. I am astonished, recording for ages to come this great calamitie, and comprehending what should be the will of God, highly thus to exalt some man or place, and then upon no reason appearing, to ruine them. It is not lawfull to say, but that all things by him are done with reason; who yet endured Antioch to be laid
flat with the ground by a most impious man; whose beauty and magnificence could not even then be wholy concealed. The Church onely escaped this de∣struction, by the Persians care, who had the charge of it; Many houses also were saved in the Cerataeum, not by any mans care; but standing in the furthest end of the city, not joyning to other buildings, the fire reacht them not. They burnt also all without the walls, but the Church of Saint Julian, and the houses about it, where the Ambassadours lodged. And the city-walls they wholly forbore. The Ambassadors came againe also to Chosroes, and said thus. If we did not, Sir! speak to your self present, we should not believe, that Chosroes the son of Cabades were entred the Roman Territories in armes, despising his Oath so lately sworn, (the strongest pawn of faith among men) and breaking Truce, the onely hope left in the calamities of warr. Certainly this course is to translate the life of men to that of beasts. Without Truces must be perpetuall warr, which will banish those from nature who use it. You wrote lately to your brother, that he is guiltie of breaking the Truce: confessing thereby, that Truce-breaking is a foule mischief. If the fault be not his, you do not justly to invade us. If he have done some such thing, yet pursue your action no further, and appeare the better man. He that hath the worst in the ill, ought to overcome in the better. But we know the Emperour hath not transgrest the peace; and we entreat you not to act those mischiefs upon us, which the Persians will never enjoy: and you will gaine nothing, but the fortune of doing desperate injuries to the Romans, with whom you lately made Truce. But Chosroes protested, Justinian to have broken the Truce, and recited particulars, some materiall, others slight, or counterfeited. Especially he offered to shew the Emperours letters to Alamundarus; and the Hunnes, the maine causes of the warr: but he neither alledged nor shewed, that ever any of the Romans in∣vaded the Persians, or did any hostile act. The Ambassadors denied some things, and in others laid the blame upon Justinians Ministers. In conclusion, Chosroes demanded money; not onely a present summe, being to establish a peace for ever; (For friendships gotten with money, commonly wast with the money) but a yearely pension for a firme peace, and for the Persians guard∣ing the Caspian Gates, and no more importuning about Daras; for which they shall be their perpetuall stipendiaries. What! said the Ambassadors, would you have the Romans pay them a tribute? No! quoth he, but to have the Persians their souldiers, giving them pay for their service. You give pensions to the Hunnes and Saracens, not as they are Tributaries, but to guard your Terri∣tories. After much debate, in the end they came to this accord; That Chosroes should presently receave fifty Centenaries of gold,157500. l'. 15720. l'. sterl. and a perpetuall yeerly payment of five more; and so do no more mischief, but receaving ho∣stages upon this accord to retire with his whole army into his country: whither other Ambassadors should be sent from Justinian to settle a firme peace. CHAP. VIII. CHosroes then went on to Seleucia, a maritime city, about sixteen miles from Antioch, where neither finding nor harming any Roman, he washt onely in the Sea-water, did sacrifice to the Sun, and whom he pleased, with a deale of superstition, and rode back againe. Being come to his camp, he desired much, (as he said, onely for curiosity) to see Apamea, which stood neer. The Ambassadours unwillingly yeilded, upon condition, that having seen the city, and receaved 1000. l'. weight in silver, he should retire without spoiling it. But Chosroes appeared to the Ambassadors and all men, to take that journey, onely to catch at some triviall cause to sack the city, and coun∣trey about it. Then he went up to Daphne, a suburbe of Antioch, where he ad∣mired the Grove and the Fountaines, things worth the seeing. Having sacri∣ficed to the Nymphs, he came away, doing no mischief there, but the burning of the Temple of Michaell the Archangell, upon this mistaking. An eminent Persian, well known to the King, rode with some in his company by a ragged
piece of ground, called Tretum, where stands the Church of the Archangell made by Evaris; where finding a young man of Antioch hidden, and alone, he quitted his company and chased him. The young man was a Butcher, named Acimachus; who ready to be caught, turned upon his pursuer suddainly, and with a stone hit him under the eare into the dura mater: and being fallen down, dispatcht him with his own Cimiter, rifled his armes and apparell, got up on his horse, and rode cleer away by good chance, or his knowledge of the wayes. Chosroes was grieved at the accident, and commanded some to burne that Church of the Archangell; who thinking he meant this in Daphne, burn it with the buildings about it. Then Chosroes with his army went to Apamea: where is a piece of wood of a cubit long, part of Christs Cross, brought thither long agoe by a Syrian. This the Inhabitants believing to be a great defence to them and their city, have put it in a casket set all with gold and precious stones, and committed it to three Priests to keep; and one day yearely the whole city brings it out, and adores it. The Apameans were affraid of the Persians coming, hearing too, how in Chosroes was no truth: and they entreated their Bishop Thomas, to shew them the wood of the Cross that they might doe it their last worship: When a miracle happened above reason and belief. The Priest carrying, and shewing the wood, a bright flame hovered above it, and the roofe over it shone with an extraordinary light. The Priest goeing round the Church, the light went a∣long, keeping still the place of the roofe directly over him. The Apameans were ravisht with delight at the miracle, at once rejoycing and weeping; and now confident of their preservation. Thomas having gone round about the Church, put up the wood of the Cross into the casket, and covered it, and sud∣dainely the shining ceased. Understanding the enemies to be neer, he went to Chosroes; who asking him if the Apameans meant to oppose his army, he ans∣wered, they had no such thought. Then open your gates (quoth Chosroes) and re∣ceave me into your city with some few. I am come (replied the Bishop) for the same purpose to invite you. So the Army pitcht their tents by the walls, and Chosroes with two hundred of his best men rode into the city. And no sooner in, but he forgot his promise to the Ambassadors, commanding the Bishop to give him not 1000 l. weight of silver onely, nor ter fold that; but all their treasures of gold and silver, being very great. I doubt not, but without scruple he had sackt, enslaved the whole city, if God had not manifestly hindred him: So did covetousness and vaine glory besot him; For to lead cities into captivity he esteemed it a great renown; and thought it nothing to use the Romans thus, contrary to accords and truces. This humour of his appeares by his attempt upon Daras, and the Callinicians during the truce, which I shall relate hereaf∣ter. But God, as I said, preserved the Apameans. When Chosroes had taken their treasures, and Thomas saw him drunk with aboundance, he brought the wood of the Cross, and opening the casket, shewed it him, saying; O Excellent King! This is all I have left; This casket beautified with gold and precious stones, I envy not unto you: Take it with all the rest. But this piece of wood is to us both preservative, and precious. I beg, and entreat you Sir to give it me. Which Chos∣roes granted. Then to shew magnificence, he willed the people to goe to the Circus; and the Charioters to run their matches; and himselfe was an earnest beholder of their sports. But hearing how Justinian was long addicted to the Veneti, meaning to be contrary to him in that also, he would procure the vi∣ctory for the Prasini. The Charioters from the starting place set out; and one that wore the Blew, got the start, another wearing Green, following close at the others wheels. Chosroes supposing it done purposely, chafed, and cry∣ed out, That Caesar was foremost; which should not be; commanding the fore∣most Chariot to stay, and so cast behind, to get afore againe if it could. His command being fulfilled, his side, the Prasini won the match. There an Apa∣mean came, and complained to him of a Persian, for entring his house, and for∣cing his daughter a virgin. He in a great rage, commanded the man to be produced, and crucified in the campe; But the people clamour'd to him, and beg'd to spare the man. Chosroes promised to pardon him, but shortly after
secretly crucified him; and these things done, rode back with his army. And at Chalcis, distant ten miles and a half from Berrhoea, He forgot the ac∣cord againe; encamped before the city, and sent Paul the interpreter, threat∣ning to force their city, unless they buy their safety, ransome themselves, and deliver him the Souldiers in their town with their Commander. The Chalci∣ans feared both the Emperours, and swore they had no souldiers; hiding most of them, and Adonachus their Captaine, in poore cottages from the ene∣my; And getting up hardly * two Centenaries of gold,6300 l'. sterl. (their city being not rich) with it they ransomed their bodies and city. From hence Chosroes meant to make his retreat, not by the way he came, but to cross the Euphrates, and plunder Mesopotamia. Neer Obbane, which stands five miles from the castle of Barbalissus, he made a bridge, and went over, signifying to the army to fol∣low, and that the third day by such an houre, he would take up the bridge; and some of them chancing to be cast behind, at the houre, he not regarding them, sent to take up the bridge, and they got home as they could. CHAP. IX. CHosroes was then ambitious to take Edessa; induced by a confident tra∣dition among the Christians, (which troubled him) that it was never to be taken; affirmed upon this ground. Augarus, long agoe Toparch of Edessa (so they then called their nationall Kings) was one of the wisest men of his time, and for that cause in much savour with the Emperour Augustus. Desir∣ing to be a Roman Confederat, he went to Rome; and conferring with Augu∣stus, so amazed him with his wit, and inamour'd him with his conversation, that he would not part with him, though he urged his dismission. At last, after long absence, longing to returne to his country, but not persuading Augu∣stus to let him goe; he used this devise. He went out neer Rome to hunt (being therein studious) and compassing much country, took many wild beasts alive, and from every countrey where he caught them, carried of the earth home with him to Rome, together with the beast. Augustus sitting in the Circus (as his manner was) Augarus came to him, and shewed him the beasts, and the earth, and which country earth belong'd to every beast. The earth he caused to be laid in severall parts of the Circus, and the beasts from one place to be let goe: When every beast leaving one another, ran to the country earth from whence he was taken. Augustus beheld it long and earnestly, wondring to see nature untaught make even to beasts desirable their native earth. Then Auga∣rus suddainly taking him by the knees, said, O Sir! And what mind doe you think I have, who have wife and children, and a Kingdom (though a small one) in mine own countrey? Augustus overcome, and forced with the truth, dismissed him, though unwillingly; and bad him ask him some thing. Augarus prayed him to build a Circus at Edessa; which being granted him, and he dismissed, he came home. His Subjects askt him; what good he had brought them from the Emperour Augustus. He answered, That he had brought a Grief without damage, and a joy without gaine; intimating the fortune of the Horse-races. Augarus growing old, and vexed with a grievous gout, and the paine, and sitting still troubling him, he consulted with the skillfullest Physicians from all lands; but finding no ease, he forsook them, and absolutely despairing, bewayled his fortune. At that time Jesus, the Son of God, conversed in the body with the people of Palestine; by committing no sin, and by working miracles, mani∣festing himself indeed the Son of God. He raised dead men, as from sleep; to men born blind he opened their eyes, cleansed leprous bodyes, lame feet he set loose, and did what ever Physicians pronounce incurable. Augarus hearing the relation from some Palestinians, residing at Edessa, took comfort, and wrote to Jesus, to leave Jury, and those ungratefull men, and to live with him. Christ wrote back againe to Augarus, refusing to come, but promising health by his Letter. They say he added this, That the city should never be conquered by the Barbarians. This Postscript, the writers of the history of
that time knew not of; but the Edessenians affirme to have found it with the Epistle; which Epistle they have hung for a defence, engraven upon their city gates. But shortly after it came under the Persian, not forced, but thus. Augarus upon the letter from Christ, grew well, and having lived long, de∣ceased. But his son succeeding him, being the ungodlyest man living, wrong∣ed his subjects; for which fearing the Romans chastisement, he revolted to the Persians. But long afterwards the Edessenians killed the Barbarian Garrison, and yeilded their city to the Romans. Which Chosroes knowing, studies to re∣cover the city: and this I guess by things happened in my time, which shall be related in their seasons. And I have had a conceit, that if Christ did not write that Postscript, yet (men having that opinion) he would keep the city from taking; that he might give them no excuse of wandring. But upon this ground Chosroes much affected the taking of Edessa. At Batne, a little Town three dayes journey from Edessa, he lodged his army; and by break of day was marching toward Edessa. But they went out of their way so, that the next night they lodged in the same place: and this happened twice: And when with much adoe he was gotten to Edessa, they say, his chopps swell'd with Rhewme; which so troubled him, that he resolved not to attempt the city. But he sent Paul, and demanded money of them. They said, that of their city they had no feare; but not to hurt their towns, and villages, they agreed upon two Centenaries of gold; which he receaved, and kept his agreement. CHAP. X. THen came letters from Justinian to Chosroes, agreeing to ratifie the trea∣tie between him and the Ambassadours; upon which he discharged the Hostages, and prepared for his retreat; being pleased to ransome the Antio∣chian captives: the Edessenians therein shewed an incredible alacrity. Not a man, but according to his ability brought the ransomes into the Church, and some above ability. Courtisans threw in their Jewells, and the husbandman, wanting money or householdstuffe, brought his asse or poore ewe to the Church, that a great quantity was gathered of gold and silver, and other goods; but none of it was given for the ransome. Buzes being there, prohi∣bited the ransoming, expecting some great gaine out of it. So Chosroes with the captives marcht on. The Carrenians met him, and offered him a great summe, but being no Christians but Heathens, he would not take it. But of the Constantinians he took their monie, yet claimed the city to be his from his An∣cestors. For Cabades having taken Amida, would have also gotten Edessa, and Constantina. And being before Edessa, he demanded of the Magi, if it were to be wonne, pointing with his right hand to the place. They told him, no. For by stretching his right hand to it, he gave a symbole, not of taking, or of hurt∣ing the city, but of preservation. He was satisfied with this, and led his army against Constantina, and encamped, with purpose to besiege the town. Barado∣tus then Bishop of the city (an upright godly man, mighty with God in pray∣er, whose very countenance shewed him to be indeed gracious with God) came to Cabades with a present of wine, dry iggs, hony, and fine manchets; and besought him, not to attempt a town of no importance, neglected by the Romans, without garrison, or other defence, but the poore miserable inhabi∣tants. Cabades upon this, not onely bestowed the city upon him, but gave him all the store-victualls of the army for the siege, and then departed out of the Roman territory. Hereupon Chosroes claimed the city to belong to him from his Father. Being come to Daras, he sate down before it. Within, the Romans, and the Generall Martinus prepared for their defence. The city hath two walls, the innermost large and faire, and sixty foot high, with turrets; all one hundred foot high: The outward wall is much lesse, but strong and of good importance. The ground between is about fifty foot broad; where, upon the approach of
an enemy, the Darenians put their cattle. At first Chosroes with multitude of arrows forced upon the walls to the West-ward, and set fire to the gates of the lesser wall; but none durst enter. Then he wrought a Mine closely on the East-side of the town, the rest of it being built upon a rock. The Persians be∣ginning from the town ditch, being very deep, were neither seen, nor at all discovered by the enemy. And now they were under the foundation of the outter wall, and in the ground between the walls, and shortly to pass the great wall, and take the town; when from the camp of Chosroes, about noon, came a man (or more than a man) all alone to the wall, seeming to gather up the scattered arrows; and withall warding with his shield, to flout those upon the battlements. Then discovering the businesse, he bade them watch∣fully provide for their safety, and went his way. The Romans immediately dig'd for life in the ground between the walls; which the Persians not discern∣ing, went on with their work, in a streight line to the wall; and the Romans, by the advise of Theodorus, a famous Ingineer, traversed with their Mine very deep, that in the end the Persians in the ground between the walls, fell sud∣dainly into the Romans cross Mine; who killed the first comers, but the rest escaped to the camp. The Romans would not pursue them in the dark. Chosroes failing in this, and seeing no hope of taking the town, capitulated for a thou∣sand pound weight of silver, which he had from the besieged, and went home. Justinian, for this attempt of Chosroes upon Daras, during the truce, refused to ratifie the Treaty. And this was the successe of Chosroes first Invasion, and so the summer ended. In Assyria he built a City a dayes journey from Ctesiphon, and named it Antioch of Chosroes, planting there the Antiochian captives. He built them a publique Bath, and a Circus, and fitted it for other delights; bringing from Antioch, and other Roman Cities, Charioters, and skilfull Musicians. He kept these Antiochians at the publique charge, not like captives; and term∣ed them Basilici, as exempt from all Magistrates but the King. If a Roman captive ranne from his Master, and fled to this Antioch of Chosroes, being there avowed by an inhabitant for his Kinsman, he might not be led away by his master, though a very principall Persian. The Prodigy which befell the Antiochians in the reign of Anastasius was now consummated. A strong wind then, and a suddain, blew up by the rootes, the goodly tall Cypresses in Daphne, the suburb of Antioch; it being not lawfull to cut them. Shortly after this prodigy, in the reign of Justine, an Earthquake shook the City so, that it overthrew most of the buildings, and destroyed three hundred thousand men. But in this last destruction the City, as I have related, was even ruined. And now Belisarius the Emperour sent for to Constaentinople; where having wintred, at the beginning of the spring he sent him Generall against Chos∣roes; with the Commanders who came with him out of Italy.Anno Dom. 541. & Justi∣niani 15. Of whom Va∣lerianus was made Generall of the Cohorts in Armenia; Martinus being formerly sent into the East; so that, as I said, Chosroes found him at Daras. Of the Goths, Vitigis stayd at Constantinople; the rest served with Belisarius against Chosroes. At this time the Ambassadour of Vitigis, who called him∣self a Bishop, dyed in Persia. The other stayd awhile with them for an In∣terpreter, then retired into Roman land; where John, commander of the forces in Mesopotamia, took him near Constantina, and imprisoned him; and being que∣stioned, he told him all his negotiation. Belisarius made haste to prevent any new Invasion of Chosroes; But CHAP. XI. IN the mean time Chosroes led an army into Lazica,Second Invasion of Chosroes, the said Anno Dom. 541. upon this ground invi∣ted by the Lazians. The Lazians first inhabited Cholchis, and were subject to the Romans; not to payment of tribute: Onely upon decease of their King,
the Roman Emperour sent to the Successor the Ensignes of Majesty; and they guarded the marches of their country; that the Hunnes might not by Mount Caucasus (which borders with them) passe through Lazica, and invade the Romans. Neither for this received they money, nor army from the Romans, nor served in their wars; only they trafficked in Merchandise with the Romans of Pontus; bartring skins, hides, and slaves for corn, salt, and other com∣modities they want. But upon the accident formerly recited by me, to Gur∣genes King of Iberia, some Roman forces were lodged in Lazica; with whom the Barbarians were discontented, and chiefly with Peter the General, a man naturally mischeivous. He was born in Arzanéne, a country beyond the river of Nymphius, subject to the Persians. Being a child, he was taken captive by Justine, invading Persia with Celers army after the taking of Amida; who used much humanity to him, and sent him to a Grammar school. Then was he Scribe to Justine; who comming to the Empire upon the death of Ana∣stasius, made him a Generall, wherein he grew infinitely covetous, and lewd to all men. Justinian afterward sent Commanders into Lazica, and at last Iohn Tzibus; a man raised from mean condition, and advanced to this Ge∣neralship, onely for being the wickedest of all men, and very sufficient to find unjust revenues. And he ruined and confounded the affairs of the Romans and Lazians. He perswaded Justinian to build a Sea-town in Lazica, called Pe∣tra: Where sitting, as in a Cittadell, he made booty of Lazica. He prohibi∣ted Merchants to import Salt, or other provisions to the Lazians, nor to buy ought of them; but setting up a Monopoly at Petra, himself was both retailer, and sole master of the sayd trade, and sold to the Lazians, not at usuall prizes, but as he list. The people also were displeased at the Roman army, ly∣ing upon their country, not formerly used; and not enduring it, resolved to revolt to the Persians. And (unknown to the Romans) they sent Ambassadors to negotiate the same with Chosroes, with instructions to take assurance from Chosroes, not to leave the Lazians to the Romans without their consent; and so to come home with an army of Persians. These Ambassadors in Persia get∣ing private accesse to Chosroes, spake thus. Great King, if ever fortune did gladly reduce men revolted foolishly from their friends to strangers, such think us the Lazians to be. We were ancient allyes of the Persians, and did, and received many good turns; the monuments whereof remaine to this day, both among our Records, and in your royall Palace. But in succeed∣ing times, our ancestors either neglected by you, or upon some other ground, entred into league with the Romans. And now both we and our King present to the Persians our selves and country, praying you to consider of us thus. If upon no hard measure from the Romans, but of meer ill nature, we come to you, reject us, as not likely to be faithfull to you. The manner of break∣ing friendship, is a detection of that made with others. But being to the Romans friends in words onely, but in effect trusty slaves, and suffering most unrighteous tyranny; receive us for your servants, formerly your friends; detest a bitter tyranny risen so near you; and doe things worthy the justice naturall to the Persians. He is not just who does no wrong himself, if he re∣scue not men oppressed by others, being able. To speak some of the things practised by these accursed Romans: To our King they have left the only out∣side of Royalty, themselves have usurped the authority. The King, in the condition of a minister, stands in aw of a Generall directing him. They have laid an army upon us, not to guard our country (for none molest us but themselves) but to lock us up in prison, while themselves are masters of what is ours. Nay, see Sir! a more expedite devise of theirs to rob us. Their own superfluities they compell us to buy, and they buy what Lazica affords for their use; but so, as the price in both is set down as our conquerours please. And thus they rob us of our necessary commodities, and our mony too; under the specious name of Trade, being indeed a meer oppression. Over us is a Governour, a retailer, with his authority making a trade upon our wants. This being the cause of our revolt, it hath the justice of it in it self. But as to the commodity resulting to you by accepting the Lazians;
you shall add unto the Persian Empire an ancient Kingdom, and therein en∣large your glory. Then shall you by our Countrey have the conveniencie of using to Roman Seas. Wherein building shipps, the very Palace of Constanti∣nople will be accessible unto you, with ease, nothing being between to stop you. Adde also, that it will be in your power, for the bordering Barbarians to spoile the Romans every yeare, Lazica, (as you know) being now their on∣ly rampier against the mountaines of Caucasus. So that right leading, and profit following, not to admit our proposition, is certainely no good coun∣sell. Chosroes was pleased with this discourse, and agreed to aide the Lazians: Demanding of the Ambassadors, if it were possible for a great army to march into Lazica, which he heard to be scarce passable for a traveller, being moun∣tainous, and for a long way entangled with thick woods. They told him that by cutting the trees, and throwing them into the ill passages, there would be easie way for his whole army; and they promised to be his guides, and to work in the head of the army. Chosroes encouraged herewith, gathered a great ar∣my, and prepared for the voyage, not discovering his intent, but to his most secret Counsellors, and charging the Ambassadors not to reveale their nego∣ciation. His pretence was, a journey into Iberia, to settle things there; where a nation of Hunnes was reported to invade the Persian dominion. In the meane time Belisarius gather'd together the army in Meso∣potamia, and sent some into Persia to discover; intending to encounter the enemy there, if he invade againe; and he mustred, and furnished his Soul∣diers; being naked, and unarm'd, and afraid of the name of a Persian. The espialls returning assured him, there would bee no invasion; Chosroes being engaged in a warr with the Hunnes. Belisarius upon this re∣solved to enter the enemies land with his army. Arethas came up to him with an army of Saracens; And the Emperour wrote to him to invade the enemies countrey immediately. So that calling to him the Commanders at Daras, he 'spake thus. Fellow Commanders! I know you experienced in many warrs; and I call you not now, by remembrances or exhortations to provoke your resolution against the enemy (I doe not thinck you need discourses to make you valiant); but that by consulting we may chuse the best for the Emperours affaires. For the warr, more then any thing affects the directions of good counsell: And those who counsell, must be free from awe and feare. For feare amazing, suffers not the judgement to make choice of the best things: And awe clouding better determinations, carries the judgement com∣monly to the worse. If therefore the Emperour or my self, be thought to have made any resolution already, believe it not. For he being farr distant from the affaires, cannot fit proceedings to new occasions; and so there is no feare; if by crossing him, you effect what is most expedient for his affaires. And me, being but a man, and af∣ter a long time come from the West, something cannot but passe unseen. So that with∣out standing in awe of my opinion, you are to speak boldly what is best for your selves and the Emperour. At first, we came hither to restraine the enemy from invading our countrey. But now, things succeeding above our hopes, we may consult concern∣ing his countrey. For which purpose being now assembled, it is fit for every man to speak freely, what he holds most expedient. Belisarius spake thus; and Peter and Buzes bad lead on the army without delay into the enemies countrey, whose vote all the Assembly followed. Requithancus and Theoctistus, commanders of the forces in Phoenicia Libani, said, they approved the invasion also, but feared in their absence, Alamundarus would forrage Phoenicia and Syria, and that the Emperour might be offended for their not guarding the country under their charge: So they refused to accompany the army. Belisarius said, they imagined that which was not; For being now Summer, two moneths of this season the Saracens consecrate to their God, and make no inroads. And so promising to dismisse them, and their troopes within two moneths, he commanded them to goe along, and with much diligence prepared for the Invasion.
CHAP. XII. BUt Chosroes and the Persian army, being come through Iberia to the con∣fines of Lazica, guided by the Ambassadors, cut the tree which they found thick and entangled, and threw them into the steep and ragged wayes, and so past easily, none encountring them. When they were come into the midst of Lazica (where the Poets fain to have been acted the fortunes of Jason and Medea) Gubazes, King of the Lazians, came and adored Chosroes as his ma∣ster; rendring himself with his Royall Palaces, and all Lazica. Petra stands in Lazica upon the Euxine Sea, formerly a meane town, but by Justinian fur∣nished with walls, and other ornaments, and made a strong famous place. Chosroes understanding the Roman Forces with John Tzibus to be there, sent an army, and Aniavedes Generall thereof, to surprize it. But John knowing their coming, directed no man to sally, nor to be seen upon the battlements; and he placed his forces in armes, close to the gates, commanding them not to ut∣ter the least sound or voice. The Persian being come before the walls, and see∣ing no man, supposed the city wast, and abandoned by the enemy. So he ap∣proach't to set up scaling ladders, expecting none to defend, because he saw nor heard no enemy, and he sent to Chosroes, to let him know, what they found. He sending the most of his army, commanded a generall assault, and one of the Commanders to make use of the Ramme neer the gates, and from the neer∣est hill to the city himself was a spectator of the business. When suddainly the Romans opened the gates, and falling upon the enemy unaware, killed most of them, specially those about the Ramme; The rest with their Generall ran away and escaped. Chosroës in anger crucified Aniavedes, for being over-stragem'd by John, a retailer, and no souldier. Some say he crucified, not Aniavedes, but the commander who attended the Ramme. Then himself with his whole army encamped before the town; and perceaving upon view the fortifications not very tenable, he brought on his forces, commanding to shoot at the battle∣ments. The Romans defending with their engines, and shot, at first the Persi∣ans (though they shot thick) hurt little; but suffred much, being shot from high. Afterward (for Petra was to be taken by Chosroës) John, being shot into the neck, died. Then the Romans became careless; and it growing dark the Bar∣barians retired. The next day, they drew a mine to the town: which for steepe rocks about it, is not accessible, nor yet to the sea-ward; but by one narrow entrance only upon plaine ground, with high clifts on each side. There the builders of the city foreseeing the walls easie to be forced, made from each clift a long wall, a crosse the entrance, and at each end two turrets, wrought with great stones, not hollow in the middle, but whole from the ground, and very high, and the stones so joyned, as not to be shaken with Ramme or other engine. The Persians closely with their mine, were come under one of these turrets; whence carrying out the stones, they set up tim∣bers, and put fire to them. Which encreasing by degrees, crumbled and brake the firme ess of the stones, and so loosening the Turret, down it came suddain∣ly. The Romans in it perceaved it just so much before, as not to fall with the Turret, and to get within the city walls. Then the Enemy could easily force their entrance upon even ground. But the Romans affrighted, came to a par∣ly, and receaving Chosroës oath, for their persons, and goods, yeilded them∣selves and the city by composition. Chosroes finding in Petra much wealth be∣longing to John, took it; but of any other, himself nor the Persians toucht nothing; And the Romans, having every man his own, mingled with the Per∣sian army. CHAP. XIII. BElisarius heard nothing from these parts; but marcht with the army toward Nisibis; and being half way thither kept his right hand way, where
were store of springs, and a spacious champian to encampe. But some had no mind to goe on, so that Belisarius made this speech to the Commanders. I did not mean to publish my determination: For a word vented in a camp spreds at last even to the enemy. But I see every man will be an absolute Commander; therefore I shall impart, what I thought to conceale; with this preamble, that when in an army many will be absolute, nothing can be well done. Certainly Chosroes invading others, hath not left his own country without guard, especially this City, being the first therof and a rampire to the rest; wherein, I know, he hath lodged a garrison so strong, and of so good men, as will be able to oppose our assaults. A demonstration thereof is Na∣bedes their Commander, who next to Chosroes is the prime man for reputa∣tion in Persia. Who doubtlesse will set upon us, and we shall not be rid of him, without vanquishing him in fight. If we fight near the city, the Per∣sians will have the advantage, backt with their fortification, to follow their execution securely, if they overcome; and if they be overcome, to be pre∣sently within their walls, which you see well defended, and inexpugnable. On the other side, if we rout them, we may enter the town pell-ell with the enemy, or thrust between them, and force them to fly to some other re∣gion, and so get Nisibis, having none to defend it. Upon this speech of Be∣lisarius, the rest obeyed, and kept within the camp: Onely Peter, General of Armenia, stood still, with a good part of the army under his command, a mile and a quarter from Nisibis. Belisarius put in order of battail the troupes with himself, and sent direction to Peter to stand in readinesse till he gave the sig∣nall, and to observe at noon, that the Barbarians will sally, because them∣selves dine in the evening, and the Romans at noon. But Peters men slighted his commands, and being faint with the sunne (for that city is extremely hot) layd down their arms, and disorderly fell to gather figs, without apprehen∣sion of an enemy. Which Nabedes observing, gallopt up to them with his army. They seeing them issue out of the gates (being in an open champian) sent to Belisarius to succour them; and themselves tumultuously, and in con∣fusion encountred. Belisarius, before the messenger came, saw the enemies mo∣tion by the dust raised, and with his troupes rode amain to their succour. But in the mean time the Persians charged them; which they not enduring, ran away. The enemy pursuing took Peters Ensign, and slew fifty of them. Doubt∣less they had dyed every man, if Belisarius had not received them into his troups, much distressed. Where first the Goths presenting their long thick Lances, the Persians stood them not, but fell to running, and the Romans, and Goths pursuing killed a hundred & fifty of them. The chase was not long. So the enemy got within their walls, and the Romans returned to their camp. The next day the Persians set the Ensign of Peter for a trophy, upon one of the turrets; and laught and brag'd, but durst sally no more out of their forti∣fications. Belisarius considering Nisibis strongly scituated, and having no hope to take it, urged to rise thence, and to march, where they might suddainly spoyl the enemy. So after a dayes march he came to a castle of the Persians called Sisibranum, full of inhabitants, and eight hundred of the best Persian horsmen to guard it; commanded by Blechames, a principal man. The Romans encamp∣ed before the Castle, and assaulting were repulsed with losse of many; the walls being strong, and the Barbarians opposing obstinately. Belisarius then called his fellow Commanders, and told them; How experience of many wars taught them to foresee the event in actions doubtful, and before dis∣asters to chuse the better way. That they knew their disadvantage now, marching in an enemies country, full of strong Garrisons. If they goe on, it is likely that from Nisibis the enemy will follow them, and infest them with ambushes. And if another army meet them, they will be forced to a battail with both, and may be undone. Then if they be routed, they have no means of retreat into Roman land. They should not therefore crush them∣selves with inconsiderate industry, nor with ambition to winne, hurt the Roman affairs. An ignorant daring brings to destruction, and a sober de∣laying
laying preserves men. That themselves therefore should sit down before the Castle, and that Arethas with his Saracens (men unapt for assaults, but excel∣lent plunderers) should enter Assyria, and with them some of their best soul∣diers. These, if no opposition appear, to take the spoyl; and (the enemy op∣posing) to retire to this army: Which if it take the Castle, may passe the Tigris, fearing no mischief behind, and informed in what state the Assyrians are. They all approved this advise of Belisarius: Who accordingly commanded Arethas to go against the Assyrians, and sent with him 1200 souldiers, most of his own Targettiers, commanded by two of his Lanciers, Trajanus and John sirnamed Phagas, and directed to be obedient to Arethas, whom he instructed to forrage the countries, and coming back to the camp, to report what forces the Assyrians had. These past the Tigris into Assyria, found the country rich, and without guard, and so ransackt many towns and got much wealth. Be∣lisarius in the mean time understood from Persian prisoners, That the Castle (not using, as Daras and Nisibis, to lay in yearly provisions, and then prevent∣ed by an enemy, and having brought in none, and many suddainly resorting thither for refuge) wanted provisions. He sent therefore George, a wise man, and trusted with his secrets, to try if the place might be had by composition. Who with his reasons, and fair words, prevailed with them to take assurances for their safety, and to render themselves and the Castle to the Romans. Be∣lisarius did no harm to the Inhabitants, being Christians, and antiently Ro∣mans. The Persians with Blechames he sent to Constantinople, and threw down the walls of the Castle. These Persians and Blechames the Emperour sent into Italy against the Goths. But Arethas, fearing the Romans might take away his booty, would return no more to the camp. And he commanded some scoutes sent out purposely by him, to report a great army of enemies to be at the passage of the river; up∣on which he advised John and Trajan to return some other way into the Ro∣man Territories. So they went not to Belisarius, but keeping the Euphrates on their right hand, came to Theodosiopolis, standing upon the river of Abor∣ras. The Roman army with Belisarius, hearing nothing of these forces, were troubled and affraid: And the said siege having being long in the Persian Mesopotamia, infinitely hot; the men being not used to heats, specially those of Thrace; and stirring much in them, and lodging in close cabbins in the summer, the third part of them lay half dead with Feavers; and all were ear∣nest to be gone home; specially Requithancus, and Theoctistus, Captaines of Phoenicia Libani. Who importuned Belisarius (the Saracens consecrated time being past) protesting to stay there to no purpose, and in the mean time to abandon the towns of Libanus and Syria to Alamundarus. Belisarius hereupon called a counsell, where John the sonne of Nicetas first rose, and spake thus; Excellent Belisarius! I think the world hath not had, neither for time nor va∣lour, a Captain like your self. This opinion prevailes not onely with Ro∣mans, but with all Barbarians. And certainly hereby you will preserve this glory firm, if you bring us alive into the Roman dominions; as we now are, our expectations are not fair. Our Saracens, and best men are come over the Tigris, and gone into our upper Provinces, so fast, as not to send us so much as a messenger. Requithancus and Theoctistus will be instantly gone; supposing Alamundarus forraging Phoenicia: and of the rest we have more sick, then sound men, to bring them into the Roman dominions. Such, as if an enemy light on us here, or upon our retreat, not a man will be left to report our disaster to the Romans at Daras. To march up higher, I think it not pos∣sible in reason. Whilst therefore some hope is left, 'tis good counsell to make a faire retreat; and madness for men in our danger, not to advise upon safety, but designes on an enemy. All approved this speech of John; and cryed out for a speedy retreat. So Belisarius put his sick into waggons, and led home the army; where he heard what Arethas had done, but could have no right of him, being not yet come to him. Chosroes in the mean time, having taken Petra, had the newes of Belisarius invasion; of the battaile by Nisibis; the taking of Sisabranum, and what the
forces, which with Arethas past the Tigris, had done. So leaving a Garrison in Petra, he went into Persia with the rest of his army, and Roman captives. These were the occurrents of Chosroes's second invasion; And Belisarius was by the Emperour sent for to Constantinople, where he spent his Winter. CHAP. XIV. IN the beginning of the Spring,Chosroës third Invasion in An. Dom. 542. & Justiniani 16. Chosroes invaded the Roman territorie the third time, with a great army; keeping the Euphrates to his right hand. Candidus, Bishop of Sergiopolis, having not kept his day with Chosroes, was a∣fraid, and came to the Persian Camp; where he besought Chosroes not to be of∣fended with him; That he never had money, nor ever thought of ransoming the Surenians himselfe; he had been a sutor to the Emperour, but got no good. But Chosroes put him in prison, and bitterly tortured him, and bad him pro∣cure double the summe formerly agreed. He prayed him to send to Sergiopo∣lis, to receave the treasures of the Church; which Chosroes did, and Candidus sent some with his messengers: to whom the Sergiopolitans gave many of those treasures, protesting to have nothing left. But Chosroes said, those should not suffice; he must have more; and he sent some in pretence to make privy search for their wealth, but indeed to surprize the city: But Sergiopolis was not then to be taken. For a Saracen under Alamundarus (being a Christian) named Ambrus, came under the wall by night; revealed the plot; and bad them re∣ceave no Persians into their town. So Chosroes seeing his men returne without effect, in a great rage sent six thousand men to force the town. Who assaulted, and the Sergiopolitans at first defended bravely. But grown weary and affraid, they advised to render the city; having but two hundred Souldiers within. But Ambrus came againe by night, and told them that within two dayes the Persians would raise their siege; their water absolutely failing. Whereupon they refused to parly; and the enemy afflicted with third, rose, and returned to Chosroes. Who would not dismiss Candidus: It behoved, I think, that having broke his oath, he should no more be a Priest. But when Chosroes came into Comagena, called Euphratesia, he would not forrage, nor take townes, as having spoiled all in Syria formerly in his way, and either sackt or ransom'd them, as hath been said. But his intent was to march directly into Palestine, and there to take the spoile, especially of the Treasures at Jerusalem; hearing the Province was fertile, and richly inhabited. The Ro∣mans both Commanders and Souldiers had no mind to meet the enemy, to stay his passage; but thought it enough within their fortifications to preserve them, and themselves. Justinian advertised of this invasion, againe sent Belisa∣rius; who taking Post-horses, arrived with great speed, (having no Souldiers with him) in Comagena. Justus the Emperors brothers son, with Buzes and some other, were gotten into Hierapolis; and hearing Belisarius to be neer, wrote this letter to him. Chosroes, as your self know, hath againe invaded the Romans, with a much greater army then formerly. Whither he intends, he yet makes no shew: onely we heare, he is very neer, and hurts no town in his way, still marching forward. Come therefore speedily unto us, if possibly you can slip by the enemy; that you may be preserved for the Emperour, and guard here Hierapolis with us. Belisarius liked not this letter, but went to Europus, a town upon the Euphrates; from whence he sent, and levyed an army; which encamped there; and to the commanders he returned this answer; If Chosroes goe against other people, and not Romans, you have fallen upon a most safe counsell. They who by lying still can avoid the mis∣chief, are madd to run into a needless danger. But you being quit of the Barbarian, he will fall upon some other country, the best he can find, and without garrisons; Know then, that a valiant death is better, then such a preservation, or rather trea∣son. Come you therefore speedily to Europus; where assembling our whole forces, we shall effect upon our enemies, what God shall grant us. The Commanders took heart at this letter; and leaving Justus with some to guard Hierapolis, the rest went to Europus.
CHAP. XV. WHen Chosroes heard Belisarius to be at Europus, he march't no further; but sent to him one of his Secretaries, named Abandanes, (a very dis∣creet man,This is supplied by the Latin Translation.) to complaine; that Justinian had not sent his Ambassadors to ra∣tifie the treaty. Of whose coming Belisarius understanding, he chose six thousand the goodliest of his men, as if he would send them out to hunt. He commanded also Diogenes, one of his Lanciers, and Adolius, the son of Acacius and Armenian (one of those who attend in the Emperours Palace to keep off noise, whom the Romans call Silentarij, and now Captaine of the forces in Armenia) to skirt along the shore of Euphrates, with a thousand horse, and at times to make shew to passe the river to invade their countrey. Himself hearing the Ambassador to be at hand, retired to his pavillion, which uses to be made with boards; that he might seeme to the Ambassador, to be in a poore town without pro∣visions. His souldiers he thus disposed. On the one side of his pavillion, were the Thracians, and Illyrians; and behind them the Goths; and next the Heru∣lians; then the Vandales and Moores. They took up much space, not standing still, but walking at distance, and looking carelesly, and confidently upon the Ambassador. None had his mantle on, but linnen coates like women girt about them, and in their hands a Horsemans-whip. For armes some had swords, some battle axes, others bowes onely; looking like hunters, in all hast, (omit∣ting all) to be pursueing the wild beasts. Abandanes the Ambassador, coming to Belisarius said, That it was a foule indignity, that Cesar (so the Persians call the Roman Emperour) had not sent Ambassadors about the Articles, which had constrained his master to enter the Roman territory in armes. Belisarius not fear∣ing their great army, and without any trouble in his mind or countenance, smiled, and with a cheerfull look answered him; Men doe not censure the acti∣ons of Chosroes by the same reasons he does them by: other men demanding ought of their neighbours, send Ambassadors first, and if they get not right, then they make warr. But he being in armes in the heart of our provinces, shamelesly now talks of peace. Having thus said, he dismissed the Ambassador. Who coming back to Chosroes, perswaded him to lay down armes, telling him; That he lighted up∣on a captaine the stoutest, and the wisest in the world, and upon such souldiers as he never beheld the like; whose order he extreamely admired. Then was the match between them unequall; He overcoming, should onely vanquish a slave of Cesars; but being overcome, should get infinit dishonour to him and his house. The Romans also being beaten, may escape into their fortresses, and in their own countrey. But if other then well happen to his army, there will be no messenger left to report the cala∣mity in Persia. Chosroes upon these reasons, had a mind to goe home, but was troubled, knowing the passages of the river to be guarded by the enemy:Here the Greek begins againe. and march the same way againe through a wilderness he could not, the provisions they brought with them failing. In conclusion he thought it best, though with hazarding a battaile, to get to the land on the other side the river, and so to march through a plentifull countrey. Belisarius knew well, that not 100000. men could hinder his passage; the river being passable by boats, and his army stronger, then to be barred their way by few enemies. Having also, as I said, commanded Diogenes and Adolius with a considerable party to the shore, to amaze the enemy with suddainess, and to put him in disorder: Now he fear∣ed, least by frighting him, he might interrupt his quitting the Roman territo∣ry; thinking it a matter of much importance, to drive him away, without hazarding with a very small army, heartily affraid of the Persians, against so many thousands. Wherefore he bad Diogenes and Adolius stay. And Chosroes speedily making a bridge, pass'd with his army over the Euphrates. Which was done with ease, the Persians having in their marches, ever ready, great iron hooks, wherewith they fasten long timbers together, and make a bridge sud∣dainly. Being upon the other side, he sent to tell Belisarius, that he had grati∣fied the Romans with his retreate, but expected Ambassadors from them imme∣diatly. Belisarius also passed the Euphrates, and sent some to Chosroes, to com∣mend
him for retiring; to promise Ambassadors forthwith from the Em∣perour, to finish the articles accorded; and to desire him in his passage through the Roman subjects, to use them as friends. Which he promised, so he might have some principall man for hostage of performance of what they under∣took. Belisarius hearing what he said, sent him from Edessa John, the son of Basilius, an unwilling hostage; being the chief man in the city for birth and estate. But the Romans much extolled Belisarius, who in this action seemed to gaine more reputation, then when he brought Gelimer and Vitigis prisoners to Constantinople. The truth is, it deserved highly to be valued, when the Ro∣mans were terrified, and hid in their fortresses, and Chosroes with a mighty ar∣my in the midst of their country, for a Generall coming post from Constan∣tinople, to encamp with a few in the face of Chosroes; to stop him; and then, either frighting him with his fortune and valour, or deceaving him with art, to make him in effect run away, and in words desire a peace. But Chosroes neglected his agreement, and took Callinicum, none being to guard it. Their walls, being decayed, they were ever taking down to rebuild them, and then they had opened a piece, and not made it up. When they heard the enemy to be neer, the richer sort carried out their goods, and re∣tired to other strong places. The residue, with a number of peasants flock't thither, continued in the town without any garrison. These Chosroes made slaves, and laid the town even with the ground. Shortly after he recea∣ved John the hostage, and retired into his country. The Armenians also, who revolted to Chosroes, took assurances from the Romans, and went with Bassaces to Constantinople Belisarius also went to Constantinople, sent for by the Emperour, to be immediatly dispatcht into Italy, where things were very ill. CHAP. XVI. ABout the same time was a Plague, which almost consumed mankind. Of all blowes from heaven, bold and subtile men will talk of a cause, amazing us with reasons, and physiologies above our apprehension; knowing nothing to be sound they say; but contented, if they may perswade with their cosenages, such as frequent them. But of this to find any other cause is not pos∣sible, but God himself. For it came not upon one part of the world, nor in one season of the yeare, from whence subtile wits might coyne a cause. But it vexed the whole world, and all conditions of men, though differing often even to contrariety; sparing no constitution, nor age. Mens differing in their places of dwelling, diets, complexions, addictions, or any thing else in this disease did no good. It took some in the summer, some in the Winter, others at other seasons. So that let Sophisters, and discoursers of Meteors shew their learning; I will onely relate where it began to rage, and in what manner it destroyed. It began among the Egyptians of Pelusium, and spread to Alexan∣dria, and the rest of Egypt one way, and the other, to that Palestine, which borders upon Egypt. From thence it travelled through the world, as by set journeyes and stages; removing as by appointed gistes; and staying in each countrey a certaine time; and making destruction its onely business; and spred∣ing on both sides to the utmost bounds of the world, as if affraid, least any odd hole of the earth should escape it. It spared neither Iland, nor cave, nor top of mountaine, which had men dwelling in it. If it skipt a countrey, by not touching it at all, or but here, and there; yet returning afterward, it struck no more the neighbouring people formerly visited, but from that coun∣try it removed not the sore, before it had justly made up the full measure of the dead, according to the lot of their perisht neighbours. It began still at the sea-coast, and from thence went to the uplands. In the second yeare of it, it came to Constantinople, about the middle of the Spring; where it was my for∣tune then to reside. And it was in this sort. Apparitions of Spirits in all shapes humane, were seen by many; who thought the man they met, struck them in some part of the body; and so soon as they saw the Spirit, they were taken
with the disease. At first men meeting such, blessed themselves; repeating the most divine names; and using other ceremonies; but did no good; For many who fled into Churches perisht. Afterwards, they would not heare their friends calling, but lockt up in their chambers, stopt their eares, though the dores were even broken open; fearing the Sprite called on them. Some in their dreames suffred that, which others from those that met them; or heard a voice, that they were enrolled in the appointed to dy. But most without warning by dreames, or waking visions, suddainly became feaverish; some newly waking; some walking; others doing other things. Their body changed not colour, nor was hot, as in a feaver, no inflammation being, but the feaver so remisse in the beginning, and so till evening, that neither the sick, nor the physician feeling his pulse apprehended danger. But to some the same day, to some the next, or many after, there rose a Bubo, not onely in the groyne (which part is called Bubo) but in the armeholes, under the eare, and in other parts. These things came alike to all; but the symptomes afterward, I cannot say, whether the difference of bodies made, or the onely will of him, that sent the sickness. Some had a deep slumbring; others a sharp distraction; both suffering, what was proper to the disease. These slumberers forgot all they were formerly used to; seeming perpetually to sleep. If they were look't to, they would eate sometimes; and some neglected, starved. Those taken with madness, were troubled for want of sleep, and with many apparitions; thinking men assaulted them to kill them, crying out, and running away. Their keepers vexed with endless toyle, were pittied as much as themselves: Not for being infected (for no Physician, nor other, caught the disease by touching sicke or dead bodies; many strangely continuing free, though they buryed, and tended such as were nothing to them; and many catching it, they knew not how, and dying in∣stantly;) but they pittied their perpetuall toyle; in raising them tumbling upon the ground; and in strugling with them, when they would throw them∣selves out of windowes. Such as could, leaped into the water, not for thirst, but caused by their phrensie; for many leap't into the Sea. Much toyle they had also to get them to eat; and many, for want of keepers, were starved, or brake their necks. Some without slumbring, or madness, had their Bubo gangrened, and they dyed with extreame paine. Which doubtless happened to the rest, but being not themselves, they understood it not; the Phrensie taking away their senses. Some Physitians upon these symptomes, conceaving the head of the disease to be in those plague sores, searcht the dead bodyes, and opening the sores, found a huge carbuncle, growing inward. Some died forthwith, some after many dayes. Such, whose bodies were spotted with black pim∣ples, the bigness of a lentile, lived not a day. Many, a voluntary vomiting of bloud seizing, died. This I can say, that many famous Physicians judged some instantly would dye, who unexpectedly grew well; and confidently af∣firmed the recovery of others, who were vpon the point of death. So that no cause of this sickness was reach't by mans reason; some event happening to all, whereof no reason could be rendred. Some bathing helped, others it hurt; Many dyed for want of cure; and many scaped without it; it proving both wayes to those that used it. In a word no way was found of preservation, nei∣ther by preventing the disease, nor mastering it; no cause appearing neither of their falling sick, nor recovering. Women with child taken with it, certain∣ly dyed; some miscarrying; some fairely deliver'd, and perishing with their children. Yet they say that three women were delivered, who grew well, their children dying; and one dyed, whose child had the happ to live. Such as had their sore great, and running with putrefaction, escaped; the same as∣swaging the violence of the carbuncle; and this was commonly a certaine signe of health. But whose plague-sore stay'd, as it first rose, such had the miserable accidents, I mentioned. Some had their thigh withered, the sore rising upon it, and not running. Some escaped with imperfect tongues, and lived stam∣mering, o speaking sounds without sence. In Constantinople this sickness lasted foure months, and was three months in extremity. At first few dyed, more then usually. Then it grew hotter; then died five thousand every day, then
10000 and more. In the beginning, men took care to bury each his own dead, casting some into other mens Monuments, either unseen or by force. But in the end all was in confusion: Servants were without Masters; and rich men wanted servants to attend them; being sick or dead; and many houses were empty. So that divers for want of acquaintance lay long unburied.The Greek fails here, and it is supplied from the Latine translation. * The Emperour (as was reason) made it his own care; and committed the over∣sight to Theodorus, whose office was to subscribe the Emperours answers to Pe∣titions (the Latines call him Referendarius.) To them that wanted, and to the poor multitude, he gave reliefs in mony out of the Treasury. And now in the afflicted City were no trades, nor shops to be seen. Many for fear leaving their bad courses, consecrated themselves to God: and many, when the danger was past, fell to their old despising of God again. CHAP. XVII. BUt to return to my former discourse. Chosroes marcht Northward to Ar∣dabigara, a town in Assyria,Anno Domini 543. Justiniani 17. purposing from thence to invade the Romans again. Here is a great Pyraeum, which the Persians adore above all Gods; where the Magi keep a perpetuall fire, and offer much sacrifice; and in their greatest affairs use it for an Oracle; it is the fire which anciently the Romans called Vestall. Here Chosroes had news of two Ambassadors from Constantinople, about the Peace, Constantianus an Illyrian, and Sergius an Edessenian; both Ora∣tors, and able men. Chosroes expecting their comming, forbare hostility. But Constantianus fell sick upon the way; and the Plague at last came into Persia. But Nabedes, Governour of Persarmenia, by the Kings command, sent Euduli∣us, Prelate of the Christians there, unto Valerianus, Commander of the forces in Armenia; to complaine of the slownesse of the Ambassadors; and to exhort the Romans to peace. He came into Armenia with his brother, and told Vale∣rianus, that he heartily affected the Romans, being Christians as himself; and would so perswade Chosroes, that the Ambassadors should find no impediment of concluding a peace to their own desire. But the Prelates brother getting privately to Valerianus, told him; That Chosroes in great distresse desired a peace; his sonne conspiring against him; and his army being full of the Plague. Valerianus upon this sent away the Prelate; promising the Ambassa∣dors should shortly come to Chosroes; and the said advertisement he wrote to Justinian. Who thereupon directed him and the Army to invade the Persians; for he saw not that any enemy would oppose them; willing all the forces to joyn, and enter into Persarmenia. The Captains upon these Letters rode with their troopes into Persarmenia. Chosroes was newly gone from Ardabigara, for fear of the Plague, with his army to a part of Assyria, where the sicknesse was not yet come. Valerianus with his forces encamped at Theodosiopolis, to whom joyned Narses, with some Armenians and Herulians. But Martinus, Generall of the East, with Ildiger and Theoctistus, encamped at Citharizum, a Castle four dayes journey from Theodosiopolis; whether came Peter shortly after, and Ado∣lius, with some other Captaines; Isaac also, * brother of Narses was there;Here begins the Greek again. and Philemuth; and Verus, with the Herulians under their command, came to Arzanéne, not far from the camp of Martinus. Justus also the Emperours Nephew, and Peranius, and John the son of Nicetas, with Domentiolus, and John Phagas, encamped at Phison, a Castle near unto Martyropolis. Thus were these Commanders quartered, with their severall troops; amounting in the whole to thirty thousand. These joyned not, nor communicated; save when the Ge∣nerals sent to one another to know news of the Persians. Peter upon a sudden motion, without acquainting the rest, invaded the enemies country. And the next day, Philemuth and Verus, with their Herulians followed. Martinus and Valerianus hearing thereof, marcht likewise to the Invasion. Shortly all joyned in the enemies country, save Iustus, who was quartered far off; but hearing (though late) that his fellow Commanders were entred the enemyes land, he marcht thither also, but could not unite his troopes with theirs.
Those Generalls marcht directly to Dubis; neither forraging, nor other∣wise hurting the country. Dubis is a Territory eight dayes journey from Theodosiopolis, of good land, wel scituated for air, and water; being fair cham∣pians, full of populous villages close together, and inhabited by Merchants, who traffique with the Indians, and neighbouring Iberians, and with all the Persian Nations, and some Romans. The Bishop of the Christians, the Greeks call Catholicus, who hath the charge of all the country. Some fifteene miles from Dubis to the right hand comming from the Roman Territories, stands a ragged mountain, hardly to be passed, and in a very narrow passage a village called Anglon, where Nabedes hearing of the enemies comming, kept fast; confident of the strength of the place. The village is at the furthest end of the mountain; where, upon a steep rock, stands a Castle of the same name. Na∣bedes fortified the passage to the village with stones, and waggons, and drew a trench before, and lodged his army in the said village; and in old houses without it, layed ambushes of foot. The Persians amounted in all to four thousand men. The Romans came to a place, distant a dayes journey from Anglon, and took a scout of the enemies, who told them, that Nabedes was re∣tired from Anglon. Narses at this chafed, reproaching his fellow Comman∣ders for their tardinesse. The same others did likewise; taunting one ano∣ther. And now carelesse of fighting, and fearlesse of dangers, they attended pil∣laging onely. They marcht confusedly, without discipline, without watch∣word (as is usuall in such actions) or distinction by any kind of order. The souldiers were mingled with the attendants upon the baggage, and marcht as to some great booty ready drest for them. Being near Anglon, they sent out scoutes, who brought them word, that the army was inbattail array. The Commanders were amazed with the suddainnesse; yet thought it base and cowardly to turn their backs with so great an army. So ordering the army as well as in that case they could; they marcht against the enemy. Peter ha∣ving the right hand wing, Valerianus the left, and Martinus the battell. Being come near the enemy, they stood still in their ranks confusedly, by rea∣son of the ragged ground, and their being newly put in order. The Barba∣rians also drew close together, and stood viewing the enemies powers; Nabedes had commanded none to strike the first blow, but the enemy giving on, to resist him. Narses with his Herulians, and some Romans, gave on upon the Persians; and them he routed, who ran away up to the Castle. Much mischief was done between them in the narrow passage; and Narses pressed upon the enemy, and encouraged his men; and the rest fell to work. But suddainly the Ambushes issuing from the old houses, into the narrow lanes, killed some Herulians, and wounded Narses in the head mortally, whom his brother Isaac carried off; but he dyed quickly, having in this fight done bravely. The Romans upon this growing to confusion, Nabedes drew out all his army, which in those narrow lanes shooting at a multitude, killed them at ease, and most the Herulians; being the most part unarmed, and in fight never using head∣piece, corslet, or other defensive armour, save a shield, and a thick coat girt about them. Their slaves fight without shields, which their masters permit them to weare, when they have shewed themselves good souldiers. But the Romans not enduring the enemy longer, fled amain, remembring neither va∣lour, shame, nor ought that good is. The Persians suspecting, that they could not fall to so shamelesse a running away, but had some ambushes; drave them out of the fastnesses, and then turn'd bridle, not daring with a few to encoun∣ter so many in a plain. But the Romans (specially the Commanders) think∣ing the enemy still pursuing, ran without intermission; urging their horses with whip and voice; throwing away their arms in haste; as having no cou∣rage to fight with a Persian over-taking, but all their hope of safety in their horses feet. In a word, it was such a running away, as scarce a horse over-lived it, but instantly dyed, the course ended. So great a disaster the Romans have not formerly had. Many were slain, more made slaves to the enemy, who took so great a quantity of arms and baggage, that the rich state of Persia appeared much richer by this victory. Adolius in this retreat, passing by a Castle in Pers∣armenia,
was slain by a wound in his head of a stone thrown by one of the In∣habitants. Justus and Peranius, having a little plundered the country of Ta∣raunia, returned home. CHAP. XVIII. BUt the next year Chosroes invaded the Romans the fourth time,Chosroës 4th. Invasion in An. Dom. 544. & Justiniani 18. with his army into Mesopotamia. And this expedition he made not against the Em∣perour Justinian, nor any mortall man indeed, but even against God, whom onely the Christians adore. For in his first Invasion, missing Edessa, and reti∣ring so; he and his Magi were much discontented to be overcome by the Chri∣stians God. Wherefore he threatned to make the Edessenians slaves, and to turn their City to a Sheep-pasture. Being come before Edessa with his army, he sent some Hunnes to the walls over against the Circus to steal the sheep, kept near the walls by shepheards, presuming upon the strength, and steepnesse of the place. But the Barbarians got to the sheep, and the shepheards stoutly re∣sisted; but with the aid of some Persians they got away one flock; which ran back again, while some Romans sallying fought with them: Where a Hunne fighting in the front, and most troubling the Romans, a country fellow hit him with a sling-stone on his right knee, and down he fell headlong; which en∣couraged the Romans. The fight lasted from morning till noon, and both thinking they had the better, parted, the Romans to their walls, and the Bar∣barians to pitch their tents a mile from the City, where they encamped. Chos∣roes, either upon some dream, or the apprehension of disgrace to misse Edissa twice, thought of selling his retreat to the Edessenians for money. Paul the Interpreter therefore the next day, under the town-walls, advised the Ro∣mans to send men of quality to Chosroes. They chose four eminent men; whom Zaberganes met in the camp, by the Kings direction; and with threatning words asked them; which they would rather have, a Peace, or a War. They confessing to chuse peace before dangers: Then must you buy it, quoth Zaber∣ganes, with a great summe. They sayd they would give as much as formerly; when he came thither after the sack of Antioch. Zaberganes laught; and bade them consult seriously for their lives; and come back again. Shortly after Chosroes sent for them, and recited the Roman towns he had led into captivity; threatning to them also the terriblest usage, if they gave him not all their money within their walls; upon which onely he would raise his siege. The Ambassadours acknowledged, that they would buy their peace, if he enjoyned possibilites. But the conclusion of a danger, they said, no living man could know before the combat; war being not upon articles of agreement between the parties. Upon this Chosroes commanded them in anger to get them gone. The eighth day of the Siege, he beganne to raise a mount against the walls; making, without arrow-shot, a square work of trees cut down with leaves on, spreading over them much earth, and over all, a quantity of rude unwrought stones (his onely care being to raise the Mount speedily) putting between the earth and stones long timbers, which fastned the work; that growing high, it should not be weak. But Peter the Roman Generall being in the town, with Martinus and Peranius, sent out Hunnes against the workmen, who falling on suddainly, killed many. One of his Lanciers, named Arger, killed above seven and twenty. But the Barbarians kept better guard afterward, and none sallyed on the workmen: Who being come within arrow-shot, the Romans from the walls stoutly employed their slings and bows. Before their labourers in this Aggestus (so is it called in Latine) the Barbarians hung upon long poles hair-cloths of Goats hair, thick and long, that no fiery darts nor arrows could pierce through, but there fell dead. Then the Romans affraid, sent Am∣bassadours to Chosroes, and with them Stephanus a famous Physitian, who had cured King Cabades of a disease, and got a great estate by him. He with the rest
coming to Chosroës, spake thus. Men have ever held humanity the marke of a good King. So that, mighty Sir! if you kill and lead into captivity, you may perchance obtaine some other titles, but shall never be thought a good man. And of all cities, Edessa should least have a misfortune from you; Where I was borne; who not foreseeing what would come to passe, fostered you; and by counselling your father to appoint you his successor, have been to you a principall cause of the Empire of Persia, and to my country of these miseries. Thus men are themselves the authors of most of their own misfortunes. But if you have any remembrance of this service, you will doe us no more hurt; bestowing this retribution on me; by which, O King! you will have the for∣tune not to be esteemed a most cruell man. But Chosroës professed not to rise from thence, till the Romans delivered him Peter, and Peranius his fathers slaves, presuming to beare armes against him. If they refused this, they must either pay1575000. l'. sterl. five hundred Centenaries of gold, or admit his ministers to search the city, and to bring him all the gold and silver within it, and upon this they might keep the rest of their goods. This Chosroës spake at randome, ex∣pecting with ease to take the city. And the Ambassadors finding his proposi∣tions impossible, returned much troubled; And reporting the demands, filled the city with noise and lamentations. CHAP. XIX. BUt the mount rose to a great height, and went on apace. The Romans in perplexity, sent againe Ambassadors; who were sutors for the same things, but were not regarded, but driven out of the Persian camp, with scorn & hout∣ing. Then they began to raise their walls higher, toward the mount; But the Persians worke farr overtopping that also, they gave it over; And desired Mar∣tinus to procure a capitulation, as he would himself. He got as neer as he could to the camp, and spake with some Persian commanders; who to amuse him said, Their King desired peace, but could not perswade the Emperour to leave quarrelling. He could not deny Belisarius to be above Martinus in power, and place; who perswaded the King to retire from the midst of the Roman Provinces, with pro∣mises of Ambassadors to perfect the Treatie of peace; but he could not performe, be∣ing not able to force the Emperours will. In the mean time the Romans drew a mine to the enemies work; and commanded not to leave working, till they were under the middle of the Mount. Where being, the Persians above heard the noise; and finding what they did, cross-mined on both sides, to catch them in the middle. They perceaving it, stopt up their mine there with earth; and from underneath the part of the Mount next the town, carryed out the timber, stones, and earth, and made a little hollow roome; where they laid dry loggs steep't in Cedar oyle, and Assyrian pitch. During this preparation the Persian commanders in many meetings with Martinus discoursed to the effect afore∣said, seeming to entertaine a parley for Peace. But their mount being brought to perfection, and raised farr above the walls, they sent away Martinus; re∣fusing any composition; and fell to work.Here againe the Latin trans∣lation fills up a great gap. The Romans then set the dry loggs a fire: which burnt part of the Mount; but not spreading to the whole, and be∣ing burnt out, they brought more into the hollow roome. Then appeared the smoake from the Mount at night: and the Romans to prevent the discovery, shot small vessells filled with burning coales, and fire darts, thick over the mount: and the Persians thinking the smoake came from them, ran to quench them. But the fire prevailed, and the Barbarians pittifully crying, were shot and killed from the walls. At Sun-rising, Chosroes came with some of his army; went upon the Mount; and first found the mischief, shewing, how the smoake came not from that darted from the enemy, but from fire below; and he willed the army to shout. The Romans grew confident, and flouted them: They all cast on, some earth, others water, which abated the smoake there, but presently it burst out in another part more vehemently; The water also added force to the sulfur, and Assyrian pitch, and spread the fire more; and within, the fire
prevailed above the water; and about evening the smoke was so high, that it was seen at Carr, and other neighbouring parts. There were fights also upon the Mount, wherein the Romans overcame. And now the flame rose cleerly; when the Persians abandoned the work. Six dayes after they assaulted some∣thing before day-light, (the Romans being dead asleep): And they set to their ladders, and were mounting: But a peasant awaking, called up the Romans. They fought; and the Persians were beaten to their camp; leaving their lad∣ders, which the Romans drew up. About midnight Chosroës sent a great part of his army to force the great Gate. The Romans (not onely Souldiers, but peasants and people) stood them, had the better, and routed them. As they were running, Paul the Interpreter put himself among the Romans, and told them, that Recimer was newly come from Constantinople an Ambassador about peace. So they parted. Recimer came to the Barbarians camp some dayes be∣fore; which they concealed from the Romans; expecting the event of their works; if those prosper'd, they resolved to come to no treatie; if they were beaten (as they now are) they might come to it fairely; the Romans having invited them. When Recimer was neer the city gate, the Persians demanded some to be sent out to treat an accord with Chosroës. They answered, they would within three dayes send Martinus, who now was sicke. Chosroës suspe∣cting the answer not to be sincere, prepared for warr; commanding store of bricks to be laid upon the Mount. Two dayes after he approached the walls with his whole army, and applyed his ladders and engines; and begirt the town; placing squadrons at every gate, & Saracens behind them; who when the town was taken, were to lay hold on run-awayes. The fight began in the morn∣ing, and at first the Persians had the better; being many against few; for the Romans were not aware of the assault. The fight proceeding, the city was full of tumult; the women and little children went to the walls; and the men re∣sisted valiantly; Many peasants did bravely. The women and children with the old men brought stones to the combatants. Some threw down boyling oyle. Then the Persians refused to fight any longer; telling the King plainely, they would not give on: Chosroës in a rage, threatning and urging them, brought them all on. And againe with shouts they applied their ladders, and engines, as if they would instantly enter. But the Romans defending in great numbers, the enemy fledd; and the Romans hiss't at Chosroes; daring him to the assault. Onely Azarethes with his troupes continued fighting about the gate of Soëna; and from a place called Tripugia, the valiantest of the Romans sallied. Other Persians assaulting an outwork, prest hard upon the defendants, till Peranius with many souldiers, and some Edessenians, having routed Aza∣rethes, rode up to these. So that Chosroes beginning the assault in the morning, gave it over late at night: Both passed the night unquietly; the Persians affraid of their trenches; the Romans providing stones and other things against ano∣ther assault the next morning; when the Barbarians came not on. But the day after, a part of the army animated by Chosroes set upon the gate of Barlaim; but were beaten back to their camp. Then Paul the Interpreter called up to the walls for Martinus, to treat an accord. Which he did; and Chosroës recea∣ving39062. l'. 10. s'. sterl. 50000. gold Staters from the Edessenians, subscribed the articles; pro∣mising no more to infest the Romans. In conclusion, setting his palissadoes and others works on fire, he went home with his army. About this time died two Roman commanders, Justus, Justinians nephew, and Peranius the Iberian; the first by sickness, the other by a fall from his horse in hunting. In whose roomes the Emperour placed Marcellus, his sisters sonne, a youth, and Constantianus, afterward Ambassador to Chosroes about the treatie. These had audience in Assyria, where stand Seleucia, and Ctesiphon, faire cities, built by the Macedonians, who after Alexander the great raigned in Persia. Of which cities the Tigris bounds their territories; no other countrey being be∣tween them. Here finding the King, they demanded restitution of the places in Lazica, and ratification of the articles of peace. But Chosroes said, that a peace would hardly be, without a truce first for a time, during which by mu∣tuall concourse, and communication, they might more firmely determine the
Perpetuall Peace, and that the Romans to get it must give him money; and they must send him one Tribunus, with whom by a day certain he would con∣clude the businesse. This Tribunus, a Physitian, had cured Chosroes of a great sicknesse,The Quinquen∣nial Cessation, An. Justin. 19. Anno Dommi 545. for which he was his friend, and very gratefull. Justinian forth∣with sent him Tribunus; and of the money twenty thousand Staters. And so a Truce was concluded for five years, in the nineteenth year of Justinians reigne. Shortly after Alamundarus and Arethas had a war, without any ayds of Per∣sians or Romans on either side. Alamundarus in an Inroade took a son of Are∣thas prisoner, and sacrificed him to Venus. From him was discovered, how Arethas sold the affairs of the Romans to the Persians. Afterward they came to a battel with their whole forces, wherein Arethas got the better, and rout∣ed the enemy, and killed many. A while after he had the pursuit of two sons of Alamundarus, but could not take them. CHAP. XX. But in Lazica, Chosroes had a design to kill Gubazes their King,Here the Greek continues. * and to transplant the Nation into some other part of his dominions, and to plant Persians in their room: For he thought it a matter of much importance, firmly to possesse Lazica, being of manifold use to the Persians: First, by holding more securely the Iberians, who would have none to fly to in case of revolt: For the principall Iberians with their King Gurgenes revolting (as I said be∣fore) the Persians suffered not the nation to chuse their King any more; nei∣ther were they willing subjects to the Persians, but both were suspicious of each other; and the Iberians discontented, and ready to stir upon fit oppor∣tunity. He considered also, that not onely the Persian dominions would here∣by be for ever free from the devastation of the Hunnes bordering upon Lazica; but that himself, having a mind, might send them against the Romans; there being no rampire against the Barbarians of Mount Caucasus, but only Lazica. But principally Lazica would advantage the Persians, by issuing from thence to infest by land and sea the places upon the Euxine sea, to subdue Cappadocia, Galatia, and Bithynia, and to surprise Constantinople, there being none to stop their course. Upon these considerations Chosroes would have Lazica, but could not be confident in the Nation. For after the Romans were retired from thence, the common people were discontented at the Persians Government, who of all men have least variety in their humours, their manner of life being extreamly strict; their laws hard of disgestion, and their commands intol∣lerable. And in reference to the Lazians the difference infinitely appeared, both in Religion and conversation; the Lazians being Christians, none more; and the Persians quite contrary. Besides, no Salt being in Lazica, nor Wine, nor other native commodity; all is imported from the sea coasts of the Ro∣mans; not giving money to the Merchants, but skins, and slaves, and other things with them abounding. From which being now barred, they were dis∣contented. And Chosroes perceiving it, consulted upon some safe prevention, before they should stirre for an alteration; and thought it most expedient to rid away Gubazes their King, and to transport the Nation, and to plant Per∣sians and others in their country. He sent also to Constantinople Isdigunas, under pretext of an Ambassage, and with him five hundred chosen Persians, directing them to get into Daras, and lodging in severall houses to set them afire, and while the Romans were busie to quench the fire, to open the gates, and receive in the rest of the Persian army; the Governour of Nisibis being commanded to be in readynesse with forces concealed thereabout. Thus Chosroes thought without labour to have the killing of the Romans in Daras, and to be master of the City. But a Roman fugitive in Persia having knowledge of it, went to Daras, and there revealed it to George; who formerly perswaded the Persians besieged in Sisibranum to yeeld to the Romans. George went out to meet the Ambassador, and told him,
this was not like not Ambassage; and that Persians in so great numbers use not to lodge in Roman Cities; he should do well to leave the rest in a town called Amudis, and with a few in his company to enter Daras. Isdigunas chased, and took this for a great affront, being an Ambassadour sent to the Emperour. But George, without respect to his storming, preserved the City to the Romans; receiving him in, with onely twenty of his train. He failing in his plot, went to Constantinople, with his Wife and two Daughters, the pretence of his extraordinary company. Where having accesse to the Emperour, of businesse great or small he had nothing to say, though he had been six moneths in the Roman dominions; but he delivered usuall presents to the Emperour, and letters, to know if he were in good health. This Isdigunas Justinian entertain∣ed with the most grace and honour that we ever saw him use to any Ambassa∣dour; feasting him, and Braduionas his Interpreter; and setting them upon the same couch with himself, a thing never done before. No man ever saw an Interpreter sit at table with the meanest Governour, much lesse the Em∣perour. And this Ambassadour without businesse, he entertained, and dimissed more honourably than ever any.31500 l. sterl. His charges and presents came to more than ten Centenaries of gold. CHAP. XXI. BUt into Lazica Chosroes first sent much ship-timber, giving out it was for engines to stand upon the walls of Petra. Then he sent Fabrizus, with three hundred chosen Persians, instructing him, closely to kill Gubazes, and of the sequele he would take care. The timbers in Lazica were all consumed by lightening. But Fabrizus being there, and practising to execute his instructi∣ons concerning Gubazes, sent for a Nobleman of the country, named Pharsanses, (whom he understood to be in disgrace with Gubazes for some offence, not daring to come in his fight) and to him revealed the matter, and advised with him how to attempt it. The conclusion was, that Fabrizus should goe to Petra, and send for Gubazes, to acquaint him with the great Kings reso∣lution touching Lazica. But Pharsanses secretly discovered the plot to Gu∣bazes. Who thereupon refused to come to Fabrizus, and prepared for an open revolt. Fabrizus committed the guard of Petra to the other Persians, to pre∣pare all things safe against a siege; and so went home, having done nothing. Gubazes reported to Justinian the present estate, besought his pardon for things past, and his present ayd to shake off the Persian Government. The Emperour was glad of the news, and sent him seven thousand men, comman∣ded by Dagisthaeus, and a thousand Tzanians. Who joyned with Gubazes and the natives, and besieged Petra. The Persians within defended it valiant∣ly, and much time was spent in the siege; they having laid in store of victuall in the town. Chosroes was troubled at it, and sent against them a great army of horse and foot, under the command of Mermeroes. Whereof Gubazes being advertised, and upon advise with Dagisthaeus, did thus. The River of Boas springs near the confines of Tzanica, about Pharangium in Armenia. First it runnes a good way to the Northward, and is small and fortable, till it comes where it hath the Marches of Iberia to the North, and the utmost ridge of Mount Caucasus to the South. Hereabout inhabit the Alans, and the Abas∣gians, in antient amitie with the Romans, and they are Christians; the Zec∣chians also, and Sabirian Hunnes. From the Marches of Iberia and Caucasus, this River is supplyed with other waters, grows greater, and instead of Boas is called Phasis; is navigable, and disembogues into the Euxine sea. On both sides of it is Lazica. To the right hand the country is well inhabited, to the borders of Iberia; on that side the river are their villages, and some small cities, antiently built, as Archaeopolis, a strong place; Sebastopolis, and the Castle of Pityuntium; and towards Iberia, Scanda, and Sarapnis. Other strong Cities there are, as Rhodopolis, and Muchrisiis. But to the Southward are the Marches of Lazica for a dayes journey, a country uninhabited; upon
which border the Ponticke Romans. In the desert marches of Lazica Justinian built Petra in my time, where, (as I said) John Tzibus set up the monopoly, which caused the Lazians defection. From Petra Southward the Roman bor∣ders begin; where are populous towns, as Rhizaeum, Athens, and others unto Trapezond. The Lazians, when they brought Chosroes into the countrey, past the Boas, and came to Petra; leaving Phasis (then so called) to his right hand; pretending to avoyd the delay and toyle of ferrying over the river Phasis; but in truth not willing to shew the Persians their dwellings. And Lazica on both sides the river is full of bad wayes, having rocks on either side the countrey, which make long narrow glinnes. (The Romans, as the Grecians, call such wayes, Clausurae.) But then, Lazica being unguarded, the Persians guided by the natives, came with ease to Petra. But now Gubazes being informed of the Persians coming, wrote to Dagisthae∣us to send forces to guard the passage beyond the Phasis, and not to raise the siege, before Petra were taken. Himself with his own army march't to the utmost borders of Lazica, to guard the Passage there. He had sometime be∣fore gotten some troopes of Alans,9450 l. sterl. and Sabirians; who agreed for three Cente∣naries, to help to guard his countrey, and so depopulate Iberia, that the Per∣sians should not be able to come in that way; and the money the Emperor was to pay: whom Gubazes praid to send the same, and some Donative to the La∣zians, now in much distress; alledging himself also to be behind for ten yeares, being enrolled a Silentiary of the Imperiall Palace, and having receaved no pay from the time Chosroës entred Lazica. Justinian meant to performe his re∣quest, but greater business diverting him, he sent not the money in the due time. But Dagisthaeus, being a young man, and unable to manage a Persian warr, made no advantage of the opportunities offered him: Whereas he should have sent to the Passage the most of his army, and been himself at the action, he sent, as to some slight business, onely two hundred men. And he did nothing upon Petra with all his forces: The enemy within, at first were not 1500. men, who continually being shot, and slaine at the assaults; after as much valour, as ever men shewed, were reduced to a very few; and dispairing, and unable, lay still. The Romans drew a mine under the wall; and the wall falling with a house joyning to it, fell all into the Ruine, securing the town as much as the wall. This troubled not the Romans, who saw hope, by mining in another part, to take the town: and Dagisthaeus wrote of it to the Emperour; urging for rewards of victory, and appointing what he and his brother should have; for they would take Petra presently. But the Persians receaved the assaults bravely, and beyong expectation; their troopes being much decayed. Where∣in the Romans prevailing not, they mined againe, and came on with their work so, that the foundation of the wall had no ground to beare it, and the wall was in the aire, suddainly to fall. And if Dagisthaeus had presently put fire to the supporters, the town had been taken. But he with his hopes from the Emperour, dallying, did nothing. CHAP. XXII. IN the meane time Mermeroes with a Persian army past the marches of Iberia, and avoyding the townes of Lazica, for feare of stopp, kept the Phasis to his right hand; his care being to save Petra, and the Persians in it. Where the piece of the wall which tottered, as I said, fell suddainely; at which fifty Ro∣mans entred, and cryed out aloud, The Victorious Emperour Justinian. They were led by John, a young Armenian, son of that Thomas sirnamed Guzes, who by the Emperours direction built many fortresses in Lazica, commanding the army there, and well esteemed by the Emperour. This John the Persians en∣countred, and so he retired, wanting seconds. Then Mirranes, commander of the garrison, willed the Persians to attend their guards, and went (being afraid of the towne) to Dagisthaeus; gave him faire words; promised to ren∣der the town shortly, and so amused him, that he did not, as he should have
done, presently march into the town. In the meane time Mermeroes was en∣countred at the Passage by the two hundred Romans: who valiantly kept off the assailants. But the Persians persisting, and being still supplied with new men for their slaine (having lost more then 1000.) The Romans weary with killing, and overprest with numbers, ran up to the mountaines. Dagisthaeus hereof advertised, presently raised the siege, and without giving any direction to the army, away he gallopt towards the Phasis, and all the Romans followed; leaving their baggage in the camp. Which the Persians seeing, sallyed, fell a∣mong their Cabbins, and were rifling the camp. But the Tzanians, who fol∣lowed not Dagisthaeus, came to the rescue; routed the enemy (who ran into the town, after the losse of many) and ransackt the Roman camp themselves; Then went to Rhizaeum, and from thence home by Athens, and Trapezond. The ninth day after Dagisthaeus his retreat, Mermeroes with his army came thither: where he found remaining of the Persian Garrison 350. men, whereof 150 sound, the rest wounded and unserviceable. The dead bodies the survivors never threw from the walls, but endured almost stifling with the stench; that the enemy, seing so many lost, might not be the more encouraged to assault. Mermeroes said scoffingly, that the Romans affaires were to be lamented, being fallen into so weak a condition, as not to be able with all their endeavour to force 150. Persians, that had no walls to defend them. But the walls he care∣fully repaired, and wanting lime and other materialls, he filled with sand the linnen wallets, wherein the Persians brought their provisions, and laid them insteed of stones; and this served for walling. In the town he left 3000 chosen men, with a proportion of victuall for no long time, and direction to repaire the walls. Himself with the rest of his army returned homeward; And because if he marcht the same way he came, he would find no provisions, ha∣ving left what he brought out of Iberia in Petra; he went over the mountains, which, he heard, were inhabited; that by forraging he might make his army live. But one Fubelius, a noble man of Lazica, conducting Dagisthaeus, and 1000. Romans, surprized the Persians where they lodged; and having stolne some horses at pasture, and killed some who kept them, retired; and Merme∣roes rose from thence. But Gubazes not affrighted with what happened to the Romans, quitted not the Passage on his side, supposing there to be the maine of his hopes. For though the Persians forced through the Passage beyond the Pha∣sis, and got to Petra; yet he could not incommode Lazica, being not able to cross the Phasis without shipps; the river is so deep and broad, and so swift, that it enters the Sea a good way unmingled with salt water, & out of it passengers take in fresh water: And with shipps, the many Fortresses on this side, will make an enemies landing unsafe. Justinian also at last sent the monyes for the Sabirians, and other for Gubazes, and the Lazians. Long before he had sent a good army thither commanded by Recithangus the Thracian, a wise man, and a good souldier; but it was not yet arrived. Mermeroes having gotten to the mountaines, would have provided victuall for Petra, knowing, that that he had left, would not serve a Garrison of 3000. men. But what he could light on in the country, hardly sufficing his own army of 30000. he could send nothing to Petra worth the speaking. So he resolved with the most of his army to quit Lazica, and leave some few, who of the provisions they could get, were to transport most to Petra, and to live upon the rest. And so 5000. chosen men he left with Fabrizus, and three other commanders. He thought a greater ar∣my not needfull; there being no enemies. With the residue he went into Pers∣armenia, and lay quiet in the townes of Dubis. The 5000. upon the furthest con∣fines of Lazica, encamped by the river Phasis, stragling to plunder thereabout; Gubazes observing it, sent to Dagisthaeus to come up to him, as having it in his power to doe the enemy a notable mischief. He did so, marching with the river Phasis to his left hand, till he came where on the other side encamped the Lazians, and where the river was fordable. This neither the Romans, nor Persians knew (not knowing the countrey) but the Lazians knew it, and there passed the river, and joyned with the Romans. The Persians sent out 1000 chosen men to prevent an enemies infesting their camp: And two of these
advancing to discover, fell into the enemies hands, and discovered all to them. So the Romans suddainely set upon the 1000. men, of whom none es∣caped, but were most slaine, and the rest taken. Gubazes learnt the number of the Persian army, how farr off they were, and in what estate. They march't therefore towards them, computing to fall on them farr within the night. They were in number fourteen thousand. The Persians, without thought of an enemy, slept securely. They thought the river not fordable, and their 1000. men farr upon their way, without encountring any. So that the Romans unexpe∣cted charging them after midnight, found some asleep, some newly awake, and naked upon their pallets; not a man with a thought of fighting; But most of them thus surprized were slaine. Some they tooke, among whom a prin∣cipall commander. Some few escaped in the darke. The camp the Romans and Lazians took, with all their Ensignes; and had the booty of much armes, and goods, and of Horses and Mules a great number. They followed the execu∣tion farr into Iberia; where lighting upon other Persian troopes, they killed many. The Romans and Lazians also found there a quantity of meale and other provision, and burnt it; which the Persians were conducting out of Iberia to Petra. So they left at the Passage some numbers of Lazians, that no provi∣sions to Petra might passe that way; and then returned with all their booty and captives. And thus ended the fourth yeare of the Persian affaires, being the three and twentieth of Justinian's raigne. The yeare before,Anno Dom. 548. & 23. Justiniani. was the fourth yeare of the truce, where A∣gathias begins. John the Cappadocian was sent for by the Emperour to Con∣stantinople; for the Empress Theodora died in that yeare. Yet could he not re∣cover any of his offices. The honour of Priesthood he held against his will. He had also apparitions promising the Empire. For the Devilluses to display before unsetled judgements, with some great hopes, that which they natu∣rally love: and so was this John deluded by some Juglers; who told him he should weare the habit of Augustus. And in Constantinople was a Priest, who kept the treasures of the Church of S. Sophia, named Augustus. When John was shorne a Priest (having him∣self no garment fit,) they, who were employed in it, made him put on the Cope and Rochet of this Augustus; And so, I think, the prediction was fulfilled.
THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST BOOK OF THE WARRE With the VANDALS. CHAP. I. THe extent of the Roman Empires, Eastern and Western, and the division thereof. CHAP. II. In the reigne of Honorius, the Gothick, or Getick Nations invade the Roman Empire. They spoyl Italy. CHAP. III. Alaricus by a stratagem takes Rome. Honorius feared the loss of his Game cock Rome. Attalas made Emperor. Honorius miraculously restored. A∣laricus dies. Constantine the Usurper of Britany slain. CHAP. IV. The Vandals possess Spain by the consent of Honorius; John after him, is made Emperour, but deposed. Theodosius and Valentinian held
the Empires. Valentinian effeminate. The plot of Aetius against Bonifa∣cius, which lost Africk, in whose room the Visigoths possess Spain. Some battels lost to the Vandals by Bonifacius. The presage of Martian to be Emperour. CHAP. V. Gensericus makes a league with Valentinian, paying him tribute. Va∣lentinian ravishes the wife of Maximus. Actius unwisely killed by him. Attilas the Hunn, takes Aquileia by the presage of a Stork. Valenti∣nian slain by Maximus; who marries Eudoxia. Gensericus revenges his death, and sacks Rome. CHAP. VI. Gensericus hard proceedings with the Africans. His Army. His pira∣cies. Leo sends Basiliscus against him; who betraies the business by Aspars direction. Is defeated by fire-ships. The valour of John. Ba∣siliscus takes sanctuary, is pardoned. Aspar slain by Leo. Zeno suc∣ceeds. CHAP. VII. Majorinus disguises himfelf to spie Africk. Dies before he could make war. Basiliscus expels Zeno. Who recovers, and kils the other in a Wilder∣ness with famine. He makes a perpetual peace with the Vandals, which lasts till Justinians reign. CHAP. VIII. Gensericus his Testament. Honoricus succeeds; who persecutes the Chri∣stians, as his successor Gundamund. Trasamund succeeds, and persecutes. Cunningly marries Amalafrida, sister of Theodorick. Is routed by Ca∣baon, a More of Tripolis, whose reverence to the Christian Churches, and order of battel is remarkable. CHAP. IX. Ildericus succeeds. Is deposed by Gelimer. Justinian resolves a war a∣gainst him. Is disswaded by John of Cappadocia. But by a Bishop is put again upon it, and appoints Belisarius General. CHAP. X. Pudentius causes Tripolis to revolt. Godas usurps Sardinia against Ge∣limer, and calls in Justinian to his aid. The preparation of the Ar∣my against Africk, and names of the Captains. CHAP. XI. Belisarius sets forth Procopius dream. Belisarius speech, admonishing the Army to Order. He sets Lanterns in the Generals Ships, to lead the
rest. Many die at Methone by unwholsome bisket, provided by John the Praefect. CHAP. XII. Antoninus way to keep the water sweet. The Fleet comes to Sicily. Pro∣copius discovers the estate of the Vandals. They come to the coast of Africk. Belisarius after a consultation chuses to land. He encamps strongly, and gets water by miracle. CHAP. XIII. Belisarius speech upon his soldiers stealing the ripe fruits. He gets Syl∣lectus by surprise, and the Inhabitants consent. Gelimers Post conceals Justinians Letters. CHAP. XIV. Belisarius order of marching safely. He gains the good will of the na∣tives. Gelimer murders Ildericus. His order to compass the Roman Army. CHAP. XV. A party of Vandals routed by John; Another by the Hunns. A custom for a Hunnish Family to give the first blow in a battel. Belisarius encou∣rages his Army to fight. CHAP. XVI. The Romans are routed; Gelimer not using his advantage, Belisarius makes a stand, and quite everthrows him. CHAP XVII. Belisarius forbears to enter Carthage in the night, fearing the disorder of his soldiers. Strange news to the poor Roman captives in Carthage, when they saw the Roman fleet entring the harbour. Belisarius is joyful∣ly received in Carthage, the City not leaving their ordinary affairs; but entertaining the soldiers. He dines in the Palace on the meat provi¦ded for Gelimer. Delphica Palatium. His admirable government of his soldiers. CHAP. XVIII. Belisarius repairs the ruined walls. The Prophecy, That Gamma should ex∣pel Beta, and Beta Gamma. The Cypriana storms. St. Cyprian pro∣mised
often in dreams to be revenged of the Arrians, for polluting Christian Churches; and now performs it on his festival. The Arrians running from the same, adorned by themselves. The advice of an old Vandal, concerning their old Country. The Vandals cruelty to the Za∣cynthians, now punisht. CHAP. XIX. Gelimer plots to kill Roman soldiers. Diogenes makes a brave escape with 22. men against 300. Tzazons unseasonable news of his reducing Sardi∣nia. How Theudis, King of the Visigoths in Spain, used the Ambassadors of Gelimer, who knew nothing of the ruine of the Vandals. CHAP. XX. Gelimer is abandoned by the Moors and Numidians, whose Princes send for their Ensignes of principality from the Romans, according to custom. What those are. Gelimer sends for his brother Tzazon out of Sardinia by a passionate Letter. Their mournfull meeting.
THE CONTENTS of the CHAPTERS OF THE SECOND BOOK OF THE WARRE With the VANDALS. CHAP I. GElimer maketh head. Attempts a revolt of the Hunns. Belisa∣rius encourages his Army. The Hunns hover between both. CHAP. II. Gelimer and Tzazon encourage their soldiers. The Romans order. John begins. The rest of the horse give the Vandals an absolute defeat. Ge∣limer basely runs away from his Camp and Army; which is quite ruined, and the Camp spoyled, where they found infinite wealth. CHAP. III. The disorder of the Romans after the victory and huge booty. The unfor∣tunate death of John the Armenian, being ready to take Gelimer. Pha∣ras the Herulian is left to besiege Gelimer in the mountain of Pappua. Belisarius fortune to get the royal treasures of Gelimer.
CHAP. IV. Sardinia and Corsica recovered to the Emperour. Likewise Ebusa, Majo∣rica, and Minorica. The Goths refuse to render Lylibaeum. Pharas at∣tempts Pappua, and fails. The delicacy of the Vandals; and the hard∣ness of those Moors. CHAP. V. Gelimer refuses the counsel of Pharas at first: desires a loaf, a sponge, and a harp. Upon the sight of his Nephew, a boy, beaten by a Morish boy for snatching vp a cake, he relents. Being brought to Belisarius, on a sudden he fell a langhing. CHAP. VI. Belisarius discovers a plot against him, of his fellow-Commanders. The Moors revolt, upon the Oracle of their soothsaying women. The Ar∣my is left by Belisarius with Solomon. Belisarius triumphs at Constan∣tinople: Where were shewed the spoils of the Temple of Jerusalem. Ge∣limer hath Towns given him to live on. CHAP. VII. The unfortunate loss of Aigan and Rufinus. The original of the Moors from the Canaanites subdued by Joshua. Solomon perswades peace; but is answered with denyal. CHAP. VIII. Solomon kils 10000 Moors, and takes their camp and baggage. At Burgaon kils 50000. and utterly routs them: He took so many prisoners, that a Moorish boy was sold for a sheep. He fulfils their womens prophe∣sie, that they should be destroyed by a man without a beard. CHAP. IX. The Moors remaining, fly to Jabdas to mount Aurasium. Althias his sin∣gle combat with Jabdas. Solomon makes war on him in Aurasium without effect. He prepares a new war that way, and against the Moors of Sardinia. CHAP. X. Belisarius in Sicily. A strange passion of the Sun a year together. A muti∣ny of the soldiers in Africk, caused by their Vandal wives. Solomon fled to Belisarius into Sicily.
CHAP. XI. Stotzas General of the mutiners; besieges Carthage. Belisarius coming from Sicily with 100 men, frights him away, and defeats his Army at Membresa. Then upon a mutiny in Sicily, returns. The Commanders of Numidia are forsaken by their soldiers, and slain by Stotzas. CHAP. XII. Germanus, the Emperours nephew, is sent into Africk. He pacifies the Ar∣my somewhat. Defeats Stotzas in Numidia; takes the mutiners Camp. Stotzas flies into Mauritania, and so that mutiny ended. CHAP. XIII. Maximinus his mutiny; who growing worse, being made one of the Generals life-guard. Is defeated and crucified. CHAP. XIV. Solomons second Government of Africk. He beats Jabdas to the top of Aurasium. Takes Zerbule, and besieges Jabdas in Tumar. CHAP. XV. Solomon encourages his Army. He assails, and takes the two Castles, and Jabdas flies into Mauritania. CHAP. XVI. Sergius, nephew to Solomon, is Governor of Tripolis, and kils 70 Moors who came to treat. Antalas revolts, and with the Leucathian Moors in∣fests Africk Solomon is slain. Sergius made Governor of Africk. Is hated. Antalas grows strong. CHAP. XVII. Solomon the younger scapes his imprisonment by a wile. Himerius being taken, gets Adramettus for the Moors. Which is recovered again by the stratagem of Paul a Priest. The Moors and Stotzas do much mis∣chief. CHAP. XVIII. Areobindus is joyned with Sergius, then is sole Governor after the death of John, son of Sisinniolus; who having wisht to die after the killing of
Stotzas; and Stotzas having in like sort wisht against John, they both have their wishes in a sort. Gontharis plots against Areobindus with Antalas; and Areobindus hath a counterplot with Cutzinas. CHAP. XIX. Gontharis perfidiously kils Areobindus after oath given by Reparatus, the Bishop of Carthage, at the baptism of, 28c. and usurps. The pusillanimi∣ty of Areobindus in his death. Artabanes the Armenian plots his ruine. CHAP. XX. Gontharis plots a marriage with Projecta. Artabanes willingly omits the beating of Antalas. With Gregorius and Artasiris plots to kill Gon∣tharis, and resolutely does it at a feast. Africk under John, after vari∣ous successes, gets quietness.
THE HISTORY Of THE WARS Of the Emperour IVSTINIAN: BOOK I. Of the War with the Vandals. CHAP. I. THis end had the Emperour Justinian of the Persian war. And now I come to his actions against the Vandals and Moors: First shewing from whence those Vandals brake in upon the Roman Provinces. After the death of Theo∣dosius, a most just Prince, and a great Souldier, his two Sons succeeded, Arcadius the elder in the Eastern Empire, and Honorius in the West. This Division was formerly made by Constantine and his sons, who first transfer'd the Empire to Constantinople, which City he much enlarged, and dignified, and called it by his own name. And the Emperours divided the two Continents be∣tween them, thus. The Ocean encompasses the whole earth, or the most part of it, (we know no certainty therein) But into this part comes an Inlet from the Western Ocean, dividing the two Continents, and making our Seas; which begin from Caliz, and reach to the lake of Moeotis. The land to the Southward thereof from that pillar of Hercules which is named Septem (by reason of the seven hillocks there appearing) is called Asia, and that over against it Europe: And the Strait
which parts these Continents, is ten miles and a half over; which then continue parted by main seas to the Hellespont; and there they meet at Sestus and Abydus, and again at Constantinople and Chalcedon, to the anciently named Cyanan rocks, whereabout now is that which they call Hieron. At both these last Straits, the Lands are a mile and a half distant. From one of Hertules pillars to the other, along the shore, not compassing the Ionian gulf, nor Euxine sea, but crossing from Chalcedon to Constantinople, and from Otranto to the Land over against it,  285 dayes journey. To reckon exactly from Constantinople to the Lake of Maeotis, along the Euxine sea, is impossible; the Barbarians beyond the River r, or Danu, making the Coasts unaccessible to Romans: But to the River  from Constantinople is twenty two dayes journy: And on  side, from Chalcedon to the River of Phasis (which comes out of Cholchis into that sea) is forty dayes journy. So the circuit of all the Roman Empire along the Sea-shore is three hundred forty seven dayes journy; crossing the Ionian gulf from Otranto (as I have said) which is an hundred miles over, and the compass of the gulf isLeander says, That from O∣tranto to Ve∣nice is 700. miles; and that is but half of the Gulf. My conceit is, that the Author wrote 54. days journey; which is twice 700. milei. four dayes journy: So great anciently was the Roman Empire. The Emperour of the West had Africk under him, which contains ninety dayes journy, from Caliz to Tripolis: And in Europe his share was from the other Hercules pillar to the Ionian gulf, 75 dayes journy: To which must be added the compass of the said gulf. But the Emperour of the East had for his share 120 dayes journy from Cyrene in Africk to Epidamnus upon the Ionian gulf, now called Durazzo; be∣sides the Roman Provinces upon the Euxine Sea, as I have said. A dayes journy contains 120 furlongs, (which are 25 English miles) the distance from Athens to Megara. Of the Ilands Britany, by much the greatest, fell to the Western Empire, being without Hercules pillars: And within them, Ebusa, and Majo∣rica, and Minorica, lying above seven dayes journy from that Inlet of the Ocean. The other Ilands upon the Mediterranean belong to each Emperour, as they are situate in the limits of either. CHAP. II. BUT Honorius holding the Western Empire, the Barbarians invaded his Coun∣try: Who they were, and in what manner, I will tell you. Heretofore were many Gothick Nations, and now are; but the greatest, and most famous of them are the Goths, Vandals, Visigoths, and Gepaedes. Anciently they were called Sar∣matians, and Melanchlenians. Some called, these, Getick Nations. They vary all in names, but in nothing else; being all fair-bodied, with yellow hair; tall, and with good faces: They have the same lawes, customes, and religion (being all Arrians) and speak all the Gothick language. I suppose them to have been anci∣ently one Nation, and their names to have been distinguished afterward by their several Princes. Formerly this people inhabited about the river Danubius; then the Gepaedes held the places about Singedon and Sirmium, on both sides the River where now they are. From thence the Visigoths rose first, and came to the aid of Arcadius; but some time after, (For Barbarians cannot inure themselves to keep faith with Romans) these Visigoths under their Prince Alaricus rebelled against both the Emperours: They begun in Thrace, and thence overran all Europe. Honorius at first sate still in Rome, thinking of no enemy, but contented to be suf∣fered quiet in his palace but hearing how the enemy was not far off, but already in Taulantia with a mighty Army, he fled from his Palace to Ravenna, a strong City lying upon the bottom of the Ionian gulf.That is, all Ita∣ly on this side Otranto, in re∣spect of Con∣stantinople: which must di∣ligently be ob∣served in this Author, when he says, On this side Some say (but improbably, by what I can gather by his disposition) that upon some mutiny by his subjects he drew in the Bar∣barians: But they finding no enemy opposing, exceeded all that ever were in cruel∣ty; so destroying the Cities they took, especially on * this side the Ionian gulf, that they have no mark now remaining save some turret or gate; killing also all in their way, old and young, not sparing women nor children, so that Italy remains to this day extreamly unpeopled. They robbed all the wealth of Europe; and having for their master-piece left nothing in Rome, publike nor private, they marched into France.
CHAP. III. THe taking of Rome by Alaricus, was thus.An. Dom. 412. & Honorii 16. Having spent much time in the Siege, and not taking it by force, nor other means; he chose out 300 beard∣less Youths, whom he knew well bred, and valorous above their years: These he told secretly, that he would colourably present them for Slaves to some Roman Patricians; and he charged them, being in their houses, to shew all mildness and sobriety, and to serve their masters cheerfully in all their injunctions; but at a day apyointed, after noon, while their masters were sleeping after their dinners to meet all at Porta Salaria, suddenly to kill the Guards, and to open the gate, Alaricus having thus instructed the young men, sent Ambassadors to the Senate to tell them, That he admired their good affection to their Emperour, and would trouble them now no more, seeing manifestly their singular valour and fidelity: But to have remembrances remaining with such worthy men, he desired to present them with some few Servants. Soon after, he sent the young men, and commanded the Barbarians to trus up their baggage for a retreat, that the Romans might perceive it. The Senators gladly entertained this discourse, and the Presents, and lived merrily, and suspected no design, seeing the young mens obedience, and in the Camp some gone already, some busie to rise, the rest ex∣pected to do the like immediately. At the hour assigned, Alaricus put his Army, in order by Porta Salaria, as if to march away, (being there quartered at first) The young men then also killed the Guards at the said gate, and set them open, receiving in Alaricus at pleasure. The houses next the Gate they burnt, and a∣mong them that of Salust who wrote the Roman History, whereof the remains half-burnt stood to my time: Then they sackt the City, slew most of the Romans in it, and went away. Then they say that the Eunuch of Honorius, then being at Ravenna, who kept his Cocks of the game, told him the news how Rome was lost; He cryed out, Why! even now he eat from mine own hands, (He had an extra∣ordinary great Cock named Rome) The Eunuch understanding him, told him, that the City Rome was lost by Alaricus: The Emperour rousing himself replied, I thought, my friend, it had been my Cock Rome. So simple, they say, was that Emperour. Some say that Alaricus took not Rome thus: But that Proba a Ro∣man Lady eminent for wealth and honour, pittying the people perishing with miseries, and for famine eating one another, and seeing no hope of better, (the River and Port being block'd up by the Enemy) directed her servants in the night to open the gates; Alaricus at his parting from Rome, declared Attalus, one of the Nobility, Emperour, putting on him the Diadem and Purple robe, and all other ensigns of the Imperial dignity; that by this he might depose Honorius, and give Attalus the Western Empire. But Attalus had neither wit himself, nor could follow good counsel; sending into Africk, without Alaricus's consent, Gover∣nours without an Army. Britany then revolted from the Romans, and the Souldiers chose Constantine their Emperour, an eminent man, who with a Fleet and a good Army invaded Spain and Gaule. Honorius with ships in readiness, expected the success in Africk, to sail thither upon the rejection of those sent from Attalus, and so to retain some part of the Empire; if otherwise, to go to Theodosius (who being very young, held the Empire after his father Arcadius and to continue with him. But fluctuating in these uncertainties and cares, he had a miraculous blessing, (God usually assist∣ing men not subtile to devise for themselves, so they be not wicked) For from Africk came sudden news, that Attalus's Governours were slain; and unexpectedly came to him a great Navy from Constantinople with an Army to his aid: Alaricus also offended, took from Attalus the Imperial habit, and made him a prisoner, and himself soon after died; and the Army of Visigoths were by Adulpbus led against Gaule. Constantine also was overthrown in battel, and slain with his sons. But Britany the Romans could never recover, continuing ever since under their own Princes.
He ever calls the Ostro∣goths, only Goths. The Goths who passed over the river Danubius first held Pannonia; then Towns in Thrace given them by the Emperour, where having not spent much time, they Conquered Italy. But of that in my discourse of the Goths. CHAP. IV BUt the Vandales inhabiting about the Lake of Moeotis, upon a great famin, went to the Germans, now called Franks, and to the river of Rhine, associ∣ating the Alans, a Gothish Nation. From thence they rose under the conduct of Godidiscius, and planted in Spain. And Honorius came to conditions with Godi∣discius, to continue there without infesting the Province. And whereas there is a Roman Law, That men out of possession the space of thirty years, cannot enter upon the disseisors; but before are by prescription barred their action in Court for the same; Honorius by his Edict commanded the Vandales continuance in Roman Land, not to need that thirty years prescription. In this estate Honorius left Italy, and died. With him Constantius was Emperour, who married his sister Placidia, but died before Honorius; having had in his small time in the Empire no means to act any thing, his son Valentinian from his nurse was brought to the Palace of Theodosius, and there bred. But the Courtiers in Rome chose Emperour one of the Souldiers named John; a mild and a prudent man, and valiant. He usurped five years, but ruled moderately, not hearkning to informers, nor unjust∣ly killing nor confiscating any: But against the Barbarians he could do nothing, by reason all at Constantinople was his enemy. Theodosius, the son of Arcadius, sent an Army against him under Aspar and Ardaburius his son, and deposed him; giving the Empire to Valentinian, yet a child, who took John cut off one of his hands, brought him into the Circus of Aquileia upon an ass; and when he had endured much scorn and indignity from the Stage, there put him to death. Valentinian being thus Emperor of the West, his mother Placidia bred him ef∣feminately, that he became vicious from a child; he frequented Conjurers and Star-gazers, made love to other mens wives, and was extreamly debaucht, though he had a wife most beautifull: So that he was so far from recovering the lost pieces of the Empire, that he added the loss of Affrick, and ruined himself; and after his death his wife and children had the fortune to be captives. The disaster in Africk hapned thus. The two Roman Generals, Aetius and Bonifacius, both valiant and expert Soldiers, inferiour to none of their time, ever were at difference in the publique affairs; being men so high in worth and spirit, that he shall not err, who cals them the last of the Romans. All the Roman virtue and valour was so reduced into these two. Bonifacius Placidia made General of Africk, which displeased Aetius, but he concealed his dislike (their enmity being covered yet under a fair visour) but Bonifacius once out of the way, he accused him of Ty∣ranny, and a desire to deprive her and the Emperour of Africk; and that she might easily find the truth; (for if she sent for Bonifacius he would not come.) She liked the advice, and did so: But Aetius wrote privatly to him before, that the Emperours mother had a plot upon him, to be rid of him; for proof where∣of he forewarned him, how he should be presently sent for upon no ground. Bonifacius not thinking light of the advice, and being summoned to go to the Emperour, refused, concealing the advertisement he had from Aetius. Upon this, Placidia thought Aetius above all men well affected to the Emperour, and con∣sulted about Bonifacius: Who nable to withstand the Emperour, and to go to Rome holding it not safe; advised by what means he might make a league with the Vandales, who, as I said, were eaed in Spain, not far from Africk. Godidis∣cius was dead; but Gonthar his legitimate son, and Genserick his base son succeed∣ed in his Dominions; the first whereof was a oy, not much active; but Gense∣rick very well exercised in Military affairs, and the shrewdest man alive. Bonifa∣cius sent to Spain to these sons of Godidiscius, to invite them to equal terms with him, for each of the three to have a third part of Africk; and if any one of them
be invaded, the rest to defend him.Anno Dom. 430 & Valentiniani Tertii anno quarto. Upon this accord the Vandales passed the straits of Calize into Africk: and afterward the Visigoths planted in Spain. But in Rome the friends of Bonifacius, weighing the disposition of the man, took it for a miracle that Bonifacius should turn Usurper; and by Placidia's direction went to him to Carthage, and spake with him; where they saw Aetius Letters, heard the whole business, and returning reported to the Empress, in what terms he stood. She amazed at this, hurt not Aetius, nor reproacht the disservice done to the Em∣perours house, his power being great, and the Emperours affairs in bad terms: But with that advertisement of his, she acquainted Bonifacius's friends, and be∣sought them to draw him (upon her oath for his safety) to return to his Country, and not to endure to see the Roman Empire reduced under Barbarians. Bonifa∣cius hearing this, repented his League with the Barbarians; and wooed them with large promises to leave Africk. But they thought themselves scorned by such Propositions, so that he was forced to come to blowes with them and being bea∣ten retired to Hippo, a strong City in Numidia upon the Sea. Where the Vandales besieged him under the leading of Genserick: Gontharis being dead, made away by his brother, some say: but other Vandales say, he was taken prisoner by the Germans in a battail in Spain, and crucified, and that Genserick was King alone, and lead the Vandales into Africk. But Hippo they could not get by force nor composition, and they were prest with famine: so that after much time spent they raised their siege. Shortly after a great Army came from Rome and Constan∣tinople under the General Aspar to Bonifacius; which in a battel very bravely fought, he had much the worse, and all ran away. Aspar returned home; and Bo∣nifacius came to Placidia, and removed the groundless suspition against him. Thus the Vandals got Africk from the Romans; and the enemies they took alive, they reserved for slaves in restrains. Among whom was Mantianus, who was Emperour, after the decease of Theodosius. But then Genserick commanding the captives to be brought into the Palace, that he might examine if any had not a Master fit for his quality; and they being together in the open air about noon in the heat of Summer, troubled with heat and weary, they lay down, and fel asleep, when an Eagle flying that way, hovered with her wings spread out over the head of Martianus. Genserick markt this strange Omen not to come for no∣thing, called for him, and askt him what he was.This is supplied from the La∣tine Translation. He said he was the Assistant of Aspar in his secret affairs, (an Officer the Romans call Domesticus.) Genserick con∣sidering the gesture of the Eagle, and Aspars power in Constantinople, would not kill him; not thinking such an Omen fit for a dying man: If he were to reigne, he was not left to him to kill. Gods decrees are not possibly to be prevented: So he bound him by oath to be his friend, and upon no ground ever to make war up∣on the Vandales. Thus was Martianus dismissed; and shortly after succeeded Theodosius, and proved a very good Prince: Only he regarded not how things went in Africk. But this was afterward. CHAP. V. GEnserick, after the defeat of Asper and Bonifacius, weighing wisely the va∣riety of fortune, that new Armies might come from Rome and Constantinople, that his powers would not match with the Romans; and that God changes mens fortunes as they grow old; he resolved in his new victories to bear himself moderately, and not too high. So he made a league with Valentinian, paid him tribute, and left his son Honoricus in hostage; whom afterward he received home, when then friendship was more grown. In the mean time Placidia died at Rome; Valentinian having only two daughters by Eudoxia, sister to Theodosius: But he was ruined thus. Maximus a Senator, descended from that Maximus the Tyrant, destroyed by Theodosius the elder, for which the Romans celebrate an annual festivals; had a very sober and fair Lady to his wife. Valentinian being
in love with her, and desiring to enjoy her, but finding it difficult, used this wicked plot. He sent for Maximus to the Palace, and at Dice laid gold against his Ring, and won it; This he sent secretly to the wife in the husbands name, requiring her to come immediately to visit the Empress Eudoxia: She obeyed, and some acquainted with the secret waited upon her in the Court into a room far from the Empresses chamber;Here the Greek continues. There Valentinian met her, and ravisht her. She extreamly afflicted with the dishonour, went home, all blubber'd with tears, and reviled Maximus for giving the opportunity: Who being infinitely grieved at it, con∣spired against the Emperour. But seeing the great power of Aetius, who lately had defeated Artilas invading the Roman Empire with a mighty Army of Mas∣sagetes and other Scythians, and fearing him for an obstacle of his proceedings, he determined first to remove him, not considering that in Actius was the whole hope of the Romans. So by the artifices of some Eunuchs about the Emperour, his friends, he infused into the Emperour, that Aetius was plotting a revolt. And Valentinian judging the information by no other argument but by the worth and power of Aetius, put him to death. When a Roman was famous for a word spoken, being askt by the Emperour, if the killing of Aetius were not well done? and answering, That he could not tell whether it were well done, or how it was done; but this he knew, that he had cut off his right hand with his left. Aetius being dead, Attilas having none to match him, forraged at his ease all Europe, and made both the Empires tributary, both the Emperours sending him annual taxes. Then they say, Attilas besieging Aquileia, a great and populous maritime City within the Ionian gulf, and not being able by force nor otherwise to get the town, and wearied with a long Siege, put his Army in readiness to rise the next day by sun-rising; and the Barbarians were busie in their retreat accordingly: When a Stork having his nest upon one of the turrets, where he had bred his young, sud∣denly with his young flew from the same, the young ones sometimes flying even with him, sometimes getting upon his back; and thus they fled far from the town. Attilas seeing it (being a very cunning Diviner) commanded his Army to stand still, telling them that the Bird with his young ones was not fled away for no∣thing, but prophesied some mischief to the Town. Upon this they say the Bar∣barians renewed their siege, and that the wall by the Storks nest fell down of it self, making the Town open to the enemy, and that so Aquileia was taken by assault. But afterward Maximus killed the Emperour, and married Eudoxia by force, his wife being newly dead. And in bed he spake a word once, how for her love he had done what he did. Eudoxia, before offended with Maximus, and desirous to revenge the wrong done to Valentinian, by this word was more incensed to plot against him, hearing thus from Maximus himself how her husbands disaster came for her sake. So that, no sooner day, but she sent to Carthage, entreating Genserick to revenge Valentinian, ruined by a wicked man, in a manner unworthy of himself and the Empire; and to redeem her, suffering things abominable, from the Tyrant. She urged him as his Friend and Allie; and that it were impious, such a villany should be acted in a Kings house without a revenger; And from Constanti∣nople she expected no revenge, Theodosius being dead, and Martianus in possession of the Empire. Genserick for no other respect, but finding he should get wealth by it, sailed into Italy with a great Navy, marcht up to Rome, and (none resisting) was Master of the Imperial palace. Maximus running away, the Romans stoned to death, and cut off his head, and rent his other members in pieces. Eudoxia with her two daughters by Valentinian, Eudocia and Placidia, Genserick made prisoners; and carried away to Carthage infinite wealth of gold and silver, and spared neither Brass nor any thing in the palace: He robbed the Temple of Ju∣piter Capitolinus, and took away half the covering of it being of the richest brass, with much gold melted in it, and very admirable and magnificent. They say, the ship where the Images were was cast away, but with the rest the Vandals landed at Carthage. Eudocia Genserick married to his eldest son Honoricus; The other daughter was married to Olybrius a principal Senator of Rome, whom with the mother Eudoxia, at the Emperours request, he sent to Constantinople. The Em∣pire
of the East Leo then held, Aspar placing him therein after the death of Martianus. CHAP. VI. GEnserick afterward took down the wals of all the Cities of Africk, save Carthage; That the Africans siding with the Romans might have no strong places to gather head, nor the Emperours forces by taking towns and by garrisons in them, think to trouble the Vandals. His counsel seemed a good one then, to secure the Vandals: But afterward, when these Towns without walls were so easily taken by Belisarius, Genserick was laught at, and his wise counsel judged folly. Thus men ever change their opinions of counsels, with the fortunes of them. The rich and eminent men of Africk he gave as so many bond-men, with their lands and goods, to his sons, Honoricus and Genson, Theodorus being dead without issue: From the rest he took their lands, and bestowed them on the other Vandals, which are yet called the Vandals Heritages. All the Towns he gave his sons, and others he called the Kings land, freeing the same perpetually from tributes: The ancient possessors the while had the fortune to be poor and free men, and had permission to go whither they would.Lat. vers. Some held, or claimed their lands to no purpose: Many were banished and put to death upon no cause, specially such as were thought to have hid money in their houses. Thus Africk was overwhelmed with miseries. Genserick also in convenient places had garri∣sons under 80 Colonels, whom he called Chiliarchs, as if his Army were so many thousands, being in truth but 50000. At first he enrolled only Vandals and Alans; afterward he admitted under the name of Vandals all other Barbarians, except Moors, and at last he received them also into the Army. After the death of Va∣lentinian, he made every Spring a voyage to rob Sicily, or Italy, sacking some Cities, and some laying flat with the ground. When he had made havock in those parts, turning upon the Eastern Empire, he infested Illyrium and Peloponesus, and the Ilands adjacent, with the rest of Greece: Then to Italy and Sicily again, if ought were left, to pillage it. Once hoyng sail from the Port of Carthage, his Ship-master askt him, whither he would go for pillage? His answer was, Whither God shall drive me. Making war thus at random. The Emperour Leo, to restrain this insolence, prepared an Army of 100000 men to send against the Vandals, and a great Navy, collected from all parts of Greece. This war, they say, cost him a huge treasure, and to no purpose. His Ge∣neral was Basiliscus, brother to his wife Verina, the trustiest man he had, and safest for him; friendship continuing yet between him and Aspar, who, being an Arian, could not get the Empire, but with his power made Leo, against whom afterward he conspired. And now fearing lest the victory of the Vandals might make him proud, both to his particular, and in the government, he instructed Basiliscus at his departure to prolong the war. Leo also sent Anthemius a Senator, great in blood and estate, to be Emperour of the West, that he might be aiding to him in the Vandalick war. And Genserick promised the Western Empire to Olybrius, Placidia's husband, to joyn with him; upon which confidence he had higher thoughts, and more vexed the Roman dominions.The Greek again. In the mean time Marcelli∣anus a friend of Aetius, (who after the murder of Aetius entred into action against Valentinian, and got the dominion of Dalmatia none opposing) Leo courted and gained; and then sent him to the Iland of Sardinia, subject to the Vandals, whom Marcellianus presently drave out and got the Iland. From Constantinople also was sent Heraclius into Tripolis in Africk, who took all the Towns therein, left his ships there, and led his Army by land to Carthage. These were the entrances into this war. But Basiliscus arrived with his Army at a small Town 35 miles from Carthage, called Mercurium, from an ancient Temple of Mercury. And if he had not treacherously dallied, but marcht instantly to Carthage, he had taken the Town instantly, and made the Vandals his Captives. So much afraid was Genserick
of Leo, seeing Tripolis and Sardinia taken, and so brave a Navy as the Romans had not set out of a long time. But this the Generals either cowardly, or trai∣terous delay hindred. But Genserick made this good use of Basiliscus his neg∣ligente. He armed his Subjects, manned most of his ships, and made ready of the rest the swiftest of sail without men in them; then sent Ambassadors to Ba∣siliscus,, desiring a five days cessation, that he might advise upon the means of doing the Emperours pleasure. They say, he sent him closely a great sum of money, which bought this truce, supposing (which came to pass) that he should get in that time a wind to bring his ships about. And Basiliscus, either to comply with his pro∣mise to Aspar, or selling his opportunity, or whether he thought it so best, lay stil, attending the enemies advantage. But the Vandals (the wind serving) hoist sail a∣gainst the enemy, towing after the ships without men. When they came near, they put fire into the empty ships, whose sails spreading to the wind, they let them run upon the Roman Navy. They falling in among a multitude of Vessels, sud∣denly consumed with themselves, those they fell foul with. In the mean time the Roman fleet was in confusion, with cries equalling the winds, and the whizzing of the flames, and with the Soldiers and Mariners calling, and thrusting the fire-ships with long poles, from their own pittifully perishing. The Vandals also shot, and sunk the rest, taking the flying Soldiers with Arms and all. Some in this over-throw did bravely; specially John, Lieutenant General to Basiliscus, but not acquainted with his Treason: His ship being boarded, he slew many up∣on the deck; and when he saw the ship taken by the enemy, he leapt into the sea with all his Arms. Genson, the son of Genserick wooed him, and gave him his faith to save his life; but he plunged into the sea, using this word only, That John should never come into the hands of dogs. And this was the end of this war: Heraclius returned home; Marcellianus pe∣risht by the Treason of one of his fellow-Commanders: But Basiliscus in Con∣stantinople took sanctuary in the great Church dedicated to Christ, (the Constan∣tinopolitans call it the Church of St. Sophia, holding the attribute of wisdom most becoming God;) and the Empress Verina obtained his pardon. But the Em∣pire he could not then get, what he endeavoured: for Leo shortly after killed Aspar and Ardaburius in his Palace, suspecting them to conspire his death. An∣themius, also Emperour of the West, was slain by Recimer who married his daugh∣ter. And Olybrius succeeding him, had not long after the same fate. Leo de∣ceasing in Constantinople, Leo the son of Zeno, and of Ariadne daughter to Leo, received the Empire, being very young. And his father being chosen his partner in the Empire, the child was quickly rid out of the way. CHAP. VII: THen Majorinus had the Western Empire; a man worth the remembring; as excelling in virtue all the Roman Emperours that ever were. He could not with patience endure the disaster of Africk, but raised a great Army in Li∣guria to go against the Vandals himself, being industrious and very ventrous of his person. He thought best first to discover the Vandals power, and the hu∣mour of Genserick; and how the Moors and Africans stood affected towards them: And resolving to put this in execution himself, he took his journey to Genserick with a feigned name, and as an Ambassador from the Emperor. And further to avoid mischief and the overthrow of his business by discovery, he died his hair, (which was as yellow as the finest gold) into a perfect blew for the time. Genserick to fright him, took him in a friendly way, into his Armory, where was much good Arms. They say the Arms then of themselves moved, and clashed together; that Genserick thought it an Earthquake: but being without, and upon enquiry finding no notice taken of any Earthquake, he thought it a mira∣cle, not guessing the meaning. Majorinus dispatcht to his desire, returned into Liguria; lead his Army over land, purposing to cross the Straits at Hercules
Pillars, and so to march to Carthage. Genserick informed thereof, and how he was deceived by Majorinus, was heartily afraid, and made preparation for the war; and the Romans from the virtues of Majorinus conceived hope of recove∣ring Africk. In the mean time Majorinus died of a dyssentery; a man mode∣rate to his Subjects, and to his enemies terrible; newly come to the Empire, and living in it too short a time,An. dom. 471. Glycerius succeeded him, and had the  for∣tune. Then Augustulus received the Empire. Other Emperors there were in the West, whose names though I know, I omit; they living a very short time in the Government, and so doing nothing worth mentioning. But Basiliscus in Constantinople passionately in love with the Empire attempted to usurp, and prevailed, Zano with his Empress fled into Isauria his native Coun∣try: And Basiliscus usurped a year and eight months, generally hated by all men, and by the very Guards of his Palace for his extream avarice. Zeno therof ad∣vertised, went against him with an Army, to whom Basiliscus opposed another under Adius his General. But being encamped near, Armatus delivered his Army to Zeno, upon condition, he should make his son Basiliscus, Caesar (being very young) and make him his successor Basiliscus forsken by all the world, fled to the Church of St. Sophia; but Acacius the Bishop of the City, put him into Zeno's hands, objecting against him impiety, in much embroiling and inno∣vating the Christian Doctrin, as inclining to the heresie of Eyches: And so it was indeed. Zeno resuming the Empire, (to comply somewhat with his oath to Armatus) adopted his son Basiliscus; but soon after deprived him of that honour, and killed Armatus. Basiliscus with his wife and children he sent into Cappado∣cia in the winter season, commanding them to be left without meat or apparel, or any other conveniencies. Where pincht with cold and hunger, and lying to one another for succour, embracing them own dear bodies, they all died. Such punishment had Basiliscus of his ill Government. But these things hapned af∣terward. Genserick, having now either with force, or artifices, shaken off his e∣nomies, aied the Roman Provinces more then ever; till Zeno came to a Trea∣ty with him, and perpetual peace was concluded; That the Vandals should commit no acts of hostility against the Romans; nor from them receive any. THis Treaty was observed all the time of Zeno, and Anastasius his successor, and during the reigne of Justin; whose sisters son Justinian succeeding; in his time this war was, which I purpose to relate. CHAP. VIII. BUt Genserick shortly after died a very old man; charging the Vandals by his Testament, that the Kingdom should descend ever to such male descendent of Genserick, as was eldest in years. Genserick having reigned over the Van∣dals from his taking of Carthage 39 years,An. dom. 479. & Zenonis septimo. Honoricus his eldest son succeeded, Genson being dead. In the reigne of Honoricus, the Vandals had war only with the Moors, who being rid of Genserick, who kept them in awe, did the Vandals many mischiefs and suffered many. This Honoricus was most cruel, and un∣just to the Christians of Africa; forcing them to turn Arrians, or for refusing, burning, and in several sorts destroying them. From many he cut out their tongues by the roots; who to my time lived in Constantinople, speaking perfect∣ly, and feeling no manner of inconvenience from that torture. Two of these, medling with light women after it, lost their speech. He reigned 8 years, and died in his bed. The Moors inhabiting the mountain Aurasium, being revolted already from the Vandals, and not to be reduced, by reason the Vandals could not come to fight with them in that sleep unpassable mountain; which stands in Numidia,  days journey to the Southward of Carthage. After Honoricus,An. dom. 488. & Zenonis 15. the Dominion of the Vandals come to Gundamund the son of Genson, the son of Genserick, having the advantage of year above any of Gensericks race. Gun∣damund had many battels with the Mors,  the Christians more then the
other;An. Dom. 500. & Anastasii 7. and died in the middle of the 12th. year of his reign. * His brother Trasamund succeeded; a goodly man, wise and magnanimous. But he constrained the Christians to change, not by tortures, as his Predecessors; but courting them with honours and offices, and with large gifts; taking no notice of such as would not submit. If he found a man in a great crime, he offered him impunity to change his religion. His wife being dead without children, and he desirous to establish his government with succession, demanded to wife Amalafrida, the sister of Theodorick King of the Goths, whose husband was lately dead: He sent him his sister with a guard of 1000 selected Goths, attended with 5000 more, fighting men; and he gave her Lilybaeum, one of the Promontories of Sicily. So Trasa∣mund of all the Princes of the Vandals seemed the most powerful. Yet in his reign the Vandals had a great overthrow from the Moors, Cabaon, Prince of the Moors about Tripolis, a man experienced in many wars, and very witty, hearing that the Vandals would make war upon him, first enjoyned his Subjects to forbear unjust dealings, delicious foods, and specially the company of women: Then he made two Entrenchments; in the one himself lodged, and his men; in the other he shut up the women, making it death for any man to go into the womens Entrench∣ment. Then he sent Spies to Carthage with this direction, to mark what scorns the Vandals upon their march, did to the Christians Churches; and when they were gone from the place, themselves to doe the quite contrary. And they say he used this speech, That 'tis true, he was ignorant of the God whom the Christians worship: But it was likely (if he were so powerful as they say he is) that he will punish those that scorn him, and defend those that honour him. The Spies having markt the Vandals preparations at Carthage, followed their Army in a poor disguise toward Tripolis. The Vandals at their first dayes march lodged in the Christians Churches, put in their horses and other beasts, and spared no kind of scorn. They practised therein all lewdness, and beat and whipt the Priests they found, commanding them services which they imposed on their mean∣est slaves. So soon as they were gone, the Spies of Cabaon, according to his order, made the Churches clean again, took away the dirt and such like profanely left in them, lighted the Lamps, did lowly reverence to the Priests, and used them cour∣teously, and to many poor about those Churches gave money, and then followed the Vandals Army. Thus in all the journey, they mended herein what the Vandals offended: And being come neer, went before to Cabaon, and told him how far the enemy was, and what was done to the Christians Churches. He presently put in order to fight. The field where he would entrench, he took in with a circle a∣bout, and placed his Camels side-long in a round to fence his Camp, making the Front 12 Camels deep: The women and children, unable men, and baggage he put in the middle, and his fighting men between the legs of those beasts with shields to ward with. The Vandals knew not what to do to this kind of batallion, being neither Archers, nor Darters, nor good Infantry, but most Hors-men using the Lance and the Sword, and not able to hurt an enemy afar off; and their horses not enduring the sight of the Camels, would not approach the enemy, who dart∣ing at multitudes from a safe place, killed them and their horses, that they ran away. The Moors followed the execution, and killed and took them, so that few came home. This fortune had Trasamund with the Moors, and after 27 years reign dyed. An Dom. 527. & Justini 9. It was Justi∣niani 1. who began to reign with Justin on good Friday of that year, 5 Ap. and alone in August fol∣lowing. CHAP. IX. ILderick succeeded him, the son of Honoricus, the son of Genserick: A Prince mild to his subjects, and not harsh to Christians, nor to any; but faint-hearted, not enduring to hear of war. In such expeditions at the Vandals had, Hoamer was Generall, his nephew, a good Souldier, whom they called the Achilles of the Vandals. In his reign the Vandals lost a battel against the Moors of Byzacium, commanded by Antallas; and fell out with Theodorick and the Goths in Italy.
For they kept in prison Amalafrida, and put all the Goths to death who attended her, charging them with practise against their King and State. Of this Theodorick had no revenge, wanting a Navy to make war upon Africk; and Ilderick was an ancient friend of Justinian, who governed absolutely then, (his Uncle Justin being very old, and not skill'd in affairs of State) and they courted each other with Presents. There was of the race of Genserick one Gelimer, the son of Gelgris the son of Genson, of ripe years, and so expected immediately to succeed Ilderick. In war he was thought one of the best of his time, but wicked, and skilful in mutinies and rapines. Perceiving his Reign coming slowly, though he had taken the govern∣ment by the yieldingness of Ilderick, he could not keep his thoughts in that con∣dition, but made a party, and perswaded the best men to depose Ilderick, as a Coward, beaten by the Moors; and betraying the State to the Emperour Justin, to keep the Kingdom from him, who was of the other house, which he said was the intent of the late Ambassage to Constantinople. They did so upon these per∣swasions:An. dom. 530. & Justiniani quarto. And Gelimer getting the Kingdom, kept Ilderick in prison, after seven years reign; with Hoamer, and his brother Evagees. Justinian hereof adver∣tised, being now Emperour, sent Ambassadors, and wrote thus to Gelimer. You doe not religiously, nor as is due to the testament of Genserick, to keep in prison an old man of your blood, and your King (if Genserick's wise constitutions be worth ought) and to force from him a Kingdom, which shortly you will have by law. Pro∣ceed not in evil; nor change the title of a King to that of an Ʋsurper, for a little ad∣vantage of time: But let him carry the image of Royalty to his grave (whereinto he is stepping) yourself having the execution of it already; and having the substance, attend upon the Law of Genserick for the name. If you doe thus, you will find God propitious, and Ʋs your friend. But Gelimer sent away the Ambassadors unsatisfied; put out Hoamers eyes, and kept Ilderick and Evagees in straiter prison, accusing them to have attempted an escape to Constantinople. Upon this Justinian sent other Ambassadors, and wrote thus. We did not think, you would have done the quite contrary to our advices. But seeing it pleases you to get a Kingdom thus, take what fortune gives you. But send to us Ilderick, and blind Hoamer and his brother, to get such comfort, whereof men are capable, who have lost Kingdoms and eye-sights. If you refuse this, we will not endure it. The hope they had in our friendship induces us; and the Treaties with Genserick cannot stop us, being not to make war upon, but to vindicate his Successor. To this Gelimer made this answer. King Gelimer to the Emperour Justinian. I have neither taken the Kingdom by force, nor committed impiety against mine own blood. The Vandals deposed Ilderick for practising against the house of Genserick: And me time hath called to the Kingdom, giving me my right of eldership according to the law. 'Tis good for a man to govern the State he hath, and not to encroach upon other mens cares; and 'tis just in you, who have a Kingdom of your own, not to be thus medling. If you break the Treaties, and invade us, we shall oppose you to our power; calling to witness the oath sworn by Zeno, whose successor you are. Justinian was angry before, but these letters more set him upon a revenge: And being an acute deviser, and nimble in execution, he resolved to conclude the Persian war speedily, and then to invade Africk. Belisarius Gene∣ral of the East was, then at Court, sent for; but with no word of leading an Army into Africk. It was given out, that he was discharged of his government: AndAn. dom. 533. Justiniani septi∣mo. the Persian perpetual Truce was newly made. Iustinian (all being wel at home, and with Persia) at a consultation acquainted the great Officers, that he would levy an Army against Gelimer and the Vandals. The most of them were discontented at it, remembring the overthrow of Basiliscus, and that great Fleet of the Emperour Leo, the Souldiers lost, and the huge debt made by the State. Above all, the Prefect of the Palace, (whom the Romans call Praetor) was netled at it, and the Lord High-Treasurer, and all Collectors of tributes, both belonging to the Treasury and the Emperour; considering how they must supply the necessities of the war infinitely, and not be admitted to excuse or delay. And every Generall, doubting the employment, apprehended the great∣ness of the hazard; after escaping the sea, to encamp in an enemies country, and upon their landing to fight with a great and potent Kingdom. The Souldiers
newly returned from a long and difficult war, scarce having tasted of their home-contentments, were troubled to be led now to a Sea-fight (a thing they had never heard of) and to be sent from the East to the West, to hazard against Vandals and Moors. All others (as is the manner of multitudes) meant to be spectators of new businesses, with other mens danger. None durst cross the voyage, save Iohn the Cappadocian, Prefect of the Palace, being the boldest and smartest man of his time: He (while others mourned in silence) spake thus to the Emperour. Sir! The security of conversing with you gives me confidence, to speak things expedient for your service, though not pleasing. Your wisdom hath so temper'd power & justice in you, that you judg not him absolutely a friend to your affairs who seconds you, nor are offended with opposing you; weighing things by the sin∣cere meaning: which makes it safe to differ from your counsels. Hereby in∣duced, Sir! I shall advise happily what for the present may offend, but here∣after I shall make my affection apparant, and call you for a witness. If you shall begin a war with the Vandals, and then find it grow into length, my counsel will then appear good. If your confidence arise from assurance of victory, no mar∣vail you venture men, spend money, and engage the toyls of such combats; for victory gotten covers these afflictions of war. But seeing this is in the hands of God, and that looking upon foregoing presidents, we cannot but fear the event of this war; certainly to content our selves with quietness, is better, then the hazards of battels. You will send an Army against Carthage, whither by land it must march 140 dayes journy; or sail the ength of the great sea to the utmost bounds of it: So that the news of the occurrents will be a year in coming to you. And if you vanquish your enemies, yet you cannot be master of Africk, Sicily and Italy being in other hands. But if you be overthrown, (the Peace being broken) you will draw the war upon your own country. In a word, it will not be in your power to enjoy the victory; and if fortune be cross, it will ruine the affairs well setled. Before action, consultation is profitable: when the blow is given, it is vain to repent; but before it, one may safely change his mind: It will be most expedient therefore to make due use of the times. The Emperour approved this advise, and let fall his eagerness to the war. But a Bishop out of the East got access to him, and told him, That God had charged him in a dream to blame him; having undertaken to deliver the Christians in Africk from Ty∣rannie, to grow faint now upon no ground; whereas I will assist him (said he) and make him master of Africk. The Emperour upon this could hold no longer; but prepared an Army and a Navy, and provisions, requiring Belisarius to be in readiness to goe Generall into Africk. CHAP. X. TRIPOLIS was already put into rebellion against the Vandals by one Puden∣tius, a native there, who sent to the Emperour for an Army to subdue the Province unto him: who sent Tattimuth with some small forces; with whom Pudentius joyning, and finding no Vandals there, he took the Countrey for the Emperour. Gelimer was hindred from chastizing Pudentius, by Godas a Goth and servant of Gelimer, a man pragmatical and couragious, and seeming well af∣fected to his Master. To this Godas Gelimer had committed the Guard of Sardi∣nia, and to collect the tributes there: whose mind not digesting such a fortune, he usurped the Island, and denyed to send the Tributes, keeping them to himself. And understanding that Justinian sought occasions of a war with Gelimer; He wrote thus to him. Not out of ingratitude, not suffering any disfavour from my Master, I have thought upon a revols. But seeing his cruelty both to kindred and subjects; I would not willingly be a partaker of the same. It is better to serve a just Emperour, then a Tyrant who commands things unlawfull. Consider therefore of assisting my enterprize, and send me forces to defend me from an invasion. The Emperour sent Eulogius to him, and wrote him an answer, commending his wis∣dom
and zeal to justice; and promising aides, and a General sufficient to keep the Island, and assistance otherwise, that the Vandals should not hurt him. Eulogi∣us being come into Sardinia, found Godas had put on the title and habit of a King, and gotten a Guard about him. And to the Emperours Letters he said, That for souldiers he desired them, but had no need of a General. Which he wrote to the Emperour, and dismist Eulogius. But before, the Emperour had prepared 100 mens commanded by Cyrillus, to guard the Island for Godas. And with them he had in readiness for Carthage 10000 foot, and 5000 horse levied of the Legionaries and Confederates. Here∣tofore such Barbarians only were enrolled Confederates, as were admitted into the Roman State, not to be slaves (as having not been vanquisht by the Romans) but upon equal terms; the Romans calling foedera; their Treaties with those they have had war with: but now all take that name; time not deigning to keep names upon the things they were first put, and things being called as men please; not as they were before their times. The Commanders of the Confederates were, Dorotheus General of Armenia, and Solomon, who was assistant to the Ge∣neral Belisarius; the Romans call such an Officer, Domesticus;Cassiodorus cals these Do∣mesticos mi∣nistros qui comitibus ad obeunda pub∣lica munera obsequeban∣tur. Why fol∣lowed the Co∣mites or Gene∣rals to execute publick servi∣ces, Lib. 9 ad vilum. (he was an Eunuch, but not purposely cut, but upon an accident in his swathing clouts) Cyprianus also, and Valerianus, Martinus, Altheas, John, Marcellus, and Cyrillus afore men∣tioned! Of the Legionaries, Ruffinus and Aigan (who had been of the retinue of Belisarius) and Barbatus, and Rappus, were Commanders of horse; and of foot, Zaedus, Martianus, Sarapis and Theodorus, sirnamed Ctenatus, and Teren∣tius. John who was born at Durazzo, commanded in chief all the foot. Solo∣mon came from the farthest East, belonging to the Romans, near Daras. Aigan was a Hunne; all the rest were Thracians. Pharas also commanded 400 Her∣rulians:Which is a∣mong the 500 ships, 40 to a ship, one with another. I won∣der how the Latine Transla∣tor thought 3000 Mari∣ners could mann 500 wips. But he, though a learned man, had not the Greek Edition now extant; and so his Transla∣tion is full of errors. and Sinnion and Balas, gallant men, had 600 auxiliary Hunn; all Arch∣ers on horseback. This Army was transported by 500 ships none being of more burden then 50000 Medimni, nor of less then 3000. They were manned with 20000 Mariners, most Egiptians, Ionians, and Cilicians. The Admiral of the whole Fleet was Calonymus an Alexandrian. They had also 92About 1200. tun, accounting a medimnus for a bushel. Pinnaces in case of a sea-fight, with one row of oars, and decks over their heads; not to be sub∣ject to the Enemies shot. They call these Dromones, for their swiftness. They had aboard no passengers, but 2000 rowers, Constantinopolitans. Archelaus, a Patritian, who had been Praefect of the Palace in Constantinople, and Illyrium, went now Praefect of the Camp. So is the Officer called who makes provision for the Army. Over them all, the Emperour placed Belisarius (late Comman∣der of the Oriental Legions) his General with absolute authority; whom many Launciers and Targetiers followed, old tryed Souldiers. The Emperour enabled him by his Letters to do whatsoever seemed best unto him; and the same to be firm, as the Emperours own act. Belisarius was born in Germania,Not in Ger∣many, as some Germans would have it; but in Germa∣nia, a City of Thrace in the confines of Illy∣rium. It was a Metropolis, and recited in the Sanctions of the Eastern Bi∣shops, saith, A∣lemannus, in his Historical notes upon the Secret History. a City which stands in the confines of Illyrium and Thrace. Gelimer in the mean time having lost Tripolis by Pudentius, and Sardinia by Godas: The first lying far off, and having Roman aids already, he gave over; and sent no forces against it. But to prevent the Emperours succours in the Island, he sent under his brother Trazon 5000 Vandals in 120 good ships. But Justinian having commanded away Valerianus and Martinus, to attend the rest of the Ar∣my in Peloponesus; and being both a ship-board, he had some further direction to give them, which he had resolved, but it was forgotten upon other business inter∣vening. So he sent for them; to tell it; but again thinking it inconvenient to in∣terrupt their passage; he sent to command them not to return to him any more, nor to come ashore. The Messenger called out aloud to them not to come back again at all. The company took it for a bad Omen, that none of them should re∣turn out of Africk to Constantinople. And they thought the Emperour unwit∣tingly had sent them a kind of a curse. If it be interpreted of Valerianus and Martinus, the conceit proved not true. But Stotzas, there a Lancier of Marti∣us, was to rebel against the Emperours and usurp, and never to come back to Constantinople: upon whom it may be conjectured fortune conferred that curse.
CHAP. XI. BUt in the seaventh year of Justinians reign, about the Summer Tropick, the Army was embarqued; and Belisarius the General commanded the Praeto∣rian ship to ride under the Emperours Palace. Thither came Epiphanius, Arch∣bishop of the City; and having prayed as was fitting, he put aboard a Souldier newly baptized,Being suppli∣ed out of the beginning of the Secret History. Whose Godfather and Godmother were Belisarius, and Antonina, being one of their houshold, and named Theodosius, and much valued by them. And thus the said General and his wife put to sea. With them was Procopius; the Writer of this History; who at the first was afraid of this Voyage; but a dream, he had, encouraged him, and made him eager upon it. He dreamt he was in Be∣lisarius his house, whom a servant told that one had brought him presents; that Belisarius bad himself go look upon them; and he in the inner Court, saw men carrying flowers growing with their earth; which he commanded them to lay down in the Porch. That then Belisarius came with his Life-Guard, sate down upon that earth and eat of the flowers, willing the rest to do the like, who fell to, and seemed much pleased with the dainties. Thus was the dream. But the fleet followed the Praetorian ship, and at Perinthus, now called Heraclia, staid five days; where the Emperour gave the General almost all his horses of his pa∣stures in Thrace. From thence they came before Abydus, where being becalm∣ed four days; it fell out that two Massagetes in their drink (the Massagetes be∣ing all great drunkards) killed one of their Countreymen, whom Belisarius cru∣cified upon a hillock near Abydus. The rest, especially the kinsmen of the men, murmured; That they came not to aid the Romans upon terms of subjection to their Laws; and by their own Laws, murders had no such punishments. Some Roman Soldiers murmured too; such as would not be punished for their offences. Whereupon Belisarius spake thus to the Army. To men that never saw wars, I should need a long speech to perswade, how great a preparation for victory it is, to be just. But you by often vanquishing enemies, not inferiour in bodies, and very valiant; and by often having the contrary success, have learnt; that men fight in both the Armies, but God determines the victory, as himself pleases. So that we must make less account of good bodies, of arms, and warlick prepa∣rations, then of justice and duty to God▪ For men in need are to honour that most, which is most able to do them good. Now the principal mark of justice is, the punishment of murderers: For if we must judge of right and wrong, by what men do to one another; certainly to a man nothing is so precious as life. If any Barbarian killing his Countryman in drink, upon that pleads im∣punity; I conceive his excuse aggravates his crime: For a man must not be so drunk as to kill his best friends; specially in an Army; nay drunkenness it self, without murder, deserves punishment. And then to wrong ones own Nation, appears more heinous to any man of understanding, then a stranger. The exam∣ple and event of such doings you may all yonder behold. And you must not be∣gin quarrels, nor take away ought which is other mens. Neither will I endure that man, or esteem him a souldier of mine, who cannot employ innocent hands against our enemies, No valour will get the victory, which is not rankt with justice. The Army upon this speech, and seeing the crucified men, and expecting the danger of committing unlawfull acts, grew afraid, and resolved to live sober∣ly. Then, that the whole Army might sail, and lie at anchor together (in a great fleet many ships necessarily being cast behind, specially if the wind blow high, and the ship-masters know not what leader to follow) he painted the masts of his own ship, and two others where his train was, from the top about a third part, with red, and in their sterns setting up high poles, hung up lanterns, that the Generals ships might be seen both by night and day. And to these he comman∣ded the ship-masters to hold their course; which thus leading the whole fleet, not one ship was cast behind. And at weighing anchor from any harbour, the Trumpets ever sounded the warnings. From Abydus a stiff wind brought them
to Sigaeum; from whence being becalmed, they came late to Malea. There the calm stood them instead; for the want of sea-room for so great a fleet, and in the night, troubled, and endangered the same. The Mariners did bravely, calling out, and thrusting with their long poles, and skilfully keeping their distances but if the wind had risen strong, and against them, they had with much adoe saved the ships. But getting by, they reached Taenarus, now called Caenopolis. From thence they came before Methône where they found Valerianus and Martinus, arrived a little before; and the wind not serving, Belisarius landed the whole Ar∣my. There he distributed the Commands, and ordered the Soldiers; and being therein busie, and the wind not serving, many of the Army died of a sickness thus occasioned, John the Cappadocian, a bad man, was ingenuous to find projects for money to the treasury, with the ruine of men; (a man beyond my power to de∣scribe; and in my former History I have spoken of him;) but now he destroyed these soldiers thus. The bread for the Army, to make it laste, and not corrupt too soon, is to be twice baked; and so of necessity must weigh less; and the soldiers, in the giving it out, must have a fourth part less in weight. John, that he might spend less wood, and wages upon bakers, & by gain the weight, brought the loaves unbaked to the publick bath, and put the same into the stove there, under which the fire is made, and being thus sorrily baked, sent it in bags to the fleet: which being at Methone, the bisket turn'd to dough, and that mouldy, corrupt, and usty; and the Officers distributed it thus to the soldiers by pecks, and sometimes by bushels. Who feeding upon it in the Summer, and a place of ex∣tream heats, grew sick, and above 500 died; and more had, if Belisarius had not provided bread of the Country to help them. He acquainted the Emperour there∣with, who commended him for it: but he could not get John punished as then. CHAP. XII. FRom Methòne, they came to the Port of Zante. Here they took in fresh wa∣ter, and other necessaries, to pass the Adriatique sea;Thus the Author calls constantly that sea which others call Ma∣re Ionium. through which, with a scant wind, they came in sixteen days to a desert coast of Sicily; near Mount Aetna. In this lingring passage their waters corrupted, all save what was drank at the table of Belisarius, which his wife devised to keep untainted, in six vessels of glass, covered thick with sand in a little cabbin in the hold, where the Sun could not come. Belisarius landed there, and was much troubled in his thoughts, not knowing what soldiers the Vandals were, nor how, nor from whence to make the war upon them. The soldiers also troubled him, fearfull of a sea-fight, and not ashamed to tell him, that on land they will do their best, but if the enemies ships come they will fly, not able to fight with them and waters too. In this perplex∣ity he sent Procopius, his Assessor, to Syracuse, to enquire if the enemy way-laid their passage in the Island, or main Land: what part of Africk was best to land in, and from whence to make the war, and this done, to meet him at Caucana; a∣bout 27 miles from Syracuse, where the fleet should ride at anchor. It was gi∣ven out, he was sent to buy victual of the Goths: For Amalasuntha, the mother of Alricus, had agreed with Justinian to give his Army free market. Ara∣laricius was under years bred by his mother, and was King of the Goths and Ita∣lians: upon whom after the death of Theodoricus, the Kingdom descended, be∣ing son to his daughter Amalasuntha; by a man deceased also. Amalasuntha, to make Justinian her friend, had yielded to this free market, among other his com∣mands, and now performed it. But Procopius found at Syracuse, a Countryman and friend of his from a boy, residing there about his Traffique at Sea; of whom he learnt all his demands. For a servant of his who had returned within three days from Carthage, told him, that there was no fear of the Vandals way-laying the fleet; there being there no news of an Army coming; and their vali∣antest men being newly sent against Godas; and that Gelimer having no thought
of an enemy, neglected Carthage, and the sea-towns and made his abode at Hermi¦one, near Byzacium, 4 days journy from any sea; so that they might sail on securely, and put in where the wind and weather should invite. Procopius hearing this, took the servant by the hand to the Port, and was inquisitive of many particulars; til be∣ing abord, he commanded to hoist sail for Caucana. The Master of the fellow stood upon the shore wondring at his mans not returning. But Procopius called out to him not to take it unkindly, for his servant must speak with the General, and guide the Army into Africk, and then should be returned to him to Syracuse, with a rich reward. But arrived in the Army, he found them all mourning the death of Dorotheus, General of Armenia, a man much desired by the Army. Belisarius, when he heard the news from the man, rejoyced extreamly, and much commen∣ding Procopius, commanded the Trumpets to give warning for weighing anchor And so they came to the Isles of Gaulus and Malta, dividing the Adriatique and Tyrrhen seas; and thence with an Easterly wind, they came the second day upon the coast of Africk, five dayes journey from Carthage. Being near the shore, Belisarius commanded to cast anchor; and assembling the Commanders consulted of their landing. After some diversity of opinions, Archelaus spake thus, Our General is to be commended highly, who having the advantage of wisdom, experience and power, yet consults, and commands us to speak our opinions of landing, though knowing by his own observations, what must and may be done. And I cannot but admire you the Commanders for so readily perswading our landing; who know that to exhort men to an immi∣nent danger, brings no advantage to the adviser, but laies him open to an accu∣sation. For men when things succeed to their desire, are pleased, and that's all; but when otherwise, they accuse the author of the advice; though it be unjust that a man for his counsel in publick deliberations should be questioned. But resolving thus to land in an enemies Country, in what Port will you leave your ships? What fortification, or walled Town expect you? The coast from Lec∣ca to Carthage, you hear is nine days journey open to all winds, and without a∣ny harbour: And in all Africk, by Genserick his command, no walled Towns are standing but Carthage: And the Country, I am told, is destitute of waters. And if in the midst of these incommodities we meet with an enemy, what shall we resolve then? shall we not think such counsels infused rather by some unlucky Damon, then humane reason? Our ships also, when we are landed, and a storm comes, must either be scattered infinitely, or else perish upon this shore. Then for your necessary support, what supply expect you? Let no man look upon me the Commissary for Provisions. Then there are no servants for you, the soldiers must supply that Office. To conclude, where will you put your spare arms and baggage? and when you need such, whence will you be furnished? My opinion is, to sail directly for Carthage, where there is a haven four miles and a half from it, called the Pool, unguarded and capable of a great fleet, from whence you may make the war, and easily take Carthage. And then having vanquisht the enemy far from thence, nothing will be difficult nor dangerous to Conquerours. For na∣turally, the head once gon, the rest fals of it self. These things you are to con∣sider, and chuse the best. After this speech, Belisarius began thus. 'Let none, fellow Commanders, think me to sit here a judge of what hath been spoken, nor to speak last, suppo∣sing my sentence necessarily to be followed. I have heard your opinions, and my part is to propound what I conceive, and together with you to chuse the best. One thing you must remember, that the soldiers even profess to fear a sea-fight, and if the enemy come, to turn their backs to them. And in that case it is foolish to pray to God for success, being afraid, and our selves procuring the contrary event. If then we sail to Carthage and encounter an enemies Navy and our men fly from them, our counsel will be followed with repentance and complaints. A fatal error admits some excuse, but this none. And if a Tem∣pest happen (which is most urged to fright us, and not well) and our ships be attered (as they say) or perish upon this coast: I pray which is less hurt, to have our ships cast away alone, or with them, all the rest of us to fall by the enemy? Besides, falling upon the enemy unprovided, and not looking for us,
we may subdue him; but when he is armed and prepared, we shall hazard a war upon equal terms. Concerning the provision of necessaries, and how we shall put ashore, it is not now time to consult, nor enquire. Shall we stay for a tem∣ipest to fall upon our Navy in a fight (as often happens) and then begin to learn what to do? I think we ought forthwith to land, taking with us our horses, arms, and other needfull things; and presently to entrench our selves within a good Rampire (which will defend us as the strongest wall) and from thence make the war. And think not to want any thing, if we fight valiantly. Who vanquish their enemies, all they have is theirs; Victory brings all to that side it enclines to. In your swords therefore consists your safety, and aboundance. All the Counsel easily consented to this, and rose; forthwith landing the Ar∣my, three months after their departure from Constantinople. The General chose by the sea-side, a place which both soldiers and mariners fortified with trench and rampire; and by multitude of hands concurring, and the General urging, it was finished the same day. Digging the earth, they came to much water (a thing never before seen in Byzacium, a dry Country) which supplyed men and beasts. Procopius congratulated with the General, not so much (as he said) for the water, as for the presage of an easie victory, which proved so indeed. That night the Army lodged in the Camp, set their watches and did all as is usual. Only aboard every ship Belisarius appointed five Archers, and the light Gallies to lie round a∣bout them to prevent sodain mischief. CHAP. XIII. THe next day some soldiers went up into the Country, and stole their ripe fruits, whom the General severely chastised; and calling the Army together, spake thus. To feed upon other mens goods by violence, is at all times wicked, because unjust; But now, setting the consideration of justice aside (though that were hard) it is so aboundantly inconvenient, that we must fear the danger: we are here put ashore with this only confidence, that the Africans being anci∣ently Romans, are unsure, and ill affected to the Vandals. From this I did hope for supply of necessaries, and to avoid mischief from the enemy. But now your intemperance hath changed all to the contrary. You have reconciled the Africans to the Vandals, and turn'd their hatred upon your selves, (for wrong'd men naturally hate them that do them the present violence;) and so you have for a little gain now sold your future safety, and plenty. By buying what you needed, you might have avoided the imputation of injustice, and made the ow∣ners your friends. Now you must have the war with Africans and Vandals too; nay with God himself; whose assistance no man can invoke, doing wrong. But give over this sharking, and quit your hands of a gain so full of hazard: The proper time now being, when sobriety must preserve us, and disorder will bring certain death▪ If you be carefull of these things, God will be propitious, the people of Africk well affected, and the Vandals easie to be dealt with. After this speech, Belisarius sent Boraides, one of his life-guard, with some of his Targetiers, to Syllectus a sea-town in the way to Carthage, and a days jour∣ney from the Camp; whose Inhabitants, he heard, instead of their demolished walls, to have fortified each man his own house, to keep off the Moors, and so to have made a kind of Town wall. Boraides he instructed to attempt the Town, and taking it, to do no hurt, but with representing many conveniences, and how they come to set them at liberty, to get entrance for the Army. They about candles lighting getting near the Town, past the night in a deep bottom there; and the next morning overtaking some Peasants, they slipt into the Town with them, and possest it; then without tumult, called the Bishop, and principal of the Town; told them their Generals instructions, and immediately receiving the keys from them, sent the same to the General. The same day the Master of the Kings Posts revolted, and gave up all his horses. The General also took one of
those that ride with the Kings Packets, which they call Veredarii, and did him no hurt, but took his oath to deliver Justinians Letters, written to the Vandals, into the hands of the Governours. Which signified thus. We make no war upon the Vandals, nor infring the Treaty with Genserick. But we endeavour to free you from an usurper; who, disrespecting the Testament of Genserick, keeps your King in prison, and hath begun to destroy such of his bloud, whom he hated; and of the rest, hath put out their eyes, and imprisoned them, not suffering them to end their sorrows by death. Assist us therefore to free you from so wicked Tyranny, that you may en∣joy peace and liberty: which to observe to you, we make oath here to God. The man that took these Letters from Belisarius, durst not shew them, but to some privat friends, and did nothing material. CHAP. XIV. BUt Belisarius marcht in order for a battel towards Carthage. He gave 30 of his Targetiers to John, who was the Steward of his houshold, whom the Romans call Optio; being an Armenian, and eminent for valour and discretion. Him he directed to march some two miles and a half before the Army, and to give warning, if they see an enemy, that the Army may prepare for fight. And to the left hand of the Army, he directed the Massagetes to march. And himself was in the rear with his best men, looking for Gelimer to come shortly from Her∣mione. To the right hand was no fear, being to march by the sea-shore; and the seamen he commanded to keep them company, by letting down all their sails, but their sprit sail, in case of a strong gale; and in a calm, to force their way with oars. When they came to Syllectus, Belisarius had his soldiers most sober, not striking, nor using any disorder. And the Africans he so gained with his gentleness, that he marcht as in his own Country; the people not withdrawing themselves nor goods, but giving free market, and being very serviceable to the soldier. They marcht ten miles a day, till they came to Carthage, lodging still in a Town, or safely in their Camp. We came by Lepta and Adrymettum to Grassa, about 43 miles from Carthage; where was a Palace of the Vandal Governor, and the fai∣rest Gardens we ever saw, aboundantly watered with fountains; and with a large grove of trees loaded with ripe fruit, whereof the soldiers took their fill without any miss, every man setting his cabbin under a fruit-tree. But Gelimer hearing the enemies arrival, wrote from Hermione to Carthage, to his brother Ammatas, to kill Ilderick, and the other prisoners of his bloud, and otherwise appertaining to him; and himself to arm the Vandals, and such forces as he had in the City; and at the narrow passage near a town called Deci∣mum, to charge the enemy on both sides, and so to catch him as in a net. Am∣matas accordingly killed Ilderick, and his cousin Evagees: Hoamer was dead be∣fore. He armed also the Vandals, to sally in the due time. Gelimer followed us close; and one night only, as we lodged in Grassa, he gave us an alarm; upon some skirmishing of our scouts with theirs; by whose returning to the Camp, we understood the enemy to be near. From hence marching, we lost sight of our ships, being put to go about some high rocks there, and a Promontory under which stands Mercurium. Belisarius sent word to Archelaus the Commissary, not to put in at Carthage, but to stay 25 miles short, till he send for them. From Grassa the fourth day we came to Decimum, about 8 miles from Carthage. This day Gelimer sent his Nephew, Gibamumdus, before with 2000 Vandals, to march to our left hand; that so Ammatas from Carthage. himself in our rear, and Giba∣mundus at our left hand, charging together, might compass us.
CHAP. XV. FOr my part, I could not but wonder in this battel to see, how God knowing the event, draws out the model thereof to his own will; and how men are ignorant whether they mistake, or whether they be upon a right counsel, that a way so may be made to the success before determined. If Belisarius had not commanded John to advance before the Army, and the Massagetes to march at our left hand, we could not have escaped the Vandals. And for all this, the Van∣dals could not have been so ruined, if Ammatas had not come to Decimum about noon, three hours sooner then his time, we being then farr short of it, and the Vandals Army also. And this was not all his fault. He came with a few, and those not of his best, to encounter John, leaving the main body in Carthage, with direction to come after to Decimum. He killed 12 good men of ours in the head of Johns troops, but himself fell, having shewn much valour; and being fallen, the rest were routed, and running away, turned the whole body marching from Carthage; who being in no order to fight, but in small parties of thirty and twenty together, and seeing Ammatas troops running, and imagining multitudes pursuing, ran back for company. Whom Johns Troops killed up to the gates of Carthage; And so great was the execution of that 8 miles, that one would have guest it the work of 20000 men at least. Gibamundus at the same time, and his 2000 men, came to the Salt plains, five miles from Decimum, on the left hand of the way to Carthage, a place without men or trees, or ought else (the saltness of the water hindring the grouth of any thing but salt;) here falling upon the Mas∣sagetes, they perisht every man. Among the Massagetes was a man valiant and strong, but Captain of a few; who had a priviledge from his ancestors, in all encounters to charge first; and no Massagete to shoot or strike till he began the fight. This man rode up close to the Vandals Army; who either amazed with his da∣ring, or suspecting some plot of the enemy, stirred not so much as to shoot at him; fearing (it may be) to venture, hearing the Massagetes to be a warlick Na∣tion, and having never seen their manner of fighting. But he returning, told his Countrymen, that God had sent them those strangers ready drest; So they gave on furiously, and the Vandals breaking their ranks, and not resisting, basely pe∣risht every man. We without hearing these accidents, marcht towards Decimum. And Belisarius, in a convenient place, some four miles from Decimum, fortified an entrenchment, and placed his foot in it; and then made this speech to the Army. Now, fellow Soldiers! is come the time of our tryal. Our enemies, I hear, are marching towards us; and our ships, by the scituation of the place, are severed from us; and now our only hope of safety is in our swords; having neither Town nor Fortress to be bold upon. If we now do valiantly, we shall in likelyhood subdue our enemies; but if we faint, nothing remains, but to be beaten, and perish by the enemy: Advantages for victory we have: First, We fight for the possession of that which in right is ours; then do the Vandals hate their own usurping Tyrant, and commonly God assists the rightfull cause; and the soldier ill affected to his Prince, never fights valiantly for him. Besides, we have spent our time against Persians and Scythians; but the Vandals, since their Conquest of Africa, have seen no enemy but naked Moors. Now, in every Trade practise breeds skill, and disusage ignorance. Our Entrenchment from whence we are to make the war, is finished; where leaving our arms which we cannot carry, and baggage, we may sallie, and retiring, find what we need. I en∣treat therefore every man to think upon his reputation, and the pledges he hath left at home, and so undanted to encounter the enemy.
CHAP. XVI. BElisarius having thus spoken, and said a prayer, leaving the guard of his wife and the Camp to the foot, he sallied with his horse. He thought not good to hazard with the whole Army, but first to skirmish with his horse, and try the enemy, then to give battel with the main; so he sent the Confederates be∣fore, and followed with the rest, and with his own Lanciers and Targetiers. The Confederates being come to Decimum, found the bodies of the 12 companions of John; and close by them the body of Ammatas, and some other Vandals. Being in doubt, and not knowing whether to go further; and from a hil discovering round, they saw a dust, and soon after a great troop of Vandals. They sent to Belisarius to come speedily; the enemy being upon them; and the Commanders, some urged to charge the enemy, others alleadged their forces not sufficient. While they were disputing, the Barbarians came up close, with Gelimer in the head of them; ha∣ving passed between the way where Belisarius went, and that where the Massagetes, who had fought with Gibamundus; but the hilly ground between, hindred their sight of Belisarius; or his entrenchment, and of the defeat of Gibamundus. Be∣ing near, each contended to possess the highest down, which seemed apt for an entrenchment. The Vandals running hard, gained the down, and grown terri∣ble, routed the enemy. The Romans fan away to a Town less then a mile from Decimum, where was Ʋliaris, one of Belisarius his life-guard, and 800 of his Targetiers. The Vandals staid their course, thinking that Ʋliaris would stand them; but his troops, so soon as the other began to charge, fled amain to Belisari∣us. It was strange, that Gelimer having thus the victory in his hands, should vo∣luntarily quit it. But God, when he wil have a mischief befall a man, infects his reason, not suffering the most expedient things to come into his mind. If he had followed the execution, Belisarius himself had not stood him, but we had al been absolutely ruined; so great seemed the number of the Vandals, and the Ro∣mans fear. Or if he had rode on to Carthage, he had killed the troops of John, every man, (who were carelesly scattered, and rifling the dead bodies) and had saved the City, and been Master of our ships, and cut off all our hope, either of victory or return home: But he did neither; but riding softly down the hill, and in the plain, finding his brothers dead body, he spent the time in lamentations, and about the funeral, and thus lost his opportunity, which he could never recover. Belisarius stopt his flying men, chiding them; and hearing of the death of Am∣matas; and the brave execution of John; and informed sufficiently of the place and the enemy, he marched against Gelimer and the Vandals: who being in dis∣order, and unprepared, ran away amain, with the loss of many, (the execution lasting till night) and fled not to Carthage, nor Byzacium, from whence they came; but toward the plains of Bule, and the way to Numidia. About evening, John, and the Massagets also came to us; and relating, and hearing the several ad∣ventures, lodged with us that night in Decimum. CHAP. XVII. THe next day our foot coming up, with Belisarius his wife, we marcht toward Carthage; and arriving within night, lodged abroad near the City. No man would have opposed our entrance; the Carthaginians opening their gates, and the City shining all night with lights and bonfires; and the Vandals remaining, were fled into the Churches. But Belisarius feared in the night some ambush, and the soldiers disorder, lest in the dark they might fall to pillage. The same day also the fleet came up to the Promontory, and the Carthaginians had opened the iron
Chain of Mandracium their haven, to let it in. In the Palace is a dark prison, called Ancon, (or the Elbow) for such as the Tyrant was offended with. Here at that time were many Eastern Merchants, whom the Tyrant accused to sollicite the Emperour to invade him; and the same day that Ammatas was slain in Decimum, he had given order for their execution. The keeper of the prison hearing the accident at Decimum, and seeing the fleet within the Promontory, went to the men (who had heard nothing, but sate in the dark expecting death) and askt them what they would give to be saved from thence. They promising to pay any thing, he said, he would none of their mo∣ney, but prayed them to swear, if they escaped, and he came into danger, to as∣sist him to their power; they did so. And he taking out a board, shewed them the fleet sailing in, and then set them lose, and went along with them. The fleet first doubted, hearing nothing: then sending to Mercurium, they were advertised of all, and with great joy sailed on with a strong gale. Which bringing them within 18 miles of Carthage, Archelaus, and the land-men, com∣manded to cast anchor, according to the Generals instructions. But the Mari∣ners alleadged the coast to be without harbour, and that there was likelyhood of a storm, which kind of storms the natives call Cypriana; which falling in that place, they should not be able to save a ship. And so it was indeed: Wherefore striking sail, and consulting, they thought not fit to attempt the haven of Man∣dracium, fearing to break Belisarius's direction, and suspecting Mandracium to be chained up, and besides, not able to hold the whole fleet; but they thought the Pool to be for their purpose (being but five miles from Carthage, and capa∣ble of the whole fleet) and to find there no stop. So coming thither about even∣ing, they cast anchor, all, save Calonymus, with some mariners; who not regarding the General, put into Mandracium, and there robbed some Merchants, strangers, and Carthaginians, dwelling upon the sea-side. The next day Belisarius commanded the men a ship-board to land, and with the Army, in order of battel, rode towards Carthage, fearing the enemies am∣bushes. Here he put the soldiers in mind of their good fortunes since their mo∣deration to the Africans; admonishing them to continue their good order, e∣specially in Carthage; That the Africans were formerly Roman subjects, and unwillingly brought under the Vandals, from whom they had suffered abomi∣nable things; That for this, the Emperour made war with the Vandals; and that it were impious now to abuse them, whose liberty was the cause of this ex∣pedition. Then he entred Carthage, none opposing; went to the Palace, and sate down in Gelimers Throne. Here the Merchants, and the other Carthagini∣ans, who dwelt upon the sea, came in a multitude, and with clamour to Belisari∣us, complaining that Mariners the last night had robbed them of all they had. He made Calonymus swear to produce the goods; but he neglecting his oath, went away with the goods then; but afterward at Constantinople, by a terrible judge∣ment, he fell mad, bit out his own tongue, and died. Belisarius then comman∣ded his dinner to be, where Gelimer used to feast his great men. The Romans from the Greeks, call the place Delphica, from a three-footed Table standing in the Palace at Rome, upon which the Emperours Cup-bearers set the cups; which they call Delphica (a three-footed table, and first used at Delphos) and so in Con∣stantinople; and wheresoever the Emperours Table stands, they call the room Delphica. The Emperours house also they call Palatium, of one Pallas a Gre∣cian, who dwelt in that place before the sack of Troy, and built in it a good hand∣some house; where Augustus, having got the Empire, first lodged, and thence they called the Emperours house the Palace. Thus Belisarius dined in the Del∣phica, and with him the Commanders of the Army. The day before, a dinner was provided for Gelimer, and we feasted upon the meats. Gelimers servants brought in our dinner, filled our wine, and in all things else attended us. Here a man might see fortune in her bravery; shewing all things to be hers, and that none can call any thing his own. And that day Belisarius attained a glory, which never happened in his own time, nor to any of the ancients. For the soldiers using not to enter, no not into any Roman City, and but 500 together, without some disorder, specially upon the sodain: This General had his men in such or∣der,
that there was not the least insolence or menace used. There was no inter∣ruption of Trade; but in a City newly taken, in a state changed, and upon the alteration of their King, not an Officer of Justice had his house shut up. The publick notaries dispatcht their writings at the Courts, and took the soldiers home with them, as is the manner; and the soldiers bought what they liked in the mar∣ket place, using no unquietness. CHAP. XVIII. THen Belisarius gave assurances to the Vandals fled into the Churches; and took care of the walls of Carthage, which had been so neglected, that in many places they were easily to be mounted, and a great part was quite faln down; which, the Carthaginians told us, caused Gelimer not to stay in the City; as not able in so short a time to secure the walls. We heard also of an old Prophesie, that had been among the boys in Carthage. That Gamma should expell Beta; and again Beta should expell Gamma. It was then acounted as an idle riddle among sporting boys; but now it was clear; for Genserick expelled Bonifacius, and now Belisa∣rius Gelimer. Then also the meaning of a dream was manifested, which many had dreamt, and often; not guessing at the event. The Carthaginians, above all, reverence St. Cyprian and by the sea-side have dedicated a Church to him close to the City, where they use many devotions, and yearly celebrate a feast which they call Cypriana; and from thence those storms I mentioned, are named, which hap∣pened about that feastival. This Church, in the reign of Honoricus, the Vandals got, forcing out the Christians and their Priests with much indignity; and officiating there themselves, as now appertaining to the Arrians. The Africans being much grieved at this, they say St. Cyprian often appeared to many in their dreams, and bad the Christians not be carefull for him; he would be his own revenger. Which saying being divulged; the Africans expected the time of punishment upon the Vandals for these devotions; but guest not at the event. But now, the Feast being to be the next day, and the Arrian Priests having made clean the Church, hung out their fairest reliques, prepared the lamps, brought out their treasures, and fit∣ted every thing for the proper use. When they heard of the overthrow of Am∣matas at Decimum, away they all ran. And the Orthodox Christians came to the Church, lighted the lamps, and officiated according to their own rites. And so the prediction of that vision was known also. The Vandals likewise remembred an anti∣ent story, and wondring acknowledged, that to man no expectation is impossible, nor no possession firm. The story was this. That when the Vandals were forced by a famin, to forsake their ancient native Country, yet some staid, having no mind to follow Godigisclus. They in time came to have plenty, and Genserick with his fol∣lowers got Africk. Which they were glad to hear, who followed not Godigisclus, finding their Country now able to feed them. And they feared lest their African Plantators or their posterity, might in time come home upon them again, expelled by the Romans, who (they doubted) would not always neglect that Province. So they sent Ambassadors to Genserick, who said unto him, That they congratulated their Countrymens great prosperity, but were no more able to guard their own Country; which they despising, had planted themselves in Africk. Wherefore they prayed them, if they make no account of their native soil, to bestow on them a possession to themselves useless. That so being absolute proprietaries of the Country, they might chearfully spend their lives for it against any invader. Genserick and the Vandals, thought this just, and yielded to the Ambassadors de∣sire. But an old man among them, esteemed very wise, said. He would never con∣sent to it; for among men is nothing setled upon a sure foundation; there is no firm and perpetual estate in what they have; nor in what they have not, impossibili∣ty. Genserick approved his saying, and sent away the Ambassadors with a de∣nial: and was then laught at, and his old Counsellor, for foreseeing things im∣possible.
But upon these accidents I have related, the Vandals were better instructed in humane affairs, and found it the speech of a wise man. Of those Vandals that staid in their own Countrey, there is no memorial left. They were few, and ei∣ther forced under some bordering Barbarians, or willingly mingled, and their names drowned in the other. And these subdued by Belisarius, had no thought of going to their antient Country, having no means sodainly to pass into Europe, specially their ships being gone. But in Africk they were punished for the mis∣chiefs done the Romans; chiefly the Zacynthians: For Genserick infesting for∣merly Peloponesus, and attempting Tenarus, but repulsed with loss of many men, and put to a shamefull retreat; being angry, set upon Zacynthus, killed many, made captives of 500 principal men, and then sailed away; and in the middle of the Adriatique sea, cut those 500 men in pieces, and scattered their pieces in the Sea. This was formerly. CHAP. XIX. BUt now Gelimer by mony and courteous usage, gained many African pea∣sants to undertake the killing of such Romans as they found stragling; and he proclaimed a sum of gold upon every killing to the actor. Many slaves and at∣tendants upon the Army were slain, pilfring in the Villages, and their heads were brought to Gelimer, for which the peasants were well paid by him, supposing to have been rid of so many soldiers. About this time Diogenes, one of Belisarius his life-guard, did very bravely; who sent him out with 22 of his Targetiers to discover the enemy. These men, at a Town two days journy from Carthage, the peasants being not able of themselves to kill them, advertised Gelimer. Who sent against them 300 horse, with direction to bring them alive; he thought it a great matter to have one of Belisarius his life-guard, and 22 of his Targetiers his prisoners. Diogenes and his company entred one of the houses, and in an upper chamber went to bed, hearing the enemy to be farr enough off. The Vandals came after midnight, and thought it not good to force into the dores in the night, fearing in the dark they might kill one another, and open a passage out for the e∣nemy. Cowardise dul'd their wits; for by using fire, or without it, they might have with ease taken them, being naked in their beds. So they put themselves in rank round about the house, and chiefly at the dore. In the mean time a Roman soldier waked, and hearing the noise (some Vandals murmuring to one another, and stirring their arms) he guest the matter, waked his companions, and softly told them the accident. They, by Diogenes direction, quietly put on their cloaths, cook their arms, went down, and bridling their horses, got up unespied. And after a short stay in the Court, suddenly they open the dores and sally. The Van∣dals charged them, but the Romans warding with their shields, and with their jave∣lins keeping off the assailants, rode away clear; with loss only of two men. Di∣ogenes himself had three wounds, one in the neck, into the face another, of which he was within a little of dying; and one upon his left hand, by which he lost the use of his little finger. But in Carthage, Belisarius with mony got artificers, and labourers, and made a Trench, and strong Palissadoes round about the walls; and in short time repaired also the decaies thereof; a work much admired by the Carthaginians, and afterward by Gelimer, being brought thither prisoner. Who wondring at the walls, said, that his negligence therein had been the cause of his present condition. In the mean time Tzazon the brother of Gelimer, arrived with his fleet in Sar∣dinia, at the Port of Carnalis; took the Town at the first charge, and slew Godas and his soldiers, and hearing that the Emperours fleet was upon the coast of A∣frick; but not what was done, he wrote this Letter to Gelimer. Know O King of Vandals and Alans, that Godas the Ʋsurper is slain by us, and the Island again under your Empire; Keep therefore a festival of Victory; And hope that the enemy who pre∣sumes now to invade our Country, shal find the same fortune, which they had formerly,
when they invaded our Ancestors. The bearers of these Letters sailed into the ha∣ven of Carthage without thought of an enemy, and by the watch being brought to the General, delivered the Letters, and revealed their negotiation; a∣mazed to see the sudden change. But from Belisarius they had no hard usage. About the same time this happened also. Before the coming of our fleet, Gelimer had sent Gotthaeus, and Fuscias, and other Ambassadors to Theudis, Prince of the Visigoths in Spain, for a league. Who being past the straits, found that Theudis was at a Town far from the sea. When they cae to him, he feasted them with much courtesie, and askt them at the feast, how things were with Ge∣limer and the Vandals. He had heard all before (the Ambassadors coming slow∣ly) from a Merchants ship which parted from Carthage the same day the Romans entred it, and with a fair wind arrived in Spain. And he had forbidden the Mer∣chants to divulge it. But now when Gotthaeus and his fellows answered him, that all was well, he demanded about what they came? They propounding a League, Theudis bad them go to the sea-side; and there you shall know certainly your af∣fairs at home. The Ambassadors taking it for the idle speech of a man in drink, replyed not. But the next day again propounding the League, and again Theu∣dis using the same words, they thought there was some alteration in Africk; but not imagining any thing of Carthage, they sailed thither, and landing near it, fell among the soldiers, and yielded; and were brought to the General, and told him their business, and had no hurt from him. CHAP. XX. CYRILLƲS also came to Sardinia; but hearing what was become of Godas, he sailed to Carthage; where he found Belsarius and the Roman Army victo∣rious. Solomon was sent to the Emperour to relate the successes. Gelimer in the Plains of Bule, near the Frontier of Numidia, four days jour∣ney from Carthage, gathered together the Vandals, and such Moors as were his friends; being few, and without Government. For the Rulers of the Moors of Mauritania, Numidia and Byzacium, sent Ambassadors to Belisarius, to profess their service to the Emperour, and to promise to joyn with him. Some of them sent their sons for hostages, and desired him to send them their Ensignes of Principality, according to the ancient custom; which was, that none might rule Moors, before he had those Ensignes sent by the Emperour, though he were an enemy to the Romans; And having them now from the Vandals, they thought not their Government firm. The Ensignes are, a silver Rod gilt, a sil∣ver Cap, not covering the whole head, but like a Garland, and kept upright with silver wire round about: A white Mantle also, fastened with a golden Clasp over the right shoulder, in the manner of a Thessalian Mantle: A white Robe embroi∣dered, and a gilt shoe. Belisarius sent all these unto them, and mony also, but they did not joyn with him, nor yet durst stand for the Vandals, but kept aloof, watching the event of the war. Gelimer also sent a Vandal into Sardinia, with a Letter to his brother Tzazon, containing this It was not Godas surely, but some mischief from heaven upon us, that put that Island into rebellion; which thereby deprived us of you, and our best Vandals, and in sum, swept away the prosperity of Gensericks house: You went not from hence to recover that Island, but that Justinian might be Lord of Africk. We un∣derstand by the events, what Fortune then determined. Belisarius came upon us but with a small Army: But the Vandals valour presently ran away, with our good for∣tune Ammatas and ibamundus are lost by the Vandals cowardise Our horses, ships, all Africk, nay Carthage it self are in our enemies hands; while the Vandals sit down with the loss of their wives and children, and estates, having fought poorly. We have nothing left but the Plains of Bule; where the hope we have in you hath put us, and still keeps us. So that leaving any farther to usurp, and quitting Sardinia, and those cares, come speedily unto us with your whole fet. It is inconvenient for
men in hazard for the main, to quillet about the rest. And combating our enemies together, we shall either recover our former fortune, or gain this, not to suffer with∣out one another. Tzazon, when he had perused this Letter, and imparted it to the Vandals, they howled and lamented, concealing it from the Islanders; but between themselves bewailing in silence their present estate. And forthwith disposing the businesses at random, they went all to sea, with the whole fleet, and the third day landed in Africk, upon the Frontiers of Numidia and Mauritania. Thence they marcht a foot to the Plains of Bule, and joyned to the rest of the Army. There were many sad rencontres then among the Vandals, not to be exprest, and such as an enemy would have pittied to look on, and see the condition of mankind. Geli∣mer and Tzazon fallen on each others neck, could not let go. They said nothing, but grasping each others hand, howled. The like did the others, embracing those who came from Sardinia; and a long time they enjoyed that contentment: And were so amazed at the present fortune, that what was important before, was not now thought upon; Gelimer not enquiring concerning Godas, nor Tzazon of the passages in Africk. Which he might conjecture by the place they were now in. Neither was there speech of wives or children; they perceiving well, that what was not here, was certainly dead, or a prisoner with the enemy.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARS Of the Emperour IV STINIAN: BOOK II. Of the War with the Vandals. CHAP. I. BUT Gelimer conducted the Army of Vandals, being now all come together against Carthage: where he cut off the Cities Aquaeduct encamped a while, and no enemy sally∣ing, retired. They quartered themselves in the neigh∣bouring Towns, and thought to block up the City so, set∣ting guards upon the high-ways. They used no spoyl nor pillage, assuming the Country as their own: and expe∣cting some Treason by the Carthaginians, and such Roman soldiers as were Arrians. With large promises also, they invited the Comman∣ders of the Hunns to be their friends and confederates: They, who were dis∣affected to the Romans, alleadging that Peter, the Roman General, had brought them to Constantinople against their wills, and contrary to his express oath. So they entertained the motion, and agreed in the battel to turn their powers against the Romans. Of all this Belisarius had some suspition, by relation of some fu∣gitives;
and the walls being not wholly finished, he would not sally, but accom∣modated all things within. He crucified one Laurus a Carthaginian, for Treason, upon a hillock before the City, convinced by his own Secretary; which frighted the rest from the like attempts The Massagetes courting with gifts, and invita∣tions to his table, and other complements, at last he got out of them what Geli∣mer had promised them, to turn cowards in the battel; and indeed that they had no mind to fight, fearing that, the Vandals being overthrown, the Romans would not dismiss them to their own Country, but wear them out in Africk; and be∣sides, take their booty from them. Belisarius sware to them, that they should be sent home so soon as the Vandals were absolutely overthrown, with all their boo∣ty; and bound them by oath to aid us with all alacrity. Then, all things being well prepared he spake thus to the Army. To use exhortations of courage to you, may seem needless fellow-soldiers! who have already so vanquisht the e∣nemy, that Carthage and all Africk is the purchase of your valour: and Vi∣ctors never have faint hearts. But it is not unseasonable to put you in mind, that fighting bravely now the Vandals will have an end of their hopes, and we of fighting. You ought then chearfully and with pleasure to enter into this combat; being to be the period of your labours: And let none speak of the Vandals multitude; which uses not to determine wars, but mens valour. Let the most powerfull thing among men, a sense of reputation upon your former acti∣ons affect you: it being a shame for men in their wits, to grow worse, and to lessen their own virtue. The enemy their fear, and remembrance of misfor∣tunes will make cowards; the one frighting with things past, the other expel∣ling hope of victory; ill fortune ever instantly dejecting mens spirirs. Be∣sides, our combat is for greater things. If the former fight had succeeded ill, our danger had been, not to conquer anothers Country: But now we lose that which is our own, if we be not victorious. So that our fear is so much the grea∣ter, as it is less to purchae nothing, then to lose what one hath. Formerly we got a victory without our Foot; but now with our whole Army I hope we shal get the enemies Camp, men, and all they have. You have in your hands the conclusion of this war; if you neglect it, and put off opportunity, you will seek it when 'tis gone. Fortune despised, stops; especially if the judgements be improved of those she favoured not before. That Goddess hates such as squan∣der away their prosperity. And if any man imagine that the fight of the ene∣mies wives and children, and most precious things, will make them dare even be∣yond power, he errs. Anger about things so dear, weakens minds excessively affected, and suffers them not to make due use of occasions. All which taking into our consideration, let us undaunted march against the enemy. Having thus encouraged them, he sent out all his horse that day, save 500. and to John the Armenian he gave his own Targetiers and Ensigne, (which the Ro∣mans call Bandum) commanding him to skirmish upon occasion. Himself with the foot, and oo horse followed. The Hunns were determined to keep their ac∣cords with Gelimer and Belisarius too, and to begin no fight for the Romans, nor before it to turn to the Vandals; but upon the victory of either, to follow the execution upon the vanquished. The Roman Army found the Vandals encamp∣ed at Tricamazus, about 17 miles from Carthage, and lodged not far from them. Where about midnight, fires were seen upon the Romans spears, and the heads thereof red hot; and the few who saw this Prodigie were amazed, not know∣ing what the event would be. But the same happening long afterward in Italy, they took it upon experience for a signe of victory. But then it happening first, they were troubled, and past the night in fear.
CHAP. II. THe next day Gelimer placed the Vandals wives and children, and all their wealth, in the midst of the Trench, though unfortified; and calling them to∣gether, spake thus. We strive not now, dear Countrymen! about loss of ho∣nor, or Empire; as if by cowardly abandoning these, we might live quietly at home, and hold our estates. Fortune hath turn'd us now to this point, either to con∣quer our enemies, or to leave them masters of our wives, and children, Coun∣try, and all our wealth; and the only advantage of our escaping will be to be slaves, and beholders of these things. But if we vanquish we shall live in prosperity, and after an honorable death, leave our Families happy, and pre∣serve the Vandals name and Empire. If ever men fought a battel for all they have, and for the hopes of all men, we are they. Our fear and danger now, is not to die; but not to vanquish our enemies: which failing, only death is good for us. Let none of you therefore faint, but couragiously abandon his person; affecting death rather, then the base miseries of a defet. He that is ashamed to be base, fears no dangers. Think not upon the former fight, where∣in not our cowardise, but some cross fortune tript us; whose stream holds not always the same course, but changes every day. In valour we presume to have the advantage; and in numbers we exceed our enemies by ten times as many men. Then have we many, and great provocations to valour. The glory of our ancestors, ashamed of our degenerating and the Empire they left us, pro∣testing to forsake us, if unworthy. Then to see the howlings of these women, and these weeping children, even stops my speech, with the extream grief: so that I will only say this: That these our dearest pledges we shall never more see, if we vanquish not our enemies. Consider it, and be valiant, and do not deface the glory of Gensrich. Having thus said, he commanded his brother Tzazon particularly to animate his soldiers, that came from Sardinia; who assembling them some space from the camp, spake thus. 'Fellow soldiers! The generality of Vandals are to combat for what you have heard from the King: but you are moreover to strive with your own selves. Lately fighting for dominion, and to recover the Island, you o∣vercame. Now you hazard in the greatest things you have, and must use your greatest courage. Who fight for dominion, and are vanquished, are not ruined in the main: But fighting for all, their lives depend upon the conclusion of the battel. And if you be valiant to day, the deposition of Godas will clearly ap∣pear an effect of your valour; but if now you faint, you will lose the reputa∣tion also of that action. And we have the advantage over the rest; terrified with their former defeat; we being unvanquisht, and fighting with a courage untainted. Then will the greatest part of the garland of victory be yours, you will be called the Preservers of the Vandal Nation: for by winning in com∣pany of men formerly unfortunate, you will appropriate to your selves the bet∣ter fortune. Upon these considerations you may do well to stint the howling of your women and children, and calling God to your assistance, to march boldly against the enemy in the head of your Countrymen. Gelimer and Tzazon, after these exhortations, drew them out; and about noon came on (the Romans being preparing their dinners) and stood in order up∣on the banks of the brook there. On the other bank the Romans put also in or∣der thus; The left wing Martinus, Valerianus, John, Cyprian, Althias, and Mar∣cellus had, and the other Commanders of Confederates: The right wing Pap∣pus, Barbatus, and Aigan, and the Captains of the Legionary horse. In the midst stood John, with the Generals Lanciers, and Ensigne; and thither in the due season came Belisarius himself, leaving the foot behind, marching fair and softly. The Hunns who used before not to mingle their ranks with the Roman Army, then stood aloof, with the intention I have said. The Vandals order was,
to distribute each wing among the Colonels of thousands, every one leading his proper Regiment: And in the middle stood Tzazon; and in the rear the Moors. Gelimer himself rode about from place to place, to encourage his soldi∣ers: Whom he warned in this fight, not to use Javelins, nor any weapons but their swords. It was long ere they began. Then John, by Belisarius his direction, with a few chosen men, passed the brook, and charged those in the middle; where Tzazon repulsed him back towards the main Army, pursuing him to the brooks side, but not going over. Again John drawing out more Targetiers of Belisari∣us, rode against Tzazon; and being again repulsed, retired. He renewed the charge the third time, with almost all Belisarius his Targetiers and Lanciers, and the Generals Ensigne, shouting and clashing their arms. The Barbarians valiant∣ly received them, using their swords only; and the fight grew stiff, where many Vandals, and of the best, were slain, and Tzazon himself. Then came on the whole Roman Cavalry, and passing the brook, charged the enemy. And the defeat, begin∣ning in the middle, appeared clearly; each one routing their opposites with ease. Which the Massagetes perceiving, according to their resolution they followed the execution with the Roman Army, which lasted not long; the Vandals recovering their Camp; and the Romans not holding themselves able to fight with them in their entrenchment, stript such dead bodies as had any gold upon them, and retired to their Camp. In this fight were slain of Romans 50. and of Vandals 800. But Belisarius about the evening (his foot being come up) marcht with his whole Ar∣my to the Vandals Camp. Gelimer seeing Belisarius with his foot, and all marching, without one word speaking, or giving any direction, leapt on horseback and fled the way into Numidia; his kinsmen, and some few houshold servants following him, amazed, and concealing what it was for. Some time the Vandals knew not of Gelimers flight; but when they found it, and saw the enemy, the men were in a tumult; the women howled, the children cryed; none sought to save their goods, nor regarded the lamentations of their dearest friends; But every man in confusion ran away. The Romans took the Camp, with all the wealth in it, and destitute of men: And following the chase all night, killed the men they over∣took, and made slaves of the women and children. They found in the Camp so great a mass of wealth, as was never together in a place. For the Vandals had long ransackt the Roman Provinces, and brought much wealth into Africk; which being also good land, and most plentifull of all commodities; the reve∣nues in mony were not spent in other Countrys, but put up by the owners for the space of 95 years,An. Dom. 533. Just. 70. in which the Vandals had the dominion of Africk. From whence their wealth now grown into a great bulk, was that day restored to the Romans. This overthrow, and taking the Vandals Camp, happened three months after the coming of the Roman Army to Carthage, in the middle of December. CHAP. III. BUt Belisarius was troubled to see the Romans disorder, and all night was a∣fraid, lest the Vandals making head again, might ruine them. If they had come, not one Roman had escaped to enjoy their booty. For the soldiers, being of a sudden become masters of so great wealth, and of personages extreamly beauti∣full, could not contain, nor find any satiety in their booty. They were drunk with their prosperity, and would have every man returned to Carthage, carrying all along with them. And they stragled by one and by two, as their hope of gain led them, searching in woods and fastnesses, and in caves and such places, subject to danger, and ambushes, fearing no enemy, nor respecting Belisarius; being af∣fected with nothing but the desire of booty. Which Belisarius seeing, he knew not what order to take. And so soon as it was day, he stood upon a hillock by the high way, calling upon them for order, and chiding the soldiers and commanders. Such as came that way, sent their booty and captives with their Comrades to Car∣thage; and themselves repaired to the General, and obeyed his directions. He
commanded John the Armenian, to follow Gelimer without intermission, and to take him alive or dead. And he wrote to his friends in Carthage, to take the Vandals out of the Churches in Towns thereabout, giving them assurances and to disarm them that they might not stir, and to keep them safe in the City till his coming. With the troops he had, he went about recollecting the Army, and giving assurances to such Vandals as he found, there being none but in Churches; whom he disarmed, and sent under guards to Carthage, giving them no time to make head. All being setled, he marcht with the rest of his Army against Geli∣mer. John following the chace five days together, came very near to Gelimer; who being not ordained to be taken by John, this cross chance happened. A∣mong the pursuers with John, was one Ʋliaris, a Lancier of Belisarius; valiant, and of an able body; but not serious, his greatest delight being wine, and jests. The sixth day of their pursuit, being in drink, he spied about Sun-rising a bird upon a tree, and let fly an arrow at it. He mist the bird; but shot John behind in the neck; who soon after dyed of the wound; leaving a great miss both to the General and Emperour, and all, both Romans and Carthaginians. He was a valiant, and a virtuous man, and bore himself mildly and moderately to all men. Thus John the Armenian died. But Ʋliaris coming to himself, fled into the Church of a Village near hand; And the soldiers pursued no further, but at∣tended the cure of John; and being dead, performed his funeral rites, and ac∣quainted Belisarius with the accident, staying in the place: Who came immedi∣ately to the Sepulchre, mourning the misfortune, and honoured the same with a yearly Revenue, and many other things. To Vliaris he did no harm, hearing from the soldiers that John had made them swear that he should not be punished for the fact, being unwittingly done. Thus Gelimer escaped his enemies hands that day. Belisarius still pursued im; and at Hippo Regia, a City upon the sea in Numidia, ten days journy from Carthage, he learnt how he was gone up to the mountain of Pappua, and not possible to be taken. This mountain is steep, and very ill way; high rocks standing round about it. In it inhabit Barbarian Moors, friends and confederates of Gelimer; and on the utmost border of it, stands an antient City, named Medenos. Here Gelimer with his company rest∣ed. But Belisarius being not able to attempt the mountain in the winter; and holding it unsafe to be absent from Carthage, the state being unsetled, he left Pharas with some forces to besiege the mountain. This Pharas was a valiant, prudent, and virtuous man, though an Herulian. And for an Herulian not to be false and a drunkard, but to pretend to virtue, is rare, and much to be commen∣ded. But he was both himself an affecter of discipline, and all the Herulians that followed him. Belisarius commanded him to lie all the winter at the foot of the hill, exactly guarding, that neither Gelimer get down, nor have provisions brought to him. Then taking the Vandals out of the Churches in Hippo, upon his faith given them (being of the best) he sent them with a guard to Carthage: and he had this fortune here. One Bonifacius an African of Byzacium, Secretary to Geli∣mer, was by Gelimer furnished with a good ship, having in it all the royal trea∣sures; and he was commanded to lie at anchor in the Port of Hippo; and if he saw the affairs go ill, to sail with the mony to Theudis, Prince of the Visigoths in Spai; where himself, upon the ruine of the Vandals, intended to save himself. Bonifacius staid, while there was any hope; but hearing of the battel of Trica∣marus, and the rest formerly related, he hoists sail according to Gelimers appoint∣ment: But a contrary wind brought him back into the Port of Hippo: and under∣standing the enemy to be near, he wooed the Mariners with large promises, to get to some other Land. But they could not, a storm coming, and the Tyrrhene sea being grown high; so they resolved, that God certainly meant to give the Romans that treasure, not suffering them to put to sea: and with much adoe get∣ting clear of the harbour, they lay off at sea in some danger. Bonifacius sent to Belisarius, being come to Hippo, some whom he directed to get into a Church; saying that they were sent by Bonifacius, who had Gelimers Treasures; but con∣cealing where he was, before oath given; that delivering the Treasures, he shall have no hurt done him, but keep such moneys as are his own. They performed
these directions. And Belisarius glad of the news, made no scruple to swear: But sent some who received the Treasures, and dismissed Bonifacius with his own moneys, having stollen a mass of wealth from Gelimer. CHAP. IV. BEing returned to Carthage, he made the Vandal prisoners ready to send to Constantinople with the first of the spring; and sent forces to take in what had been under the Vandals: and to Sardinia Cyrillus, with the head of Tzazon; the Islanders not yet yielding, nor believing the report of the Vandals il fortune at Tri∣camarus. And he directed him to send part of his forces to take in Corsica (antiently called Cyrnus) not far from Sardinia, which had been under the Vandals also. Cy∣rillus accordingly shewed the head of Tzazon to the Islanders of Sardinia, and made both the Islands tributary. Belisarius sent also John with the foot company under his leading, unto Caesa∣rea in Mauritania, being 30 days journey from Carthage, in the way to Caliz and Hercules Pillars; and a populous maritine City. Another John, one of his targetiers, he sent to the Straits of Caliz, to possess the Castle of Septum, one of the Pillars. To the Isles of Ebusa, Majorica, and Minorica, he sent Apollinarius, an Italian, who went young into Africk; and there being grown rich by the bounty of Il∣derick, after his deposing and imprisonment, he went a sutor for Ilderick to Justi∣nian, with some other Africans. And in this voyage with the Romans he did va∣liantly, and at Tricamarus the best of any. For which service Belisarius gave him the command of those Islands. He re-enforced also the Romans under Pu∣dentius and Tattimuth in Tripolis, the Moors pressing sore upon them. He sent some likewise to receive the Castle at Lilybaeum in Sicily, as belonging to the Van∣dals dominion, but was repulsed by the Goths, refusing to yeeld any part of Sicily, and denying the Castle to have been the Vandals. Whereupon he wrote thus to the Governours there▪ You deprive us of Lilybae∣um, a Castle of the Vandals, the Emperours slaves; wherein you deal both unjust∣ly and unwisely, without your Princes mind and privity, to put the Emperour into a war with him, whose favour he hath so laboured to purchase. How strange a pro∣ceeding is it, to suffer Gelimer to hold the Castle, and from the Emperour, Gelimers Master, to take away his slaves possessions? Take heed: consider how friendship co∣vers many grievances: but an enemy endures not the least injury, but looks back, and will not wink at his foe grown rich, whence he should not; But then he alleadges the wrongs done to his Ancestors; then he fights; wherein though he fail, yet he loses no possession; but prospering, makes the vanquished ask forgiveness. Do you there∣fore do us no farther ill, nor suffer any. Make not the Emperour an enemy to the Goths, whom you wish propitious. For know, that if you dispute this Castle, you will have a war, not only for Lilybaeum; but for all you hold without just title. The Goths imparted these Letters to Atalaricus his mother, and by her di∣rection made this answer. Excellent Belisarius! your exhortation may be perti∣nent to some other men, but not Goths. We are not so mad as to detain any thing from the Emperour: Sicily we challenge all to be ours; whereof that Castle is one of the head Lands. If Theodorick gave his sister, married to a Vandal King, the use of a Mart Town in Sicily, this can give no pretence of title. But noble General! do us right; and decide this controversie not as an enemy, by a battel, but as a friend at an Arbitrament. We refer it to the Emperour himself, to do as to him shall seem le∣gal and just. And we wish you to be advised, and to attend the determination of your Emperour. Belisarius herewith acquainted the Emperour, and staid till he should further direct him. In the mean time Pharas being weary of a winter-siege, and supposing the Moors unable to oppose him, he undertook the ascent unto Pappua, with his troops well armed. But the Moors defended it so, that those who went up the Hill being steep, and bad way, were easily ruined; and Pharas being obstinate lost
110 men, and with the residue was beaten back. But he set very diligent guards, that they might be put to yield for hunger, permitting none to scape away, nor any thing to be brought them from without. Where the sufferings of Gelimer and his kindred and others with him, delicately bred, no relation can equal. The Van∣dals being of all the known Nations the most effeminate, and these Moors the hardiest. They first since their possession of Africk have used their daily baths, and plentiful tables, of the best and pleasantest things the earth and sea afford; most of them wore gold and silk, and past their times in Theaters, horse-races, and other delights, and principally huntings: They had their Masques and Playes, Musiques and gallant sights; many had gardens furnished with waters and trees, used much feasting, and were as much addicted to venerie. But those Moors are choaked up in close cabbins, never removing for heat of summer, or any inconvenience; and ly∣ing upon the ground, or happily with a sheeps-skin under them: They never change apparel, but all the year wear a thick coarse mantle, and a Freese-coat: They have no bread nor wine, eating their wheat, barley, and Olyra (as other animals) without reducing it to flour. With these Moors Gelimers company having long sojourned, in this strange change of diet, and now necessaries failing too; they could hold out no longer, but thought it the most pleasant to die, and to serve not base. CHAP. V. WHich Pharas understanding, wrote thus to Gelimer.I also am a Barba∣rian, not used to discourses; but do write now what I cannot but learn from the course of things. Why have you cast your self, dear Gelimer! and your whole kindred into this depth of misery? Is it to avoid being a slave? is that it you stomack, as conceiving all miseries good cheap for liberty? And doe you not now serve, having your best hopes of safety upon the most wretched of all the Moors? Tis better for a man to be a slave among Romans begging, then to reign over the Moors of Pappua. And can it be so extreme a scorn to be a fellow-servant of Belisarius? Fiel noble Gelimer. We glory (being not born of noble parentage) to be the Emperours slaves. But you (they say) the Emperour in∣tends to receive into the Senate, and to the highest honour called the Patriciate, and to bestow on you a large fertile country, and much wealth; and Belisarius will undertake these conditions upon his oath. Can you bear what fortune brings generously? and when she mingles her distastes with some good, will you peevishly reject it? Are not good things from fortune as needfull for us as bad? But these things the most sensless will not think. It seems being plunged in dis∣asters, you lose your wits; For grief uses to amaze, and turn the mind upon bad counsels. But if you can manage your thoughts, without repining against for∣tune; you have it in your power, to chuse what's good for you, and to rid your self of these miseries. Gelimer lamented bitterly at the reading this Letter, and wrote back thus. I thank you much for your counsel; but to serve an Enemy wronging me, I hold intolerable; Of whom I would get right, if God were propitious. He hath set Belisarius upon me, I know not why; found a reasonless pretext of a war, and brought me to this, having never offended him in word nor deed. It is not impossible, but that something he wishes not may happen to him, though an Emperour, yet but a man. I can adde no more; my misfortune hath taken a∣way my invention. Farewell gentle Pharas; and at my request send me a Harp, a Loaf of bread, and a Sponge.Pharas doubted long how to construe the last clause of the Letter; till the beater told him, That Gelimer askt him a Loaf of bread, longing to see and taste a baked loaf, which he had not seen since his com∣ming to Pappua: That he needed a Sponge for his eye, swell'd with a rheume, for want of sweating and bathing: And being skilful upon the Harp, he desired one to sing to it a sad Ditty he had composed upon his present calamity. Pharas con∣doling
with him, and at the condition of mankind, sent him the things according to his Letter; but blocke him up faster then before. And three winter-moneths were spent in this siege; And Gelimer feared that ere long they would get up to him; He saw the children of his kin even swarm with lice; full of sorrow he was, weary of the thought of any thing but dying; yet he endured all beyond imagi∣nation, till he saw this sight. A Moorish woman had pounded some wheat, and thereof made a little Cake, which she threw in the hot ashes upon the hearth, as the Moors use to bake then bread: Two hungry boyes, (one the said womans son, and the other Gelimers sisters son) watcht at the hearth to catch the cake when it was baked: The Vandale boy caught it first, and hungerly thrust it hot into his mouth, with the ashes on; the other boy took him by the hair, and with beating forced him to put out the cake again. Gelimer, who observed all this accident, could not beare it, but relented, and presently wrote thus to Pharas.If ever man endured misery with a success quite contrary to his counsels, such am I, Excellent Pharas! I mean not to neglect your good advice; being no longer able to strive with fortune, nor struggle under the yoke of destiny, which I will follow as it pleases the same to lead me. Let me have assurance of Belisarius un∣dertaking the performance of that by the Emperour, which you lately intimated, and I will immediately render my self to you, and all my kindred, and Vandals here with me. Pharas acquainted Belisarius with this, and the former Letters; desiring to know his pleasure. Who much desiring to bring Gelimer alive to the Emperour, and overjoyed with the news, instantly sent to Pappua, Cyprian Commander of the Confederates, with some others, to give oath to Gelimer for the safety of him∣self and company, and that he should have an honourable rank with the Emperor, and want nothing. And they with Pharas went to the foot of the mountain, whither came Gelimer, received the assurances as he desired, and went with them to Carthage. Belisarius was in a suburb thereof, named Aclae: where Gelimer be∣ing presented, fell a laughing openly, that some imagined him to be distracted through the extremity of his misery: But his friends alleadged the man to be of sudden apprehension; He was royally born, and a King; and now from a con∣tinued power and wealth, fallen into bondage and fear; And after his enduring so much in Pappua, he must now be ranked amongst slaves; And thus having had experience of Fortunes smiles and frowns, he thought Humane condition to de∣serve only laughter. Thus they conceived of it. But Belisarius acquainted the Emperour how Gelimer was a Captive at Carthage, and prayed leave to come a∣long with him to Constantinople; keeping him in the mean time in an honorable restraint, and preparing his Fleet. Many experiments the world hath seen beyond hope, and many it will, while Fortune continues the same. Many things seeming to Reason impossible, have come to pass, and been wondred at: But I know not whether ever the like of these things hath happened. For a fourth Successor of Genserick (his Kingdom flourishing with wealth and men of war) to be ruined in so short a time, by 5000 new comers without a place to anchor in, (so many only were the Horse, who by their valour or fortune debated the whole war) is justly to be wondred at. But I return from whence I digressed; This being the con∣clusion of the Vandal wars. CHAP. VI. But some Commanders being envious of Belisarius (as is usual in great felicities) traduced him without any colour of truth, to the Emperour, of usurpation. The Emperour made no shew of it, either despising the accusation, or thinking it his best way; and sent thither Solomon, and gave Belisarius his choice, either to come to Constantinople with Gelimer and the Vandals, or to stay and send them. But he (who was not ignorant how the Commanders charged him with usurpa∣tion) urged to go to Constantinople to cleer the imputation, and to be revenged of
his accusers. He came to discover the plot against him thus. His accusers fearing the miscarriage of their letters to the Emperour, and so to spoil their design, wrote of the usurpation in two letters, by several messengers in several ships; one where∣of sailed away unespied; but the other upon some suspition was taken in Man∣dracium, and his letter intercepted, and the plot discovered to Belisarius, who thereupon made haste to get to the Emperours presence. But the Moors of By∣zacium and Numidia, breaking their truce, revolted, and suddenly made war up∣on the Romans, without any occasion at all: An action agreeable to their dispo∣sitions; for with Moors is no care of oaths, nor hostages, (though of their chil∣dren, brethren, or Rulers) neither any assured peace, but by their feare of the enemy. They made truce with Belisarius, and broke it, as I shall tell you. The Emperours Fleet being expected in Africk, the Moors afraid, resorted to their soothsaying women, it being not lawfull for their men to soothsay. These women after being possessed with a Spirit, as was usual for them, according to the manner of the ancient Oracles; foretold an Army from the waters, the ruine of the Van∣dals, and destruction of the Moors, when a Generall of Romans should come without a beard. Upon this answer the Moors, seeing the Fleet at sea, were afraid, and would not assist the Vandals; but sent to Belisarius, and made a peace, watch∣ing for the success. And the business of the Vandals being dispatcht, they sent to spie in the Roman Army if there were any Commander without a beard; And finding all well stored with beards, they thought (as they would have it) the Oracle to concern some after-ages, and not them. So they long'd to break the truce, but were afraid of Belisarius, despairing of overcoming the Romans, he being with them. And hearing him to be ready to go, and his Lanciers, Targetiers, and Vandal Captives to be already on ship-board, they took arms suddenly, and did the Africans much mischief: For the Souldiers being dispersed in small gar∣risons upon the borders, and unprepared, could not every where oppose, nor hin∣der the Barbarians inroads, which were often, and secret. And so men in con∣fusion were slain, women and children made slaves, goods every where carried a∣way, and all the Country full of flights. Belisarius was at sea when he heard of this, and could not come back now; but he appointed Solomon to govern Africk, and to take the most part of his Targetiers and Lanciers, and to chastise the Moors for this wrong to the Romans. Another Army the Emperor sent to Solomon, with Theodorus the Cappadocian, and Ildeger, who married the daughter of Antonina, Belisarius his wife. And the ancient African tributes being not to be found up∣on the ancient Roman records there, which Genserick had destroyed; Tryphon and Eustratius were sent with commission from the Emperour to make a taxe; Men whom the Africans found harsh and intolerable. But Belisarius being arrived at Constantinople with Gelimer and the Vandals, was thought worthy of those ancient honours given to Generals for the greatest victories. It is about 600 years since any had the same, unless it were Titus, Tra∣janus, and such Emperours, as led the Army in person, and got victory of some Barbarian nation. He led the spoils, and prisoners of war, in pomp through the City; which the Romans call a Triumph; but it was not in the ancient manner: He went afoot from his own house to the Circus, and there from his Pavillion to the Emperours throne. The spoils were things belonging to the service of the King, and Gold-chains, and the Chariots for his Queen, with many Jewels & Cups of gold, and all things useful at a Kings feast. Silver also weighing many thou∣sand talents and a huge mass of Royal furniture, (Genserick having sackt, as I said, the Palace at Rome) among which were some monuments of the Jewes, brought to Rome by Titus, after the destruction of Jerusalem. A Jew there espy∣ing the same, standing by one of the Emperours familiar friends, It is not so good (quoth he) to bring these monuments into the Palace of Constantinople; for they cannot continue but where Solomon first placed them: Hence it is that Genserick sackt the Palace in Rome, and now Belisarius that of the Vandals. The Emperour hearing this, sent them to the Christian Churches in Jerusalem. The Captives were, Gelimer, bearing a Purple robe, and all his kindred, and the tallest and beau∣tifullest of the Vandals. Gelimer seeing the Emperour sitting upon a high throne, and the people on both sides in the Circus, and himself in that calamity, used no
lamentation, but still repeated that in the Scripture, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Being at the Emperours throne, they took from him the Purple robe, and caused him to fall upon his face and adore the Emperour. The same did Belisarius, sup∣plicating for him to the Emperour: who, with his Empress Theodora, gave large means to Ildericks children, and the descendants of Valentinian; and to Gelimer they gave towns in Galatia of good value, where they suffered him to dwell. He would not change his Arrian Religion; so he was not admitted a Patrician. Belisarius not long after had a Triumph according to the ancient custom. Going to be installed Consul, he was born by Captives in a chariot, from whence he threw of the Vandal spoils among the people, silver-vessels, and gold-belts, and much more of the Vandals wealth. And then men saw things forgotten, thus re∣newed by time. CHAP. VII. BUt Solomon taking the charge of the Army in Africk, the Moors being up, and the State tottering, was uncertain what to do; Hearing how the Bar∣barians had killed the Garisons in Byzacium,An. Dom. 534. Just. 8. and forraged the Country; but the misfortune in Byzacium of Aigan the Hunn, and Rufinus the Thracian, troubled him most, and all Carthage, being men of great reputation in Belisarius his reti∣nue, and the whole Army. Aigan was one of Belisarius his life-guard; and the other, as the valiantest of the rest, was the Generals Standard-bearer, whom the Romans call Bandophorus: These commanding then Troops of horse, and seeing the Moors make booty, and slaves of the Africans, laid wait for them in a narrow passage, killed them, and rescued all their captives. Which the Barbarian Prin∣ces, Cutzînas, Esdilâsas, Juphrûthes, and Medisinissas hearing, set upon them a∣bout evening; whom the Romans, being few, and surprised in the narrow pas∣sage, in the midst of thousands, were not able to resist; which way soever they turned the enemy having their backs. Rusinus and Aigan ran to a rock, and thence kept off the enemy with their arrows; who durst not come up, but darted their Javelins. Their arrows being spent, the Moors came to handy blowes, and they awhile defended themselves with their swords; but numbers overpressing, cut Aigan in pieces, and carried away Rufinus. But Medisinissas, fearing he might escape, and trouble them again, took off his head, and shewed it at home to his wives; being for bigness, and abundance of hair, a goodly sight. It is not amiss to say something here, how, and from whence the Moors came originally to inhabit Africk. When the Hebrews came out of Egypt, and Mo∣ses was dead, and Joshua his successor, with more then humane valour, had brought the people into Palestine, possest the Country, overthrown the Nations, conquered their Cities, and was thought invincible: The Gergesites and Jebusites, and other Nations, mentioned in the Scripture (being populous, and inhabiting the sea-coast, from Sidon to Egypt, called Phoenicia, and under one King, as is confessed by all Writers of Antiquities) seeing this new Captain unresistible, they removed from their own Country into Egypt. Where finding no room, (Egypt being antiently populous) they went on into Africk: and building many Cities, possest it all, unto Hercules Pillars, and to this day continue there, using the Phoenician language. In Numidia they built a Castle, where now is the City of Tigisis. In which stand two Pillars, near the great Conduit, with these words engraven in the Phoenician language. We are they who fled from before Jo∣shua the chief, the son of Nun. Other people antiently inhabited Africk, and therefore were said to be born of the earth. Whereupon their King, Antoeus, (who wrastled with Hercules in Clypea) was called the son of the earth. After∣ward the Phaenicians came with Dido into Africk, to those of the same race, who received them and permitted them to build Carthage. But in time, the Cartha∣ginians grown great and populous, overcame these Moors in battel, who came
thus out of Palestine, and forced them to inhabit far from Carthage. And the Romans afterward being Masters of the world, planted the Moors upon the ut∣termost borders of the inhabited Countrys of Africk, and made the Carthagi∣nians, and other Africans Tributary. But lately the Moors got many victories of the Vandals, and held Mauritania, extending from Caliz to Caesarea, and the most part of Africk beside. But Solomon understanding the accident of Aigan, and Rufinus, prepared for a War, and wrote this Letter to the Princes of the Moors. Others heretofore have ventured foolishly, and perisht, not divining the event of their presump∣tion: But you, seeing a president of your neighbours the Vandals, upon what madness have you drawn your swords against the great Emperour? and do thus abandon your safeties, after solemn oaths, and your sons given for pledges? Is it to shew that you regard neither God, faith, kindred, nor safety? Being such, in what God can you trust for help, provoking a Roman Emperour? You have lost your sons; for what is it you mean to hazard? If you repent for what is past, write that you will give over; If not, expect a Roman war to come up∣on you, with your violated oaths, and the undoing your own sons. The Moors made this answer to Solomon.Belisarius perswaded us with large promises, to obey the Emperour. But now affording us no share of your pro∣sperity, you would have us friends and aids still, starving with hunger. It is you are the faith-breakers, not the Moors: Not they, who fly off from their as∣sociates upon wrongs, violate Truces, but they who demand Truce, and then oppress men: Not they, who fight for their own, make God their enemy; but who usurping other mens right, dare hazard a war. Concerning sons, you may be troubled, who must have but one wife: We who may have 50 wives at once, can never want a generation. Upon this, Solomon resolved to lead his Army against them; and having dispo∣sed of things in Carthage, marcht into Byzacium, and encamped at Mamme, near the aforesaid Moorish Princes. CHAP. VIII. AT the foot of high mountains there, upon a plain piece of ground, the Bar∣barians put their battel in order to fight, thus. They put their Camels in a round (as Cabaon did formerly) made their front 12. Camels deep, and placed their women and children in the middle, save some few, who made their entrench∣ments, and cabbins; drest their horses and Camels, and their own diet, and did many services in their fights. Themselves stood between the Camels legs, having shields, swords, and Javelins; and some horse upon the mountains. Half the Round next the mountain, Solomon omitted; fearing lest the enemy from thence, and from the Round might charge his men at once, and so get their backs, oppo∣sing the Army to the rest, and finding them dejected with the accident of Aigan and Rufinus, he made them this speech to encourage them. You that are fel∣low soldiers of Belisarius, are not to fear, nor make it an example, if 50000 Moors have vanquisht 500 Romans. Call to mind your own valour: Think how the Vandals vanquisht the Moors, and with what ease you are now Masters of the Vandals; and having beaten the better men, will you fear the weaker? The Moors are the poorest Nation to fight in the world, coming naked, or with short shields only, ill made, and unable to keep out a blow, and such men, as when they have thrown out their two Javelins, if they do no effect, run instant∣ly away: So that we may by warding their first fury, have the better with ease, your advantage in your arms, valour, strength of body, experience in battels, and confidence, for having been already victorious over every enemy, you are to consider. All which the Moors wanting trust only to their multitude, who be∣ing no soldiers, are the more easily beaten by a few well prepared. The soldi∣er hath his confidence in himself: but the coward is commonly distressed by
his croud of assistants. And these Camels deserve your contempt, which can∣not resist us, and being wounded by us (as they shall) will put these men in dis∣order. Their presumption upon their former good fortune, will fight for you. For boldness measured by ones power, may be an advantage: but exceeding that, it runs him into danger. Which considering, and not valuing the enemy, you shall silently, and with ease vanquish him. The Princes of the Moors also, seeing their men amazed at the Romans order, used this encouragement. You have found, fellow soldiers I that these Romans have but the bodies of men, having killed some of their best men, overwhelmed with our Javelins, and taken many of them prisoners. Then have we a great advantage in numbers: And our strife is about the greatest things, either to be Masters of Africk, or slaves of these braggarts. So that now hazarding for all, if we be not more then ordinarily valiant, we shall do no good. And let us not regard their arming, which combers their foot, then whom the Moors will be much the swifter. And their horse will be disordered by the sight of our Camels, and by their cries, louder then the noise of the battel. To think the enemy unresistible because of his victory of the Vandals, is an errour. The Generals vertue ever poises the battel: and Belisarius, the greatest cause of that victory, fortune hath removed: Besides, the Vandals we had weakened be∣fore, and made them an easie conquest to the Romans: And if we do valiantly now, we shall be Masters of these men also. This exhortation ended, the battel begun. At first the Romans were put into confusion by their horses skittishness at the sight and cry of the Camels, throw∣ing their riders, and running away, and by the Moors incursions, darting the Javelins they had: so that being frighted and in tumult, they neither defended, nor kept their ranks. Which Solomon seeing, leapt from his horse, and comman∣ded the rest to do the like, and to stand still, warding with their shields, against the enemies Javelins, and to keep their orders. Himself with 500 men gave on upon the Round; directing to kill the Camels. The Moors there ran away, and some 200 Camels were killed. Which being done, the Round was to be entred, and the Romans pierced into the midst of it, where the Moors wives were. The Barbarians all amazed, ran up the mountain, whom the Romans pursuing, killed some 10000 of them, flying in confusion. The Camels surviving were taken: and the Romans marcht to Carthage, to keep their Feast of Victory. The Barbarians grown angry, made an universal invasion, leaving none behind. First they overran Byzacium, sparing no age they could catch. Solomon was new∣ly come to Carthage, when this news was told him. So that he marcht against them with the whole Army; and at the mountain of Burgaon, upon which the Moors encamped, he sate down, expecting the Moors descent, that he might give them battel upon plain ground. But seeing them not come down, he put the Army in a fair order to fight. But they watched their occasions in the mountain, being heartily afraid of the Romans, and having no mind to fight in a champian. Burgaon is most of it very ragged; and to the East inaccessible; but to the West passable; and rising gently; and between two rocks is a deep woody Valley. The top of the mountain, where they expected no enemy, they left without men; and they quitted the foot of it, which was easie of access; and encamped in the mid∣dle, to have the shooting of the enemies heads from above. And they had hor∣ses, either to run away with, or to chase, if they got the day: Solomon seeing the Moors would not yet come to the even ground, and the Roman Army weary in that desert place, made haste to fight. But finding the soldier dismayed atheir enemies multitude, much greater then in the former battel; he spake thus to them. The enemies fear of you needs no accuser nor witness; it convinces it self. So many thousands not daring to encounter you upon even ground; and ha∣ving no confidence in themselves, but making this fastness their refuge: So that exhortations in words are needless to you, whom the things themselves, and your enemies weakness animates: Only let me put you in mind, that by the prosperous conclusion of this day, you will instantly enjoy all the wealth of Africk; the Vandals being overcome, and the Moors reduced, and no enemy
left to think of. And that the enemies may not shoot down upon our heads, nor we suffer harm from the nature of the place, shall be my care. Solomon having thus said, commanded Theodorus the Scout-Master, to draw out 1000 foot, with their Ensignes, about the evening, and closely to get up at the East side of Burgaon, where the mountain is most difficult, and being come to the top, to pass the night without noise; and with Sun-rising to shew them∣selves to the enemy, displaying their Ensignes, and to shoot at them. He did accordingly, and at mid-night, passing up a ragged way near the rock, was nei∣ther discerned by Moors nor Romans; being said to be sent to ly abroad, to pre∣vent mischief to the Camp. Before break of day Solomon went to the skirt of the hill, toward the enemy; and the soldiers, when the day grew bright, seeing the top of the mountain, full of men displaying Roman Ensignes, were amazed. When they on the top, began the fight, the Romans perceived them to be their own; and the Barbarians finding themselves shot on both sides, and without means to drive off the enemy, they despaired and ran away. But daring to fly neither to the top nor bottom of the hill, being both possessed by the enemy; they ran amain to the woody Valley, some on horse-back, some afoot. And being a multitude, and in fear, and tumult, they killed one another, and falling in to the Valley very deep, the foremost were slain, and not discerned by them that followed. But when the Valley was full of horses and dead bodies, the residue were saved, passing over the bodies from Burgaon to the other rock. The survi∣vers affirmed 50 thousand Moors to have been slain in this overthrow. The Ro∣mans lost not a man, nor so much as received a wound from the enemy, nor other accident, but all enjoyed the victory untoucht. The Barbarians Princes escaped all, save Isdilasas, who upon promise of life, yielded himself prisoner. Their boo∣ty of women and children was so great, that they sold a Moorish boy for the price of a sheep. The Moors remaining, then remembred the womens Prophe∣sie, That their Nation should perish by a man without a beard. CHAP. IX. THe Roman Army with their booty and Jsdilasas returned to Carthage. But the Barbarians surviving, would not continue in Byzacium, being few, and fearing to be opprest by the neighbouring Africans, but fled to to Jabdas,An. Dom. 535. Just. 9. Prince of the Moors of Aurasium in Numidia. In Byzacium such of them only re∣mained, as were subject to Antalas, who kept his faith to the Romans, and had no harm done to his Sujects. In the mean time the said Jabdas forraged Numidia with 3000 men, and made slaves of many Africans. Althias then had the com∣mand of a Castle thereabout, who having a mind to rescue some of those captives, drew out 70 Hunns of his Garison; but not conceiving it possible with such a number to stand the multitude of the Moors, he would have possest some nar∣row passage, where the enemy marching, he might have seized upon the captives. But finding all open champian about the Towns there, he resolved to possess a great well standing in Tigisis, an unwalled City, but in a great fastness; thinking that the enemy being thirsty, would certainly come thither, no other water be∣ing near. The great odds in numbers caused his conceit herein to savour of mad∣ness. The Moors having toiled in the summer heats, and being extream thirsty, ran to the well, imagining no opposition: But finding the place possest by the ene∣my, they stood amazed, being faint, and longing for water. Jabdas therefore came to a parly with Althias, and offered the third part of his booty, that his Moors might drink, which he refused, but offered to fight a single combat with him. Which Jabdas accepted; and it was agreed, that if he vanquisht Althias, the Moors should drink. Who were glad, and confident, seeing Althias a lean man, not tall; whereas Jabdas was the goodliest and valiantest of all the Moors. They were on horseback; and Jabdas threw first his Javelin, which Althias caught fly∣ing at him in his right hand (which amazed his enemy) and with his left hand
bent his bow (being both-handed) and killed Jabdas horse. The Moors brought their Prince another horse, upon which he leaped up, and ran away; the Moors following in disorder. Althias recovered the captives and booty, and got a great name in Africk for this act. But Solomon, after a short stay in Carthage, led the Army against Jabdas to mount Aurasium, for sacking the Towns of Numidia, while the Roman Army was busie in Byzacium. The other Moorish Princes also incensed Solomon against him; as Massonas, being enemy to Jabdas, who killed Mephanias his father trea∣cherously, though he had married his daughter: And Orthaeus, because he had plotted with Mastinas, Prince of the Barbarians in Mauritania, to expell him, and the Moors his subjects, from their antient habitation. So the Army under Solomon, and their Moorish aides, encamped by the river of Amigas, which runs by Aurasium. Jabdas thought the champian disadvantageous for him to fight in; so he made Aurasium as difficult as he could in the fit places for an as∣sault. This mountain is 13 days journey from Carthage, and the greatest we know; the circuit being three days journey. It is difficult to get up, but being up, and on even ground, are fields, fountains, rivers, and many admirable gardens; the wheat there, and all that grows, is twice as big as in any other part of Africk. Some neglected Castles also there are, the Inhabitants finding no use of them: who never were put into any fear since the Moors took Aurasium from the Van∣dals. Nay they demolished Tamugadis, a populous City to the Eastward of the mountain, upon the very entrance of the plain, that enemies might not lodg there, and for the Cities sake approach the mountain. The Country to the west of Aurasium being large and good, the Moors had likewise; beyond whom are other Moors subject to Ortaeus, who aided Solomon. I have heard that man say, that beyond his Country is a Wilderness, and beyond that, men not black, like Moors, but with white bodies, and yellow hair. Solomon distributed monies amongst his Auxiliaries, encouraged them, and with his whole Army ascended mount Aurasium, in order of battel, thinking that day to try his fortune against the enemy; so that the souldier had brought but little fodder for their horses. They went six miles and a quarter in very bad way, and lay all that night in the fields. And the seaventh day (going every day as much) they came to an old Castle by a river, called by the Latines, Mons-scuti. Here they had been told the enemy was encamped; but none encountring, them∣selves encamped there, preparing to fight: they spent there three days. But see∣ing the enemy absolutely gone, and necessaries failing, Solomon and the whole Army doubted some plot of their Auxiliary Moors. Who knowing perfectly the ways of Aurasium, and in likelyhood the enemies designes, by riding to them secretly, and often being sent by the Romans to discover, yet they never spake a true word. So they thought it best to be gone before some blow, and to return with greater provisions, and better furnished in other things. Now they were a∣fraid, and suspected treason from their Auxiliaries, whom they knew naturally false, and especially when they aid the Romans, or any against the Moors. Upon all these considerations, and the famine pinching, they went down immediately, and made an entrenchment in the champian. But the winter being come, Solomon marcht to Carthage, where he prepared for another journey in the beginning of the spring to Aurasium, without any auxiliary Moors, if it might be; and he appointed forces and a fleet against the Moors in Sardinia; being a rich Island, and as big as two third parts of Sicily; the circumference of it is twenty days journey; and is in the mid-way between Rome and Carthage, and much vexed with Moors, who were confined and planted there with their wives and children, by the Vandals. There possest the mountains near Carnalis, and at first committed petty stealths upon the natives; but being grown to a number of 3000 men, they made open inroads, and ransackt all the places near them, being by the natives called Barbaracini. Against these Moors Solomon prepared a fleet th winter.
CHAP. X. BUt at the same time, Belisarius being sent into Italy by the Emperour, against Theodatus and the Goths, landed first in Sicily, and took the Island; the man∣ner whereof I refer to my ensuing History of the affairs of Italy. When I have written the occurrences of Africk, I will come to the Relation of Italy and the Goths. This winter Belisarius spent in Syracuse, and Solomon in Carthage. And all this year the Sun had a fearfull and prodigious light, without beams, like that of the Moon, and for the most part it was as eclipsed, without the clear and usual lustre. And during the same, famine, war, and all kind of mortality did infest mankind. It was in the tenth year of Justinians reign. In the beginning of the spring, the Christians celebrating their Easter,An. Dom. 536. Just. 10. the soldiers mutinyed in Africk upon this occasion. The Roman soldiers having vanquisht the Vandals, married their wives and daughters. Who drew their husbands to challenge the possessions formerly theirs, as being unjust (having enjoyed the same by the Vandals) to be deprived of them now, being married to their Conquerors. The soldiers having this put into their heads, thought they ought not to yield those possessions to Solomon, who intended to annex the same to the Treasury, and the Emperours house; not refusing the slaves and moveables for spoils to the soldier; but the Lands he alleadged to belong to the Emperour, and State, which fed them, and gave them the quality of soldiers, not to conquer for them∣selves the Lands taken by Barbarians from the Empire; but to recover them to the Treasury, from whence they and the other Armies had their entertainments. Another party also there was which troubled Africk as much, or more. In the Army were some thousand Arrian soldiers, most Herulians. These were provoked by the Vandal Priests, being not allowed their accustomed divine service, but bar∣red from all, both Sacraments and Churches: For Justinian permitted not any Christian not Orthodoxal, to have the benefit of Baptism, or any other Sacra∣ment: Especially they were troubled, the Feast of Easter approaching, wherein they might not baptize their children in the holy Laver, nor do what belong'd to the Feast. And Fortune heaped to this, another mischief upon the Romans, by adding a supply to these Mutiners. The Emperour had made five horse troops of the Vandals, brought to Constantinople by Belisarius, to lye perpetually in Ci∣ties of the East, under the title of Vandalici. The most of these went by sea into the East, and made up the appointed troops, till this day serving against the Per∣sians. But 400 of them from Lesbos, forcing the Mariners, came upon the coast of Peloponesus, and from thence sailed into Africk, landing in a desert coast; where leaving the ships, they went into Mauritania to mount Aurasium. This encouraged and more combined the mutinying soldiers, who had many conferen∣ces and oaths about it. The Feast being at hand, the discontented Arrians, who were interdicted the Church, eagerly urged it. And the ring-leaders of them had resolved to kill Solomon, the first day of the Feast, called the great day. The plot was undi∣scerned by any: For though many were engaged in it, yet none misliked, nor re∣vealed it; many of Solomons Lanciers, and Targetiers, and most of his houshold-servants coveting those possessions, were in the mutiny. At the day, Solomon sate in the Church, apprehending no mischief; The men appointed to kill him, made signes to one another, and had their hands on their swords; but did no∣thing: either reverencing the Church-service, or abashed at the state of their General, or by something divine restrained: But divine service being ended, and every man come home, the soldiers blamed each other for fainting, and appoin∣ted the plot the next day: When they likewise came from Church without doing any thing; and meeting in the market-place, railed upon one another, each man terming his fellow false, and faint-hearted, and reproaching his awe of Solomon. And their plot being divulged, they thought it unsafe to stay in Carthage. So the most of them went out, and pillaged the Villages, and used the Africans as
enemies. The rest remained in the City unsuspected, and seeming ignorant of the conspiracy. Solomon hearing what the soldiers did in the Country, and exhorting them in the City to good affection to the Emperour, at first they seemed to entertain his discourse. But hearing how those abroad did what they listed in the Countrys, securely; the fift day of their mutiny, they impudently railed upon Solomon, and the other Commanders in the Circus. Solomon seat Theodorus the Cappado∣cian to appease them, a man that loved him not, and was suspected to practise a∣gainst him. Whereupon the mutiners with cries chose him their General, and with him went to the Palace, where they killed another Theodorus the Scout-Ma∣ster, a worthy man, and a good soldier. Being blouded, they killed all they met, whether Africans or Romans, if Solomons friends, or with mony about them. Then they pillaged the houses, where no soldiers defended, taking away all of any value, till the night, and drink after their toil quieted them. Solomon fled to the great Church of the Palace; whither about the evening came Mar∣tinus; and when the mutiners were asleep, they went to the Lodging of Theodo∣rus the Cappadocian, who constrained them to sup, though they bad little mind to it, and brought them to a ship in the harbour, provided for them by Valerianus. Procopius, the writer of this History, was in company, and five of Solomons re∣tinue. After 37 miles sailing, they came to Messua, a road for Carthage shipping, and a safe place. From hence Solomon sent Martinus to Valerianus, and the o∣ther ommanders in Numidia, to attempt to reduce such mutiners as any of them knew, by mony, and all means. And he wrote to Theodorus to take care of Car∣thage, and to do what he could. Himself with Procopius went to Belisarius to Syracuse, relating the accident, and praying him to repair to Carthage, and vindi∣cate the Emperour from this affront of his own soldiers. CHAP. XI. IN the mean time the mutiners having sackt Carthage, made their rendezvouz in the Plains of Bule, and chose Stotzas, one of Martinus his life-guard, their General; a man couragious and active, hoping to get Africk thus, by expelling the Emperours commanders. He arming his forces, being 8000. led them to Car∣thage, expecting instantly to take the City. He sent for the Vandals who escaped from Lesbos, and others who wnt not with Belisarius, being either concealed, or neglected by the Officers. In all they were 1000 men, who went readily to Stot∣zas Camp, and a multitude of slaves came also, Stotzas being near, sent to Car∣thage to yield without further hurt. But Theodorus and the rest professed to guard the City for the Emperour, and required them to forbear force; sending to them Josephius, who had been of the Emperours guard, and now was one of Be∣lisarius retinue, and lately sent to Carthage about business: whom Stotzas put to death for his message, and fell to the siege. And the Citizens afraid, were think∣ing to yield upon composition. When Belisarius with 100 of his Lanciers and Targetiers, and Solomon with one ship arrived at Carthage toward the evening: the besiegers expecting the rendring the City on the next day, and with that hope lying still that night; and when it was day, hearing of Belisarius arrival, shame∣fully rose, and ran away. Belisarius got together 2000 of the Army, and with fair words and mony, exhorting thm to a good affection to the Emperour, he pursued the flyers, and overtook them at Membresa, about 43 miles from Carthage. Here they both encamped, and prepared to fight; Belisarius by the river of Ba∣gradas; the other upon a high ragged ground: Neither would enter the City, being unwalled. The next day they drew out to fight, the mutiners trusting in their numbers, whom Belisarius his men despised, for foolish fellows, undisciplined. And to imprint this the more firmly, Belisarius spake thus unto them. Fel∣low soldiers! This happens to the Emperour against our hopes and wishes, to come to a battel with our kinsmen and companions, whom we cannot conquer
without grief. But our comfort is, that we began not; we only defend our selves. He who by his treasons renounces his kindred, is not killed by his friends, but in the quality of an enemy is punished for his injury done them. These men have proclaimed themselves enemies, Barbarians, any thing, by their spoy∣ling Africk, and killing both natives, and many Roman soldiers, for no offence, but their good affection to the State. For this we come to chastise them, now enemies, though some time friends. No men are friends or enemies by nature; but in their actions are either united in a joint assistance by a similitude of man∣ners and opinions, or disunited by a dissimilitude. And as they are unjust men and enemies, we are to fight with them: So are they to be despised, being a mul∣titude not assembled by Law, but upon wrong: And such never fight valiantly: valour not vouchsafing to keep company with outlaws, and men unjust: neither will they keep their orders, nor obey the directions of their new General, who wanting power to be confident, must necessarily be contemned by them For rebellion is naturally hated, never honoured; and being timerous it self, cannot govern the subject, and keep him in awe. So that the enemy wanting both va∣lour and government, their defeat will be easie; and you must march against them with contempt, not estimating the power of a battel by numbers, but by order and valour. Stotzas also used this exhortation. You have with me, shaken off the Roman servitude; and grudg not now to die for the liberty gotten by your valour. It is not so grievous to grow old and die in slavery, as after freedom to return to it again; the interim of ease making the calamity taste more sowre. You may consider therefore, how in the overthrow of the Vandals, you had your part in the toil, and others now possess the spoils; and how being soldiers, you are en∣gaged to a life of hazarding, either for the Emperour, if you serve him again, or for your selves, if you keep your liberty. And the better of these two you may now chuse, by resolving in this action to fight, without fainting. Consider also that you have taken arms, and if you now be subdued, you will not find the Romans gentle masters, but shall suffer extremities, with the addition of be∣ing justly ruined: So you see our death will be honorable if we die, and if we be victorious, our life will be free and happie; but bitter, if we be beaten, when our only hope must be in our enemies mercy. And in the battel the enemy hath much the disadvantage in numbers, and hath no great mind to charge us, wish∣ing, it seems, their part in our liberty. Thus spake Stotzas, and the Armies came to the encounter. But a strong wind blew in the mutiners faces, who fearing the disadvantage of fighing, where the wind would carry the enemies arrows violently on them, and abate the force of theirs; they wheeled about, thinking the enemy, not to have their backs o∣pen, would turn about too; and so have the wind in their faces. But Belisarius seeing them open their ranks, and straggle disorderly, bad begin the fight, which Stotzas men not looking for, fell into confusion, and ran away into Nu∣midia, where they rallied again. Belisarius followed no execution, thinking it e∣nough with so small an Army to beat the enemy, and send him going. To the soldiers lie gave the enemies camp to pillage, who found not a man in it, but much wealth, and many Vandal women, for whose sake this war was. Then, Belisarius marcht back to Carthage, where hearing that his Army in Sicily muti∣nied too, and would undoe all, if himself in person did not prevent; he took or∣der for Africk, and committing Carthage to Ildiger and Theodorus, he went in∣to Sicily. The Commanders in Numidia, hearing of Stotzas being there, and gathering head, prepared to fight with him. Marcellus and Cyrillus commanded the Con∣federates, Barbatus the horse, and Terentius and Sarapis the foot; Marcellus commanded in chief, being Governor of Numidia. Who hearing of Stotzas being, with a few at Gazophyli, a Towne two dayes journey from Constantina; marcht with speed to prevent the coming of the other mutiners. The Armies being near, and the fight ready to begin, Stotzas came alone into the midst, and spake thus to the enemy. Fellow soldiers! It is unjust in you to take arms a∣gainst
your kinsmen and companions, who have undertaken this war with the Emperour, being grieved to see your miseries and wrongs. Do you not remem∣ber how long your pay hath been due, and still is detained from you? how the spoyls of the enemy, your prizes appointed by the law of arms, are taken from you? The fruits of your victory others must riot upon, while you follow as their servants If I offend you, use your anger against this body presently; for I hate to fly to others for refuge. If you have no exception to me, come and use your arms for your selves. The soldiers embraced this motion of Stotzas, and affectionately saluted him; and their Commanders seeing it, retired into a Church in Gazophyli. Stotzas joyned the Armies against them, gave them his faith for their coming out, and then killed them all. CHAP. XII. THe Emperour hearing these things, sent Germanus his brothers son, a Patri∣cian, accompanied with Symmachus, as Praefect of the Camp, to manage the expence of the Army,An. Dom. 537. Just. 11. and Domnicus, to be Commanders of the foot, upon the decease of John his predecessor. Germanus being landed at Carthage, mustered the forces, and by the Check Roll of the soldiers names, he found a third part of them to be in Carthage and other Cities, and the rest joyned with the Rebels. Wherefore he would begin no fight, but took care of the Army; and finding the soldiers in Carthage to be kinsmen and comrades of the enemies; he courted them: and said the Emperour had sent him expresly into Africk to vindicate the soldiers, and to chastise such as had wrong'd them. Which the mutiners hearing, came in by few at a time; whom Germanus received courteously, gave them his faith, and held them in good account, paying them their full dues for the time they had been in rebellion. The report whereof drew them in troops from the enemy. And then Germanus hoping to match the Rebels in numbers, prepared for a battel. Stotzas also perceiving the mischief, and fearing more defection of his men, made haste to try his fortune. He had some hope too, if he could get near the soldiers in Carthage, to get them to run away to him. And with this hope he chiefly confirmed his Army, and speedily marcht to Carthage, and encamped near the sea, about four miles from the City. Germanus armed and put in order his soldiers, and having heard what hopes Stotzas had, he spake thus. Fellow soldiers! you have no just complaint against the Emperours usage of you: Who in Constantinople took you to him newly come out of the Country with a knap-sack, and one poor coat; and hath now made you so great, that the Roman State is committed to you. But how he hath been scorned by you, and suffered the greatest extremities, you cannot be ignorant. Whereof the remembrance indeed he would have you retain, but the prosecution he clearly remits, expecting this only satisfaction from you, to be ashamed of what you have done, and thereupon to learn a new lesson of fidelity, and to repair your former ingratitude. The timely repentance of er∣ring men obtains their pardon; and a seasonable service done, may take the name of ungratefull men from you. Nay if at this time you appear well af∣fected to the Emperour, know this, that no memory will remain of what is past, The actions of men have their names from the conclusion: and errors done, no ages can undoe; but being repaired by better deeds, they get a hand∣some silence, and commonly are forgotten. If now you neglect your duties a∣gainst these rogues; your many battels hereafter for the Romans, and victories of our enemies, will not by the Emperour be thought a recompence. The bravest apology is, to get honour in the very things men have erred in. Thus you are to think concerning the Emperour. And I, who never wrong'd you, but to my power have shewed my affection to you, entreat this only of you in this danger,
That no man will march against the enemy contrary to his mind; but if he de∣sire to joyn with their Army, to pass over to them immediately; doing us this only favour, not to abuse us secretly, but in an open way: Which is the reason I move this here between the Armies, and not in Carthage; not to hinder any that will run away; but to leave it in every mans power, to shew his affection to the State. Every man upon this speech, bustled to shew himself to his General, and to swear the good affection he had to the Emperour. And some days they were thus encamped against each other. At length the mutiners seeing none come to them, whom Stotzas told them of, being afraid, as failing in their hope, they disbanded, and went into Numidia, where were their wives and booty. Ger∣manus shortly after, with his Army well prepared, and with store of waggons for it, came thither also; and overtaking the enemy at a Town called Scalae Vete∣res, he prepared to fight, setting the waggons in front, and the foot by them (commanded by Domnicus) to secureing their backs. The best horsemen, and such as came from Constantinople, himself had at the left hand of the foot. The rest he set at the right wing in three Troops, commanded by Ildiger, and Theodorus the Cappadocian; and the biggest by John the brother of Pappus: the fourth by himself. The Mutiners stood opposite to them, not in much order, but scatter'd like Barbarians. Not far behind came many thousand Moors, led by Jabdas and Orthaeas, not all true to Stotzas; many having sent to Germanus, and pro∣mised in the fight to turn against the enemy. Germanus could not much trust them, being a people so false to all men. And they joyned not with the muti∣ners, but kept aloof behind, waiting the event, and with the conquerours to pur∣sue the vanquished. Stotzas approaching the enemy, and seeing the Generals Ensigne, call'd to his men, and marcht towards him. But the Herulian mutiners stopt him, saying, that the powers of Germanus they knew not; but they knew that the enemy in the right wing would not stand. So that charging them, and they running away, they are likely to put the enemies whole Army in disorder; whereas if Germanus beat them, all will be lost. Stotzas approving the advice, left the rest to fight with Germanus, and himself with his best men, gave on upon John, and his troops, who not abiding them, ran away in confusion. The muti∣ners took their Ensignes, and pursued them. Some turn'd upon the foot, who began to disband; When Germanus drawing his sword, and calling upon his troop to do the like, with much adoe he routed the enemy on his side; and gal∣lopt up to Stotzas, with the troops of Ildiger and Theodorus. And all was so mingled, that the mutiners chasing some of their enemies, fell among others, and were slain. The confusion grew great, and Germanus his troops coming on neer∣er behind them, they were afraid, and thought no more of fighting. Both sides using the same language, and arms, and differing not in shape, habit, nor any thing, could not be distinguished; till Germanus directed the Emperours Army to ask any they took, what he was; if he said he was a soldier of Germanus, to bid him give the watch-word, which if he could not, to kill him. Germanus had his horse killed in the fight, and himself being down and in danger, his life-guard rescued and remounted him. Stotzas in the tumult with some few escaped; and Germanus marcht against the enemies camp; where the mutiners who had the guard of the Trenches, opposed him; and there was a stiff fight, the mutiners being very near beating them back. But some sent by Germanus to attempt the camp in another place, got into the entrenchment with ease, which the mutiners seeing, ran away; and Germanus with the Army, entred the camp. The soldiers fell to pillage, neither thinking of the enemy, nor hearkning to their Generals directions; Who fearing the enemy might rally, and charge them, stood in the camp gate, crying and complaining for discipline to men that heard him not. The Moors followed the execution upon the mutiners, and pillaged the camp with the Army. Stotzas at first trusting to the Moors, rode up to them, to renew the fight. But finding what they were doing, he made a shift to escape with 100 men. Many made head with him, and tryed to fight again, but being repulsed, they all submitted to Germanus; only Stotzas, with a few Vandals, retired into Mauritania, and there marrying a daughter of one of their Princes, remained. And so ended this mutiny.
CHAP. XIII. BUt Maximinus, a Lancier of Theodorus the Cappadorian, had gotten many of those mutiners with a design to usurp, and drew stil more, revealing his intent, among others, to one Asclepiades, a Palestinian, a great favorite of Theodorus; who discovered the plot to Theodorus, and he to Germanus. Germanus would not stirr new business in a state unsetled, but thought to gain the man by fair usage, rather then to punish him. The life-guard of any great Roman officer use at their admit∣tance, to swear fidelity to him and the Emperour: He sent therefore for Maximi∣nus, and extolling his valour, took him for one of his own guard, and he, glad of the honour, and means hereby to facilitate his designe, took the Oath, but neglected the same, and persisted more then ever in his Treason. The City keep∣ing a publick festival, many of Maximinus mutiners came at dinner time to the Palace, as Germanus was feasting his friends, with Maximinus behind him. One whispered Germanus, that many soldiers stood tumultuously at the Court gate, complaining of their pay for a long time unsatisfied. Germanus commanded some of the trustiest of his life-guard to make sure of Maximinus, without let∣ting him perceive any thing. Those mutiners with threatnings and tumult, ran to the Circus; and such other conspirators as knew their intent, ran thither by one and one. If they had been all assembled, it had been hard to suppress them: But most of them being yet behind, Germanus sent instantly such as affected the Emperour and himself, and they came to a fight with the mutiners, who expected not such a thing from the soldiers; but missing Maximinus to conduct them, and wan∣ting the numbers they lookt for, gave it over, and disorderly ran away; many of them were killed, and many taken, and brought to Germanus. Such as came not to the Circus, shewed as if they had not been in the conspiracy; and Germanus would not make any search after them. He examined if Maximinus had, since his Oath, proceeded in his Treason; and being convicted to have been more for∣ward in it since his being of the life-guard, he caused him to be crucified under the walls of Carthage: And so absolutely dispersed the mutiny. CHAP. XIV. BUt the Emperour called home Germanus, with Domnicus, and Symmachus, and again made Solomon Governor of Africk, being now in the thirteenth year of his reigne;An Dm. 539 Just. 13. giving him another Army, and Commanders in it, Rufinus, and Leontius the son of Zannas, the son of Pharesmanes and John the son of Sisinio∣lus; Martinus and Valerianus being formerly sent for to Constantinople. Solomon being come to Carthage, and free from the mutiny, governed Africk moderately, and kept it safe, disciplining the Army, and sending the suspicious men to Constan∣tinople, and to Belisarius, supplying their rooms with new, and banishing the re∣mains of the Vandals, and all their women. He compassed the Cities with walls, and observing the Laws exactly, preserved the State; that Africk in his Govern∣ment was rich and happie. Things being setled, he made war upon Jabdas, and the Moors of Aurasium: and sent out before with forces, Gontharis, one of his life-guard, a good soldier; who encamped by Bagais, a desert Town upon the River of Abigas; and there he was overthrown in a fight by the enemy, and retiring to his camp, was straitly besieged. Solomon afterward encamped with the whole Army, seven miles and a half from Gontharis entrenchment; and hearing how he had sped, he sent him part of his Army, and bad him be of good courage and fight again. The River Abigas comes from Aurasium, and being in the plain below, waters the land as the Inhabitants will, by drawing the stream to their uses. For it enters through
several breaches under ground into the plain, where it rises again, gathering a stream: And the Inhabitants, by damming up the breaches, or opening them, make what use they please of the waters. The Moors then opened the breaches, and let in all the River about the Romans camp, which made a marish not to be past for deepness. The Romans were distracted at it; but Solomon bearing there∣of, marcht thither; whom the Barbarians fearing, retired, and in Baboss, at the foot of the mountain encamped. Solomon came thither too, and in fight beat them, and made them run away. The Moors thought it disadvantageous to have fights upon equal terms, thus being not able to stand them; but trusting to the fastnesses of Aurasium, and hoping that the Romans would be weary of the toil, as formerly, and be gone, many of them went away into Mauritani and to the Barbarians to the southward of mount Aurasium. But Jabdas with 20000 Moors, went to Zerbule, a Castle built by him in Aurasium, and there lay still. Solomon, not to spend time in besieging; and hearing how the Country of Ta∣mugadas had store of ripe wheat, he conducted his Army thither, took the spoil, and burnt the rest, and then returned to Zerbule. In the mean time Jabdas lea∣ving a sufficient guard for the Castle was gone up to the top of Aurasium, fea∣ring to be blockt up in the Castle, and reduced to wants. And at Tumaz, a place rising with cliffs round about, and fenced with broken rocks, he rested. The Ro∣mans three days assaulted Zerbule, and the walls being low, shot many Moors, and chanced to kill all their Commanders. The third day at night, the Romans, hearing nothing of those Commanders death, consulted to rise; Solomon thinking it best to go against Jabdas and the main body of the Moors, who being subdued, Zorbule would quickly yield. But the Barbarians (their Leaders being slain) would hold no longer, but silently ran away, and abandoned the Castle, undi∣scovered by the enemy. The Romans at day break were trusting baggage; but wondred to see no enemy upon the wall. And doubting what it should mean, and compassing the Castle, they find the gate open, where the Moors ran way. They entred and took the booty, but would not pursue the enemy, being men ap∣parelled lightly and skilfull in all the passages. Having sackt the Castle, and left a Garison in it, they went on, all afoot. And at Tumaz, where the enemy was, they encamped in a fastness, having water and other necessaries very scarcely. A long time was spent, and the Moors sallied not, so that being more besieged then the enemy, they fretted, chiefly for the want of water,Here the La∣tine Transla∣tion. which Solomon put a guard upon, giving out but a cup full to a man every day. But seeing them im∣patient, and unable to endure longer this hard diet, he resolved to stay no longer, but to draw the men to fight near this Castle, and thus exhorted his men. CHAP. XV. HAving by Gods favour beaten the Moors out of Zerbule, a thing seeming difficult, and uncredible to such as have not seen our former actions; we must not now neglect the gift of God, but with our accustomed valour, boldly undergoe this hazard, and from our former good fortune presage a future vi∣ctory. And the advantages of all actions standing in the due use of occasions; if any man now slothfully neglect the offer of fortune, let him not accuse her, but himself, being abandoned through his own default. You see the Moors weakness, and this Castle wherein they shelter themselves, destitute of provisi∣ons. And you must with a patient siege expect the enemies surrender, or by neglecting that, neglect with danger, a victory ready for us. How much bet∣ter, and less dangerous is it to try your fortune against men, not likely to fight with you, being wasted with famine? Confider these things seriously and obey directions. Solomon spake thus, and then studying how, and where to assault (all being round about a rock) fortune shewed him his way. One Geson, a Lieutenant of
foot, (whom the Romans call Optio,) either in sport, or earnest, or by divine impulsion mounted alone, and presently other souldiers admiring his courage followed him. Three Moors ran to oppose him, and the place being narrow, came single. The first by chance falling, the Roman used his advantage, and killed him. The souldier who followed him seeing it, ran up with a shout; and the whole Army neither expecting leader, nor sound of trumpet, nor observing order, but crying and encouraging one another, gave on: where Rufinus, and Leontius, the son of Zanas, did so bravely upon the enemy, that terrified at it, and seeing their guards cut in pieces, they all ran away, and the most overtaken in narrow passages were slain. Jabdas, though woudned by a dart in his thigh, escaped and fled into Mauri∣tania. The Romans pillaged the enemies camp, and Solomon caused them to stay in Aurasium, and repair the Castle, and left a garrison to hinder the Moors re∣course thither in their rebellions. In Aurasium is an ancient Tower, standing up∣on a rock called Geminians Rock, safe, and difficult of accesse. Here Jabdas had lately put his wealth, with his women; and never thinking that an enemy could get thither, or force the Tower, he left one old Moore onely to take charge of his treasure. But the Romans through all the difficulties got thither, and one of the souldiers as in sport, began to climb up to the Tower; whom the old man and the women laught at for a mad man. But he scrambled up with his hands and feet, and being got up drew his sword, and cut off the old mans head. The rest of the souldiers boldly and with alacrity helpt one another up, took the women and a great treasure, with which Solomon re-edified the walls of many cities in Africk. The Moors being beaten out of Numidia, fled into Zebe, a Country of Mauritania beyond mount Aurasium: whose metropolis is Sitiphis, tributary to the Empire. Caesarea is head of the other Mauritania, tributary likewise, except the City it self, exempted by Belisarius for a landing place for Romans; there being no good passage to it by land. So in Zebe the Moors sate down, whereby the Affricans continued in obedience, and a setled peace, without thought of hostility, and were very happy under Solomon, a prudent and moderate Governour. CHAP. XVI. IN the fourth year after, all this prosperity changed into miseries. It was Justinians fourteenth year of his reign,An. Dom. 540. Just. 14. when Cyrus and Sergius the sons of Baccus, Solomons brother, were sent to govern in Africk; the elder Pentapolis, and the younger Tripolis. To these the Leucathian Moors came with an Army as farre as Leptis Magna, giving out it was to give them presents, and to esta∣blish a peace. Sergius by the perswasions of Pudentius the Tripolitan (who made the first war against the Vandals for the Emperour) received into the City 70. Moors, whom be invited courteously to a feast, promising to grant their de∣mands, and the rest he willed to stay in the suburbs. They say they came with a treacherous intent to kill Sergius; and that one of them in speech with him ex∣postulated the Romans unjust spoiling their corns and Towns, and other wrongs; which Sergius slighting, and rising from his seat, and going away; one of them caught him by the mantle, and would have staid him, Hereupon the rest rose, and tumultuously stood about Sergius: and one of his Lifeguard drew his sword, and killed the Moore that held him by the mantle: whereupon all being in an up∣roar, the Lifeguard of Sergius kill'd all the Moores, save one; who seeing his fellowes slain,Here again the Greek begins. stole out of the roome, and got to his countrymen, telling them what happened: who ran to their camp, and with the rest came in Armes against the Romans. Neer Leptis Magna Sergius and Pudentius, with their whole forces, met them. The fight came presently to handy blowes, and the Romans were victorious and flew many, sack't their camp, and got a great booty, and abun∣dance of women and children. Afterward Pudentius was slain by his own rash ad∣venturing, and Sergius retired with the Army into Leptis Magna, it being grown dark. Shortly after the Lucathians came with a greater preparation against the Romans; Sergius went to Solomon his Uncle, to desire that he would come back
against these with a great Army; where he found Cyrus his brother. The Moors the while over ran Bizacium, and sack't most of the towns. Antalas also formerly ever faithfull to the Romans and therefore having the Government of the Moors in Bizacium, was now turned enemy to Solomon, who had taken from him those allowances the Emperour had assigned him, and killed his brother, for making a commotion in Beracium. So he willingly joyned in a league with these Barbari∣ans, and led them to Carthage against Solomon: who advertized thereof, marcht towards them; and finding them at Tebeste, a City six dayes journey from Carthage, he encamped his Army, together with Cyrus, and Sergius, and Solomon the yonger, all sons of Bacchus. He sent to the chiefes of the Leucathians (being afraid of their multitude) complaining of their taking arms, and invading, be∣ing yet in league with the Romans; demanding a ratification of the peace; and promising to take the strongest oathes, to abolish the memory of what they had done. They laugh at these overtures, and said; That doubtlesse they would swear the Christians oath, which they call, the Gospels: which Sergius having sworn, and then killed those who trusted him; they meant now to try by a bat∣tel, what power those oracles have against men that forswear them; that so be∣ing confident in them, they may come to a treaty. Solomon, hearing this, prepared to fight; and the next day, meeting some enemies driving a great prey, he defeated them, and took it from them. The souldiers murmured because he kept it to himself, not giving them the spoiles of War: But he bad them stay till the War was ended, and then every man should have his share according to his desert. The Barbarians again urged to give battel. But of the Romans, some were absent, others went on with no heart: yet at first the fight was equall; afterward, the Moors surmounting much in numbers, the Romans ran away. Solomon with his company endured their shot a while, then being over prest, fled; and at a torrent his horse stumbling he fell. His Lifeguard set him up again, but being in pain not able to hold his bridle, the Barbarians overtook and killed him, and many of his guard, Solomon being dead thus the Emperour gave the Government of Africk to Sergius, who proved the de∣struction of the Province. All were discontented; the commander at his youth, indiscretion, and insolence, and the impertinent affronts he did them, wherein he imployed his power, wealth, and the authority of his place; The souldiers, because he was a coward; And the provincials, for all this, and moreover for his unsatiable love of their wives and Estates. Above all, John, the son of Sisinniolus, being an able souldier, and of great reputation, was offended with his greatness, and extream ingratitude to himself. So that neither he nor a man among them would draw their swords against the enemy. Almost all the Moors followed Antalas, who had sent for Stotzas out of Mauritania. And Antalas then wrote this letter to the Emperour. That I am the servant of your Empire I deny not; But the Moors have been forced to take arms upon the base injuries done by Solomon, not to rise up in arms against you, but to resist an enemy; especially I from whom he was not contented onely to take away my allowances, designed by Belisarius, and by you given me, but he hath killed my brother guiltlesse; we have now righted our selves up∣on him that wrong'd us; and if you will have the Moors obsequious servants of your Empire, as formerly, command Sergius the Nephew of Solomon to leave Africk, and send some other Generall: you cannot want men far worthier then Sergius. So long as he commands your Army, there can be no peace between the Romans and Moors. The Emperour notwithstanding this letter, and though he knew the Generall hatred of Sergius; yet in respect of Solomons worth, and manner of death, he would not remove him. CHAP. XVII. THe brother of Sergius, yong Solomon, was thought to have perisht with his Uncle, and was not lookt after, so much as by his brother. But he was taken prisoner by the Moors; and being askt who he was; he said he was a
Vandal, and slave to Solomon, and that he had a friend at Laribum, a Town there∣about, named Pegasus, a Physitian, who would pay his ransome. The Moors un∣der the Town-walls called for Pegasus, and shewing him Solomon, askt if he would redeem him;38 l. 15 . and for 50 gold staters they delivered him to him. Being within, he slouted the Moors for being cosened by a boy; and told them how he was the brothers son of Solomon. The Moors angry for having so easily let goe such a pawn, besieged Laribum to take Solomon. The besieged were afraid, wanting provisions, and offered the Moors money to raise their siege: which they accept∣ed, finding they should not force the Town, being not used to assaults; and not knowing the wants within: So the Leucathians went home; But Antalas made head again in Byzacium; having besides his Moors, Stotzas with some few Ro∣mans, and Vandals. John the son of Sisinniolus, at the Africans opportunity, raised Forces and went against them; and he appointed Himerius the Thracian, Commander of the forces in Byzacium, to draw out his troops, and to joyn with him at Menephesis in Byzacium. But heating the enemy to be there encamped, he wrote of it to Himerius, and to joyn with him in another place, that they might with joynt forces encounter the enemy. The bearers of the Letters going another way, met not Himerius; who with his troops fell into the enemies hands; only Severianus a young man, the son of Asiaticus a Phaenician, with his troop of horse, being 50. fought with the enemy, and held out, till pressed with multitude, they ran to a Castle upon a hill, which was of no strength, and there yielded upon composition to the enemy, who killed him not, nor any of the soldiers, but they took Himerius prisoner, and bestowed all the soldiers on Stotzas, upon their promise to serve against the Romans. Hi∣merius they threatned to kill if he performed not his promise: which was to de∣liver to them the City of Adramettus; and upon the protestation of his true meaning, they went thither with him, being not far off. Him they sent before with some soldiers of Stotzas, dragging after them Moors bound: Themselves followed. They directed Himerius to tell the guards that John was victorious, and would forthwith come with a multitude of Moors his prisoners; and that the gates being open, he should get in with his company. They did thus, and the Adramettians were deceived, and let them in, not mistrusting one who com∣manded the whole forces in Byzacium. They that entred with him, staid the guards from shutting the gates, and received all the Moors into the City; which they sackt, and leaving a small Garison, departed. Some prisoners afterward e∣scaped to Carthage, among whom was Himerius, and Severianus; it being no hard matter to run from Moors Many staid willingly with Stotzas. Shortly after one Paul, a Priest, (such as oversee the sick) told some principal men of Adramettus, that he would go to Carthage, and hoped to return with an Army shortly, which he bad them be ready to receive in. They let him down the wall by cords; and e finding at sea-side a fishing Busse, perswaded the ow∣ners with mony, and sailed to Carthage. Where he acquainted Sergius with the matter, and desired some forces to recover Adramettus, Sergius liked it not, ha∣ving not many soldiers in Carthage; He desired him to give him some few; and getting but 80. he put them aboard a number of ships and boats, with many Ma∣nners and Africans, wearing soldiers coats; and with this fleet sailed to Adra∣mettus; and being near it, sent word secretly to some chief Citizens, that Germa∣nus, the Emperours Nephew, was newly come to Carthage, and had sent a good Army to the Adramettians, in the confidence of which, he bad them open one of their gates. They did so, and Paul with his company got in, killed the ene∣my, and recovered thus Adramettus. The report of Germanus spread as far as Carthage: and the Moors, and Stotzas followers at first ran to the utmost march∣es of Africk; but hearing the truth, it vexed them to be used thus by the Adra∣mettians, whom they had spared; so that every where they committed cruelties upon the Africans, sparing no age; the Country became waste, the Provinci∣als that were left flying, some to the Citi, some into Sicily, and other Islands, and the chief of them to Constantinople; among whom was Paul who recovered Adramettus. The Moors in the mean time (none opposing) ransackt all without controll, and with them was Stotzas, grown powerfull; and many Roman soldi∣ers
followed him, some voluntaries, some taken prisoners at first, but now staying willingly; John also, whom the Moors did somewhat respect, being in disgrace with Sergius, lay still. CHAP. XVIII. IN the mean time the Emperour sent into Africk with some soldiers another General, Areobindus, a Senator, and a gallant man, but no soldier. With him for Prefect of the Camp, he sent Athanasius, lately come out of Italy, and some Armenians commanded by Artabanes and John, the sons of John, of the race of the Arsacides: These, with the Armenians with them, lately revolted from the Persians to the Romans. With Areobindus was his sister, and his wife Projecta, daughter to Vigilantia, the Emperours sister. Justinian did not call home Sergius, but divided the Generalship, the Province, and the Cohorts be∣tween Areobindus and him. And him he directed to make the war in Numidia, and Areobindus in Byzacium; who arriving at Carthage, Sergius with his Army went into Numidia. And Areobindus hearing that Antalas, and Stotzas were encamped at Sicavenerea, three days journey from Carthage, sent John the son of Sisinniolus against them, with the choice of his Army, and wrote to Sergius to joyn with John, and in one body to encounter the enemy. Sergius slighted the direction, and the business; so that John with a small power was forced to com∣bat with innumerable enemies. Between him and Stotzas was an everlasting ha∣tred; Their wish had been to kill one another, and so die. This batel being ready to joyn, they both rode out against each other. John shot Stotzas in the groine on the right side, who having his deaths wound, fell upon the place, but died not instantly; His own men and the Moors set him against a tree ready to expire, and then they furiously charged the Romans, and exceeding them so much in numbers, easily routed them. They say, John then said, that he should die a pleasant death, seeing his wish upon Stotzas accomplised: and then his horse stumbling down a hill, threw him: and the enemy killed him striving to get up again. A man great in reputation and valor Stotzas being told of it, said this only word and died, that now he died with delight. John the Armenian was also slain, having done very bravely. The Emperour advertised of the death of John, and troubled for the great worth of the man, finding it also inconvenient to have two Generals, recalled Sergius, and sent him with forces into Italy, and committed Africk whol∣ly to Areobindus. Two months after Sergius departure, Gontharis attempted to usurp, being Commander of the Cohorts in Numidia, and there residing. He dealt secretly with the Moors that they should invade Carthage; and they sudden∣ly with an Army levied out of Numidia and Byzacium, marcht thitherward; the Numidians led by Cutzinas and Jabdas, and the Byzacians by Antalas: With them was John, who was made General in the room of Stotzas, by the Roman mutiners. Areobindus informed hereof, sent for Gontharis and other Captains to Carthage: Artabanes also came to him with his Armenians. Gontharis being commanded by Areobindus to march in the van, and promising much forward∣ness, sent to the enemies camp a Moor, his cook, to pretend himself a runaway, but to Antalas privatly to say, that Gontharis would share with him in the domi∣nion of Africk. The cook performed accordingly; and Antalas, though glad at the motion, yet answered him, That men do not execute great matters by cooks. Gontharis hearing this, sent to him Ʋlitheus, one of his guard, whom he most trusted, to entreat him to come as near Carthage as he could, and promi∣sing to kill Areobindus. And Ʋlitheus (without the knowledge of the rest of the Moors) agrees that Antalas shall have the dominion of Byzacium, and half Areobindus wealth, and 1500 Roman soldiers; and that Gontharis shall retain the title of Emperour, Carthage, and the rest of Africk. Having negotiated this, Gontharis returned to the camp; the Romans being quartered before the walls, to guard the several gates of Carthage. The Barbarians made haste thither, encamped at Decimum, and the next day marcht forward. Some Romans fought
with them unlookt for, and killed many; whom Gontharis called in, rating them for putting the State into evident danger by unadvised adventuring. In the mean time Areobindus practised also on that side with Cutzinas, who promised him in the battel to turn against Antalas, and the Moors of Byzacium; thus the Moors observe no faith to others, nor among themselves. Ariobindus revealed the plot to Gontharis, who desirous to dash it, advised him not to trust Cutzinas without his sons for hostages. But Areobindus and Cutzinas proceeded closely in their de∣signe; and Gontharis secretly sending Ʋlitheus, acquainted Antalas with the de∣signe; who neither charged Cutzinas, nor made shew to have heard of his Trea∣son, nor yet revealed the plot between him and Gontharis. They both hated one another, yet with these bad intents fought in company together, each against his own friend. CHAP. XIX. BUt Gontharis his intent was to kill Areobindus secretly in the battel, that he might not seem to intrude into the Empire; but rather that the soldiers, think∣ing the treason to be acted by others, might constrain him to usurp the dominion of Africk. To circumvent Areobindus, he counsels him to lead the whole Army the next day by sun-rising against the enemy, who was now come near to Car∣thage. But Areobindus being backward and raw in such businesses, delayed, and spent most of the day in fitting his arms about him, and other things for the fight; which he thus put off till the next day. Gontharis suspected him purposely to dally, as senting the plot; and resolved openly to murder him, and so to make himself King of Africk. His plot was, to set open the gate whereof he had the guard, and to hinder the shutting of it again by great stones put between; and then to place armed men upon the battlements; himself standing in the gate with his corselet on: This he invented, not for the Moors reception into the City (who being false themselves, suspect all men else; and good reason, that a faithless man should trust none, weighing others disposition by his own.) So that he did not hope that the Moors would trust him, and come within the walls; but that Areo∣bindus being frighted, might run away to Constantinople: and he lighted upon a right conceit, if a sudden storm had not slaid Areobindus; who being informed of the plot, sent for Athanasius, and other principal men. Artabanes, with two others, came to him, and advised him not to shrink at this presumption of Gontha∣ris, but instantly to sally, and fall to work before further mischief: But Areobin∣das first sent Phredas, one of his favorites, to Gontharis, to feel his resolution. Who brought him back word, that Gontharis avowed the usurpation. Then he resolved to go out and fight with him. Gontharis in the mean time accused Areo∣bindus to the soldiers for a coward, and that to detain their pay from them, his intent as to sail away out at the Port of Mandracium with Athanasius, and to leave the soldiers to perish by famine and the Moors. He therefore demand∣ed, if it were their pleasure to seize upon them both. His hope herein was, that either Areobindus would run away at the tumult, or be taken and killed by the soldiers; and himself undertook to satisfie their arrears. They embraced the counsel: And Areobindus, with Artabanes, and their troops coming up to them, there was a fight at the battlemets, and the gate where Gontharis stood. The soldiers well affected to the Emperour, making head from several quarters, (the most part continuing ound, and not corrupted by Gontharis) had absolutely routed the mutiners▪ but Areobindus astonisht to see men killed (a sight he was not used to) cowardly ran away. Within the walls of Carthage, by the sea-side, is a Church of Monks, men who precisely exercise duties to God. This Church Solomon lately had repaired, walled, and made a strong Castle of it: And hither Areobindus fled, and sent for his wife and sister. Artabanes retired also, and the rest; and Gontharis having an absolute victory, seized upon the Palace with his soldiers, and put guards upon the City gates, and the Haven. He sent first for
Athanasius; who soothed him, and seemed to like the action wonderous well: Then he sent the Bishop of the City, to will Areobindus to come to the Palace upon assurances of safety; threatning, if he refused, to pull him out, and kill him. The Bishop, named Reparatus, went, and by Gontharis his direction of∣fered to swear that he should have no hurt, and told him what he threatned upon his refusall. Areobindus was afraid, and promised, if the Bishop at the celebra∣tion of the holy Baptisme would in Gontharis his name by oath assure his security, that he would go with him. This the Bishop did, and Areobindus without more scruple went with him, having on a garment called in Latine Casula) not sit for a Generall, nor a common soldier, but for a slave rather. At the Palace he took the Bible from the Bishop; and being brought to Gontharis, he fell upon his face, and lay so a long time, holding out his supplication, and the Bible, and his little son, newly made partaker of the holy Baptisme, at which the Bishop had sworn his safety. Gontharis raised him with much adoe; he conjuring him by all that is holy, to tell him if his life were safe. Gontharis bad him be of courage; for the next day he should go from Carthage safe, with his wife and goods. Then he dismissed the Bishop, and invited Areobindus and Athanasius to sup with him in the Palace. At supper he honoured Areobindus, placing him on his right hand upon the couch. After supper he would not let him go, forcing him to lie in a Chamber alone whither he sent Ʋlitheus and some others, who after his much crying and wailing, and words to move pitty, killed him. Athanasius they spared, despising his age. The next day Gontharis sent Areobindus his head to Antalas, but kept his goods. and the 1500 soldiers. At which Antalas chased; and it troubled him to see how Gontharis had forswore himself to Areobindus his friend, so that he could not think he should ever keep faith to himself, or any. After much debate, he resolved to submit to the Emperour, and so marcht away. He then sent to Marcentius, Commander of the Horse in Byzacium (who was fled into an Island) acquainted him with the business, and upon assurances got him to come to him. So Marcentius was with Antalas; and the soldiers of Byzacium, true to the Emperour, guarded Adramettus. The mutiners of Stotzas about 1000 men, were led by John to Gontharis, who gladly received them. Of them were 500 Romans, and 80. Hunnes; the rest were Vandals. Artabanes, upon assurances came to the Palace with his Armenians, professing his service to the usurper. But closely he plotted his death, consulting with Gre∣gorius, his Nephew, and Artasiris, one of his guard. Gregorius, to egge him on, told him, That he had now the means to gain the glory of Belisarius, nay to exceed it. He, with a gallant Army, a huge treasure, with many Com∣manders and Counsellors; with a Fleet of ships (the like whereof this age had not heard of) with store of horse and arms, and with a preparation fitting the Roman Empire, had recovered Africk, All which was now so cast away, as if none of it had ever been; and that the Romans from Belisarius his victory were fallen to be abused in their persons, and robbed of their goods. But that it was onely in his spirit, wit, and sword now, to recover all this to the Em∣perour. He bad him consider, how he was of the race of the Arsacides, and think how men nobly born must be every where valiant. Being a youth, he slew Acacius, Governour of Armenia, and Sittas the Generall; and thereby was made known to King Chosroes, and made war for him against the Romans: that being such a person, he ought not now to abandon the Roman Empire thus to a drunken dog, but to make it appear, that his former actions proceeded from true nobleness and valour: that himself, and Artasiris would serve his commands therein. Thus Gregorius incensed Artabanes against the Tyrant. CHAP. XX. WHo in the mean time removed the wife and sister of Areobindus from the Castle, to a house where they had competent provisions, and had no dis∣honour
honour nor constraint used to them, save onely that Projecta was made to write to the Emperour her Uncle; That Gontharis used her with all due respect, and was clear of her husbands murther, committed by Ʋlitheus without his allow∣ance, Gontharis did this upon the advise of Pasiphilus, a chief mutiner in Byzacium, and his principall assistant in this usurpation; who alleadged, that by thus doing, the Emperour might give him the Lady to wife, which would bring him much wealth. Gontharis also commanded Artabanes to lead the Army against Antalas, and the Moors of Byzacium: Cutzinas was fallen from Antalas, and joyned with Gontharis, and had given him his mother and children for hostages. Artabanes marcht directly against Antalas, with John Captain of Stotzas mutiners: and Ʋlitheus with the Moors under Cutzinas. They past by Adramettus, where∣about they found the enemy, and encamped a little distant. The next day John and Ʋlitheus staid with part of the Army; and Artabanes and Cutzinas with the rest drew out against the enemy. But Antalas and his Moors stood them not, but ran away; And Artabanes with a willing cowardize turned about his ensign suddainly, and rode back: whom Ʋlitheus would have killed at his coming; but he excused it upon his fear, lest Marcentius with aids from Adramettus might distresse them, and that it were it that Gontharis should oppose the enemy with his whole Army. Artabanes hereupon thought first to joyn with the Em∣perours Army at Adramettus: but upon better advise he resolved to kill Gontharis, and so rid the Emperour and Africk from trouble. Returning therefore to Car∣thage, he told the Tyrant the necessity of a greater Army; who after consulting with Pasiphilus, armed the whole forces, and purposed to lead them himself, leaving a garrison in Carthage. And every day he killed some upon causelesse jealousies. He instructed Pasiphilus (to whom he left the guard of Carthage) to murder all the Greeks; and having set all in order, he thought good to feast his friends, being the next day to depart. His feast was in a room where three couches stood ever ready: upon the uppermost himself sate, with Athanasius, and Artabanes, and some of Gontharis favourites, and Peter a Thracian, formerly of the guard to Solomon. At both the other couches were the best men of the Van∣dals: John, the captain of Stotzas mutiners, was feasted by Pasiphilus, and the rest severally by Gontharis friends: Artabanes when he was invited, resolved it for a sit opportunity to kill the Tyrant, and to execute his designe. He acquainted Gregorius and Artasiris therewith, and three other of his guard; these he directed to get in with their swords (the fashion being, while the Commanders feast, for their guard to stand behind them) and when they see their time, to fall to work suddainly, and Artasiris to begin. Gregorius he instructed to bring many of their valiantest Armenians to the Palace onely with swords (it not being lawfull to at∣tend their Commanders in a City with other weapons,) and leaving them in the utter Court, to go in with the guard. And they to pretend themselves jealous, lest Gontharis had invited Artabanes for no good, and to desire to stand among Gontharis guards to guard their Captain. And then in sport, to eatch the others shields, and to tosse them, and play with them, and when they heard the cry within, to put on the shields and run in. This direction of Artabanes Gregorius put in execution, and Artasiris had this devise also. He cut arrowes in two, and the pieces he thrust in round about his left arm to his elbow: tying them with whip-cord, and covering all with the sleeve of his coat; that he might take any blow made at him upon his arme, and so cause it to glaunce down the wood of the arrowes from off the body. To Artabanes also he spake thus I will undertake this without the least fear, and I hope with this sword to pierce Gontharis. The successe I know not, whither God offended with the Tyrant will assist me, or, to punish my sins, crosse me. If you see him not mortally wounded, kill me with this sword instantly; lest by torture I should discover you, and so basely perish my self, and be forced to ruine you too. Having thus said, he went with Gregorius and one of the guard, and stood behind Artabanes. The rest staid with the guards without, and did as they were directed. Artasiris at the beginning of the feast would have done it, and had his hand upon his cimiter. But Gregorius stopt him, saying in the Armenian tongue; that Gontharis was yet himself, not having drunk much wine. 'O the brave spirit in me you suppresse now!
quoth Artasiris. The drink proceeding, and Gontharis being well drencht, and grown bountifull, gave of his meats to the guard, which they went out to eat, leaving Ʋlitheus, and two other of the guard by Gontharis. Artasiris went out for company; and having a conceit that something might hinder the draw∣ing his Cimiter, being without, he slipt off his scabbard; and with his sword na∣ked under his mantle, he stept suddenly to Gontharis, as to say something in pri∣vate. Artabanes seeing him, his heart boyled, and falling into a deep musing, he shaked his head, and changed his colour, seeming wrapt with the greatness of the action. Peter markt it, and perceived the business: but loving the Emperour, he liked it well, and so made no discovery. Artasiris being come near to Gontharis, one of the waiters thrust him off, and perceiving his naked sword, cryed out, what's this my friends? Gontharis cros∣sing his hand over his own right shoulder, turned about to look at him. In the doing whereof Artasiris struck him with his sword, and cut off part of his head, and his fingers. Peter cryed out to Artasiris to kill the wickedest of all men. Artabanes seeing the Tyrant down, and sitting next him, with a broad knife he had hanging at his side, thrust him into the left side up to the haft, and there left it: Gontharis strove to rise; but fell, the wound being mortal. Ʋlitheus made a blow to have cleft Artasiris head: but he held up his left arm, and had the bene∣fit of his own wit at his most need: For the sword losing the vigour upon those arrows about his arm, he had no hurt, but he killed Ʋlitheus Peter and Artaba∣nes took up the swords of Gontharis and Ʋlitheus, and killed the other two of the guard. The Armenians who stood without with the guards, hearing the crie and tumult, snatcht up the shields according to their plot, and ran to the other couches, where they slew the Vandals, and Gontharis favorites. Artabanes char∣ged Athanasius openly, to look to the treasures of the Palace, all being there Which Areobindus left. The guards without hearing of the Tyrants death, joyn∣ed presently with the Armenians, having been most of Areobindus retinue. And with one voice, they all cryed, Emperour Justinian victorious! which growing very loud from such a multitude, reacht to most parts of the City. Such as were well affected to the Emperour, brake into the mutiners lodgings, and killed them, being asleep or eating, or amazed with the terror of it; and among them, Pasiphilus. John the mutiner, and some Vandals, fled to the Church; whom Ar∣tabanes took out upon assurances, and sent them to Constantinople; and having recovered the City for the Emperour, he made it safe. This killing of the Ty∣rant, was the 35 day of his usurpation. in the 19 year of Justinians reign. And for this service Artabanes got a great renown: Projecta, Areobindus widow,An. dm. 545. Just. 19. gave him a great present; and the Emperour made him General of Africk. Not long after, at the entreaty of Artabanes, he sent for him home, and made John, the brother of Pappus, General. Who immediately fought with Antalas, and the Moors of Byzacium, and defeated them, killing many, and recovering all the Ensignes taken at the killing of Solomon, which he sent to the Emperour. All o∣ther Moors he drave as far as he could from the Roman dominion. But afterward the Leucathians coming from Tripolis into Byzacium, with a great Army, and joyning with Antalas; John met them, and was beaten, with the loss of many, and fled to Laribum. The enemy then over-ran Africk, and did much mischief, even to the gates of Carthage. John quickly rallied the soldiers remaining, and drew Cutzinas, and other Moors to his aid; and in a battel with the enemy, over∣threw them beyond expectation, and killed numbers of them in the execution, as they fled in confusion. The rest escaped to the uttermost marches of Africk. And so at length the Africans who were left, being few, and very poor, with much adoe obtained some quietness.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK Of the GOTHICK Warre. Chap. I. OF Augustulus, and his Father Orestes Odoacer, Tyrant of Ita∣ly: whom Theodorick overthrew; and beseiges Ravenna three yeares, and is King of Italy. Chap. II. Theodoricks strange death; after killing Symmachus, and Boetius, by a fi∣shes head. Amalasunha for her Sonne Atalarick governes; the Goths mis∣like their Kings civill breeding: conspire against her. Shee seemes to flye to Constantinople. Theodatus plots revolt to Justinian. Chap. III. Justinian quarrells with Amalasuntha in shew: Hath offers from her, and Theodatus, of Italy. Atalarick dyes. She unwisely invites Theodatus to the Kingdome. Chap. IV. Amalasuntha is imprisoned. Justinian would ayde her, but before, shee is mur∣dered. He enters into war with the Goths, Anno 9. of his Raigne. Belisa∣rius is sent with 7000 men: who finishes the subduing of Sicily on the last day of his Consulship. Theodatus agrees to share Italy with the Emperour. Chap. V. Theodatus agrees to resigne Italy to Justinian, for Lands worth 12 Centena∣ries per annum. Mundus and his Sonne are killed by the Goths in Dal∣matia, which causes Theodatus to refuse the agreement. Discourse concer∣ning Ambassadors. Chap. VI, Constantianus subdues Dalmatia, and Liburnia. Belisarius besieges Naples, and tryes to get it by Composition. Chap. VII. Pastor and Asclepiodotus hinder the surrendring of Naples. The Augury of Hogs frights Theodatus. Belisarius is rising from Naples, but Chap. VIII. He takes the City the great Aquaeduct, and restores to the Neapolitans their women, children, and other Prisoners after much slaughter. Chap. IX. The deaths of Pastor and Asclepiodotus. Theodatus deposed. Vitigis is chosen King. Theodatus is slaine by Optaris, whose Love he had taken from him, and marryed to another. Chap. X. Vitigis leaves Rome: his reasons; he marryes Amalasunth's Daughter. A di∣gression of the Franks coming into Gaule with the Arborychi; and a rem∣nant of Romane souldiers. Theodorick allyes himselfe with them. Chap. XI. The Franks and Theodorick share the Burgundians countrey. They beat the
Visigoths. Theudis a Goth usurpes Spaine: The Francks conquer Thu∣ringia, utterly expel the Visigoths (who fled into Spaine) and divide all Gaule with the Goths. Chap. XII. The Goths give the French their part of Gaule, and 20. Centenaries of gold to joyne with them. Via Appi. Belisarius enters Rome, repaires the walls, and prepares against a siege. Chap. XIII. Halfe Samnium, Calabria, and Apulia submit to the Emperour. Diomedes, and the Boares teeth. The Palladium. A description of Italy, and the coun∣tryes about it. Tuscany taken: wars in Dalmatia. Chap. XIV.Vitigis marches towards Rome, passes the Tiber, where Belisarius, with a few, hazards his person in the first rancks. Chap. XV. Belisarius enters Rome with difficulty. Visandus found among the dead bo∣dyes. A false alarme. Vacis is sent to rail. Belisarius is confident of victory. Chap. XVI. The manner of the Goths intrenchments, and of the Romanes quartering at the severall Gates. Belisarius invention of mills with Boats: a presage of his Victory by Samnite boyes. Chap. XVII. Vitigis sends Ambassadors to terrifie the Romans, already fainting. Of the form of the Ramme, Balista, Wolfe. Belisarius laughs at the Enemy, shootes two of their men dead, and by killing their Oxen, prevents their assault. Chap. XVIII. Moles Adriana, or Adrians Tombe is assaulted and well defended: the broken wall in the guard of St. Peter. A Goth stuck into a tree with an arrow from a Balista. Chap. XIX. The Goths defeated in the Parke. Belisarius sallies, and routs their whole ar∣my, and kills 0000 men. More forces demanded by Belisarius of the Empe∣rour, and sent. The Romans victory presaged by Theodoricks Image at Naples in Musaique worke. Sibylla's oracles obscure. Chap. XX. Belisarius rids Rome of the unnecessary mouthes. The Commons are entertai∣ned to serve upon the guards. Silverius Bishop of Rome is sent into Greece, and Vigilius by Belisarius made Bishop. The Temple of Janus. Vitigis cau∣seth the Roman Senators his Prisoners to be slaine. Chap. XXI. Portus surprized by the Goths. The description thereof, and of Ostia. Belisa∣sarius with three sallies kills 4000 Goths, who imitating his stratagem therein are cut in peices. Chap. XXII. Belisarius tells why he was so confident of victory: he is importuned by the soul∣diers to a battell: he incourages them, orders his troopes, resolved to fight with the horse only, the foote being over few; but is disswaded by Principius and Tarmutus. Chap. XXIII. Vitigis encourages his army, and sets it in order of battell. The Romans in Ne∣ro's feilds first conquer; then by disder are ruined: the rest first have the better, in the end are beaten unto their walls by the Goths, with some loss, es∣pecially of Principius and Tarmutus.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARRS of the Emperour JUSTINIAN. Of the GOTHICK VVarre, the first BOOK: CHAP. I. THUS were the Romane Affayres in Affrick. But I proceed to the Gothick Warre; First, touching in a word what happened to the Goths and Italians before this Warre. When Zeno was Emperour of Constantinople, Augustus held the Westerne Dominion, whom by a diminitive, the Romans called Augustulus, because he received the Em∣pire being yet a Boy, which his Father Orestes, a very wise man, did administer. The Romans sometime before had drawne to their ayde Skirrians and Alans, and other Gothick Nations; from whence they came to suffer those things from Alaricus, and Attalus formerly related. As the Barbarians grew strong, the Roman Souldi∣ers were under-valued; and by these New-comers under colour of ayds, they were tirnnyzed, and forced impudently to many things: And in Conclusion they demanded of Oreses all the Lands in Italy to be divided, and to have a third part allotted them, and refusing to do it, they killed him. There was among them one Odoacer, one of the Life-guard to the Emperour, who promised to satisfie their de∣mands, if they would place him in the Governement: † so hee usurped,Anno Do∣mini 479. permitting the Emperour to live still a private man, without other harme: Hee gave the third part of the Lands to the Barbarians, and so made them sure his own, and established his Tyranny for ten yeares together. About the same time the Goths, planted in Thrace by the Emperour, rebelled against the Romans under Theodoricus, a Patritian, and advanced in Constantinople to the Consulship: Zeno, skilfull at a present accommodation, advised Theodoricus to go into Italy, to fight with Odoacer, and to get for himself and the Gothes the Dominion of the West; it being better for him (being a Senator) to beat out the Tyrant, and raign in Rome and Italy,
then to runne a hazard by contending with the Emperour. Theodoricus liked his Counsell and went into Italy with all the Goths, putting their Wives and Children in Waggons, and all the Goods they could carry. They could not crosse the Jonian Gulfe,These were sea∣ted in Alba∣nia, now, up∣on the Gulfe of Venice, neer unto Epida∣mus, now Durazzo. wanting ships, but compassed the Gulfe, and passed by the Taulantians, and other Nations. Odoacer and his people opposed them, and were beaten in many Bat∣tells: then they shut themselves up in Ravenna with their Prince, and in other strong Towns. All the Townes the Goths took in by Siege, save the Castle of Caesina, about thirty seven miles distant from Ravenna, and Ravenna it selfe, where Odoacer was; which they could not get by Force nor Composition. It is scituate in an open Champian, at the bottome of the Jonian gulfe, distant only a quarter of a mile from the Sea. Ravenna is hard of accesse for an Army by Sea or Land; no ships can land upon the shore, by reason of a shelve of almost foure miles lying before it, which keepes the Sayler far from the Coast, though it seem neer at first. Neither is it ap∣proachable by an Army of Foot, by reason of the River Poe, (by some called Eri∣danus) which descends from the mountaines of Gaule; and of other navigable Ri∣vers and Lakes, compassing the City with waters, where happens a dayly wonder. The sea each morning rises a dayes journey into the Land, and makes it navigable; and at evening draws home her waters, and spoyles the passage. Such as are to im∣port to the City Merchandize, or to export the same, towe their ships to the place where the water uses to make a Passage, and there stay for a Floud; which coming, by little and little they float their Vessells, and steere away. This happens all along that coast to Aquileia, but not alwayes alike: when the Light of the moon is little, the tyde is weak, and after the first halfe moon to the o∣ther, the course of the floud is stronger. But Theodorick and the Goths spent three yeares in the Siege of Ravenna, and were wearied with it, aswell as Odoacer and his men, who were also prest with wants: So that by the mediation of the Bishop of Ravenna, they came to an accord, that Theodorick and Odoacer should remaine in Ravenna upon equall tearmes. This for a while was observed; but Theodorick (as he sayd) finding him plotting against him, invited him to a Feast, and killed him; and gaining so the Barbarian Enemyes surviving, he had the sole Dominion of the Goths and Italians. He did not assume the Habit, or Style of Emperour of the Romans, but continued the name of Rex, as the Barbarians call their Rulers. In the government of his Subjects he had all the Ornaments of a true King; being zealous of Justice, and maintaining the Lawes; guarding also the Province from the Neighbouring Barbarians, and attaining to a great heighth of wisdome and valour. He never did Injury to his Subjects, nor suffered others, that practised such things: Onely he distributed to the Goths the Lands by Odoacer allotted for his Partizans. So that he was in repute an Usurper; but in Effect a true Prince, no lesse then those, who have successively beene graced with that Dignity. The Goths and Italians loved him exceedingly, and not accor∣ding to the ordinary Humour; for in States, men have severall Inclinations, and while things are as they would have them, they are pleased with the present Go∣vernment; but if otherwise, they are male-content. CHAP. II. THeodorick having raigned thirty seven yeares, died, being growen terrible to his Enemyes, and much beloved by his Subjects. The manner of his Death was thus. Symmachus, and his Son in Law, Boetius, ancient noble men, and chelfe of the Senate, having been Consulls, and both being Philosophers, just men, and great Relievers of the poore, had many bitter envyers; by whose false accusations Theodorick being perswaded, that they plotted against him, put them to Death, and confiscated their Estates. Not long after, his Wayters set before him at Supper a great head of a Fish, which seemed to him to be the Head of Symmachus lately mur∣dered, and with the teeth sticking out, and fierce glaring eyes to threaten him. Be∣ing frighted at it, he became chill, and presently went to bed, commanding store of
clothes to be layd on him: And afterward he revealed all to Elpidius his Physitian, lamenting the sinne he had done against Symmachus and Boetius; and soone after dyed. This was the first, and last wrong he ever did his Subjects, in pronouncing sentence thus against men without Examination. † Atalarick,Anno Domini, 526. his Daughters Sonne, succeeded, being eight yeares of age, and bred with his Mother Amalasuntha, his Father being dead also. Not long after Justinian received the Empire in Constanti∣nople, and Amalasuntha governed as her Sonnes Guardian, being Wise, Just, and of a very manly nature. She never, during her Government, layd corporall pu∣nishment, or fine upon any Romane, nor gave way to the Goths longing to do them Injuryes. She restored to the Children of Symmachus and Boetius their Estates; and shee desired to forme her Son in his manner of living like to the Roman Princes. Shee caused him to frequent the Grammar Schoole, and chose three discreet, moderate men of the Gothick Nation to accompany him. This the Goths misliked, and desi∣ring to wrong the Subjects, would have him bred more according to the Barbarian way. The Mother once taking her Sonne in some dis-order in the Bed-chamber, strake him; and he weeping, went out into the great Chamber, where some Goths seeing him, made a great matter of it, and rayled upon Amalasuntha, that shee made haste to be rid of the youth, and marrying some man, with him to raigne over the Goths and Italians. And their principall men assembling, complained; that their King was ill bred, and not as was fit for him; that Learning is opposite to Va∣lour; that this schooling by old men produces commonly cowardly and low spirits, and that whosoever will prove daring, and a man of Reputation, must be remo∣ved from feare of Schoole Masters, and imploy his Study in Armes. Theodorick (they sayd) suffered not the Goths to send their Sonnes to the Grammer schoole; alleadging that if they were seasoned once with the feare of a Feruler, they would never despise a Sword, nor a Lance. They besought the Queene to consider, how Theodorcik gained large Provinces, and a Kingdome to which he had no right, and was dead without knowing his Letters; and therefore to dismisse those Paedagogues, and to give Atalarick Companions of his own Age, who growing up with him, might incite him to governe according to the Barbarian Lawes.Amalasuntha ap∣proved not these reasons, but fearing Treason, shee seemed pleased with the dis∣course, and yeilded to their demands. The old men left Atalarick, and Youths were bred up, with him, having some small advantage of yeares above him: who when he was come to yeares, provoking him to Drinke, and Women, made him extreamly ill-conditioned, and so foolish, as to be disobedient to his Mother; nay to desert her, in a Faction of Barbarians, who impudently com∣manded her to retyre from Court. But Amalasuntha feared not their Faction, nor womanlike softned her Resolution, but with the Majesty of a Prince shee pickt out three of most Account, and most faulty, and confined them single, and far asun∣der, to the remotest parts of Italy. They were reported to be imployed in guarding the Marches against the Enemy; but they continued still correspondence with their Freinds and Kinsmen, and all men flockt to them, and the conspiracy grow ripe: Which shee not able to stand against, shee sen o Justinian, desiring him to be plea∣sed, that Amalasuntha the Daughter of Theodorick might repayre to him, shee minding instantly to quit Italy. The Emperour was glad of the news, bade her come, and directed the fayrest House in Epidamnus to be made ready for her to lodge in, and having stayed there what time shee pleased, to be convoyed to Constantinople. When Amalasuntha understood this, shee chose some Goths, valiant, and men most inward with her, and sent them to kill those three cheifes of the Mutiny. And shee put a board a ship † four hundred Centenaries of Gold, and much other wealth,A million and 260000 l. sterl. under the charge of some of her most confidents, whom shee commanded to sayle to Epidamnus, and to lye at Anchor in the harbour, without unshipping any thing till shee sent direction. This shee did, purposing if those three were Executed, to stay and remand the ship, fearing then no Enemyes; but if any of them escaped, to fly into the Emperours Dominions, there being no sound hope at home. Such was her Resolution: And her Ministers with the Treasure came into Epidamnus, observing her directions. But she quickly (those Executions being dispatcht) cal∣led back the ship, and remaining at Ravenna, fortified her Government. Among the Goths was one Theodatus, Sonne unto Amalafrida, the Sister of Theodorick,
a man in yeares, and who had been conversant in Latine discourses, and the Do∣ctrines of Plato, but unpractised in Warr, and never aspiring to seats of Justice, yet extreamly avaricious. He was Lord of many Townes in Tuscany, and by Op∣pression sought to spoyle the owners of those remaining: it was an Affliction to Theodatus to have Neighbours. Amalasuntha endeavoured to curbe this humour in him, which made him very spitefull against her; And he plotted to deliver Tuscany to the Emperour for a great summe of Money, and to be made a Senatour, and to remain at Constantinople. In the mean time came Ambassadors from Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome, Hypatius Bishop of Ephesus, and Demetrius, Bishop of Philippi in Macedonia, about points which Christians of different opinions dispute among themselves. The questions I know, but will not recite; To search what the nature of God is, I hold to be a frantick arrogance; humane things are not to man exactly comprehensible, much lesse things pertayning to the nature of God: Let me there∣fore be silent without danger, onely by my not mis-beleiving that which in God is honoured. For let Preists or private men speake as they are perswaded, I can say no other thing concerning God, but that he is absolutely good, and hath all things in his power. But Theodatus, meeting privately with these Ambassadors, gave them order to acquaint the Emperour with the plot I mentioned before. CHAP. III. IN the mean time Atalarick fell into a Consumption with his excessive gluttony; which much distracted Amalasuntha, who had no confidence in her Sonne, being runne into so much folly; nor if he dyed could shee thinke her life safe, having of∣fended the principall Goths. So shee resolved to deliver the Dominion of the Goths and Italians to Justinian, and to save her selfe. With Hypatius, and Demetrius, came one Alexander, a Senator; whom the Emperour (hearing of Amalasuntha's ship in the harbour of Epidamnus, and that shee came not, much time being spent) sent to view, and report concerning her, in pretence as an Ambassador, to treate about Lilyboeum, and about ten Hunnes, who were run from the Campe in Affrick in∣to Campania, and entertained by Ʋliaris, Captaine of Naples, without Amalasun∣thas consent. And the Goths warring with the Gepaedes about Sirmium, had used hostitility upon Gratiana, a City in the marches of Illyrium: All which the Empe∣perour charged Amalasuntha with, and wrote his Letter to her by Alexander; who left the Bishops at Rome to negotiate their affaires, and repayring to Ravenna, had accesse to Amalasuntha, whom privately he acquainted with the Emperours propositions; and openly presented the Letter, which was thus. You detaine from us our Castle of Lilyboeum; you have entertayned our fugitive Souldiers, and do not yet send them back; you have also used our City of Gratiana with extrea∣mity without cause; from all which you are to judge what the conclusion is likely to be. Amalasuntha to this Letter returned this answer. It were more fit for a great Emperour, and one who pretends to virtue, to assist an Orphan, ig∣norant of these passages, then upon no ground to quarrell with him; no victory bringing credit, when the opposition is not equall. You expostulate for Lilyboeum, and ten fugitives, and an Errour of Souldiers marching against their Enemyes, unwittingly committed upon a City in Amity with us. Do not thus, O Empe∣rour! But thinke how in your invasion of the Vandales wee gave you no impedi∣ment, nay gave you quiet passage, and free market freindly of what you needed, cheifely of Horses in such abundance, as with them principally you vanquisht your Enemyes. Not onely he who sends his neighbour aydes, is a freind and an Associate, but he also who readily furnishes him for the warr with necessaryes. Consider how then your Navy had no place to put into, but Sicily, nor could go into Affrick without what was there bought. So that the principall cause of your Victory is from us; who releiving you in time of need, may lay a clayme to the good successe: and what greater contentment, O! Emperour, could you have, then to subdue your Enemyes? nay it is a great wrong to us, not to receive ac∣cording
to the Law of War, our share in the spoyles: Whereas you seek to take Lilyboeum from us, long appertaining to the Goths, and a poor Rock not worth the money (in case it did belong to your Empire) which in reason you ought to recompence Atalarick with, for assisting you in your greatest needs. Thus Amalasuntha wrote publickly, but in private promised to deliver Italy to the Em∣perour; to whom the Ambassadors at their Return to Constantinople related all; Alexander concerning Amalasuntha's Resolution; and Demetrius and Hypatius, what they had in trust from Theodutus, and how having great power in Tuscany, and being Lord of a large Countrey, he could easily performe his promises. The Empe∣rour being over joyed with it, sent forthwith into Italy, Peter, an Illyrian by Race, but borne in Thessalonica, and an Oratour in Constantinople, a wife, milde man, and of great ability to perswade. In the mean time the Tuscans accused Theodatus to Amalasuntha for his oppressions; and for intruding not onely into the Lands of common persons, but into the Royall domeans, called Patrimonium. Amalasun∣tha called him to his answer, and upon expresse conviction; compelled him to re∣store his unlawfull Intrusions, which infinitely offended Theodatus, and made him her Enemy, being vexed that hee could not use his sinne of oppression. About the same time Atalarick dyed of his consumption, having raigned eight years. And Amalasuntha (ordayned for a mischeife) without considering Theodatus nature, nor her late proceeding against him, imagined by some extraordinary good Turne to oblige him from hurting her. She sent for him, and to appease him, told him; That she had long foreseene her Sonnes end, by the dayly wasting of his Body, and the opinion of the Physitians; that she found the Goths and Italians inclined to him, being of Theodoricks blood; That shee endeavored therefore to purge him of aspersions, which might hinder his calling to the Kingdome; that shee was also troubled in the point of Justice, if men wrong'd should complayne, to have none to make their cases knowne to, but to have their Adversary their Lord. But now being clear, shee invited him to the Kingdom: But they must binde them∣selves by solemne oathes, for him to continue the name of King, and her selfe to continue her former power. Theodatus swore what shee pleased, with a false Intent, remembring how shee had used him formerly. Thus Amalasuntha, deceaved by her owne Counsells, † placed Theodatus in the government,Anno Demini, 534. Justiniani 8. and sent some Goths to Constantinople to acquaint Justinian with her proceedings. CHAP. IV. THeodatus being in possession of the Kingdome, did quite contrary to her hopes, and his own Ingagements. He drew to him many principall Goths, kinsmen to such as shee had put to death; some of Amalasuntha's party he suddenly killed, and put her selfe in safe custody in a strong castle in an Island upon the Lake of Vulsinus in Tuscany. But fearing that the Emperour might be offended at it, (as indeed he was) he sent Liberius and Opilio, two Senators of Rome, and others to make his Excuses, and to assure the Emperour, that Amalasuntha had no harme, though shee had done him extreame Injury formerly. This he wrote to the Emperour, and made Amalasuntha write as much. The Emperour in the meane time had instructed Peter to get private speech with Theodatus, and to give his Oath to conceal the negotia∣tion, and so to make Tuscany sure; to deale likewise with Amalasuntha, and to conclude for all Italy, but publickly to pretend his Ambassage for Lilyboeum, and the rest before mentioned. For of the death of Atalarick, or succession of Theoda∣tus, or of the Fortune of Amalasuntha, the Emperour had not yet heard. Peter upon the way met Amalasuntha's Ambassadors, and heard of the Succession of The∣odatus. Shortly after at Appollonia upon the Jonian gulfe he met with Liberius and Opilìo; and was informed of all the passages. He advertised the Emperour, and stay∣ed there: Who thereupon intending to imbroyle Theodatus and the Goths, wrote Let∣ters to Amalasuntha, of his Resolution to take her part, and sent instructions to Peter to professe the same openly to Theodatus, and all the Goths; Whose Ambas∣sadors
being arrived at Constantinople, Liberius, who was a very honest man, and carefull to speake no untruth, and the rest acquainted the Emperour with the whole matter; onely Opilio protested that Theodatus had not wronged the person of Ama∣suntha. But before Peter came into Italy, Amalasuntha was murdered; The kins∣men of those put to death by her alledging to Theodatus, that neither he, nor they could be safe, if shee were not made out of the way. So with his permission, they went to the Island, and killed her. Which much greived the rest of the Goths, and all the Italians. For (as I sayd before) shee was a woman strongly bent to all kinde of virtue. Peter protested openly to Theodatus and the Goths, that for this foule fact there should be implacable war between the Emperour and them. Theo∣datus was so absurd, as albeit he graced Amalasuntha's Murderers, yet he would perswade Peter, and the Emperour, that the villany was committed by no allow∣ance of his, but much against his will. At the same time Belisarius had newly conquered Gelimer, and the Vandales; and the Emperour advertized of Amalasuntha's mis-fortune, presently entred in∣to this war, in the Anno 9. Just. Th Gothick warre now be∣gins, and is Annus 1 bel. Goth. begin. Anno Do∣mini 535. ninth yeare of his Raigne: He commanded Mundus, Gene∣rall of Illyrium, to march into Dalmatia, which was subject to the Goths, and to attempt Salonae. Mundus was a Barbarian borne, but much affected to the Em∣perour, and a good Souldier. Belisarius he sent with a fleete, having 4000 Legi∣naries and Confederates, and 3000 Isaurians. Commanders of marke there were Constantinus and Bessas. Thracians, and Peranius of the Iberia next to Media, but he revolted from the Persian, and was now of the Emperours side. Captaines of Horse were Valentinus, Magnus and Innocentius. Of foote, Herodian, Paulus, Dme∣trius & Ʋrsicinus; of the Isaurians Ennes was Leader. There were also 200 auxiliary Hunnes, and 300 Moores. Generall with absolute power was Belisarius, who had with him many Lanciers and Targettiers of his guard, tryed men. With him went also Photius, the Sonne of his wife Antonina by a former Husband, a discreet young man, and shewing an Ability above his years. The Emperours instructions to Belisa∣rius were, to pretend the voyage for Carthage, but upon some pretext to attempt Sicily, and if he found it feasible and easie, to subdue it, and not to quit it upon any tearms; but if he found Impediment, to sayle away to Affrick, without dis∣covering his intent: He wrote likewise this Letter to the Princes of the Francks.The Goths have by force taken from us Italy, which they not onely refuse to re∣store, but adde unsfferable injuryes: which constrayne us to send an Army a∣gainst them, and you have reason to joyne with us in the war, which our Ortho∣doxe Religion rejecting Arrianisme, and our equall Enmity with the Goths makes common to us both. The Emperour accompanied this Letter with liberall gifts, and promise of more, when they came to the businesse; they readily promised to joyn with him. But Mundus in Dalmatia had a battell with the Goths, was victorious and got Salonae. And Belisarius landing in Sicily, tooke Catana; and from thence got Syracuse by composition, and the other townes without any difficulty. The Goths onely in Panormus presuming upon their walls, and strong Towne, refused to yeild. Belisarius finding it by Land impregnable, sayled with the fleete into the Haven, which reaches to the walls, none being there, neither without nor within, to oppose him therein: The ships being at Anchor, had their Masts higher then the Battlements. Belisarius filled his Cock boates with Archers, which he hung fast to the Mast tops, and the Enemy being thereby shot upon their heads, their hearts fain∣ted, and they surrendred Panormus to him by composition; then all Sicily became tributary to the Emperour, where Belisarius had a fortune beyond expression. He had received the consulship upon his conquest of the Vandales, and in the last day of it he conquered Sicily, and rode into Syracuse, applauded by the Army and Sicilians, and throwing peices of gold among them. This was not so appoin∣ted, but it was his fortune that very day to recover the Island to the Romans, and to ride into Syracuse, and there to lay down his Consulship at the end of his yeare, and not as the use is, in the Senate house of Constantinople. Peter, upon the newes of these successes of Belisarius urged Theodatus, and frighted him: And he, his heart fayling, came to a secret conference with Peter, and to this accord; That Theo∣datus should surrender the whole Island of Sicily to the Emperour, and should yearly send him a crowne of Gold of three hundred pound weight, and three thou∣sand
fighting Goths, when ever he should require them. And that he should not kill, or confiscate the goods of any Priest, or Senatour, without the Emperours as∣sent; Nor make any Patrician or Senatour by his owne authority; but be a Su∣tor for it to the Emperour: That the common people in their acclamations shall alwayes name the Emperour first; In the Theaters, Circus, or elsewhere, he must not erect any Statue to himselfe alone, but ever another to the Emperour, which is to stand to the right hand of his owne. CHAP. V. THeodatus subscribed the accord, and dismist the Ambassadour; but presently his cowardize drave him to endlesse feares, and the thought of a Warre vexed him, which he instantly expected, if the Emperour should not allow the sayd con∣ditions. He sent for Peter, being gone as far as into Albania, secretly to commu∣nicate something to him; and ask't him, if he thought the Emperour would like the accord; who answered, that he thought so. But if he do not, said the other, what will follow? A warre Noble Sir, quoth Peter. And is that just? replyed he; Why not just (quoth Peter) for every man to be constant in his own addictions? Theodatus askt, what he meant by that? Because, quoth he, your addiction is to Philosophy; and the Emperour Justinians to be Noble; The difference is, that for you, professing Philosophy, and that from the Schoole of Plato, to cause the death of so many men, is not decent, but wicked, not to be absolutely cleere of murder; But for him to challenge the ancient appurtenances of his Empire, is not unreasonable. Theodatus perswaded by the advice, agreed to quit the King∣dom to Justinian; and to that effect himselfe and his Wife took their Oaths; and he bound Peter by oath not to discover this to the Emperour, before he perceived him not to accept the former accord; and with him he sent Rusticus, a Priest, a Roman borne, and his Favourite. These at Constantinople acquainted the Emperour with the first accord; who not accepting the conditions, they shewed the second agree∣ment, contained in a letter written by him, thus. I am no stranger to a Court, O Emperour I being born in the Palace of the King mine Unkle, and bred as became my birth. Indeed in the tumults of War I have no skill, my love of learning and exercises therein, have removed me from the noise of Battailes. So that I have no reason to be ambitious of Kingdomes, nor to live in dangers, having meanes to avoid both, neither pleasing me. The first, as all other sweets, being ever pu∣nisht with satiety: And the other, vexing a man that is not used to it. If there∣fore I may have lands in possession of the yearly value of 12. Centenaries of gold, I shall prefer them before a Kingdome; and will surrender to you the Dominion of the Goths. and Italians. I shall be more contented to live a Husband-man, then in the cares and multiplying dangers of a Kingdome. Send to me therefore spee∣dily some man, to whom I may resign Italy, and the State. The Emperour in∣finitely over-joyed, returned this answer. I ever took you for a wise man, and now my experience assures it, in that you depend not on the uncertaine event of a War, by which some have undone themselves already; and you shall never repent for having made us a friend of an Enemy; your demands you shall have, with this addition, to be advanced to the prime honours of the Roman State. I have sent Athanasius, and Peter to make our selves sure by some Articles; and Be∣lisarius shall be speedily sent to put a conclusion thereunto. The Emperour ac∣cordingly sent Athanasius brother to that Alexander lately sent Ambassador to A∣talaricus, and the afore-named Peter, with Instructions, to allot lands to Theodatus of the Emperours Demeans; and having by writings and oath perfected the accord; to call in Belisarius from Sicily to take possession of the Imperiall Palaces, and Ita∣ly, and the custody thereof: And he directed Belisarius, being sent for, instantly to go over. During this negotiation, an Army of Goths led by Asinarius, and Gripas, entred Dalmatia; and neer Salonae were encountred by Mauritius the sonne of Mundus, who with a few went out to discover only. They made a furious charge,
and the best of the Goths fell, but the Romans almost all, and Mauritius their Lea∣der. Munaus was much grieved at the newes, and in his passion marched against the Enemie with no good order. The Battail was stifly fought, and the Romans got a Cadman victory, cleerly defeating the Enemy, and cutting off the most part. But Mundus killing and chasing at adventure, as enraged for the losse of his sonne, was wounded and slain by a Run-away; Whereupon the Execution ceased, and the Ar∣mies parted. Then did the Romans remember a verse of Sibyll, famous, and seeming formerly to foretel some strange prodigie; That when Affricke should again come under the Romans, Mundus cum suo semine interibit. But in the Oracle it was not so exprest; but having intimated the said return of Affricke, it sayes Quod tunc Mun∣dus cum filio interibit. Mundus signifying the world in Latine, they conceived it to be meant of the world. But into Salonae no man entred; The Romans destitute of a Generall retired home; and the Goths, having lost their cheife men, kept close in their Garrisons, having no confidence in the Fortifications of Salonae, and the Ro∣mans inhabiting it being not their friends. Theodatus upon the newes hereof sligh∣ted the Ambassadors, being naturally slippery and faithlesse; The present fortune ever drew him either into senseless fears not sutable to the occasion, or into excessive presumption. As now upon the newes of Mundus, and Mauritius, he was exalt∣ed, not proportionably to the accident, and he flowted the Ambassadors, being now with him. Peter once expostulating his breach of agreements, he called him into publique, and said, That Ambassadors indeed are persons of respect, and by all men honoured; but that they preserve this priviledge, and the honour of their places by moderation onely. For men use to put an Ambassador to death if he demeane himself insolently to a Kings person, or lye with another mans Wife. Theodatus said not thus, as thinking Peter to kave layen with any mans Wife; but to shew that there were crimes in an Ambassador punishable with death. But the Ambassadors made him this answer. O Prince of the Goths! upon such mistaken, unsound pretences do not you violate the persons of Ambassadors. An Ambas∣sador, if he would, cannot be an Adulterer; who can hardly have so much as the use of water, without the privity of those that guard him. For words (though harsh) if he utter such as he received from his Master, not he, but his Master is to beare the blame; An Ambassadors onely part is, to execute the service. And we, what we have received from the Emperour, will utter it all, and you are pa∣tiently to heare us. If you be angry, you have no help, but to abuse men that are Ambassadors. It is high time for you to perform your Covenants with the Em∣perour; For which purpose we are sent hither. His letters to your selfe you have; another, directed to the principall Goths, we will deliver only to themselves. The great Officers being present, bad them give the Letter to Theodatus; which was thus. Our care is, to receive you into our State; for which you ought to re∣joyce; For you shall mingle with us, not for your diminution, but to adde more value to you. We invite not the Goths to Countries strange, and unknown to them; but to our selves, sometimes their familiars, though for a time divided from them. Athanasius and Peter are sent about this businesse, whom you are to assist in all things.
CHAP. VI. THeodatus perused all the letters, but refused to perform the agreements, and put a strait guard upon the Ambassadors. The Emperour advertized hereof, and of the successes in Dalmatia, sent into Illyrium Constantianus, Master of his Horse, to gather an Army, and attempt Salonae; and he directed Belisarius with∣out delay to passe into Italy, and make War upon the Goths. Constantianus at E∣pidamnus stayed some time, and raised Forces. Gripas in the meane time had ente∣red Salonae with the Goths. And Constantianus having made his preparations, left Epidamnus with his Fleet, and Ragusa stands now where about this was, upon the gulfe of Venice. cast Anchor at Epidaurus, standing to the right hand, as you saile into the Jonian gulph. Some here sent by Gripas to discover, seeing the land Army, and the Ships covering (as they imagined) Land and Sea, reported to Gripas, that Constantianus had many thousands. He afraid, thought it not best to encounter them; Neither would he willingly be besieged by the Em∣perours Army, Master of the Sea. The walls of Salonae much decayed troubled him too; and he could not trust the Inhabitants. For these reasons he removed from thence, and encamped in a champian be∣tween Salonae, and the Citie of Croton. Constantianus wayed Anchor from Epi∣daurus, and came before Lysne upon the gulph. Hence he sent some to discover, and report concerning Gripas; from whom understanding how it was, The Gothick war began in the Spring, which begins exactly 11. Martii, the Sun emring in∣to Aries. Justi∣nian began to reign alone af∣ter Justins death on the first of July, saith Evagri∣us: And with Justin the 3. day before Ea∣ster. vide Se∣cret. Hist. cap. 7. he made for Salonae. Where arrived, he landed, and rested his Army upon the place; and he di∣rected Siphyllas, one of his Life-guard, with 500. chosen men, to possesse a narrow passage in the Suburbs of Salonae; which he performed. And the next day Constan∣tianus entered the Citie with the Land army, and the Fleet lay before it at Anchor. He tooke care of the walls, and repaired the decayes; And Gripas seeing the Romans masters of Salonae, seven dayes after rose, and transported the Goths over to Ra∣venna. So Constantianus tooke in Dalmatia, and Liburnia, and the Goths there in∣habiting. And then ended the Winter, and the first year of this Warre, written by Procopius. Belisarius leaving Garrisons in Syracusa, and Annus. 2. Bll. Goth. in∣cipit. being in 10. Iustiniani.  Ann. Dom. 536. Panormus, passed over his Army from Messinae to Rhegium, where the Poets fain Scylla, and Charybdis to have been. The Inhabitants came in to him daily, their Towns having been long without walls, and without Garrisons; and they hated the Goths, weary (it seems) of the present Government. Ebrimus also a Goth revolted to him, with his Followers, having marryed Theodatus Daughter, Theodenanthe. He was sent to the Emperour, and besides other bounties, made a Patrician. The Army marcht from Rhegium through Brutia, and Lucania, and the Navy kept close to the Coast. In Campania they sate downe before Naples, a strong maritime Citie, with a great Garrison in it of Goths. The Fleet Belisarius commanded to lye at Anchor, without Bow-shot in the Har∣bour. Then he took the Castle in the Suburbs by composition. He gave the Citi∣zens leave to send him some chiefe men, to acquaint him with what they had to say, and hearing his Propositions, to report them to their Communalty. The Napoli∣tans sent him Stephanus, who spake thus to Belisarius. It is not just, O Gene∣rall! to bring your Army upon Romans, and who never wrong'd you, having a small Citie, and the Barbarians within our Masters; that we cannot do as we would: Nay the Souldiers of our Garrison have lest under Theodatus their Wives and Children, and most precious things, that by practising upon us, they should not more betray our Town, then themselves. But if we may say the truth without mincing, you have advised ill to invade us. For take Rome first, and Naples is yours without difficulty; but repulsed from thence, you can never be sure of this Towne. So that you will spend time impertinently in this siege. Be∣lisarius made Stephanus this answer. We meane not to referre it to the Napoli∣tans, whether We be here upon good, or bad advice. We desire you to consult of what concerns your selves, and to choose your owne best advantage. Enter∣taine therefore the Emperours Armie, come to free you and all Italy; and doe not prefer the most sorrowfull things. Such as make War to shake off slavery, or other base condition, gaine in vanquishing, with the victory, freedome from
misery; and being vanquished are yet comforted for not having willingly sub∣mitted to a wretched fortune. But such as may be free without fighting, and yet will fight to establish their own servitude; if they conquer, they do but more ruine themselves; and if they have the worse, they adde to their other wretched∣nesse, the calamity of a defeate. This he sayd to the Napolitans. To the Goths we give Liberty either to serve the Emperour with us, or to retire home with∣out harme. If you slight all this, and imploy your armes against us, we shall use you as Enemies: But if the Napolitans will joyne with the Emperour, and be rid of a sharpe servitude; I will pawn my faith for such conditions, as the Sicilians had, who cannot say we are forsworne. This Belisarius commanded Stephanus to impart to the people; promising him great rewards, if he drew them to the Em∣perour. Stephanus acquainted the City with these propositions, and with his owne opinion of the inconvenience of resisting the Emperour. With him joyned Antiochus a Syrian merchant, who had long dwelt there, and was esteemed a very wise and an honest man. CHAP. VII. BUt Pastor and Asclepiodotus, two Orators much esteemed in Naples, and freinds to the Goths, to crosse the treaty, drew the people to propound great things, and many, and that Belisarius would swear to their present obtaining the same: And they gave to Stephanus demands in writing, which they thought Belisarius would never yeild to. He went to the Camp, shewed the writing to the Generall, demanding if he would grant those propositions, and take his Oath accordingly. He promised to grant all, and sent him away. The Napolitans imbraced the Capi∣tulation, and commanded the army to be received into the City: which (said they) may safely be done, the Sicilians giving us ample proofe, who for Barbarian Ty∣rants have chosen the Empire of Justinian, and are become free men, and eased of all greivance. And then in much tumult they went to open the gates; which troubled the Goths: but being not able to hinder it, they kept out of the way. But Pastor and Asclepiodotus assembled the people, and spake thus. It is not strange for a City-multitude to ruine it selfe, when they will resolve in the generall absolutely, with∣out communicating with the better sort. But being with you upon the point of de∣struction, we cannot but contribute this last advise to our country. You are run∣ning to deliver your selves, and City to Belisarius, who promises much, and will solemnly swear to it. If he could assure you, that he shall conquer in this war, no man can gainsay, but that these things will be good for us. It were foolish not to gratifie him that is to be our Lord; but since this is uncertaine, and since none can secure the Resolutions of Fortune; consider for what miseries you may take this pains. For the Goths overcoming, wil punish you for having done them the grea∣test despight, revolting thus not forced by necessity, but as willing cowards. Nay even Belisarius himself being Victor will esteeme us false and Traitors to our Prin∣ces; and as such, we must expect a perpetuall garrison upon us. A Traitors service pleases for the present with the victory obtained, but afterward the Victor suspects, fears, and hates his Benefactor, having with him the marks of his falshood. But con∣tinuing true to the Goths, and valiant in this danger, if they conquer, they will do us many good turnes; and Belisarius getting the victory will pardon us. No un∣derstanding man will punish a good affection failing of successe. And why fear you this seige? being in no wants, nor blockt up; but at home, secured by these walls and souldiers? If Belisarius could hope to force us, he would not come to this ca∣pitulation: and if he would do justly, and us good, he would not fright us thus, and establish a power upon our wronging the Goths, but come roundly to a battell with them, that we without danger or Treason might follow the Conquerour. Ha∣ving thus said, they produced Jewes, who assured the town should want nothing: and the Goths promised to guard them safely. Wherewith perswaded, they defied Belisarius; who fell to assault, and was often repulsed with losie of many, and even
of his valiantest men. For the walls what by reason of the sea, and for the steepe ground, were unaccessible, and not to be approacht by an enemy. And the cutting of the Aquaeduct by Belisarius troubled not the Napolitans much, their wells within supplying their uses: And they sent to Theodatus to Rome, to send them succours. Theodatus being a coward (as I have said) made little preparation for a warre: and he had an accident (they say, but not credibly to my conceit) which put him in∣to great fear. Theodatus was acquainted ever with men thar pretend to foretell things to come; and being now perplexed with the present affaires (when men use most to runne after prophesies) he askt an Hebrew, famous for such things, what would be the event of the War. He directed him to shut up three halfe scores of Hoggs severally, and to each ten to give severall names, of Goths, Romans, and the Emperours Souldiers, and so for a certain number of dayes to let them alone. The∣odatus at the appointed day went to the sties, to see the Hoggs. Those which were cal∣led Goths, he found all dead, save two: Those called the Emperours Souldiers, were allmost all alive: And those who bare the name of Romans were halfe living, and all with their haires fallen off. Theodatus by this divined the successe of the war, and was affraid: perceiving that one halfe of the Romans should perish, and all loose their Estates; that the Goths should be vanquisht; and reduced to a small rem∣nant, and that the Emperour should get the victory with the losse of few. Upon this he was affraid to fight with Belisarius; who besieging Naples was troubled, not thinking it would yeild, and being not able to force the difficulty of the place: and his losse to time vexed him, fearing to be put to set upon Theodatus and Rome in the winter. But having directed the army to rise, and being thus perplexed, he had this fortune, CHAP. VIII. AN Isaurian, curious to see the structure of the Aquaeduct, and how it brought water to the City, entred it far from the city where Belisarius had cut it; (which had made it dry) and being come in neer to the town-wall, he met with a Rock to which the Aquaeduct was joyned, and through it was cut a vault, not suf∣ficient for a man to enter, but only to let through the water; so that there the A∣quaeduct was not passable, especially by a man armed with sheild and corslet. The Isaurian observing it, conceived that by widening the vault, forces might enter; and being himself an obscure man, unknown to the Commanders, he revealed it to Pau∣caris, a Targettier of the guard to Belisarius, who told it to Belisarius; and he revi∣ved with the newes promised the man mony, and perswaded him to take some Isau∣rians, and with speed and secrecy to cut the rock wider. Paucaris, with some choice Isaurians fit to worke, entred silently the Aquaeduct, and being come to the Rock and narrow Vault, they wrought, not cutting it with hatchets and axes, lest the noise should discover them, but paring and filing it with instruments of iron; and in short time there was roome for a man with his sheild and corslet on to go through. All being ready, Belisarius considered, how the army entring by force, there would be slaughter and such things as befall places forced by Enemies. He sent therefore for Stephanus, and sayd to him thus. I have been at the taking of many Cities, and and am acquainted with the usuall accidents therein. They kill the men of all ages; the women they vouchsafe not to kill, though they beg it, but lead them away for base and pitifull uses. The children without other Education must learne to serve their greatest enemies, whose hands are stained with their Fathers bloud. I speake not of the fire which wil consume your goods, and the beauty of your city. Behol∣ding as in a glasse in other ruined cities, the miseries of Naples, I pity it. For my engins are ready, wherewith I shall not faile to take it. And while I am Generall; I would not have an ancient city, long inhabited with Christians and Romans, come to this fortune: the rather having in the army Barbarians, enraged for the losse of brothers and kindred, whom I shall not be able to restraine; if they enter by hostili∣ty. So that chuse the best for your selves while you may, and avoyd this calamity; which happening (as it will) blame not fortune, but your owne Counsells. Stepha∣nus
weeping, reported to the People this Speech of Belisarius: But they (whose Subjection to the Emperour was to be accompanied with their mischiefe) feared not, nor thought of yeilding. Then did Belisarius about Evening chuse out 400. men, and gave the Command of them to Magnus, a Captaine of Horse, and Ennes, Commander of the Isaurians, whom he directed to stand ready with their Corselets on, and with Swords and Shields, till he should give the Signall. And he sent for Bessas, to advise with him of some things of Importance. Far within night, he told Magnus and Ennes the busi∣nesse, shewed them the place, where he had cut the Aquaeduct, and commanded affright the Towne, and to signifie to him what they did. Himselfe had many sca∣ling Ladders in readinesse. They entred the Aquaeduct, and went towards the Town, and himselfe, with Bessas and Photius, staid in the place, directing the Army to stand with their Armes ready; and keeping many of the Valiantest men about himselfe. More then the one halfe who were to enter, apprehending the danger, came back to the Generall, and Magnus with them: after much exhorting them to go on, but not prevailing, Belisarius rated them, and gave Magnus 200. other of his owne Retinew, whom Photius would have led, and first entred the vault; but Belisarius forbad him. The Run-awaies ashamed at the reprehensions of Belisarius, took hart, and followed the rest. Belisarius, least the Enemies sentinels upon the Turret next the Aquaeduct should discover them, went thither, and bad Bessas talke with the Goths in their owne Language, that they might not heare the clashing of the Armes. Bessas aloud called to them to yeild, promising many Advantages; And they flouted him with scornefull Speeches against Belisarius, and the Emperour. The Aquaeduct is not onely covered without the Walls, but so continues with a high Arch of Brick a great way within; that Magnus and Ennes being within the City, could not imagine where-about they were, nor finde where to get up, till their fore-most men came, where they found the Roofe uncovered, and where stood a Cottage, and in it dwelt a Woman alone, and very poore; and at the top of the Aquaeduct grew an Olive Tree. The men perceiving the Skie, and them∣selves in the midst of the City, would willingly get up, but could not with their Armes, the Building being high, and without Steps. Being long in doubt, and be∣ginning to be crowded with the Company pressing behinde them; one of them, having a minde to make triall, laid downe his Armes, and clambered up; and finding the poore Woman in the Cottage, threatned to kill her, if she made any noise. She astonisht, sate mute; and he tying a Rope to the Olive Tree, threw the other end into the Aquaeduct, by which the Souldiers mounted one by one. All being up, and but a fourth part of the Night remaining, they ascended the Wall, and killed the Sentinels upon two Turrets on the North side, where Belisarius, Bessas, and Photius stood expecting the Event. They called them to the Walls with their Trumpets, and Belisarius set to the scaling Ladders, commanding the Soul∣diers to mount. The Ladders were too short, the Work-men having not made them upon view, and so not judging of a just scantling. But they tied two together, and so mounted the Battlements. That part of the Walls next the Sea, where the Jewes guarded, the Souldiers could not ascend. For the Jewes had offended the Enemy, in hindering a peaceable surrender of the Towne, and so being hopelesse, (if subdued) they fought valiantly, though the Towne were entered; and they indured beyond Expectation. But day appearing, and being charged behinde by some who were entred already, they fled; and Naples was absolutely taken, and the Gates set open; where the rest of the Army entred. Those who were quartered Eastward, having no Ladders, burnt open the Gates there, the Guards being all run away. A great Slaughter was made; all being angry, and especially such as had Brothers, or Kins-men slaine in the former Assaults, and they killed all, sparing no Age; broke into the Houses, and made the Women and Children Slaves, and pillaged the Goods; principally the Massagetes, who spared not the Churches, but killed many who fled into them; till Belisarius rode about and restrained them, and as∣sembling the Army, spake thus. Since God hath given us Victory, and the glory of subduing a City, heretofore impregnable; let us not prove unworthy of the Favour, but by our Clemency to the Vanquished, make it appeare, that we have
justly overcome them. Do not without limit extend your hatred to the Napoli∣tans, beyond the Rules of War. No Conquerours continue hating the Vanquish∣ed; if you kill them now, you are not rid of Enemies, but indamaged by the death fo your Subjects. So that do them no further harm, nor gratifie you owne Anger. It is base, having conquered your Enemies, to be overcome by your owne Passion. Take the Wealth, as the Reward of your Valour; but restore the Wo∣men and Children, and let the Conquered finde by the Events, what kinde of Friends they lost by their owne ill Counsels. Belisarius having thus said, released all their Women and Children, and other Prisoners, without enduring any Dishonour, and reconciled the Souldiers to them. So in the same day the Na∣politans had the Fortune to be made Slaves, and to recover their Liberty, with the most precious of their Goods; having hid their Gold, and things of Value from the Enemy, under ground, and so found them upon the Restitution of their Houses. Thus ended this Seige, having lasted twenty daies. CHAP. IX. THE Gothish Garrison, being 800. men, Belisarius took, and hurt not, but respected them as his owne Souldiers. Pastor, when he saw the Towne taken, fell dead of an Apoplexy, having never had any touch of it before; Asclepiodotus his associate, with some other chiefe men, came to Belisarius, whom Stephanus seeing, Thou vildest of all men (quoth he) what mischiefe hast thou done thy Country-men, and sold their safety for Barbarians Favour? If they had pros∣pered, thou wouldst have claimed Rewards, and accused us of Conspiracy with the Romans, who gave the best Counsels. And now the City being the Emperours, and we preserved by this mans Virtue, dar'st thou thus foolishly come to him? as if cleare of all disservice to the Neapolitans, and the Imperiall Army? Stepha∣nus in passion for the Disaster uttered this. But he answered him; Worthy Sir, you unwittingly extoll me, in that you raile at me for my affection to the Goths. None loves his Superiours in danger, but from a constant mind. Me the Victors shall finde a Defender of their State, as lately their Enemy. A faithfull man changeth not his Minde with Fortune, nor entertaines Propositions from Ene∣mies in an alteration. But he that is sick of Inconstancy, renounces his Friends upon his first feares. Having thus said, and retiring, the common people fol∣lowed and charged him with their Sufferings, and left him not, till they had kil∣led him, and torne him in peeces. And they entred Pastors house, searching, and not beleiving the Servants Affirmation of his Death, till they saw his Body, which they crucified in the Suburbes; then excused their doings to Belisarius upon such just provocation; and obtaining Pardon, went home. But the Goths in Rome, and other Townes that way, wondred to see Theodatus so tame, not offering to fight with the Romans, being his so neere Neighbours: And they suspected him to betray their State to Justinian, caring onely to live at ease himselfe, and to be rich. When they heard that Naples was taken, they assembled at Regêta 35. miles from Rome, and accused him openly. The place they found fit to encamp in, being neere to a faire Champian, and to the River of Decanovius, so called, because having made a compasse of 19. miles, it enters the Sea about the City of Taracina. Neere unto which is the Mountaine Circaeum, where they say Ʋlisses had the Company of Circe, improbably in my conceit; Homer affirm∣ing Circes house to be in an Island. Indeed Circaeum runs far into the Sea, and seemes an Island along the Shore to the Sailer: but being in it, he findes his mista∣king. Upon this reason Homer might call it an Island. But the Goths assembled at Regeta, chose Vitigis their King, a man of no conspicuous Family: but in Fights about Sirmium, against the Gepaedes (with whom Theodorick had War) he got great Reputation. Theodatus hearing his, ran away to Ravenna: after him Vitigis sent Optaris a Goth, to bring him alive, or dead. This Optaris had a pique a∣gainst Theodatus: for having betroathed a handsome Maid, an Inheritrix, Theodatus perswaded her for Wealth to marry another man. So that to gratifie his owne An∣ger
and Vitigis too, he pursued Theodatus eagerly day and night: And overtaking him upon the way, laid him upon his back like a Beast, and cut his Throat. This end made Theodatus in the third yeare of his Reigne. CHAP. X. VItigis then marcht to Rome, glad of the newes of Theodatus Death, and he put his Son Theudegisclus in safe Custody. From thence, finding things yet in no good preparation, he thought it best to go to Ravema, and having there com∣pleatly furnished himselfe, to enter into the War. He assembled therefore the Goths; and spake thus unto them. Great Actions, fellow Souldiers, prosper not commonly by suddaine Opportunities, but by solid Counsels; seasonable delay∣ing often doing good, and many undoing their hopes by undue hast. For men un∣provided, though equall in numbers, are more easily beaten in Fight, then though inferiour in Powers, yet well prepared. Let us not therefore, provo∣ked with the present honour, hurt our selves incurably. It is better with a short disgrace to preserve a perperuall Reputation, then avoding it for a moment, to be ever confounded with Ignominy.Leander cals this Venetia Marca Trivi∣giana. Our maine numbers, and our magazines are in Gaule, and Venetia, and other remote Parts. We have also a War with the Francks; which before we have setled, to enter into another, is folly. Who stands between two Enemies, and hath not his eye upon one at once, is com∣monly ruined by both. I say then, that we ought to go to Ravenna, and ha∣ving agreed the War with the Francks, and disposed our businesse, then to fight with Belisarius. Let none be ashamed, or feare that this Retraite will be called a running away. A seasonable Imputation of Cowardize hath crowned many a man with Successe: And the name of Valour, gotten by some before the time, hath ended in a Defeat. Let us not affect Names, but reall Advantages. Actions in their conclusions, not beginnings, shew the worth of men. They run not away, who returne upon the Enemy with greater preparations; but who hide them∣selves, as if they would keep their Bodies ever alive. And of this City be not af∣fraid. If the Romans be well affected to us, they will secure it for us; being to indure no extremity in the short time before we returne. If they be unsure, they will hurt us lesse by receiving the Enemy into their City; it being ever best to Encounter men that hate us in an open way. But this also I shall prevent; leaving in it a strong Garrison, and an able Commander; and that being so set∣led, we can have no hurt by this Retrait. The Goths approved this advise of Vitigis, and prepared for the Journey. Then Vitigis using many Exhortations to Liberius the Bishop of Rome, the Senate and People, to think of Theodoricks Reigne, and to continue their affections to the Gothish Nation, he bound them in strong Oathes; And leaving to guard Rome 4000. men under Leuderis, a man ancient, and much esteemed for his Wisedome, he marcht to Ravenna with the rest of his Army, ta∣king the most part of the Roman Senators with him in the quality of Hostages. There he married perforce Mattasuntha, a Beautifull Virgin, the Daughter of Amalasuntha, that by alliance with the Blood of Theodorick he might make his Reigne firme. Then he assembled the Goths from all parts, and ranckt them in or∣der, distributing Horses and Armes to them. Those onely lying in Gaule, for feare of the Francks, he sent not for. The Francks were formerly called Germans, where they first inhabited: and how they incroached upon Gaule, and then fell out with the Goths, I will tell you. I said before, how from Calis and the Ocean, into the Mediterranean, the left hand continent is called Europe; and that against it, Africk, and further on, Asia. The Countries beyond Africk I can say nothing of, being not inhabited; where∣by the Spring of Nile is unknowne, which, they say, comes from those Parts. But Europe at the first is like Peloponesus, having the Sea on both sides. The first Pro∣vince from the Ocean is named Spaine, unto the Alpes, which are in the Pyrenaean Mountaines (the Natives calling narrow passages, Alpes) From thence Gaule reaches to Liguria, where other Alpes divide the Gaules and Ligurians. Gaule is
broader then Spaine (for Europe begins narrow, and proceeds to a great breadth by degrees) and it hath the Ocean on the North side, and on the South the Tyr∣hene Sea. Among other Rivers it hath the Rhone, and the Rhine, having contrary courses; the Rhone into the Tyrrhene Sea, but into the Ocean the Rhine. Here Lakes also are, where-about anciently these Germans did inhabit, now called Francks, a Barbarian Nation, and at first not considerable. Beyond them dwelt theThey inhabit (some say) Belgia about Brabant. Arborychi, subject formerly to the Romans, as all the rest of Gaule and Spaine. Augustus planted the Thuringians to the East of the Arborychi, not far from whom to the South inhabited the Burgundians, and beyond the Thuringians the Suevians, and Almans, Potent Nations. All these were free States, and from all Antiquity seated there. In processe of time the Visigoths oppressing the Roman Em∣pire, subdued Spaine, and Gaule, to the River of Poe, and made them tributary. The Arborychi were then become Roman Souldiers, whom the Germans, or Francks, to bring them in Subjection, being their Borderers, and for having abandoned their former Common-wealth, pillaged, and made a generall War upon them. In this War the Arborychi shewed much Valour and Affection to the Romans: And the Germans not able to force them, offer'd to make them their Confederates, which they willingly embraced (both being Christians) and being joyned into one peo∣ple, they grew into a great power. Other Roman Souldiers also Garrison'd in the Confines of Gaule, being not able to returne to Rome, nor willing to mingle with the Goths their Enemies, and Arrians, yeilded themselves, their Ensignes, and the Country under their Guard to the Arborychi and Germans, which they have left to their Posterity, and preserved the Roman Customes, which to my time they re∣ligiously observe. They still are inrolled in the same Bands they anciently served in, have their proper Ensignes in Fights, and use the Roman Lawes, and Habit; and especially the Fashion of their Diadems. The Roman State flourishing, Gaule on this side the Poe was the Emperours; But Odoacer usurping the same, by the Tyrants cession, the Visigoths had all Gallia Cisalpina toThe Author calls the Pyre∣an and the Apennine by the name of Alpes. those Alpes, which sever Gaule and Liguria. Odoacer being slaine, the Thuringians and Visigoths; fearing the Ger∣mans power (who were grown a strong multitude, subduing all in their way) sought allyance with the Goths: And Theodorick afterward gladly contracted affi∣nities with them. Theudichusa his Daughter, a young Virgin, he betroathed to Alarick the younger, Prince of the Visigoths; and Amaloberga, the Daughter of his sister Amalafrida, he affianced to Hermenefridus, Prince of the Thuringians. And the Francks, fearing Theodorick, forbare to force the Visigoths and Thuringians, but made Warr upon the Burgundians. CHAP. XI. AFterwards the Francks and Goths made a league against the Burgundians, up∣on conditions to ruine the race of them, and to subdue their Countrey, and that the Conquerours shall have a Fine from the part not joyning in the War, but the Country to be a common conquest of both. The Francks accordingly went with a great Army against the Burgundians. Theodorick made preparations in shew, but delayed the expedition, expecting the event. At last he sent his Army, which he bade march faire and softly; and hearing the Francks to be vanquished, to go no further; but understanding them to be victorious, to march on speedily. They did so; And the Francks in a Battail with the Burgundians stifly fought, with much slaughter, routed the Enemie, and drave them into the uttermost borders of their country (where they had many strong places) and subdued the rest. The Goths hear∣ing it, were speedily with them; and being blamed by their Confederates, they al∣ledged the ill wayes, and paying their Fine, divided the Countrey with the Con∣querours. And thus Theodorick shewed his great providence, by gaining thus halfe the Countrey with a little money, and without losse of his Subjects: Thus the Goths and Francks held part of Gaule. Afterward the Francks power encreasing, without any feare of Theodorick, they led an Army against Alarick and the Visi∣goths.
Alarick sent for Theodorick, who marcht with a great Army to his ayde. In the meane time the Visigoths hearing how the Francks besieged Carcasona, en∣camped themselves neer to oppose them. The siege continuing, and their coun∣trey being spoyled by the Enemy, they murmured, and put scorns upon Alarick, rayling at the delay of his Kinsman, and affirming themselves strong enough with∣out company to beate the Francks. Alarick thus constrained to hazard a Battaile, before the Goths could come, was therein slaine, and many of his people by the Francks, who thus got the greatest part of Gaule. They straightly besieged Carca∣sona, hearing there was much treasure in it, which Alarick the Elder had pillaged, when he tooke Rome. There were the jewels of King Solomon, goodly pieces, by reason of a green stone in many of them, and long agoe taken by the Romans out of Jerusalem. The Visigoths remaining, made Giselick their Prince, a base sonne of Alarick; Amalarick, his Daughters sonne, being a child. But Theodorick co∣ming with the Goths Army, the Francks raised their siege; and returning from thence,Note. Beyond the Rhone in re∣spect of Italy. held the parts of Gaule beyond the Rhone to the Ocean; from which Theodorick could not drive them, and so let them keep it, and recovered the rest of Gaule. Giselick also being dead, he made Amalarick his Daughters son Prince of the Visigoths, and himselfe protector of the Child, and out of Carcasona he took the Treasures, and returned to Ravenna. His ayme was to make the Domini∣on of Spaine and Gaule his owne for ever, sending Forces thither, and Governors, whom he appointed to send the tributes to him, which (not to appear avaricious) he gave as a yearly donative to his Armies of Goths and Visigoths: who upon this occasion, of having one Prince and the same Country, marryed with one another, and mingled their races: And afterwards Theudis a Goth (whom Theodorick sent to command the Army) marryed a Wife of a rich Family of the Spaniards, no Visi∣goth, but very wealthy, and Lady of a great countrey. He had 2000. Souldiers, and a strong guard of Lanciers, and was in shew as Theodoricks Governour of the Visigoths, but in effect an usurper. Theodorick grown now an absolute wise man, fearing least while he had a Warr with his owne servant, the Francks might assaile him, and the Visigoths rebell, he discharged not Theudis of his command, but still upon any Warr directed him to lead the Army. Only he got some principall Goths to write to him, that he should do both justly, and as a wise man, to goe to Ravenna, and salute Theodorick. He continued obedient to Theodoricks command, and failed not in the annuall tribute, but to Ravenna he would neither goe, nor promise it. Theodorick being dead, the Francks invaded the Thuringians, killed their Prince Hermenfridus, and held them in subjection. Hermenfridus his Widow fled to Theo∣datus her Brother, then King of the Goths. Afterward the Francks vanquished the remaining Burgundians in a Battaile, and kept their Prince close prisoner in a Ca∣stle; they used them as men conquered in Warre, made them serve in their Armies, and their Countrey tributary which they dwelt in before. Amalarick Prince of the Visigoths,From the Poe and Gallia Cis-Alpina to the Rhone. being at mans estate, and fearing the Francks greatnesse, married the Si∣ster of their King Theudibert: And Gaule he gave to Atalarick his cozen german, King of the Goths. So that Gaule on this side the Rhone the Goths had, and that be∣yond it was subject to the Visigoths:Namely Galli∣a Narboner∣sis, or rather some part of it. And they agreed to suppresse the tribute im∣posed by Theodorick; And the said Atalarick fairly restored to Amalarick the treasures taken out of Carcassona by Theodorick. The two Nations being joyned thus in allyance, who had married any Wife of the other, might either goe with his Wife, or bring her home to his owne kindred; And some (as they pleased) brought home their Wives, others followed them. Amalarick afterward offended his Wives brother, and was ruined. He was an Ar∣rian, and permitted not his Wife, being orthodoxall, to use her country fashions, nor religion; but for her not applying her selfe to his customes, hee used her with much dis-respect. The Lady acquainted her Brother with her grievance, which put the Francks, and Visigoths into a War; and in a Battaile long and stoutly fought, Amalarick was vanquisht, with losse of many, and of his own life. Theudibert received his Si∣ster with all her goods, and so much of Gaule as the Visigoths held. The survivors with their Wives and Children went into Spaine to Theudis, who now openly usur∣ped.
So then all Gaule was held by the Francks and Goths: But Theodatus King of the Goths, hearing of Belisarius landing in Sicily, made an accord with the Francks; That they should command in the Warr; and have the Goths part of Gaule, and twenty Centenaries of gold to assist them in this War. But before this treaty was fi∣nished, he dyed as hath been told. CHAP. XII. AND many of the Goths best men under Marcias were Garrison'd in that part of Gaule; These Vitigis could not safely raise from thence, but thought them rather too weake for the Francks, who would certainly over-run that part of Gaule and Italy, if he with his Army went to Rome. So he called to him those Goths he trusted most, and said; I call you here to impart an advice not pleasing perhaps, but necessary; and you must heare patiently, and in the present case counsell what becomes you. Whose affaires are not according to their mind, such must obey necessity and fortune, and so manage the occasions presented. We are excellent well prepared for this War, save only that the Francks stand in our way; our ancient Enemies, with whom hitherto, though with the hazard of our lives and fortunes, we make our party good. But now (another Enemie appearing, against whom we must march) it behoves us to make peace with them. If they continue Enemies, certainely they will come with Belisarius; A common Enemy ever combines men in amity and mutuall ayde. And if we en∣counter them severally, we shall be beaten by both: So that it is better by loo∣sing a little, to save the maine of our Dominions, then by coveting all, to perish and loose all. My opinion is, if we give the Francks the parts of Gaule, borde∣ring on them, they will lay down their quarrels, and joyne with us in the Warre. How to recover those parts upon our good successe, let none examine now: I re∣member an old saying;To settle well the present. The principall Goths conceiving this course advantageous, resolved upon it, and Ambassadors were sent to the Francks, to surrender Gaule, and pay the money, and to conclude a Confederacy. The Princes of the Franks were then Childebert,Note. Clouis the first Christian K. of France had 4. sonnes, Childebert, Theodorick, Clotarius, and Clodomir. Clodomir di∣ed without is∣sue, and Chil∣debert had his partage; this Theodebert was sonne of Theodorick. See Agathias, lib. 1. cap. 1. Theudebert, and Clotarius, who received that Gaule with the money, and divided it proportionably to every mans dominion; They agreed to be firm friends to the Goths, and to send them succours, not Francks, but of the Nations subject to them. They could not enter into an open War with the Romans, having lately promised to joyne with the Emperour in this. The Ambassadors having dispatch'd, returned to Ravenna, and Vitigis sent for Marcias and his Troops. Belisarius in this mean time prepared his journey for Rome. He appointed 300. Foot under Herodian for the guard of Naples. He put a Garrison into Cuma to guard the Castle there; there being no strong place in all Campania, but Naples and Cuma. In Cuma they yet shew Sibyllas Cave, where her Oracle was. It is a mari∣time Towne, distant sixteen miles from Naples. Belisarius put his Army in or∣der; but the Romans fearing the fortune of the Napolitans, resolved to receive the Emperours Army, being moved thereunto chiefly by the Bishop of Rome, Liberi∣usNote. He calls this Bishop of Rome in the secret History Silverius. And so Helvicus in his Chronology.. They sent one Fidelius, born in Milan, a City of Liguria, and formerly Quae∣stor to King Atalaricus, inviting Belisarius, and promising to surrender the Ci∣tie. He led his Army by Via Latina, leaving Via Appia on his left hand; which Ap∣pius a Roman Consull made 900. years agoe; and it reaches five dayes journey from Rome to Capua: It is broad enough for two Carts a breast, and worth the sight; all the stones being of Mill-stone quarry, and very hard, and brought by Appius from a far countrey. They are smooth wrought, square, and close fastned, without brasse between, or any thing else. They are so well fastned and close, that one would thinke them to grow together. After so long a time trampling on by Carts, and Beasts every day, there is not the least chink in the pavement, nor any stone broken, nor worn out, nor that hath lost the brightnesse. But the Gothish Garrison in Rome understanding the Enemies approach, and the
Romans intent, were troubled; being not able both to guard the Citie, and encounter the Enemie. So that by the Romans permission they left Rome, and went to Raven∣na: Only Leuderis (ashamed it seems) staid behind. The same day and houre Be∣lisarius entred Rome with the Emperours Army at Porta Asinaria, and the Goths went out at Porta Flaminia.The taking of Rome, Anno 11. Iustiniani, Anno Dom. 337. Thus Rome was recovered in the. 11. yeare of Justini∣ans Reign, sixty yeares after the last taking of it. The keyes of it, and Leuderis Belisarius sent to the Emperour: He took care of the walls decayed in many places, and made the turrets tenable against an assault. He made Works upon the left side of every turret, to secure the Defendants left side from shot: And about the walls he drew a good deep ditch. The Romans commended the Generalls providence, and chiefly his skill in contriving the turrets: But they murmured, wondring he would enter Rome with an opinion of being besieged, a place unfit for a siege for want of provisions, being not upon the Sea, and having a huge compasse of walls, and in an open champian easily invested. But he, though he heard all this, yet still pre∣pared for a siege. The corn he brought from Sicily he kept in publique Granaries, and he compelled the Romans (though they grumbled) to bring in all their provi∣sions from their Farms. CHAP. XIII. A GOTH then, one Pitzas, yeilded to Belisarius halfe Samnium, lying upon the Sea, and the Goths there inhabiting to the River, which divides the coun∣trey. The Goths on the other side the River, neither would follow Pitzas, nor submit to the Emperour. Belisarius gave him some Souldiers to help to guard the Townes there. The Calabrians and Apulians having no Goths, had vo∣luntarily before submitted to Belisarius, both in the Mid land, and upon the Sea∣coast; Of which was Beneventum, anciently by the Romans called Maleventum; now Beneventum, to avoid the reproach of the name: for Ventus in Latine signi∣fies the Wind: because in Dalmatia over against it uses to blow a rough wind, du∣ring which no Traveller is seen upon the wayes; they all shut themselves in their houses. The force of the wind is such, that it snatches up a Horse-man and his Horse together, carries them in the ayre, and throws them down and kills them. And Be∣neventum standing high, and over against Dalmatia, shares in the inconvenience of this wind. Diomedes built the Citie, being banisht from Argos after the destru∣ction of Troy. It hath a monument of him, the teeth of the Calydonian Bore, the prize of Meleager his Uncle in that famous hunting, which are still there, and worth the seeing, the circumference like a half-moon, being of three spanns. Here they say Diomedes met with Aeneas, and according to Minerva's Oracle, gave him the Image stollen by him and Ʋlisses out of her Temple, when they came as spies into Troy, before the Citie could be taken. Afterward being sick, they say, he consulted the Oracle, which answered, that he should never have ease, unlesse he gave that Image to some Trojan. Where it is the Romans now know not, but shew the figure of it graven in stone, standing to my time in the Temple of Fortune, be∣fore the brazen Statue of Minerva in the open ayre, on the East-side of that Tem∣ple. It resembles Minerva fighting, and charging her Lance; yet in a long robe, and with a face not like her Grecian Statues, but as the ancient Aegyptians made them. They of Constantinople say, that Constantine buried the Statue in the Market-place bearing his name. But Belisarius thus conquered Italy on this side the Joni∣an Gulph, to Rome and Samnium. On the other side Constantianus (as hath been said) got all, to Liburnia. To speake something how Italy is inhabited; the Adriatique Sea dischar∣ges a stream farr into the firm Land, and makes the Jonian Gulph; Not as in other places, where the Sea running to the Land-ward, in the end makes an Isthmus, or neck of Land. As the Chrisaean Gulph ending in the Haven of Lechaeum by Corinth, makes there the Isthmus, being some five miles broad: And the Gulph Melas from the Hellespont makes another of the same breadth in Chersonesus. Whereas from
Ravenna, where ends the Jonian Gulph, to the Tyrrhene Sea, is eight days journey over land, by reason the current of that Sea is carried out farre to the South-ward. The first Towne on this side the Jonian Gulph is Otranto in Apulia. To the North of that Town is part of Calabria, and Samaium: Next to which is Picenia, reaching to Ravenna. On the other side of that Town is the rest of Calabria, then Bruttia, and Lucania. Next to which is Campania, to the City of Taracina. To them ad∣joynes the Territory of Rome. These Nations hold both the shores of the Mediter∣ranean, and all the Mid-lands that way. Here is that which was formerly call∣ed Magna Graecia. In Bruttia are seated the Epizephyrian Locrians, Crotonians, and Thurians. On the other side of the Jonian Gulph, first are the Graecians of E∣pirus, to Epidamnus, which stands upon the Sea. Bordering thereunto is the Pro∣vince of Precalis: Beyond which it is called Dalmatia, accompted of the western Empire, and all beyond it, as Liburnia, Istria, and Venetia, reaching to Ravenna. Above these up into the Land are the Siscians, and the Suevians (not those subject to the Francks) and the Carnians, and Norioi beyond them. To the right hand of whom are the Dacians and Pannonians, holding Singidon, Sirmium, and other places, & extending to the river Ister. The Nations on that side the Jonian gulph, the Goths at the beginning of this war ruled. Beyond Ravenna, to the left hand, and by North of the Poe, are the Ligurians, and beyond them North-ward the Albanians, in an ex∣cellent Countrey, called Languvilla. To the West of these Nations are the Gauls, and then the Spaniards. To the South of the Poe is Aemilia, and Tuscany, which reaches to the Territory of Rome. But Belisarius took all the said territory of Rome to the Tiber, and fortified it round about; which being in good estate, he directed Constantianus with a band of his owne Targetiers, and with Zanter, Chorsomanus, and Aeschmanus, Hunnes, and some of his Life-guard, and other Forces to march into Tuscany, and take in the Towns there. And he gave order to Bessas to take Narnia, a strong place in Tus∣cany. Bessas was of the race of the Goths formerly inhabiting Thrace, but followed not Theodorick into Italy. He was valiant, a skilfull Souldier, and an excellent Cap∣tain, and very dextrous in his own person. He got Narnia by the Inhabitants good will; and Constantianus as easily took Spoletum and Perusia, and some other Towns in Tuscany; the Tuscans willingly receiving him. He placed a Garrison in Spoletum, and himselfe with his Forces lodged in Perusia, the cheife Citie in Tusca∣ny. Vitigis sent an Army against him under Ʋnilas, and Pitzas, whom Constanti∣nus encountred in the Suburbs of Perusia. At first, the Barbarians having advan∣tage in numbers, the battaile was equall; but at last the Romans by their valour routed them, and killed them almost all; Their Commanders they sent prisoners to Belisarius. Vitigis upon this would stay no more at Ravenna, where he attended Marcias and his Troops. First he sent an Army under Asinarius and Ʋligisalus, to recover Dalmatia to the Goths; directing them to get Barbarians out of Suavia to joyne with them, and so to march directly to Salonae: Which to besiege by Sea also he sent along many Pinnaces. Then himself prepared to go against Belisarius, and Rome, with no lesse then 150000. Horse and Foot, the most of them armed, horses and Men. Asinarius raised an Army of Suevians; and Ʋligisalus led the Goths a∣lone into Liburnia, where he fought with the Romans at a place called Scardon, was beaten, and retired to the City of Burnus, where he staid for Asinarius. Constan∣tianus hearing of Asinarius his preparations, and fearing Salonae, drew together the Souldiers garrison'd thereabout, made a Ditch about the City walls, and provided against a siege. Asinarius with a great levy of Barbarians came to Burnus, and joyning with Ʋligisalus march'd to Salonae. They compast the Walls with their Trenches, and manning their Pinnaces with souldiers, blockt Salonae to the Sea-ward, and so besieged it by Sea and Land: But the Romans set sodainly upon their Pinnaces, scattered them, and sunck many with the men aboard, and took many, the men being gone. Yet the Goths raised not their siege, but were rather more eager upon the Romans within.
CHAP. XIV. IN the meane time Vitigis hearing of the smalnesse of Belisarius his Army, it re∣pented him for retiring from Rome; so not enduring longer where he was, in much anger he marcht thitherward. Upon the way he met a Roman Preist, of whom, they say, he ask'd earnestly, if Belisarius were yet at Rome; as fearing not to catch him before his running away. He bad him apprehend no such thing, undertaking that Belisarius would not fly, but stay upon the place: Which made him hast the more; openly praying, to see Rome before Belisarius were run out of it. Who hearing the whole Nation of Goths thus coming upon him, was troubled; For though his Army were very small, he would not leave destitute Constantinus and Bessas, nor abandon the places in Tuscany, least with them the Goths should block up Rome. So upon advice he sent to Constantinus, and Bessas, to leave competent Garrisons in the most important places, and with the rest to come to Rome. Con∣stantinus accordingly placing Garrisons in Spoletum and Perusia, came with the rest to Rome. But Bessas staying to settle Narnia, the Enemy passed that way, and the Feilds and Suburbs were full of them, being Avant-coureurs, whom Bessas char∣ged, and defeated them, and killed many; but prest with their numbers, he reti∣red into Narnia, where he left a Garrison; and coming to Rome, brought newes, that the Enemie would speedily be with them. Narnia stands almost 44. miles from Rome. Vitigis would not spend time upon Perusia, and Spoletum, being strong places. His desire was to find Belisarius in Rome, before he was run away. And Narnia possest by the Enemy, and a place steep and hard of accesse, he would not stir neither: it stands on a high hill, at the foot whereof is the River of Narnus, giving the name to the City; and it hath two ascents on the East and West sides; the one narrow with ragged rocks; to the other is no coming, but over the bridge upon the River, which is an ancient building of Augustus Caesar, admirable to see, and with the highest arches we know. Vitigis, not to spend time, speedily went thence with his whole Army toward Rome, marching through the Sabins Coun∣trey. Being within a mile and three quarters thereof, he came to a bridg upon the Tiber, where Belisarius had built a Tower, and Gates, and placed a Garrison. The Tiber was every where passable by Boats and other Bridges; but this he did, to put the Enemy to more delay (expecting from the Emperour more Forces) and that the Romans might have the more time to bring in provisions; conceiving that the Goths repulsed here, could not passe by any other Bridge in lesse then twenty days; and to get Boats would be a longer worke. Upon these considerations he placed that Garrison. The Goths lodged neer it, and the next day intended to assault the Tower. Here came to them 22. Fugitives, Barbarians born, but Roman Souldiers of Innocentius Horse-troop. Belisarius thought fit to make a Camp neer the Tiber, the more to hinder the Enemies pas∣sage, and to give some demonstration of their own courage. The Roman Garrison upon the Bridg frighted with the multitude, and the dan∣ger, quitted the Tower at night, and ran away into Campania. They would not goe to Rome, fearing chastisement from the Generall, or ashamed to see their fellowes. The next day the Goths brake down the Gates, and passed over, none opposing. Whereof Belisarius hearing nothing, with 1000. Horse marcht toward the bridg, to view their ground, where they might best incamp; who lighting upon the Enemy newly passed over, were engaged in a fight unwillingly. They were both sides Horse: And Belisarius, though formerly cautions, observed not then the ranck of a Generall, but fought in the head of his Souldiers, which hazarded extreamly the Roman affairs, the whole inclination of the War depending on him. But he was up∣on a Horse used to the War, and skilfull to save his Rider. He was of a brown bay, and from the fore-head to the nostrils white (Such a Horse the Grecians call , and the Barbarians, Balan.) Most of the Goths shot at Belisarius and his Horse up∣on this occasion. Those new-come Fugitives seeing Belisarius fighting in the first ranck, & knowing that by his fall the Romans would be ruined, cryed aloud to shoot at the bald fac'd Horse. This word ran through the Goths Army, who in the tumult
being not inquisitive, nor certain it was Belisarius, but guessing the word so general∣ly spred was not for nothing, most left all others, and shot at Belisarius. Such as were ventrous, and ambitious of honour, got neer, reacht at him, and in fury layd on with Lances and swords. And Belisarius layd about him too, killing those within his reach. The affection of his Lanciers and Targetiers stood him in good stead in this danger; who sticking close to him, shewed valour, the like whereof (I think) was never seen, holding their sheilds before the Generall, and receiving all the arrowes, and thrusting off the multitudes with main strength. CHAP. XV. THus was the whole fight about one man, wherein fell at least 1000 Goths, and such as fought in the first rancks. Many of the best of Belisarius his Retinue were slaine, and Maxentius, one of his Lanciers, after he had performed bravely: Himselfe was neither wounded that day nor shot, though the fight was about him alone. In conclusion, the Romans routed the Enemy; multitudes flying, till they re∣covered their campe: where their foot being fresh, received the Romans, and easi∣ly repulsed them. Who seeing another supply of Horse coming, fled up to a Hill, where they made a stand; and encounter'd the Barbarian horse overtaking them. Where Valentinus, Gentleman of the horse to Photius, Antonina's sonne, shewed ex∣traordinary valour, gallopping into the thickest of the enemy, and stopping their course, and bringing off his company; and thus they escaped to the Walls of Rome, with the Barbarians at their heels up to the gate, now called Belisaria. The Ro∣mans within, fearing the Enemy might enter pell mell, would not open the gate, not∣withstanding Belisarius's earnest commands, loud cries, and threats, who could not be discerned from the Turret (it being after Sun set) having his face covered with bloud and dust, and they did not think the Generall to be alive; those that ran away at the first defeat having reported him to be slain, fighting bravely in the head of his troopes. The Enemy therefore coming with multitudes, and much Fury, thought to get over the ditch, and charged the retirers, who near the Walls stood thick and close body to body in a small roome. And they within being no Souldi∣ers, nor prepared at all, and afraide of their city, could not succour them; when a sudden bold resolution of Belisarius saved all, who encouraging his company, char∣ged the Enemy: and they being disordered, as in the dark, and upon a chase, and see∣ing those that fled unexpectedly coming on, suspected succours to be come from the city, and in a fear run all away. Belisarius pursued them not, but turned about to the walls; whom the Romans, taking heart, received in, and his company. In so great pe∣rill was Belisarius, and the Emperours affaires. The fight beginning in the mor∣ning ended at night; wherein Belisarius did best of the Romans, and of the Goths Visandus the standard bearer, who with the rest charged Belisarius; and went not off, before hee fel to the ground after 13 wounds received, and neglected by his com∣panions (though they had the victory) he was left among the dead. Three dayes after, the Goths being encamped neer Rome, sent out to bury the dead men, and to performe their funerall rites: these searching the bodies, found Visandus with breath in him, but he could not speak; his inward parts with famin and drouth being ex∣treamly inflamed, they put water in his mouth, and so having drunk and got life, they carried him to the campe; and for this he was in great reputation with the Goths, and he lived long after. Belisarius being in safety, assembled his souldiers to the walls, and most of the common people; commanding them to light fires, and to watch all night. He went the round himself, set all in order, and appointed com∣manders to every gate. Bessas, who guarded Porta Praenestina, sent him word, that the town was entred by the Enemy at a gate bearing the name from Saint Pancra∣tius. The company advised Belisarius to escape out at some other gate; but hee misliked the motion, sent horsemen down to the Tiber, who upon the view brought word, that there was no Enemy thereabout appearing. Wherefore he sent directi∣on to the Commanders of every gate, if they heard that the Enemie was entred at any other part, not to succour, but to continue upon their guards; least they should be
disordered with false alarms; Himself would take care of those things. Vitigis (the Romans being in this tumult) sent a Commander named Vacis, to Porta Salaria, who reviled there the Romans for their disloyalty to the Goths, and thus betraying their countrey, and indeed themselves, having exchanged the Goths power, for Greeks, unable to defend them; none of which nation were formerly seen in Italy, but stage-players, and some pilfring mariners. But seeing none would answer him, he went back to Vitigis. The Romans also flouted Belisarius, who had so hardly escaped, yet bade them despise these Barbarians; for he knew he should absolutely beat them. By what he knew this, shal be sayd anon; but now it being grown late, and he being yet fasting, his wife and freinds had much ado to perswade him to eat something. CHAP. XVI. THe next day the Goths thinking with ease to enter Rome, by reason of the great∣nesse of it; and the Romans defending it, were thus quartered. The city hath fourteen gates, and some posterns; but the Goths, unable to encompasse the whole circuit thereof, made ixe intrenchments, and infested the space of five Gates, from Porta Flaminia to Porta Praenestina. These were on this side the Tiber; But fearing least the enemy should take down Pons Milvius, and so exclude them from all from the river to the sea, and thereby might not feel the inconveniences of the Seige; they made a seventh Intrenchment on the other side of Tiber, in Nero's feilds; that they might have the sayd bridge in the midst between their Camps. And so they infested two gates more;It was called Porta Trium∣phalis, & Va∣ticana, and was next to Pons Trium∣phalis, Leand. in descrip. Italiae. Mons Jani∣culus it was called. Porta Aurelia (now named of Peter, the cheife of Christs Apostles, lying buried neer unto it) and the Gate beyond the Tiber. Thus they incompassed half the city; and being not cut off by the River, made the warre in what part of it they pleased. The Romans have built their walls on both sides the River, thus. The Tiber grown great, runnes a good space by the walls on this side of it, which stand by the Rivers side, upon Ground flat, and very assaultable. Opposite to them beyond the Tiber, is a * great hill, where stand the City mills; the water being brought by an Aquaeduct to the hill top, and from thence descending with much swiftnesse: which caused the ancient Romans to compasse this hill, and the Rivers banck neer it with a wall; that an Enemy might not demolish the mills, nor passe the River to assail the town walls; which with a bridge they joyned to this part; and building houses upon this ground beyond the Tiber, took the River into the midst of the City. The Goths also made deep ditches about their intrench∣ments; and casting the Earth inward, and therewith making the intrenchment very high, and pitching the top with multitude of stakes, they made their camps not in∣feriour to so many Castles. The Entrenchment in Nero's feilds Marcias comman∣ded, being come out of Gaule with his troops, and there quartered. The other were commanded by Vitigis, and five other; a Commander to every intrenchment. They cut also all the Aquaeducts, to cut off the cities water that way: they are fourteen in all, ancient works of brick; and so deep and broad, that a man on Horse back may ride in them. But Belisarius to guard the City used this order; himself had Porta Pincia∣na, and Porta Salaria standing to the right hand of it, because the wall there is very assaultable; and being opposite to the Enemy, the Romans were to sally there. He gave Porta Praenestina to Bessas, and to Constantianus Porta Flaminia (which stands to the left hand of Pinciana) and rammed up the gate with stones within, that it might not be opened; fearing the Enemies designs there, being close to one of their Entrenchments. The other gates he directed the commanders of the foot to guard. The Aquaeducts he fortified a good space, to avoyd mischeife that way from without. But the Aquaeducts being cut, they wanted water for their mills, and with beasts they could not worke, their scarce provisions of fodder (as in a siege) not sufficing for their horses of service. Belisarius to help this, tied cables before the bridge, that joyned to the City wall, from one banck of the river to the other, stretching them stiff, and fastning boats to them two foot asunder, where the stream from the arches
of the bridge ranne strongest; and putting into each boat a mill-stone, he hung the Engine between the boats which turns the Mill. Beneath these he tied other boats together in the same manner in a distance proportionable, fitting them with like En∣gines; and the stream being strong, and turning the Engins, set the Mill stones on worke, and grinded sufficient for the City. The Enemies informed hereof by fugitives, endeavored to spoil the Engins by throwing into the River great trees and bodies of Romans slain, and these being driven down with the stream, brake the Engins at first; but Belisarius had this remedy. He hung before the bridge iron chains a-cross the River, which stopt all that came down the stream; which men appointed drew up to the land; and this he did not only for the mills, but to prevent the Enemies entrance with boats through the bridge into the midst of the City. The Barbarians failing in their attempt gave it over, and the Romans made use of those mills, but for want of water were shut from their Baths; they had sufficient to drinke, those who dwelt far from the River having the commodity of wells. Their common sew∣ers they needed not secure, having all their mouthes into the River; and so impossible to be entred by the Enemy. In the mean time among the Samnites, their boyes who kept their sheep, chusing two of the lustiest, and calling one Belisarius and the other Vitigis, caused them to wrestle. It was Ʋitigis chance to be thrown; whom the boyes in sport hung on a tree, and suddenly a wolfe appearing, they all ran away, and poor Ʋitigis after a long time hanging in great pain dyed. The Samnite upon this accident punisht not the boyes, but divining at the event, beleived that Belisarius would get the Victo∣ry. CHAP. XVII. BUT the people of Rome not used to the miseries of warr, and a siege; and now wanting their baths, and pincht with scarcity, being put also to guard the walls, and want their sleepes; supposing too, that ere long their City would be taken, and seeing already their country farmes spoiled by the E∣nemy; they murmured greivously to be besieged and run this hazard, having done no offence. So assembling themselves, they railed at Belisarius for presuming to make war with the Goths, having no competent forces from the Emperour, and the Senators privatly objected the same unto him. Ʋitigis understanding this from fu∣gitives, to exasperate them yet more, and so to put the Romans affaires into confu∣sion, he sent Ambassadors to Belisarius; among whom was one Albes, who having accesse to him in the presence of the Senate, and Commanders of the army, spake thus. Anciently, O Generall! men fitly defining names for things, have distin∣guisht presumption from valour; the one drives men into danger with dishonour, the other with virtue brings abundantly glory. One of these hath brought you hither, and which of them you may quickly manifest. If in the confidence of your valour you have entred into this warr; you see from your walls your Enemies; and brave S•. you have meanes to be valiant enough. If through presumption you have invaded us, you will certainly repent what you have rashly done, as over-weening men ever use when they come to the tryall: Adde not therefore more misery to these Romans, whom Theodorick hath bred in freedom and delights; and oppose not your self against the Lord of the Goths and Italians. How absurd is it for you, shut up thus, and affraid of your Enemies, to lodge in Rome, while her King lives in a trench, acting the mischeifes of a war upon his own Subjects? Yet will wee grant to you and your troopes a free retreat, and leave to carry away your goods; holding it not religious nor manly to insult upon men, who have learnt to be sober again. But we would willingly aske these Romans wherewith they can charge the Goths, that they thus have betrayed both us and themselves; having hitherto enjoyed our moderation, and now finding what your aides are. Belisarius to this speech made this answer. Our season for fighting shall not be at your disposing; men use not to make war by the advise of their Enemies, whose Law is for every man to order his owne businesse to his owne liking: The time
will come when you would hide your heads in bushes, and shall not be able. We having taken Rome, possesse nothing that is anothers. You usurped it formerly being not yours, and now have restored it to the ancient owners. And who ever of you hopes to enter Rome without fighting, he is mistaken. It is impossible Be∣lisarius should live, and so much degenerate. Thus spake Belisarius. But the Romans for fear sate mute, not daring to contradict the Ambassadors, though re∣proached thus with treason. Onely Fidelius was bold to reprove them, being Pre∣fect of the pallace made by Belisarius, and most affected to the Emperours Service. The Ambassadors were reconducted to the campe; whom Vitigis askt what manner of man Belisarius was, and how resolving, touching his retreat. They answered, that the Goths hoped an impossibility, if they thought to fright Belisarius: whereup∣on Vitigis resolved to assault the City; for which he was thus prepared. He made Towers of wood equall with the walls; having the just measure of them by often numbring the stones: at the Bases and corners of the towers were wheeles, which with ease were moved and turned about as the assailants pleased, and drawn by ox∣en. He fitted also many Ladders, and made four Rammes; which Engin is made first setting up four woodden pillars equall and opposite to each other; into which are mortessed eight crosse beams, four above and four into the Bases, making the form of a little house four square. This instead of roofe and walls was covered with Skins, that it might be light to draw, and they within secure from shot. Within a∣bout the Engin aloft, hangs another crosse beam with loose chains, the top where∣of is made sharpe, and over it a great quantity of iron layd as on the head end of an arrow, where the said iron is made four square like an anvill. The Engin is rai∣sed upon four wheeles, fastned to the four pillars; and within fifty men at least move it, who having set it to the walls, draw the said loose beam backward with a pully, then let it go with violence at the walls; and by often shooting it thus, it shakes and makes a breach where it hits: hence the Engin hath the name; the point of the said beam putting forth, and pushing like a ram. The Goths also had quantity of fagots of wood and reed ready, to make the ground and the City ditch even for their Engins to passe without rubb. Belisarius upon the other side placed upon the Towers engins called Balistae. These have the form of a bow, with a hollow horne sticking out beneath and hanging loose, but lying upon a strait peice of Iron: when they are to shoote, they bend the two peices of wood, making the two ends of the bow, with cord; and put the arrow upon the hollow horne, being halfe so long as common arrowes, and four times as thick. It mounts not with feathers, but in∣stead thereof hath thinn peices of wood mortess'd in, and it is in shape wholly like common arrowes, having a head of iron proportionable to its thicknesse; men at both ends bend the bow with pullyes; and the hollow horne going forward, at last falls off, and out flies the arrow with such force, that it reaches twice as far as an arrow from a bow, and lighting upon tree or stone, cleaves it asunder. It is called Balistae, because it shootes very far. Other Engins were set upon the battlements proper for slinging stones, and are like slings, and are called wild Asses. At the Gates they set up wolves,These wolves were something like Potteulis∣ses. made thus. They set two beams from the ground reaching to the battlements; and laying Chequer wise peices of Timber wrought, some upright and some a crosse, they joynt them so, that the mortessing holes meete one another. And before each joynt sticks out a pointed peice of wood like a thick spurr and fastning the crosse timbers to another beam, which from the top reaches half way down, they lay the beams flat-long upon the Gates, & an Enemy approach∣ing, men above lay hold of the higher ends of the beams and thrust them down, which falling suddenly among the Assailants with those wooden points sticking out, kill all they light on. Belisarius having these preparations, the Goths conducted by Vitigis himself the eighteenth day of the siege about sun rising, marcht to the assault. The Towers and Rams in the head of them astonisht the Romans, not used to such sights. But Belisarius seeing the Enemies order with their Engins, fell into a laughing, and bade the Souldiers stand and begin no fight, till he gave the Signall. He imparted not the reason of his laughing, but afterward it was known. The Romans thinking he jeer'd them, railed at him, and called him an impudent man, and extreamly mur∣mured, that he did not stop the Enemy coming neer or still. Who being approacht the town ditch, the Generall bent his bow and shot an armed man, leading the rest
into the neck; and the wound being mortall, the man fell downe with his face up∣ward. All the people of Rome upon the Battlements taking it for an excellent pre∣sage, made a huge shout. Belisarius shot again, with the like fortune, and againe there was a greater shout from the walls, that the Romans within thought the E∣nemy had been vanquisht. Then Belisarius gave the signall to the whole Army to shoot, and commanded those about himselfe, to employ all their Arrows against the Oxen; which soone fell all, and so the Enemy could neither bring on their Towers, nor invent any remedy, being puzzel'd in the midst of their business. Then was known Belisarius providence, not to stop them afar off; and that he laughed at their sottishnesse, in hoping to bring their Oxen to their Enemies walls so unadvi∣sedly. These things were about Porta Belisaria. CHAP. XVIII. BUT Vitigis being there repulsed, left a good part of the Army, ordered in a deep Batallion; and directing the Commanders, not to assaile the walls, but to stand in their orders, and ply the Battlements with shot, to divert Belisa∣rius from succouring another part (which with greater Forces hee meant to assault) he marched toward Porta Praenestina, to that part which is called Vivari∣um (or the Park) where the Walls are most assaultable, having other Engines of Rammes, Towers, and scaling Ladders. The Goths also made another assault a∣gainst Porta Aurelia; without which stands Adrians Tomb, a stones cast from the wals, worth the sight. It is made of Parian stone close joyned, without any other matter within. It hath four equall squares, each being neer a stones cast broad, and is higher then the City walls. On the top are Statues of the same stone of men and horses, of admirable worke. This tombe the Citizens have anciently joyned to the walls by two Flanckers from the same; that it shews as a turret defending the gate there. The Fortification being very sufficient, Belisarius gave the command of it to Constantianus, directing him to take care of the wall adjoyning, which had but a small guard. For the wall being there strong (the river running under it, he look't not for an assault that way, and so put no important guard at it; distributing his maine Forces (which were but few) to the most necessary places. For the Empe∣rours Army at the beginning of this siege amounted but to five thousand men in Rome. Constantianus perceiving the Enemy to attempt a passage over the Tiber, and fearing the Flancker there, himselfe went to the succour with a few, directing the rest to guard the Gate and Adrians tomb. Where the Goths gave on, holding be∣fore them their leather Bucklers like Persian Targets, and having no engines of Batteries, but store of scaling Ladders and Archery, thinking quickly to perplex the Enemy, and master the Garrison being few. Their opposites saw them not, till they came very neer, being covered by the Porticus, which reaches to Saint Peters Church. Then suddenly the Goths shewing themselves, began; and the Romans were not able to use their Balistas (which can shoot but right forward) nor with their Archery to annoy them, the shot doing no good by reason of those Bucklers. The Goths prest hard, and shot thick at the Battlements, and were ready to se their Ladders to the Flanckers, having almost encompassed the tomb, and when the Ro∣mans came on, still wheeling about at their backs. The Romans were troubled, see∣ing no hope of holding out, till they agreed to take down the Statues being great, and the stones huge, which they threw down upon the Enemies heads. Who being hurt, gave ground by little and little, and the Romans grew bold, and repelled them with their Bowes and stones; and falling to their Engines, put them into feare, so that their assault was not long. And Constantianus appearing, frighted those who attempted to passe the River, not finding the Flancker there without guard, as they imagined. Thus the Aurelian gate was in safety, and all about it. The Enemy also attemp∣ted Porta Pancratiana upon the River, but did no good upon the place, being strong,
and the walls not easily assaultable there, standing on steep ground. Paulus with his Foot company guarded there. Neither attempted they Porta Flaminia, scituate upon craggy ground, not easie of accesse, and guarded by a Foot-company of Rhe∣gians, commanded by Ʋrsicinus. Between this gate and Porta Pinciana, next it on the right hand, part of the wall had been long broken halfe way down from the top. It fell not, but panch't on both sides, part appearing inward, and part outward: whence the Romans call it the broken wall. Belisarius at his first coming, going a∣bout to repair it, the Romans hindered him, alleadging that the Apostle Peter had promised to guard the place, whom above all they reverence. And it succeeded ac∣cording to their expectation: For neither that day, nor during all the siege of Rome the Enemy ever approacht it, not was the least trouble about it. And we wondered in all the time, that the place never came into the Enemies thoughts, having made so many assaults, and attempts by night. No man since hath been so bold as to re∣paire it, but still the wall remains broken. At Porta Salaria in the meane time, a tall goodly man, valiant, and of good quality among the Goths, being armed with Corslet and Morion, left his ranke; and standing on a tree, threw a rope up to the Battlements, whom an arrow from a Balista piercing through his body halfe way into the tree, nailed him dead to the same. This frighted the Goths from coming within arrow-shot, and kept them in their ranks, from infesting any more those up∣on the walls. CHAP. XIX. IN the meane time Bessas and Peranius (whom Vitigis hotly charged in the Vi∣varium) sent for Belisarius. And he speedily came to their reliefe, fearing the weaknesse of the wall in that part; and leaving at Porta Salaria one of his retinew, He encouraged the Souldiers in the Park, frighted with the assault, and the Enemies multitude. Anciently the Romans finding the ground flat, and fit for invasion, and the bricks of the wall there grown loose, scarce sticking toge∣ther, compassed the same with a Flancker, not so much for safety (for it had no Battlements, nor other Fortification upon it, to resist an Enemy) but for plea∣sure, to keep in it Lions, and other wild Beasts, whereupon it was named Vivari∣um, the Park. Vitigis made ready his Engines against the wall there, and command∣ed the Goths to get through the Flancker into the Park, and then he knew he should be easily master of the Town-walls, being weake. Belisarius seeing the Enemy dig∣ging through into the Park, and in many parts assaulting the walls, suffered not his men to defend, nor stay upon the Battlements, but held them, with their swords and Armour ready neer unto the Gate there. The Goths having now cut through the wall, and entred the Park, he sent out Cyprianus with his company to begin the fight; who killed them all, falling downe for feare, and spoiled by one another, running out at their narrow breach: the whole Enemy being amazed with the sud∣dennesse, and out of their orders, and some carried one way, some another. Belisa∣rius instantly opened the Gate, and sallied with the whole Army; And the Goths having no mind to fight, ranne away every man; whom the Romans followed, and killed them with ease, and had a long execution; the Goths having assaulted there far from their Entrenchments. Belisarius commanded to burn the Enemies Engines, which with the flame (being high) more astonished them. At Porta Sa∣laria also they sallied at the same time unexpectedly, killed the Enemy running a∣way without resistance, and burnt their Engines. The flame rose above the walls, which put them all to a generall retreat: the Romans from the walls shouting to encourage the pursuers, and the others from the Entrenchments wailing the dis∣aster. Thirty thousand Goths were slain that day (as their Commanders affirmed) and more wounded. For from the Battlements shooting at multitudes, they sel∣dome mist; and they who sallied, slew heaps of amazed flying men, and the busi∣nesse lasted from morning to evening. At night they retreated; the Romans singing their Paeans upon the walls, extolling Belisarius with acclamations, and some strip∣ping
the dead bodies; and the Goths curing their wounded, and mourning for their dead. Belisarius also wrote to the Emperour this letter. We are come into Italy, according to your commands, and have gained a great part of the Country, and taken Rome, expelling the Goths, whose Commander Leuderis we send.Belisarius de∣fended Rome with 5000 a∣gainst 150000. Goths. But in the strong places of Sicily and Italy (which we took by siege) we have left the greatest part of our Armie; that it is now reduced to 5000 men, the Enemie assailing us with 150000. First, going out to discover the Ene∣my neer the Tiber, we were put to fight beyond our determination, and were al∣most overwhelmed with the multitude of their Lances. Afterward they made a generall assault with men and Engines on all sides, and failed little of taking Rome at the first assault, if fortune had not rescued us. Hitherto what hath been done by fortune, or valour, hath succeeded well: But now I must entreat, what may conduce to your future service. I will never conceale what it behoves me to say, and you to do. I know affaires goe as God guides them, but the Governours of them get blame or commendation by the actions they perform. So that Armes must be sent us, and such numbers of Men, as that we may encounter the Ene∣my with aequivalent powers. We must not ever trust to fortune, which runs not always one way. And consider, O Emperour! That if the Goths now beat us, we shall loose Italy (now yours) and our Army too; besides the disgrace for our ill carriage of the businesse. And we shall also undoe the Romans, who have pre∣ferred their faith to your Empire before their safety; and so will our prosperity prove the occasion of our calamity. For if we had been repulsed from Italy, or before from Sicily, the lightest of misfortunes would have troubled us only; not to be rich with other mens goods. You are to consider also, that Rome was never before kept so long, with many thousands; it compasses so much ground: and being not upon the Sea, it is excluded from necessaries. The Romans yet are well affected to us, but the prolongation of their miseries will make them choose the best for themselves▪ New freinds to any men, keep faith, not when they suf∣fer, but when they prosper by them. Besides, the Romans will by famine be for∣ced to do things they would not. I know I owe my death to your Majesty, so that none shall ever pull me out of this place alive; But think, what glory such a death of Belisarius will bring you. The Emperour upon this letter gathered an Army and Ships, and sent direction to Valerianus, and Martinus, who were dispatch'd with an Army about the Winter Solstice, to saile for Italy with all speed; but not able to keep the Sea further, went on Land, and wintred in Aetolia, and Aarnania. The Emperour advertised Beli∣sarius thereof, which much comforted him and the Romans. In the mean time in Naples this happened. The Image of Theodorick, King of the Goths stood in the Market-place, made of small peeble stones, dyed into all colours. In his life time the stones of the head of this Image peeled and shed off, and present∣ly after he dyed: Eight years after, the peebles forming the Images belly dropt off, and instantly Atalarick dyed, Theodoricks daughters son: soon after fell off the pe∣bles upon the privities, and then his daughter Amalasuntha was murthered. And now the Goths besieging Rome, the limbs down to the Images feet were in the same manner spoiled, and the whole out-side defaced; and the Romans divining upon it, were confident of the Emperours prevailing in this Warr; taking Theodoricks feete for his Subjects, the people of the Goths. In Rome also some Patricians produced O∣racles of Sibylla, that the Cities danger would last but till July; when the Romans should have a King, through whom they should no more feare Geticke Nations: And the Goths, they say, are a Nation of Getes. In the Oracle it is the fifth moneth, which they interpreted July; some, because the siege began in the beginning of March, from which July is the fifth; others, because before Numa March was the first moneth, there being but ten in all, whence July was called Quintilis. But this was mistaken all. For the Romans had no such King, and the siege was raised after that time, and another siege was under Totilas King of the Goths, as shall be said hereafter. I conceive the Prophesie to intend not this, but some other invasion of Barbarians, happened already, or to come: And to find the meaning of Sibylla's Oracles before the event, is not possible, for a cause I shall tell you, having read them all over. Sibylla utters not things in order, nor with any congruity. Having
said a few words of the calamities of Africa, instantly she leaps into Persia; Then talks of the Romans, then comes to the Assyrians. Then having prophesied again of the Romans, she fore-tels the miseries of the Brittons; that it is not possible to un∣derstand her, before the event of her Oracles; when time, having made the tryall, proves the only exact Interpreter thereof. But to return to my matter. CHAP. XX. THE Goths were thus repulsed, and both parts past that night as I have sayd. The next day Belisarius commanded the Romans to send away their Wives and Children to Naples, and such servants as were not usefull for defence of the City, to save victuals; and he willed the Souldiers to send away their women servants, telling them he should not be able to feed such, but must be con∣strained to put themselves to half victuals every day, & to take the remainder of their entertainments in money. They did so, and multitudes went into Campania, some getting shipping at the Port of Rome, and the rest going by Via Appia by Land. And neither that way, nor to the Port feared they danger; the Enemie being not a∣ble to encompasse Rome with their Entrenchments, nor daring in small parties to be far from their Camp, for feare of the Romans excursions: That the besieged had meanes enough for a time to remove out of the Citie, and to bring in provisions, especially by night. For the Goths were affraid, and attending their Guards, kept in; and the Moores often sallyed, and finding them either asleep, or in small com∣panies upon the wayes to pasture their Cattell, or to get necessaries for themselves (as is usuall in great Armes) they killed and stript them; and if they saw numbers of Enemies charging them, they ran home, being naturally swift of foot, lightly apparelled, and beginning to fly in time. Thus the uselesse multititude got away out of Rome, some into Campania, some into Sicily, or whether they could with most ease. But the Souldiers being few, and not sufficient for so great a circuit of wall, and some being to take their rest, while others guarded; and the common people being poor handi-crafts men, having nothing but from one day to another, and there be∣ing no means to releive them; Belisarius mingled them with the Souldiers upon the Guards, and appointed them them a daily pay, raising Companies of them, com∣petent to guard the Citie; and to every company allotting their nights, so that all in their turnes stood Sentinells. And by this meanes the Souldiers were releived, and they fed. Having some suspition that Liberius Bishop of Rome practised to betray the Citie to the Goths, he sent him into Greece, and made Vigilius Bishop soone after. Upon the same ground he banished some Senators, whom he recalled after the siege was raised, and the Goths retired. One of these was Maximus, whose Grand-father. Maximus ruined the Emperour Valentinian. Fearing designs upon the Gates, and lest some might be corrupted with money, he brake the old keyes twice a moneth, and made new of the same form. And he stil changed the Sentinels to other Guards far off; and every night appointed new Commanders of those Guards, who were directed every night by turns to goe rounds, with notes in writing of the Sentinels names, and where any was missing, to place new in his roome, and the next day to produce the defaulters for due punishment to be inflicted. And he commanded Musitians to play all night on their Instruments upon the walls. He sent out Moores also with dogs to lye all night about the ditch, to discover such as came towards the walls though afar off. Some Romans then attempted secretly to force open the gates of Janus. This was the chiefe of those ancient gods, whom the Romans called Penates. His Temple is in the Forum, before the Senate house, a little beyond the Temple of the three Fates. It is all of Brasse, four-square, high enough only to cover the Image, which is of brasse also, five cubits high, resembling a man, only it hath two faces, one stan∣ding to the East, and the other to the West, and against each face are brazen gates,
which the Romans anciently kept shut in Peace and Prosperity, and in time of War set them open. But since the Romans have imbraced Christian Religion, as much as any men whatsoever, they opened these Gates no more, though they were in Wars. But in this Seige, some having the old Religion (I think) in their mindes, endea∣voured secretly to open them, but could not wholly, but onely so much, as they stood not close together as before. The Actors were not knowne, nor inquired after in that troublesome time; none of the Magistrates, and few of the People having no∣tice of it Vitigis in the meane time being in Rage, and troubled, sent some of his Lanciers to Ravenna to kill the Roman Senators, whom in the beginning of the War he had brought thither. Some having notice of it, fled; of whom were Ger∣bentiu, and Reparatus, Brother to Vigilius Bishop of Rome; who both got into Liguria, and there staid; the rest all perished. CHAP. XXI. VItigis also seeing the Enemies free scope of exporting from the City what they pleased, and of importing Provisions by Sea and Land; resolved to take in Portus, the Romans Haven, standing almost 13. miles from the City, (so far is Rome distant from the Sea:) and being at the mouth of the Tiber, which coming from Rome, and being almost within two miles of the Sea, parts in two, and makes the Holy Island. This Island growes still broader downe the River, and for about two miles together is as broad as long, and on both sides of it the Tiber is navigable in two severall Streames. The right-hand Stream runs into the Haven; where without the Rivers mouth upon the Strand is an ancient City called Portus, incompassed with a strong Wall on the left hand. At the other Streames mouth beyond the shore of the Tiber stands Ostia, anciently a famous City, but now without Walls. The way from Portus to the City the Romans have made pas∣sable; and still Lighters are in readinesse in the Haven, and many Oxen for Mer∣chants to draw up their Goods to Rome aboard those Lighters not using Sailes, no wind being able to stemme them up the Stream, by reason of the many eddies in the River: And Oares can do no good, the Stream against them is so strong; so that they tye the Lighters with long Ropes to the Oxen, and draw them up to Rome like Waggons. The way to Rome on the other side the Tiber is woody and neglect∣ed, and not neere the shore; the Lighters being never drawn that way. The Goths finding the said Towne of Portus ungaurded, took it at the first on-set, and killed many Romans dwelling in it, and so held the Haven too; leaving a Garrison of a 1000. men, and the rest retiring to their Campe. So that nothing could come to Rome from the Sea, but by Ostia with much toile and danger; the Romans Ships coming no more in at Portus, but lying at Antium, a daies journey from Ostia, and from thence bringing their Commodities. Scarcety of men caused this: For Be∣lisarius searing Rome it selfe, could put none into Portus; if there had been but 300. men in it, the Goths had never attempted it, being a strong Place; and this they did the third day after their being beaten from the Assault. Twenty daies after the taking of Portus, and the Haven, came Martinus and Valerianus with 1600. Horse-men, most Hunnes, Slavonians, and Antians, seated beyond the River Jole not far from it. Belisarius glad of their company, resolved now to make the War upon the Enemy; and the next day commanded Traianus, one of his Life-guard, a valiant man, to march with 200. of his Targetiers on Horseback against the Bar∣barians, and neere their Entrenchments to get up to a Hill which he shewed them, and there to stand; if the Enemy came against them, not to come to the Sword, or ance with them, but onely to use their Bowes; and having empted their Quivers, to make no scruple to retire, running away to the Towne Walls. Having thus di∣rected, he prepared the shooting Engines, and their Engineers. Traianus at Porta Salaria sallied out upon the Enemies Campe; who amazed with the suddainesse, encountred, as every man chanced to e in readinesse. Traianus, got up to the Hill, kept off the Goths with his shot, which falling among a multitude, still hit Man, or Horse; and their Arrowes being spent, they gallopt home with the Goths at
their heeles: who being neere the Walls, the Engineers fell to work with their En∣gines, and then the Goths gave over the Chase. In this Action were kill'd a 1000. Goths. Some few daies after Belisarius sent out Mundilas, one of his Guard, his Favourite, and Diogenes, extraordinary good Souldiers, with. 300. of his Target∣tiers, to do the like, and they did so; and killed rather more of the Enemy, then fell before, and in the same manner. The third time he sent out Oilas, one of his Life-guard, who performed upon the Enemy the same things; So that with these three Sallies he killed about 4000. Enemies. Vitigis (who conceaved not the dif∣ference between training men to their Armes in Camps, and an experimentall per∣fectnesse in the Actions of War) though by charging also with small Forces to indamage the Enemy. And so he sent 500. Horse to approach the Walls, and what they had suffered from a few, to act upon the Enemies whole Army. These got to a rising ground neere the City, onely out of Arrow shot, and there stood. Belisarius commanded Bessas with a 1000. selected men to charge them: These made a compasse, and shooting the Enemies backs, killed many, and forced the rest to come downe to the plaine ground, where the Fight being with Sword and Lance, and with unequall powers, the Goths were most cut in peices, and the rest retired with difficulty to their Campe; whom Vitigis reviled, as beaten through want of Valour. Three daies after he sent out 500. selected out of all the Quarters, and bad them do as became their Valour and Reputation. Belisarius seeing them ap∣proach, sent against them Martinus and Valerianns with their 1500. Horse, who exceeding the Enemy so much in numbers, with ease routed them, and killed al∣most every man. The Enemy thought it strang ill Fortune, to be beaten before, be∣ing many, by a few, and now being few, to be cut in peices. CHAP. XXII. BUT the Romans extolled Belisarius for his Wisdome; admiring him, as they had reason. One of his Favourites askt him, what Argument he saw that day wherein he escaped the Enemy, to be so full of the hope of Victory. He an∣swered, that beginning to fight with them with a few in his Company, he found the difference of either Army, such as if he make his Fights proportionable to his Powers, the Enemies multitude shall not ruine his small numbers. The difference was, that the Romans almost all, and the auxiliary Hunnes were Archers on Horse∣back; a matter not practised by the Goths, whose Horse-men have only Lances and Swords, and all their Archers fight on foot, covered with their armed men; so that the Horse-men, unlesse the Fight be at handy blowes, having nothing to resist with, are easily shot and ruined by the Enemy, using Bowes; and their Foot cannot make excursions against Horse. These he alleadged to be the reasons of their being beaten in the former Encounters. But the Goths finding how strangly things fell out, would no more ride up to the Walls in small Parties, nor pursue the Ene∣my infesting, but so much only as to drive them from their Trenches. The Romans exalted with these Prosperities, longed to come to a generall Battell, and would have the War made in an open brave way: but Belisarius seeing the great odds against him, was fearfull to hazard his whole Army; at last wearied with the rail∣ings of the Army, and Roman Citizens, he resolved to give Battell; but to begin with Excursions. Often he was repulsed attempting, and forced to put it off till the next day: But at last finding the Enemy advertised by Fugitives what would be, and beyond his Expectation in readinesse, he determined to fight in the open way, which the Goths gladly entertained; And both Parties being Imbattelled, Belisarius made this Speech to his Army. Fellow Souldiers, I have been backward to come to a Battell with the Enemy, not condemning you of faintnesse, nor fearing their Powers; but because in this way of Excursions we have prospered, and I thought it best to ply the cause of our prospering; holding it inconvenient, for men setled in a course to their mind, to be altered by others. But seeing now your forwardnesse to hazard, I hope well, and will be no further a stop to your Courage; knowing that in War, the Resolutions of those that fight, contribute
the greatest part of the Successe, and that most things are acted by their Alacrity. And your selves know, not by heare-say, but by your daily experience, that few, well ordered with Valour, can conquer multitudes. It is now in your power not to blemish the glory of my former Stratagems, nor my hope in this your Ala∣crity. All we have acted in this War, must be judged by the Successe of this day. The present opportunity is for us, and in likely-hood will subdue the Enemy to us, their Courage being dejected by what is past; and the Resolutions of men often unfortunate, seldome performing valiantly. Let none therefore spare his Horse, or Bow; what is spoiled in Fight, shall instantly be supplied by me. Be∣lisarius having thus said, led out the Army at Porta Pinciana, and Salaria. Va∣lentinus a Captain of Horse, he sent out at Porta Aurelia to Nero's Feilds, with not many; whom he directed not to begin any Fight, nor to approach the Enemies Campe, but still to make countenance of charging, thereby to keep the Enemy there from passing † the Bridge,Pons Milvi∣us, which stood something dist∣ant from the City. to succour the other Quarters. For he held it e∣nough to cut off those in Nero's Feilds (being many) from succouring the rest of the Enemy. The Commons of Rome being Voluntaries, he would not mingle with the Souldiers in the Battell, fearing, least being handicrafts men, unexperienced in War, they might upon apprehension of the danger disorder the Army. So he com∣manded them to stand in a Battallion without Porta Pancratiana beyond the Tiber, till he gave the Signall; imagining that which fell out, that the Enemy in Nero's Feilds (who were in great numbers) seeing them, and Valentinus Troopes, would not venter out of their quarter to joyne with the rest of the Gothish Army; and to keep them divided, he took to be a matter of great Importance. He resolved also that day to fight with Horse onely; for most of the Foot having stolne Horse from the Enemy, and being skilfull Riders, were turned Horse-men. And so his Foot being few, not able to make a Batallion of any Importance, nor daring to fight, but in case to run away at the first charge, he thought it safest to place them not far from the City, and caused them to stand still close to the City Ditch, to receive the Horse if they were beaten back, and being fresh, to help to resist the Enemy. But Principius one of his Guard, a Pisidian, and an approved Souldier, and Tarmu∣tus an Isaurian, Brother to Ennes, Collonell of the Isaurians, came to Belisarius,and said this. Excellent Generall, suffer not your small Army encountring so many thousands, to want your Battallion of Foot, nor put not a disgrace up∣on the Roman Infantry, by which the Empire of the ancient Romans arrived to so much greatnesse. If in this War they have done little Service, it is no Argu∣ment of their Cowardise, but their Commanders are to beare the blame, for serving on Horse-back, and not esteeming the Fortune of the War common to all, nay often running away before the Fight. Now you see our Foot Com∣manders all Horse-men, not contented to serve with those under their Conduct; And keep them, Sr. with the other Horse in this Battel, but suffer us to lead on the Foot; and we alighting on foot, will with them stand this multitude of Barba∣rians, hoping to do something, as God shall give us Grace. Belisarius at first would not grant this Motion, loving the men whom he knew valiant, and un∣willing to put the Foot (being few) to the hazard; at last importuned with their forwardnesse, he placed some few Foot at the Gates, and upon the Battle∣ments with the common People, and about the Engines; the rest he commanded to stand in order behind him, under Principius, and Tarmutus, that they might not by apprehending danger, put the rest of the Army in confusion; and if any Horse were routed, they might not run far, but flying to the Foot, with them resist the Pursuers.
CHAP. XXIII. VITIGIS also put the Goths in armes, not leaving any in the Trenches but unserviceable men. The troopes under Marcias hee commanded to stand still in Neros feilds attending the Guard of the bridge, that the E∣nemy might not come that way; and assembling the Army he spake thus. Some may thinke me fearfull of the losse of my Kingdome, and from thence grown kind, and to speak now what may move you to courage: and it is no strange conceit, for ill naturd men use to be curteous to meaner people when they need them; and to be churlish to those whose service they have no use of. For me; I care neither for losse of life, nor Kingdome: I could wish this day to put off this purple robe, if a Goth were to put it on; and I think the death of Theodatus to have been very happy, loosing his life and Government at once, by the hands of his own Nation: A private disaster, not ruining the whole race, is not without comfort to a wise man. When I consider the miseries of the Vandales, and the end of Gelimer, I can think nothing tollerable. Me thinks I see the Goths with their children made slaves, and their wives doing the basest services to their greatest foes; and my self, with this Daughter of Theodoricks daughter, led away whether it plea∣ses our Enemies I would have you with the fear of these things to enter into this fight; for so will you rather chuse death upon the place, then safety after an over∣throw. Generous men judge of mis-fortunes by one rule only; namely to be vanquisht by their Enemies: Besides, a quick Death makes men happy before miserable. And it is evident that these our choice men disputing this battell will easily overcome the Enemy, (a few Greeks, or no better then Greeks) and chastise them for the wrongs and scorns they have done us. Certainly we hold our selves their betters in valour, numbers, and every thing; and their boldnesse is grown out of our mis-fortunes, nothing sustains them but our negligence; it is their prospering beyond their deserts that feeds their confidence. Vitigis having used this Exhortation, marshalled his army. He placed his bataillion of foot between the wings of horse very neer their intrenchments, that having routed the Enemy they might overtake them the better, and have the Execution in a great way of Ground. For by reason the Enemies army was much inferiour in powers, he hoped that the battell coming to Sword and Lance, they would not be able to stand them. They began on both sides early in the morning, Vitigis and Belisarius incouraging their men in their Reares. At first the Romans had the better, and the Goths fell thick by the shot: but there was no rout; the Goths with their great numbers ea∣sily supplying the slain, that the losse was not seen; and the Romans being few thought it enough to be at this point, to continue the fight up to the entrenchments, and having killed many to return to the city with the first faire pretence. In this Encounter three Romans did best; Athenodorus an Isaurian, one of the life Guard to Belisarius, of good reputation; and Theodoret and George, Cappadocians, and of the Life Guard to Martinus; who still sallied out of their bataillion, and kept off the Barbarians. In Nero's feilds both sides stood still a long time, onely the Moores made excursions darting their Javelins, and infested the Goths, who would not charge them for fear of the common people, whom they tooke to be Souldiers; and to stand there with some design to get their backs and by shooting them both waies to ruine them. About noon suddenly the Romans there gave on, and routed the Goths amazed with the suddennesse who could not fly to their quarter, but got up to some hill and there stood. The Romans (though many) were most an unarmed multitude; many mariners and Servants being mingled with Souldiers, and the main army being else where; yet terrifying the Goths with their numbers they thus rou∣ted them; but by their disorder undid themselves. For the Souldiers being so ming∣led fell into confusion, and were deaf to all the directions of Valentinus their Com∣mander; They not so much as followed the Enemy nor killed any, but ave them leave quietly upon the hills to view what they did. Neither came it into their minds
to cut the bridge which had excluded the Enemy from beyond the Tiber, and from besieging Rome on both sides: nor by passing the bridge, did they charge the Ene∣mies backs fighting with Belisarius Troops; which had put the Enemy to flight doubtlesse without resisting any longer; but they turn'd to pillage the Enemies quarter, and carryed away much silver vessell and other Goods. The Barbarians where they were, stood still a while to see what they did. At last all together shouting, and with much fury they charged them; and finding them pillaging and in confu∣sion, they killed many, and drave away the rest; who threw away their pillage and ran away. Whilst this was doing in Nero's feilds, the other Goths neere their quar∣ters fencing with their sheilds resisted the Enemy, and killed many men, and more horses. The Romans some wounded, some having lost their Horses, left their rancks, and then in the army (small before) the fewnesse was more apparant, and their great disproportion to the Goths multitude; which the Barbarian horse perceiving, from the left wing gallopt toward the Enemy next them. They not a∣biding the Goths Lances, fled to their bataillion of foot, who stood not the charge neither, but ran away together with the horse; and presently the whole army reti∣red with the Enemy at their heeles, and it was an absolute route. But Principius and Tarmutus with some few foot did things worthy their valour, and made a stand; fighting, and not induring to be routed, and the Goths admiring their resolution. By their means the foot, and most of the horse escaped with more ease. Principius with his body hewen in peices fell upon the place, and neer him two and forty of the foot. But Tarmutus with an Isaurian Javeling in either hand kept off the assai∣lants, and being spent with perpetuall knocks, his Brother came to his succour with some horse, which revived him, that with full speed he ran to the walls full of sweat and wounds, and having still both his Javelins. Being a strong man and swift, hee got cleer (though in that case) as far as to Porta Pinciana, where he fell downe. His companions thinking him dead, brought him in upon a sheild. He survived onely two dayes and then dyed, leaving a great name behind him in the whole Army. The Romans within were terrified, guarded the walls, and tumultuously shut the gates a∣gainst the flying souldiers, fearing the Enemy might enter with them pell mell. Such Souldiers, as had not gotten within the walls already, leapt over the ditch, and with their backs to the walls stood trembling, unable to keep off the Goths (ready to leap over the Ditch to them) in regard their Lances were broken, and their bowes they could not use standing so close to one another. While few were on the battlements, the Goths prest on to cut them in peices, and all that were left behind; but when they saw numbers of Souldiers and common people upon the battlements ready to resist, they rode back despairing thereof after some railing words. And thus the fight, which began at the Goths Trenches, ended at the ditch and city Wall.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK Of the GOTHJCK VVarre. Chap. I. SKIRMISHES by Bessas, Peranius, Constantianus, where∣in the Goths are routed. A Roman and a Goth, being both fallen into a pit, agree as freinds to get out. The valour, rashness, and death of Chorsomantis. Chap. II. Treasure arrives from Constantinople: Many brave Skirmishes divert the Goths from hindring the entry thereof into Rome. Cutilas, Buchas brave∣ly end their lives. Arzes strange recovery of a hurt. Chap. III. The Goths block up Rome, which causes a Famin and a plague. Belisarius refuses to fight at the peoples importunity, and sends Procopius and Anto∣nina to Naples, and also sends out parties to cut off the Goths forragers. Chap. IV. The Goths by garrisons abroad are brought to Famine and Pestilence. Mount Vesuvius bellowed. New forces from Constantinople. Belisarius issues out at Porta Flaminia, and puts the enemy into despair. Chap. V. The Goths despaire, and send an Ambassage of peace. Their offer of Sicily, Campania, Naples is refused. They have leave to send to the Emperour. Chap. VI. Acessation. Provisions are brought into Rome, and new forces. Portus, Cen∣tumcellae, and Alba surprised by the Romans. The Goths long to break the cessation. Belisarius sends out John with strong forces..
Chap. VII. Ʋpon a quarrell between Belisarius and Valerianus; the later looses his life: the Goths tryed to enter the City by an Aquaeduct; but failed: as in another design, and in an assault. Chap. VIII.John prospers, takes Ariminum, which made the Goths raise their seige of Rome: who in their retreat receive a great overthrow. Ildiger and Mar∣tinus are sent to John; and Vitigis puts garrisons in the strongest places. Chap. IX.Ildiger and Martinus take Petra-pertusa. Vitigis besieges Ariminum; is beaten off with his tower, and resolves to famish it. Chap. X. Mundilas overthrowes the Goths, and seizes upon Millane: Vitigis comes with his army, and an aid of an 10000 Burgundians, sent by Theodibert K. of the Francks. Millane is besieged by the Goths, and Ancona; which is assaulted, but preserved by two of Belisarius his Life-guard. Chap. XI. A digression touching the Herulians; who being overthrown by the Lom∣bards, some of them come into Illyrium and make league with the Empe∣rour Anastasius; others went to the Island of Thule. Chap. XII. The description of Thule. The Scritifini. The Herulians neer Illyrium send thither for a King to their kinsmen already planted there. They sent one; but before they had demanded of Justinian, one Suartuas, their countryman; whom they expelled, and took him that came from Thule: upon this occa∣sion they revolt from the Romans. Chap. XIII. Belisarius, by the opinion of Narses, is brought to releive John in Ariminum. A strange child nursed by a shee-goat. Chap. XIV The siege of Ariminum raised by a stratagem of Belisarius. Narses raises a faction against him. Chap. XV. Urbinum despaired of by Narses, but taken by Belisarius upon composition with halfe the army. John takes in Emilia. Belisarius besieges Urbiven∣tum.
Chap. XVI. A digression concerning a generall famine wasting Italy: Millane in danger is not releived, as it should, by Martinus, and Uliaris; nor by John. Chap. XVII. Millane for want of releiving is miserably destroyed, and 300000 men slain; the rest made slaves. John attending Narses direction, and not joyning with Martinus by Belisarius's command, caused this ruine. Chap. XVIII. Narses is sent from home: The Herulians abandon the army. Vitigis sends Ambassadors to Chosroes, to provoke him against Justinian. Belisarius sends out forces, to favour his intended siege of Auximum and Ravenna. Chap. XIX. Belisarius blocks up Auximum: The Romans are beaten by an Ambush, for want of knowing the use of Trumpets. Vitigis promises to releive the Town, but only sends Uraias; who lyes close by the Romans, neither having a mind to fight. Chap. XX. The Francks, cr Germans, come into Italy with 50000 men against both parts; and route 2 armies of each. But are ruined with sicknesses, and retire, having lost a third part of their army. Chap. XXI. The Goths in Auximum endure much; convey letters to Vitigis by Burcen∣tius, a Roman souldier: which practise is discovered by the stealing of a Goth by a Slavonian, and is punished by burning Burcentius alive. Chap. XXII. In a fight about breaking of a cisterne, the Goths are routed, by the valour cheif∣ly of 7 Armenians: Fesula is yeilded to Cyprian by composition; and Auximum to Belisarius after much induring. Chap. XXIII. The Poe strangely is so low, that the Goths provisions are intercepted. The Goths refuse the Francks motion to divide Italy. Belisarius hires one to burn the magazins of Ravenna: Castles upon Alpes Cottiae are taken in by the Romans. Chap. XXIV. The Emperour offers a peace. Belisarius mislikes the conditions, though the Commanders approved it. The Goths offer him the kingdome, which hee seems to accept; and thereby takes Vitigis, and the principall Goths, and Ra∣venna with their own consents. Chap. XXV, Belisarius is sent for home: Uraias refuses to be King of the Goths. They chuse Ildebad; and by his advice importune Belisarius to take the Kingdome: He constantly refuses, and goes towards Constantinople.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARRS of the Emperour JUSTINIAN. Of the GOTHJCK VVarre, the second BOOK. CHAP. I. THE Romans durst no more hazard their whole Army with the Goths, but skirmished with the Goths (as before) with their Horse. Both of them were lined with Foot marching at their Horses sides; and ever the Romans had the better of the Bar∣barians. Bessas in one Encounter, charging the Enemy with his Lance, killed three of their best Horse-men, and made the rest run away. Constantianus at another time, led the Hunnes into Neros Feilds about the Evening, and finding himselfe over-matcht in numbers, he did thus. Up∣on a great old Stadium standing there (where formerly the Fencers used to com∣bat) are many houses built, and consequently divers narrow Lanes. Constantianus not able to Encounter the Goths multitude, nor yet safely to run from them, cau∣sed the Hunnes to alight from their Horses, and with them made a stand in a nar∣row Lane; and shooting the Enemy from a secure place, killed many. The Goths a while stood their shot, hoping when the Hunnes Quivers were empty, to take them all Prisoners good cheap; But they being good Archers, and shooting at a multitude, almost at every shot killed an Enemy, that halfe their number ap∣peared to be lost. And being about Sun-set, and having no place to be safe in, they ran away; and the Hunnes pursuing them close, and being excellent to shoot up∣on the full speed, killed them as fast as before, and at night came back to Rome with Constantianus. Some daies after Peranius fallied at Porta Salaria with Romans, and routed the Gothes. The over-throw being suddain, and about Sun-set, a Roman Foot-man in the tumult fell into a Pit, there being many anciently made in that place to lay up Corn in. He durst not cry out so neer the Enemies Camp, and he could not get up; so there he staied all night, the next day the Barbariaus being again routed, a Goth fell into the same Pit. They here grew acquainted; necessity
making them Friends, and they sware to procure each others safety; and then both roared as loud as they could. The Goths ran to the Pit, and askt who made that crying: The Roman by agreement between them was silent, and the other prayed them in their Language, to let down a Rope to lift him up; they threw in a Rope, which the Roman first catcht, and said, that he being up, the Goths would not leave their Companion behind, but would make no account to save him being an Enemy, and so got up. The Goths when they saw him, wondred, but hearing the Story, took up the other, who went along with them, and the Roman was permitted to go to the City without harm. Some Bravadoes there were often between small par∣ties of Horse, as if they would fight; but still the Quarrell ended in a Duell, where∣in the Romans ever had the Victory. At an Encounter in Nero's Feilds, there being many Chases on both sides by the Horse, Chorsomantis of the Life-guard to Beli∣sarius, by Birth a Hunne, pursued with some others 70. Goths; who being gon far, the rest rode back, only Chorsomantis followed still; the Goths turn'd about at him, and he killed on of their best men, and routed the rest: They fearing that they were seen from their Trenches, and ashamed, charging him again, and again, after the losse of another of their best men, were made to run away as fast as before; and Chorsomantis chased them up to the Trenches, and then returned all alone. Not long after at another Fight he was shot into the left leg to the bone, and lying for the cure unserviceable, he chafed (being a Barbarian) and threatned to be even with the Goths, for the wrong they had done his leg. When he was well, and had drunk store of Wine at his Dinner, out he went towards the Enemy to be revenged for his leg; he told the Sentinels at Porta pinciana, that Belisarius sent him to the Enemies Camp, who not mistrusting one of the Generals Guard, opened the Gate, and let him go out. The Enemy seeing him, took him for a Fugitive; but when he was come neer, and fell to use his Bow, some twenty came upon him, whom he shook off and retired a foot pace; more came on, yet he would not run away, and still resisting (though more still charging him.) The Romans from the Turrets see∣ing it, thought him some mad man, not knowing it to be Chorsomantis, who did there brave things, and highly to be commended: but at last being compassed by the Enemy, he paid the penalty of his fool-hardinesse. Belisarius and the Army (when they knew who it was) mourned for him, as if all their hopes had perished with him. CHAP. II. BUT about Midsommer, Euthalius arrived at Taracina, with Monies from Constantinople owing to the Army; who fearing the Enemy, and his Money, wrote to Belisarius to conduct him safe into Rome, who sent out a 100. of his Targetiers, with two of his Lanciers to Taracina, to convoy the Treasure, and himselfe made a shew of giving Battell to the whole Army, to amuse the Ene∣my from going out upon occasion of Forraging. The nex day hearing Euthalius with his convoy would arrive, he ordered his Army for a Fight; and knowing En∣thalius would enter by night, he stood all the morning neer the Gates in Armes, and at Noon he commanded the Army to dine; the Goths did likewise, thinking that he put off the Battell till the next day: Then he sent Martinus, and Valerianus to Nero's Feilds, to give Alarmes to the Enemy there. And at Porta Pinciana he sent out 600. Horse against the Trenches, led by three of his Life-guard, Artacines a Persian, Buchas a Hunne, and Cutilas a Thracian. The Enemy encountred them with many, and a good while they spent in charges, and retirings only, without coming up to the Sword, and Lance, seeming willing so to weare out the day. At last they grew angry, and the Fight being hot, many, and of the best fell, and seconds came in from the City and the Camp; from whence (the Skirmish grow∣ing more and more) the shouts filled the Combatants with Courage. In conclu∣sion the Romans routed them; Cutilas was hit into the head with a Dart, which sticking therein, he followed the Execution; and that being done, he rode with the rest into the City, with the Dart dangling on his head; a strang Sight. Arxes a
Targetier of Belisarius was shot between the nose and the right eye; the Ar∣rowes head peircing to his neck, but not appearing through, and the Shaft as he rode shaked upon his Fore-head: The Romans wondered to see him, and Cu∣tilas, ride so little sensible of such hurts. This was the Successe here; but in Ne∣ro's Feilds the Goths had the better: Martinus and Valerianus sustaining their great numbers, with much difficulty and danger. Belisarius commanded Buchas, who was come off untoucht, to ride up to Nero's Feilds, to succour there; who falling on suddenly, and in the Evening, defeated them: but charging himselfe too far, he was compast by twelve Enemies with Lances; which troubled him not, his Corselet holding good against the pushes thereof, till a Goth thrust him behind un∣der his right arme-hole, which Wound was not mortall: but another thrust him into the left thigh, and cut the Muscle acrosse. Valerianus, and Martinus, rode speedily to his rescue, and beat off the Enemy, then led him into the City, taking his Horse by the Bridle. Night being come, Euthalius entred the City with the Treasure, and all being within, they lookt to their hurt men; the Surgeons de∣sired to take the Arrow out of Arzes Face, but demurred; not in respect of the eye (which they had no thought to save) but least by tearing the Membranes and Nerves there-about, they might kill one of the bravest men of Belisarius reti∣new. One of them (named Theoctistus) pressing with his hand behind upon the neck, askt if it pained him; he answering that it did: then (quoth the Surgeon) your life is safe, and your Sight unhurt. This his confidence was, because he found the head of the Arrow not far from the Skin; such of the Shaft which stuck out, he cut off and threw away, then opened the Fibres, or small Strings, where his pain was most, and drew out the Arrow head with the rest of the Shaft that way with ease; So Arzes was not only unmaimed, but had not so much as a Skar left in his Face. But the Dart being pulled violently out of Cutilas head (where it stuck deep, and fast) he swounded; then the Meninges inflaming, he fell into a Phrensie, and died quickly. Buchas thigh fell into such a bleeding, by reason the Muscle was cut crosse-way, that he died within three daies. The Romans mourned that night for these mis-fortunes, and from the Goths Trenches heard extream Lamentations. They wondred at it, not supposing the Enemy to have received any notable losse, but to have had much more in former Skirmishes, which troubled them not, by reason of their multitudes.Incipit Annus 3. bel. Goth. 11. Reg. Ju∣stinian An. Dom. 537. The next day they knew that it was for many of the bra∣vest men they had slain, in Buchas first Encounter in Nero's Feilds. Many petty Skirmishes there were, which I mention not: In all there were during the Seige, 67. the two last shall be related in their due place. And then ended the Winter, and the second yeare of this War, written by Procopius. CHAP. III. SOone after the middle of the Summer, the City was visited with Famine, and Pestilence, and the Souldier also was in want of Corn, but of no other Provisi∣on. But the Citizens besides that want, were sorely prest with the Famine, and Pestilence. The Goths found it, and resolved to hazard no more Fights; but with Garrisons to hinder the importing Provisions to the Enemy. Two Aquaeducts between Via Latina, and Via Appia, high built with goodly Arches, meet at a place about six miles from Rome; then that which took the right-hand way before, goes to the left, crossing one another, and again they meet, and sever again, inclosing the ground in the middle; and the Goths damming up the Arches with Stone, and Earth, made it as a Castle, and lodged in it a Garrison of 7000. men, to cut of the Roman Forragers. The Romans then grew hopelesse, compassed with every species of misery. While the Corn was, some Souldiers (the most daring) rode out in the night, and cut off the Eares, and brought them in unseen by the Enemy, upon spare Horses, and sould them to the Rich for great Sums. The rest lived upon Grasse growing within, and neer the Walls, (The Feilds about Rome being green with Grasse Summer, and Winter, which served the Army for their Horses.) Some
made Saussages of Mules flesh which died in the Towne, and sould them secretly. But the Corn being gone, and the Citizens in extremity, they flockt about Beli∣sarius, urging him to end all in one Battell, and promising that not a Citizen should be absent from it. He was much troubled, and the Commons still importuned; say∣ing, that their present Condition had over-taken them suddenly, and that their hopes ended in the quite contrary; having gotten what they longed for, and yet now being in this Calamity: And their former Opinion of doing well, in affecting the Emperours Protection, being now their folly, and the ground of their misery, which now necessitated them to a daring, and again to put on Armes against the Enemy. They craved Pardon, though sawcy with Belisarius. A hun∣gry belly knowes no modesty; and their fool-hardinesse to fight, Fortune must excuse, seeing life prolonged in misery, is of all the most grievous. That he saw their case, their Farmes in the Country in the Enemies hands, and their City blockt up; the Citizens lying dead without earth to cover them, and the Sur∣vivers wishing their Carkasses lying by them; all mischiefes being made tolerable by the Plague, and forgotten, when that appeares, it making all other Deaths, but from it selfe, a kind of pleasure. They prayed leave to try their Fortune in Fight, before the sicknesse had utterly subdued them; either they should conquer, or be rid of their troubles. Men who have hope in delaying, are unwise to hazard all with forwardnesse; but in such as find their match the worse by deferring, a little delay is more to be blamed, then instant rashnesse. To this Speech Belisa∣rius made this answer; This is no more then I expected from you: I know what an inconsiderate thing a common People is; who neither can beare the pre∣sent, nor provide for the future; only it can attempt Impossibilities, and ruine it selfe unadvisedly. But let me never willingly destroy you, and the Emperours Af∣faires by your negligence. The War prospers not by bruitish eagernesse, but by weighing the Opportunities wisely, and with consultation. You thinking you are at Dice, will throw at all; but it is my manner not to chuse hasty, but profitable counsels. You promise to fight with the Enemy in our Company: since when have you been trained to your Armes? and were you perfect therein, who knowes not, that a Battell is, not proper to try Masteries in? In the Fight the Enemy will not give you leave to practise, and learn. I commend therefore your forward∣nesse, and pardon this Tumult. But why it is not seasonable, and why we use a provident backwardnesse, I will tell you. The Emperour hath sent a mighty Army gathered out of all Lands, and a Fleet (the like whereof the Romans never had) covering the shores of Campania, and much of the Jonian Gulfe. These Forces are coming to us, and will deliver you from your feares, and over-whelme the Barbarians with their Arrowes; and I defer our fighting till their Arrivall, to get rather a secure Victory, then by adventring without reason, to abandon our safety; and I will take order, they shall be with us without delay. Belisarius with this quieted the Commons, and dismist them. And it being reported, that the Emperour, would send Forces to Naples, he dispatcht Procopius thither, the Writer of his History, with Instructions to freight Ships with Corn, and to assem∣ble the Souldiers come from Constantinople, and the Horse-men quartred in those Countries; and marching then into Campania, to take also some out of every Garri∣son, and to convoy the Corn to Ostia. Procopius went out at Saint Pauls Gate, with Mundilas one of the Life-guard, and some Horse-men, and were not seen by the Enemy, quartered by Via Appia. When Mundilas at his return, reported how Procopius was by that time in Campania, without meeting a Goth, who went not out of their Camp in the night, they all took hart: And Belisarius grown bolder, sent store of Horse to the next Fortresses, from thence to charge the Enemies For∣ragers, and to lay Ambushes to cut of their bringing Provisions to the Camp, that by this the City might be lesse vexed with wants, and the Goths might be beseiged more then It. He sent Martinus, and Traianus with a 1000. men to convoy his Wife Antonina to Taracina, and from thence to give her a convoy to Naples; where she was to expect the Event in a safe place. And he sent Magnus, and Sin∣thues, one of his Life-guard, with 500. men to the Castle of Tibur; standing about 17. miles from Rome. To the small City of Alba, standing so many miles also from Rome, upon Via Appia, he had before sent Gontharis with some Herulians; whom
the Enemy beat out from thence a while after. There stands a Church of the Apo∣stle Saint Paul, a mile and three quarters from the walls of Rome upon the Tiber. It is not fortified, but a Porticus reaches to it from the City, which with the build∣ings upon it make the place not easily to be invaded. The Goths also so much reve∣rence those two Apostles, that during the siege no hurt was done to either of these Temples, but the preists celebrated divine Service in them as formerly. In this place Belisarius commanded Valerianus with all the Hunnes to intrench upon the bancks of Tiber, thereby to favour the pasturing of their own Horse, and to restrain the Goths from coming out so far at their pleasure. Valerianus encamped the Hunns accordingly, and then returned to the City, And Belisarius having setled these things, lay still, resolving to begin no fight, but to defend only the walls from harm, and to some of the Commons he distributed corne. CHAP. IV. BUT Martinus and Trajanus, past in the night by the Enemies camps, came to Taracina, and sent Antonina with a convoy into Campania; them∣selves seised the fortresses there about: from whence issuing and charging ever suddenly, they restrained the Goths inroads that way. Magnus also, and Syn∣thues, repaired the decayes of the castle of Tibur, and from a safe place infested the Enemy, and a fortification they had not far off, frighting with unlook't for char∣ges their convoys of provisions: Untill Synthues by a hurt of a Lance upon his right hand, was disabled, his sinews being cut asunder. The Hunnes also, quarter'd neer there about, did the Goths as much hurt; that the Famine vexed them, having not provisions brought so freely; and the plague killed many, especially in the camp neer Via Appia; where the few that escaped ran to the other intrenchments: The Hunnes also suffered the like, and went back to Rome. Procopius in Campania got together 500 souldiers, and ships freighted with corn, and when Antonina came, she took care with him to set out the fleet. Vesuvius then bellowed, but did not cast up, which was expected; and the inhabitants were terribly frighted. This mountain stands eight miles three quarters from Naples northward, steep, and thick with wood below, and above craggy and very wild. At the top is a deep cave, seeming to reach to the bottom of the mountaine, and if you peep in, you may see fire, which ordinarily keeps in, not troubling the peo∣ple; But when the mountain bellowes like an Oxe, soon after it casts out far a∣way a huge quantity of cynders, which catching a man upon the way, he hath no means to save his life; if it fall upon houses, they fall with the weight; if the wind blow stiff, it rises up past ones sight, and is carryed by the wind to very farr coun∣tryes. They say, it fell once in Constantinople, which so frighted the Citizens, that to this day they have yearly publick supplications to appease God; and that a∣nother time it fell in Tripolis. Formerly this bellowing came every 100 yeares, or more, but since oftner. When the Vesuvius casts out cynders, they are confident of a plentifull year: the aire about it is pure, and none more healthy; that the Physiti∣ans send thither men far gone in Consumptions. But from Constantinople arrived at Naples 3000 Isaurians, commanded by Paulus and Conon, and at Otranto 800 horse, Thracians, led by John, Sisters Son of that Vi∣talianus, who formerly rebelled against the Emperour. With them were a 1000 more horsemen, commanded by Alexander and Marcentius, and others. Zeno with 300 horse was already come to Rome through Samnium, and by Via Latina. John and the rest coming into Campania with many waggons out of Calabria, and joyning the 500 levied (as I said) in Campania, marcht by the Sea shore with their waggons, which they were to fortifie with, in case of an Enemies assault. Paulus & Conon they sent by sea with their troops, to joyn with them at Ostia, having put corn sufficient in their waggons & fraighted the ships therewith, & with wine and other provisions. They thought to find Martinus & Trajanus about Taracina, but they were newly sent for and gone to Rome. Belisarius fearing the Enemy with multitudes might cut off the troopes marching with John, and having at the beginning of the warre
ram'd up Porta Flaminia with stones, that the Enemy encamping neer it, might not there force the city (neither was there ever any fight there, nor did the Barbari∣ans looke for any Enemy thence) from this gate he took away the stones secretly, and put there in armes the greatest part of his army, and at day-break he sent out Diogenes and Trajanus, by Porta Pinciana, with a thousand horse, to shoot into the Enemies quarters, and when they came out to run away, upon the full speed to the town walls. They accordingly provoked the Goths, who from all their quar∣ters encountred them; and both parts came upon the speed towards the walls, the one flying the other pursuing. When Belisarius saw the Enemy upon the chase, he opened Porta Flaminia, and drew out the army unexpected. Neer the high way, there was one of their camps and before it a narrow lane craggy and hard to passe: where a Barbarian gallant and well armed, seeing the Enemy coming ran and prepo∣sessed the said passage, calling to his companions to help to maintain it; but Mundilas overtook him and killed him, not suffering any of the rest to come to the Lane. So they went through without opposition to the Enemies quarter: which some attemp∣ted, but could not take it, though few were within, by reason the ditch was deep and the Earth cast up inward, and was raised to a kind of a wall, and the stakes were ve∣ry well pitcht and thick, wherein the Goths trusting resisted valiantly. Aquilinus a Targetier of Belisarius, and very valiant, leapt into the quarter, drawing his horse by the bridle after, and some he killed; but they darted thick at him, and killed his horse, himself escaped strangely through the Enemy, and went towards Porta Pinci∣ana, with his fellowes, who overtook the Goths yet pursuing and killed them shoo∣ting them behind. Trajanus with his troopes seeing it, (their horse there also secon∣ding) gallopt against the pursuing Goths, who surprized between the Enemy thus, were slain in confusion; and the slaughter was great, and few recovered their Quar∣ters: Which they were all afraid of, kept in, and fortified; expecting a present assult. In this fight Trajanus was shot above his right eye, neer the nose. The ar∣row head though broad and long stuck fast, and was not seen; but the shaft fell off, the head being loose set. Trajanus felt it not, but continued chasing and killing, & 5 years after the point of the arrow head appeared of it self out of his fore head. This is the third year that still by little and little it comes out; and in time 'tis thought it will all come out. In the mean time it is no trouble to him at all. CHAP. V. BUT the Goths upon these successes despaired of the warr, and thought of reti∣ring, being reduced by the plague and Ememy from many thousands to a few, pincht with famin, excluded from all provisions, and in shew besieging, but indeed besieged themselves. Hearing also of other forces come from Constan∣tinople, by sea and land, not as they were, but as same gave them out, they con∣sulted upon a retreat, and sent into Rome a Roman of good account among them, "with two other Ambassadors, who spake thus to Belisarius. How neither part hath got by this war, all of us find by our experience of the incommodities there∣of. And neither army can deny what no man can be ignorant of, that no wise man wil for a little Emulation perpetually toil and seek no relaxation; he must be sens∣lesse that sayes the contrary. So that it behooves our Princes, not to sacrifice their Subjects safety to their own Glory; but to imbrace what is just and profi∣table not only for themselves but their adversaries, and so to end these troubles. By desiring moderate things, difficulties are accommodated, but by wrangling no∣thing concluded. We having therefore advised upon a conclusion of the war, are come to propound things advantagious to both, parting with some of our Right, as we conceive. And do not you by contending with us run your selves rather, then chuse what is best for you; and herein it is not so good to use Rhetoricall speeches, but to reply instantly, if any thing seem to be said or done amisse. Belisa∣rius approved the conference to be so, but bade them speak peceable & just things. They replyed, you have done us wrong to take arms against us your freinds and allyes, and we will say what you all know: The Goths conquered Italy, not for∣cing
it from the Romans; but Odoacer had deposed the Emperour and changed the state into a Tyranny: and Zeno, then Emperour of the East, desiring to re∣venge his fellow Emperor upon the usurper, & to free the Province, but unable to suppresse Odoacer, perswaded our Prince Theodoriok, (ready then to besiege him in Constantinople) to lay down that quarrell, being a Patritian, and having been a Roman Consull; and by revenging the wrong done to Augustulus, upon Odoacer, to become with the Goths lawfull master of the province. Thus we received the Dominion of Italy, and have maintained the Common-Wealth and Lawes, as much as any Emperour. There is not one new Law made by Theodorick, nor any of his Successors, written, nor unwritten. And concerning Faith and Gods Worship, we have conserved them exactly, that not an Italian willingly nor unwillingly hath changed his Religion, and when Goths have changed, it hath not been questioned. The Romans Churches have been by us held in highest Reve∣rence, and none flying to them hath been violated. The great Offices the Ro∣mans have had, not a Goth hath been advanced to any. If any man think this not to be so, let him stand out and disprove me. Nay the Goths have given way, that the Roman Consulship should yearly be conferred on Romans, by the Eastern Em∣perour. Things being thus; you, who never pretended to Italy, wasted by Bar∣barians under Odoacer (who for ten yeares together wrought so much mis∣chiefe now force out the lawfull Purchasers, having nothing to do with it. Be gone therefore from us, keeping what is yours, and the Booties you have taken. Belisarius replied: Your promise was to be briefe and moderate, but your discourse hath been tedious, and something insolent. The Emperour Zeno sent Theodorick against Odoacer, not to be King of Italy (for to him what distinction could be between one Usurper and another?) but that it might be free and obedi∣ent to the Emperour. And Theodorick did good Service against the Usurper, but in the rest proved extreamly ungratefull; never bethinking himselfe to restore the Country to the Lord thereof. He that ejects forcibly, and he that restores not what is his Neighbours, is the same man. For me, I may not give away the Em∣perours Provinces: If you would have any thing else, speak on. Ambassadour. You know all, that we have spoken nothing but truth. But to shew, we affect no Disputes; we quit to you Sicily, a great and rich Island, without which you cannot hold Africk securely. And weMr. Camb∣den out of this passage, and o∣ther authori∣ties, proves the Goths to in∣habit Scot∣land, sent thi∣ther by Gra∣tian, and Va∣lentinian; & that the Scots are their des∣cendents vid. Camb. Brit. page 88. quit all Britanny to the Goths, greater then Sicily, and formerly subject to the Romans. It is fit to requite such as do us Benefits, with the like. If we mention Campania, and Naples, you will not ac∣cept. Belisarius: We have no power to dispose of what is the Emperours, but with his liking. Ambassadour. Nor if we shall yeild to the payment of an annuall Tri∣bute. Belisarius: No truly; we have no absolute power in any thing, but to guard the Province for the Conquerour. Ambassadour. Be pleased then we may repaire to the Emperour, and conclude and accord with him, and some time must be limited for the Armies to forbeare hostility.Belisarius: Be it so, I will not hinder, while you consult upon wayes of peace. Thus the Conference ended, and the Ambassadorurs returned to the Goths Camp. CHAP. VI. AFTER often meetings, they concluded a Cessation, and to give Hostages mutually of eminent men. During this negotiation, the Fleet of Isaurians came into the Haven of Rome, and the Troops of John to Ostia, without the Enemies interruption to land or encamp. The Isaurians to lodge securely from the Enemie, drew a deep Ditch neer the Haven, and kept guards; and John lay fenced within his Waggons. At night Belisarius came to Ostia with a 100. Horse, acquainting them with the occurrents, and conclusion with the Goths, & command∣ing them to send up their lading, and to goe boldly to Rome; promising them to secure the way for them: himselfe before day rode back into the City. When it was day, Antonina consulted with the Commanders about sending up their lading; which seemed difficult, and scarce faisible. The Oxen were halfe dead, and could not
hold out: and it was unsafe to go with their Waggons in a way so narrow; and to draw Lighters up the River, as formerly, was impossible; the left hand way by the same being possessed (as I said) by the Enemie, and not passable for the Romans; and by the other bank was no passage at all: So that taking the Cock-boats of the greater Ships, and walling them round with boards, to guard the men from shot, they put aboard those Boats a proportion of Archers, and Marriners; and stowing as much as they could carry in them, and getting a wind, they sailed up the Tiber; a part of the Army winging them on the right hand shore: And they left a strong guard of Isaurians in the Ships. Their sailes they tooke from the Enemy, and went up with ease. Only where the Stream with an eddy went side-long, their sails had no wind for them, and the Marriners rowed, and with much toyle forced up. The Barbarians interrupted them not, either fearing to hazard, or not thinking provisions could be imported that way. And they held it inconvenient to crosse the Cessation promised, upon a slight occasion; In Portus also the Goths medled not with them, as they sayled by them, wondring what their intent was. Having in this manner, sailing to and fro, imported their ladings; the Marriners went away with the Ships, it being now toward the Winter Tropick. The rest of the Army en∣tred Rome, save Paulus, who staid in Ostia with some Isaurians. Afterward they gave Hostages for observing the Cessation, the Romans Zeno, and the Goths, Ʋli∣as, a man of quality; Neither to invade the other for three moneths, till the Am∣bassadors should bring the Emperours resolution. And if any should begin to wrong the other, yet the Ambassadors should be returned home safe. The Goths Am∣bassadors were convoyed by the Romans to Constantinople; and Ildiger, who marri∣ed Antonina's daughter, came from Africk to Rome with a faire troop of Horse. The Goths in the Castle of Portus wanting provisions, quitted it, and came to the camp by Vitigis direction: The place Paulus with his Isaurians from Ostia surprized. It was the Romans being Masters of the Sea, which caused these wants of Victuall, permitting no Provisions to come to the Barbarians. Upon the like scarcity they quitted then also Centumcellae, a Sea Towne of much importance, great, and popu∣lous, and standing in Tuscany, 35. miles to the West of Rome. The taking of it much strengthened the Romans: and of Alba likewise, standing to the East of Rome, and abandoned by the Enemy for the same reason. So that the Romans compassed them round; which made the Goths eager to breake the Accord, and to do them mis∣chiefe. They sent Ambassadors to Belisarius, complaining, that Vitigis having up∣on some occasion sent for the Goths from the Castle of Portus, Paulus without any reason had surprized it; and pretending the like for Alba and Centumcellae, with menaces, if they had not restitution. Belisarius sent them away, laughing at their pretext, all men knowing why they quitted those places. From hence forward they were suspicious of each other. Belisarius seeing then Rome strong with Souldiers, sent out many parties of Horse to places neer Rome: And Vitalianus, Johns Nephew, to winter about Alba in Pice∣nia, with his own 800. Horse, and 400. of the Troopes of Valerianus, whose Sisters Son Damianus commanded them, and 800. of his own Targetiers, extraordinary good men, led by two of his Life-guard, Sutas, and Abigis. These he directed to follow John, withersoever, and him, while the Enemy kept the Truce, to be quiet; but if they broke it, suddenly to fall upon Picenia, to visit the Townes before they had newes of his coming, (few men being left in the Country, but almost all before Rome; and their Wives, Children, and Goods being in every Town some) and to carry away Captive, and pillage all he found, taking care not to hurt the Roman Inhabitants: lighting upon any Town Fortified and Garrison'd, to attempt it; and if he took it, to march forward; but if were too tough for him, to come back, or stay: For going on with a strong Town at his back, it would be dange∣rous, and he could hardly be succoured, if distressed by an Enemy: that he should keep all the Booty to be distributed to the Army. Then smiling, he added this word; That it is not just for some to toile, to kill the Droanes, and others at their ease to eat the Honey. Belisarius with these Instructions sent away John, and those Forces.
ABout that time Datius, Bishop of Millane, with some chiefe Citizens came to Rome, and intreated of Belisarius some Souldiers, with whom they un∣dertook not only to draw Millane from the Goths to the Emperour, but all Liguria. This City is in † Liguria,This Author cals much more Liguria then now is. Lean∣der sates, there was a Liguria Cisappeninna anciently. The Liguria now he names Transappen∣nina. in the mid way between Ravenna and the Alpes (which are upon the Frontier of Gaule) standing eight daies Journey from either. Next to Rome it was the greatest of the Western Cities, and the most popu∣lous and rich. Belisarius promised as they desired, and kept them there the Winter; but Fortune grew envious at the Romans Prosperity, and meant to temper it with some ill; putting a quarrell between Belisarius, and Constantianus, upon a slight ground. Persidius, a Roman Citizen of quality, who dwelt at Ravenna, having of∣fended the Goths (when Vitigis was upon leading his Army to Rome) under a pre∣tence with some few Servants to go a hunting, ran away, communicating his De∣signe to none, nor carrying money, nor money-worth, save two short Swords with Scabberds, set with much Gold and precious Stones. Being come to Spoletum, he lodged in a Church without the Walls, which Constantianus, (then there) understanding, sent Maxentiolus, one of his Targetiers, and took the Cimiters from him; who being grieved at the wrong, went to Rome to Belisarius; whether soon after came Constantianus also, the Goths Army being reported to be neer. While the Romans were in trouble and danger, Persidius was silent; but they having the better, and the Goths Embassadours being dispatched to the Empetour, he ac∣quainted Belisarius with the Injury, praying his assistance in his just Cause; who in Person, and by others reproved Constantianus, and advised him to wash his hands of so foule an Imputation. But Constantianus (who was to have a mischiefe) put off the advise with a Jest, and flouted the man he had wronged. Who meeting Belisarius riding through the Market place, took his Horse by the Bridle, and clamouring aloud, askt, if it were the Emperours Law, that when a poor Suppliant comes for refuge from Barbarians, any man may take from him what he hath about him. The Company threatned him, and bad him let go the Bridle; which he would not do, before Belisarius promised to give him the Swords. The next day he called Constantianus and many Commanders to a Room in the Palace; putting him in mind of the Accident the day before, and (though late) to restore the Cimiters. He said, he would sooner throw them into the Tiber, Belisarius grew angry; and askt, if he took not himselfe to be under his command: In other things he professed to obey him, since it was the Emperours pleasure; but that which he now commanded, he would never do. Belisarius then had his Guard to come in; is it to kill me, quoth Constantianus? no, said Belisarius, but to com∣pell your Targetier Maxentiolus, to restore to the man his Swords, which he took from him by violence, and brought them to you. Constantianus supposing yet it was to kill him, thought first to do some brave Act; and drawing a short Sword, made a thrust suddently at the Belly of Belisarius; who amazed stept back, and em∣bracing Bessus who stood next him, avoided the danger. Constantianus yet in rage made at him; but Ildeger taking him by the right hand, and Valerianus by the left, drew him back: Then came in the Guard, who wrested his Sword from him, and snatcht him away. Then they hurt him not, respecting the Commanders pre∣sent, but they led him to another Room, and there by Belisarius Command, killed him. This was the only † impious Act ever done by Belisarius,This History is supplied in the secret His∣tory; where it appeares to be impious indeed. not conformable to the much moderation he had still used to all men. But (as I said) Constantia∣nus was to have a mischiefe. Shortly after the Goths had a designe upon Rome; They let down some men into an Aquaeduct, whose water they had cut off in the beginning of the Seige; these with Lamps, and Torches searched for an entrance into the City. Not far from Porta Pinciana, an Arch of this Aquaeduct had a breach in it, out of which a Cen∣tinell saw light, and told it his fellowes; they said it was a Wolfe, there being no Land to be seen over the building of the Acquaeduct, they took it to be a Wolfes eyes, shewing like fire. The Goths in the Aquaeduct came into the midst of the City,
where had been an ascent into the Palace, and found there a Building made by Be∣lisarius, providently in the beginning of the Seige, which hindred their further passage, or ascent. So they took a small Stone out of it, and returned to Vitigis, shewing him the Stone, and relating the particulars; who held a Counsell about it. The next day the Romans upon the Guard at Porta Pinciana had speech of their suspition about the Wolfe; which being spred, and coming to the wise Generall, he did not slightly give eare to it, but instantly let down into the Aquaeduct Dio∣genes, one of his Life-guard, with some choice men, to search; who found scatte∣red Lamps of the Enemy, and droppings of Torches, and saw where they had ta∣ken out the Stone, and reported all to Belisarius; whereupon he kept a strong Guard upon the Aquaeduct: which the Goths perceiving, forbare the attempt. But they prepared to give an open Assault; and at dinner time with scaling Lad∣ders and fire, they came unlookt for to Porta Pinciana, hoping to take the City so by a sudden on-set, few Souldiers being left within it. Ildeger then kept the Watch with his Company, every man being appointed to guard by turnes. Seeing the Ene∣my approach disorderly, he charged them not ranckt for a Fight, but marching in confusion, and he routed and killed them. At the noise the Romans ran up to the Walls, and the Goths without doing any thing retired. Vitigis then had another designe; the Walls are very assaultable by the Tibers Banck, the Ancients ha∣ving built the Wall carelesly there, and low, without Towers, trusting to the Fortification of the River. Here he hoped to take the City, there being no con∣siderable guard. He corrupted two Romans dwelling about Saint Peters Church, to repaire to the Sentinels there with a Vessell of Wine about the Evening, and with some colour of kindnesse, to bestow the Wine on them, to sit drinking with them till midnight, and to throw into their Cups a sleepie Drug, which he gave them. He prepared Boats upon the opposite Shore, in which the Goths upon a Signall, (the Sentinels being asleep) were to passe over and assault; and he put the whole Army in readinesse to force the City. But one of the men hired for the Service, (Rome being not to be taken by that Army of Goths) revealed the Plot to Beli∣sarius, and discovered his fellow; who upon torture opened all, and shewed the Drug given by Vitigis. Belisarius cut of his Nose, and Eares, and sent him upon an Asse into the Enemies Camp; who seeing him, saw God preventing their Counsels, and therefore the City by them not to be taken. CHAP. VIII. IN the mean time Belisarius wrote of John to attend close his businesse. And he with 2000. Horse forraged Picenia, taking all in his way, Women, and Children Captives. And he overthrew Ʋlithius, Vitigis his Uncle, killing him and almost his whole Army;Auximum is now called O∣sano, in Mar∣ca Anconitan∣na, subiect to the Pope. that none durst encounter him. † At Auximum he heard there was but a weak Garrison of Goths; but finding the place strong, and hard to take, he would not beseige it, but marcht forward. He left also Ʋrbi∣num, and marcht toward Ariminum, and daies Journey from Ravenna, whether some Romans invited him. The Goths being jealous of the Townes-men, when they heard of the Roman Army coming toward them, ran all away. So John got Ariminum, and left at his back Garrisons in Auximum, and Ʋrbinum, not forgetting Belisarius Instructions, nor upon any ungrounded temerity (being one who had Discretion mixt with Valour) but considering what came to passe; that when the Goths heard a Roman Army to be neer Ravenna, they would instantly raise their Seige, affraid of the place. And he lighted upon a right conceit; for Vitigis and the Goths, understanding Ariminum to be in his Possession, and extreamly fearing Ravenna. made a direct Retreat, without any further consideration; for which John got a great Reputation, being before generally famous; a daring man, laborious in his own Person, and fearlesse in dangers. He used a hard Diet, and in toiles was in∣feriour to no Barbarian, or common Souldier. Mattasuntha, Vitigis Wife, offended with her Husband, who at first attained her Bed by violence, and hearing John to
be in Ariminum, was glad of it, and secretly treated with him, touching a Marri∣age and a plot of Treason: This they negotiated by Messages unknown to any. And the Goths having the newes of Ariminum, and their Provisions failing, and the three Months being expired, made their Retreat, though they heard nothing of their Ambassadours successe. About the Summer Tropick having spent one yeare and nine daies in this Seige, they burnt up their Hutts, and by day-break be∣gan their Journey. The Romans seeing them, doubted what to do, their main body of Horse being not present; but sent out severall waies, as I have said, and con∣ceiving themselves not able to fight with such multitudes: Yet Belisarius armed his Horse, and Foot; and more then halfe the Enemies being past over the Bridge, he sallied at Porta Pinciana. The Fight came to the Sword, and Lance, and the Goths first stifly sustaining the Enemy, many fell on both sides: But afterward the Goths being routed, made their overthrow very great, by pressing and crowding to passe the Bridge, that they suffered extraordinary losse, being killed by Enemies and one another. Many fell into the Tiber, and were drowned in their Armes; and having lost most of their men, the rest ever-took those formerly past over. Longinus the Isaurian, and Mundilas, two of Belisarius his Life-guard, did extraordinarily in this Battell: Mundilas killed foure Barbarians, and came off; but Longinus having been the greatest cause of the Enemies overthrow, fell upon the place, much lamented by the whole Army. Vitigis in his march toward Raven∣na with the remainder of his Army, fortified the defensible places with strong Garrisons; leaving in Clusium, a City in Tuscany, a 1000. men under Gelimer, and as many in Ʋrbiventum, under Albilas a Goth; and in Tudera Ʋligisalus, with 400. In Picenia he continued the 400. formerly lodged in the Castle of Petra; In Aux∣imum, the greatest City there, he left 4000. selected Goths, and Visandus a valiant Commander. And in Ʋrbinum 2000. under Tomoras; In Caesina and Montefere∣trum, other Castles there, he Garrison'd 500. men in each; Himselfe marcht with the rest to beseige Ariminum. Belisarius when the Seige was raised, sent Ildeger and Martinus with a 1000. Horse to get before the Enemy into Ariminum, (taking sōe other way) and to cause John and his Troops to rise from thence, placing in their stead other sufficient numbers to guard the Town, and to be taken out of Ancona standing upon the Jonian Gulfe, two daies journey from Ariminum; which he had taken in before, sending Conon with an Army of Thracians, and Isaurians. He hoped, that there being only Foot in Ariminum, and no Commanders of Note, the Goths would not imploy their powers to beseige it, but despise it, and march on to Ravenna; and if they should beseige it, that Provisions would last longer for Foot only, and that the 2000. Horse with John would infest the Enemy, and force them to raise their Seige. Ildeger, and Martinus with these Instructions took their Journey by Via Flaminia, and by much prevented the Goths, who by reason of their multitudes marcht slowly, and were forced to go about for want of Pro∣visions, neither would they come neer the strong places upon Via Flaminia, the Romans (as hath been said) holding Narnia, Spoletum, and Perusia. CHAP. IX. BUT those Romans finding Petra in their way, attempted the Castle as a by-businesse; a fortresse not made by men, but by the nature of the place, where is a craggy way, and to the right hand a swift running river unfordable; on the left hand a steep rock so high, that men on the top seem below like little birds. Anciently there was no passage through, but in time a way was dig'd through it, & a gate made; the other entrance was walled, save so much as was left for a gate there, and so of it self the place became of fortification, and was named † Petra,it is called afterward Pe∣tra Pertusa, because of the passage cut through the Rock. the Rock. Martinus and Ildiger assaulted one of the Gates, but did no good with their shot, though the Goths within made no defence. And last behinde they forced their way up the crag, and threw stones upon the Enemies heads: they ran into the houses, and there kept close. The Romans when they could not reach them with stones, cut great peices out of the Rock, and with many hands tossed
them down aiming at the houses, such as they light on tottered, and so frighted the Goths that they held up their hands to those at the Gate, and yeilded upon com∣position, to have no hurt, but to be servants to the Emperour, and obedient to Be∣lisarius. Martinus and Ildiger, removed the most of them, leaving some few with their wives & children, & placing a Garrison of Romans, Then they went to Ancona from whence they took many foot companies, & brought them the third day to Ar∣num, declaring Belisarius his direction. But John refused to go with them, and de∣tained Damianus with his 400 men; so that leaving the foot companies, they went away with the Lanciers and Targetiers of Belisarius. Soon after Vitigis with his whole army sate downe before Ariminum. He made a woodden tower higher then the walis, and upon wheels brought it where the same were most assaultable: They drew it not on with oxen, least they should speed as they did at Rome; but men covered within it, shoved it on: within it was a great broad scaling ladder for the common souldier to mount the battlements, they not doubting but to get up with ease so soon as their tower was set to the walls, so was the figure thereof contrived. Being come neer the walls with it, they lay still, because it grew dark, set their sentinells about it, and took their rest, dreaming of no opposition; there being but a small trench only to hinder their approach. The Romans past the night in fear, ex∣pecting the next day to be ruined. But John neither despairing nor fearing, about midnight left the rest upon their Guards, and himself with his Isaurians carrying Mattocks and other instruments, got secretly without the walls, and caused them to dig in the trench, and to cast up the Earth to the town-ward, which served for a rampire, and in a small time, the Enemy being fast a sleep, they made the Trench of reasonable depth and breadth, where the walls were weakest, and the Goths were to approach with their tower: who (the night being far spent) perceived it, and ran to beat them off: but they, the trench being compleated, got within the walls. Vitigis was extreamly vexed at in the morning, & put to death some sentinells: and being as eager as ever, commanded to fill up the ditch with Faggots, and so to draw the tower on. They did his commands with alacrity, though mightily opposed from the walls. But the faggots with the weight of the Tower sunk, that they could not get it forward, the Ground growing still steeper, where the Earth was cast up, as I sayd. So that fearing the night approaching, and the Enemies sallying to burn their Engin, they drew it back. John to hinder them, put the Souldiers in Armes, and used this Exhortation. "Fellow souldiers, and my partners in this danger, he that would live, and see those he hath left at home; let him know that he holds this hope by his sword only. When Belisarius sent us out, the hope and Love of many things made us cheerfull in the businesse. We suspected not so neer the sea (the Romans being masters of the sea) to be besieged, nor imagined, that the Emperours army could so much neglect us. Then the occasion of shewing our affection to the state, and of getting Glory incouraged us; now, but by our va∣lour, we cannot so much as live, and for life (were there nothing else) we must of necessity undergo this hazard. And who pretends to valour also, hath a fair opportunity this day to get Glory by it; which is gotten not by overcoming in∣feriours in power, but by a victory with lesse preparations, and greater courage. And who love their lives best, shall gain most by daring; whose affaires (as ours now) are upon the Edge of a razor, such as are preserved only by despising dan∣ger. Having thus sayd, he led them against the Enemy, leaving some upon the bat∣tlements; the Enemy received them bravely, and it was hotly fought; and with much ado about Evening they brought their Tower to the Camp with losse of many good men, that they resolved to assault no more; but lay still to take the Romans by Famine; whose provisions failed, and they knew not which way to get supply.
CHAP. X. BUT Belisarius sent towards Millan, 1000 Isaurians and Thracians; Ennes led the Isaurians, and Paulus the Thracians, and Mundilas commanded in cheife, having some Targetiers of Belisarius. Fidelius (made Praefect of the Palace) being born at Millan, was thought fit to accompany these for∣ces, having some power in Liguria. From the port of Rome, they went by Sea to Genoa, the utmost City in Tuscany, at the Entrance of the Gaulish and Spanish seas; where leaving their ships they took their journey, putting their schiffs upon waynes to passe the Poe with. Being passed the River, and come to the City of Pi∣cenum, the Goths, with many and of their best men fought with them; For such of them as dwelt in those parts, had put into Picenum their Goods of most value, it be∣ing a strong place; but the Romans after a hot fight had the victory, slew many, and failed little of taking the town; for the Goths had much ado to shut their gates, they were so closely pursued. Fidelius, as the Romans rod back, staid to pray in a Church; and having a fall by the stumbling of his horse neer the Town: the Goths sallied and killed him, unseen by the Enemy, which much greived Mundilas and the Romans, who went to Millan, and took it without fight, and all Liguria. Vitigis un∣derstanding it, sent an army thither under Ʋraeas, his Sisters son. And Theodebert, King of the Francks, sent to his ayd at his request, 10000, not Francks, but Burgun∣dians, that he might not seem to wrong the Emperour. These Burgundians pre∣tended to come of their own accord, not upon the Command of Theodebert. The Goths joyning with them came before Millan unexpected by the Romans, and be∣sieged it; that they had no means to import provisions, but were instantly in want of necessaries. Neither could the Souldiers guard the walls; Mundilas having put Garrisons into Pergamum, Comum, Novarra, and other small fortresses neer Millan; and having there with himself but about 300 men, and Ennes and Paulus, so that necessarily the Cityzens were to guard in their turnes. And thus the winter ended, and the third year of this warr written by Precopius. But Belisarius about midsummer went against Vitigis, leaving in Rome a small Gar∣rison; and taking the rest with him. He sent some to intrench before Tudera,Incipit annus quartus bell. Goth, beng in It reg. Justi∣nian et anno domini 539. and Clusium, meanning to follow, and with them to besiege the Goths therein. But they hearing of the army coming, sent to Belisarius, and yeilded upon composition to have no hurt done them. He took the Goths there, and sent them to Naples and into Sicily, then left Garrisons in Tudera and Clusium, and marcht on. In the mean time Vitigis sent another army under Vacimus to Auximum, to joyne with the Goths there, and to attempt the castle of Ancona. This Ancona is a cornerd rock, from whence it hath the name, Ancoa, signifying an Elbow. It stands from Auximum ten miles, and is the Haven for it; the Castle is at the corner of a rock, very secure, but the houses without being not many, have no defence of walls. Conon, who had the Guard of the place, hearing Vacimus to come against him, and not far off, fell upon a sencelesse resolution, as if it were nothing to save the Castle, Peole, and Souldi∣ers. He left the castle unguarded, and drew out some five furlongs off, standing in order of battel, not of any depth, but compassing the hill, as if he were hunting. But when they saw the Enemy so much exceeding in numbers, they all ran away to the Castle. The Barbarians pursuing, killed many that could not get in; set to their Ladders to mount the Castle, and put fire to the houses without. The Romans who dwelt within were amazed, and first having opened the Gate, and received in the flying Souldiers, now seeing the Goths at their heeles ready to enter with them, they shut the Gates, and drew up with ropes divers, and Conon among them. The Goths, mounting by their Ladders, had taken the Castle, if two men upon the Battlements had not miraculously thrust them off, the one a Thracian, and a Lancier to Belisarius, named Ʋlimun, the other Bulgudas a Hunne, a Lancier of Valerianus. These by chance landed a little before at Ancona, and in this fight keeping off the Goths with their Swords, saved the Castle beyond expectation, but were carried off themselves mangled and halfe dead.
CHAP. XI. THen came newes to Belisarius, that Narses was come from Constantinople with an army, and was in Picenia, Narses was an Evnuch, and Treasurer to the Emperour, valiant above the condition of an Evnuch: with him came 5000 men in severall Regiments, commanded by Justinus, Generall of Illyrium, and others; and another Narses, a Pers-Armenian, who revolted former∣ly to the Romans with Horatius his Brother, who came a little before to Belisarius with other forces, and 2000 Herulians under Visandus, Alueth, and Phanotheus. Formerly the Herulians inhabited beyond the river Ister, serving many Gods, and holding it no impiety to appease them with human sacrifices. They had Lawes dif∣fering from other men: When men were grown aged or sick, they were not to live, But to intreat their kindred to put them out of the world: Who made a pile of wood, and set the man in the top, and sent a stranger to him, in blood, with a sword to dispatch him; then set the pile on fire, and the flame being done, gather'd up his Bones, and buried them. When an Herulian died, his wise (if she would be thought vertuous) was to strangle her self over her husbands Tombe; otherwise shee was esteemed infamous, and an Enemy to her husbands kindred. In time over-topping the bordering Barbarians in populousnesse and power, they vanquisht them in fight one by one, and forraged their country, and kept them under. They subdued the Lombards being Christians, and made them pay Tribute, upon Covetousnesse or vain glory, it being a thing not used by the Barbarians in those parts. In the Raign of the Emperour Anastasius, having none left to invade, they remained quiet for three years: But were discontented for it at their King Rodulphus, flocking about him, and calling him coward, and immodestly they scoft and abused him. Who not enduring the disgrace, made a causelesse war upon the Lombards, not charging them with breach of Treaties, or any other pretence. The Lombards sent to R∣dulphus to know why the Herulians were in armes against them; if their Tribute were not all paid, they would satisfie it with advantage; if they thought it too mean, they would make it greater. But Redulphus sent their Ambassadors away with Threats. They sent again other Ambassadors, who used much entreaty; but speeding not, the third came and advised him; In no sort to make a war without a cause: if he did, the Lombards (though unwillingly) must oppose the invasion; calling God to witnesse, whose least drop upon the scale will weigh down all the power of men, & as he is induced by the causes, wil determin the conclusion of this war. The Herulians not frighted herewith, nor relenting, resolved to have a Battell. Both parts being neer each other; over the Lombards the aire was suddenly over cast with a black thick cloud; there being a clear sky over the Herulians, a Presage that the Herulians entred the fight for their own mischeife, and among those Barbarians before a battell the saddest prodigie that can be. But the Herulians, not heeding the same, marcht proudly against the Enemy, judging of the successe by their great mul∣titudes. But they were very many slain, with their King Rodulphus, and the rest fly∣ing were almost all cut in peices. Upon this they left their Country, and passing through all the land beyond the River Ister, came where the Regians, or Rugians had inhabited, (who were gone with the Goths into Italy) and there they sate down. But the land being wast, and famine compelling they removed, and came to a coun∣try next the Gepaedes; who at the first permtted them to plant, coming as Suppliants: But afterward they wronged them, forcing their wives, and making prey of their Cattell and Goods, and at last began unjust quarrells with them: which the Heruli∣ans not able to bear, past the River Ister to dwell by the Romans there. And Ana∣stasius the Emperour received them, to plant in the country. Soon after by commit∣ting much wickednesse upon their neighbouring Romans, they offended him, and he sent an army against them; which in a battell had the victory, killed most of them, and would have destroyed them all; but their cheiftains remaining, with supplicati∣ons begged their lives, and to be taken for Auxiliaries and Servants to the Empe∣rour; who granted the same, and so some Herulians escaped alive, but neither ayded nor served the Romans. Justinian coming to the Empire gave them a good coun∣try,
and Goods, and made them absolute Associates, and perswaded them to be Christians; upon this they grew civiller, and applyed themselves to the Lawes of Christians, serving the Romans as Auxiliaries. But still they are false to us, and co∣vetous; not thinking it any shame to wrong their Neighbours. They use impious mixtures with men and Beasts, being indeed the wickedest of all men, and wretches wretchedly to perish. Some few of them continued their League with us; the rest re∣volted upon this occasion. To shew the lavagenesse of their nature, they killed O∣chon their King, suddenly, without alleadging any thing, but that they would no more be under a King. And indeed their King before had only the name, otherwise little advantage above a private man. All sat and ate with him, and put licentious scornes on him; the Herulians being the most indiscreet, and the lightest men alive. This foule Fact they instantly repented, finding no possibility to live without Gover∣nours, and Generals. After much consultation, they resolved to send for one of the Blood Royall from the Island of Thule. For the Herulians being overthrown by the Lombards, and leaving their native Soile, some dwelt in Illyrium (as I said) others past not the River Ister, but thought it better to plant in the uttermost bor∣ders of the habitable World. Conducted by many of the Blood Royall, they past through all the Nations of the Slavonians; then passing a large desert Country, they came to a Nation called the Varnians, after whom they traversed the Nations of the Danes; the Barbarians there using no violence against them: Then they came to the Ocean, and getting Shipping, arrived at the Island of Thule, where they staid. CHAP. XII. THule is ten times bigger then Britany, much distant from it to the North∣ward: The most of it is waste;Mr. Camb∣den. Nec me latet vastissiman il∣lam egionm Scandiam sub Thules nomine a Procopio des∣cribi. Indeed this Scandia, wherin is Nor∣way & part of Denmark, it appeares in the Mappe as a Peninsule. It is called by some of our Writers, Vagina gen∣tium. but in that which is inhabited are seated thirteen populous Nations, and over every Nation is a King. The Sun a∣bout the Summer Tropick sets not in the Island for fourty dayes, being in all that time a strange sight still above the Earth. And neer the Winter Tropick, it is not seen in the Island for fourty dayes, but a continuall night hangs over it; the Inhabitants leading a sad life all the while, and not conversing which one another. It was not my fortune to goe to this Island, though I much desired to behold the wonder: But inquiring of some that came from thence, how they knew the due times of Sun-rising and Sun-setting, they told me the true reason; That the Sun sets not indeed there for fourty dayes, but it shines sometimes from the Eastward, sometimes from the West; and when they see it returne to that place of the Hori∣zon, where first they saw it rise, they reckon a day and a night. And in the long nights they count the dayes by the courses of the Moone, which they see every moneth. When five and thirty dayes are runn out of this long night, men used to it are sent to the tops of the Mountaines, who there seeing the Sun, bring word that within five dayes it will shine againe. For this good newes a solemne Feast is celebrated in the dark; which is the Thulites greatest Holy-day. They feare (it seemes, notwithstanding their yearely experience) that the Sun may forsake them quite. Of all the Nations of Thule, onely the Scritifini are Savages, who use no apparrell, nor shooes to their feet, nor get any mans meat out of the earth; them∣selves neither manuring it, nor their Wives using any work, but both perpetually hunting; for their vast Woods and Mountaines breed multitudes of wilde Beasts; which they, catch and feed upon their flesh, covering themselves with their Skins, which they patch together with Sinews of Beasts, wanting thred, or any thing to sow with. Their Children are not nursed like other people, with Womans milke, nor hang at the Mothers breast, but are nourished with the Marrow of the wilde Beasts they take. The Woman having brought forth her childe, wraps it in a Skin, and hangs it on a Tree, and laying Marrow to the mouth of it, out shee goes a hunting with her Husband. The rest of the Thulites differ not much from other people. They worship many Gods, and Damons, both Coelestiall, and of the Ayre, Earth, and Sea; and the Spi∣rits sayd to be in Fountaines, and Rivers. They are perpetually sacrificing, and pa∣cifying
with blood; and their fairest Victime is a Man, before taken Prisoner, whom they sacrifice to Mars, esteemed their greatest God. And they doe it, not by cut∣ting his throat onely, but hanging him on a tree, and throwing him among Bry∣ers, and other kinds of death. Among these Thulites the Herulian wanderers, planted themselves; and those who continued among the Romans, having murdered their King, sent some chiefe men to the Island of Thule, to bring home one of the blood royall, if they could finde any there. They found many, and made choice of one whom they liked best, and tooke him with them. But being come neer home, he dyed of a sicknesse; and the men went againe to Thule, and brought another, named Todasius, accompanied with his Brother Aordus, and two hundred Heruli∣ans of the Island. Who being long upon their journey, the Herulians about Sin∣gedon conceiving it might be inconvenient to introduce a King from Thule, without the Emperour Justinians consent, to Constaneinople to the Emperour, to give them what King he pleased: He sent them Suartuas, an Herulian, who had long continued in Constantiople, whom the Herulians at first received joyfully, adored him as King, and obeyed him in the usuall directions: But within few daies, they had newes how the Ambassadours from Thule were neer. Suartuas commanded them to go out and kill them; and the Herulians followed him with a seeming ap∣probation; but being within a daies journey of them, they revolted from him by night to the new commers, and himselfe alone fled to Constantinople; the Empe∣rour was studious to restore him; and the Herulians fearing the Romans, betook themselves to the Gepaedes: And this was the cause of their Revolt. CHAP. XVIII. THE Armies of Belisarius and Narses joyned at Firma, a City standing neer the Jonian Gulfe, a daies journey from Auximum. They held a Coun∣sell of War where to oppose the Enemy with best advantage. If they go to releive Auximum, they doubted the Enemy from Auximum might at their backs infest them, and spoile the Romans inhabiting those parts. And likewise of the be∣seiged in Ariminum, they were affraid they might be distressed for want of Victu∣all. Most of the Captaines offended with John, charged him in their speeches for run∣ning into that danger rashly, and to get money, and for crossing (contrary to or∣der) the Counsels of Belisarius concerning the War. But Narses (who loved John above all men) fearing least Belisarius upon the Captaines speeches might put Ariminum in the second place, spake thus. Fellow Commanders, you dis∣course in things not to be discoursed of, and consult where none reasonably can be of two Opinions; but where he who never knew the War may chuse upon the sudden. When the danger appeares equall, and the damage alike in mistaking, aboundant consultation, and much discourse is fit, and so to determine the mat∣ters propounded. But we deferring to attempt Auximum now, shall receive no important hurt; for what so soon can alter our case? Whereas if we receive a blow at Ariminum (as can no otherwise be) we shall ruine (a harsh word) our whole power in Italy. If John have contemned your Commands, excellent Be∣lisarius, you have it now in your power to punish him, by saving the Offender, or abandoning him to the Enemy. But take heed you do not punish the Emperour and us, for an unwitting Offence of John. If the Goths take Ariminum, they will make Captive a valiant Generall with his Army, and a City of the Emperours obedience. Neither will the mischiefe stop there, but even constitute the whole for∣tune of the War. For the Enemy have now much advantage in numbers; but by being often beaten, are become Cowards, their ill Fortune having taken their con∣fidence from them. But if in this designe they prosper, they will soon recover their Spirits; and them dispute the War with more then equall Courage: Such as es∣cape difficulties being commonly wiser, then they who never had misfortunes. Thus Narses spake. But a Souldier from Ariminum brought Letters to Belisarius from John, which were thus; Know, that our Victuall hath long failed us, and we can no longer answer the People, nor resist the Enemy; but within seven daies
must sore against our wills yeild the city and our selves. We can no longer strive against our necessities, which will sufficiently apologize for us, if we shall do any thing not so honorable. Belisarius at this was troubled, and full of irresolution. He was afraid of the besieged; and he doubted that the Enemy in Auximum would fly abroad and burn the towns thereabout without controule; and by watching advantages distresse his own army, especially if there should be a battell. In the end he left Aratius with a thousand men to incamp by the Sea side, 25 miles from Aux∣imum, and not to stir, nor give fight to the Enemy but in their own Defence; By this he hoped that Enemy would lye quiet in Auximum, and not infest his army, having a camp of Romans so neer them. He sent also forces by Sea, commanded by Herodian, Ʋliaris, and Narses, Brother to Aratius, and the whole in cheif by Ilde∣ger. Whom Belisarius directed to sail directly for Ariminum, and to land not far off from the foot, which should march by the Sea shore commanded by Martinus, and appointed to wait upon the Fleet; whom he directed being neer the Enemy to light many fires, not proportionable to their small army so to give the Enemy ap∣prehension of greater numbers. Himself with Narses, and the rest of the army, marcht by Ʋrbisalia, far from the Sea coast; a city so ruined by Alaricus, that nothing remained of the former beauty, but some reliques of one Gate, and of the pavement. Here I met with this adventure. When Jo came with his army into P. the peple were in much confusion. and the women some suddenly fled where they could, others were carried away captives. In this place some woman, newly delivered of a Child, had left it in swathing clouts upon the Ground; whether she ran away, or were taken from it by the Enemy, she never did return, being likely either gone out of Italy, or the World. The child lying in that Desart cryed, and a shee Goat perceiving it, pittied it, and having also lately brought forth young, came to it and gave it her Teate, guarding the child, that no Dog nor wild beast might hurt it. The troubles lasting long in the country, this Infant had long the benefit of this Teat. But the Picenians finding the Emperours army was come against the Goths only, and not to hurt the Romans, returned to their severall homes. And into Ʋrbisalia the women with their husbands coming, and seeing the child, could not imagin what it was, and won∣dred how it lived: such women as were sit, offered their breasts; but the child would not take womans milk, neither would the Goat leave it; but importunatly bleated, and seemed to be greived at the womens troubling it, and in a word pre∣tended to it her own. So that the women let it alone, and the Goat nursed it; for which the people called the child Aegisthus. I travelling that way, they brought me to it, and anger'd it to make it cry; the Goat hearing it, being a stones cast off, ran to it bleating, and stood over it that none might hurt it, and this is the story of Aegis∣thus. CHAP. XV. BUT Belisarius marcht by the mountaines, resolving not to come to a direct battell, being much inferiour in numbers, and the Goths desperate with their mis-fortunes. But he thought that when they heard of Forces invading on every side, they would not resist, but run away; and the guest as it fell out. For being upon the Mountaines a dayes journey from Ariminum, he lighted upon Goths travelling about businesse; who being suddenly surprized, could not turne out of the way, but were some slain by the Romans, and the rest wounded ran up, and hid them in the rocks: from whence seeing the Romans marching many together in narrow passages, they judged them far more then they were, and perceiving the Ensign of Belisarius, they knew that he led them. The night overtaking, the Romans flayed there, and the Goths hurt men run to Vitigis Camp; whether being arrived a∣bout noon the next day, they shewed their wounds, and reported Belisarius to be at hand with an innumerable army. Hereupon they prepared to fight; marching to the North of Ariminum (which way they thought the Enemy would come) and still looking to the mountain tops. At night having put off their armes, and tak∣ing
their rest, they saw fires some seven miles from the City Eastward, kindled by Martinus. They fell into terrible fear, apprehending in the morning to be surroun∣ded by the Enemy; and so lay still that night in that fear. And by Sun rising they saw a great fleet coming, which even struck them dumb; that with tumult and cla∣mouring they trus'd up, harkning to no commands, nor thinking upon any thing but how to get quit of the camp, and within the walls of Ravenna. If the besieged had had any strength or courage left, they had cut the Enemy in peices, and made an end of the war; but they were heartlesse with their miseries, and feeble with want of food. The Goths in that confusion left much of their baggage behind, and ran a∣main to Ravenna Ildiger with his forces first seized the Enemies trenches, tooke the baggage they left there, and some sick men At noon Belisarius came with the army, and seeing John and his company pale, and greivously nasty, he said, he must give thanks to Ildiger, glancing at his unadvised presumption. He answered that he acknowledged none to Ildiger, but to Narses the Emperours Treasurer; intima∣ting that Belisarius did not willingly releive him, but perswaded by Narses; both these were ever after jealous of each other: That Narses friends would not let him march with Belisarius, sugesting how poor it was for him who communicated of the Emperours secrets, not to be an absolute commander, but to obey one that was but a Generall; and that Belisarius would never indure to command with him in E∣quality, but that if he would himself lead an army, he should have more Souldiers & better captaines to follow him; the Herulians, and his own Lanciers and Targetiers, and the troops under Justinus and John himself, with those of Narses and Aratius, being not lesse in all then 10000 valiant men and able Souldiers. That they would not have the conquest of Italy wholly attributed to Belisarius, but Narses to share in it, who had not left his attendance on the Emperours person, to estab∣lish with his own dangers the Glory of Belisarius; but by shewing his own valour and wisdome, to grow famous in the world; and that Belisarius without him could do nothing; most of the army commanded by him being dispersed in the places he had taken. All which they reckoned up from Sicily to Picenia. Narses was much pleased with these discourses, and could not contain himself within his pre∣sent condition: but Belisarius directing him any businesse, still he flew to some ex∣cuse, rejecting his commands. Which Belisarius observing, he assembled the Com∣manders, and spake thus. Fellow commanders, I find not my self to be of the same opinion with you concerning this War. You despise the Enemy, as absolutely sub∣dued; but I thinke this confidence will bring you into danger; knowing that the Goths have not been beaten through their cowardice, or want of men, but over∣stratagem'd with counsell and foresight, and so routed. And you in like sort I fear from some false opinion may receive a blow, which may undo your selves and the Roman affaires. They are more easily undone, who are insolent with successes and conceit of victory; then such as having lost some honour, do for the time to come use feare and caution towards their Enemies. Carelesnesse hath ruined many well setled, and a solicitous labour releived men after mis-fortunes: the powers of the negligent lessening of themselves, but care naturally adding powers, Consider that Vitigis is in Ravenna with many thousands, That Ʋraas besieges Millar, and holds all Liguria; That in Auximum is a great and gallant ar∣my; and that there are other garrisons of Goths able to fight with us, all along to Ʋrbiventum, which is a neighbour to Rome. That if we should now be com∣passed by the Enemy, our danger were more then ever. The Francks also are said to be in armes in Liguria, which every Roman ought to consider and apprehend. My opinion therefore is, that part of the army be sent into Liguria and Millan, and all the rest to march against Auximum, and undertake as God shall enable, and as shall seem best and most advantagious. To this speech of Belisarius, Nar∣ses replied. Noble Generall, in all the rest (being nothing but truth) none can contradict you; but that all the rest of the Emperours army should be confined to Auximum and Millan, I hold it inconvenient; for you to lead such of the army as you please for those purposes, is good reason: In the mean time we will getLombard Ci∣padana, from the city of Ast to Parma vid. Leanurum. Emilia for the Emperour, a Province most set by by the Goths; and we will give such alarmes to Ravenna, that you shall bring the Enemy on your part to what tearmes you please, being excluded from hope of succours. I fear if we sit down
before Auximum together, the Goths will set on us from Ravenna, and we shall be charged on both sides, and wanting Victuall perish upon the place.Belisarius fearing least by dividing the Forces, the Emperours Affaires might fall asunder, and ruine by the disorder arising from thence; produced the Emperours Letters directed to the Commanders in these words. We have sent Narses our Treasu∣rer into Italy, not to command the Army; it being our pleasure that Belisarius alone shall have the leading thereof, whethersoever himselfe thinks best; and it behoves you all to follow him for the good of our State. Narses took hold of the last words of this Letter; and said, that Belisarius did now advise against the good of the State, and therefore they were not bound to follow him. CHAP. XV. BElisarius upon this sent Peranius with an Army to beseige Ʋrbiventum; Him∣selfe led the rest to Ʋrbinum, a strong Town, a daies journey from Arimi∣num, which had a good Garrison of Goths within it: Narses and John follow∣ed him, but before the Town they encamped severally at the foot of the Hill, Beli∣sarius on the East side, & Narses on the West. Ʋrbinum stands upon a round high Hill, not craggy, but unsafe to mount, only for the steepnesse, and neernesse to the City. Towards the North is an entrance upon plain ground. Belisarius (the Ar∣my being thus quartered) sent Ambassadours to the Goths, hoping to bring them (being affraid) to a composition; and promising many advantages by their sub∣mission to the Emperour. The Ambassadours at the Gates (being not admitted into the Town) used many allurements; but the Goths presuming upon the strength of the place, and their aboundance of Provisions, rejected them and their motions. Belisarius upon this caused the Army to gather Poles, and with them to make a Gallery for men, to approach the Gates and Walls under this covert. Some Friends of Narses told him that Belisarius laboured in vain, (John having attempted the place when the Garrison was small, and found it impregnable) therefore he should take in the Emperours Townes in Emilia. Narses upon this advise rose that night (though much wooed by Belisarius to stay and help to take Ʋrbinum) and went to Ariminum with the rest of the Army. Morras and the Goths under him, in the morning seeing halfe the Army gone, flouted from their Walls at those that staid behind. But Belisarius with them resolved, to as∣sault, and consulting about it, he had strange Successe. The only Fountain in Ʋr∣binum which watred all the Inhabitants, grew dry of it selfe, and in three daies so failed, that the Goths drunk the water with mud, whereupon they determined to yeild: whereof Belisarius not knowing, put the Army in readinesse to assault round about the Hill, and commanded to bring on the wooden Gallery upon the even ground. The men within unseen by the Enemy brought the same on, at which the Goths held out their hands, crying for peace. The Romans knowing no∣thing of the Fountain, conceived that it was the Fight they feared, which they gladly forbare: And the Goths rendred themselves, and Town to Belisarius, up∣on composition of indemnity, they becoming Subjects to the Emperour, & serving in the Army with equall conditions. Narses wondred to heare the Newes, and took it for a misfortune. He lay still in Ariminum, but commanded John with the Army to lead out against Cesina. They approach the Castle with their scaling Lad∣ders upon their backs, & assaulted; But the Goths defended stoutly, and Phanotheus Leader of the Herulians was slain, and many more, so that John would attempt it no more, seeming impregnable, but marcht on with Justinus, and the rest of the Army, and took an ancient City, named Forum Corneli, by surprise: And he re∣covered all Emilia; the Goths avoiding still to fight with him. Belisarius also ha∣ving taken in Ʋrbinum, thought it not expedient (being at the Winter Tropick) to go against Auximum, expecting a long Seige of it, the place being strong, and impossible to be forced, by reason the Goths within it were many, and of the best, who having forraged much Country, had brought in great quantity of Pro∣visions, so that he appointed Aratius to winter in Firmum, and to restrain the
Goths incursions, and to spoile the Country; and himselfe marcht against Ʋrbi∣ventum, perswaded by Peranius, who had learnt of run awaies, that the Goths within wanted Victuall; and that it was thought, they would yeild upon sight of Belisarius Army, which came so to passe. Belisarius quartered his Army before it, and himselfe went round, and viewed the Town, and found it not possible to be taken by force, but he thought by some plot it might be faisable. Ʋrbiventum is built upon a Hill, standing alone in a Valley, and being plain at the top, and to∣wards the bottome craggy. About it, a stones cast off are many Rocks, and the Town hath no Walls, nor other Fortification, Nature having made it impregnable; in regard there is but one way to it between those Rocks: which being guarded, the Townes-men feare no invasion at any other part. And where the way into the Town is, a large River unfordable takes up all the space between the Hill and those Rocks. So that there is only a small Fortification at the said passage, and a Gate to it, which the Goths guarded. CHAP. XVI. BUT Belisarius begirt the Town with his Army, hoping to incommode the Enemy from the River, and to take them by Famine. The Goths for a while were in no absolute wants, and though furnished very barely, yet they indured beyond expectation, having not Food to satisfie, but to keep alive only; and their Provisions being failed, they fed upon Hides, and Skins soa∣ked in water, and upon vain hopes, which Albilas their Commander gave them, a man of great Reputation with the Goths. The Summer being come, the Corn in all those parts grew of it selfe, but not in such quantity as formerly; being not covered under Furrowes by the Plow and Harrow; but lying upon the Face of the Land, which could yeild so but small Crop: And none being to reap it, much shed, and never grew again. The same happened in Emilia, that the Inhabitants went all into Picenia, which being up∣on the Sea, they thought the Famine not to be so much there: Which seised al∣so upon Tuscany; but there the Mountainers grinded Acornes, and made bread, which bred all kind of Diseases in many; but some recovered and lived. But in Picenia 50000. Roman Husbandmen at least perished, and more on this side the Jonian Gulfe. I have seen their Countenances, and manner of deaths. They grew lanck, and pale, the Flesh wanting Food (according to the old saying) feeding on it selfe; Choler prevailing spred a wan Complexion over their Bodies: And as the Disease grew, all moisture forsook them; the Skin was hard like a tanned Hide, and lookt as if it cleft to the bones; afterwards they became black-coloured, and like Lincks much burnt. Their Countenance were hideous, like mad-men; and as most dyed for want of Sustenance, so some with greedy feeding: whose heat be∣ing quenched within, if they were nourished to satisfaction, and not by little, and little, like Babes new born, being not able to digest the meat, they dyed. Some for∣ced by the Famine fed upon one another. Two Women in a Village beyond. Ari∣minum were reported to have eaten 17. men, they onely were left alive in the place, and so Passengers lodged in their Cottage, whom they killed sleeping, and eat them. As they were attempting the like upon the 18. he waked, and finding out the truth, killed them both. Many being pincht with this Famine, went where there was Grasse, and stooping to gather it, but being not strong enough to pull it up, they fell upon their hands, and dyed with the Grasse in their mouths. None buried any, nor had the least thought of Funeralls: The very ravenous Fowles, that feed on dead bodies, would not touch them, there being no flesh left to allure them, which the Famine had consumed all. So grievous was that Famine. But Belisarius sent Martinus and Ʋliaris with an Army against Ʋrbias and the Goths, whom he heard to besiege Millan. They encamped and stayd upon the Poe a dayes journey from Millan, and spent much time in consulting about their passage over the River. Which Mundilas understanding, sent one Paulus a Roman to them; who slipt by the Enemy and finding no Boats upon the Poe stript himselfe,
and in great danger swam over the River. Coming to the Roman Campe he told the Commanders Martinus and Ʋliaris, that they did unjustly, and not befitting their reputations, to come there in pretence to serve the Emperour, but in effect to augment the Goths power. That Millan, the cheife of the Italian Cities for big∣nesse, wealth, and populousnesse, being a Bulwark for the whole Roman Empire against the Germans, and other Barbarians, is now in perill with Mundilas and the Emperours Forces, and yet by them neglected. The wrong they did the Em∣perour, he would forbeare to aggravate, time not allowing many words, but demanding speedy succour, whilst yet some hope is left. That therefore they must instantly releive Millan; if they delayed it, Our fortunes (quoth he) will be after the bitterest sufferings to perish, and yours, to betray the Emperours Soul∣diers to the Enemy.. Seeing such are justly sayd to betray, not onely who open their Gates to an Enemy, but who having meanes to rescue their best Freinds be∣seiged, by preferring a backward security before hazarding, abandon them to the Enemy. Paulus spake in that sort, and Martinus and Ʋliaris promised him to fol∣low immediately, and so sent him away; who entred Millan by night, revived the Souldiers and other Romans, and made them yet more cheerfull in their Faith to the Emperour. CHAP. XVII. BUT still the Troops with Martinus were backward, and lay still, and so continued long. Martinus to put the blame from himselfe, wrote thus to Belisarius:You sent us out to releive our distressed Freinds in Millan: we have used our best diligence, and are as farr as the River of Poe; which the Army feares to passe, hearing that in Liguria is a great Army of Goths, and a multitude of Burgundians; with whom we conceive our selves not able to fight. Command therefore John and Justinus (who are our neighbours in Emilia) to joyne their Troops with us in this adventure; whereby we shall be safe our selves, and doe some hurt to the Enemy.Belisarius upon receite of this Letter, com∣manded John and Justinus immediately to joyne with Martinus for Millan. They refused, unlesse Narses directed them; whereupon Belisarius wrote thus to Nar∣ses:Consider how the Emperours Army is one body: If (as members in bodies) you be not all of a minde, but will be doing one without anothers concurrence; in the end (having done nothing you should) you will all perish. Wherefore leave Emilia, which hath no strong place in it, and for  present is not of any impor∣tance to us; and command John and Justinus immediately to march with Marti∣nus against the Enemy before Millan, whose Troops are neer the same, and well furnisht to vanquish the Barbarians. From hence it is not convenient to send For∣ces thither, much time will be spent in the march, that they will come after the season; and being come, they will not be able to use their Horses in a fight after so long a journey. But those, and Martinus and Ʋliaris marching to Millan, in likely hood will beat the Goths, and then againe subdue Emilia, none being to op∣pose them. Narses after perusall of this Letter, wrote to John and Justinus to march to Millan accordingly. John afterwards was sent to the Sea-coast, to get Barks for transporting the Army over the Poe; but a sicknesse hindred his businesse. In the mean time of this backwardnesse of Martinus Troops, and Johns staying for Narses his Orders, the Besieged became infinitely distressed with Famine. The ex∣tremity constrained them to feed on Dogs, Rats, Mice, and such uncouth creatures. The Goths sent to Mundilas to render the City, offering Indempnity to himselfe, and the Souldiers. He accepted, so they would give assurances of performance, and not use hard measure to the Inhabitants. When the Enemy had given assurances to Mundilas and the Souldiers, but being angry with the Ligurians, appeared resolved to destroy them; he called the Souldiers and spake thus. If ever men have chosen to dye honourably when they might have lived basely, such would I have you now to be, and not for love of breath to live in disgrace; the rather being of the
Schoole of Belisarius, where you have learnt so plentifully, that it were impi∣ous not to be generous, and extreamly daring. To all men that come into this light, one fate is appointed, in their due time to dye. But in the manner of their deaths men are distinguished; Cowards first becoming the scorn and laughter of their Foes, fulfill their destiny too in their defined times. But generous men suffer the same with Virtue, and an advantage of Honour. If by becoming Slaves to the Barbarians we could preserve this People, our base preservation would have an excuse; but for us to behold so many Romans destroyed by the Enemy, is more bitter then any death; for we shall seem even to have helpt the Goths to act this Calamity. Whilst therefore we are yet Masters of our selves, and can beare necessity with Virtue, let us make this our hard Fortune, our Glory. My Opinion is, to arme our selves compleatly, and to sally upon the Enemy not looking for us: We shall gain one of these two; either Fortune to do some∣thing for us, or else an honourable riddance of our miseries, by a happy death beyond our hopes. The Souldiers for all these words of Mundilas would not ha∣zard, but yeilded themselves and the City upon the Conditions offered. Them the Goths hurt not, but made Prisoners with Mundilas, but the City they demolisht to the Ground, killing men of all ages, 300000. at least. The Women they made Slaves, and gave to the Burgundians, to gratifie their joyning with them. Finding there Reparatus, Praefect of the Palace, they cut him in peeces, and threw them to the Dogs. Vergentinus, who was then in Millan, went into Dalmatia with his Troops through † Venetia,This is now Marca Trivi∣giana, saith Leander. and other Countries, and from thence brought the newes to the Emperour, of the Romans Disaster at Millan. The Goths also took other Townes by composition from the Roman Garrisons, and quickly subdued all Liguria. And Martinus and Ʋliaris returned towards Rome with their Army. CHAP. XVIII. BElisarius heard nothing of these Occurrents in Liguria, but the Winter be∣ing ended, he marcht with his Army into Picenia: In which Journey he un∣derstood to his great griefe what was become of Millan. Ʋliaris he suffered not to come into his sight, and wrote the whole matter to the Emperour, who punisht no man; but hearing of the differences between Belisarius and Narses, he sent for Narses home, and appointed Belisarius absolutely to command all the Army. Narses went to Constantinople with some few Souldiers; And being gone, the Herulians would  stay in Italy, though Belisarius in his own name and the Emperours made them large promises. They first went into Liguria; where meeting with Ʋraeas his Army, they sold their Slaves, and Cattell they had, and for a Sum of money given them, sware never to take Armes against the Goths, and so peaceably they came into Venetia; where having speech with Vitalius, they re∣pented of their Errour against the Emperour, and to expiate the same, left Visan∣dus there, and his Troops. The rest came to Constantinople, conducted by Aluth, and Philimuth, who was chiefe; Phanotheus being dead in his Tent. But Vitigis hearing that in the beginning of the Spring Belisarius would come against him, and the Goths in Ravenna, they were all affraid, and consulted what to do; and finding upon debate themselves alone not able to match the Enemy, they resolved to draw in the aid of other Barbarians. Of the Germans they were shy, having already had experience of their unfaithfulnesse, being contented they should continue neutrall, not joyning with Belisarius. But to Vacis King of the Lom∣bards they sent Ambassadours and large Sums for aide; but he being a Friend, and Auxiliary of the Emperour, they returned without doing any thing. So that Vitigis, in much perplexity, demanded the advise of ancient men, what was to be done to repaire his Affaires. After many Opinions of his Counsell, some unsea∣sonable, some worthy of consideration, it was said; That the Roman Empe∣rour could not invade the Barbarians of the West, before he had made truce with the Persians. Then the Vandales, and Moores were ruined, and these
things now befell the Goths. If the King of Persia might be put into a quarrell with Justinian, the Romans in war with that Nation could maintain none else∣where. Vitigis liked the Counsell, & resolved to send Ambassadours, who were not Goths, to set Chosroes, King of Persia, at variance with Justinian (for feare of discovering, and spoyling of the negotiation.) But they perswaded two Priests of Liguria with money to undertake the Service. One of them taking upon him the shew and name of a Bishop, was the Ambassadour, and the other went as his attendant. To these Vitigis gave his Letters to Chosroes, who being there∣with moved, did those mischiefes to the Romans during the Truce I formerly, re∣lated. And the Emperour, so soon as he found the Persians plotting those mis∣chiefes, thought good to end the War in the West: He sent therefore for Belisari∣us to go against the Persian, and he dispatcht Vitigis Ambassadours, (who yet were at Constantinople) with promise to send some to Ravenna, to conclude a Truce with the Goths, as should be expedient for both parts. But Belisarius made stay of the Enemies Ambassadours, untill they also sent home Athanasius and Peter, who went to Constantinople, and were highly rewarded.Incipit. Annus 5. belli Goth. 13. Reg. Justiniani & Ann. Dom. 540. Athanasius the Emperour made Praefect of the Palace in Italy, and Peter, Captain of the Emperours Guard. And thus the Winter ended, and the fourth yeare of this War, written by Proc∣pius. Belisarius resolved first to get Auximum and Faesulae, and then no Enemy be∣ing in his way, nor to be at his back, to set upon Vitigis and Ravenna. Unto Faesu∣lae he sent Cyprian and Jastinus with their own Troops, and some Isaurians, and 500. Foot under Dmetrius; these beseiged the Goths in that Castle. Towards the Poe he sent Martinus and John Phagas with their own Troops, and other For∣ces, commanded by that John; whom he directed, in case Ʋraeas with his Forces came towards them out of Millan, by any meanes to get the Reare of them, and to follow at their backs. These taking Dorthon, a Town unwalled upon the River, there encamped. CHAP. XIX. BElisarius himselfe with eleven thousand men came before Auximum; which is the Metropolis of Picenia. It stands ten miles and a halfe from the shore of the Jonian Gulfe, and from Ravenna three dayes journey, and ten miles more, upon a high Hill, with no entrance in any plaine ground, and so not approachable by an Enemy. Vitigis had Garrisoned in it the choisest Goths, sup∣posing that the Romans, missing this Towne, would not dare to invade Ravenna. Belisarius encamped his Army round about the bottome of the Hill, divided and lodged in severall quarters. The Goths seeing them thus severed, and not likely in a great Campagnia to succour one another, charged them about evening from the East side of the Towne, where Belisarius Quarter was with his Lanciers and Tar∣getiers: who opposed the Invaders, and soon routed them; and pursuing got up to the midst of the Hill; where the Barbarians trusting to the advantage of the place, turned head against them, killed many, shooting upon their heads, till the night prevented them. The day before this skirmish, some Goths being sent out ear∣ly to get Provisions, were returning by night; and seeing the Romans fires, stood a∣mazed. Many adventured and got into Auximum unseen by the Romans, others of them hid themselves in the Woods, thinking to goe to Ravenna, but were surpri∣zed, and all cut in peices. Belisarius finding Auximum strong, and no meanes to assault it, despaired to take it by force, but hoped by a close Siege to reduce them to wants, and in time to subdue them. The store of Grasse neer the Walls was oc∣casion of dayly skirmishes: The Romans seeing the Goths cut the same for their Horses, ran up the Hill, fought with them gallantly still, hindred their carrying a∣way the Grasse, and killed many of them. The Barbarians overmatcht by their E∣nemies valour, did thus. They took the Wheels and Axeltrees off their Waggons, and (their men beginning to cut Grasse) they rolled them downe upon the Ro∣mans, when they were ascended the middle of the Hill; but they went to the bot∣tome
without touching a man. The Goths failing herein, ran into the Towne. Af∣terward they layd an ambush of their best men in Vallies neer the town; then some few appeared about the Grasse plot, and when the fight was come to Sword and Lance, they rose from their ambush, and having the advantage much in numbers, and amazing the Romans being unlookt for, they, killed many, and put the rest to flight. The Romans in the quarters saw the Enemy rise from their ambush, and cryed loud to their companions to retire, but were not heard, being divided from them the whole length of the hill, and the Barbarians clashing their armes to drown their cryes. Belisarius was troubled at it, and Procopius, the writer of this History, came to him, and sayd. Noble Generall, Anciently the Roman Trumpeters were skilfull in two tunes, one composed to incourage the Souldiers to fight, the other to sound a retreat, when the Generall saw his time: Who by this means signified his pleasure, and the Souldiers put it in Execution. For in a battell to doe it by shouting is impossible; the fright of it amazing, and the clashing of armes over∣coming the noise. But now rudenesse hath berest us of this skill, and we cannot signifie both with one Trumpet: wherefore do you thus. Let the horsemens trum∣pets incourage the Souldiers to fight, and let those of the foot call them to the re∣treat; they cannot but distinguish the sound, the one being made of Leather, and very thin wood, and the other of a thick peice of Brasse. Belisarius liked Procopius advise, and calling the army, spake thus. Courage and forwardnesse is expedient and commendable so far as it is moderate, and hurts not them who use it; all things becoming ever worse with Excesse. Commit therefore no more of these Errors through vain ambition; to fly sometime is no shame, and who unadvisedly runs into evident mischeif, if he chance to escape, yet is he guilty of Folly. The gal∣lant man is he, that fights valiantly in time of need. The Goths now unable to fight with you, indeavour to ruin you with ambushes; and you are more to be blamed for standing the danger, then if you had run out of their ambush; nothing being baser, then to serve an Enemies Counsells. I will be carefull to prevent your falling into ambushes; and you, when I give the signall, presently retire, which shall be done by the sound of the foot Trumpets. The Souldiers after this speech, seeing the Ene∣my at the Grasse, went towards them, and at first killed some. A Moore espying one of them with Gold Ornaments, ook him by the hair, and drew him aside to strip him; but a Goth hit him through both the calves of his legs with a dart, and so fet∣tered them both together, yet still he drew the dead body, holding, it by the Hair. In this instant the Goths rose from their ambush, and immediatly Belisarius seeing all from the camp, caused the foot Trumpets to sound, which the Romans hearing, retired gently, taking up the Moore with the Dart through his leggs. The Goths durst not follow them, but retired too. Afterward the Goths considered how they might advertise Vitigis of their wants, which grew great, and none adventuring to go, as thinking it impossible to slip by the Enemy, they observed a night without moon light, and preparing their men with Letters to Vitigis, when the night was far spent, they made great cries upon the walls, as if they were in some terrible confusion, prest by Enemies, and their town suddenly taken. The Romans could not imagine the cause, and kept within their quarters by Belisarius's direction, fearing a surprize from the Town, and from some army from Ravenna, which might be come to the Enemies succour; and so thought better to lye still in a safe place, then in a dark night to run into danger: Whereby the Goths sent out their men unespied to Ravenna; who the third day, without meeting Enemy, delivered the Letters to Vitigis, to this Effect. When your Majesty placed us in Auximum, you said, that in our hands you left the keyes of Ravenna, and of your Kingdom, and you therefore summoned our uttermost power to conserve the dominion of the Goths, and if we needed it, you promised to come to us unsent for with your whole army. We have fought with Famin and Belisarius, and been faithfull Guards of your Kingdome; but you have not thought meet to succour us at all. Think if the Romans take Auximum, and the keyes which lye here by you forgotten, whether they will be kept out of any thing you have. Vitigis, upon perusall hereof, promised forthwith to succour Auximum with his whole forces, and difmist the men: But upon better considera∣tion he lay still, doubting least the troops with John might fall upon his back, and be∣fore
him fearing a great power of resolute men with Belisarius; but principally want of victuall troubled him, not knowing from whence to furnish his army, in re∣gard the Romans were masters of the Sea, and transporting their provisions from Sicily and Calabria, to the Castle of Ancona, from thence had it brought with case in the due season; but the Goths in Picenia should have no means of supply. But the Messengers came safe to Auximum with Vitigis promise, which raised them with vain hope. And Belisarius hearing thereof, caused the Guards to be more strictly kept. In the mean time Cyprian and Justinus, besieging Faesulae, could not approach to as∣sault the place; and the Goths willing rather to end it by fights, then to indure the want of victuall, sallied often. At first the fights were equall, in the end the Ro∣mans being too hard for them, shut them within their walls; keeping exact watch that none might get out. In Auximum the Goths perplexed with their wants, sent out again to Vitigis for succour, as unable to hold out any longer. He directed Ʋ∣raeas with the army in Liguria to march into Picenia; promising also to come to the besieged with his whole power. Ʋraeas went into Picenia accordingly, with the ar∣my with him; pass't the Poe, and came neer the Romans Camp. and sate down about 7 miles distant from them. They began no fights, the Romans thinking it enough to keep them from joyning with the besieged. And the Goths were afraid to fight, considering if they should lose the battell, they should ruin all; being to have no more means of joyning with Vitigis, and with him of opposing the Enemy: with there counsells they both lay still. CHAP. XX. IN the mean time the Francks hearing how both the Goths and Romans were wasted with this war, conceived it easy to get a good share of Italy, and re∣pined to sit idle thus, and look upon others, disputing a province so neer neigh∣bouring. So that forgetting their late oathes and accords both with Romans and Goths (for this nation of all men is the most slippery of Faith) with an army of 50000 men under the leading of Theodebert, they invaded Italy. They had some few horse men, Lancers, to attend their King. The rest were foot men, without bowes or Lances, only wearing a sword, a sheild, and a battell axe; the iron where∣of was broad and sharp on both sides, and the handle very short; This upon a sig∣nall at the first charge they throw from them, to break the Enemies sheilds and kill them. Thus the Francks, passing the Alpes which divide Gaule and Italy, came into Liguria. The Goths were before angry for their not accepting their offers of a large country, and great summes to aid them; but now hearing Theodebert was come with a mighty army they rejoyced; and hoped to beat their Enemy now without striking stroake. And the Francks, while they were in Liguria, hurt not the Goths, that they might find no impediment in their passage over the Poe; and at a Town in Picenia, where was an ancient bridge over the River, the Garrison supplyed them, and let them at their pleasure passe the Poe. But the Francks being masters of the Bridge, such women and children as they found, they sacrificed, and threw into the River as the first spoiles of the War,It seems they had Almans with them yet Heathen. See Agathias lib. 1. cap. 3. retaining yet (though Christians) much of the old religion, & using sacrifices, and other ungodly Rites in making their predictions. The Goths seeing it, in a great fear fled into the town, and the Francks being past, marcht towards the Goths Camp: Who at first seeing them in small troops, were glad of their coming, thinking it to be to aid them. But when numbers came on, and fell to the businesse, and darting their Battle axes hurt many, they turn'd about, and ran away by the Romans camp into Ravenna. The Romans seeing them flye, thought that Belisarius had vanquisht them in fight, and taken their camp from them; and they took armes, thinking to joyne with him in the pursuit; but they found an Enemy unlook't for, and unwillingly they fought, till being beaten, and not able to return to their camp, they fled into Tuscany, and sent Newes of the accident to Be∣lisarius. The Francks having conquered both parts, and taken their Camps without any men in them; there then found their provisions. But in a while they had no∣thing
to feed on in a wasted Country, but Oxen, and water of the Poe, no bread at all, and being not able to disgest the flesh, and abundance of water, they fel into flux∣es and dysenteries, which they could not get cured for want of things convenient: So that a third part of them are said to have so perisht, and being not able to march on, they staid there. Belisarius hearing of this army of Francks, and how the troops of John and Martinus were routed, he was afraid of his army, especially of those be∣fore Faesulae, who were neerest the Barbarians, and he wrote this Letter to Theodebert.Noble Theodebert, for one pretending to virtue, and especially being a King of so great a Nation, not to be true of his word, is not Princely; but to violate oaths and accords reduced into writing, is not fit for the meanest man. Herein you know your self a Transgressor; having lately agreed to joyne with us against the Goths; & now not so much as continuing neutrall, but advisedly having taken armes, and set upon us. Put not this affront upon the Emperour, Good Sr. who will revenge it in the highest kind. It is better for a man to hold his own securely, then by medling with what belongs not to him, to run a danger in that which most concernes him. Theodebert upon this Letter, and being troubled with his present Estate, and reviled by the Germans for letting them dy thus in a desart country to no purpose, rose with the Francks surviving, and made haste home. CHAP. XXI. NEverthelesse Martinus and John came back with their Troops, least the E∣nemy should set upon the Army before Auximum. Where the Goths hearing nothing of the Franks retreat, but despairing at the delayes from Ravenna, thought once more to importune Vitigis, but could not get by the Enemy. Seeing at noon one Burcensius, a Bessian by birth, and a Souldier of Narses the Armenian, standing Sentinell to keepe off the Towne from cutting Grasse; some came to parley with him, and agreed to give him a great Summe in hand to carry a Letter to Ravenna, and more at his returne with Letters from Viti∣gis. The man for the Money undertook the service, and presently put it in execu∣tion. He brought the Letters sealed up to Vitigis with all speed, which were thus. You will perceive our estate, by enquiring who is the bearer of this Letter; there being no meanes for a Goth to get out of the Towne walls; and our best supply of Victuall is the Grasse that growes about them, which we cannot touch with∣out fighting and losse of men. To what conclusion this will bring us, you and the Goths in Ravenna are seriously to consider. Vitigis returned this answer: My best Freinds in the World! think not I am so dejected, nor come to that de∣gree of basenesse, as through sloth to abandon the Goths affaires; my owne journey was in readinesse, and Ʋraeas by my direction was coming from Millan with his Army; but an unexpected invasion of Franks stopt our preparations, whereof I am not to beare the blame: For things above humane power bestow this favour on the unfortunate, to make him unblameable; Fortune taking the whole imputation upon her selfe. But Theodebert being now gone, as we heare, we will shortly, God willing, be with you with our whole Army. And you must beare your Fortune valiantly, and suitably to the necessity. Thinke upon the ver∣tue for which we made choice of you to guard Auximum; and respect that gene∣rall opinion held of you by all the Goths, which set you there a Bulwark of Ra∣venna, and of their whole safety. Vitigis with this Letter and good store of Money, dispatcht the man: Who com∣ing before Auximum pretended to his Companions a sudden sicknesse, which caused him to goe to a Church neer there for cure; and standing Sentinell where he was wont, he delivered the Letters unseene by the Romans. The reading whereof so raised their Spirits, though opprest with the Famine, that they would not yeild, al∣beit Belisarius much woed them to it: But having no newes of any Army from Ravenna, and being in extream want of Victuall, againe they sent Burcensius, writing onely, That they were able to struggle with the Famine five dayes, and no more; who brought them againe a Letter from Vitigis, holding them in suspence
with like hopes. The Romans also were weary of this long Siege in a barren desert Countrey, and troubled to see the Goths not to yeild, though in so much misery. Belisarius therefore sought to take some Enemy alive, from whom he might learne the ground of this obstinacy of the Goths. Valerianus promised to serve him there∣in; who had in his Troops Slavonians, that used to lye under some Stone or Bush, and to steale Enemies; a thing ordinarily practised by them by the River Ister, where their dwellings are, both upon Romans and Barbarians. Belisarius liking his way, and committing it to his care, he chose out a Slavonian, a tall lusty fellow, and valiant, and assured him a good reward from Belisarius to get an Enemy alive; and told him, That at the Grasse plat, which the Goths used to eat for want of food, he might doe it with ease. The Slavonian before day-breake, put himselfe neer the Towne walls, concealed in a Bush, and gathering up his feet close about him. By day-light a Goth came out to gather Grasse, suspecting nothing from the Bush; but had his eye upon the Camp, least any enemy might come from thence. The Sla∣vonian stealing behinde him, snatcht him up fast between his armes, & delivered him to Valerianus; who enquiring, from what confidence the Goths being so weake re∣fused to yeild, and wilfully endured so much distresse; the Barbarian told him all the story about Burcensius, desiring he might be brought face to face. Burcensius seeing himselfe discovered, concealed nothing; and Belisarius gave him to his Companions to use him as they pleased, who burnt him alive in the sight of the E∣nemy: And this fruit had Burcensius, of his covetousnesse. But Belisarius seeing the Goths still hold out, he had a designe upon their water, by that way thinking to take them in with most ease and advantage. CHAP. XXII. THere was a Spring-head to the North-ward of Auximum, in a craggy ground, a stones cast from the Town, sending a small stream into a Cistern anciently there built, which being filled from that small stream, supplyed water for the Citizens. Belisarius thought that if the water were not re∣ceived into the Cistern, the Goths being plyed with Arrowes, would be long filling their Vessels from so small a stream. To spoile this Cistern, he did thus; he put his Forces in Armes, and in their orders round about the Town, as if he would make a generall Assault; The Goths fearing the same, stood upon the Battlements, to oppose the Enemy. In the mean time Belisarius brought to the Cistern five Isau∣rians, covered under a multitude of Shields, skilfull in Masonry, with Axes, and other Instruments to cut stones, commanding them to break down the sides of the Cistern. The Goths thinking they came to approach the Walls, kept quiet; that being neerer they might shoot at them with more advantage, not imagining the businesse. But seeing the Isaurians within the Cistern, they plyed them with Ar∣rowes, and stones; The rest ran back, and the five Isaurians being under in safety, fell to work; there being an Arch over the water for shade, under which they made no account of the Enemies shot, though it came thick. The Goths opening the Gate there, sallied furiously upon the Isaurians, and the Romans encountred them, where was a hot fight long, and body to body, and much slaughter on both sides. The Romans fell thicker, the Goths having the advantage of the upper ground; but the Romans gave not back, Belisarius being present, and with loud shouts en∣couraging them: When from the Enemy came an Arrow whizzing towards the Generals belly, whether shot by chance, or purposely: Belisarius seeing it not, could not ward nor shun it; but Ʋnigatus, one of his Life-guard, perceiving the Arrow coming almost to his belly, put his right hand between, and saved the Ge∣nerals life; and being himselfe wounded with it, and in extremity of pain, he re∣tired: His Sinewes were afterwards cut asunder, and he lost the use of his hand. The Fight beginning in the morning ended at noon, where seven Armenians of the Troops of Narses, and Aratius, shewed great deeds of Valour; running up the steep Hill, and upon the plain killed all that stood them, untill they had routed the Goths in that part. And the Romans seeing the Enemy give ground, fell to Ex∣ecution
and the Defeat being cleer, the Goths got within their Walls. The Romans thought the Cistern to be downe, and the Isaurians to have dispatcht their work; but they could not force one stone out of it. The ancient Artists, above all, care∣full of their Credits, had so wrought this building, that it would not yeild to time, nor the attemps of men; wherefore the Isaurians, seeing the Romans masters of the Feild, came out of the Cistern, and retired to the Camp. Hereupon Belisarius caused the Souldiers to throw dead bodies of Beasts, and poysonous Herbs into the water, and to quench burning Lime in it; that the Goths having but one Well within the Walls, with little water in it, were much scanted. Neither did Belisarius use any more force or designes against the Town, hoping by Famine only to have his will of the Enemy; and therefore he attended earnestly to his Guards and Sen∣tinels. The Goths also in their great wants were quiet, expecting an Army from Ravenna. In Faesulae the Beseiged endured fore Famine, and much misery, and having no hope from Ravenna, they resolved to yeild: And coming to a Parly with Cyprian and Justinus, and taking assurance for their lives, they rendred themselves and the Castle. Cyprian brought them and the Roman Army before Auximum, leaving a Garrison in Faesulae. Belisarius shewed their Leaders to the Goths in Auximum, bidding them leave their Opiniativenesse, and hopes from Ravenna, from whence receiving no good, but being more ruined daily, they will at last come to the same Fortune with those of Faesulae. They considered of it, and being unable to hold out longer against the Famine, they embraced the Proposition, and rendred the City upon conditions of indemnity to themselves, and to go with their Goods to Ravenna. Belisarius was in some doubt to suffer so many brave men to joyne with those in Ravenna; but he would not lose the opportunity of marching thi∣ther against Vitigis, while Affaires was yet in suspence, and the Francks expected to come with succours to the Goths; whose coming though he would willingly prevent, yet he would not raise the Seige of Auximum, before it were, taken. But the Souldiers opposed the Goths having their Goods, shewing their wounds, and recounting their toiles in the Seige, whereof they alledged the spoiles of the Conquered to be the due Prizes. In the end forced by the pressing opportunity, and the Goths compelled by the Famine, they came to this accord; That the Ro∣mans should have halfe the Goods, and the Goths with the other halfe he subject to the Emperour: And upon this they gave Oath, the Roman Commanders to observe the Agreement, and the Goths not to conceale any of their Goods. So they shared the Goods, and the Romans had Auximum, and the Goths were mingled with the Army. CHAP. XXIII. BElisarius having taken Auximum, made hast to Ravenna with his whole Army; He sent Magnus before with competent numbers, to skirt the Bancks of Poe, and prevent the transporting of Provisions into Ravenna that way. Vitalius, being come out of Dalmatia with Forces, guarded the other side of the River; a Fortune here befell, which shewed evidently, that she it is who will determine the controversie. For the Goths had formerly brought down into the Poe many Barks out of Liguria laded with Corn, bound for Ravenna; but the wa∣ter was grown so low then, that they could not row on; till the Romans coming, surprised the Barks and all the lading. Soon after, the River had the wonted stream and was Navigable again; which never happened so before, that we could heare. And now the Goths began to be scarce of Provisions, importing nothing from the Jonian Gulfe (by reason the Enemy was Master of the Sea) and the River be∣ing blockt up. The Kings of the Francks understanding how things went, and desiring to put for Italy▪ sent Ambassadours to Vitigis with offers of aides, so they might share the Dominion of the Country with him; which Belisarius being advertised of, sent also Ambassadours to dispute it with the Francks, and among others, Theo∣dosius
the Steward of his house. The Francks Ambassadours were first heard, and spake thus: The Kings of the Francks have sent us hither, sorry to heare that you are distressed by Belisarius, and ready according to their League to avenge you. There is an Army passed the Alpes, of 500000. men, who at their very first Encounter will over-whelme the Roman Army with their battle Axes. Hearken not therefore to their Counsell, who would make you Slaves, but to theirs ra∣ther who in their Affection to you embrace the hazards of a War; And the rather, because joyning with us, the Romans cannot hope to match both our powers, but we shall with ease have the Victory. Whereas if you joyne with the Romans, yet shall they not be able to stand against the Francks, (the Bat∣tell even then being not to be with equall powers) and you will be vanquished in the company of your greatest Foes. To run therefore into so evident mischiefe, having meanes to be preserved without hazard, is extreamest folly. The Romans are not faithfull to any Barbarians, but naturally Enemies to them. But we (if you like it) will share with you the Dominion of Italy, and divide the Country as we shall both think best. Make choice therefore of what is most expedient for you. The Francks having done, the Ambassadours of Belisarius spake thus: That the Francks multitudes shall not hurt the Emperours Army, as these men would fright us, what needs a long Speech to you, whose experience hath learnt all the moments of War? and that Valour is not vanquisht with multitudes. The Emperour can more then any, (if he please) exceed his Enemy in num∣bers. The faithfulnesse of these men to all Barbarians, we know, and themselves have shewed it to the Thuringians, Burgundians, and to you their Allies: So that we would gladly ask, by what God they mean to sweare for the pledge of their Faith. How they have respected him by whom they have already sworn, you know; who coming as Friends to aide you, did not only not joyne in the danger, but impudently took Armes against you; if you remember what they did at the Poe. What need we, by repeating things past, convince the Francks im∣piety? Can any thing be more detestable then this their Ambassage? as if they had forgotten former Treaties; now they pretend their aides to be better then other mens; but if they obtain the Goths to mingle with their Armies once, what will be the period or their insatiable desires, were good to consider. Belisarius Ambassadours having thus spoken, Vitigis after long conference with the princi∣pall Goths, chose an Accord with the Emperour, and dismist the Francks with de∣nyall. From hence forward the Romans and Goths sent Ambassadours to each other: But still Belisarius set Guards to hinder importation of Provisions; and he employed Vitalius to take in Townes in Venetia, and himselfe with Ildeger guar∣ded both sides of the Poe, to draw thus the Goths to yeild to him upon his own tearmes for want of Victuall. Hearing how there was much Corn in the publick Magazines of Ravenna, he won a Citizen with money to set them all on fire; which losse (some say) happened by Mattasuntha's advise, the Wife of Vitigis. It was so suddenly done, that some thought it was by lightning, as others by designe, and Vitigis and the Goths taking it in either kind, fell into more irresolution, neither trusting one another, and thinking God himselfe made War against them. In the Alpes also which divide Gaule and Liguria, (called Alpes Cottiae) are many Castles, whereof many principall Goths have the Guard, having long dwelt there with their wives and children. Belisarius desirous to reduce them, sent Tho∣mas thither, one of his retinue, with some few, to give Faith, and receive the Goths upon composition, whom Sisigis commander of all those Garrisons received into a Castle, and with himself brought in all the rest. In the mean time Ʋraeas with 4000 choice men out of Liguria, and those Castles, was marching to succour Ravenna: These hearing what Sisigis had done, and afraid of their own Estates, with Ʋraeas went first to these Cottian Alpes, and besieged Sisigis and Thomas. John Vitalianus hearing of it, and Martinus (being then about the Poe) came to their succour with their forces, and some of the Castles they surprized, and made the Inhabitants slaves, and among them many wives and Children of Ʋraeas souldiers, who from those Castles had followed him; but hearing now how their own Estates were ran∣sack'd
they suddenly ran from the Goths Camp to John, whereby Ʋraeas could do no∣thing there, nor yet releive Ravenna, but went into Liguria with some few, and lay still. CHAP. XXIV. IN the mean time, Belisarius shut up in Ravenna, Vitigis, and the cheife of the Goths: and the Emperours Ambassadors arrived, Domnicus and Maximinus, both Senators; with commission to make peace upon Tearms, that Vitigis should have half the Revenues of the Crown, and the Dominion of the coun∣try beyond the Poe; the other half of the Revenues to be the Emperours, and the rest of Italy to be subject to him, and to pay him Tribute. The Ambassadors shewed the Emperours instructions to Belisarius, and were conducted into Ravenna: And Vitigis and the Goths gladly agreed to conclude the treaty upon those condition. This discontented Belisarius, as an ill service to hinder him from the absolute con∣quest, and his bringing Vitigis to Constantinople prisoner, having it in his power: and at the Ambassadors return he refused to signe the Treaty, upon which the Goths were jealous of the Romans that they fraudulently propounded a peace, and protested to conclude nothing without the signature and oath of Belisarius. Who hearing that some Commanders taxed him with a design against the Emperours service, to prolong the War; he called them all, and in the presence of Domnicus and Max∣iminus spake thus The fortune of the war (I and you know) stands not upon firm Ground; many in hope of an instant victory have been overthrown, and an Ene∣my, in appearance ruined, hath beyond imagination subsisted. So that men consul∣ting of peace, are not to fancy the best for themselves only, but to consider the event both waies in possibility, and so to resolve. And I now assemble you my fellow Commanders, and the Emperours Ambassadors, that chusing with all free∣dome what you think most expedient for the Emperour, you may not after the businesse done, lay imputations upon me; it being most unreasonable, when you may chuse the best, to be silent, and when you see the Event, then to coyn accu∣sations. The Emperours resolution, and Vitigis mind for concluding the war, you know; which if you conceive to be expedient, say so; but if you thinke your selves able to recover Italy, and to subdue the Enemy, there is no danger, boldly to say it.Belisarius having spoken, they all said plainly that the Emperours in∣structions were best, and that they were not able to do more then they had done. The opinion pleased Belisarius, and he bade them expresse it in a writing, that they might not deny it afterwards; which they signed accordingly; that they were not able to subdue the Enemy by war. But the Goths the while prest with Famin, could hold out no longer; weary they were of Vitigis government, and yet scrupulous to yeild to the Emperour; fearing to be removed by him out of Italy to Constantinople, and planted thereabout. So that the principall men upon debate resolved to declare Be∣lisarius Emperour of the West, and secretly they sent to entreat him to accept the Empire, professing to be most willing to obey him. Belisarius would not take the Empire without the Emperours consent; to whom he was tyed in a solemn oath, not to innovat during the said Emperours life; and the very name of an Usurper he hated: yet to facilitate his businesse, he seemed to accept the offer. Vitigis perceiving it, out of fear, commended the Goths resolution, and secretly animated Belisarius, that there should be no rub in his way to the Empire. Belisarius hereupon called the Commanders with the Ambassadors, and askt them, if they thought it not a matter of importance, to make all the Goths, and Vitigis the Emperours Captives; to share their wealth, and to recover all Italy to the Romans: They said, it would be an ex∣tream high fortune, and prayed him to effect it if he could. Presently Belisarius sent some of his favorites to Vitigis, and the cheife Goths, willing them to perform their offer immediatly. Indeed the Famin would not permit a put-off, but brought them to it; that again they sent Ambassadors with the former propositions openly, but privatly to take Belisarius oath for their indemnity, and that he would be King of Italy; and that done, to return into Ravenna with the Roman army. Concerning
the rest Belisarius gave oath; but touching the Kingdome, he said he would swear it to Vitigis and the Goths Commanders. The Ambassadors not thinking he would reject the Kingdome, but that he desired it above all things, prayed him forthwith to march into Ravenna. Belisarius sent away Narses, Aratius, Bessas and John, (whom he suspected to be worst affected to him) to quarter with their Troops in severall countryes, telling them he could not possibly bring into that city provisions for the whole army. They with Athanasius, Praefect of the Palace, lately come from Constantinople, went accordingly; & himself and the rest of the army entred Ravenna, with the Goths Ambassadors. He commanded also ships he had laded with Corn, to come into Esclae the haven for Ravenaa. When I saw the entrance of this army into Ravenna, I considered how actions are not concluded by valour, multitudes, or human virtue; but that some spirit steers the wits and judgments of men thither, where nothing can hinder the pre-ordained conclusion. The Goths had much the advan∣tage in numbers and power, and since they came to Ravenna had no battell, nor their courages dejected with any accident, yet they became prisoners, and thought it no shame to be slaves to fewer in number. The women (who had heard from their Husbands, that the Enemy were tall gallant men, and not to be numbred, scorned the Souldiers when they saw them in the City, and reviled their husbands cowardice, pointing at their conquerours. CHAP. XXV. BUT Belisarius kept Vitigis in an honourable restraint, and sent away such Goths as inhabited this side the Poe, to their own houses, to possesse them freely; fearing from thence no hostility, nor that the Goths would gather head in those parts, because much of the Army was there Garrison'd. And these Goths were glad to go home, whereby the Romans in Ravenna were secure, having equall numbers. The Treasures in the Palace he seised, with intent to carry them to the Emperour; But neither himselfe plundred any Goth, nor suffered o∣thers; leaving them their Estates according to the Accord. The Captaines of For∣tresses, hearing Ravenna and Vitigis to be in the Romans hands, sent to Belisarius offers of surrendring the same upon Composition. He gave them assurances, and received Tarvisium, and another strong Hold: Cesina and Emilia he had taken in before with Ravenna; and the Goths Garrison'd in those places, upon assuran∣ces given, came into Beliarius, and staid with him. debad also, Governour of Verona, having his Children Prisoners in Ravenna, sent to Belisarius to the same purpose; but he would not put himselfe into his hands there. In the mean time some Commanders had traduced Belisarius to the Emperour falsly with usurpation; Who not beleiving the accusation, but the Persian war pressing him, sent for Beli∣sarius to make an Expedition that way. Belisarius left the charge of Italy with Bes∣sas and John, and some others; and he directed Constantianus to come to Ravenna from Dalmatia. But the Goths inhabiting beyond the Poe, hearing how Belisarius was called home, at first made no account of it, not thinking that he would less esteem a Kingdome then his faith to Justinian: But afterward seeing his preparations to be gone, their cheif men continuing in those parts, went into Picenia to Ʋraeas, sisters Sonne to Vitigis, and after much lamenting, spake thus. There is none a greater cause of these miseries of our Nation, then your self. We had long since deposed your uncle, so cowardly and unfortunate a Prince, as formerly we did Theodatus the sisters Son of Theoderick, if we had not (respecting your valour) given him the Title, but in Effect put the Kingdome into your hands. But now our then see∣ming good counsell, appeares our folly, and the cause of these Calamities. The best Goths are consumed by the war, and the best of the remainder Belisarius is carry∣ing, away with all our Treasures; and no man doubts, but we shortly being few, & enemies, shal suffer the same. In this extremity a glorious death is better, then to be∣hold our wives and children led Captives to the uttermost bounds of the earth; and might we have you in the head of us, we may yet do something worthy the name of valour. Ʋraeas made this answer▪ I am of your opinion to chuse danger before sla∣very; but to make me King I hold it in no fort convenient. For being the Nephew of Vitigis, a man so unlucky, the Enemy may despise me, supposing Fortunes ever
to run in a blood. Besides I shall seem dishonest to intrude upon my Uncle, and thereby have many male-contents. My Sentence is, to make Ildebad King in this danger, a man accomplisht in Virtue, and very valiant, whole Uncle Theudis, King of the Visigoths, in likely-hood will enter into this War for his sake, where∣by we may dispute it with more hope. This advise of Ʋraeas seemed best; and forthwith Ildebad was sent for from Verona, whom they invested with the purple Robe, and proclaimed King, recommending unto him their Affaires Ildebad be∣ing thus made King, assembled the Goths, and spake thus: Fellow Souldiers, we have had experience of many Wars, and in likely-hood shall not run rashly now into this; Experience brings Wit; and wit is never Foole-hardy. It is fit now to consult of our present Estate, by calling to mind the former Accidents. Men by an affected forgetfulnesse of things past, and so by foolishly keeping high thoughts, have been ruined in their greatest occasions. Vitigis, without your opposing him, hath put himselfe into the Enemies hands; you being tired with crosse Fortunes, and chusing rather (quietly sitting at home) to obey Beli∣sarius, then to hazard. But he being going to Constantinople, now you resolve to stir; whereas you should consider, that men speed not alwaies in the way they expect, that often the Event beyond Imagination is contrary to the apparance; Fortune and Repentance commonly doing best, unlookt for, which is not un∣likely, may be now the case of Belisarius. Wherefore our best way is, to send first to know his mind, and to perswade him to what was lately accorded, and so to enter into action. This counsell of Ildebad they all conceived to be best, and im∣mediately sent Ambassadours to Ravenna; who put Belisarius in mind of his Agreement, blamed his infringing the same, and reproached him for not blushing to be thus a Voluntary Slave, and to prefer Servitude before a Kingdome. Many such Provocations they used, and animated him to accept the Government, assu∣ring him that Ildebad would willingly give place, lay at his feet the Purple Robe, and salute him, Belisarius, King of the Goths and Italians. The Ambassadours spake thus, thinking that Belisarius would not be so scrupulous, as to reject the Title of a King. But he, contrary to their expectations, plainly refused it, saying; that during the Emperour Justinians life, he would not intrude upon such a Title. They hearing this, instantly departed, and reported it to Ildebad. And Belisarius took his Journey towards Constantinople, the Winter ending, and the fifth yeare of this War, written by Procopius. Finis lib. 2. Bell. Goth.
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK Of the GOTHJCK VVarre. Chap. I. AN Elogium of Belisarius. The ill carriage of the other Comman∣ders in Italy. Ildebad is chosen King, and the Goths recover. The Roman Souldiers and Subjects are discontented with Alex∣ander Psalidion the Auditor. Ildebad kills Uraeas, and is slain himself by Vilas, one of his Guard. Chap. II. Erarick, a Rogian, is chosen King. The Romans have II. Commanders un∣der Constantianus, and Alexander Psalidion; They basely run away from Verona, and are routed by the Poe, through the want of Artabazes, who was hurt in a Duell. Chap. III. Florence attempted, and mist by Totilas, elected King of the Goths. The Ro∣man Army makes head, and is routed. Naples besieged by Totilas, who is Master of Italy. Demetrius, sent from Constantinople, is routed in a Sea-fight, taken Prisoner, and the Navy ruined by storme. Chap. IV. Totiles takes Naples by composition: His humanity to the Citizens and Soul∣diers. His noble punishment of a Rape. The basenesse of the Roman Army. Totilas invites the Roman Senators to revolt. Chap. V. Belisarius is sent into Italy. Otranto is besieged, and relieved by Valenti∣nus. Tibur is surprized by the Goths. Belisarius come to Ravenna. The Illyrians goe home. Forces are sent to relieve Auximum.
Chap. VI. Some Romans are slaine by an Ambush. Pisaurus is repaired. Belisarius writes to the Emperour for supplies. The Goths take Spoletum, and Assisi∣um by composition, besiege Rome, and block it up by Sea and Land. Beli∣sarius unfortunate, or infatuated, returns to Epidamnus. The Emperour sends him an Army with John. Narses the Eunuch levies an Army of He∣rulians; who by chance do great service against the Slavonians. Chap. VII. A digression of a counterfeit Chilbudius, a Romam Generall upon the River Iste. A description of the Slavonians, and Antians; inhabiting the fur∣ther side of the River Ister. Chap. VIII. Valentinus and Phocas are slain before Rome, by the basenesse of Bessas. Ships of Corne sent by Vigilius, Bishop of Rome, for Rome, are surprized by the Enemie. Pelagius, a Deacon, is sent Ambassador to supplicate Toti∣las, but prevailes not. Chap. IX. The miserable Famine in Rome. John recovers Calabria, Bruttia, and Lu∣cania. He defeats an Army of Goths about Rhegium. Totilas builds Towers, and a Bridg upon Tiber. Chap. X. Belisarius burnes one of the Towers with a Fire-boat; being ready to relieve Rome, is diverted, by a report of Isaac's taking, whose madnesse, and the basenesse of Bessas spoiled the Action. Four Isaurians offer to receive in To∣tilas, Bessas negligently guarding it. Chap. XI. Totilas takes Rome by the Treason of the foure Isaurians. He spares slaugh∣ter, at the supplication of Pelagius: Whom he sends Ambassadour to Justi∣nian for Peace; and in the meane time spares the demolishing of Rome. A small defeate of Goths by Tullianus. Chap. XII. Totilas is diverted from destroying Rome, by the advises of Belisarius, and left it without any man in it. Martianus by a plot recovers Spoletum. John fortifies an Isthmus at Tarentum, and makes head. Totilas goes to∣wards Ravenna.
Chap. XIII. Belisarius repaires Rome, and defends it against Totilas; and after some time, beates him away. The speech of Totilas to the Goths in his owne A∣pology. Chap. XIV. Iohn rescues the Senators and their Wives, confined in Campania, is beaten out of his Camp by Totilas, with losse of 100. men. The Emperour sends new Forces into Italy, Scyllaeum, The bay of Tarentum, Thurium, and Croton. Chap. XV. The Forces sent by Belisarius to guard the passages are cut in pieces by Totilas, where Pharas is slaine. Belisarius frighted with the newes, runnes a Ship∣board. The Slavonians over-run Illyrium. Inundation of Nile; The great Whale. Russiana is taken by Totilas. Conon is killed by his Soul∣diers. Chap. XVI. Belisarius dares not relieve Russiana: and the Garrison yeelds it to Totilas upon their lives saved. A plot against the person of Justinian, by Artabanes, and others. Chap. XVII. Artabanes, and Arsaces endeavour to bring in Germanus, and his sonn Ju∣stinus into the plot against the Emperour. Marcellus, by deferring the dis∣covery, hazards Germanus, and after by telling the whole truth, saves him. The Kings of the Francks coyne gold Staters, a thing not done by the King of Persia himself. No gold pieces will goe, no not among Barbarian Merchants, but of the Emperours coyne. Chap. XVIII. The Gepaedes and Lombards spoile the Empire: Fall at difference: Demand ayd of the Emperour by both their Ambassadors. The Lombards arguments have more justice in them. But the Gepaedes more reason of State. Chap. XIX. The Gepaedes and Lombards make Peace without the Romans. Belisarius returnes to Constantinople without honour. of Ildeges a Lombard, who was coming to ayde Totilas, but returned. Ilauf, a revolter, does mischief in Dalmatia; and sackes Monecurum, and Laureata. Totilas besieges Rome, which is bravely defended by Diogenes.
Chap. XX. Totitas takes Rome againe by another Isaurian Treason; but demolishes it not, upon an occasion of being formerly refused allyance with the French King, because he durst not hold Rome, but demolish it. Paul, a Cilician, makes a gallant composition. Justinian refuses to see the Goths Ambassadors for Peace. Centumcellae agreed to be yeilded, if succours came not. Ger∣manus, then Liberius, appointed Generall for Italy. Verus is slain. Chap. XXI. The Slavonians spoile Thrace, and Illyrium, beate the Emperours Army, and commit savage murders. Rhegium yeilded to the Goths. Messina be∣sieged. After Liberius, and Artabanes, Germanus is made Generall a∣gainst the Goths; who makes a powerfull preparation, frights away the Slavonians out of Illyrium, and dies at Sardice in Illyrium. John is ap∣pointed to lead the Army. Chap. XXII. Artabanes escapes a storme at Sea. Liberius quits Syracuse. Totilas is perswaded by Spinus to leave Sicily. The Slavonians do much spoile; rout a Roman Army, and come up even to the Long wals in Thrace, a days jour∣ney from Constantinople. They are beaten home.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARRS of the Emperour JUSTINIAN. Of the GOTHJCK VVarre, the Third BOOK. CHAP. I. THUS Belisarius, leaving Italy yet unsetled, brought Vitigis and Ildebads children to Constantinople, with all the rich spoiles; accompanied only with Ildiger, Valerianus, Marti∣nus, and Herodian. Justinian was glad to see Vitigis and his Queen, admiting the Goths for their beautifull tall bodies. Theodericks treasures (a goodly sight to behold) he took in∣to the Palace, and in private exposed them to the view of the Senate, glorying much in the greatnesse of the things done. He shewed not the same to the People, nor allowed Belisarius a triumph, as after his conquest of Gelimer and the Vandals. Yet was Belisarius the discourse of all the world, having gained the honour of two unmatchable victories, brought two Kings Prisoners to Constantinople; and beyond all expectation, made spoiles of Warre the race and wealth of Gensericke, and Theoderick, the most illu∣strious of all the Barbarians. He brought backe also to the Roman State their owne wealth from the hands of their Enemies, and in a short time recovered the Domini∣on of almost one halfe of the Land and Seas thereof. It was a delight to the Constanti∣nopolitans (and they could not be satisfied with it) to behold daily Belisarius passing from his house, and returning thither through the Market-place; His going in the streets being a kind of triumph; multitudes of Vandales, Goths, and Moores ever fol∣lowing him: and he was a beautifull personage, tall, and of the goodliest counte∣nance that could be seen; To sutors ever easie of accesse, and milde as the meanest man. Both the Souldier, and the Countrey-man were ever infinitely in love with his Government, being to the Souldiers exceeding bountifull; to such as had mischances in fight, comforting their wounds with large summes, and to such as did bravely, gi∣ving chaines and bracelets for prizes of honour. If a Souldier in fight, lost his horse,
or his Bow, or the like, presently he had another from Belisarius. And he was dear to the Countrey people, because he used such good husbandry and providence, that where he was Generall, none ever suffered violence, but all where his Armie came had the strange fortune to grow richer; selling their commodities to the Soul∣dier at their owne rates, who guarded still their ripe Corns, to keep off Horse from spoiling them; Neither was any suffered to take away their ripe fruits. Besides he had a wonderfull care of his chastity, never touching any woman but his Wife; and of so many faire Prisoners of the Vandales and the Goths (such as none ever saw the like) suffering not one to be brought into his sight, nor to come at him. He was of a very sharp wit, and excellent in a doubtfull case to devise the best way; valiant in Warr with cautiousnesse, and bold upon advise of reason; ever either swift or flow in his undertakings upon an Enemy, according to occasion. In extreamities resolute, full of hope, and free from perturbation. In prosperity hee was neither exalted, nor voluptuous: No man ever saw Belisarius drunck. And thus during his command in Affrick and Italy, he was still victorious, and Master of all in his way: And when he came home to Constantinople, his worth was yet more taken notice of; For being himselfe eminent in vertue, and exceeding all the Generalls that ever were in wealth, and in the strength of his Lanciers, and Targettiers, he was terrible both to Commanders and common Souldiers. So that no man durst oppose his com∣mands, but readily put in execution what he directed; both reverencing his worth, and fearing his power. For he had ready of the Retinew of his House 7000. Horse∣men, choice men, and every one of them thinking himselfe fit to stand in the first ranck at a Battaile, and to challenge the bravest of the Enemies. The ancient men of Rome at that siege seeing what those men did in the fights then, and taking if for a great wonder, said, That one mans Family ruined the power of Theoderick. Thus was Belisarius growen powerfull both in dignity and counsell, ever advising the Emperours best advantage, and cheerfully executing what was resolved. But the other Commanders (being equall in power, and having no thought but upon their owne private gaine) made spoile of the Roman Subjects, and exposed them to the injuries of the Souldier. They apprehended nothing worthy themselves, nor had the Common souldiers obedient to their commands; and so commiting many errours, the Romans affaires were in a short time ruined; and thus it was. Ildebad hearing that Belisarius was gone from Ravenna, and upon his journey, recollected the Goths, and such Roman Souldiers as would revolt; was carefull of the Government, and diligent to recover the Dominion of Italy. At first he had with him but a thousand men, and no Towne but Picenum. But in a while all who were in Liguria, and Venetia, came dropping in to him. There was in Constantinople one Alexander, chiefe Auditor of the publique Trea∣sury, called Logothetes by the Romans, from the Greek. This mans practice was to inform against Souldiers for wronging the Treasury; and for such misdemeanors by bringing them to justice, he became of an obscure man eminent, and of a Beggar very rich. He raised as much money for the Emperour as any man; but was the greatest cause that the Soldiers were few & poor, and backward in dangers. At Constantinople they gave him a nick-name, Psalidion, for the dexterity he had to clip away the ring of the gold coyn; and though he made it lesse, yet to have it keep the circular form it had at the first. The instrument wherewith this is done, is called Psalidion, or clipping sheers. This man the Emperour sent into Italy, when he recalled eli∣sarius; And he in Ravenna set a foot Audits without reason, calling the Italians to accompt, who never toucht the Emperour monies, and some that never had pub∣lique employment, and charging them with wrong done to Theodorick, and the o∣ther Gothish Kings, and compelling them to repay what they had robbed, or fraudu∣dulently gained, as he alleadged. The Souldiers for their wounds and bazards he re∣quited with slender accounts; whereby the Italians grew ill affected to the Empe∣rour, and the Souldiers would not engage themselves into dangers; but turning wil∣full cowards, advanced the Enemies affaires to a great height. All the Commanders sate still, but Vitalius, who had with him in Venetia many Herulians, and some other numbers of the Army; he would fight with Ilde∣bad, fearing (what afterward came to passe) that his growing power might not so easily be restrained. The Battaile was valiantly fought neer the City of Tarvisium;
but Vitalius had the worst; and suffering the losse of most of his men, with a few escaped by flight. Many Herulians fell, and Visandus their Leader. Theudimund, the Son of Mauricius, the Son of Mundus, a young man, was in much danger of being lost, but escaped with Vitalius. This Battell made Ildebad famous with the Em∣perour, and all men; But afterward Ʋraeas fell foule with him, upon this occasion. Ʋraas had a Wife, for Wealth and Beauty, the chiefe of her Nation. She went once to the publick Bath bravely drest, and with a goodly Traine; where seeing Ildehads Wife in a mean Habit, she bowed not to her, as to the Kings Consort, but slight∣ed, and scoff'd at her; for as yet her Husband was in a low Condition, as having not been Master of any Kingly Revenue. But the Queen vexed with this grosse Affront, came weeping to her Husband, desiring him to right her, having suffered from Ʋraeas Wife things not to be endured. Whereupon Ildebad first accused Ʋraeas to the Goths, of purposing a Revolt; and afterward killed him treache∣rously, and was hated for it by the Goths, who liked not this killing of Ʋraas without Examination; and they gathered together, and railed upon Ildebad for this foule Act; yet none of them were willing he should suffer for it. One among them, named Vilas, by race a Gepaede, and a Lancier of the Guard to the Empe∣rour, was a Suiter to a very faire Woman, and infinitely doted upon his love. But being sent upon some Service, Ildebad the mean while gave his Mistresse to another in marriage; either ignorantly, or upon some motive: Which Vilas hearing at his coming from the Army, and being naturally impatient, could not beare the disgrace, but resolved to kill Ildebad; wherein he thought too to gratifie all the Goths. He observed his time as the King feasted the chiefe men, when many use to stand by him, especially his Guards. The King reaching his hand to a dish, and bowing with his face upon the Couch, Vilas suddenly strook him with his Sword upon the neck, that the meat being between his fingers, the head fell off, and ama∣sed all the Company. Thus was the Murther of Ʋraeas revenged upon Ildebad; and the Winter ended, and the sixthIncipit An∣nus 7. Bell. Goth, in anno 15. Justiniani. yeare of this War, written by Procopius. CHAP. II. AMong the Goths was one Erarick, a Rogian by Nation, but he had gained a great power with the Goths. The Rogians are a Gothish Nation, formerly a free People; but Theoderick made them and some other Nations his Confederates, and mingled them all together, and used them joyntly against the Enemy. But these taking no Wives of any other Nation, preserved their Name in a Posterity of the whole blood. And the State being in trouble upon the Murther of Ildebad, they proclaimed Erarick King, which the Goths misliked, whose hearts were now quite down, and their hopes frustrated. For Ildebad was a man able enough to have recovered the Dominion of Italy; but Erarick did nothing to purpose; and having reigned five Months, he was slain in this manner. Totilas, Nephew to Ildebad, (a wise and a Valourous man, and in much Estimation with the Goths) commanded then the Goths in Tarvisum; and hearing how Ildebad was slain, sent to Ravenna to Constantianus, offering upon assurances of indemnity to deliver up Tarvisium, and the Goths under his Command. Constantianus most gladly gave Oath; as To∣tilas desired, and a day was appointed for receiving into the Town men sent by Constantianus, and to put the Gothish Garrison into their hands. All the Goths were weary of Eraricks Government, finding him not capable to make a War with the Romans; and they railed on him as a hinderer of many good Designes they were ready to act, when they killed Ildebad. In conclusion, by common consent they sent to Tarvisium, exhorting Totilus to the Government. They felt the misse of Ildebad, and turned their hope of Victory upon Totilus, his Kinsman, hoping there∣in what they desired. He told them plainly his accord with the Romans, and that if they shall kill Erarick before his day of Assignment with the Romans, he will fol∣low them, and do as they desire him. The Goths upon this resolved the ruine of Erarick. In the mean time, the Roman Army secure, and enjoying their Enemies
troubles, neither drew together, nor had any designe upon them. But Erarick as∣sembling the Goths propounded the sending Ambassadours to Justinian, for such a peace as was once resolved to be made with Vitigis: namely, that the Goths hold∣ing all beyond the Poe, should quit the rest of Italy. The Goths all approved the Motion; and he sent Caballarius, and some other of his Friends Ambassadours, who were to pretend the negotiation, as aforesaid; but he gave them secret In∣structions, to treat only with the Emperour, to give him a good Sum of money, and to make him a Patritian, upon condition of his delivering up all Italy, and his laying down the Royall Habit. The Ambassadours coming to Constantinople, did according to his directions. In the mean time the Goths kill Erarick by trea∣chery, and Totilas takes the Government, as was agreed. Justinian advertised hereof, both of the accident of Erarick, and that Totilas was made King, he could no longer contain from sharply reproving the Commanders: whereupon John, Vita∣lianus Sisters Son, Bessas, Vitalius, & the rest, leaving Garrisons in the Townes, drew together at Ravenna, where were Constantianus, and Alexander. They resolved in Counsell to lead the Army first against Verona, which is in Venetia, and having taken the same, to go against Totilas and Picenum. The Army was gotten toge∣ther 12000. men, under eleven Commanders; and Constantianus and Alexander in chiefe. Being come within seven miles of Verona, they encamped before it; the City being compassed with faire Champians, reaching as far as Mantua, which is a daies journey from Verona. In Venetia one Marcianus, a principall man, dwelling in a Castle not far from Verona, and well affected to the Emperour, sought meanes of delivering the City to the Romans. He was acquainted with one of the Watch∣men, to whom he sent a Friend, and perswaded him for money to receive in the Emperours Army. The Watch-man promised, and Marcianus sent some to the Roman Commanders to negotiate, and to let them know the Agreement, and to enter the Town by night with them. The Commanders thought it best to send one of themselves before with a few; if the Watch-man opend the Gate, to make it good, and then the rest to bring the Army in without hazarding. All refusing the danger, Artabazes an Armenian chearfully undertook it; a very gallant Soul∣dier, who was Captain of those Persians, whom Belisarius brought to Constanti∣nople with Blischames, after his taking the Castle of Sisaurium. He settled a 100. men of the Army, and late in the night got neer to the Town. The Watch-man o∣pened the Gate; some stood still and sent for the Army, others mounted the Walls and slew the Sentinels, coming unexpected: And the Goths perceiving the mis∣chiefe, ran out at another Gate, and retired to a high Hill over against Verona (from whence one may discern all done in the City, and number the men in the Streets, and it hath a large Prospect into the Champian) and here they stayed all night. The Romans being within five miles of the City, would go no further; the Generals disputing about the Booty of it; and while they were thus brabling for the spoiles, the day grew bright. The Goths from the Hill discovering the Enemy in the Town, and how great a way the Army was from it, ran in at the same Gate they ran out; the Romans within being not able to possesse it: who advising to∣gether fled to the Battlements, where the Goths in multitudes assailed, and they stoutly defended, and did wonders; especially Artabazes. The Roman Comman∣ders, when they had disposed the Wealth of Verona among themselves, marcht a∣gainst the Town with the Army. But finding the Gates shut, and the Enemy strong∣ly opposing, they forthwith ran away, though they saw their Companions upon the Walls fighting, and calling to them to stay for them. So that Artabazes, and the rest being opprest with multitudes, and despairing of Succour, leapt from the Walls; and himselfe, with such as lighted upon smooth ground, came safe to the Camp, but they that fell upon stony ground, perisht all. The Roman Army past the Poe, and came to Faventia, which is a City of Emilia, standing 15. miles from it. Totilas when he heard what had happened at Verona, sent for most of that Garri∣son, and with his whole Army being 50000. he marcht against the Enemy. The Roman Commanders hereof advertised, held a Counsell; where Artabazes spake thus. Fellow Commanders, let us not despise the Enemy, as inferiour in numbers; nor as being to fight with men cowed by Belisarius, go on with resolution. False
conceits have deceived and undone many, and their unseasonable despising an Enemy dissolved their Forces. The former ill successe of these men invites them to some better Fortune; Fortune by making men desperate, brings them to an excesse of daring. I speak not this by guese, I have learnt their Courage by mine own late danger. And let none be offended with me for extolling their power, having been with a few with me beaten by them. Mens Valour is seen as well when they are more, as when they are fewer then those they fight with. My Opinion therefore is, to guard the passage of the River, and when the Goths are halfe past over, to fight with them rather, then now with their whole body. And let no man think that there is no honour in such a Victory. Honour and disgrace receive their names from the Event. Men commend the Victors, not searching into the manner of the Victory. Artabazes so spake; But the Comman∣ders contradicting one another, did nothing they should do, but there staid, and did nothing. The Goths came neer, and being ready to passe the River, Totilas spake thus unto them. Friends and Country-men; other Battells begin upon the shew of equality in the Armies to fight, but we now stand to fight, having a Fortune most unequall. If they be beaten, they have meanes to fight with us a∣gain, having numbers of Souldiers in their Garrisons, all Italy over, and expect∣ing forthwith the seconds of another Army from Constantinople. But if the same befall us, the hopes and name of our Nation is lost; being already from 200000. reduced to 50000. yet is it sit that you be put in mind, that when you took Armes with Ildebad against the Emperour, you had but 1000. men together, and no place left but the Town of Picenum. But no sooner were you Conquerours, but your Armies and Townes augmented: And if you now do bravely, I hope (the War proceeding probably) we shall vanquish the Enemy. It is the Fortune of Conquerours ever to grow in numbers, and power. So that resolve to meet the Enemy chearfully, and stoutly; knowing, that if you get not the honour of this day, you can never possibly fight again. Moreover our Enemies Injustice is to embolden us in this Battell. The Italians subject to them they have so opprest, that they need no other punishment for their Treason against the Goths: So (in a word) have they found all manner of mischiefes from their new Guests. Now what is more easily caught then an Enemy, who stands not sound with God? Their feare of us also may encourage us; we going against no other men then those, who being in the midst of Verona, quitted it without reason, and ran away shamefully, none pursuing them. Totilas having used this encouragement, com∣manded 300. men to passe the River two miles and a halfe off, and to get behind the Enemy; and (the Fight being begun) to shoot at their backs, and being in confusion to gall them. Himselfe with the rest past there the River, and went against the Enemy. The Romans encountred them, and both marching faire and softly, and being neer each other, Valiaris, a Goth, tall, and of a stern Counte∣nance, and very Valiant, rode out from the rest between the Armies, armed with Corslet and Helmet, and challenged any Roman to fight with him. Artabazes accepted the Combate. Both rode against each other, and charged their Lances; Artabazes preventing, ran Valiaris into the left side, who having his mortal wound, and sincking backward, his Lance resting upon the ground and at a great stone, kept him from falling: Artabazes with eagernesse thrust his Lance into his belly, not thinking he had his deaths wound already; and the head of Valiaris Lance standing upright, lighted upon the Corslet of Artabazes, and gliding over it, peir∣ced his neck, and cut one of the Arteries: He bled instantly in abundance, but feeling no pain, gallopt to the Roman Camp, and left Valiaris dead upon the place. The blood could not be stancht, so that the third day he dyed, and stagger'd all the hopes of the Romans; for his being not able to fight in that Battell, was an extream ruine to them. He attending the cure of his Wound without Arrow-shot, the Armies joyned Battell; in the heat whereof the 300. Goths at the Romans backs suddenly appeared; the Romans thinking them to be great numbers, were af∣fraid, and ran away in confusion, with the Enemy at their heels; who took many Prisoners, and all their Ensignes, a thing never before happened to the Romans. The Commanders with some few ran into severall Townes for safety, and guarded the same.
CHAP. III. TOtilas forthwith sent forces against Florence, commanded by Bledas, Rode∣ricus, and Valiaris, who sate down before it. Justinus within it having laid in no provisions, sent to Ravenna, praying the Commanders to come to his succour. The messenger by night slipt by the Enemy, and reported their Estate to the Roman Commanders in Ravenna, whereupon an army of good im∣portance under Bessas, Cyprianus and John, Vitalianus his Sisters Son, marcht to Flo∣rence. The newes of them raised the Goths siege, who retired to Micale, a Town standing a dayes journey from Florence. The Roman army left with Justinus some few men, and went against the Enemy: Upon the way they advised to make choise of one of the Commanders of most account, suddenly to set upon the Enemy, and the rest to march after fair and softly; they cast lots, and fortune gave it to John; but the commanders would not stand to the agreement, so that John with his own troops only went against the enemy. The Goths understanding their coming, left the cham∣pian, and in fear and tumult ran up to a high hill: Johns Troops ran up also, and be∣gan the fight. The Goths valiantly opposed, and many brave men fell on both sides. Then John furiously giving upon the Enemy with a great shout, one of his life guard was slain by a dart, whereupon the Romans retired, beaten back: Then came up the rest of the Roman army, and in the plain put themselves in batallion, and made an halte: if they had set upon the flying Troops of John, and with them set upon the Enemy, they had gotten the day, and had them almost all at their mercy; but an unlucky rumor was spred that John was slain in the fight by one of his owne Life-Guard, so that they would stay no longer, but made a shamefull retreate, not reti∣ring in a whole body, nor yet in Troops; but every man ran away as he could. Ma∣ny of them perished, and they who escaped ran on for many dayes, none pursuing them, and at last every man as he could got into strong places, reporting to all they met, that John was slain: From thence forward they joyned not, nor had thought of making head; but every one kept within his walls, expecting a siege. To∣tilas gained his prisoners with his much humanity to serve him willingly against the Romans, and then ended the winter, and the seventh year of this warr, written by Procopius. Totilas then took in the Castles of Cesina and Petra,Incipit An. 8. bel. Goth 6. Justiniani, Anno domini 542. came into Tuscany; and the Towns there not yeilding to him, he past the Tiber, but would not touch upon the Territories of Rome, but went into Campania and Samnium, and tooke without labour the strong Town of Beneventum, and layd the walls flat with the Ground, that the Romans coming from Constantinople might not from a fortified place infest the Goths. Naples refusing to receive him, notwithstanding his fair words (having Conon within, with a thousand Romans and Isaurians) he incamped before it with the most part of his army, and sent out some forces, who took in Cuma and other fortresses, from whence he raised great sums of mony. The wives of some Senators he found in the fame, who had no incivility used to them, but were dismist with much curtesie: from whence he got a great fame of the Romans of discretion and huma∣nity. He still sent out small parties (no Enemy appearing against him) and did things of good importance, taking Bruttia, and Lucania, Apulia, and Calabria, He took up the Tributes, and from the land-holders received the rents; disposing all things as absolute Master of Italy. The Roman army hereby received no enter∣tainments, and the Emperour owed it huge summs; and the Italians mourned, be∣ing reduced to so great danger, The Souldiers also grew more disobedient to their Commanders, and were glad to lye still in their Garrisons. Constantianus held Ra∣venna, John Rome, Ressas Spoletum, Justinus Florence, and Cyprianus Perusia; eve∣ry one the place he had fled to. The Emperour hereof advertised, and esteeming it a great calamity,Praefectus praetorio per Italiam. forthwith made Maximinus * Praefect of the Palace for Italy, that he might be over the Commanders, and to furnish provisions to the Souldiers. With him he sent a navy, having aboard an army consisting of Thracians under Herodian, and of Armenians under Phazas an Iberian, sisters Son of Peranius, and some few Huns they had with them. Maximinus from Constantinople, with his Fleet came up∣on
the coast of Epirus, where he spent the time to no purpose, being no Souldier, a coward; and an extream delayer. Afterward the Emperour sent Demetrius Ge∣nerall; who had formerly commanded a company of Foot under Belisarius: He arriving in Sicily, and hearing how Conon was besieged in Naples and in great want of victuall, had a mind to succour him speedily; but with so small an army being not able, be freighted a number of ships, (which he got together from all parts of. Si∣cily) with corn and other provisions, making the Enemy beleive that he had a great army abroad, who indeed hearing of a huge navy coming from Sicily, expected a great army with it. If Demetrius had made directly for Naples, he had frighted a∣way the Enemy and saved the city. But he was afraid to put in there, and sailed on to the port of Rome, imploying himself there to gather together the Souldiers; Who being already beaten by the Goths, and extreamly afraid of them, refused to follow him against Totilas. So that with those only he brought from Constantinople, he went towards Naples. Another Demetrius, a Cephalenian, an ancient marriner ve∣ry skilfull, when he sailed with Belisarius into Affrica and Italy, grew famous for his skill, and the Emperour made him Procurator of Naples. In the beginning of the Goths seige there, being a man of a foul intemperate tongue, he used many disgrace∣full words against Totilas. the Famin there growing, and the mortality still increa∣sing, with Conons consent he adventured in a small bark alone to go secretly to De∣metrius, and hardly escaping, he met with Demetrius, and incouraging him, drew him to undertake the businesse. Totilas hearing of the Fleet coming back, prepared many Pinnaces swift of sail, and the enemy being upon the coast neer Naples, he set on them suddenly, amazed them, and put them to flight; killing many and taking more: They only escaped, who at first leapt into the cock-boats, among whom was Demetrius the Generall. The shipps the Goths took with all their men and Lading, and there sound Demetrius the Procurator of Naples, whose Tongue they cut out, and so let him go whether he would; such was the punishment of Demetrius for his intemperate language. Afterward came Maximinus with his Fleet upon the coast of Sicily, where he sate still in Syracuse, afraid of the war. The Roman commanders, and especially Conon from Naples (whom all provisions now failed) sent to him to come to their succours: He wore out the season in this cowardly fear; but at last fearing the Emperours menaces, and wearied with the revilings of all men, he staied himself; but sent the army to Naples under Demetrius, Herodian, and Phazas in the sharpest of the winter. The Fleet being neer to Naples a storm took them, so great, that Demetrius and the two other yeilded to the Sea. The Waves would not suffer the sea men to use their Oares, nor do any other worke, neither could they hear one anothers call for the Tempest. Confusion had the victory, and the storme was the absolute judge, bringing them against their wills to the shoare, where the Enemy was incamped; who clining up into their vessells, kill'd men and sunk ships none resisting; many prisoners they took, and the Generall himself, Demetrius. He∣redian and Phazas, with some few putting in further from the Enemies campe, esca∣ped. CHAP. IV. TOTILAS led Demetrius with a rope about his neck to the Town wall, willing him to perswade the besieged, not to perish, trusting in Groundless hopes, but by yeilding to get free of their miseries; that no further succours could possibly be expected from the Emperour, and that their hopes and power was lost with that Navy. Demetrius spake all this unto them, and they being extreamly prest with famin, and all kind of necessities, and seeing the disaster of De∣metrius, and hearing what he said, dispaired, and lamented, not knowing what to do; and their City was full of tumult and howlings, Totilas then calling them to the bat∣tlements, spake thus.
Citizens of Naples, we do not now besiege you upon any quarrell we have a∣gainst you; but to disingage you from Masters that hate you, and to have the power to recompense the service of every one of you to us, and his sufferingsfrom the Enemy, you of all the Italians having shewed greatest affection to our Na∣tion, and with most unwillingnesse come under the enemy; that now being neces∣ssarily to besiege you, we blush when we thinke of your fidelity, though wee be∣siege you not for your hurt. Think not therefore, as offended with the accidents of the siege, that you must he ever angry with us. They who study the Good of their freinds, are not to be blamed by them, when they are inforced to do them good by none of the gentlest meanes. And be not affraid of the Enemy, nor thinke by what hath past, that they will conquer at last: strange, unlookt for, and accidentall things melt away in time. We have thus determined of you, to suffer Conon and his Souldiers to go free without harm, or losse, they presently surrendring the City unto us; and upon this we are ready to swear that the Napolitans shall be safe. Both Conon and the Napolitans accepted this offer of Totilas, being extream∣ly prest with the Famine; but to comply with their faith to the Emperour, and ha∣ving some hope of succours, they promised to surrender the City within thirty daies. Totilas to put such hopes out of their heads, assigned three Moneths, in which time he would not assault nor have any designe upon them. But the besieged not atten∣ding the day (though assigned accordingly) urged by their necessitiess, received a while after Totilas into the City. The winter also ended, and the eighth year of this war, written by Procopius. Totilas used humanity to the Napolitans, not like a Bar∣barian Enemy. For fearing least the languishing Romans with Famine, coming sud∣denly to eat their fill,Incipit an bel. Goth 9.17. might surfet themselves with fullnesse; He commanded guards at the Gates,Justinian & An. Dom. 544. and the port, to suffer no man to go out, and with a provident sparingnesse he gave them food more scarcely then according to their appetite; ad∣ding thereunto every day unsensibly. Then having restored them to strength, he set open the Gates, and let them go that would. Conon, and such Souldiers as would not stay with him, he shipped, and bade them sail whether they pleased: They were ashamed to return to Constantinople but making towards Rome, the wind came crosse, and being not able to get away, they feared least Totilas might neglect his a∣greements, and do them mischeif: but he perceiving their trouble, called them to him, comforted and cheered them, and invited them to joyne with the Goths, and buy what they wanted, or take it as from freinds. The wind continuing contrary a long time, he furnished them with horses, waggons, and provisions, and gave them a convoy of Goths to Rome: But the walls of Naples he threw to the Gound; that the Romans might not (surprizing the Town) infest the Goths from it: his desire being rather to determin the war at once by a battell, then to be ever skirmishing a∣gainst artifices, and stratagems: yet he left a good part of the said walls stand∣ing. There came to him at that time a Roman of Calabria, complaining, that one of his Life Guard had forced his daughter, a Virgin; he in great anger put the man in prison, not denying the fact, and was eager to punish him; but the cheif Goths fea∣ring in the mans behalf, being valiant, and a good souldier, assembled themselves in his presence, and besought him to pardon the crime; he mildly, and without any per∣turbation, made them this answer. Fellow souldiers, I shall speak to you, not from any humour of cruelty, or delight in my countrymens mis-fortunes; but from my fear of some ill consequence unto us. I know that most men shift the names of things to their contrary; they call the inobservation of Lawes, Mercy; and hence all good things come to be corrupted, and confounded. On the contra∣ty, to pinch upon Lawes too exactly, is perverse and greivous, and also to use spe∣cious names, as a veile to a lincentious power, thereby to act wickednesse with more security. But you I advise by no means to exchange your own safety for the guilt of another mans sin, nor to share in his impiety, having done no ill your selves: For to commit an offence, and to hinder the offenders punishment is e∣quall. Consider thus the businesse now presented, and determine accordingly; you have the choice offered you, whether this man shall escape the just punishment of his offence, or our nation be preserved, and conquer in this war. Think what num∣bers of Souldiers we had in the beginning of it, how famous, how well experien∣ced in war; in a word, our endlesse wealth, abundance of horse and armes, and all the strong holds of Italy, and these were important preparations for a Warr. But when under Theodatus, a man that valued riches more then right, we made God
angry with us by our lawlesse living; how we sped you all know, and by what kind of men, and by how many we were beaten. Now God, having sufficiently punished our faults, frames our life to his own will, and conducts our affaires be∣yond our hopes. And being such now, and having vanquisht our Enemies, not pro∣portionably to our powers, it will be more advantagious for us, to prepare a fair occasion of victory by doing that which is just, then by the contrary to appear envi∣ous of our own Good For it cannot, it cannot be, that he that practises wrong and oppression; should get honour in the day of battell: the fortune of the War is ad∣judged to mans good or bad lives. The cheif Goths upon this speech of Totilas, ceased to intercede for the offender, and left him to him; who soon after put him to death, and bestowed his Estate upon the ravished maid. In this mean time the Roman army preyed upon the Subjects, leaving no insolence unacted. Their commanders in their Garrisons with their Mistresses lived riotously; having the Souldiers disobedient, and full of all kind of disorders: between both the armies, the Italians suffered the hardest measures; the Enemy took their lands from them, and the Emperours army their goods: they were basely beaten for nothing, and perished for want of food. The Souldiers could not defend them from the Ene∣my, and were so far from blushing to see their miseries, that by their wrongs they made the Barbarians dear unto them. Constianus troubled at this, wrote to Ju∣stinian, professing his disability to incounter the Goths: and the Commanders sign∣ed the Letter, being a confession of their base fear to fight. Totilas also sent this Letter to the Roman Senat. When men ignorantly, or upon forgetfullnesse do wrong, the wronged are to be easie to grant pardon: The cause of the offence concurring in such, excuseth the heaviest of the accusation. But a man that does wrong upon malice, is not to be admitted so much as to plead; see∣ing he is to bear the blame not only of his fact; but of his intent. Which being so, what can you apologize for your actions against the Goths? Can you be ignorant of the favours of Theoderick and Amalasuntha? or can time wear them out of your remembrance? neither is possible. The benefits have not been mean, nor are of an ancient date; but in the most important things, and lately done. For the Greeks Goodnesse to their subjects, your selves have, heard of it, and you have had triall of it, and you have known how the Goths and Italians have sped under them. What Guests and freinds they have been to you, the Audits of Alexander may inform you, to say nothing of their Souldiers and Captaines; you have in∣joyed their noble usage, by which their affaires are come into this case now. Think not this to be the reproaches of an insolent young man, nor the vaunts of a Barba∣rian Prince. I say not, that our subduing of these men is a work of my valour; but that due vengeance for the injuries done to you hath overtaken them. And how ab∣surdly it shewes, that God should punish them for you, and yet you adhere to their folly, and refuse deliverance from the miseries arising from thence. Make therefore some introduction of an apologie, and of our pardoning you; which will be, if while you have some hope (though a poor one) you chuse what is best for you, and repaire what you have done amisse against us. Totilas gave this letter to some prisoners, to deliver to the Senators in Rome; which they did; but John forbade them to answer it. Totilas wrote many other Letters to them, wherein were strong oathes, that no Roman should receive hurt from the Goths I cannot say who were the Messengers, all of them were in the night, & set up in the most publick places of the City, and discovered in the morning. The Roman Commanders suspected the Arian priests, and put them out of Rome. Totilas here∣upon sent part of his army into Calabria, to summon the Castle of Otranto; and (the Garrison refusing to yeild) to besiege it: Himself with his main forces went against the towns about Rome.
CHAP. V. THE newes of these things troubled the Emperour; and though the Persian War lay heavily upon him, he was constrained to send Belisarius against To∣tilas; and the Winter ended, and the ninth yeare of this War, written by Pro∣copius; when Belisarius went the second time into Italy. Incipit Annus 10. Bell. Goth. in anno 18. reg. Justiniani, & Anno Dom. 544. Having but few Soul∣diers, (as being not able to withdraw his own Forces from the Army in Persia) he levied with his own money Voluntaries in Thrace, being assisted by the Empe∣rours direction with Vitalius, Generall of Illyrium, lately returned from Italy, where he had left the Illyrian Cohorts; they both raised 4000. men, and came to Salona, determining to go to Ravenna, and thence to make the War: For about Rome they found they could not land unespyed, (the Enemy being in Campania and Calabria) nor yet force their landing, being inferiour in powers. In the mean time, the Garrison in Otranto (the Victuall being absolutely fail∣ed,) capitulated about the surrender of the Castle, by a day assigned. Belisarius put a yeares Victuall aboard Ships, and commanded Valentinus to transport it to Otranto, and to take out the former Garrison, pined with Sicknesse, and Famine, and put in the Souldiers he had with him aboard, being fresh and well supplyed. Valentinus with a faire wind got to Otranto four daies before the time assigned, and finding the Harbour unguarded, was Master of it, and entred the Castle without resistance. The Goths being carelesse, and lying still under their confidence in the Capitula∣tion, and imagining no opposition, and then seeing the Fleet enter, ran away in feare, and encamped themselves some distance from the Town, and advertised Totilas of what happened. Some Troops of Valentinus from Otranto made in-roads into the Country, and meeting the Enemy upon the Sea shoare, they fought, were beaten, and most of them fled into the Sea; where having lost 170. men, the rest retired into the Castle. But Valentinus, as Belisarius commanded, took out the old Garrison, (being men halfe dead) and leaving fresh men with a yeares Victuall, he went to Salonae with the rest. Belisarius from thence came with the Fleet before Pola; where he staid, and ordered the Army. Totilas hearing of his coming, and being desirous to know his Forces, he wrote Letters to him in the name of one Bo∣nus, Nephew to one John, and Commander of the Garrison in Genoa, entreating his speedy repaire to him, as being in much distresse and danger. This Letter he de∣livered to five witty fellowes, directing them to spy what Forces Belisarius had, and to give out that they came from Bonus. Belisarius used the men courteously, (as his manner was) perused the Letter, and bad them tell Bonus that he would be with him with his Army. They having spyed into every thing, returned to the Camp to Totilas, assuring him that Belisarius powers were not considerable. In the mean time Totilas took Tibur, which had in it a Garrison of Isaurians: Some of the Townes-men, guarding the Gates with the Isaurians, fell into an idle brable with them, and upon that ground drew in the Enemy by night. The Isau∣rians rallyed themselves (seeing the Town taken) and almost all got away; but of the Townes-men the Goths spared not a man, and killed the Bishop of the Town in a fashion, which I will conceale, not to leave to Posterity Monuments of Inhu∣manity: And one Catellus, a man much esteemed in Italy, perisht also. Thus the Goths having Tibur, the Roman Citizens could no more import Provisions out of Tuscany, by the River of Tiber, the Town being upon the River 15. miles above Rome, and commanding the passage thither. Then came Belisarius to Ravennae with his Fleet, and calling to him the Goths there, and the Roman Souldiers, he spake thus. It is not now only, that Vice hath ruined, what hath been built by Virtue; from the beginning it hath been so in humane Affaires. The lewdnesse of bad men hath been still able to demolish the Actions of the good. This hath over∣turned the Emperours Affaires; who to repaire the Errour, hath made lesse ac∣count of subduing the Persians, then of it; and hath sent me to cure the Faults committed by either Captaines, Souldiers, or Goths. It is above humane condi∣tion not to erre, but it becomes the Emperour to repaire the Errours of those,
whom from his Soule he loves; whereby you shall be also eased of your grie∣vances, and both perceive and feele his good affection towards you, then which what Wealth is more valuable. My coming therefore being to this purpose, it behoves you to endeavour the obtaining of that Fruit, which will arise from thence. If any of you have Friends, or Kinsmen with Totilas the Usurper, let him send for them, acquainting them with the Emperours intention. Thus you may find good both from a peace, and the Emperours Favour for me: I come not to pick Quarrels, nor to be an Enemy to the Emperours Subjects by my good will: But if some will still make slight the chusing their own good, and others take Armes against us; we must, though most unwillingly, use such as Enemies. Beli∣sarius spake thus; but no Goth, nor Roman came into him; so he sent Therimuth, one of his Life-guard, with some of his own Retinew, and Vitalius with the Illy∣rian Cohorts into Emilia, to attempt the Townes there: Vitalius came to Bono∣nia, and after the taking of some Castles by composition, lay still there. Soon after the Illyrians retired home upon the suddain, having suffered nothing, nor so much as heard any ill. They sent Agents to the Emperour, for pardon of this Retreat, in regard they had long served in Italy, and received no pay, and much was due to them from the Treasury. They heard besides of an Army of Hunnes, which in Il∣lyrium made Captives their Wives and Children, which caused them (wanting necessaries also) to go home all in one Troop. The Emperour was troubled at the proceeding, but at last pardoned them. Totilas hearing of the Illyrians Re∣treat, sent Forces to drive Vitalius and his Troops out of Bononia, who with The∣rimuth laid an Ambush for them, killed many, and routed the rest; where Naza∣res an Illyrian Captain of good quality, did Miracles upon the Enemy. Therimuth then returned to Belisarius, who sent him Nicetas, and Sabinianus with 1000. men to Auximum, to re-enforce Magnus there beseiged. They by night got in∣to the Town unseen by Totilas and the Enemies Camp. The next day at noon, they sallied to encounter a party of Enemies they had notice of; sending before avant∣coureurs to discover their Forces, that they might not blindly set on them. Ri∣cilas of the Life-Guard to Belisarius, being in drink, would himselfe go upon the discovery, and gallopt on alone. In a rough stony way he met three Goths, and made a stand, as to fight with them, being very Valiant; but when he saw more coming in from all sides, he ran away. His Horse in the rough ground came over and over with him, at which the Enemy gave a great shout, and darted all their Javelins at him; the Romans perceiving it, went to his rescue, but he was covered with Javelins, and dyed upon the place. Therimuth took up his dead body and car∣ryed it into Auximum, having met with a conclusion of life not sutable to the Va∣lour of the man. CHAP. VI. SAbinianus and Therimuth upon conference with Magnus, and considera∣tion of the inconvenience of their longer stay, being so far under-matcht to the Enemy, and by consuming the Townes Provision making it more ready to be lost, they prepared to be gone, and to begin their journey in the night: But a Souldier ran out to the Enemies Camp closely, and revealed the designe. Totilas chose out 1000. good men, and laid them concealed three miles and three quarters from Auximum. These perceiving the Enemy at midnight upon the way, fell to work with their Swords, and killed 200. but being dark, Sabinianus and Therimuth got away to Ariminum; all the Baggage, Armes and Apparell, the Goths took. Between Auximum and Ariminum are two small Townes, Pisaurus and Phanus upon the Jonian Gulfe. Vitigis in the beginning of the War had burnt the houses, and broken down halfe their Walls, that the Romans surprising them, might not in∣fest the Goths. Pisaurus Belisarius resolved to seise, as a place fit for Horse-pa∣stures; he sent some in the night to take the exact measure of the Dimension of each Gate, then framed Gates lined with Iron, and sent them thither by Sea, com∣manding Sabinianus and Therimuth to set them up, and to stay in the Town; and
being secure, to repaire the Walls with stones, and earth, as they could. This they did; and Totilas upon the news came against them with a great Army. But failing to take the Towne, after much time spent in the attempt, hee retired to his Camp before Auximum: Where the Romans sallied no more, but kept close within their walls. Belisarius sent Artasiras a Persian, and Barbation a Thracian, two of his Life-guard, to guard Rome with Bessas, being there already, directing them not to sally at all. But Totilas finding Belisarius not able to fight with him, fell upon the strong Townes; in Picenia he block'd up Firmum, and Asculum: and so ended the Win∣ter, and the tenth yeare of this War, written by Procopius. When Belisarius,Incipit annus 11. Bell. Goth. in Anno 19. having no meanes to releive the besieged Townes, sent John to Constantinople,Justiniani, & Ann. Dom. 545. making him sweare to return speedily, and to importune the Em∣perour for an Army and money, horses, and armes; the Souldiers being few, and refusing to fight, because of their wants, the Treasury owing them much money. And he wrote of these particulars to the Emperour in these words. Most mighty Emperour! We are come into Italy, wanting men, horses, arms, and money; And without a competent preparation of these, no man can make Warre. Our Thracians and Illyrians we behold here few, wretched, and strag∣ling without Arms, and unexercised for any fight; The rest deficient, fearfull of the Enemy, with spirits dejected by their often beating, and not simple running away only, but quitting their Horses, and throwing down their Armes. To raise contribution in Italy is not possible, it being possest by the Enemy; And being behind with the Souldiers for their Pay, we cannot lay commands on them, the debt taking away our confidence. And the most of those that served your Maje∣stie are run to the Enemy. If nothing therefore needed, but the sending Belisari∣us into Italy, the Warr is excellently prepared; for I am in the midst of Italy. But if you meane to vanquish your Enemies, there must be other preparati∣ons. No Generall can subsist without men to follow him. Above all things it be∣hoves therefore, that you send me mine owne Lanciers and Targettiers, and store of Hunnes and other Barbarians, who must have present money. Thus wrote Belisarius: But John staying long at Constantinople, effected nothing for what he came thither, but marryed the Daughter of Germanus, brothers sonne to the Emperour. In the meane time Totilas tooke Firmum and Asculum by composition; and in Tuscany besieged Spoletum, and Assisium. Herodian commanded the Garrison in Spoletum; and that of Assisium, Sisiphris a Goth, but well affected to the Romans. Herodian agreed to render the Towne with himselfe and Souldiers within thirty days, if no succour came, and gave his sonne for Hostage. And the day presixed being come, and no Romans appearing, Herodian and the Souldiers yielded themselves and the Town to Totilas. Some say that Herodian did this upon hatred to Belisarius, who threatned to question him for his rapines and oppression. Sisiphris in Assisium made some sallies, and in the end most of his men and himselfe were slaine; whereat the Towns-men despairing, rendred the Towne. Totilas also sent to Perusia, threat∣ning Cyprianus there, if he would not yeeld the Town to him, and promising him money to do it. Not prevailing with him, he practised with Ʋliphus, one of his Life-guard, for money to murder him; who watch'd him when he was alone, and ha∣ving killed him, ran to Totilas. Yet the Garrison kept the Towne for the Emperor, and the Goths retired from it. Then went Totilas to Rome, and besieged it. To the Husbandmen of Italy he did no damage, letting them securely manure their Land, paying to him the rents and tributes reserved to the Treasury, or the Owners At Rome, some Goths approaching the walls, Artasiras and Barbation (against the opi∣nion of Bessas) sallyed with some Troops, and killed many, routing the rest; whom pursuing too far, they fell into the Enemies Ambushes, where they lost most of their men, and escaped narrowly themselves, and afterward for bare to charge the Enemy, though they prest upon them. Hence the Famine grew sore in Rome, no Victuall coming in by Land, and being shut from the Sea. For the Goths, after they had Naples, kept a kind of a Fleet of small Barques about the Islands of Aeolus, and other Islands in that Sea, which guar∣ded exactly the passage of ships; that all from Sicily, sailing to the Port of Rome, fell among them.
Totilas sent also an Army into Emilia, to take Placentia by force or composition, being the chiefe City of that Province, and well fortified, and standing upon the Poe, and only remaining obedient to the Romans. This Army summoned the Gar∣rison to yeild upon composition; and not prevailing, fell to besiege it, finding they wanted provisions. And at the same time the Commanders in Rome were jea∣lous of Cethegus, a Patrician, that he betrayed them; who thereupon fled to Cen∣tumcellae. Belisarius fearing the losse of Rome, and of all the rest; and from Ravenna, and with so small an Army, to releive them being not able, he resolved to rise from thence, and to surprize some places neer Rome, from whence he might aide it in di∣stresse. He repented his coming to Ravenna, upon the perswasions of Vitalius, dis∣advantageously for the Emperours service; For being shut up there, he gave the E∣nemy free scope to advance their affairs. Either Belisarius chose the worst, that the Romans might have a mischiefe; or he chose the best: but God crost it, purposing to favour Totilas and the Goths, and turning Belisarias good counsells to the quite contrary. So when Fortune blows a faire gale, mens worst counsells meete no disa∣ster, being wasted by the higher power to all advantages. Unfortunate men either advise nothing well, their fate hiding from them all knowledge and right apprehen∣sion of things: Or advising well, fortune with a crosse wind turns their good advi∣ses to bad events. But Belisarius left Ravenna, committing the guard of it to Justinus; and through Dalmatia came to Epidamnus, where he staid, expecting an Army from Constan∣tinople, and by his letters acquainting the Emperour with his condition. Who sent him an Army of Barbarians and Roman Souldiers under John, the Nephew of Vitali∣anus, and Isaac the Armenian, Brother to Aratius, and Narses; who coming to E∣pidamnus, joyned with Belisarius. He sent also Narses the Eunuch to the Herulian Princes, to obtaine aides of them for Italy. Many Herulians came along with him, under Philimuth and others, to the confines of Thrace, there to Winter, and at the beginning of the Spring to be sent to Belisarius. With them was John Phagas In this journey they did the Romans a great service by chance. A multitude of Slavonians had passed the River Ister, and sack'd the Towns thereabout, and taken abundance of Roman Captives. The He∣rulians fought with them, and though inferiour in numbers, beate them, and killed many, and freed the captives, and sent them home. CHAP. VII. AT that time Narses discovered the imposture of one naming himselfe Chil∣budius, who had been a famous Generall of the Romans. This Chilbudius was first of Iustinian's Retinew, a valiant Souldier, and so great a despiser of wealth, that it was his greatest riches to possesse nothing. Justinian in the fourth yeare of his Reign made him Generall of Thrace, and gave him the guard of the River Ister, to hinder the passage of Barbarians; the Hunnes formerly, Antians and Slavonians having come over, and done much mischiefe to the Romans. Chil∣budius grew so terrible there, that in his three years continuance in that charge, not a Barbarian durst passe the River; and the Romans under Chilbudius invaded the o∣ther side, and killed and took many Captives. After three yeares he passed over the River with a small Army; the Slavonians in a Battaile stifly fought, killed many Romans, and Chilbudins the Generall. From thence forward the Barbarians came over at pleasure, and the Provinces lay open to them; all the Roman Empire in this not countervailing the valour of one man. After this the Antians and Slavonians fell out, and in a Battaile the Antians were vanquisht. Wherein a Slavonian took a youth of the Enemy named Chilbudius, and led him home. This man in time be∣came very affectionate to his Master, and valiant against the Enemy; having often fought singularly well, hazarding for his Master, and so getting a great reputati∣on. About the same time the Antians entred Thrace, which they pillaged, and
took many Captives; one of whom Fortune brought to a gentle Master. But the fellow being a knave, and cunning to deceive, and desirous withall to return to his owne Countrey, came once to his Master, and commended his humanity, which God (he said) would reward, and himselfe would not be ungratefull to so kind a Master; but if he would follow his advice, he would make him a rich man. For a∣mong the Slavonians was one Chilbudius the Roman Generall, unknown, and repu∣ted a slave; whom if he would ransome, and conduct into Roman Land, he should get the Emperours favour, and a great reward. Thus this Roman perswaded his Ma∣ster, and with him went into Slavonia, there being truce then between them, and safe intercourse. Hee paid the ransome to this Chilbudius Master, and took him home; where he ask'd the man if he were Chilbudius the Roman Generall. He told him all the truth; that he was an Antian, and taken Prisoner by the Slavonians then Enemies, but now being restored to his Countrey, he claimed freedome according to the Law. The man who had laid out his money, stood mute, and vexed to fall from his hopes thus. But the Roman cheered him up, and to out-face the truth, that it might not crosse his return home, confidently said that it was Chilbudius; but being a∣mong Barbarians, he was afraid to reveale himselfe; Were he once upon Roman ground, he would be proud of the name, as he had reason. In the end the business came to the knowledg of all the Antians; who stird in it, pretending a publique interest, and imagining to make a great advantage, of having Chilbudius the Roman Generall. These people both Antians and Slavonians, are not under a Prince, but ancient∣ly are a Democratie: whence all things are brought to the common vote. They have almost the same Laws and customes: They hold one God, who makes the light∣ning, and is only Lord of all things. To him they sacrifice Oxen and other victimes. They acknowledg no destiny to govern among men; when Death threatens either in a sicknesse, or in a Warr; they promise if they may escape, to offer to God a sa∣crifice in recompence for their life: And if they escape, they pay their vow, and think they have bought their safety. They worship also Rivers, Nymphs, and other Spirits, to whom they sacrifice too; and by those sacrifices make their predictions. They dwell in poor wretched Booths, scattered, and still shifting their habitations. In fights the most part serve on foot, with Shields and Javelins, having no Corselets, and some not so much as a Coate, or Mantle; but they tye up their Trouses above their Privities, and so enter into the fight. They both use one Language, and that a very barbarous one: And they differ not in shape, being all tall and very strong. Their haire is neither very white, nor yellow, nor yet black at all, but inclining to red. They live hardly, and slovenly like the Hunnes; wicked they are not, nor cun∣ning, but in their simplicity much of the Hunnish disposition. They had both for∣merly but one name, and were called Spori, because they pitch their booths  scatteredly; and so they take up much space of Land, holding the most part of the other side of the River Ister. But then the Antians in their Assembly urged the said man to acknowledge him∣selfe to be Chilbudius, and denying it, threatned him. In the meane time came Am∣bassadors to them from Justinian, who offered to plant them in Turris, an ancient City built by Trajan; which had been sack'd by Barbarians, and layen long wast. Justinian offered them this City, and the Countrey about, formerly belonging to the Romans, and to plant them in it with his powers; and besides to give them great summes of money; Conditionally they should keep a perpetuall league with the Ro∣mans, and hinder the Hunnes from over-running the Empire that way. They liked the Proposition, and promised to do so, if the Emperour would make Chilbudius his Generall, to settle their Plantation, affirming that man to be Chilbudius: And the fellow exalted with these hopes, had now a mind to it, and took the name upon him. So he was sent to Constantinople, and upon his way thither, Narses met him; and upon speech with him, found him a counterset; yet he spake Latine, and had many marks of Chilbudius, which he cunningly assumed. Narses kept him close Prisoner, and at last got out of him all the matter, and tooke him with him to Con∣stantinople.
CHAP. VIII IN the mean time Belisarius sent Valentinus, and one of his life Guard named Phocas, an expert Souldier, with forces to the Haven of Rome, directing them to guard the castle of Portus, with the Garrison already there, commanded by Innocentius, and by excursions from thence to infest the Enemies camp. They accordingly sent word to Bessas in Rome, that they were ready to give a sudden a∣larme to the Enemies quarters, praying him when he saw the fight begun, to ride out to second them with some of his choice men; that so both together might do some service upon the Enemy. Bessas, though he had 3000 Souldiers, liked it not: yet Valentinus and Phocas with 500 charged of a sudden, and killed some. The besieged saw the stir and tumult, but sallied not; so that the other retired safe to Portus. A∣gain they sent to Bessas, complaining of his unbeseeming sloth, and that they would make another Excursion, praying him to charge at the same time with all his army; but he refused to hazard a sally. So Valentinus and Phocas resolved to charge with greater forces. But a Souldier of Innocentius ran away to Totilas, advertizing him how from Portus he would be assaulted the next day. Totilas laid ambushes in their way, into which the next day they fell, and with the losse of most of their men were slain themselves; few escaped to Portus. Vigilius Bishop of Rome, being then in Sicily, sent some ships laden with corn, by some means to be put into Rome. The Enemy saw them coming into the harbour, and hid themselves in houses, to surprize them so soon as they put to land; which the Garrison in Portus perceiving, from the battlements, they waved their Garments to those in the ships, to come no neerer, but to turn some other way. But they un∣derstanding not their signes, took them for rejoycings at their coming, and invitings into the harbour; and the wind being fair they soon got in. There were Roman pas∣sengers aboard, and Valentinus a Bishop; and the Goths from their Ambush seized upon the ships, none resisting, and put all to the sword save the Bishop, whom they brought prisoner to Totilas: and he, after he had questioned what he would, cut off his hands, charging him that he had not spoke truth. And then ended the Winter, & the eleventh year of this war, written by Procopius. Vigilius also, Bishop of Rome, left Sicily,Incipit anus 12. bel. Goth. in anno 20. Ju∣stinian & an∣no Dom. 546. being sent for to Constantinople by the Emperour, and having staid long in Sicily upon that occasion. In Placentia, the besieged Romans wanting victuall fell to food abominated, and in the End to eat one another; so that they rendred upon Composition. Rome also was destitute of all provisions; where was Pelagius, a Deacon of the same, who had long dwelt in Constantinople, much favored by Justinian, and was grown rich; and lately come to Rome, he spent most of his riches upon men in want in this siege, and for his bounty got a great fame; being famous before through all Italy. The Ro∣mans having suffered under the famin incredibly, sent this Pelagius to Tetilas to ob∣tain some few dayes of cessation, conditionally, that if during the same, no succours came from Constantinople, to render themselves upon a Composition. Pelagius accor∣dingly came to Totilas, who saluted him with much reverence and curtesie, and first spake to him thus. Almost all Barbarians reverence Ambassadors, but I besides, have from my youth honored vertuous men like your self. And I know that the honouring or disgracing an Ambassador, is discerned not by fair countenances and hollow-hearted complements, but by true and reall dealing; he is most hono∣red who hath the plain truth told him, and is so dismist: and he most affronted, who carries home nothing, but fained, deceitfull words. So that Pelagius, there are three things, which if you ask not, you shall obtain all the rest; and it is good you should not mention them, least being the cause of your own effecting nothing, you lay the blame on us; the not asking things sutable to the condition of affaires producing commonly want of successe This then I say, move not for any Sicilian, nor for sparing the walls of Rome, nor for restitution of your fugitive servants. For it cannot be, that the Goths should favour a Sicilian, that these walls should stand, or that our Souldiers should return again to be slaves to their Masters. And I will tell you my reasons of these propositions, that they may not seem to proceed
from a willfullnesse. Sicily hath been ever happy, rich, and most fruitfull, not sup∣plying only the Inhabitants; but transporting also to you of Rome, yearly sufficient for your uses; whereupon you besought Thodrick not to place Garrisons in it; least it might decay in the Liberties and happinesse thereof. Things being thus, up∣on the coming of a Fleet of Enemies upon the Coast, not comparable to our powers, the Sicilians neither advertized the Goths, nor shut their Gates, nor op∣posed them in any sort, but with all alacrity received them with open armes, like persidious slaves, who long had watcht an opportunity to run from their old ma∣sters to strangers. Hence the Enemy issued and got all Italy, surprizing Rome, and maintaining it against more then a yeares siege, with the abundance of corne brought out of Sicily. Thus it stands with the Sicilians, whom the Goths cannot pardon, the hainousnesse of their crimes making them incapable of mercy. These walls when the Enemy had once got into, they could never be drawn to a battell in open feild: with stratagems and circumventions they cluded our powers, and became strangely Lords of all we had: And now we must prevent the like here∣after. Men ignorantly undone, to fall again into the same ruin whereof they had experience before, is not to be attributed to the crosnesse of Fortune, but to their own grosse Folly. Besides, the demolishing your walls is your own advantage; Neither part hereafter being to be shut within them, and starved by the besieging adversary. So that both will put it to the fortune of a battell, and you without in∣curring danger, will be the prize of the victor. Touching your fugitive slaves, who have fought for us, and have our promise not to abandon them to their former Masters, if we should now betray them, even your selves will never trust us; it being impossible that he that neglects his Engagements to men of all the most to be pityed, should be constant to any: It will be a Character of his falsehood to all that meet him. To this Speech of Totilas, Pelagius thus answered. Great Sir, having intimated your respect of my Person, and of the quality of an Am∣bassadour, yet have you ranckt both in the basest condition. I conceive him to affront more his Friend, and an Ambassadour, who resolves to send him away without his businesse, then he that strikes, or otherwise abuses him. Ambassa∣dours come not to receive honours from those who admit them, but to get dis∣patches for their good that sent them. It is better they were affronted at first, and at last effect that they come for; then after many Caresses, to return with∣out their hopes. So that to what purpose should I supplicate you in these things, or importune one that denies us, before he heare us? Only this I must say; that you shew what mercy you mean to use to the Romans, who have taken Armes against you; who resolve an irreconcileable hatred against the Sicilians, who never did it. But forbearing Supplications to you, I lift them up to God, who takes vengeance of men that despise Supplications. Pelagius having thus said, went his way. CHAP. IX. THE Romans seeing Pelagius come back without effecting any thing, were much troubled. The Famine grew sore, albeit the Souldiers Victuall was not yet all spent: But the People in multitudes came about Bessas, and Conon, weeping and howling, and said thus. Our Fortune O Generals is such, that if we could do you any mischiefe, it were a Crime we could not be blamed for; our extream necessity being our ex∣cuse. But being not able to take revenge, we come to bewaile our Calamity; And heare patiently our bold expression, weighing it by our sharp Sufferings. They who must despaire of safety, cannot observe their duty in words, nor deeds. Think us not Romans, nor your Kins-men, nor conformable to your State; nor to have chearfully received the Emperours Army, but ancient Enemies, and to have taken Armes against you, and to be vanquisht in fight, and made your Pri∣soners by the Law of War. Yet furnish your Captives with Food, not sufficient for our need, but so much as may keep us alive to do you Service. If you please
not to do this, yet vouchsafe to manumit us, and free your selves from the trou∣ble of burying your Slaves. If this neither may be afforded, kill us, deprive us not of an honest end; envie not to us the sweetest of all deaths, but with one Act de∣liver us from a thousand miseries. Bessas, and Conon told them, that to supply them with Victuall was not possible, to kill them was impious, and to let them go, un∣safe. But they comforted them with an assurance of Belisarius, and an Army from Constantinople, and so dismist them. The Famine still grew, and destroyed, suggest∣ing strange unnaturall Food. At first Bessas and Conon, who had laid up in store a great quantity of Corn for the Souldier, retranched their own allowances, and sold Corn to the richer sort at huge rates; a bushel of Wheat for seven Gold Staters. Such whose Meanes could not attain to so costly feeding, paid a fourth part of the price, and had the bushell fill'd up with Branne, which their hunger made dainty food. An Oxe, such as Bessas Targetiers could get out and take, they sold for 50. Gold Staters. He was happy that could get a dead Horse to feed on. The poor multitude fed on Nettles, growing neer the Town Walls, and among the rubbish in the City; first seething them to avoid stinging. Such as bought Corn, and Branne, as aforesaid, when their money was spent, brought their Houshold-stuff to the Market-place, and exchanged it for a little daily food. In the end the Soul∣diers Corn being consumed, (save some small quantity which Bessas had) and the Romans money spent, they all fell to Nettles; which food not sufficing Nature, and there being of it not enough to fill their bellies, their flesh pined away, their colour grew wanne, and they lookt like so many Ghosts. Many walking, with their teeth chewing Nettles, fell suddainly dead. They did eat also one anothers dung, and many, when they could find no more Dogs, nor Rats to feed on, killed themselves. One having five Children hanging importunately upon him for meat, made no shew to lament, but restraining his passion, he willed the Children to fol∣low him, and they should have meat. When he came to the Bridge over the Tiber, tying his Cloak about his face and eyes, he leapt into the River, his Children and many more looking on. Afterward the Commanders, for money, suffered such as would, to go out of the City; some few staid, the rest fled whether they could; the most of whom were so weak, that they dyed a Ship-board, or upon the high waies. Many the Enemy caught, and kill'd. To this was reduced the Fortune of the People and Senate of Rome. Isaac and John being joyned with Belisarius at Epidamnus, John advised to crosse the Jonian Gulfe, and with the whole Army to try their Fortune by Land. But Be∣lisarius liked it not; for more time would be spent, and some impediment might encounter them by Land. He would have John march through Calabria, and those Countries, to expell the Goths being few there; and having subdued all on this side the Gulfe, to joyne with him about Rome; where himselfe purposed to land with the rest of the Army. He considered how the least delay would ruine all at Rome, and that in five daies with a wind they might land at Portus; whereas from Otranto thither, would cost the Army 40. daies march. So he hoist Saile with a strong gale, and came before Otranto. The Goths seeing them, instantly raised their Seige, and went to Brundusium, standing upon the Gulfe, a daies journey from Otranto, with no Walls about it. They advertised Totilas of it, thinking that Be∣lisarius would instantly passe the straits there; who prepared to encounter him, and directed the Goths in Calabria to guard the Passage there: But the wind com∣ing faire, Belisarius left Otranto, and the Goths were secure and quiet in Cala∣bria. Totilas before Rome guarded the Avenues more stictly, to keep out Provisions. He made choice of a place about eleven miles below Rome upon the Tiber, where it is narrowest, and there laid a Bridge of Plancks, reaching from one Banck to the other. At either end he built Towers of Wood, and put good Garrisons into them, to impede the passage of Barks from Portus to Rome. In the mean time Be∣lisarius landed at Portus, and attended Johns Army. John past over into Calabria, undiscerned by the Goths, who were all at Brundusium: He took two Scouts of the Enemy upon the high way, and having killed the one, the other took him about the knees, and besought him for mercy, promising to be usefull to him; John de∣manded wherein; he said, he would bring him upon the Goths unlookt for. John
told him, he should not then faile in his request; but bad him first shew him where were any Horse-pastures,; The Goth promising that also, went along with him. And first surprising the Enemies Horses at their Pasture, such as were a foot leapt on them, being many of the best men. Then they gallopt to the Enemies Camp, who being unarmed, unprepared, and amazed with the suddennesse, were most of them cut off, using no resistence. Some few escaped to Totilas. John then animated the Calabrians, and reconciled their affections to the Emperour with faire promi∣ses of many advantages. He staid not in Brundusium, but surprised Canusium, a Town in the middle of Apulia, five daies journey to the Westward of Brundusium, in the way to Rome. About three miles from this Town is Cannae, where Hanniball gave that great overthrow to the Romans. Here Tullianus the Son of Venantius, a Roman of great power in Bruttia and Lucania, complained to John of what the Army had done formerly against the Italians, and promised, if moderation were used hereafter, to reduce his Country-men to obedience and payment of Tribute; who revolted unwillingly to Barbarians and Arrians, forced by them, and ex∣treamly wronged by the Emperours Army. John promised all favour from the Em∣perour to the Italians, and Tullianus went along with him, whence the Italians were no more jealous of the Souldiers, and the most part of the Country on this side the Jonian Gulfe became Friends to them, and obedient to the Emperour. Totilas upon the newes hereof, sent 300. Goths to Capua; whom he directed, when they saw Johns Army march towards Rome, closely to follow it. Himselfe would take care of the rest: This stopt John, (fearing to be encompast by the E∣nemy) from marching further towards Belisarius; and he went into Bruttia and Lucania. Recimund an eminent Goth, was placed by Totilas with some Goths, fugitive Romans, and Moores to guard Bruttia, and the straits of Scylla, and the Coast thereabout, and to hinder the landing of Boats from Sicily, & the pasting over thither. John suddenly fell upon this Army between Rhegiam and Bivona, and rou∣ted them using no resistance: They fled towards a Mountain hard of accesse and craggy. But John ran up with them, and before they could be settled in the fast∣nesses, killed most of the Moores and Roman Souldiers, stoutly defending themselves, and took Recimund and the Goths upon composition. And having thus done, staid in the Country; while Belisarius lay still attending his coming, and blaming him for not adventuring to passe by a Garrison of 300. men in Capua, having with him the choice of the Roman Army. But John despaired of getting by, and lay quiet at Cervarium, a place in Apulia. CHAP. X. SO that Belisarius fearing some desperate resolution of the starving Romans, studyed meanes to Victuall the City. Forces he wanted to fight with the E∣nemy; but he did thus. He tyed two Barks together, upon which he built a Tower of wood, higher then those, which the Enemy had at the Bridge; having by some Souldiers, pretending to run away, taken the exact measure of them. He lancht into the Tiber also 200. Pinnaces, having Walls made of boards full of loop-holes, to shoot at the Enemy. Aboard the Prinnaces he put Corn and other Provisions, and towards the Rivers mouth in places of advantage, he laid Horse and Foot by either Banck, who were to impede the Enemy, if he set upon Portus; which he committed to the Guard of Isaac, with his Wife, and what he had there, directing him not to stir, though he heard Belisarius were slain; but to keep close to his Guard, that upon any mischance, there might be a place of retreat; for other Fortresses there was none, all the Country thereabout being their Enemy. Him∣selfe aboard one of the Pinnaces, led the rest; and caused the two Barks with the Tower to be towed after. Upon the top of the Tower he put a Cock-boat full of Pitch, Rozin, Brimstone, and other combustible matter upon the Banck, where is the way from Portus to Rome, stood the Foot. He had sent the day before to Bessas, to make a generall Sally, and to alarm the Enemies Camp. The like he had directed
him often before, but neither before nor now, would he perform his directions: for he had Corn yet for his own use left, sent formerly by the Governours of Sicily, sufficient both for the Souldier and the People. Of this he gave little to the People, but took most of it upon the account of the Army, and kept it to himselfe, selling it at huge rates to the Senators: So that he had no mind to have the Seige raised. But Belisarius rowed up the River with a strong stream against him: The Goths lying quiet in their Trenches. Neer the Bridge they came to a Guard of E∣nemies, and found an Iron Chaine fastned from Banck to Banck, which Totilas had put there, to hinder the passage to the Bridge. They shot, and killed some, and frighted away the rest, then took up the Chain and rowed on to the Bridge, where they fell to work; The Goths, valiantly defending from their Towers, and many running in from the Camp. Then Belisarius brought his two Barks with the Tower on them close to the Enemies Tower, which stood into the water by the way from Portus. He caused them to fire the Cock-boat, and to shoove it down just upon the Enemies Tower, which instantly fell afire, and burnt with it selfe 200. Goths within it, and their Commander, one of the valiantest of the Nation. Mean while the Romans shot so thick upon the seconds which came from the Camp, that be∣ing also amazed at the Accident, they ran all away. The Romans laid hands on the Bridge, and had suddenly pulled it down, and gotten into Rome, none opposing; But Fortune was not so pleased. Some envious Daemon plotted that, which ruined the Romans Affaires. The Armies being thus employed, the report (to the Ro∣mans mischiefe) came to Portus, how Belisarius had taken up the Chain, and killed the Goths there. Isaac could not hold, but would have his share in the ho∣nour; and fogetting Belisarius Commands, he went hastily to the other side of the River where Ostia stands, and with a 100. Horse of the men left him by Beli∣sarius, he charged the Enemies quarter commanded by Roderick a skilfull Souldier. And coming suddenly, he wounded many, and Roderick himselfe and the Goths quitted their Quarter, either suspecting more to be coming after Isaac, or decei∣ving him, to surprise his Troops, which happened. For Isaac entring the Enemies Trenches, and falling to pillage, the Goths returned, killed many, and took him∣selfe, and others Prisoners. Some Horse-men gallopt to Belisarius, and reported that Isaac was taken by the Enemy; Who astonisht with the newes, and not en∣quiring the manner, but thinking Portus and his Wife to be lost, and all ruined, and how no Fortresse was now left for the Army to retire to, he had not a word to say, a thing never happening to him before: And immediately he drew back his Forces, meaning to charge the Enemy unprepared, and by all meanes to recover the place; And thus the Romans retired without doing any thing. But Belisarius when at Portus he found the rashnesse of Isaac, and perceived his own Counsell perturbation, the vexation of it, and at the crosse Fortune put him into a Feaver, which afflicted him long, and brought him to deaths door. Two daies after Ro∣derick dyed, which so grieved Totilas, that he put Isaac to death. But Bessas stil trading with his Corn, grew rich, hunger and necessity setting the prises for him. His whole thoughts were upon it, neglecting the Guard of the Walls or any thing tending to preservation; and the Souldiers might be as negligent as they pleased. Upon the Walls were small Guards, and those not attended. The Sentinels might sleep securely, none ever visiting them, to call them to an account, nor going the round, as is usuall. And the Citizens being few left, and they almost starved, would not keep any Watch. At last foure Isaurians, who stood Sentinels neer Porta Asi∣naria, at the time of night, when their turn came to watch, and their fellowes to sleep, slipt down the Walls by Ropes tyed to the Battlements, and came to Toti∣las, undertaking to receive his Army into the City with ease: Totilas promised many Favours, and to make them rich if they performed it, and sent two Soul∣diers with them to view the place, where they said the City might be entred. They came to the Wall, mounted the Battlements by the Ropes; not a man speaking, nor taking notice. Being there, the Isaurians shewed them how nothing would oppose their coming up, nor encounter them being up; which they bad them to re∣port to Totilas; who though he was glad of the report, yet he could not trust them, being Isaurians. Not many daies after they came again, urging him upon the same businesse, and he sent two others, who examined all exactly, and made
their report, agreeing with the former. In the meane time some Roman Scouts met ten Goths neer the City upon the high-way, whom they took, and brought to Bes∣sas: Who by enquiry learnt of them, that Totilas hope was to have the City betray∣ed to him by Isaurians. Bessas and Conon made slight of the advertisement; and the Isaurians coming the third time to Totilas, and he sending others, and one of his own Kinred with them, and they reporting still the same, he resolved the enter∣prize. CHAP. XI. THE same night he silently armed his forces, and led them to Porta Asinaria, willing four Goths valiant and strong to mount the Battlements with the I∣saurians, at the houre when they were to watch, and the rest were to go to bed in their turns. They being gotten into the Towne, went to Porta A∣sinaria without meeting any; and with their Battleaxes cut in two the Timber posts upon which the Gates on each side hung, and wrench'd off the iron worke where-into the Watch-men put their keyes to open and shut then: And so having set them open, they received in Totilas and the Army. Totilas drew all to one place, not suffering them to scatter, affraid of some ambush from the Enemy. The City sud∣denly was full of tumult, and most of the Roman Souldiers fled with their Comman∣ders out at another gate. Some took Sanctuary with other Romans in Churches. Of the Patricians, Decius, Basilius, and some others fled out with Bessas, having Hor∣ses; but Maximus, Olybrius, Orestes and others fled into St. Peters Church. Of the commons remained but 500. men, who took Sanctuary also, the rest were all gone away, or starved. Totilas being told in the night, that Bessas and the Enemy were running away, sayd, they brought him very good news, and that they should not follow them; For what should please a man mare then his Enemies running away? In the morning Totilas suspecting now no Ambush, went to St. Peters Church to Prayer: But the Goths killed some in their way, about 26. Souldiers, and sixty Commons. Totilas being in the Church, Pelagius came a suppliant to him with the Gospels in his hand, crying out, O spare, my Lord! your owne people. Now (quoth Totilas, scoffing) you come an humble Petitioner to me; Because God hath made me your slave, replyed Pelagius. And now, O Master! spare your owne slaves. Totilas wonne with his supplications, for bad the Goths to kill any more; but to make booty of their Goods, reserving the most precious for himselfe. They found much wealth in the Patricians houses, but most in the lodging of Bessas, who had heaped up those wicked prices of his Corn for Totilas: The Romans, even Senators, and Rusticiana the Widow of Boetius, and daughter of Symmachus (a woman that e∣ver laid out her Revenues upon the poor) went begging their bread of their Ene∣mies; wandring from house to house, knocking at the doors, and craving suste∣nance without blushing. The Goths indeavoured to put Rusticiana to death, for bribing the Roman Com∣manders to break down Theodericks Images, in revenge of her Husbands and Fathers deaths: But Totilas preserved her, and protected all the Women from the Souldiers insolence, who were eager to ravish them; but not one was abused: For which his modesty Totilas got a great reputation. The next day he assembled the Goths, and spake thus; Fellow Souldiers! I call you together, not to make any new exhortations, but the same I have given formerly, and by entertayning which, you have found your greatest good: And do not now to this hearken carelesly. Advises conducting you to happinesse should never be tedious, nor many words seeme wearisome, since the fruits springing from them must not weary you. I say then againe, that the other day we had 200000. valiant fighting men together, were masters of in∣finite wealth, had abundance of Horses, and other preparations, and many wise old men, who in Warre are of greatest use. Yet were we beaten by 7000. Greeks, and senselesly deprived of our Empire, and all things else. But now being reduced
to few, and those naked, poore, and unexperienced, we have vanquish'd the E∣nemy; being upward of 20000. men. The cause of this our successe I will tell you, though you know it already. The Goths then not valuing Justice, acted foule wrongs upon themselves, and their Roman Subjects: Which moved God (as could not otherwise be) to fight against them for the Enemie: Whom wee exceeding in numbers, valour, and other preparations, yet were we beaten by an unseen power. It is now in your power to keep your prosperity by keeping your justice. If you change, God will be your Enemy: Who assists not this or that race, or Nation, but the men to whom Justice is precious: In him it is no labour to transferr pros∣perity from one to another. Let man only resolve never to do wrong; To God all things naturally are in his free power. Observe therefore justice, and you shall for ever maintain your happinesse. Having said thus to the Goths, he called the Roman Senators to him, and bitter∣ly reproacht them; That having received benefits from Theoderick and Atala∣rick, been employed in all offices, managed the whole State, and made them∣selves rich; they had proved ungratefull to their Benefactors, by unworthily re∣volting to their own mischiefe, and had betrayed themselves by bringing Greeks into their Countrey. He urged them to say, what hurt the Goths, or what benefit the Emperour Justinian had done them. They were deprived of almost all com∣mands, wrung and tortured by the publique Tax-gatherers to accompt for their carriages towards the Goths in the Treasury: And being spoiled by the Warr, yet the Greeks made them pay their tributes, as in the times of Peace. He objected many such things, as angry Masters use to their new made slaves. Then pointing to Herodian, and the four Isaurians: You, quoth he, having been bred with us, could never yeeld up to us so much as one forsaken Town: but these have received us into Spoletum, and Rome it selfe. Be you therefore in the condition of slaves, and these who have been friends, and as Countrey-men to us, shall have your offices. The Patricians stood silent at these words: But Pelagius interceded for them, as men ruined and unfortunate, till Totilas promised mercy, and let them goe. He sent Pelagius, and Theodorus, an Orator of Rome, to Justinian, his Ambassadors, making them sweare to deale fairly, and to return into Italy so soon as they could: He in∣structed them to perswade the Emperour to make peace, otherwise hee should be compelled to lay Rome flat with the ground, to kill all the Senate, and to bring the War into Illyrium; And he wrote letters to the Emperor; who had the news alrea∣dy of the successes in Italy. When they came to him, they declared their instructions from Totilas, and presented his letter, of this tenor. You are fully advertised what hath happened to Rome, I doubt it not. But my reason of this Embassage is, to crave of you to entertaine the blessings of Peace your selfe, and to permit them to us. Whereof we have a faire precedent in A∣nastasius and Theodericke: Who reigned together not long since; but they filled their Reigns with Peace and good things. If you be pleased to do the like, I will call you my Father, and you shall have the Goths your Auxiliaries against whom you please. Justinian read the Letter, and heard the Ambassadors, but instantly sent them a∣way with this answer in writing to Totilas: That he had made Belisarius absolute Generall in this Warr, who had ful pow∣er to manage all things concerning Totilas as he pleased. During this voyage of the Ambassadors to Constantinople, and back again, Tullianus in Lucania leavyed some Peasants, and guarded the Straits there, to hinder the Enemies entring to infest Lucania; With him were 300. Antians, left with him by John; being of all Barba∣rians the aptest to fight in a fastnesse. Totilas thought it not fit to employ all the Goths against them; But he sent numbers of Peasants in the company of some Goths, whom he commanded to attempt the passage. They fought, and much stirring there was, but by the valour of the Antians, and favour of the fastnesse, Tullianus in the end routed them.
CHAP. XII. TOtilas hearing of it, resolved to demolish Rome, and leaving part of his ar∣my in some towne thereabout with the rest to go against John and the Lu∣canians. He threw downe about the third part of the walls of Rome, and was ready to fire the fairest, and most eminent buildings, and to make Rome a sheepe pasture; but Belisarius advertized of his intention, sent Ambassadors to him, and wrote him this Letter, It hath been the invention of wise men of old, affecting civility, to raise goodly buildings; and none destroy them but some dull men, not ashamed to leave to posterity such a mark of their disposition. And of all Cities under the Sun, Rome is confest to be the greatest and most famous; being not the work of one mans virtue, nor arrived to this beauty and bignesse in a small time. Many Emperours and excellent men, length of time, and excesse of wealth have drawn together materialls from all countries, and rare artificers, and ha∣ving so by little and little built the City as you now see it, they have filled it with monuments of all their virtues, and the violence done to the same is an injury committed against all mankind; taking from our progenitors the memorialls of their worth, and from posterity the sight of such goodly works. Know then, that one of the two must be, either you will be vanquisht by the Emperour, or get the better. If you be victorious, by having destroyed Rome; you have ruined, Great Sir, not anothers, but your own; by preserving which, you will be rich in the goodliest possession in the world. But if you draw the loosing lot; having preserved Rome, you have reserved abundant thanks from the conquerour: But by destroying it, bereft your self of all pretence to favour. And you will get no∣thing by it, but a fame in the world sutable to such a proceeding, which attends your Resolution herein either way. Whatsoever the actions of Princes be, such are necessarily the name they must bear from them. Totilas upon often reading this Letter, and pondring the advise, forbare further harme to Rome. and signifying to Belisarius his determination, he dismist the Ambassadors: He encamped most of his army at Algidum, 15 miles from Rome to the Westward, to ly there and keep Belisarius fast in Portus, and himself and the rest went against John and the Lucani∣ans. Some Roman Senators he led with him, and the rest with their wives and chil∣dren he sent to Campania, leaving not a man in Rome. John hearing of Totilas com∣ing, would stay no longer in Apulia, but ran into Otranto. The Patricians confined in Campania, sent commands by Totilas direction to their husbandmen of Lucania, to leave John, and to manure their Lands as formerly, which were declared to belong to their Landlords. Whereupon they forsook John, and went and lived peaceably at home. Tullianus also ran away, and his 300 Antians retired to Johns army. So all on this side the Jonian Gulfe, save Otranto, became again subject to Totilas: and the Goths grown bold, stragled about in small parties; John sent forces out, and kill'd many of them, which caused Totilas to unite his army about mount Gargarus, al∣most in the middle of Apulia, where he encamped in Hanniballs Entrenchment. In the mean time Martianus, a Constantinopolitan born, & one of the souldiers that esca∣ped out of Rome with Conon, when it was taken, desired Belisarius that he might go to the Enemy, pretending himself a run-away, and he would do good service. Belisa∣rius approving it, Martianus went to Totilas, who was glad of him, having heard much of the young man, and seen him do bravely in some single combats: Present∣ly he restored to him his wife a captive, and one of his children (there being two) but reserved the other for a hostage, and he sent them with some others to Spole∣tum, whereof the Goths had demolisht the walls after their taking it by Herodians Treason, and put a Garrison there of Goths and Romans fugitives, into the place used for the hunting of wild beasts (called the Amphitheater) which they had for∣tified. Martianus got some Associates, whom he perswaded to do some remarkable service, and so to return to the Roman army, and to the Roman Commander in Pe∣rusia, he sent for forces, discovering his designe to him. Oldgandon, a Hunne, the commander there (Cyprianus Being murder'd by one of his own life-Guard, as aforesaid) marcht with some forces to Spoletum; whom Martianus seeing, with
the 15 Souldiers he had got to joyn with him, he killed the Captaine of the Goths Garrison, and received the Romans into the Fort; they kill'd most of the Enemies, and brought the rest to Belisarius. Who resolved thereupon to enter Rome, and with a thousand Souldiers he marcht to it. The Enemy at Algedon was advertized hereof by a Roman, and layed an Am∣bush neer Rome, which seeing, Belisarius set upon his troops, and a hot fight be∣ing, the Romans valour routed the Enemy, who after the killing of most of them, re∣tired to Portus. Upon the sea-coast of Calabria, stands Tarentum, two daies journy from Otranto, in the way to Thurium and Rhegium. John, invited by the Tarentines, went thither with some few, leaving the rest in Otranto, the city he found great & un∣fortified, & conceived it impossible to man it. But finding to the northward of the City the sea to embay it self on both sides the Land, and to make it an Isthmus between, of two miles and a half broad; he cut the said Isthmus from the city with a wall and a deep ditch, and put in it the Tarentines and the inhabitants of some other Townes with a good Garrison. The Calabrians having gotten this refuge, thought of re∣volting from the Goths. In the mean time Totilas surprized Acherontis a strong Castle in Lucania, upon the confines of Calabria, and put into it a Garrison of 400 men. Then himself with his army went toward Ravenna, leaving some Goths in Cam∣pania, to Guard the Senators there confined. CHAP. XIII. BUt Belisarius undertook a design provident and bold, which seemed a kinde of madnesse at first, but proved a gallant work. He left a small Garrison in Portus, and with the rest of his army he went into Rome with a resolution to hold it. He could not in so short a time repaire the walls, demolished by Toti∣las; but he heaped stones one upon another rudely, without lime or the like between, only to give it the form of a wall; without it he pitcht good store of stakes; And a ditch he had formerly made round about, as I said before. The whole army wor∣king cheerfully, in five and twenty daies the breaches were filled up. The Romans from the townes about flocked thither, aswell desiring to dwell in Rome again, as to be supplyed with Victuall which they wanted, and found there in abundance, imported by Belisarius up the River. Totilas at the newes, went in∣stantly thitherward; Belisarius having not yet set up the Gates, which Totilas had broken down; and he for want of Artificers, could not build them again. The Barbarian Army encamped by the River of Tiber, and there lodged that night; the next morning they marcht furiously to the City-walls. Belisarius placed, where the Gates had stood, some of his best men, and commanded the rest from the Walls to maintain fight against the Assailants, and it was hotly fought; For the Goths, who hoped to take the Town at the first on-set, finding the businesse prove tough, and the Romans powerfully defending, grew angry, and their anger made them more ventrous. The Romans also held out beyond expectation, the danger indu∣cing them to be valiant. The Slaughter was great of the Goths, being annoyed by shot from the Walls. Both the Armies toyled hard, the Fight beginning in the morning, and ending at night. When it grew dark, the Goths returned to their Quarters, and spent the night in dressing their wounded men. The Romans kept Guards upon the Walls, and put the best men where the Gates had been, to guard by turnes, having pitcht before them many Triboli, that the Enemy might not ride in upon them. The Triboli, or Gall-traps are of this Fashion. They fit to one another the blunt ends of foure Iron sprigs, of equall length, whose right lines make a triangle every way. These they throw upon the ground, and three of them stick fast; the other stand upright, and hinders the approach of horse and men: and if by chance they be turned over, the point that stood up before, pitches into the Ground, and another gets up instead of it, hindring a charging Enemy. But the next morning Totilas again assaulted, and the Romans defended in their former or∣der, got the better, and growing bold sallied; and some chasing the retiring Enemy far from the Town, the Goths fell to compasse them, and to cut off their retreate; which Belisarius perceiving, sent out some of his own company, who brought them off:
And the Goths repulsed, retired with losse of many of their best men, and carry∣ing off many wounded. They kept close in their Quarters, dressing their hurt-men, and mending their Armes (which were much spoyled) and making other pre∣parations. Many daies after they assaulted again, and the Romans killed the Ensigne-bearer of Totilas, who being deadly wounded, and falling, threw away his Ensigne. The Romans in the Van ran for it, and to strip the dead body: But the Goths took up the Ensigne, and cut off the dead mans left Arme, and carryed it off, having a rich Bracelet of Gold on it, which they thought would be an affront to them, if some vaunting Enemy should weare it; And then they made a disorderly retreat. The Romans followed the Execution a good way, stript the rest of the dead bodies, and came into the City without losse of a man. The principall Goths reproached Totilas something licentiously, for his unadvisednesse, in not demolishing all Rome when he took it, (that no Enemy might hold it) or in not keeping it himselfe; but in thus ruining, what they had effected with much toile and time. Thus men ever tune their Judgments to the Events of things, and yeild up the same to the stream of Fortune, from thence taking quick and sudden changes of Opinion. The Goths, when Totilas prospered, admired him like a God; calling him unresistible, invincible, as they did before, when he suffered them to destroy part of the Cities Walls which they took: But no sooner he received a blow, but they shamelessely raile on him, fogetting their former words, and contradicting themselves without reason. But such Errours being the effects of nature, it is not possible for men not to commit them. But Totilas raised his Seige, and went to the City Tibur, break∣ing down the Bridges upon the Tiber, that the Enemy might not charge him. Pons Milvius, a Bridge neer to Rome, they could not demolish. They re-built the Castle of Tibur, which they had cast down before, and kept themselves quiet within it, and all their Baggage. Belisarius set up the Gates of Rome at his ease, lining them with Iron; and he sent the Keyes again to the Emperour: And so ended the Win∣ter, and the 12. yeare of this War, written by Procopius. Some Forces not long before sent by Totilas straitly beseiged the Romans in Perusia,Incipit Annus 13. bell. Goth. in ann. 21. Ju∣stiniani & An. Dom. 547. and finding that Victuall began to faile the besieged, they sent to Totilas to come with his whole Army to take the Town with more ease. But Totilas find∣ing the Goths not chearfully to receive his directions, he called them all to him, and spake thus. Fellow Souldiers, seeing you are causelesly angry with me, and do pine at our late crosse Fortune; I now call you together, to rectifie your Opinion, and to settle your Judgments aright; least you appeare not only unthankfull to me, but foolishly to use ingratitude even to God himselfe. Humane things are sub∣ject to mischances, and he, that being but a man, yet takes such things in ill part, shall necessarily be thought to want wit, and yet neverthelesse undergo the ne∣cessity of his Fortune. I will put you in mind of former proceedings, not so much to excuse these now, as to shew that they ought rather to be commended. In the beginning of the War Vitigas demolisht the Walls of Fanus and Pensau∣rum, maritime Townes, letting Rome and all the other Cities in Italy stand un∣defaced. And from Fanus & Pensaurum we have had no inconvenience; but from Rome, and the other fortified places, our Affaires have succeeded as you know. When by your Gift I received this Government, I chose rather to follow the best courses, then by the contrary to hurt you; since naturally men differ not much, but experience is it, which makes the good Schollers of her Schoole in all things better, then they who learn not of her. So that taking Beneventum we threw down the Walls, and were presently Masters of the rest, whose Walls we also demolisht: That we might not have our Enemies ever issuing from Fortresses, and making the War with Artifices, but to come directly to a Feild, and there to fight it out. And there they ran away, and their Cities which I took, I disman∣telled, and you then were the Admirers, and Ministers of that my resolution, and made the work (as it was indeed) your own; seeing he who commends a man for an Act, is himselfe an Actor. But now you are changed, since a bold∣nesse without reason taken by Belisarius, hath succeeded; and now you are af∣fraid of the man, being so valiant. Indeed fool-hardy men are sooner thought to be courageous, then the provident, to be cautious. He that adventures more
then the occasion allowes, is honoured yet with a reputation of seeming Valour; But he that upon a provident consideration is apprehensive of the danger, and then failes, drawes upon himselfe the blame of all that happens. And if it suc∣ceed well, unskilfull men will not think that he dath done any thing in it. Be∣sides, you consider not how you are offended with me, for what I rather may take ill of you. Is it now only that Belisarius hath gotten honour upon you? Who being his Captives, and fugitive Slaves, took Armes under me, and have gotten the better of him in this War? And if by my virtue you have effected this, you should be patient and consider in mischances, that nothing is made to be ever the same. And Fortune having adjudged to you the Victory, you shall do bet∣ter to reverence the same, then to be peevish against it; least it be offended, and tach you a new Lesson of gratitude and better nature. For how can that be a good nature, that having lately attempted great Fortunes, and now failed in a small matter, is so poorly dejected? This is plainly to renounce your selves to be men; for never to slip is peculiar to God alone. So that setting by these things, I say, that you are to go to Perusia, and to encounter the Enemy: If you conquer them, Fortune will cleare up again. No age can make that undone, which hath happened to us; but the memory of ill Fortunes is aswaged by the arrivall of good. The getting Perusia will cost little labour; Cyprianus the Commander, Fortune and our Counsels have removed; and a multitude without a Governour, and without Victuals too, are no fit men to fight valiantly. None shall infest your backs, I having beaten down the Bridges to prevent any sud∣den incursions. Belisarius likewise and John are jealous of one another, as may appeare by their Actions, (which ever convince the disagreement of minds) they to this day having never joyned their Forces, by reason of their mutuall jealousie. And that Guest whosoever hath, may be sure of hatred and envie in the same lodging, which being intermingled, nothing can possibly be done that should be. Having thus spoken, he led the Army towards Perusia, and there fate down before it, preparing for a Siege. CHAP. XIIII. IN the mean time John besieged the Castle of Acherontis, and finding that he could do no good upon it, he fell upon a bold resolution, which preser∣ved some Roman Senators, and got much reputation to himselfe. While Totilas was busie before Rome, he took to himselfe a party of choice Horse-men, and concealing his intent, made a journey into Campania (where Totilas had confined the Senators) resting neither day nor night, that coming suddenly he might res∣cue the Senators, the Townes being altogether unfortified. Totilas before fearing this, and that by some Enemy he might lose his Prisoners, had sent into Campania some Forces of Horse; who being come to the City of Minturnae, thought it best to stay there, and to rest their Horses, being weary with the journey. Some others Totilas had directed, (being men in much account with him, and about 400.) to view in what Estate Capua was, and the Townes about it; And the journey thither was but 37. miles, and the Horses of these and themselves were fresh and lusty. It happened that these 400, and John arrived at the same day and houre at Capua, not knowing of one anothers coming. Suddenly a gallant fight was performed, both parties falling to it at first sight, wherein the Romans had the absolute Victory, and killed many; some few of them got away, and gallopt to Minturnae; whom the others there seeing all bloody, and some with Arrowes stick∣ing in them, others not so much as telling them what had befallen them, (so earn∣est they were to get away) and bewraying the feare they were in, they also leapt upon their Horses and ran with them for company: And coming to Totilas, they told him of innumerable Enemies, to save the shame of their running away. Seven∣ty Roman Souldiers then came into John, who were quartered in Campania; And some few Senators he found there, but almost all their Wives. For most of the men at the taking of Rome, were fled into Portus with the Souldiers, but all the
Women were taken Prisoners. One Clementinus a Patritian, fled into a Church, not accompanying the Roman Army; because having betrayed a Castle neer unto Naples to Totilas, he feared the Emperours indignation. Orestes also, who had been Consull, staid at his house for want of Horses to carry him away; John sent the Senators he found, and the 70. Souldiers into Sicily: But Totilas was vexed at this newes, and eager to have his revenge upon John; And he marcht against him, leaving only some of his Troops to guard the Camp before Perusia: John had encamped his 100. men in Lucania, and sent out some to discover upon all the waies, that the Enemy might not surprise him. And Totilas guesting as much, and that John would not lye in his Camp, without his Scouts abroad; left the or∣dinary wayes, and marcht over the Mountaines which were many, high and craggy, and thought unpassable, that none would suspect his coming that way. Johns Scouts found the Enemy was thereabout, but no certainty they could learn; and fearing what came to passe, they rode back to their Camp, and with them arrived there the Goths in the night, Totilas being in a rage, and so not well advised, had the fruit of his impertinet anger. His Army was ten times greater then his Enemies; and it is evidently best for a stronger Army to make an open fight; so that he should have charged the Enemy in the morning (to take from them the benefit of the dark to hide themselves) and so he had taken them all as in a net. But he giving way to his anger, set on them in the dark night. They used no resistance, being taken most of them asleep; yet the Goths killed not many, they having the means in the dark to slip away unseen, leaving their camp, and running up to the next mountains. John escaped amongst the rest, and Arusus, Captaine of the Herulians. Almost 100. Romans were slaine: There was with John one Gilacius an Armenian, commanding some few of his Countrey-men, who spake neither Greeke, Latine, nor Gothish, but Armenian only; some Goths lighting upon him, ask'd him who he was: (They forbare to kill any in the dark, lest they might kill their owne) He could make no o∣ther answer, but that he was Generall Gilacius, having learnt the title of his place in Greek, by hearing it often named. The Goths finding him an Enemy, took him Prisoner, and soon after killed him. John, and Arusus with their troops gallop't amain to Otranto: And the Goths afterward pillaging the Romans Camp, retired. Things being thus in Italy, the Emperour upon the importunate letters of Beli∣sarius, thought good to send more Forces thither. First, he sent Bacurius, the sonne of Peranius, and Sergius, Solomons sisters sonne, who with some few came to the rest of the Army. Afterward he sent rus with 300. Herulians, and Varazes an Armenian with 80. Roman Souldiers. He caused also Valerianus, Generall of Armenia, from thence to goe into ly with his guard of Lanciers, and l'argettiers, being above a thousand men.  first arrived at Otranto, where leaving his Ships, and not joyning with Johns Army, he rode for∣ward with his men. He was no serious man, but an excessive Drinker: and conse∣quently rash, and unadvised. He encamped neer to Brundusium: Which Totilas hearing; Either quoth he, Verus is very strong, or very foolish. Let us go to him; either to make tryall of his power, or to make him sensible of his folly. According∣ly he went against him with a great Army; But the Herulians seeing them, fled into a Wood, where the Enemy compassed them, and slew above 200. Verus and the rest were ready to be caught; but it chanced that Varazes and the Armenians came suddenly to an Anchor upon that shore; and Totilas suspecting some great Forces aboard, rode away with his Army, and so they escaped, with much joy to the ships. Varazes put into Tarentum, whither soone after came John. The emperour had written to Belisarius of a great Army sent, with which he was to joyn in Calabria, and to give Battale to the Enemy. Valrianus also was come neer the Jonian gulfe, but would not passe over, fearing that the Souldiers and their Horses would, want provisions now towards the Winter tropick. He sent unto John 300. of his men, and promised in the beginning of the Spring to be with him. But Belisarius upon perusall of the Emperours letters, chose of his best men 700. Horse, and 200. Foot: And leaving the Guard of the places about Rome to the rest under Conon, he made for Sicily, thence purposing to put in at Tarentum. He left at his left hand the place called Scyllum, where the Poets say, that Scylla did abide. Not that any such savage Woman was, as they tell it: But in that part are of old
many small rocks like whelps, and they are to this day called  little Dogs. At first names were given thus to signifie the things. Then fame spreading them a∣mong men ignorant of the truth, caused many false conceits: And time at length became the powerfull Author of some fable, suborning, for Witnesses of things that are not, Poets by licence of their art. So anciently the Natives of Corcyra have called their Easter promontory Cynocephale, the head of a Dog; Whereupon o∣thers would have the Islanders headed like Dogs. Some Pisidians are called Lycocra∣nites, not because they have heads like Wolves, but because the mountaines there are called  the head of a Wolfe. But to return from whence I digressed. Belisarius endeavoured to make directly for Tarentum. There is a coast in form like a halfe moon, the Sea embaying it selfe farre into the land; the com∣passe whereof being 125. miles, neer to the mouth of the Bay are Croton to the East-ward, and Thurium to the West, And about the middle of it is Tarentum. A storm being in their teeth, and the wind blowing high, and the waves being great, being unable to saile on, they cast Anchor in the Haven of Croton: Where Belisa∣rius finding no Fortresse neere, nor how to supply the Army with provisi∣ons, staid with his Wife and all the Foot, intending to send for Johns Army. His Horse he commanded to march higher, and to quarter themselves upon the en∣trances of the Countrey, giving them for Commanders Pharas the Iberian, and Barbation, one of his Life-guard; Thinking that so they might best get provisions for themselves and their Horses, and keep off the Enemy in fastnesses. For there the mountaines of Lucania reaching into Bruttia, and meeting at a strait, make two narrow passages; the one called in Latine Petra sanguinis, the bloody rock; the o∣ther Labulla, or Lambula. Here by the Sea side stands Ruscia, where the Thuri∣ans ships ride. Seven miles and a halfe above this, the ancient Romans built a strong Castle, which John had long possessed, and placed a Garrison in it. CHAP. XV. THE Horse sent by Belisarius met Forces of the Enemy sent by Totilas to attempt that Castle: With these they fought, and though much inferiour in numbers, they routed them, and killed above 200. The rest ran away to Totilas with the newes. The Romans encamped in the place; and being ill governed, and victorious, lived carelesly, neither lying together in one body, nor keeping guards upon the two passages; but lodging too securely farr asunder, and all the day stragling for Provisions, without sending out Scouts, or advising upon any course of safety. Totilas being thereof advertised, went against them with 3000. chosen Horsemen: And coming unlooked for upon them, being in no order to fight, but stragling, he amazed and routed them. Pharas encountred the Ene∣my, and did valiantly; whereby some escaped, but himselfe, and his company were slain. This the Romans took grievously, having their hopes in these, being extraor∣dinary good men. Barbation, of the Life-guard to Belisarius, ran away to Croton with the newes, reporting that the Goths would be instantly there. Belisarius ex∣ceedingly grieved, ran to his Ships, weighed anchor, and with a faire wind came the same day before Messina in Sicily, distant from Croton 87. miles, being right over against Rhegium. About this time an Army of Slavonians passed the River Ister, and did infinite mischiefe in Illyrium, even to Epidamnus, killing and captivating all and of all ages they found, and taking the spoile. They took many strong Castles, none to defend them, and ranged about every where without controule. The Commanders of Illy∣rium waited upon them with 15000. men, but never durst come neer them. In that Winter were many terrible Earth-quakes in Constantinople and else-where, all in the night; that the Inhabitants feared to be over-whelmed, but no hurt was done. The Nile also swelled 18. cubits, drowning all Egypt: In the Cotrey of Thebais, and the up-lands, the waters abated in the seasonable time, and gave the people meanes to sow, and husband the ground as was usuall. But they retired not
from the lower grounds at all, but covered them all the seed-season, which never happened so before: To some grounds the water returned again, and rotted all the seed put into the ground during the abatement. So that the people were much trou∣bled with the strangenesse of it, and most of their cattle perished for want of food. The great Whale was then also taken, which the Constantinopolians called the Por∣phyrion. It had troubled them, and the Townes about them above fifty years at times; drowning Ships, and catching men from aboard, and carrying them away. Justinian could by no endeavour get this Monster taken. But now a great number of Daulphins coming upon the mouth of the Euxine Sea, and espying the whale, fled from him, the most of them to the mouth of Sangaris, where the Whale overtook some of them, and devoured them: But either hunger or anger provoking him to pursue neer the shore, he fell into the mud, where tumbling and striving, hee was more engaged; and the Inhabitants hearing of it, ran downe, and hewed him with their Axes; but not being able to kill him, they drew him ashore, with great ropes, laying him upon Waynes, and found him thirty cubits long, and ten broad. They cut him in pieces, and some presently eate them, others pickled them up. The newes of the over-flowing of Nile, and this Whale, added to the Earth-quake which they had felt, filled the Constantinopolitans with prophesies of strange events; Men using still in present perplexities, and disturbances to make groundlesse conjectures of things to come. But leaving sooth-sayings, and the interpretation of prodigies; doubtlesse the flood lying so long upon Egypt, caused for the present much calamity; and the kill∣ing of the Whale was the riddance of a great mischiefe; But some say it was not the Porphyrion, but some other Whale. But to return to my matter. Totilas understanding that the Romans in Rusciana were very scarce of Victuall, sate down close by it, to take it before it could be re∣leived. And then ended the Winter, and the 13. yeare of this Warr, written by Procopius. When the Emperour sent 2000. Foot into Sicily, and commanded Valerianus in∣stantly to repair to Belisarius, He passing the Gulfe, found at Otranto Belisarius and his Wife Antonina, who then sailed to Constantinople, to entreat the Empresse Theodora for some better supplies to her Husband in this Warr. But she found her dead, having lived in the Empire 22. yeares, and three moneths. In the mean time the Garrison in Rusciana capitulated to yeild up the Castle about Midsommer, if in the mean time they were not succoured; provided they have no hurt done them. In it were many Italians, men of quality, and Theopheron, brother to Tullianus, and of the Romans 300. Illyrian Horse-men, whom John had left there under Chalazar a Hunne, one of his Life-guard, and a very good Souldier, and Godilas a Thracian: Belisarius had sent 100. Souldiers to this Castle, who with those appointed by him to guard Rome, killed their Commander Conon, for selling the Corn and other victu∣all at Rome, to their prejudice. They sent some Priests to the Emperour, protest∣ing, that if he granted not abolition of this fault, and payed them their arrears by such a day, they would immediately revolt to Totilas. The Emperour did what they desired. CHAP. XVI. BELISARIƲS sent then for John to Otranto, and with him, and Valeri∣anus, and a Fleet he had got together, he sailed to succour Rusciana. The Garrison there discerning the Fleet, took courage, and refused to yeild, though the day assigned were at hand. But a storm dispersed all the Ships, the coast being Harbour-lesse; and in the Haven of Croton they met all, and made for Rusciana again. The Goths seeing them, leap'd on Horse-backe, and stood upon the shore to oppose their landing, set in front by Totilas against their fore-ships; some with their Lances, others with their Bows bent. The Romans seeing it, durst, come no neerer, but lay at hull far off in the Sea; And at length despairing, turned
about to Sea-ward, and came again to an Anchor in the haven of Croton: Where they resolved in counsell, that Belisarius should make for Rome, and Victual it, as he could; and that John and Valerianus should land, and ride into Picenia, to impede the Enemies sieges of the Towns there; hoping also to draw Totilas towards them, with the raising of the siege of Rusciana. John with his Troops being 1000. men, did accordingly: But Valerianus was afraid, and by the Jonian Gulfe sailed for An∣cona, thinking so more securely to get into Picenia, to joyn with John. Totilas rai∣sed not his siege, but sent 2000. selected Horse-men into Picenia, to joyne with o∣ther Goths, and to beate away John and Valerianus. But the Garrison in Rusciana (their Victuall being absolutely failed) sent Godilas the Lancier, and Theopheron the Italian to intercede for their lives, and pardon for their fault. Totilas promised it to all, save Chalazar only; Who had formerly broken faith with him; & so received the Castle, and put to death Chalazar, cutting off his hands and privy members. The Souldiers that would, he kept in equall ranck with Goths, and left them their goods (as he used in all places) And such as would not, he dismist, stript, and unarmed, not desiring any to serve him unwillingly: And 80. of them quitted their goods, and came to Croton; the rest staid; of whom the Italians had their goods taken away afterwards, but no hurt was done to their persons. Antonina finding the Empresse dead at Constantinople, besought the Emperour to send for her Husband home: Which she easily obtained, the Persian War pressing sore. In the mean time there was an attempt against the Emperours person, which began, and was defeated in this manner. Artabanes, who slew the Tyrant Gontharis in Affrick, was eager to marry Projecta, the Emperours sisters daughter; He was be∣troathed to her, and she affected the match; not for love of his person so much, as in her gratitude to a man, who had revenged the murder of her Husband Areobin∣dus, and rescued her a Captive, and ready to be put into the loathed bed of Gontha∣ris the Tyrant. Both thus consenting, Artabanes sent Projecta to the Emperour; and being made Generall of Africk, besought the Emperour with some pretences, to send for him to Constantinople; Hoping thereby to effect the marriage, and to get many advantages, and even to put for the Empire. Men thus getting fortunes which they looked not for, yet look still further; and foment their rising hopes, till they fall from the happinesse they have. The Empe∣perour granted his desire, and sent for him to Constantinople, and made another Generall of Africke, as is said in my former relations. And being a tall comely personage, liberall, and of few words, the Constantinopolitans loved him, and ad∣mired him for his deeds. And the Emperour respected him with the best, made him Generall of the Forces in Constantinople, and Commander of the Confederates, and enrolled him a Consull. But he could not marry Projecta, by reason he had a for∣mer Wife, his Country-woman, whom he married young, and shook off long before upon some exceptions for slight matters, wherein women offend their Husbands. And she, while Artabanes fortunes were not yet made, sate quiet at home; But he being grown famous for his Actions, and great in his fortunes, she would suffer no longer the dishonour; but became sutor in Constantinople to the Empresse for her Husband to be restored to her. The Empresse, ever inclinable to assist distressed women, brought her to live with her Husband, much against his will: And Proje∣cta was married to John, the sonne of Pompey. Artabanes was wild at this misfortune; and that having done so great service to the Romans, they had not onely barred him from his betroathed Wife, but put him to lead his whole life with a woman that hated him; the greatest vexation which the soule of man can suffer. And so soon as the Empresse was dead, he pre∣sently sent away his Wife. Germanus also, the Emperours brothers sonne, had a Brother named Boraides; Who was lately dead, leaving his main estate to Germa∣nus and his sons, and to his own only daughter, so much only as law compelled. This daughter the Emperour protected, which troubled Germanus. There was also in Constantinople Arsaces, an Armenian of the race of the Ar∣sacides, and kindred of Artabanes. This man was taken lately in a manifest practise of Treason with Chosroes, King of Persia. The Emperour punished him onely with some few lashes upon his back, and made him ride through the City upon a Camel: taking nothing from him, nor so much as banishing him the Court. Yet was he dis∣contented
for what befell him, and he devised mischief against the Emperour and the State; finding likewise his Cozen Artabanes discontented, he provoked him more, surprizing him with cunning words, and chiding him. That he was grown a coward and effeminate in an unfit time. He was valiant to rescue others, and to pull down Tyrants, and had killed without any provocation Gentharis his freind, and feaster. But that now he lay still poorly and heartlesse; while his country lan∣guished under a perpetuall Garrison, and unusuall taxations, having lost his Father treacherously slain under colour of a Treaty, and having his kinsmen made slaves, and scattered through the whole Roman Empire. Yet Artabanes (quoth he) thinks it enough to have a Roman Generallship, and the bare title of a Consull, and me your kinsman you can behold suffering base things, without condoling with me; but I pitty noble Sir your own sufferings in both your wives, both her you have lost, and her you must live with. And surely there is no cause nei∣ther upon deliberation nor fear, that can discourage a man from killing Justinian, who sits, at midnight without his Guards, discoursing with some old Preists, and busie in endlesse scanning the Christians Oracles. None of his kinsmen will op∣pose you Germanus the most powerfull, and his Sons, young men inraged against Justinian, (I verily think) will joyn with you; that so the businesse will even do it self. For they have been more wronged by him then we, or any Armenian. Ar∣saces with such inchantments as these, finding Artabanes yeilding, imparted the mat∣ter to one Chanaranges; a Persarmenian, a handsome youth, but nothing serious; and having brought him and Artabanes together in the same resolution, he left them, promising to draw Germanus and his Sons into the plot. CHAP. XVII. JƲSTINƲS, the elder of them, was young (his beard newly sprouting) but valiant and sharp witted; and not long before was made Consull. Arsaces went to him, telling him, that he would willingly meet him in a certain Church. Being met, Arsaces prayed him to assure him by oath, that he would not re∣veal their conference to any but to his Father. When he had sworn accordingly, he fell to chide him. That being the Emperours neerest kinsman, and seeing Pettifog∣gers and common fellowes holding all the great offices, himself at these years would endure so long the affaires to be managed by mean men. That the Emperour did not only despise him, but even his Father, a man attained to the height of virtue; and suffred Justinian his Brother stil a privat man. That he could not get the estate of Boraides his Uncle, who had made him his heir by his will; but was deprived of the most part of it: and he would despise them more, so soon as Belisarius was re∣turned out of Italy, who was reported to be in the midst of Illirium. With such allega∣tions he incited Justinus, and discovered the conspiracy between him, Artabanes and Chanaranges. The young man was amazed and troubled to hear him, and plainly told him, that neither himself nor his Father could ever joyn in such an Action. Arsaces reported the successe to Artabanes, and Justinus acquainted his Father with the dis∣course, who communicated it to Marcellus, Captain of the Palatine Guards, and demanded his opinion if he should reveal it to the Emperour: Marcellus was a grave, austere man, of few words, an Enemy to jestings, and loose fashions, of a rigid life, and a stranger to all pleasures; but precisely just, and a zealous Lover of Truth. He would not have the matter revealed to the Emperour as yet. You (quoth he) to be the Informer, is not convenient. Upon your least private conference with the Emperour, Artabanes will suspect his plot to be discovered, and then Arsaces run∣ning away, you will remain without proofe. And my self never use to beleive any thing before punctually examining it, nor to report it to the Emperour. I would gladly hear the discourse my self, or that some of mine might hear the men speaking clearly in this subject. This advise Germanus bade his Son Justinus to put in Ex∣ecution: Who having so flatly denyed Arsaces, would not speak of it to him again; But he askt Chanaranges, if by the privity of Artabanes, Arsaces lately came to him. I durst not, quoth he, to such a man, open my self; but if you have any thing to say
in it, we will advise, and happily may do something. Chanaranges after conferring with Artabanes, told Justinus as much as Arsaces had done, and Justinus promised all he desired, and to draw in his Father. And a day was appointed for Germanus to conferr with Chanaranges, and Germanus entreated Marcellus for some confident of his to be an ear witnesse of Chanaranges. He sent Leontius who married the daugh∣ter of Athanasius, a right honest man, who would be sure to report the truth. Him Germanus placed in his dining roome behind the hangings, and himself with his Son Justinus staid in the roome, where Leontius heard Chanaranges plainly declaring the conspiracy between himself, Artabanes, and Arsaces. Then they fell to discourse, that if they should kill the Emperour while Belisarius was upon his way, their de∣sign would not succeed; for if they should make Germanus Emperour; it was like∣ly that Belisarius would come against them with an army, which he might levy in Thrace, and they should not be able to keep him off. It were better to defer the acti∣on till the coming of Belisarius, who being in Constantinople, and with the Empe∣rour in his Palace, they might enter at evening suddenly with their daggers, and kill Marcellus and Belisarius, together with the Emperour, and so manage their busi∣nesse as they pleased. Marcellus being hereof advertized by Leontius, yet forbare to report it to the Emperour, least with too much haste he might unadvisedly ruin Ar∣tabanes. But Germanus revealed it to Buzes and Constantianus, fearing, that which hapned, to be suspected for his delay. But Belisarius afterward being reported to be neer at hand, Marcellus revealed the Treason to the Emperour; who caused Artaba∣nes and his Complices to be committed to the common Prison, and to be examined by some principall Officers. The conspiracy being manifest, and reduced into wri∣ting, the Emperour summoned the Senate to the place within the Palace appointed for hearing causes. They, albeit they heard the plain confessions of the Prisoners, yet had involved Germanus, and Justinus in the crime; if the Testimonies of Marcel∣lus and Leontius had not cleered them: who deposed, and Buzes also and Constan∣tianus, that Germanus had hid nothing from them, but demeaned himself, as afore∣said. So that the Senat aquitted him and his Son, as having in nothing offended the State: But coming to the Emperours chamber, the Emperour stormed, and was much inflamed against Germanus, for his slownesse in the discovery; and two prin∣cipall Officers seconded his opinion to please him, and they seemed much offended with Germanus, and to kindle more the Emperours anger, being officious to ingra∣tiate themselves by other mens miseries. The rest stood amazed without a word speaking; yeilding, by not opposing. Marcellus only saved him by speaking truth, taking the blame upon himself, and urging vehemently, that Germanus discovered it to him timely, but himself searching more narrowly into it, revealed it with the latest. And thus he pacified the Emperour, and got a great fame for using his virtue in a time of so great need. Artabanes the Emperour removed from his office, and did him no other harm, nor any of the rest; they were restrained, but not dishono∣rably, nor in the common prison, but in the Palace. The Barbarians at this time were cleerly masters of all the West, and this Gothick war was now come to this, that the Romans who at first won all afore them, had now consumed their men and money to no purpose, had lost Italy, and stood looking up∣pon Illyrium and Thrace, shamefully wasted by Barbarians their next borderers. In the beginning of this war, the Goths gave to the Francks all Gallia, subject to them, being not able to fight with both, as I have said. This the Romans hindred not, but Justinian confirmed the Gift, that he might not be crost by a war from these Bar∣barians; nor would the Francks have thought their possession sure, if the Empe∣rour had not put his Seal to the Act. Hereupon the Kings of the Francks got Mar∣seilles, a colony of the Phocaeans, and all the Sea townes, and were Masters of that Sea: And now they sit in Arles, beholding the horse races there, they coyn Gold Staters out of the Gold mines in Gaule, not with the stamp of the Roman Empe∣rour (as the custome is) but with their own Images. The King of Persia coynes silver monies as he pleases, but it is not lawfull for him, nor any King of Barbarians to put his own stamp upon a Gold Stater, though he be a greater Master of Gold; for such money they cannot put away, though they trade with Barbarian Merchants. But the Francks seeing Totilas prevaile, seized the most part of Venetia; the Ro∣mans had no power to resist, nor the Goths to make war upon both.
CHAP. XƲIII. THE Gepaedes also took Syrmium, and almost all Dacia, so soon as Justinian had taken them from the Goths; making the Romans their Captives, and go∣ing still onward spoyling the Roman Provinces; so that the Emperour paid them no more the Pensions they anciently received of the Romans. To the Lom∣bards also he gave the City of Noricum, and the strong places in Pannonia, and o∣ther Townes, and great sums of Money, who thereupon left their own Country, and planted by the River Ister neer unto the Gepaedes: and pillaged likewise Dal∣matia, and Illyrium, to Epidamnus; leading the People Captive: of whom if any chanced to run away, and get home, these Lombards being in league with us, free∣ly ranging in the Roman Provinces, and discovering any of these Fugitives, laid hold of them as their Slaves, and haling them from their Parents, led them back with them without any opposition. The Herulians also had given them by the Emperour places in Dacia, neer the City of Singidon where now they inhabit, and from thence over-run and spoile Illyrium and Thrace: Some of them turned Ro∣man Souldiers, and were rancked with the Confederates. And these Herulian Am∣bassadours, when they come to Constantinople, receive their full Pensions, without much attendance, notwithstanding they ransack dayly the Roman Subjects. And thus all these Barbarians shared among them the spoile of the Empire. Not long after the Gepaedes, and Lombards, being Neighbours, became Enemies, and a day was appointed for a pitch-field between them. The Lombards inferiour in numbers, and holding themselves to be over-matcht, resolved to invite the Ro∣mans to aide them in the Battell; the Gepaedes also having truce with us, were de∣sirous the Romans would joyne with them, or stand neutrall: And both of them sent Ambassadours to Justinian for aide. Thorisin was then Prince of the Gepaedes, and Audouin of the Lombards. The Emperour heard their Propositions, not toge∣ther, but severally. The Lombards having first accesse, spake thus. Great Emperour, we are amazed at the impertinency of these Gepaedes; who having acted so many great wrongs upon your Dominions, come here to offer the foulest scorne that can be, in thinking you easie to be deceived, and so coming to make use of your simplicity. But we desire you Sir, to consider their inten∣tions in this friendship; so will you deale the more securely for your Empire, and judge more safely of the Future by what is past. If their ingratitude had been shewn only to other Nations, you might expect from us long discourses, and for∣reigne testimonies to convince them thereof. But you have the experiment now even in your own selves. The Goths formerly held all Dacia tributary, whom the Gepaedes dwelling on the further side of the Ister so feared, that they never durst attempt to passe over the River. But being in truce with the Romans, and their great Friends, and in that Title receiving large yearly Pensions, as well from former Emperours, as your selfe; what Services have they done you for the same? They can alledge not one. When they knew not how to wrong you, their disa∣bility, not good intent, kept them quiet. Beyond the Ister you would not med∣dle, and from this side the feare of the Goths restrained them. And can disability be called gratitude, or good nature? Can a firm Friend be known, while he wants power to transgresse? No Sir, It is a mans power only that expresses his nature and intentions, good or bad; his ability to do what he list, laying his disposition to the publick view. For these Gepaedes no sooner saw the Goths gone out of Da∣cia, and you busie with your Enemies, but the wicked wretches intruded every where upon your territories. Their basenesse herein what words can expresse? Have they not despised the Roman Empire? broken the sacred Lawes of Truces, put scornes upon their Benefactors, and violated that Empire, whose Slaves they would be proud to be, if you had any leisure for them. They hold Syrmium, and vaunt all Dacia to be theirs; in what War having been ever victorious, ei∣ther for you, with you, or against you? or of what Battell having made that Province the prize? Nay, being ancient Mercenaries, and receiving your Mo∣nies, as hath been said. Then, a more lewd proceeding then this Ambassage of
theirs was never. Now when they see us quarrelling with them, they have the face to come to Constantinople, and to the Emperours presence, whom they have so much abused; and peradventure in their aboundant impudence will intreat your aide against us, who have shewed our selves so affectionate to you. If they come to restore what they have unjustly intruded into, you must impute it to the Lombards, the chiefe Causers of their repentance; a constrained feare of whom, hath put on them this form of gratitude: And if you receive the benefit, you must thank those who made the doing it necessary. But if now neither they will part with what belongs not to them, what an excesse of ill nature is this? Let this suffice, O Emperour, to be spoken in a Barbarian simplicity, with words not reaching the matter. And do you, Sir, weigh well, what hath been uttered more scantly then the occasion requires; and do that which may be best for the Ro∣mans, and your own Lombards; considering also, that you shall do well to joyne with us, who are of the same Orthodoxall Religion; and to oppose these, being Arians. The Lombards so spake, and the next day the Gepaedes Ambassadours were brought to the Emperour, and said in this manner. It is right and fit, O Emperour, for men demanding aides, first to shew, that they ask things reason∣able and just, and good for those who are to aide them, and so to speak what concernes their Ambassage. It is plain therefore, that we are wronged by the Lombards, in that we have endeavoured to end our differences in a course of justice; and we striving to have a legall way, cannot be said to use violence. And that the Gepaedes exceed the Lombards in multitude and goodnesse of men, what need many words to them that know it? And we think no wise man will run into evident danger, by siding with the weaker, when he may get a Victory by joyning with the stronger. The Gepaedes moreover will assist you against your E∣nemies, upon obligation of gratitude for what you now shall do for them, and with the greatnesse of their power are likely to make you Masters of your Foes. Consider also, that the Lombards are but lately in amity with you; but the Gepae∣des are of your ancient acquaintance and allyance; and Friend-ship grown with time is not easily dissolved. It is good for you therefore to make us your Confe∣derates, being both powerfull, and firm to you. These just reasons may draw you to this Confederacy; but see the dispositions of these Lombards. Being intreated to end the quarrell legally, by no meanes they will consent, out of a groundlesse over-weening. But the War being ready for a Battell, now they shrink, being conscious of their own weaknesse, and fly to you, importuning you without rea∣son to fight for them. And these Theeves alledge, to provoke you to a War, our holding Syrmium, and some other places in Dacia: Whereas in your Empire are so many Cities and Countries, that you seek for men upon whom to bestow some of them to dwell in. To the Francks, to the Herulians, and these Lombards you have given so many Townes and proportions of Land, that they cannot be numbred. And we being bold in your Friend-ship and Favour, have done what your selfe would have to be done. And whosoever hath a mind to part with a thing, esteemes him the worthier man, who from a free Spirit is aforehand, and of himselfe takes the benefit, them him that gets it as a courtesie; if the Giver set the valuation of the thing so, as not to insult upon the Receiver; but as being bold upon him, as of an assured Friend: Which is the case of the Gepaedes with the Romans. And which you taking into consideration, we desire you in the first place to joyn your powers to ours against the Lombards, according to the Leagues with us; and if not, to stand neutrall. By thus advising you shall do justly, and expediently for the Roman Empire.
CHAP. XIX. BUT Justinian after a long consultation herein, dismist the Gepaedes with a refusall, and swore a League with the Lombards; And he sent them 10000. Horse under Constantianus, Buzes and Aratius, assisted by John lately come out of Italy, who by the Emperours direction was to return into Italy with his Troops, so soon as the Battell with the Gepaedes was fought. There were also with them 1500. Herulians, commanded by Philimuth and others. The rest of the Herulian Forces being 3000. and lately revolted from the Romans (as I have said formerly) were on the part of the Gepaedes. Some of these led by Aordus their Princes Brother, a party of the Romans marching to the aide of the Lombards met, routed them, and killed Aordus, and many more. But the Gepaedes understanding the Roman Army to be neer, compounded the quarrell with the Lombards, and a Truce was concluded without the Romans; who being thereof advertised, were troubled, being not able to go on, nor to return back: and they feared least the Gepaedes and Herulians should make a joynt in-road into Illyrium, and spoile it. So they lay still, and advertised the Emperour. Thus much by way of digression, con∣cerning these ocurrents. But Belisarius was now returning to Constantinople, with no honour. In five yeares space he never marcht up into the land of Italy, made no expedition, but was all the while in a perpetuall flight, sailing from one strong Sea-Town to ano∣ther, which gave the Enemy meanes to captivate Rome, and all the rest. He abandon∣ed Perusia, the chiefe City of Tuscany, which was taken by assault while he was in his way home. Being come to Constantinople, and now grown extream rich, and much respected for his former Victories, he made his continuall aboad there. Be∣fore his Voyage into Africa, God gave him a cleer presage of his good Fortunes. He had Land in Panteichion, the Suburb of Constantinople, right over against the City; where immediately before his expedition against Gelimer, and Africk, his Vines were very full taken, and many Vessels were silled with the Wine thereof, which had their bottomes buried in the ground, and their tops fast closed with Clay in the Wine-Cellar. Eight months after the Wine workt out of the Vessels, forcing out the Clay, and made the Cellar a puddle. The Servants wondred at it, filled many Flaggons with it, and stopped up the Vessels again, and concealed the Accident. But the same happening often, they acquainted their Master with it; and he shewed it to divers of his Friends, who divined from thence much happi∣nesse to be coming to his House. This thus happened to Belisarius. But now Vigi∣lius, Bishop of Rome, and the Italians at Court being many, and of good quality, besought the Emperour to vindicate Italy with all his power. Above all Gothigus pressed him, being a Patrician, and late Consull, and newly arrived at Constanti∣nople for this purpose. The Emperour promised to take care of Italy, but he spent the most of his time about the Christians Controversies, endeavouring to settle the same. During this War Ildiges, a Lombard, came with forces as far as to Venetia, upon this occasion. Vaces, late Prince of the Lombards, had Risiulphus his Brothers Son, who by the Law was to succeed him; but Vaces plotting the Succession for his own Son, charged Risiulphus with some groundlesse Crime, and banished him. Risiulphus fled to the Varnians, leaving two Sons behind him: These Barbarians Vaces hired to kill Risiulpus; and one of his two Sons dyed: but Ildeges, the other, fled to the Slavonians. Not long after Vaces dyed, and the Government came to Valdarus, his Son; who being a Child, Audovin was made his Protector, and attain∣ing thereby to great power, he got the absolute Government to himselfe: And shortly after the Child dyed. When the Lombards and Gepaedes were in War, Ildi∣ges brought to the Gepaedes such Lombards as followed him; and many Slavoni∣ans, hoping that the Gepaedes would restore him to the Government. But when the Truce was made, Audouin demanded Ildiges of the Gepaedes, now his Friends. They would not betray him, but they bad him be gone, and save himselfe. He with his own followers and some few Gepaedes went again to the Slavonians, and from thence marcht towards Totilas with about 6000. men; And in Venetia meeting
Romans led by Lazarus, he killed many of them; yet would not joyn with the Goths, but passed the Ister again, and retired to the Slavonians. About the same time also Ilauf, one of the Life-guard to Belisarius, and Valiant, being left in Italy, revolted to Totilas, who sent him immediately with a Navie, and Forces into Dal∣matia. He at Monecurus, a Town upon the Sea neer Salonae, at first was familiar with the Townes-men, as a Roman, and appertaining to Belisarius: But suddenly he put them all to the Sword, and sackt the Town. The like he did at Laureata, a Castle upon the Sea Coast. Claudianus, Governour of Salonae, sent Forces against him in Pinnaces; who at Laureata fought with the Enemy, and had the worse, ran away, and left their Pinnaces in the Haven; which Ilauf took, together with other Ships laden with Corn and Provisions; and having killed and spoiled all they found, he returned to Totilas: When the Winter ended, and the 14. yeare of this War, written by Procopius. Afterward Totilas with his whole Army besieged Rome,Incipit Annus 15. bell. Goth. in ann. 23. Ju∣stiniani & An. Dom. 549. where Belisarius had left three thousand of his best men under Diogenes, one of his Lifeguard, a discreet man, and a good Souldier. And the siege lasted long; the besieged with the advan∣tage of their valour matching the whole Goths Army: Diogenes also diligently at∣tending his Guards, and by sowing corne within the Walls, preventing want of Victuall; and valiantly repelling the many assaults of the Goths, who being masters of Portus, absolutely blockt up Rome. Justinian also (Belisarius being returned to Constantinople) intended to send another Generall with an Army; which if he had done, he had certainly vanquisht the Goths; Rome being in his obedience, and ha∣ving an Army there to joyne with his Succours from Constantinople. First he com∣manded Liberius, a Patrician, to be in readinesse; then other businesse intervening, he grew cold. After a long time spent in the siege of Rome, some Isaurians, who guarded Saint Pauls Gate, discontented for want of pay for many yeares, and see∣ing the advancement of their Countreymen, who formerly betrayed Rome to the Goths, and the wealth they had gotten, came to a secret conference with Totilas, and agreed at a day assigned to betray the City to him. At the day Totilas launched into the Tiber, about the first watch of the night, two small Vessells with Trumpet∣ters aboard; whom he directed, having rowed up neer the City walls, to sound their Trumpets. Himselfe closely put his Army in readinesse neer unto Saint Pauls Gate; and to prevent the Romans slipping away to Centumcellae (the onely For∣tresse they had left thereabout) he layd ambushes upon the way, to cut them off as they fled. CHAP. XX. THEY in the small Vessells being come neer to Rome, sounded their Trum∣pets, as they were directed: wherewith the Romans amazed, suddenly in feare and tumult left each man his Guard, and ran to succour there, where they suspected the Enemy would assault. Onely the Isaurian Traytors con∣tinued upon their Guard, opened the Gate, and received in the Enemy. Much slaughter there was; & many ran out at other Gates, and in their way to Centum∣cellae fell upon the Enemies ambushes, and were cut in peices. Some few hardly es∣caped; and Diogenes himselfe, after receiving a hurt. Paulus a Cilician, who had at first commanded Belisarius his Retinue, and now commanded a Party of Horse, had the guarding of Rome committed to him with Diogenes; and the City being taken, ran with four hundred Horse to Adrians Tombe, and possest the Bridge leading to Saint Peters Church. The Goths Army at break of day gave on upon these men; whom the Romans sustained, had the better, and killed many, being crowded in a narrow place. Totilas hereupon stayd the fight, and besieged them, thinking to take them by Famine. Paul and his four hundred endured that day, and all night without eating. The next day they thought of feeding on their Horses, but being loath to meddle with such uncouth food (though much pincht with hunger) late in the evening they fell to debate it, and exhorted one another valiantly rather to
end their lives by an honourable death; charging the Enemy suddenly, and killing as many as they could: So they imbraced and kissed one another, as being instantly all to perish. Totilas was affraid of men resolute to dye, least dispairing of their owne safety, they might do some desperate mischeife; and he sent to them, of two Propositions to chuse, either to quit their Horses and Armes, and to sweare never more to serve against the Goths, and so to returne to Constantinople; or keeping what they had, to serve with the Goths in equall condition. The Romans glad of the Proposition, at first chose to go to Constantinople; but afterward, as ashamed to march away on foot, and unarmed, and fearing to be cut off by ambushes in their way, murmuring also for their many yeares arreares owing to them by the Roman Treasury, they joyned with the Goths Army. Paul onely, and one Mindes, an I∣saurian, besought Totilas to send them to Constantinople, having Wives and Chil∣dren in their Countreys, without whom they could not live. Whom Totilas com∣mended for dealing plainely, and gave them provision for their journey, and a Con∣voy. The rest of the Army being in Churches about three hundred, took assu∣rances and yeilded to Totilas. Who would not now demolish any more of Rome, nor quit it, but intended to plant there Goths and Romans together, both Senators and others, upon this occasion. He had lately demanded of the King of the Francks his Daughter in marriage; who rejected the motion, saying, That he neither was, nor ever would be King of Italy, having taken Rome, but not able to keep it, ha∣ving demolished part, and quitted the rest to his Enemies. So that now he brought in Provisions, and commanded to re-edifie what was beaten downe at his first taking of Rome. And he sent for the Roman Senators, and other Romans confined in Campania; held the solemnity of the Circensian Games, and then prepared for a Voyage into Sicily: He put in readinesse four hundred small Vessels for a Sea-fight, and many great Ships sent out of the East by the Emperour, and taken by him with their men and ladings. He sent also Stephanus a Roman his Ambassador to the Em∣perour, desiring Truce, upon condition, that the Goths should serve him against a∣ny other Nation. But Justinian suffered not the Ambassadour to come into his presence, nor regarded the Proposition: Which Totilas understanding, prepared first to attempt Centumcellae, and then to go into Sicily. Diogenes commanded the Garrison there, being reasonably strong. The Goths besieged it, and Totilas sent to Diogenes, either to put it to a Battell instantly, there being no hope of suc∣cours from the Emperour; of whose disability to continue War with the Goths, the successe at Rome, after so long space given, was a sufficient Argument; or else to chuse either to joyn with the Goths Army upon equall tearmes, or to quit Cen∣tumcellae, and to go safe to Constantinople. Diogenes and the Romans refused the Battell, neither would mingle with the Goths Army, nor live without their Wives and Children; And chusing to be sent to the Emperour, they said, they had yet no honest excuse to surrender the Town; and therefore desired time to signifie their Estate to the Emperour, that receiving no succour from him, they might ren∣der the Town, and be gone, not without some pretence. Totilas approving this, a day was assigned, and 30. Hostages were given on both sides; and the Goths rais∣ed the Siege and went for Sicily. Before they passed the straits there, they attempt∣ed Rhegium, where the Garrison was commanded by Thurimuth and Himerius, left by Belisarius; who having many good men within, kept off the Enemy as∣saulting, and sallying had the better; but being inferiour in numbers, they after∣ward lay still. Totilas blockt up the Town with part of his Army, hoping in time to take it for want of Victuall. He sent also Forces, who took the Castle of Ta∣rentum: And at the same time the Goths in Picenia had Ariminum betrayed to them. Justinias hereof advertised, made Germanus his Brothers Son, absolute Ge∣nerall in the Warre against the Goths, commanding him to be in readinesse. The Goths in Italy were much troubled at the report of it, (Germanus being very fa∣mous in the World.) And the Romans, especially the Army, getting hart and hope, held out more firmly against their toiles and dangers. But the Emperour (I know not why) changed his mind, and appointed Liberius a Citizen of Rome for the Ser∣vice; who made himselfe ready, add was expected instantly to saile away with the Army. But the Emperour changed again, so that he too staid at home. Then also Verus having gotten together many of the valiantest Souldiers, had a Battell with
the Goths in Picenia, not far from Ravenna; wherein after the losse of many, and do∣ing valiantly, himself was slaine. CHAP. XXI. ABOUT this time a party of some three thousand Slavonians came over the River Ister, none opposing them, and past the river of Eurus: then they severed eighteen hundred in one party, and the rest in another. The Roman commanders in Illyrium, and Thrace fought with them severally, and were beaten, with losse of some men, the rest shamefully running away, though the Bar∣barians were far the fewer. They incountred also Asbades, who had been of the Empe∣rours Life-Guard, and advanced to the place of a Candidate, and who comman∣ded now troops of horse anciently Garrison'd in Tzurulum, a Castle of Thrace, good men. Him the Slavonians defeated, and killed most of his men shamefully running away: They took him prisoner, and soon after cut thongs from the skin of his back, and threw him into a flame of fire: Then without controule they pilla∣ged all Thrace, and Illyrium, and took many castles, having never before assaul∣ted a wall, nor presumed to come to an open feild. They never durst before this time forrage the Roman Territory, nor ever past the Ister before. But after their victory against Asbades, they pillaged all to the Sea, and took Topirum, the first Sea Town of Thrace, by assault, having a Garrison in it, being distant twelve dayes journey from Constantinople. They took it thus. The most of them hid themselves in the fastnesses neer the Town; and some few alarm'd the Romans upon the battlements; who thinking them no more then they saw, sallied: The Barbarians seemed afraid, and ran away; and the Romans being far from the Walls, the Ambushes rose, and put themselves between them and the Town: and the flyers turning head, the Romans were charged on all sides, and all cut in peices. The inhabitants deprived of the Souldiers, yet resisted the Enemies assault, as they could, powring down boyling oyl and pitch, and throwing down great stones, that they had almost beat off the danger: But the Barbarians with a multitude of arrowes forced them from the battlements, and with their scaling ladders took the City by assault. They killed fifteen thousand men in it, and sackt it. The women and children they made slaves, having formerly spared no age nor sex but killing still all they met from the time they entred Roman Land. So that all Thrace and Illyrium was scattered with dead bodies unburied; they killed not the people with Swords nor Lances, nor in any usuall manner; but they pitcht stakes into the Ground with sharp ends upward, and set the poor wretches upon the same at their fundaments; then forced them downwards, and the stakes up into their Entrailes. They stuck in∣to the Ground also four posts, to which they tied their prisoners hands and feet then knockt their heads with clubs, and killed them like so many Dogs, or Snakes. Others they shut up in houses with such cattell as they could not drive home into their coun∣try, and without mercy burned them together. In the end, being drunck with abun∣dance of bloud, both the parties of these Slavonians were pleased to make prisoners of those they met, and so returned home with innumerable captives. In the mean time the Goths assaulting Rhegium, were bravely beaten off by the Garrison, Thurimuth doing very valiantly. Totilas understanding that their victuall grew scarce, left part of his army to block it from provisions, and so to compell the Garrison to yeild in time; and himselfe crost the straits into Sicily, and set upon Messina. Domentiolus the commander, sisters Son to Buzes, sallied, and had not the worse in fight; but afterward kept themselves quiet within the walls, and the Goths plundred all Sicily, none resisting them. In the mean time Thurimuth and Himerius in Rhegium, (when their victuall was all gone) yeilded themselves and the Castle by composition to the Enemy. The Emperour, at the newes of these successes, ga∣ther'd a fleet, & put an army aboard of foot, under Liberius, whom he required to sail with speed for Sicily, and to save the Island. But Liberius being an extream old man, and no souldier, the Emperour repented, and sent Artabanes for Sicily, remitting his crimes, and making him Generall of Thrace. He gave him no great forces, but
directed him to command the fleet with Liberius.Magistrum mi∣litum pei Thaciam, An ordnary officer: his imployment now was for the time only. Afterward he sent to call home Liberius, and again made his Nephew Germanus absolute Generall against the Goths, giving him no great army; but furnishing mony for him to raise an Army of good importance in Thrace and Illyrium, and from thence to march into Italy. He commanded Philimuth, Leader of the Herulians, to accompany him into Italy, and John, Vitalianus his Nephew, who had married the daughter of Germanus, and was Generall of Illyrium, where then he resided. Germanus was ambitious to get the honour of vanquishing, the Goths and the good fortune to recover both Affrick and Italy to the Empire. In Africa where Stotzas had usurped, he overcame him and the mutiners unexpectedly, and reduced the Province as it is in my former relations. And Italy being now redu∣ced to the Estate I have described, he desired the Glory of recovering that also. His wife Passara being long since deceased, he married Mattasuntha, Daughter of Amalasuntha, the daughter of Theoderick, her former husband Vitigis being late∣ly dead. He hoped that the Goths would be ashamed to lift their armes against this Lady, remembring the Reignes of Theoderick and Atalarick. Moreover freely dis∣bursing the Emperours mony, and his own more, he levied quickly, and unexpected∣ly a very gallant army. The best Roman Souldiers left their ordinary commanders (whose Lanciers and Targettiers they were) and followed Germanus; together with many Constantinopolitans, Thracians, and Illyrians; wherein Justinus and Ju∣stinianus his Sons used much care and diligence. He pickt the best out of the horse Troops, garrison'd in Thrace, and many Barbarians about the Ister were drawn by the same of Germanus, and brought much mony with them, and joyned with the Roman army. The Prince of the Lombards promised to send him a thousand men well armed. Report as in all human things, made all this in Italy much more, and the Goths were afraid, and troubled withall to make war now against the posterity of Theoderick: And the Roman souldiers there, sent to signifie to Germanus, that so soon as they saw him in Italy, and his army intrenched, they would immediatly joine with him. The remainder also of the Emperours army in Ravenna, and some other Towns, took courage, and resolved to guard their Towns firmly for the Emperour. Nay, those who had been beaten with Verus and others, and went now stragling, hearing that Germanus was upon his way, they rallied themselves in Istria, and staid for the said army. Totilas then at the day assigned, sent to Diogenes to surrender Centumcellae, according to the capitulation. Diogenes answered that he had no pow∣er now, Germanus being declared absolute Generall, and not far off with his army; and he desired him to send him his hostages, and he would restore those given by the Goths, and so he dismist the messenger, and carefully guarded the town, expecting Germanus and his army. And thus the winter ended, & the 15 year of this war, written by Procopius. While Germanus was drawing his army together, and exercising his Troops at Sardice,Incipit annus 16 bell. Goth. in an. 24 Ju∣niani & ann. dom. 550. a City in Illyrium, and making a powerfull preparation for this warr, a Troop of Slavonians, greater then ever formerly, past the Ister into the Roman ter∣ritory, and came to Naysum: The Romans took some few straglers of them, bound them, and askt them upon what design these Slavonians were come over the River? They said it was to sack Thessalonica, and the Towns about it. The Emperour upon this advertizement, wrote to Germanus to defer his Journy into Italy, and to de∣fend Thessalonica, and to beat away the Slavonians; who grew afraid when they heard from their prisoners that Germanus upon this staid still at Sardice, whose fame was great among all the Barbarians upon this occasion. During the Raign of Justine, his great Uncle, the Antians, who inhabite next unto the Slavonians, past the Ister, and invaded the Roman territories with a great army. Germanus was lately made Generall of Thrace, and in a battell with these Enemies killed them almost all, which got him a great reputation, especially among these people. So that fearing him now, and supposing him to have a very great army, as being sent against the Goths, they forbare their intents against Thessalonica, and went over the mountaines of Illyrium into Dalmatia, not daring to appear in the Champian. And Germanus despising them, directed his army to be in readinesse, within three daies, to begin the journy into Italy; but he suddenly fell into a sicknesse, which made an end of him. And so was Germanus quickly lost; a vertuous man and very valiant; both an excel∣lent,
Generall, and a daring Souldier. In peace and prosperity a constant observer of Lawes and good Government: He was a most upright Judge, and to men in need he lent great Sums, without so much as talking of any Interest. In the Pa∣lace and in the Forum severe and stern, but at home and at his Table pleasant, free, and gracious, where he had power: he prevented the Errours and innovations of the Emperours Court: And he never consented nor conversed with the muti∣nous Veneti, and Prasini, Constantinople, though many great men ran into that absurdity. The Emperour was much grieved at this sudden. Accident, and com∣manded John Vitalianus his Sisters Son, with Justinianus, one of the Sons of Germa∣nus, to lead the Army into Italy. They went into Dalmatia, meaning to winter at Salonae, it being not possible in that season to compasse the Jonian Gulfe into Italy; and they wanted Ships to crosse it. CHAP. XXII. LIBERIƲS, who heard nothing of these alterations, put in at Syracuse, besieged by the Enemy. He forced his way into the Haven, and put his Ar∣my into the City. Artabanes also at Cephalenia, hearing how the Fleet with Liberius was gone for Sicily, crost the Adriatique Sea thither-ward; and neer the Coast of Calabria, met with a great storm full in his teeth, which so scat∣tered the Fleet, that he thought most of his Ships to be cast upon that Coast, and in the hands of the Enemy. But a strong gale turn'd them back into Peloponesus, and some were cast away, others escaped. The Ship wherein Artabanes was, lost her main Mast, and being abandoned to the Tide, and Waves, and in much danger, put in at the Island of Malta, and by this meanes he was unexpectedly preserved. But Liberius being not in case to sally, nor fight with the Enemy, and the Victuall in Syracuse failing, stole from thence into Panormus. Totilas in the mean time ransackt all Sicily, carryed away great quantities of Corn, Horses, and Cattell, and putting the same aboard his Ships, and the whole wealth of the Island, return∣ed suddainly into Italy upon this motive. He had made one Spinus of Spoletum his Assessor, who residing in Catana, an unfortified Town, was taken by the Romans. Totilas desirous to ransome him, offer'd for him an eminent Roman Lady; but they refused to take a woman in exchange for a man, holding the Dignity of Quaestor. Spinus, fearing to perish among the Romans, promised them for his liberty to per∣swade Totilas to leave Sicily, and to transport his Army into Italy. They upon his Oath for true performance, restored him to the Goths, and accepted of the Lady. He being come to Totilas, said; That the Goths further stay in Sicily was to no purpose, having already pillaged the Island: That he understood for certain a∣mong the Enemy, that Germanus was dead; and that John his Son-in-Law, and Justinianus his Son were in Dalmatia with the Army, levied by Germanus, and immediately to come into Liguria, who might take all the Goths Wives and Children Prisoners, and pillage their Goods; whom they should do well to op∣pose, by wintring securely at home, and if they vanquish them, they shall with more ease fall again in the next Spring upon Sicily, not expecting hostility.Totilas upon this advise left Garrisons in foure strong Townes, and past into Italy with all his Booty. John and the Emperours Army meant to winter at Salonae, and from thence with the first of the Spring to march by Land to Ravenna. But the Slavonians, both those who formerly forraged the Empire, and others, spoyled again with full li∣berty the Provinces. Some suspected Totilas to have hired them, to divert the Em∣perour with new businesse from putting the Gothick War into a better order. But whether to gratifie Totilas, or otherwise, certainly these Slavonians did desperate mischiefes in Europe, dividing themselves into three parties, & not sacking Townes, but wintring in them, as in some Province of their own, and fearing no Enemy. The Emperour sent at last an Army against them, under Constantianus, Aratius, Nazares, and Justinus the Son of Germanus, and John Phagas, and other Cap∣taines; & made Scholasticus an Eunuch of his Palace, Commander in chiefe. This
Army met one of the Barbarian parties about Adrianopolis in the mid-land of Thrace, five daies journey from Constantinople. The Barbarians being clogg'd with an innumerable booty of men, Cattell; and other Wealth, durst not come on; And the Romans, though eager to fight, dissembled it. The Slavonians were en∣camped up on a Mountain, and the Romans in the plain; who there besieged them; till the Souldiers murmuring at their Generals, that they had plenty of Provisions themselves, while the Common Souldier wanted Food, and so they de∣layed to fight with the Enemy; the Generals were constrained to come to a fight: which was hotly fought; But the Romans were beaten, and many of their best men slain; and the Generalls escaped narrowly with the rest. The Ensigne of Constan∣tianus the Slavonians took. And now despising the Roman Army, they went on, and forraged the Province called Astica, or Suburbuna, which was never forraged before; So that they found great Booty in it. They pillaged in many places of the Country, and came up to the Long walls, a daies journey from Constantinople. But the Romans fought afterwards with part of them, routed them, and after much slaughter rescued great numbers of Roman Captives, and recover'd the Ensigne of Constantianus. The rest with the remainder of their Booty went home-ward. Finis Lib. 3. Bell. Goth.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH BOOKE OF THE GOTHICK WARRE. Chap. I. THIS Booke is a supplement of the former History. Pontus Euxinus. Honey bitter in Trapesond. The River Boas takes the name of Acampsis in the Sea. Absarus, or Ap∣syrtus, Christians. Scunia, Suania The Phasis: Jason's fleece. Chap. II. Mount Caucasus. The Hunnes about it. The Alans. Portae Caspiae. No Ama∣zons, but Hunnish wives, accompanying their husbands to war. The Abas∣gians cruell covetous Kings; they turne Christians. The Bruchians, Zecchians, Sagines. Sebastopolis, and Pityuntium demolished. Gothi Tetraxitae anciently Christians: Justinian sends them a Bishop, as to the Abasgians. Their first Issue upon the Empire by occasion of hun∣ting a stagg. Chap. III. The Caturgurian Hunnes joyne with the Goths called Tetraxites, to infest the Empire. The description from the Cimmerian straits to the mouth of the River Ister. Phasis, not Tanais, divides Europe and Asia. The Lake of Maeotis not the Mother of the Euxine Sea.
Chap. IV. Cosroes desires to have Lazica, from thence to invade the Romans of Eu∣rope by land. A battell in Lazica, where Dagisthaeus defeats the Persian army, with the death of Chorsanes their Cenerall. Chap. V. The revolt of the Abasgians, Bessas is made Generall of Armenia. Sends John Guzes against the Abasgians; who subdues them, Apsilia revolts, and is reduced by John Guzes. Chap. VI. Anatozadus punisht by Chosroes his Father with deformity. Tribunus an honest Phifytian. Isdigunas the proud Persian is again sent Ambassador. The siege of Petra: And of the leather Rammes devised by Sabirian Hunnes. Chap. VII. Petra is taken by the valour and counsell of Bessas, and John Guzes, and by an accident of fire. The obstinate valour of the Persians in the Cittadell, where all are consumed. Bessas by this recovers his lost Reputation at Rome. Chap. VIII. Mermeroes seizes upon Lazica with an army, through the negligence and A∣varice of Bessas. He frights away a Roman army, and sits down before Ar∣chaeopolis: The Romans are perswaded by their Commanders to sally. Chap. IX. The Romans by a brave sally beat the Persians from Archaeopolis, and kill 4000 men. The Castle of Ctaesis. Justinian buyes another five years peace by making the Romans in a manner Tributaries. Isdigunas, the Persian Am∣bassador, hath excessive presents. Extraordinary heats in the Winter. Chap. X. Uchimerium is betrayed to Mermeroes, whe is absolute Master of the Feild; and invites Gubazes to yeild, who refuses. Silk Worms are brought first by Monks out of India in their Bags. Mermeroes is re-inforced in Lazica, but does nothing. Chap. XI. Africa quiet. A Panick feare makes a Truce between the Gepaedes and Lombards. Caturgurian Hunnes invade the Empire; And the Utur∣gurians their Country, which drawes them home; and some of them are planted in the Empire, which the Uturgurians take ill.
Chap. XII. Of the Brittians, and Varnians, who were vanquisht in Fight, and their King taken Prisoner by a valiant Maid, whom he married. A Fable of the transporting Soules into Brittia. I suppose this Brittia to be that penin∣sule of Cimbrica Chersonesus, where the Angles did inhabit before their invading Brittany. Chap. XIII. Narses is made Generall against the Goths, which was presaged by an Oxe. Totilas repents his defacing Rome. Of the Ship of Aenaeas, then a Monument in Rome. Corcyra is Phaeacia. The Ship of Ulisses, and that placed by Agamemnon at Geraestum. Chap. XIV. The Goths plunder Corcyra, and Epirus. The Sea-fight at Ancona, and Victory of John. Sicily is recovered by Artabanes. Justinian will heare of no accord with the Goths. Chap. XV. Theobald, the Son of Theodebert, King of the Francks, will not abandon the Goths. The Goths take Corsica, and Sardinia. The Slavonians spoile the Empire. Justinian hath a double treatie with the Lombards, and Gepaedes. Chap. XVI. Great Earthquakes in Greece. The Siege of Crotona is raised. Narses marches from Salonae into Italy, and comes to Ravenna His gallant Army, and his owne Virtue is described. The Fancks refuse his Army pas∣sage through Venetia; so he resolves to march by the Italian Coast, having Boats to make Bridges for his men to passe. Chap. XVII. A Digression of Ildigisal a Lombard, basely murthered, where they fled for refuge. Usdrilas, after his bragging Letter, is slain; and Narses passes the River at Ariminum, to meet Totilas. Chap. XVIII. The Armies of Totilas and Narses meet. Gallant Service done by 50. Ro∣mans, defending a Hill. The Captaines make Speeches to their Souldiers, and order the Battell. Chap. XIX. Cocas is slain in Duell by a Roman. Totilas after some Gllantry, to spin out the ime (his 2000. men he staid for, being come up) baegins the fight, wherein the Goths are defeated, and Totilas slain.
Chap. XX. The Lombards are sent home. Teias is made King of the Goths. The Vengeance against Ulithus at Perusia. Rome taken by Dagistthaeus. The Victory of Narses banefull to the Roman Citizens. Ragnaris breaks his Faith concerning the yeilding of Tarentum, and is overthrown by Bacurius. Portus, Nepa, Petra-pertusa taken in. The Francks will joyne with neither side. Chap. XXI. The Armies prepare to fight. Of mount Vesuvius, and the torrent of fire there. The Goths flye to Mons Lactis: but being from thence starved, they give Battell, which lasted two whole daies. The miraculous Valour of Teias, who is slaine. And the Goths compounded for their Lives, and Goods, and to quit Italy.
THE HISTORY OF THE WARRS of the Emperour JUSTINIAN. Of the GOTHJCK VVarre, the Fourth BOOK: CHAP. I. MY discourse hath hitherto been distributed and accommoda∣ted to the severall places where the actions were done, and is publisht throughout the whole Roman Empire. But now I cannot compile the same in that manner, nor insert into a History already publisht succeeding Occurrents; but must write in this Tract apart, touching these Enemies, and the Persians, what hath happened since the Edition of my Histo∣ry; and so the discourse thereof cannot be but mixt. The Occurrents untill the fourth yeare of the Quinquenniall Cessation between the Romans and the Persians, were formerly related. The yeare following a Persian Army invaded Lazica, under Chorsanes a Persian, and an ex∣perienced Commander, accompanied with Alans. This Army encamped it selfe in a Province of Lazica, named Mucheirisis, by which the River of Phasis runns, not navigable there, but to be past by Men and Horses; and they entrencht to the right hand of it some distance off. But that the Readers may have a cleer notion of Lazica, and of the people a∣bout it, and not converse with things obscure to them, like men fighting with sha∣dows: I have thought it seasonable here to discourse, what kinde of people dwell upon the Euxine Sea; conceiving, that the Ancients who have written thereof, have not handled it exactly; speaking of Tzanians, whom they make to border with the Trapezuntians, and name Colchians; and calling the now Lazians by ano∣ther name; being in both mistaken. For the Tzanians are high in the Land, and border upon Armenia, having steep Mountaines in the way to it, a vast and desart Countrey, deep Torrents, and Hills thick with Wood, and unaccessible Valleys;
all which are between them and the Sea. Nor can the Colchians be other then the Lazians, seeing they dwell now upon the Phasis. They have onely changed their name, as many other Nations. And since those Writers many ages have innovated much, by the transplantations of people, and successions of Princes, and altered their names. All which I am to take notice of, omitting both fabulous and old ob∣solete things; as upon what part of the Euxine Sea the Poets bound Prometheus, (Histories and Fables being different workes) but to set downe punctually both names and things notorious in those parts. This Sea begins at Constantinople, and Chalcedon, and ends in Lazica. Within it on the right hand is Bithynia; then Honorias, and Paphlagonia, where stand Heraclea and Amastris, Maritime Townes. Next to them are the Pontick Nations, to the borders of Trapezond, where are Sinope and Amisus, Sea townes; not far from Amisus is Themiscyrus, and the River Thermodon, where they say was the Ama∣zons Campe; of whom more anon. The territory of Trapezond reaches to Susur∣maena, and Rizaeum, which stands upon the coast in the way to Lazica, two dayes journey from Trapezond. In all the Territory of that City of Trapezond the Hony is bitter: To the right hand of these Cities are the Mountaines of Tzanica, beyond which is the Roman Armenia. From those Mountaines descends the River of Boas, through infinite Thickets, and a Woodland Countrey, into Lazica, and disimbogues into the Euxine Sea; then it quits the name of Boas, and takes that of Acampsis, because it bends not, nor yeilds to the current of the Sea. For the stream is so strong and troublous, that running farr into the Sea, the Ships sayling that way keep off at Sea, not able to hold on their course, and cut thorough that swift streame. Next to Rizaeum are Mountaines dividing Lazica from Roman Land, and inha∣bited by free Nations, and a Village called Athens; not so called from a Colony of Athenians (as some suppose) but from Athenaea, in ancient time Lady of that Countrey, whose Tombe remaines to this day. Next to Athens is Archabis, and Apsarus an ancient City, three dayes journey from Rizaeum, in old time named Ap∣syrtus, from a man of that name slaine by the plots of Medea and Jason neer unto that place; but many ages and successions of men have corrupted the memory of that act, and changed the name into Absarus; on the East side of which City stands yet the Tombe of that Apsyrtus. It was anciently very populous, and had ex∣cellent Walls, and a Circus, and a Theatre, and such other Ornaments of a great City. But of those antiquities nothing now remaines but the Pavements: By this it appeares strange, that any should affirme that the Colchians were borderers to the Trapazuntians. For so may Jason be thought not to have fled home into Greece with Medea and the Golden fleece, but to have gone the quite contrary way to the Phasis and furthest Barbarians. In the Raigne of Traan some say a Roman Legion was there garrisoned even to Lazica, and Suania. But now the Inhabitants are subject neither to the Roman Emperour, nor King of Lazica: But onely that be∣ing Christians, the Bishops of Lazica, appoint themOr Bishops . Preists. They are in amity with both, and convoy their Ambassadors to each in small Barks, which they use; but to this houre they will pay tribute to neither. To the right hand of this Coun∣trey are steep craggy Mountaines, and a Desert reaching very farre: Above it is Persarmenia, and the Roman Armenia, reaching as farr as Iberia. From the sayd Ab∣sarus to the City of Petra, and Marches of Lazica, is one dayes journey, where the Euxine Sea ends; which Sea makes there a halfe Moon, and the passage crossing the same is about sixty nine miles. All behinde the end of the Euxine is Lazica, next to which is Scumia, and Sua∣nia, both subject to the Lazians. They have Princes still of their owne Nation; but when any of them dye, the King of Lazica appoints another in his roome. On one side of this Countrey are the Mshians, reaching almost to Iberia, to which they have been anciently Subjects, and dwell upon the Mountaines, which are not wilde nor barren, but abound with all commodities, and the people are good hus∣bands, especially for Vines. Over this Countrey hang very high Mountaines, thick with Wood, and hard to be past, extending almost to the Caucascan. Mountaines. Beyond them Eastward is Iberia, reaching to Persarmenia. Between these Moun∣taines descends the Phasis, springing from Mount Caucasus, and disimboguing into
the middle of the sayd halfe Moon at the end of the Euxine, whereupon some hold that it divides the two Continents, having Asia on the left hand, and Europe on the right. On Europe side are the Lazians dwellings, having on the other side no Towne nor Fortresse but Petra, lately built by the Romans. The Countrey people hold that the Golden Fleece was kept on Europe side, but in my opinion they are mistaken: For Jason had never gotten away with Medea and the golden Fleece un∣espyed by Aeetes; if the Kings Pallace, and Houses of the Colchians had not beene separated by the River from the place where the Fleece was kept; which may appear also by the Poems written on that subject. The Phasis (as I have sayd) thus en∣ters into the further end of the Euxine, and at one point of the sayd halfe Moone stands Petra on Asia side: Over against which, on Europe side, is Apsilia, a Coun∣trey of the Lazians; the people whereof are Christians, as all the rest before men∣tioned. CHAP. II. ABout Apsilia stands Mount Caucasus, so high, that neither Raines, nor Snowes touch the top of it, being higher then any Clouds. From the midst to the foot, it is perpetually covered with the Snow; the foot of this Moun∣tain being as high as the very ridges of other Mountaines: Some parts of the said foot of Caucasus run out to the West, and North-ward, even to Illyrium and Thrace; other parts of it to the East and South-ward, reach to the two straits, which let in the Hunnish Nations upon the Romans and Persians: The one of the straits is called Tzur, the other is called the Caspian Gates. The Country extending from Mount Caucasus to the Caspian Gates the Alans hold, subject to none, but as Confederates they serve the Persians, against the Romans, and all the World. Under Mount Caucasus dwell the Sabirian Hunnes, and some other Hunnish Na∣tions. From hence, they say, issued the Amazons, and made a Camp at Themiscy∣rus, by the River of Thermodon; neer where now stands the City of Amisus. But now no Monument is left of any Amazons in the Countries about Mount Cau∣casus. Strabo and some others have spent much discourse about them: But they seem to speak most truly, who think that there was never any such Mannish race of Women; nor that Nature, in Mount Caucasus only, swerves from its sacred Lawes; but that the Barbarians of those parts, making an expedition against Asia, brought their Wives with them, whom they left in a Camp neer Thermodon: And that themselves over-running much of Asia, were encountred, and so defeated, that none escaped to the Camp; and that there the Wives being put to it by the feare of the People adjoyning, and by their want of Victuall, put on mens faces, and ar∣med themselves with furniture left behind by their Husbands, and with the same performed some commendable Actions, compelled by necessity, till they were all slain. This is my Opinion, and that the Amazons were Wives who went to War with their Husbands; the experiment whereof hath happened in our time. And commonly the addictions which descend to Posterity, are the Images of those which were before. For the Hunnes, in their in-roads upon the Romans often coming to a Battell, wherein some of them were slain; and the Romans searching the dead bo∣dies, have found Women among them. Other Armies of Women were never, nei∣ther infesting Asia nor Europe. Neither was it ever heard that the Caucasian Moun∣taines had all their men wasted at any time. And so much touching the Ama∣zons. Beyond Apsilia, and the other point of the aforesaid halfe Moon, is Abasgia, to the Caucasian Mountaines. The Abasgians were formerly subject to the Lazians, and had two Princes of their own Nation; one seated in the West, and the other towards the East. They did worship, till my time, Groves, and Woods, and in a Barbarian simplicity esteemed Trees to be Gods. But they suffered much from the covetousnesse of their Princes; who took violently from the Parents such Children as were beautifull, and made them Eunuchs, and sold them to the Romans at great prices; then killed the Fathers, least they might revenge their Children abusing,
and that they might not have suspected Subjects. And thus the poor Wretches were ruined by the fatall handsomenesse of their Children: And hereby most of the Eunuchs of the Imperiall Palace were Abasgians. But in the now Raigne of Justinian all hath been changed for the Abasgians to the milder and more civill. They have received the Christian Religion; And the Emperour sent Euphratas his Eunuch expresly to admonish their Princes, to force out no more the virility of humane nature with Iron, and the Abasgians, bold upon this injunction of the Emperour, have opposed that course; which made it formerly their greatest feare to be Fathers of handsome Sons. The Emperour also built for them a Church dedi∣cated to the Mother of God, appointing themOr Bishops. Priests, and causing them to be in∣structed in the Christian rites. They also deposed both their Princes, and became a free State. Beyond the Abasgians towards Mount Caucasus are the Bruchians, and the Alamans. Towards the Sea Coast are the Zecchians, to whom anciently the Roman Emperour gave their King, but now in nothing they obey the Romans. The Country of the Sagines is next, wherein formerly the Romans built two Castles upon the Sea-coast; Sebastopolis and Pityus, distant from each other two daies journey, and there put the first Garrison of Souldiers in those parts. Before, the Ro∣man Cohots were Garrison'd by the Sea-side, from Trapezond to the Sagines, but then held only these Castles, where were Garrisons till my time. But Chosroes, King of Persia (the Lazians having drawn him into Petra) intended to send an Army to surprise those Castles; and the Romans within them hearing it, burnt them, and threw down the Walls, and fled to the opposite continent by Sea to Trapezond, whereby they damnified indeed the Romans, by demolishing those Castles, but they prevented the Persians from being Masters of the Country; who forth-with went back to Petra, without doing any thing. Beyond the Sagines are many Hunnish Nations in a Country called Eulysia, pos∣sessed by those Barbarians in the Maritime and mid-land parts thereof to the Lake of Maeotis, and River of Tanais, which disembogues into the said Lake, and the Lake into the Euxine Sea. Anciently the Inhabitants were called Cimmerians, but now Ʋturgurians. Beyond whom to the North-ward are innumerable races of Antians: where the Lake begins to disembogue, are the Goths, called Tetraxites, observers of the Christian Religion, no men more. The Natives call this disem∣bogure, Tanais, which reaches from Maeotis to the Euxine, and running along 20. daies journey; and they call the wind which blowes from thence, Tanaites. These Goths whether they were Arrians, as the other Gothish Nations, or other∣wise instructed in Christianity, I cannot say, nor do themselves know; but they professe the same with much simplicity, and without disputes. Lately they sent foure Ambassadours to Justinian, for a Bishop to be given them, as to the Abasgians: And the Emperour dismist them with satisfaction in what they desired. The said Ambassadours in their publick audience, exprest no other cause them that, for feare of the Hunnes: But being admitted privately, they acquainted the Emperour with what might advantage the Romans (all 'Barbarians having ever some piques with their Neighbours.) The planting of these Tetraxites in that Country was thus. Anciently multitudes of Hunnes, then called Cimmerians, kept their Heards in the same, and were governed by a King. One of their Kings had two Sons, named Ʋ∣turgur, and Caturgur, who after their Fathers decease, divided the Kingdome; and gave their names to their severall Subjects; and they are yet called Ʋturguri∣ans, and Caturgurians. They have all the same addictions, and converse not with the Nations dwelling on the other side of the Lake of Maeotis, and the Cimmerian straits, fearing the passage, though very easie, because they never had tryed it. On the said other side neer unto the shore of the said Lake and straits, were formerly seated the Tetraxite Goths, and not far from them the Goths, and Visigoths, and Vandales, and all the other Gothick Nations, anciently named Scythians, as all the other Nations of those parts, with some difference in some of Sarmatians, Melan∣claenians, and other names. These People have a tradition, if it be true, that some Cimmerian young men hunting a Stag, it took the water; and that they either ea∣ger upon their sport, or driven by some Spirit, followed the Stage to the opposite shore: where the same (whatsoever it were) suddainly vanisht, as having ap∣peared to no other end, but to bring a mischiefe upon the Inhabitants there. The
young men, (they say) though they mist their game, found matter for warre and booty. And returning home told the Cimmerians, how the passage was fordable; who instantly took armes, and in multitudes past over to the other side. The Van∣dales were gone before, and seated in Affrica; and the Visigoths were in Spaine. So they fell upon the Goths, who dwelt in the Champian, killed many, and chased away the rest. Such as escaped past the river Ister with their wives and children into the Roman territory, where they did much mischeif. Afterward the Emperour planted them in a country of Thrace; and sometimes they aided the Romans in the quality of Confederates, receiving yearly pensions: whereby it appeares, that the Goths came not as men conquer'd, but upon the articles of a League, (The Romans calling Leagues after a war, Foedera.) Sometime also they made causelesse war upon the Romans, till under Theoderick they removed into Italy. CHAP. III. BUt (as I said) the Hunnes having slain many of them, and driven away more, possest their country: And the Caturgurians sent for their wives and children, and are planted there to this day; receiving from the Emperour yearly pensions, yet passing continually the River Ister, and over-running the Empire, being both confederates, and Enemies. The Ʋturgurians returned home with their Prince, where still they remain. They past the Cimmerian straits again a∣gainst the Goths, wasted, as aforesaid: Who at first stood fenced with their sheilds a∣gainst the Enemy in battell being confident in their power, and the strength of their country: And themselves are the valiantest Barbarians in those parts; and the straits (where about dwell these Goths) from the Entrance out of the Lake of Maeotis pre∣sently spreads into a Bay, imbracing most of those people, and hath one only nar∣row passage over. The Hunnes meant not to spend much time there; and the Goths could not hope to hold out long against such a multitude; so they came to a Capi∣tulation, that the Goths should go over and dwell with them in the opposite Conti∣nent, (where now they are) and be in perpetuall League with the Ʋturgurians upon equall tearms. Thus the Caturgurians hold the other side of the Lake, and the Ʋturgurians their former country, never troubling the Romans; but secluded by many nations, they observe an unwilling peace. Beyond the Lake, and the River Tanais, the Caturgurian Hunnes have a large country, all beyond that way, is possest by the Scythians and Taurians: part wherof is yet named Taurica, where stood the Temple of Diana, of which Iphigenia, Agamemnons daughter, was cheife Preist. The Armenians say, that that Temple stood in Celesene, a country adjoyning to them; and that the Inhabitants thereof were then called Scythians; grounding themselves upon that which I related formerly concerning Orestes, and the city of Comana. Thus many things happening other-where, or peradventure no where, men are fond to attribute to their owne countries, and are angry if all men yeild not to their con∣ceits. Next to the aforesaid Nations is Bosporus, a maritime city, lately become subject to the Romans. From Bosporus to Chersone a maritime City also, and formerly subject to the Romans, all between is possest by Hunnish nations. Cepi also, and Phanaguris, two cities, were formerly under the Romans, almost untill our time; but the neigh∣bouring Barbarians took, them and utterly ruined them. From Cherson to the mouth of the Danuby, or Ister, is ten dayes journey, all inhabited by Barbari∣ans. The River Ister springs from the mountaines in Gaule, and skirting by Italy, and descending through Dacia, Illyrium, and Thrace; it disembogues into the Euxine Sea. From the mouth of the River Ister unto Constantinople all belongs to the Roman Emperour. This is the whole circuit of the Euxine Sea, from Chalcedon to Constanti∣nople. How many miles it containes, I cannot say; so many Barbarians inhabiting the coasts (with whom the Romans have no commerce, unlesse it be upon Ambas∣sages) and they who formerly pretend to have taken the measure of it, not spea∣king exactly. Certaine it is, that from Chalcedon on the right hand side of the Eux∣ine,
to the River Phasis is two and fifty daies journey; and one may conjecture that the other side differs not much. And here I think it not unseasonable to set down the dispute among the Learned, concerning the bounds of Asia and Europe. Some think the River of Tanais doth sever these two continents, and alleadge that division to be naturall. For the Sea com∣ing from the western lands to the Eastern; the Tanais, from the North crosses be∣tween Europe and Asia; and the Egyptian Nile, from the South between Asia and Affrick; others reject this reason as weak, saying, that the straits of Caliz distin∣guishes at first these two continents, and that the Mediterranian still leaves Africk and Asia on the right hand, and Europe on the left, till it come to the Ends of the Euxine Sea. But the Tanais springs in Europe, and disembogues into the Lake of Maeotis, and the lake falls into the Euxine, not into the end of it, nor into the middle; but further. Now all to the right hand of the Euxine is attributed to Asia. Moreover the River Tanais springing from the Riphaan mountaines, which are con∣fest by themselves and the ancients to be in Europe; and the Ocean being far distant frō these mountains, the land behind them on both sides must necessarily be Europ∣an. Where then begins the River Tanais to distinguish the continents? If some River must divide them, it can be no other then the river Phasis; which descending direct∣ly oposite to the straits of Caliz, cuts between those two continents,; as those straits also have them on each side of it; opening from the Ocean to the midland Seas. And the Phasis likewise entring at the end of that part of the midland Seas, called Pontus Euxinus, manifestly receives from the Sea the continuation of dividing the Earth. This last opinion challenges antiquity, aswell as the other. For indeed, men possest of some ancient learning in a thing, commonly have not the patience to search long touching the truth of it, nor will endure new opinions. To them ever the ancienter the things are, the truer they seem, and they deride all of their own time as despicable. But the question now is not about Intelligences, and Intelligibles, nor such obscurites; but of a River and a country, which time could neither change nor conceal: Neither herein is there any thing can hinder a diligent searcher from finding the truth. And yet Herodotus, an ancient writer L. 4. saies, that the Earth is in one peice; but distinguisht in three parts and names, viz, Affrick, Asia, Europe; and that the Aegyptian Nile cuts Asia, Africk; and the Colchian Phasis, Asia, and Europe; and he taking notice also of the other opinion concerning Tanais, hath these words. I cannot guesse from whence three names are given to the Earth, (being one peice) and those of women. Nor why the bounds thereof are set to be, the Egyptian Nile, and the Colchian Phasis, or (as some say) the River of anais, Lake of Maeotis, and Cimmerian straits. The Tragedian Aelcylus also in beginning of his Tragedy called calls Phasis, the boundary of the land of Asia, and Europe. Another opinion there is among the Learned, that the Lake of Maeotis doth make the Euxin sea, spreading part to the right side of it, part to the left; and is therefore called the mother of the Euxine The ground of their con∣jectureis, because a current of this sea comes from the place called Hieron like a River, to Constantinople; and so they thinke the Euxine to end at Hieron. But against this down is alledged, that the Ocean is still the same, and ends no where before it arrive at Lazica; unlesse men will argue from variety of names, the one being called Pon∣tus, the other Thalassa, both signifying the Sea, And the current from Hieron to Constantinople is no proof, many things happen in Straits of the Sea, not subject to common reason, and none can expresse the causes of them. Aristotle himself, a most learned man, went purposely to Chalchis in Euboea, to consider the straits called Euripus, and the naturall reason, why the tyde there comes sometimes from the west and sometime from the East, according to which all ships made their course: and if with a tyde from the East, the ships steer'd on, and then the stream came against them (as often happens there) instantly they were driven back again, and others came on from the West with the tide, though they had no wind at all. The Stagi∣rite revolving this long in his mind, grew weary of his life, and there they say en∣ded it. In the straits likewise between Italy and Sicily, with a seeming contrariety to reason, a current puts in from the Adriatique sea, where as the tyde is from the ocean and Caliz, and sudden Eddis without any apparant reason cast away many ships. Whence the Poets fain the swallowing up of ships by Charybdis. And all this happens
thus strangely in Straits, because the tyde is contracted in a narrow passage between two lands, and so falls into those necessities, whereof no reason appeares: And so the coming of a current from Hieron to Constantinople is no argument that the Me∣diterranean and Euxine Seas have there their endings. The said reason hath no naturall foundation; but there also the narrownesse of the straits must carry it: And the fishermen of that coast find that current to Constantinople, to be only upon the upper part of the water (which is seen by us) and towards the bottome quite contrary: Where finking their Drags, they find them carried up to Hieron by the tyde below. But in Lazica the Land beats the tyde directly back again (whereas by all other shores it passes on side-long) and there only causes it both to stay its course, and to retire; as if the Creator had there sets its limits. The Sea touching that shore runnes no further, and rises no higher, though from all sides supplied with numberlesse Rivers, and some great ones; but back it goes, as being extended to its just measure, and keeping its bounds and limits in (as it were) by the awfull necessi∣ty of some Law, the articles whereof it is carefull not to transgresse. These are their arguments, whereof every man may judge as he pleases. CHAP. IV. BUT why Chosroes was so desiroust of Lazica, having sayd something before, I will now relate what most induced him, having thus described the afore∣sayd Countries, and thereby made my discourse more cleer. The Persians often had invaded the Roman Territories under Chosroes, and done mischeifes there not to be expressed: But they got little by it, but came home still with much losse of their men and estates, whereupon at their returne into Persia they mur∣mured against Chosroes, calling him the ruiner of their Nation. Once coming home out of Lazica, and being fallen into some desperate extremities, they were ready to mutiny; and had slaine him, if he had not foreseen it, and warded it, by gaining the principall of them with faire words. And being desirous to finde some reall Apologie, he was studious to procure some notable advantage to the Persian Empire. He attempted the City of Daras, but was repulsed (as I have sayd) and he despaired to get it, either by surprize, the Guards being well kept, or by a siege. There being still in Daras all Provisions layd up in store for a long time: And be∣sides neer it rises a Spring in a Rocky ground, which makes a pretty River, descen∣ding directly into the City: an no Enemy can divert it, nor force it another way, by reason of the Rocks. Being within the City it goes round about it, and having filled their Ponds and Cisternes, it goes out againe, and close unto the Town-wals falls into a bottomlesse pit, and is seen no more, nor hitherto knowes any man where it rises againe. This pit was not alwayes there, but it happened thus, long after the building of Doras by Anastasius the Emperour. By reason of this natu∣rall situation of the place, they who besiege it are afflicted with much want of wa∣ter: So that Chosroes failing in this attempt, thought of taking some other Roman Towne; but farr within the Roman Territories to sit downe before any City, lea∣ving so many strong places at his back, he thought it impossible. For this reason he layd Antioch flat with the ground, and quitted the Roman-Territories, so that his thoughts mounted after hopes further off, and full of difficulty. For hearing how the Barbarians seated on the left hand of the Euxine Sea, about the Lake of Maeotis, doe without controule over-run the Roman Provinces; he thought also by having Lazica to passe unto Constantinople it selfe, without crossing the Sea, as well as those Barbarians. And for this cause the Persians strive to get Lazica. But to returne from whence I digressed. Corianes with the Persian army encamped by the River of Hippis, and against them Gubazes King of Lazica, and Dagisthaeus commander of the Roman army, led their forces of Romans and Lazians. They past the said River, and being there incam∣ped, they consulted whether they should stay there, or receive the Enemy marching them, or should march against the Enemy, and by giving demonstration of the cou∣rage
and by beginning the fight, charge them with lesse apprehension of danger themselves, and abate the Enemies spirits. This counsell prevailed that they should charge them, and on they went: But the Lazians refused to joyne with the Roman Troops, who, they sayd, were not to fight for their Countrey and dearest pledges, themselves adventuring for Wives and Children, and their native soyle: So that being overcome, they should be ashamed to look upon their Wives; by which ne∣cessity, valour (in case they had none) would grow in them. And they would have the first charge, least the Romans, who could not have an equall eagernesse to theirs, should in the fight break their orders. Gubazes being glad to see his La∣zians so gallant, called them together at some distance from the Romans, and spake thus. Countrey-men! I know nor whether it be sit to use exhortations to courage, your forwardnesse provoked by necessity not neding any: The danger is about Wives and Children, and your Countrey, and for  which the Persians now in∣vade you. And none will willingly suffer others to take their estates from them by force, nature compelling men to contend for their right. You know how nothing will stop the Persians avarice, if once they get power. They will not now rule over you onely, and lay tributes, and in other things make you subject; but ruine and transplant you, if they have the better in this Warr. We cannot forget what Chosroes lately attempted against us: And let me not so much as mention the tryall of the Persians in that kind nor let ever the name of the Lazans be extinguished. Our fight with them will not be difficult; we have often fought with them, and vanquisht them. And there is no hardnesse in things, we have been used to; the toilsomenesse thereof being spent in our former practise. So that we must not apprehend an Enemy often beaten; as being now not so vali∣ant as they were before; and a spirit once dejected, commonly neve rising again. With these considerations therefore, encounter the Enemy with courage. Ha∣ving thus said, he led them on. The army was thus ordered. The Lazian horse were set in the front, and a good distance behind them came on the Roman horse, com∣manded by Philegagus a Gepaede, a valiant man, and by John the Armenian, sirnamed Guzes, formerly spoken of by me, an extraordinary good souldier. In the rear came Gubazes, and the King of the Lazians, and Dagisthaeus, the Roman Generall, with their foot; that if the horse were routed, they might escape unto them. Corianes on the other side sent a thousand choice men well arm'd to discover, himself marching after them, and leaving only some few to guard the camp. The Lazians being fore∣most, and coming to the businesse, gave the lye to their former confidence. For lighting suddenly upon the Enemies Avant-coureurs, they being unable to withstand them, came gallopping all back in confusion, and mingled with the Roman Horse; glad to fly to those, with whom before they made scruple to be ranckt. Both the Cavalleries being neer, they joyned not battell, but each, when the Enemy came on, gave back, and set on them retiring, and so spent much time in renewing charges, and in quick turns and returnes. In the Roman army was one Artaba∣nes a Persarmenian, revolted lately to the Roman army, having secured his faith by the killing of a hundred and twenty Persian Souldiers. He got accesse to Valerianus, then Generall of Armenia, and desired of him fifty Romans, with whom he went to a Castle in Persarmenia, guarded by a hundred and twenty Persians; who received him with his men, not knowing of his revolt. This Garrison they killed, and returned to Valerianus; and Artabanes appearing by this sure and firm to the Romans, serv∣ed them in their warrs. In this incounter he put himself between the armies accom∣panied with two Romans; against them came some Enemies, whom Artabanes charging killed a Persian, valiant, and of a strong body, and threw him from his Horse to the ground. A Barbarian standing next, strake Artabanes with his Sword upon the head, but no mortall blow. One of Artabanes two Companions, a Goth, while the Persians hand was yet over the head of Artabanes, thrust him into the left flanck and killed him. The thousand that were sent out at this retired, and stayd for Corianes, and the rest of the Army of Persians and Alans, and soon after they joyned: Then came up the Infantry both of Gubazes and Dagisthaeus to the Horse, and the fight came to handy blowes. Philegagus and John finding them∣selves too weak for the Enemies horse, and having seen what the Lazians could do,
lighted, and caused the Romans and Lazians to do the like; and with the foot they stood in a deep battallion opposite to the Enemy and charging with their Lances. The Persians being not able to charge the Enemy being on foot, nor to break their Battallion, and their Horses flying back, troubled with the heads of the Lances and noise of the sheilds, they trusted with the multitude of their arrowes to break them. The Romans also, and the Lazians let fly their arrowes, and they coming thick, ma∣ny were slain on both sides. The Persians and Alans discharged oftner; but the arrowes for the most part rebounded from the Romans sheilds. Corianes, the Persian Generall, was shot into the neck' (by whom it was not known) of which he dyed instantly; and his death swayed the victory to the Romans side: For the falling from his horse, forthwith the Persians ran away to their camp. The Romans pursued, kil∣led many, and hoped to take the Enemies camp at first assault; But an Alan a strong man, & very expert to shoot backward and forward, put himself into the nar∣rowest entrance into the Trenches, and stopt the invaders a long time; untill John Guzes killed him with his Lance, and then the Romans took the Camp. Many Persians there perished, the rest returned home as they could. This was the successe of that Persian invasion of Lazica. Another army also came, and victualled the Garrison in Petra; and then retired home. CHAP. V. IN the mean time the Lazians at Constantinople accused Dagisthaeus of Trea∣chery, and favouring the Persians; and that by the perswasions of the Per∣sians he forbare to assault that part of the Walls of Petra, which fell down, and that the while the Enemy fortified the breach with sack-fuls of Sand laid one upon another: And that for money, or negligently he lost his opportuni∣ty, by putting of the assault, which he could never after recover. The Emperour upon this confined Dagisthaeus to his house, and made Bessas, lately come out of Italy, Generall of Armenia; whom he directed also to command the Army in La∣zica, sent thither before under Venilus, Brother to Buzes, and Odonachus, and Ba∣bas the Thracian, and Ʋligangus an Herulian. Nabedes also came into Lazica with an Army, but effected nothing worth the mentioning; save only a defecti∣on of the Abasgians from the Romans and Lazians; and upon the occasion of be∣ing there with an Army, the taking of sixty Sons of their principall men for Ho∣stages; and the taking Prisoner in his way Theodora in Apsilia, the Widow of Op∣sites, late Uncle to Gubazes, and King of Lazica. She was by birth a Roman, the Kings of Lazica having long used by the Emperours consent, to take Wives in Constantinople, and to make allyances with sundry Senators: And Gubazes him∣selfe was the Son of a Roman Lady. The reason moving the Abasgians to revolt, was this. After they had (as I said before) deposed their Kings, some Roman Garrisons were by the Emperour laid upon the Country, who sought to reduce it under the Roman Dominion, and exacted new things, using violent waies, which discontented the Abasgians; And least they should be brought into slavery to the Romans, they set up Kings again: Opsites of the Eastern part of the Country and Scaparnas of the Western. They were grown desperate of any good, and so chose rather to resume their former condition, though bad, then to retain the worse which succeeded; and fearing the Romans power, revolted secretly to the Persian. But the Emperour perceiving it, commanded Bessas to march against them: who sent some choice numbers of his Army under Ʋligangus, and John Guzes. One of the new Kings of Abasgia had been lately sent for into Persia by Chosroes, where he then was. The other drew the Abasgians together, and opposed the Roman invasion. Upon the confines of Apsilia and way to Abasgia, is a high Mountain, beginning at Caucasus, and by degrees growing lower, till it ends in the Euxine Sea. At the foot of this Mountain the Abasgians have an ancient Ca∣stle of a considerable bignesse, where they beat off any Enemy invading, the place being a great fastnesse, not possible to force. It hath one passage only, leading to this Castle, and into Abasgia, not passable but by one man at once a foot. Under
the said foot-path, is a deep Vally reaching to the Sea, and very stony; which hath gotten a name sutable for the roughnesse, being called Trachea. The Roman Fleet came to the confines of Abasgia, and Apsilia, where John and Ʋligangus landed their Forces, leaving the Sea-men to waite on them neer the Shore. They marcht afoot unto Trachea, and seeing the Abasgians in Armes, and guarding the foot path, they were troubled. In the end John left there Ʋligangus with halfe the Army, and himselfe with the rest went aboard the Barkes, and compassed the Tra∣chea, so that he got the Backes of the Enemy. With Ensignes displayed he marcht against them, who perceiving themselves charged on both sides, resisted not, but re∣tyred in confusion, so hamperd with their feare and amazement, that they hardly found their owne Countrey wayes, nor easily got cleer of them. The Romans on both sides had the execution, and killed many; and came running to the Castle, where they found the Guards shutting the Gates; but not able to put them to, and so still receiving in the pursued and Pursuers, pell-mell, and not discerning Abasgians from Enemies, and by reason of the croud being not able to close the Gates, the Abasgians, who were so glad to get within the walls, were taken with the castle. Yet the Romans, when they thought themselves masters of the Enemy, found a difficulty: for the houses standing close to one another, the Abasgians mounted the same, and shot down upon their heads, and defended themselves stout∣ly, out of fear and pitty of their wives and children, till the Romans set the houses on fire, and so became absolute victors. Opsites, King of the Abasgians, fled with some few to the neighbouring Hunnes, and to mount Caucasus: The rest were consum∣ed to ashes, or made prisoners. The Romans took both the Kings wives, and all their children, demolisht the Castle, and almost emptied the country: This was the successe of the Abasgians revolt. But the Apsilians, being anciently subject to the Lazians, have in their country a strong Castle called Tzibulum; which Terdites, Master of the Palace in Lazica, ha∣ving offended the King, and being discontented, agreed to betray to the Persians; and getting some Persian forces ready, he went into Apsilia. Being neer the Ca∣stle, he rode afore with his company of Lazians, and got in, the Garrison not di∣strusting a principall Officer of Lazica. And thus Terdites, so soon as the Persian forces came up, received them into the Castle; and the Persians now held themselves Masters, not only of Lazica, but of Apsilia also; while the Romans being busie a∣bout Petra, and to incounter the Persian army, had no meanes to send succours. But the Governour of that Castle had a fair wife, by birth an Apsilian, with whom the commander of the Persian forces fell fondly in love; and when with his temptations he could not gain her, he attempted to force her; which so inraged her husband, that he killed him, and sacrificed also his Company to their commanders lust, and took the Castle to himself. Hereupon the Apsilians took occasion to re∣volt from the Lazians, charging them for not coming to their succours against the Persians. Gubazes sent against them a thousand Romans, and John Guzes; who with fair words brought them back to their former obedience to the Lazians. And thus was it concerning the Apsilians, and the castle of Tzibulum. CHAP. VI. ABOUT the same time, the cruelty of Chosroes toucht even upon his own blood. His eldest Son Anatozadus (which in the Persian language signifies, Immortall) had much offended him with his lewd courses, making no scruple to lye with his Fathers Wives. At first Chosroes chastised him with Banishment, and confined him to the City of Lapato, seven dayes journey from Ctesiphon, in a Province of Persia called Vazaine, a very good country; and soon after fell sick so dangerously, that he was reported to be dead; being of a sickly constitution: and having Physitians about him still of all countries, and among others Tribunus of Palaestina; a man famous for his art, and inferiour to none of his time, & moreover a wise and a godly man, and very honest. He had formerly cured Chosroes &
came out of Persia with many great presents; but at the making of the Quinquen∣niall cessation, Chosroes intreated the Emperour, to let him have Tribunus with him for one year; Who having performed his attendance, Chosroes bade him aske what he had a mind to. Tribunus instead of wealth, askt of him the liberty of some Roman captives; and got 3000 freed; besides some men of quality, whom he demanded by name. By this act Tribunus got a great reputation among all men. Anatozadus hea∣ring of his Fathers sicknesse, usurped, and rebelled; and though his Father were re∣covered, yet he put the City into revolt, and keenly pursued the Warr. Chosroes sent against him an army under Fabrizus, who won the battell; took Anatozadus Prisoner, and brought him to his Father. Chosroes blemished the young mans eyes, not by taking away the sight; but by distorting the eye-lids into much uglinesse, with irons red hot, applied to the out side of the Eye-lids being shut. This Chosroes did, to cut off his hope of his Kingdome, the Law permitting not any man with any blemish to be King of Persia, as I have said before. Now also was the fifth year of the Cessation expired, and Justinian sent unto Chosroes, Peter a Patritian, and his Master of the Palace with commission to con∣clude an absolute truce for the East. Chosroes dismist him with promise to send one shortly to finish all, as should be best for both: And soon after he sent Isdigunas a∣gain; a man supercilious and arrogant, and whose insolent puffing, and swelling was not tolerable to any Roman. He brought his wife and Brother with him, and a train so great, as if he were marching to a battell: He had also with him two principal Persians, who wore Diadems of Gold upon their heads. The Constantinopolitans mur∣mured to see the Emperour honour him something more then according to the qua∣lity of an Ambassador. Bradicius the interpreter was not with him, whom they say Chosroes put to death, for presuming to sit at the same Table with the Emperour Justinian, who (said he) would not have admitted an Interpreter to such an ho∣nour, if he had not betrayed the Persian affaires. Some say, that Isdigunas charged him with secret conferences with the Romans. Isdigunas now at his audience, said not a word of the peace; but complained of Transgressions against the Cessation; That Arethas, and the Saracen Confederates of the Romans committed spoiles upon Alamundarus, during the truce, and some other things of smal importance. In the meane time Bessas sate downe before Petra with the whole Army. The Romans mined in the same place where Dagisthaeus formerly had done, and for the same reason: For the Walls are for the most part founded upon a Rock; but in some places upon earth. Towards the West they are upon an impenetrable Rock, but not very thick, a peice whereof Dagisthaeus then, and now Bessas digged into; but the nature of the ground bounded their Mine, not permitting it to proceed fur∣ther then it selfe. After the retreate of Dagisthaeus, the Persians had mended the fallen piece of their Wall there, by filling up that which had been digged into, with pebble stones, and placing over it great beames, smoothed and tyed together to a pretty breadth. This basis of Timber was in stead of a foundation, and upon it was the Wall set: Which the Romans not knowing, thought their Mine to be quite under the foundation; and having voyded away much earth from beneath those timbers, they shook indeed the Wall, and a part of it suddenly sunk, but it in∣clined not to either side, nor had one stone disordered, but setled upright, whole and intire upon the digged ground, as if it had been let downe with an Engine; onely it was lower then before: And so the Romans could not assault the Towne; Mermeroes having formerly also with many hands raised all the Walls higher then ever. The Romans seeing the piece that sunck, and stood upright so, were much troubled. Mine they could no more, neither could they bring the Ram to the Wall, the ground being steep, and the Ram not being to be drawne but in even ground. In the Army then chanced to be Sabirian Hunnes, who inhabite about the Cauca∣sian Mountaines, and are populous, and divided into many Principalities. Some of their Princes are ancient freinds to the Roman Emperour, some to the King of Per∣sia; who give Pensions in Gold to their severall Confederates, not yearely, but upon occasions. The Emperour to his Confederates had lately sent Gold for their ayde in this Warre: But the Messenger finding it unsafe to passe the Caucasian Mountaines, and by an Enemy with Money, came to Bessas before Petra, and from thence sent to the Sabirians, to send some to receive the Money, who presently-sent
three of their Princes into Lezica, and these were with the Army at the as∣sault. When they saw the Romans despairing, they devised a new Engine, never thought of by the Romans nor Persians, who notwithstanding have had excellent Artists, and have often needed such an Engine to assault places in stony and steep ground: But it never came into their minds; Mans nature ever proceeding with time to new inventions. As these Barbarians suddenly made a new fashioned Ram, using no timbers upript, nor lying a crosse, but in stead of them small Poles tyed and sitted together. They covered the whole Engine with Hides, and observed the perfect forme of an ordinary Ram, and in the midst placed the usuall Beam, with a topp headed with Iron, to batter the Walls: It was made so light that it needed no men or cattell to draw and thrust it forward; onely forty men within it cover∣ed by the Hides, carryed the Engine with ease upon their shoulders, and winded up the Ram and let it go against the Walls. Such Engines now were framed by these three Barbarians, taking Beames and Iron worke from the Romans Ramms, which they could not bring neer the Walls, and forty men being put under each, they set it close to the Walls. On either side of each stood men well armed with Corslets and Morions, and with long Poles in their hands topt with great Iron Hooks, to draw off from the Walls the stones loosened and unjoynted by the strokes of the Ram. The Romans with many pushes of the same shook the Wall, and they with their Poles pull'd downe the loose stones, and quickly the Town was in the point of being taken. But the Persians upon the Wall set a wooden Tower (which they had long before prepared) full of their best men, having their heads and bodies all covered with Iron and with Corslets, and vessells full of Brimstone, and Babylonian Pitch, and Naptha, a Drug used by the Persians, and by the Graci∣ans called Medean oyle: These Vessells they sired and threw upon the Romans Rams, which failed little to be all set on fire, and were saved by the men having the long Poles, who cleered away the fire still; but long they could not think so to hold out, the fire being such, that where it toucht it instantly burnt, if not in∣stantly cast off. CHAP. VII. BUT Bessas putting his Forces in Armes, caused scaling Ladders to be set to that part of the Wall which was sunck; And himselfe using no other ex∣hortation but the example of his own Valour, being an old man above 70. yeares of age, he first mounted the Ladder. Here was a Fight so valiantly performed by both Romans, and Persians, as the like hath not been seen. The Per∣sians amounted to about 2300 men, and the Romans were some 6000. On both sides almost all were hurt, that were not slaine: the Romans forced their ascent with all their power, and the Persians with much toile, and after the killing of many on both sides, were very neer to have quite beaten off the danger. Many Romans were slain at the tops of the Ladders, the Enemy standing above them; and Bessas himselfe fell from the Ladder, whereat a great shout was made, the Persians from all parts shooting at him, and his Lanciers standing all close about him, covering him, having their Murrions and Corselets on, and with their Shields, making the form of a Roofe over him, and keeping off the Arrowes, which clasht upon their Armour, and snapt asunder. And all was full of clamour, panting, and toile. The Romans, eager to bring off their Generall, shot thick at the Walls, and represt the Enemy. Bessas could not get up for the Shields that were hold over him, and be∣ing an old man, fat and unweildly. Yet he lost not his Spirits, but in that great dan∣ger suddenly advised that which preserved himselfe, and the Romans Affaires. He directed his Lanciers to drag him off by the legs, which they did, and went off with him, holding their Shields over one another, and drawing him away so far at once only, as not to be subject to the Enemies shot. Bessas, so soon as he was in a safe place, rose, and encouraging his Souldiers, gave on again, mounting again the Ladder himselfe; and the Romans following him did very valiantly. The Persians hereupon demanded time to quit the place, and to yeild it. But Bessas suspecting
it to be cunning, in the mean time to fortifie the Walls, said, that he could not stay the Fight; but he pointed to another part of the Walls, whether they might go with him, and parly while the Armies fought. They not entertaining the motion, the Fight was hotly pursued: Which continuing equall, another part of the Wall, where the Romans had formerly min'd, suddenly fell down. Many of both parts ran thither; The Romans, though divided, exceeded the Enemy in numbers, and prest hard upon them: And the Persians being charged in both places, and their fewnesse by being divided appearing, did not equally indure the charge. While the Armies were toyling, and the Persians unable to repell the eagernesse of the Romans, and the Romans absolutely to force their entry; John Guzes left them fighting upon the ruined Wall, and with some Armenians his Country-men, moun∣ted the Rock where the City was esteemed impregnable; and forcing upon the Guards there, killed with his Lance one of the gallantest Persians, and made the place accessible. In the mean time the Persians in the wooden Tower, kindled ma∣ny Fire-vessels, by flinging the same thick, to burn the Engines and men in them, notwithstanding their long Poles. But a strong Southern wind blew against them, and withall let afire one of the boards of the Tower: They within it, being over∣toyled, and full of tumult and disorder, perceived not the Accident soon enough, (their businesse taking from them their senses,) and the flame kindling by little, and little, and with the Medean Oyle, and the other materials, burnt all the Tower, and the Persians in it; who consumed into Coales, fell down, some with∣in the Town, some among the Roman Engines. At the ruined Wall also the E∣nemy grew faint, and gave back, and the Romans entred, and then was Petra ab∣solutely taken; only some 500. Persians retired to the Cittadell. The rest the Ro∣mans took, being 730 men, of whom 18. only were unhurt in the Fight. Many Ro∣mans also fell, brave men, and among them John Guzes, valiantly entring the Town, was killed with a stone. The next morning the Romans besieged the Persians in the Cittadell, and propounded offers of safety unto them, and to give assurances for the same: But they rejected them, and resolved to oppose, though they had no thought of subsisting long; but they chose to dye bravely. Bessas was desirous to draw them from this Opinion, and to perswade them to live. He commanded a Roman Souldier to speak to them to that purpose, as hee dictated it unto him; who being neer, said thus. Valiant Persians, what mean you thus to pull on your own destruction? using a sence∣lesse endeavour to dye, and shaming the profession of Valour; which never opposes unre∣sistible necessities, but wisely yeilds to the Conquerour. It is not dishonourable to obey your Fortune, and Live; Necessity having left no hope, excuses the dishonour, although one be put to the poorest Actions; pardon ever attending that which cannot be avoided. Insoevident a danger, affect not therefore pride, nor sacrifice your lives for a little vaine-glory. Think how men once dead revive not again; but that the living may in time recompose themselves. Consult therefore your last consultation, and study your own good: Those Counsels are ever best, wherein the advisers have left it in their power to repent. We pitty this your strugling under the Yoake, and spare you, so fond to dye. And while you are wanton and foolish in a case of life; wee, as Romans, and Christi∣ans, commiserate you. If you live, the worst that shall befall you, will be to change your Common-wealth for a better, and to have Justinian your Lord instead of Chosroes; and for this we give you our Faith. Murther not therefore your selves, having meanes to live; It is not excusable thus to no purpose to be in love with dismall things, which is not to be valiant, but to be weary of life. The valiant man endures, while from his sufferings he expects advantage. Men commend a willing death, when some gallant hope is built upon it; But a precipitate end, is a rash and uselesse folly, and a vaine∣glorious dying foolish: Wise men condemning such a fond pretext of brave spirit. Con∣sider moreover, if herein you be not unthankfull to God; who if he Would have you de∣stroyed, would not have delivered you to men, who desire your preservation. Thus it is; and doe you advise, whether you be worthy to live or no. The Persians would not so much as afford attention to this Counsell, as men willingly deafe. By the Generals direction therefore the Romans threw fire into the Cittadell, thinking so to bring them to yeild. But they, though beholding the mischiefe, and knowing that certainly they would be all consumed, and having no
hope by resisting to escape, yet would not come into their Enemies hands; but pe∣risht all with the Cittadell; the Romans wondring at it. How serious a businesse Chosroes held Lazica to be, appeared by this his putting into Petra the choice and the bravest of his men, and by storing the same with so great a proportion of armes, that to every Roman souldiers share upon the pillage fell five mens furni∣tures, besides much burnt in the Cittadell. There was also found corn, and other salted provisions for five years siege: Wine there was none; but some Beveridge, and store of beans. The Romans wondred to find water coming from the Aquaeduct, till they understood the mystery. For Chosroes having taken Petra, and placed a Garrison in it; foreseeing the siege, and that doubtlesse the Romans would attempt the Aquaeduct, divided the water, brought from it to the City, into three parts, by making a deep Sewer, and by building three severall Aquaeducts; the one at the bot∣tome of the Sewer up to the middle of it, covered with stones and Earth; above that a second covered also, and a third above Ground and visible. The Romans not understanding those close conveiances, spoiled the uppermost at the beginning of the siege, not working downward to the other, thinking the water did fail the City by what they had done; and from their loathnesse to work, their wits failed them. The siege continuing, the Romans understood by some prisoners, that the besieged had water from the Aquaeduct still; whereupon digging, they found the second Conduit and cut it, and in their second Errour were not admonished by their first. But now the city being taken, and finding the water still coming in, and from their Prisoners, hearing how it was done; they saw too late their Enemies providence, and their own negligence. The Prisoners Bessas sent all to the Emperour, and threw down the Walls of Petra, that the Enemy might put them to no more businesse about it: which the Emperour approved, & commended him both for his valour, and this wise counsell of his. Thus Bessas, by his good fortune, and the great valour shewed in this action, grew into a great reputation again: when he commanded Rome, there was great hope of him, having done very valiantly in former imployments. After his ill fortune at Rome (the same being sackt by the Goths, and the whole strength of the Romans there being well nigh destroyed) yet at his return to Constantinople, the Emperour made him Generall against the Persians; though the world flouted the Emperours resolution herein, in committing the Persian war to an old man allmost in his Grave, and one who had been so grosly beaten by the Goths; but notwithstan∣ding this generall opinion, Bessas used the valour, and found the good fortune, I have said. So are humane affaires determined, not as men imagine; but as God swayes the Ballance: And this men call Fortune; finding accidentall things to suc∣ceed in a way by them not discerned, and so attributing a name of Fortune to things above their own reason. CHAP. VIII. IN the mean time Mermeroes, afraid of Petra, was coming with his army thither so soon as the winter was done, and the season was sit; but hearing what was become of it, he staid his journey, knowing how on that side of the Phasis the Lazians had no Town, but Petra. So that he marcht homeward, having pre-possest the passages in Lazica, from Iberia: and he past over the Phasis, where he found it for∣dable, and over another River called Reon. Having now the Phasis to his right hand, be led his army to Archaeopolis (the cheif city of Lazica) being most horse, and with eight Elephants, which the Persians use as a Tower to stand upon, and shoot upon the Enemies heads. The Persians industry also is worthy admiration; having made the way between Iberia and Lazica (which was unpassable for rocky places, cove∣red with thick woods and bushes; that there was no going for a man a foot) now so plain and easie, that not only their Horses, but their Elephants may passe. There came also 12000 Sabirian Hunnes to Mermeroes; who fearing least their multi∣tude would not obey him, but might do him some mischeif rather, he kept 4000 of them, and sent the rest home with good store of mony: The Roman army oun∣ted in all to 12000, whereof Odonachus and Babas two expert Commanders, had 3000. and the rest incamped neer the Phasis (with intention to succour any place
where the Enemy should fall on) commanded by Bonilus & Ʋligangus: there was also Ʋarazes the Persamenian with them, wholate came out of Italy followed by 800 Tza∣nians. Bessas was retired into Pontus and Armenia, his Government, meaning to toil no more, but to get what he could by his place; and by his avariciousnesse he again ruined the Roman affaires. After his victory at Petra, if he had made haste to fortifie the passages into Lazica from Iberia, the Persians had not entred Lazica, which he e∣ven as good as delivered to the Enemy by his neglect, and carelesnesse of the Empe∣rours indignation. Who indeed used much to connive at the Errours of his cheif Ministers, and they from thence committed many, both in the courses of their lives, and in their Governments. The two Castles of Scanda and Sarapanis, in Lazica, about the frontier of Iberia, standing upon two passages very hard to get through, the Lazians had demolisht. These Castles Justinian in the beginning of the War guarded with Romans, taking out the Lazians formerly in it; but the Romans wan∣ting victuall, and being not able like the Lazians to live long upon Elymus, a kind of pulse like mill-seed; the Lazians also being weary of bringing Provision upon their backs (there being no passage for horses) the Romans there abandoned them, and the Persians took them; but upon the truce restored them to Justinian for the Forts of Bolum and Pharangium, as I have said before. But the Lazians having de∣molisht them now, the Persians repaired Scanda, and held it at this coming of Mer∣meroes into Lazica. And entring the same from Iberia, the first Towne you meet with in the Plaine, is Rodopolis, very assaultable; whereupon the Lazians demolisht it, fearing the Persian Invasion; so that now Mermeroes marcht on to Archaeopolis. But he would not sit downe before it, fearing the Romans Army at his back, en∣camping neer the Phasis. Towards them he went first, and passing by Archaeopolis told them, That he meant to make a visit to the Romans upon the Phasis, and that done, would come to them againe. They answered him bravely, and bade him go, and that if he spake once with the Romans there, he would never come back to them. But the Commanders of the Roman Army hearing the newes, and finding them∣selves too weak, went aboard their Darks, carrying with them what they could, and throwing the rest into the River. Soon after came Mermeroes, and was very melancholly to see the Romans Camp with not a man in it; he burnt the same, and in much anger led his Army back to Archaeopolis. This City stands upon a kind of Rock, and by it runs a River descending from the next Mountaines. The Low Gate opens neer the foot of the Rock, and the ground to it from the Plaine rises onely, but makes no difficulty of accesse. The Gate opening toward the Rock is very hard to approach, having also for a great way thereabout great Thickets. The towne Walls were built up to the River, that they may draw up their water, having none within the Towne. Mermcroes was eager to assault, and finding it rising ground, not to be medled with by ordinary Rams, he caused his Sabirians to make Rams portable on mens shoulders, using the advantage of his Enemies experiment thereof at Petra, which he had heard of. And these Sabirians made such Rams as their Countrey-men in league with the Ro∣mans made then. Mermeroes set against the rocky part of the City the Delomites, a people dwelling in the midst of Persia, among unaccessable Mountaines, and so not subject to the Persian, but free; and in the Persians wars they serve them for pay, being all foot men, with sword and sheild and two Javelins; and are nimble to climbe rocks, and to runne along the sides of mountaines, as upon plain Ground. These being there ordered, Mermeroes with the rest of his army assaulted at the low∣er gate, and with his new Rams, and his Elephants. Where the Persians and Sabi∣rians galled the Romans with their shot, making them almost to quit the Battlements, and the Delomites did as much on their side with their Javelins, that the Romans were in much extremity. Odonachus and Babas (were it to shew their own, or try the Romans resolution, or by some instinct) leaving some few upon the Battlements, drew together the rest, and sayd thus to them. Fellow Souldiers! you see our danger; but neverthelesse you must nor yeild to it: Nothing preserves men despairing of life, but not to be in love with life: which sond love is commonly attended with destruction. Consider how in such a difficulty as this, it is not safe to resist an Enemy from the Battlements of a Towne: We may do it bravely, but the distance of place will not permit us to
use our valour: The best we can get, is, to get off and retyre: But if we fight bo∣dy, to body, courage is it gets the better there, and the Victory goes with valour. They who get the better from a Wall, gaine not much; for the next day the dan∣ger renues as fresh as ever, and so they perish by little and little, and loose at last their defended Fortresses. But who overcome in a standing fight, are ever after secure. Taking this into our thoughts, let us make a brave sally, trusting in Gods assistance, and hoping well even from the despaire wee are in. God preserves those most, who have no hope left in themselves. CHAP. IX. ODONACHƲS and Babas having thus fayd, led out the Army: Some they left behinde, having suspition of one of the cheife Inhabitants of the City, a Lazian; who had been treated with by Mermeroes in the heat of the assault, to set the City-Magazines on fire. Mermeroes by this thought either to enter the Towne with lesse opposition, the Romans being busie to quench the fire, or if, being eager to defend the Towne, they neglected the fire, he should deprive them of their stores, and so easily in time get the Towne by Famine. The Lazian according to his promise to Mermeroes, when he saw the assault at the hot∣test, fired the Store-houses. The Romans left behinde, seeing the flame rise, ran to it, and with much toyle, and some hurt, put it out. Those who sallyed, frighted the E∣nemy with the suddennesse, and killed them without resistance. For the Persians sus∣pected no sally from so few Defendants, and were scatterd, and in disorder as upon an assault: Some with the Ramms upon their shoulders, and without their armes: others could do no Execution with their bowes, the Romans at the first running up close unto them; who slasht with their Swords on all sides, and cut them in peices. One of their Elephants also, either wounded, or otherwise starting, flew back, and cast his riders, breaking the rancks, and driving the Persians backward; whise the Romans securely cut off all in their way. It may seem strange, that the Romans know∣ing so well the means of resisting Elephants, did nothing now; confounded (it seems) with the present businesse. The means is that, which was practised upon Chosroes at Edessa: an Elephant there was brought close to the walls, with many of the gallantest Persians upon it: and appearing like a Tower, and the shot from it being made di∣rectly upon the Defendants heads, the taking of the town was certainly expected: when the Romans escaped this danger, only by hanging out a Hog from the Bulwark, which with his squeaking scared the Elephant so, that he turned about and retired fair and softly home. This now was omitted by the Romans; but their good fortune supplied their negligence. Having mentioned here Edessa, let me tell a strange pro∣digy which happened in that City a little before the breaking of the Perpetuall Peace; which was, the delivering of a woman with a child having two heads: the events since have made the meaning manifest. For the East, and much of the Roman Empire besides, have been disputed by two Emperours; but to return to the fight. The Persians being thus disordered, and they in the rear seeing the confusion in the van, and not knowing the matter, ran away in fear. The Dolomites also, who were upon high Ground, and saw all, ran away shamefully, and the overthrow was cleer. Four thousand Persians were slain, and three principall commanders, and four En∣signes were taken, which were sent to Constantinople. They lost 20000 horses, not all in fight; but being spent with running away, and not getting a belly full of meat in Lazica, they dyed with famine and weaknesse Mermeroes having failed at Archaeopolis, was neverthelesse master of the feild in Lazica, and led his army into Muchirisis, a country distant from Archaeopolis a daies journey, having many populous villages, and the best land of Lazica, full of vines and other fruits, through which runs the River of Reon, upon which anciently the Lazians had a Castle; but they demolisht it, because standing in a plain it was easie to be taken. The Castle was called by the Grecians Cotyaeum, but now by the Lazi∣ans Cotaesis, as Arrianus in his history. Others say, it was anciently a City named-Coitaeum; where Aeaetes was born, whom the Poets call Coitaeensis, and Lazica, Coy∣taitis.
This Castle Mermerces was desirous to re-edifie, and wanting materialls, he staid till the winter was past, purposing to repaire it with Timber. Neer unto Cotae∣sis, stands Ʋchimerium, a strong Castle, guarded by Lazians with some Roman soul∣diers intermingled: Hereabout Mermeroes lay with his army, possessing the best land of Lazica, and cutting off the Romans from bringing victuall to Ʋchimerium, and from marching into the countries of Suania, and Scymnia, subject to the Persians; an Army in Muchirisis, crossing the passage into those countries. These were the successes of the armies in Lazica. In Constantinople, in the mean time Isdigunas the Persian Ambassador, had many conferences with the Emperour touching a peace. And after a long time spent in disputes, at last they came to this agreement: That in their proper Dominions there should be a cessation of armes for five years, and during the same, that sen∣ding to each other they should endeavour to compose the differences concerning Lazica and the Saracens; and that the Romans should pay to the Persians twenty Centenaries of Gold for this Cessation of five yeares, and for the eighteen months passed between the end of the first Quinquenniall Cessation, and their sending Ambassadors to each other sixe Centenaries more; the Persians alleadging, that they yeilded to a conference for truce upon that Condition. These twenty Cente∣naries, Isdigunas would have presently paid, and the Emperour demanded to pay them by four Centenaries every year, and thereof to give caution; but in the end the Romans paid down the whole summe, that they might not seem to pay a yearly Tribute to the Persians. Thus men are ashamed more of the dishonour of names, then things. Barsabes al∣so, a Persian of great quality, and much favoured by Chosroes, whom Valerianus had taken prisoner in a fight in Armenia, and sent to Constantionople, and for whom Chosroes had offered a great ransome, was now set at liberty upon the suit of Isdigunas, who promised to perswade Chosroes to remove his army out of Lazica. This Cessation concluded in the twenty fifth year of Justinians Raigne, much discon∣tented the Romans, whether unreasonable or no, (as Subjects use to censure the acti∣ons of their Princes) I will not determine. But they alleadged, that the Persians be∣ing now strong in Lazica, they might securely without the interruption of any, for five years to come, hold the fairest peices of it, and that the Romans would never afterward be able to drive them out of it, but the Persians have easy accesse even to Constantinople it selfe. These considerations troubled most men, but they could not help it; and likewise to see the ancient indeavour of the Persians, to make the Ro∣mans tributary, which by war they could never hope to effect, now established by the colour of a cessation of armes; Chosroes now taxing the Romans with a tri∣bute of four annuall Centenaries upon this fair pretence, untill his forty six Cente∣naries were paid, calling his Taxe a Truce, and shewing apparantly to have plot∣ted it from the beginning of the War. And yet still he used hostility in Lazica, as hath been said. From this Taxation the Romans had no hope ever to be freed, but saw themselves in the quality of plain Tributaries to the Persians. Isdigunas also having gotten more wealth then ever Ambassador did, and received the highest ho∣nours from the Emperour, together with immense gifts, was sent home the richest man (I think) in Persia. This only Ambassador had no Guard put upon him; himselfe and his followers freely conferred, and kept company with whom they would; and in the city bought and sold, and made any contracts, and were present at them, with all manner of license, no Roman attending them to observe their do∣ing, as was wont to be. At this time also wer Heats, such as none ever remembred the like, the Roses towards the winter growing in abundance, as in the spring, with no manner of difference, and the weather as hot as at midsummer: And the vintage being long past, new Grapes came up. Some divined from hence at great accidents likely to succeed; but the naturall cause of it was the continuance of the Southerly winds, longer then was or∣dinary, from whence came those unusuall heats. If any strange matters were signi∣fied by them, we shall know the certainty by the Event.
CHAP. X. DUring the sayd Negotiation at Constantinople for a truce; in Lazica King Gubazes affected the Romans, because he found Chosroes to plot his death; but the generality of the Lazians offended with the Romans oppressions; and discontented with their Commanders, did for the most part favour the Persians, not for love of the Persian Government, but to be rid of the other, of two ills choosing that rather which they felt not. And Theophobius a cheife man a∣mong them, treated with Mermeroes to deliver to him the Castle of Ʋchimerium, who animated him to the action with large hopes of being a Favorite of Chosroes, and naturalized a Persian, and of getting great wealth and preferments. There were no Forces joyned of Romans and Lazians, and the Persians visited all the Townes at their pleasure. The Emperialists lay concealed, some neer the Phasis, o∣thers in Archeopolis, and other Fortresses; and King Gubazes lay quiet upon the tops of Mountaines: So that Theophobius without any difficulty appearing, came to the Castle and told the Emperiall Garrison there, That the Roman Army was cut in peices, King Gubazes ruined, and Lazica wholly under the Persians, without any hope of recovering the same for the Romans or Gubazes. Mermeroes with se∣venty thousand Persians had done all this, and with great numbers of Sabirians; And that Chosroes was now also joyned suddenly with an innumerable Army, that all Lazica would scarce containe them. With this terrible newes Theophohius so frighted the Garrison, that they besought him even by the God of their Fathers to finde some accommodation for them. He promised to procure their safety from Chosroes; and returning immediately to Mermeroes, obtained of him some princi∣pall Persians with Commission to repaire to Ʋchimerium, and having given assu∣rances to the Garrison for their lives and Goods, to take possession of the Castle; by the having whereof the Persians were absolute Masters of Lazica. They subdued also Scymnia and Suania, that all places from Muchirisis to Iberia were unacces∣sible to the Romans and King Gubazes. And nor Romans nor Lazians durst meddle with the Enemy, nor come, the one from their Fortresses, the other downe from the Mountaines. Mermeroes during the Winter, repaired with timber the Walls of Coitaesis, and placed in it three thousand Persians; he put also a competent Garri∣son in Ʋchimerium, and repaired another Castle called Sarapalis, upon the Fron∣tier of Lazica. Then he martcht toward the Phasis, where he understood that the Romans and Lazians had newly made head and were encamped. But Gubazes and the Roman Commanders at the first news of his coming disbanded, and every man saved himselfe as he could. Gubazes ran up againe to the Mountaines, and there with his Wife and Children made an end of the Winter, fighting it out with pover∣ty and the hard weather, and comforting himselfe (as men use) with hopes from Constantinople. And the other chiefe Lazians in their respect to their King were contented, as he, with hard winter lodgings in the holes of Rocks. Enemy they feared none in those Mountaines, being (especially in the Winter) not to be med∣led with; but famine and other misery made them weary of their lives. Mermeros in the meane time built Store-houses in the Villages of Muchirisis, and furnisht the same with Victuall; and by sending Fugitives to the foot of the Mountaines, and promising conditions of safety, he drew many downe, supplyed them plenti∣fully with what they most wanted, and used them as his owne people. In all things else he ruled the Countrey at his pleasure, and to Gubazes wrote this Letter. Power and wisedome are the two composers of humane affaires; and they who in power excell others, live as they list, and bring the weaker to what termes they please, who being slaves to the stronger cure their want of power with wise∣dome, and by soothing their Conquerours, hold that with comfort, whereof their infirmity deprives them. This is generally in all Nations, and is fixed in the nature of men. So that gentle Gubazes! if you thinke you can vanquish the Per∣sians, delay not your owne good, but come to Battell, you shall finde us in what part of Lazica you please, ready to fight with you for the Countrey. With us you may now try your power, who can never thinke afterward to oppose the whole power of Persia. Or you may take the second course, which is to know
your selfe, and to adore Chosroes as your Master, King, and Conquerour; by sup∣plications you may be rid of your present miseries; I undertake that the King will be gracious to you, and will give you of the best Hostages in Persia for the perpetuall assurance of your life and Kingdome. If neither of these please, suf∣fer the Lazians, made miserable by your bad counsels, to raise themselves from the difficulties that presse them; and see them not crusht with an endlesse ruine, while you trust to the slippery hopes of Roman Succours, who can vindicate you no more then hitherto they have done. Gubazes was not perswaded by this Letter, but still stayd upon the Mountaines; his hatred of Chosroes not suffering him to despaire in the Roman Succours. Mens judgements ever thus tune to that which pleases their wills, admitting all reasons of that side, without examination of the soundnesse of them; and obstinately not crediting, nor weighing the arguments which crosse their desires. About this time certaine Monks came out of India, and getting accesse to the Emperour, promised to effect his long desire, that the Romans should no more buy the Metaxa, or Raw-silke from the Persians their Enemies, nor any other Nations. For having remained long in those Countries, they had learnt the way how the same might be had in the Roman Provinces. They told him that certaine Wormes, taught by nature, did spin this Raw-silke; to bring the Wormes alive, that it was not possible, but easie to get their Bags, wherein were innumerable Eggs, which being covered in Dung, and thereby heated, produced the Wormes. The Emperour promised them a great reward to bring their undertaking to effect; who returned into India, brought those Eggs to Constartinaple, and being by the meanes afore∣sayd growne to Wormes, fed them with Mulbery leaves, and so caused the making of Raw-silke in the Roman Territories. The Winter being ended, Isdigunas came to Chosroes with the Money, and the Treaty agreed upon, who sealed the same and took the Money; wherewith levying agreat Army of Hunnes, he sent them to Mermeroes, resolving not to quit Lazi∣ca. Mermeroes with these Hunnes and his Persians and Elephants marcht against the Townes of Lazica, whom the Romans encountred not, but under the com∣mand of Martinus fortified themselves about the mouth of the Phasis; and lay quiet, in the company of King Gubazes. Mermeroes led the Army first against a Castle where he understood the Sister of Gubazes to be; but the Garrison; and the strength of the place beat him from thence, and caused him to retyre without do∣ing any hurt in that journey either to Romans or Lazians. Marching into Abas∣gia, he found the narrow and rocky passage into the same possest by a Roman Gar∣rison, who opposed his entrance. So that he drew back, and went against Archaec∣polis; and not prevailing there neither, he retyred with his Army: which the Ro∣mans followed, and in that fast Countrey intercepted many, and killed the cheif Commander of the Sabirian Hunnes. But fighting about the dead body, the Per∣sians forced away the Enemy, and retyred to Coitaisis in Mucheirisis. Such were the successes of the Armies in Lazica. CHAP. XI. IN Asrica all things proceeded fairly for the Romans, by the incredible successes of John the Generall, who had drawn to his party Cutzinas, a Prince of Numi∣dia, then vanquisht all the other Numidians in a battell, and soon after brought Antalas and Jabdas, (who were Princes of Moores in Byzacium and Numidia) to follow him in the quality of slaves. So that in Africa the Romans had no Enemies, and not many subjects, whom the former wars and mutinies had almost wasted. In the mean time in Europe, the Gepades, who (as I said formerly) made a truce with the Lombards, not ending their differences, resolved upon a war again, which grew as hot as ever: The Gepades being led by Thorisin, and the Lombards by An∣auin; followed by great multitudes on both sides. They came neer, but the armies discerned not one another; when a sudden Panick fear, without any cause appear∣ing, frighted both the armies so, that they ran away, leaving their Commanders
with some few only behind: who neither with fair words nor threates could stopp them. Auduin not knowing the Enemy was in the same case, sent an Embassage to the Enemy for truce. The Ambassadors, finding the Gepades to have had the same for∣tune with themselves, demanded of Thorisin, whether his people were gone; they are fled (quoth Thorisin) none pursuing, and so are the Lombards, sayd they: since you deal truly with us, we will conceal nothing from you. And since God is pleased that these nations shal not perish, and hath cast on us both this sav∣ing fear, let us concur with that gracious sentence, and make an end of the war. Be it so, quoth Thorisin, and so a Cessation was concluded for two years, and in the mean time to send their Heralds, mutually and fully to compose the differences: but not being able to end the same, they fell again to the way of hostility. The Gepados feared that the Romans would joyne with the Lombards, and therefore they sent to the Cuturgurians, Hunnes inhabiting on this side the Lake of Maeotis, to assist them in this war against the Lombards. They sent them twelve thousand men, comman∣ded by Chinialus, an experienced Souldier. But one year of the Cessation being yet to come, and the Gepaedes having no occasion to use such a multitude, perswaded them in the interim, as upon the by, to invade the Romans, who keeping no exact Guards upon the Ister, into Illyrium and Thrace, the Gepaedes transported the Hunnes into the Empire; who spoiled the country, and sackt the Towns. The Empe∣rour hereupon sent to the Ʋfurgurians, Hunnes planted beyond the Lake of Maotis, blaming their unjust lying still, it being most unjust to neglect their freinds perish∣ing; alleadging how the Cuturgurians being their neighbours, and receiving great pensions yearly from Constantinople, ceased not to wrong them, but made daily in∣roades and spoiles upon them: & they, the Cuturgurians getting no share of the same, were carelesse of the Romans their ancient freinds, and saw them spoiled and ransackt by the Cuturgurians, without vindicating them from those oppressions. The Vtur∣gurians upon this remonstrance of the Emperour, and of the many presents they had received from him, and upon receit of more mony now, were won to invade the Cuturgurians country. They passed the Tanais, accompanied with two thousand Tetraxite Goths, who dwelt neer them, and the army was commanded by Sandill, a wise and a valiant man, and experienced in many warrs. The Cuturgurians in∣countred them in a battell long fought; but were routed, and many were slain. And the Ʋturgurians took their wives and children captives, and went home. During the battell, some thousands of Romans, who had been taken captives by the Cuturgu∣rians, slipt away, and recovered their native countries unfollowed, and getting so in that which most concerned them, the benifit of the others victory. The Empe∣rour sent Aratius to Chinialus, Generall of the Cuturgurians, to tell him the newes of his own country, and to perswade them with mony to quit the Roman territory, who hearing what the Ʋturgurians had done, took the mony, and came to this ac∣cord: That without killing, or taking prisoners, or other hurt doing, they should retire home through the Roman Subjects, as freinds: That if they could continue in their country, they should observe saith to the Romans, if they could not, they should come back, and have townes given them by the Emperour in Thrace; and being Confederates with the Romans, should guard the provinces from all Barbarians whatsoever. Of them al∣ready two thousand were come into Roman Land with their wives and children, after receiving that overthrow, from the Ʋturgurians; and were led by Sisinnion, who served formerly under Belisarius, against Gelimer, and the Vandales. They be∣came servants to the Emperour, and were seated in Thrace. Sandill, King of the Ʋ∣turgurians grew angry at this; that he should punish the Cuturgurians of the same Race, and expell them for wrongs done to the Romans, and that now the Empe∣rour should entertain them to live among the Romans, and better then ever they did. He sent Ambassadors to the Emperour to expostulate; but without Letters: for the Hunnes know no letters, nor Grammer, nor breed their Children in the toiles about learning. The Ambassadors having accesse to the Emperour, told him as they were directed. That their King Sandill bade them say, that he heard an old saying, when hee was a boy, how a Woolfe may change the colour of his haire, but not his nature, which will ne∣ver be mended: that he knew by his own experience also, as a rusticall Barbarian could observe it, how shepheards breed their Dogs in their houses from little Puppies, who have
the good nature to remember the kindnesse of them who seed them: and the Shepheards do this, that they may have the Doggs to chase away the Wolves, and to protect the poor sheep. That this is used every where, no where Dogs invading the stock, nor Wolves de∣fending it. And he doth not thinke that in the Emperours Dominions, (though aboun∣ding with so many strange things) there is any varying from this constant Law of nature; which seing it is universally the same, that he conceiveth it not good for the Emperour to harbour this wolvish race of Cuturgurians, nor to bring in such turbulent neighbours; nor to take them as sojourners, whom he could not bear being strangers, and that they will shortly snew their nature to the Romans. That the Romans shall never want Ene∣mies to destroy them, when even those who shall be beaten may hope to be in a better Con∣dition; nor will their freinds hinder inreads into their country, when the vanquisht shall have more respect from them then they, after the best they can do. As themselves live now in a barren country, while the Cuturgurians have plenty of corn, and surset in their Wine sellars, and seed upon every dish. The wanderers are now admitted to the Bathes, and have their Jewells, their silkes and imbroyderies of gold to wear, and yet they carried innumerable Romans into their country captives; where they inflicted on them the ba∣sest abuses, scourging them, nay killing them without any offence committed, and in o∣ther things acting upon them the humour and power of Barbarian Masters; but that the Uturgurians set them at Liberty, and restored them to their country by the sweate and ile of a war. And now that the rewards of them both are very unequall; while themseives still injoy the miseries of their poor country; but the Cuturgurians share a part of the country of those very men, who by the valour of the Uturgurians were delivered from thraldome under the other. Thus spake the Ʋturgurian Ambassadors, whom the Emperour soothed with store of gifts, and shortly sent them home. CHAP. XII. IN these times was a great Warr between the Varnians and the Islanders of Brit∣tia: The Varnians are seated beyond the River Isler, and extend to the Nor∣thern Ocean, and the Rhyne, which River divides them, and the Francks, and the other Nations inhabiting those parts. All which Nations on both sides the Rhyne are named Germans. Brittia lyes on the Ocean Sea, distant from the Conti∣nent but twenty five miles, opposite to the mouth of the Rhyne, and lying between Brittany and * Thule. Brittany lyes to the West of Spaine five hundred miles,Thule with this Author is Norway and part of Den∣marke. but Brittia lyes at the bottom of Gaule upon the Ocean, Northward to Spaine and Brittany: And Thule lyes in the uttermost bounds of the Ocean, Northward. This Island of Brittia is possest by three populous Nations, and over each is a King, and they are named Angli, Frisons, and Brittians. The people are so fruitfull, that yearely they transport many Families to the Francks, who plant them in de∣sert Countries, and upon that ground pretend an interest to the Island; and lately in an Embassage to the Emperour Justinian, sent some Angli in company, as if the Island were theirs. Over the Varnians one Hermegislus lately reigned, who took to Wife a Sister of Theodebert King of the Francks, his former Wife being dead; by whom he had a Son named Radisis, betroathed to the Sister of the King of the Angli in Brittia: This Hermegliscus riding to take the avre, a Raven from a tree croaked at him; he told his Noble men attending him, that the Bird in her lan∣guage did foretell his death to be within forty dayes after: And I (quoth he) for your peace and security made an allyance with the Francks by mine owne Wife, and contracted a Brittian Lady to my Son: But now being suddenly to dye without Issue from my now Wife, and my Son being yet without his Bride, let me communicate my thoughts to you, and when I am dead, if you like my ad∣vise, put it in execution. I hold it more advantagious for you, to have allyance with the Francks then with the Brittians; who being Islanders, cannot joyne with you in time, nor easily: whereas nothing severs the Francks, but the Rhyne, from you. And being so neer and so powerfull, they are at hand both to helpe and hurt you; and hurt they will, if this allyance restraine them not: An over∣growne
neighbour proves heavy, and apt to doe wrong, and the meanes of a War are easie against men at the next doore. Quit therefore that betroathed Islander, and the Money shee hath received restore, according to the Law of Nations, for a reparation of the refusall of her: and let my Son Radisis marry his Mother-in-law, which our Lawes permit. Hermegisclus gave this advise, and at the fortieth day dyed; and his Son taking the Kingdome, renounced his betroathed Spouse by the perswasion of his Nobles, and tooke his Mother-in-law to Wife. The contracted Lady could not brook the scorne done her, but was eager to revenge it. For so tender of their honour are the Barbarians of those parts, that after the name onely of a marriage without consummation, if the woman be refused, shee thinks her selfe profest a Strumpet. First shee sent Messengers to demand the reason of this rejection, seeing he could not charge her with incontinence, nor any other offence; but that way prevailing nothing, with a manly courage shee resolved upon a Warr: Shee got four hun∣dred Ships and an hundred thousand men, whom her selfe led, with one of her Brothers to assist her. The Brittians are the bravest Infantry we know, but so un∣exercised in Horsemanship, that they know not what a Horse is, nor ever saw in Brittia the Picture of any, where never any was bred. When upon Ambassages they come abroad among the Romans, or Francks, and are put to necessity of riding, men lift them up, and set them upon their Horses; and so take them downe againe when they are to alight. The Varaians also are all Footmen. Aboard the aforesayd Fleet were none but rowers, for the Brittians have no Sailes: Being landed upon the Continent, the Virgin-Generall encamped at the mouth of the Rhyne, where staying her selfe, shee sent out her Brother a∣gainst the Enemy: He finding the Varnians neer the Sea shore encamped, had a bat∣tell with them and defeated them, where many fell, and the rest with their King fled, and were followed by the Angles as farr as foot-men could; who retyring to the Campe, were by the Lady chid, and especially her Brother, for having nothing worthy such an Army, seeing he brought not Radisis to her alive. Shee selected then her best men, and charged them to bring the man to her: who in the end found him concealed in a Wood, and brought him bound to the Lady. He stood before her trembling, expecting some cruell death: But shee onely reproaching to him the unjust affront he had done her, askt him why he would neglect his Vow, and bed another Woman, his owne Spouse not having committed whoredome. He excused all upon the injunctions of a Father, and the importunity of his Nobles, mingling his apologie with supplications, and imputing the crime to necessity, pro∣mising now, if it were her pleasure, to live with her, and by his future services to cure his former injury. The Lady was pleased, and Radisis loosed from his bonds was vouchsafed all manner of courtesie: And immediately he sent home the Sister of Theodebert, and marryed this Brittian Lady, In Brittia also is a Wall dividing a great part of the Island in two; the reason of it is, because to the Eastward is good ayre according to the seasons, and many ci∣vill Inhabitants, and they have Corne and Fruit-trees in abundance, and are well stored with waters. But to the Westward all is so contrary, that a man cannot live there halfe an houre, the Countrey being possest with Adders and Snakes, and all sorts of venemous creatures. The natives affirme, that so soon as a man passes to the other side of the Wall, he instantly falls dead with the pestilentiall ayre; and the like happens to Beasts. In this description I am to mention a Story, or rather a Fable; I cannot think it true, though many men affirme to have seen it and been actors in it, neither must I absolutely reject it, least professing to write of the particularities of this Island, I be thought ignorant of the things done in it. They report that to this part of the Island are transported the Soules of the departed, by a meanes, which though I have heard in very good earnest related, yet I conceive that the first rumour of it sprung from some dreaming heads. Along the Ocean shore, over against Brittia, are ma∣ny Villages, inhabited by Fishermen, Husbandmen, and Boatmen, who traffique in the Island; subjects they are to the Francks, but pay no Tribute, the exemption from which is granted unto them for a service which I will now relate. They have the employment of conducting Soules departed imposed on them by turnes; when
any mans turne comes, they goe home to bed towards night, expecting their fel∣low conductor; and at midnight they finde the door opened, and heare a softly voice calling them to the businesse: Instantly they rise, and go downe to the Sea∣side, finding themselves constrained to goe on, but they perceive not by whom: Boats they finde ready, with no men in them, and aboard they goe and sit to their Oares. They perceive the Boats loaded with Passengers even to the Deck; and the place of their Oares not an inch from the water: They see nothing, but after an houres rowing, come a Land in Brittia, whereas in their owne Boats they have much adoe to passe over in a day and a night, having no Sayles, but rowing onely. They instantly land their Fare, and are gone away with their Boats suddenly grown light, and swimming with the current, and having all save the Keele above water: They see no men leaveing the Boat, but they heare a voice, relating to some, who it seemes stayes there for them, the names of the Passengers, with their Titles, and additions of what Fathers they were; and (if women) of what Husbands. But to returne to my History, and to the Gothick Warr, having already spoken of the successes of other Provinces. CHAP. XIII. THE Emperour, as I sayd before, had sent for Belisarius home, where he held him in honour, upon the death of Germanus: yet he would not send him into Italy; and though he were Generall of the East, he made him Commander of the Guards of his body, and kept him at Constantinople: And Belisarius was the cheife of all the Romans in dignity; some indeed had the pri∣ority of being made Patricians and Consulls before him but yet they yeilded the pre∣cedence to him, and were ashamed to make use of the Law, and to assume the right, which that gave them, against so eminent a vertue; and the Emperour took it well of them. But John, Sisters son of Vitalianns, past that Winter in Salonae, whom the Roman Commanders in Italy expecting dayly, forbare any action. And the Winter ended, and the sixteenth year of this Warr wrirten by Procopius. The next yeare John resolving to lead the Army from Salonae against Totilas,Inipit Annus 17 bel Goth man 25 Justi∣ce Anno dom. 551. the Emperour commanded him to stay the comming of Narses the Eunuch, whom he had made his absolute Generall in this warr. The reason of this determination of the Emperour was not knowne; for who can declare the counsels of his heart with∣out his consent? But men did conjecture that his Majesty did consider how the rest of the Commanders would grudge to have their power lessened, and to be made subordinate to John; whereupon either by contrary opinions, or through envy, they might purposely prejudice his affaires. I heard also this story at my former be∣ing at Rome from one of the Senators, That in the Raigne of Atalaricus, a heard of Cattell about evening came into Rome, and past through the Market place, call∣ed Forum pacis, where stood the ancient Temple of peace, and was thunder-struck∣en. Over against this Market place stands an ancient Conduit, and upon it a bra∣zen Bullock, the work of Phidias the Athenian, or of Lysippus; there being in the same place many Statues of their making, and upon one the name of Phidias is in∣graven. There is here also the Bullock made by Myron: The ancient Romans be∣ing most studious to make all the fairest peices of Greece the ornaments of Rome. But the Senator told me, that an Oxe of this Heard was left behinde the rest, and got up to the Conduit, and stood above by the brazen Bullock; and that a Tulcan passing by, a plaine countrey fellow in appearance, but a pretended Soothsayer (as all the Tuscan are) sayd, That one day an Eunuch should depose the Prince of Rome. The Tuscan and his Divination was then laught at, as all predictions are, before they be justified by the event, seeming till then ridiculous and fabulous: But now all men admire that his interpretation, being convinced by the event. So that Narses was chosen Generall against Totilas, either the Emperour wisely foreseeing the successe, or fortune determining the same: And Narses with a Gallant Army, and store of Treasure was dispatcht. He stayd a while in Thrace at Phillippopolis.
his way being stopt by an army of Hunnes, who drave and carried all away without opposition; but they being gone some towards Thessalonica, some towards Con∣stantinaple, he marcht on, being hardly disengaged from them. While John thus staid for Narses at Silonae and Narses intangled with those Hunns marcht slowly: Ttilas looking for Narses coming, placed in Rome some of the Se∣nators, confined in Campania, and other Romans, Commanding them to guard the City, and professing to repent for what he had done to it. He had burnt the most part of it, especially beyond the Tiber; and these men being grown little better then Slaves, and stript of all they had, were so unable to vindicate the publick, that they could not get every man his ownpeculiar right: and yet are the Romans the best patri∣ots in the world, studying to recover from all parts, what belongs to their City, and to save all the ancient Ornaments of Rome from perishing. During so long a subjection to Barbarians, how did they preserve their publick buildings and ornaments of their City! Even the orginall monuments of their race do yet last, the sufficiency of those ancient workmen holding out against the ruines of time, and the negligence of men Among which there yet stands a miraculous spectacle, which my selfe have seen; the ship of Aenaeas the founder of their City: it is for one row of oares only, and of a huge length, being 120 foot long, and 25. broad. It is so high only, as that men may row in it. The Timbers in it are not mortessed into one another, nor fastned by iron; but are every one of a peice, such as were never heard of, and are only found in this ship, that we can learn. For the keele be∣ing all one peice, reaches from the stern to the foreship, and bowes by little and little into a convenient crookednesse, then strangely turnes straight again, and most aptly in proportion. The ribs also of the ship reach from side to side, crooking downwards, and bowing so handsomely, that one would think the hollow bulk of the Ship to be made round and turned with instruments; either nature providing such a crookednesse in the Timber for the present use, or else those uneven ribs were fit∣ted by mens hands, or Engins. Every planck also reaches from the stern to the fore∣ship, being all of a peice, and have only spikes of iron to fasten them to the shipps ribs, and to make up her sides. Thus doth this ship affoard a sight beyond expres∣sion; strange workman-ships naturally rising above discourse, and as they subdue common things by thenew invention, so over-mastring evenspeech it selfe. And the ship is strong and lusty yet, and sound all through, none of the Timbers having any rottennesse appearing; as if the ship-wright (whatsoever he were) had lately built it. Totilas also manned 300 Gallies with Goths, whom he commanded to pillage, and spoil the coast of Greece. This fleet hurt nothing, till it came to Corcyra, anci∣ently the country of the Phaeacians; being the only inhabited Island in this passage from the straits of Scylla. Having been often upon that Sea, I was curious where the Iland of Calypso was: I found only three small islands, some thirty seven miles from Phaeacia, (now Corcyra) called Othonae, from whence one may imagine Ʋ∣lisses to have past to Corcyra, being no farther off, either in a boate made of a sud∣den, or otherwise; this is but my conjecture only. It is hard to discourse exactly of things so ancient: Time changes the names of places, and the opinion formerly held of them. Upon the Sea shore in Corcyra stands the modell of a ship made of white stone, compounded of many severall stones, which some suppose to be the modell of that which transported Ʋlisses into Ithaca, after his entertainment with the Phae∣acians.Neptune turned the ship worch carried home Ulisses into a rock, so that it must be of on pu. But * the being not of one stone, and the Letters ingraven upon it, pro∣claime the same to have been set there by some Merchant in ancient time, and de∣dicated to Jupiter Casius; the town also where this ship stands being yet called Ca∣spe. In Euboea at Geraestum, there is also such a modell of a ship, dedicated by A∣gamemnon to Diana, to please her with this also, as he had, by the sacrifice of his Daughter Iphigenia, obtained of her a passage for the Grecian army to Troy. Which is testisied by Letters ingraven upon it either then or afterward; the most of which time hath defaced, but at the beginning of the verses, they appear thus.
— , . Here Agamemnon plac'd this black-pitcht Barke, Of the Greeks Army now at Sea a Mark. And the Inscription thus, . — Tenichus built This to Diana Bolosia. — For so anciently they called Eileithuia, or Lucina; terming the Throwes and pangs of Childbirth, . But I returne from whence I digressed. CHAP. XIV. THE Goths with their fleet came to Corcyra, and forraged the Island, and the Ilands also of Syntae. They landed also upon the main land of Epirus, and pillaged the townes about Dodona and Nicopolis it selfe, and Anchia∣lus, where Anchises, the Father of Aenaeas sayling from Troy dyed, and gave the name to the Towne. They tooke upon the coast also many Greeke shippes, and some transporting Provisions to Narses Army. Totilas likewise sent an army into Picenia to take Ancona, commanded by Skipuar, and Giblas and Gun∣dulse, (called by some Indulfe) formerly of the life-guard to Belisarius. He gave them forty seven gallies to block up the Castle by sea also. The Seige lasting long, and the besieged wanting victuall, Valerianus being at Ravenna, and unable alone to succour it, wrote this Letter to John, Vitalianus his Sisters Son, at Salonae. Ancona you know is only left us within the Jonian Gulfe, if it be left us: it is so sharply besieged, that I fear our succours will come too late, and we shall use our indeavour after our opportunity. I forbear to write more; the necessity of the be∣sieged claimes all our time, and their danger permits not a long Epistle, requiring succour swifter then speech. John, though the Emperour had forbidden him to stir, adventured to go, concei∣ving the necessity, whereinto fortune had cast them, to dispence with the Emperours instructions: He chose his best souldiers, and put them aboard forty Gallies, swift of Sail, and well built for a Sea fight; and having furnished them with all necessaries, came with them before Ancona. Whether soon after came Valerianus with twelve ships: Upon conference together they rose from thence, and Anchor'd at a place called Senogallia, not far from Ancona. The Goths Generall also manned forty seven ships with their choice men, leaving the rest to block up the Castle: and sailed against the Romans. Skipuar commanded the men left behinde, and Giblas and Gundulfe those in the Ships. The Fleets being neer, each drew their ships as close together as might be and exhorted their men. John and Valerianus spake thus. Think not fellow Souldiers! that you are to fight now only for the Castle of Ancona, and the Romans in it; but that the main of the war depends upon this bat∣tell; and that the conclusion of our fortune is to be drawn in the same Lot with it. Consider, how the cheif moment of war consists in the expences of it, and that they who want supplies, are of necessity to be beaten in the End. Valour and hun∣ger cannot dwell long together, nature not induring to pine with famine, and to fight bravely too: And other fortresse we have none between Otranto and Ra∣venna, where we can lay in any provisions for our selves or our Horses. And the Enemy being Master of the Country we have no place our freind, from whence to furnish any small proportion of victuall. In Ancona is our only hope,
where such as come from the opposite land may put in and ride safely. So that if we win this battell, and thereby assure Ancona, we may hope well of all the rest of this war; but if we be defeated, I will not speak any thing that is harsh, God grant unto the Romans the perpetuall Dominion of Italy. And consider too, that if you speed ill now, you cannot so much as run away; the Enemy possessing all the land, and being also absolute master of the Sea. Our only hope of living now is in our armes, and depends upon our actions in this fight. Fight bravely therefore, having this in your minds, that if you now be beaten, it will be your last beating; if you conquer, you will be rancked with honour among the most happy. Thus Iohn and Valerianus; and the Goths Commander spake thus. These wretched men expulsed out of Italy, and long hid in some corners of the Sea and Land, seeing now they dare to sight with us again; it is our parts to check their unadvi∣sed presumption, least it grow higher being let alone. Folly, not restrained in the beginning, proceeds to endlesse daring, and at last ruines those it incounters. Shew them then quickly, that they are Greeks, and naturally cowards, and now grown desperate with being beaten. Take heed least they prosper upon this Experiment; Cowardize despised, becomes bold, and fool-hardinesse in the end may grow to be incapable of fear. And if you do valiantly, thinke not that they can stand long. A spirit not measured out proportionably to the power of him that uses it, common∣ly rises before the businesse; but when the battell is begun, it suckes. Remember therefore the often tryals this Enemy hath made of your valour; & from their then successe, argue, that they are not now suddenly become better men; but have rash∣ly undertaken as then, and will go off with the like fortune. After these exhortations, the battell began, and was stoutly sought, and some∣thing like a land fight. They stood with all their ships in front against each other; and plied their Bowes. The forwardest grapled, and fought from the decks with Javelin and sword, as in a feild. But the Goths unexperienced in Sea-sights maintained the incounter with much disorder. Some stood aloofe, whereby the Romans set on them single: Some came on so thick, that they fell, foule with their fellowes for want of Roome. Their ships stood jumbled together like so many baskets that they could neither shoot at the Enemy, nor manage their Javelins nor swords; but were perpe∣tually imployed in getting cleer of one another, with loud clamours, and confused pushing off with their long poles; intangling their front for want of roome, and then getting aloofe, and both to their own mischeise: their cries and hollowings were not against the Enemy, but to their own men to keep off; and thus puzzelling one ano∣ther, they were the cheifest cause of the Enemies victory. Who in their close fights did valiantly, and in their Sea fights skillfully; keeping their ships in front, not too far asunder, nor more close then was convenient; And still joyning and severing in good proportion, when they saw an Enemies ship scatter'd, they struck at her, and with ease sunck her; and where they saw the Enemy in confusion, thither they sent clouds of arrowes; then seeing them wearied with the toyle of their disorder, they fell on them and cut them in peices. The Goths desponding, did neither consider their crosse fortune, nor their own Errours; and being not able either to use their ships, nor to fight from their decks they left fighting and fell to a dangerous quiet∣nesse, committing themselves to fortune; and then betook themselves to a shameful and disorderly retreat, having no remembrance either of resisting, or of handesom∣ly flying; but being scattered among their Enemies, they stood amazed. Eleven ships got away; the rest the Romans took, or sunck with the men in them. Giblas was taken Prisoner; but Gundulse escaped in the eleven ships, and the men being landed, he set them on fire, that they might not come into the Enemies hands. Then they went a foot to Ancona, where relating the accident to their companions, they all retired from thence, leaving their camp for the Romans, and they ran tumultuous∣ly into Auximum. The Romans came to the Goths camp before Ancona, and took it, then put provisions into the Castle, and sailed away, Valerianus to Ravenna, and John to Salonae. This overthrow much abated the power of Totilas. In Sicily at the same time thus it was. Liberius was sent for home to Constantin∣ple, and Artabanes by the Emperour was made sole Commander of the army in Sicily; Who took in all the Castles from the few Goths left in the Iland, after some sieges and overthrowes given them. The Goths were terrified therewith, and with
the late defeat at Sea, and their hearts with these losses were so dejected, that if any succours should come to the Romans, they had no thought of subsisting, or of keeping their footing in Italy; nor could they hope to obtain any thing from the Emperour. For Totilas had sent many Ambassadours to the Emperour, shew∣ing how the Francks had seised upon a great share of Italy, and how the rest was become wast: That the Goths should quit to him Sicily and Dalmatia, which only remained unspoyled; and should pay tribute for the wasted Lands in Italy, and serve the Emperour against all the World, and in other things be obedient to him. But the Emperour would take no notice of these overtures, but still sent away the Ambassadours, being distasted at the very name of Goths, and purposing to chase them out of the Roman Empire. CHAP. XV. NOT long before dyed Theodebert King of the Francks, having unjustly made tributary some Townes in Liguria, and the Cottian Alpes, and a great part of Venetia: The Francks thus getting without blowes, what the two Antagonists were busily fighting for. In Venetia the Goths had little; the Sea-townes the Romans had, and the Francks seised upon the rest, while neither the Goths nor Romans had leisure to make new Enemies. The Goths al∣so came to this agreement with the Francks; that during the War with the Em∣perour, both should hold what they had, and forbeare hostility. If Totilas con∣quer, that then the said acquisitions of the Francks be disposed, as should be a∣greed between the parties. But in the Kingdome of Theodebert succeeded Theu∣dibald his Son, to whom the Emperour sent Leontius a Senator, and Son-in-law to Athanasius, his Ambassadour, to perswade a League against Totilas, and to demand the Townes in Italy, unjustly held by Theodebert, and surprised during the Truce. The Ambassadour spake thus to Theudibald. Others, Sir, (it may be) have had Accidents which they expected not, but no men (I think) such as the Ro∣mans have had from you. The Emperour entred not into this VVar, nay not into any expostulation with the Goths, before the Francks had received great sums of money of him, and had promised aides, and the conjunction of their Forces: VVhich Accord they have not only not performed, but have done us injuries, which none could imagine. Your Father Theodebert hath intruded into a Pro∣vince by the Emperour, acquired with much toile and hazard, and with the Francks consent. But I come not to chide, nor complain, but to demand only, and therewithall to give you this advise; to establish the prosperity you have, and to let the Romans have that which is theirs. Some small thing often times unjustly gotten, is the occasion of losing greate and powerfull acquisitions; stable hap∣pinesse, and injustice never meeting in one point. I advise you likewise to joyn in this War, according to your Fathers engagement to the Emperour. Nothing becomes good Sonnes better, then to rectifie their Fathers erroneous Pro∣ceedings, and to ratifie what they have well done. The wish of a wise man is, that his Son may emulate his vertuous Actions, and if he have done any thing amisse, he wishes another may rather imitate it, then his Son. Indeed you should not have needed invitation to this War against the Goths, originally your Enemies, and false to you of old, and ever in War with you, without truce or quarter. Now for feare of us they fawn upon you, but being rid of us, they will soon shew their intentions. Wicked men change not their Natures with their Fortunes; in adversities indeed they hide them, es∣pecially when they have need of a Neighbour. Consider this, and renew your Amity with the Emperour, and take a revenge against your ancient Enemies. Theudibald answered this Speech in this manner. It is not now just in you, to demand our assistance against the Goths, now in Amity with us; If we prove unsure to them, we shall not be trusty to you. A bad disposition to Friends being once discovered, puts a man for feare out of the right way. Concerning the Townes you mention, my Father Theodebert was no
oppressour of his Neighbours, nor intruder: And it appeares so, for I am not rich; And he took not the Townes from the Emperour, but got them fairely from Totilas, the then owner of them, which should please the Emperour, to see one who wronged him, disseised by another, and thereby justly punished, unlesse because he would have them himselfe, and cannot get them, he will envie him that can. But let us refer the examination of these things to Arbitrators: If it shall appeare that my Father hath taken any thing unjustly from the Romans, there is reason we should give satisfaction: And we will shortly send our Am∣bassadours to Constantinople, touching the same. With this he dismissed Leontius, and sent Leudard a Franck his Ambassadour to Justinian, with three others; who at Constantinople effected what they came about. Totilas desired to get the Islands belonging to Africk, and he sent an Army to Corsica, and Sardinia, which he made tributary to him. John the Generall of Africk, sent presently to Sardinia some Forces, who besieged the City of Carna∣lis; blocking it up only but not able to assault it, having a very sufficient Garrison of Goths within, which sallied suddenly, and routed the Romans; who having lost many, ran to their Ships, and returned to Carthage, where they wintered, purposing in the Spring to renew the Voyage with greater preparations. There growes an Herb in this Island of Sardinia, which being tasted, puts men into fatall Convulsi∣ons, wherein they seem to laugh, and quickly dye of it; whence is called the Sar∣donian laughter. Corsica was anciently named Cyrnus, and in it, as there is a Ge∣neration of Dwarfes, so there are races of horses not much bigger then sheep. A mighty troup at that time of Slavonians, fel upon Illyrium, committing mischeifs not to be exprest. Justinian sent against them an army commanded by the Sonnes of Germanus, and others. Who being much fewer then the Enemy, durst not fight; but infested their Reare, and cut off some, & sent of them some prisoners to the Em∣perour. These Barbarians did infinite hurt, long pillaging the Country, and strew∣ing the high wayes with dead bodies, and then went home with innumerable priso∣ners, and all their booty, none incountring them. The Romans could not infest them in their passage over the Ister, because the Gaepedes transported them, and had for every head a gold stater for their fare: This troubled the Emperour, ha∣ving no means to restrain their passage over the River Ister, to spoile the Empire, nor their sudden retreat, which made him resolve to make a League with the Gaepedes who were then again quarrelling with the Lombards, and fearing the power of the Romans. (who had lately sworn a league with the Lombards) they endeavoured to be admitted freinds and Auxiliaries. They sent Ambassadors accordingly, and the Emperour swore a league with them also, and upon the demand of the Ambassa∣dors, twelve Senatots sware it likewise. Shortly after, the Emperour sent an army to aide the Lombards against the Gaepedes, whom he charged since the League, to have transported Slavonians over the River Ister against the Romans. The Army was com∣manded by Iustine & Iustinian the Sons of Germanus, & Aratius and Swartwall, for∣merly made Prince of the Herulians by the Emperor, but banished (as I said before) by the Herulians of Thule, and returning to Constantinople made Generall of the Co∣horts there. There was likewise Amalafridas a Goth, the Daughters Son of Amala∣fridas (who was Sister to Theoderick) by Hermenifrid Prince of the Thuringians, who being brought to Constantinople by Belisarius with Vitigis, the Emperour made him Commander of Roman troops, and betrothed his Sister to Auduin Prince of the Lombards. Of the aforesaid army only, that Amalafridas with his troops, came to the Lombards, the rest by the Emperours direction staid about the City of Ʋlpiana, in Illyrium, where was a mutiny among the inhabitants about things, wherein Chri∣stians contend among themselves, as shall be set down in my relations concerning the same. The Lombards with Amalafridas invaded the Gaepedes, and in a battell de∣feated them, and killed many: And Auduin their King sent the good newes to the Emperour of his victory; but complained of the not coming up of the Emperours army according to the League; so great numbers of Lombards having been so lately sent by him to aid Narses against Totilas.
CHAP. XVI. GReat Earthquakes at that time happened in Boeotia; and Achaia, and other parts of Greece, about the Gulfe of Crisaeum, overthrowing many Cities, as Chaeronea, Corone, Patra, and Naupactus. Many men perished, and in ma∣ny places, by the renting of the Earth, were made bottomlesse holes; some whereof closed again afterward, some continue still so, that the people are to com∣passe much Ground to come to one another. The arme of the Sea between Thessaly and Boeotia, flowed up into the land about the City of Echinae, & Scarphia in Boeotia, & overwhelmed all the Towns there: The waters lay long, & men went into the Iland lying upon that arm of the Sea on dry land; while the Sea leaving her ancient current covered the firm land even to the mountaines. Afterward it returned to the channels again, leaving the fishes upon the land; a strange & prodigious accident; For some tri∣ed to seeth and eat them; but no sooner heated, but they turned to a slymy matter, extreamly putrified. In one town, where the greatest breach was, the people being assembled at a great festivall, more men perisht then in all Greece beside. But in Italy, the Crotonians, and the Garrison commanded by Palladius, being sharpely besieged by the Goths, and wanting food, had sent to Artabanes in Sicily, protesting, if they were not instantly succoured, to yeild the Town and themselves too. But no succour was sent; and so ended the winter, and the seventeenth year of this war, written by Procopius. The Emperour commanded the Garrison at Thermopylae, in Greece,Incipit Annus 18. Bell. Goth. in an. 26. Ju∣stiniani. Et An. Dom. 552. to sail for Italy and to releive Crotona. Who getting a faire wind, came unexpected into the Haven of Crotona. The Goths upon sight of the fleet rose from their siege in much fear and tumult, and fled some by sea to Tarentum, others ran from their trenches up to the mountain of Scyllaeum. These things much deiected the Goths: And Ragnaris Commander of the Garrison in Tarentum, and Morras of that in Archerontia, two principall Goths, with their Souldiers assent, had a treaty with Bacurius, the Sonne of Peranius, Commander of the Romans in Otranto, for receiving assuran∣ces from the Emperour, and thereupon to deliver up the townes in their Guard: the Capitulation Bacurius took with him to Constantinople. And now Narses marcht from Salonae against Totilas, with a very gallant army; having received much treasure from the Emperor to levy & furnish the same, & above al to pay to the Souldiers in Italy their arreares, which were grown great, being due for many years. He was with this mony also to invite the revolted, to return again from the Goths to the Romans. The Emperor in the beginning of this war, made it very carelesly, but now his prepa∣rations were very great; for Narses seeing him eager to have him to lead the army into Italy, did like a brave Generall, protesting herein not to serve the Emperours commands, unlesse he might have competent forces; and by this resolution, he pro∣cured mony, men, and armes, befitting the Roman Empire. Then with much ala∣crity he made up gallant companies out of the Constantinopolitan Guards, and Gar∣risons of Thrace,, and many he raised in Illyrium. With him went John with his own Troops, and those left him by Germanus his Father in Law. Auduin also, prince of the Lombards, in accomplishment of the league, and for great summes given him by the Emperour, sent five and twenty hundred selected men for auxlliaries, accom∣panied with a retinue of above three thousand men. Narses had also three thousand Herulians, all horsemen, commanded by Philimuth and others, and he had many Hunnes. Dagistthaeus also was with him with his troops, being discharged of his im∣prisonment for the same purpose. Cabades went also with many Persian fugitives, who was the Son of Zames, and Grand-child of King Cabades, and long ago came into the Empire; having by the practice of Chanaranges escaped his uncle Chosroes; and a young Gepaede very valiant, named Asbadas, with four hundred Gepaedes, good Souldiers. And Aruth an Herulian, from a child bred among the Romans, and married to the widow of Mauricius the Son of Mundus, a gallant man, and accom∣panied with many old Souldiers of his Nation; Iohn Phagas also commanding many Romans, good Souldiers. Narses was a man liberall, and most forward in releiving men in want; using his disposition the more easily, by reason of his great power with
the Emperour, so that he had obliged many, both commanders and common Soul∣diers; who all upon his being now Generall were eager to serve under him, both in acknowledgement of former favours, and in expectation of great advancements by him. Above all, the Herulians, and other Barbarians loved him, having done them many benefits. Being come upon the Confines of Venetia, he sent to the Captaines of the Francks, to demand passage as for freinds. They refused it, and protested to hinder it, both for the Francks good, and for their amity with the Goths, preten∣ding also a poor excuse; because Narses had with him Lombards, their greatest E∣nemies. Narses was troubled at it; but was told by some Italians, that if the Francks gave him passage, he could not from thence get to Ravenna, nor further possibly then to Verona. For Totilas had placed in Verona a choice number of Goths under Teias, a most valiant Generall, to lye in the Romans way. This Tejas had stopt up all the passages with workes, and made in some places with much art and labour thickets, in others, ditches, deep holes, and bogs, and overflowed the Grounds; and himself lay with his army ready to fight with the Roman army attempting to force their way. This was done by Totilas direction, knowing how the Romans would not be able to passe along the Sea-coast, by so many great Rivers mouths, which made the shore unpassable; and how they had not ships enough to transport the whole army at once over the Gulfe, and coming but few at once, that he might easi∣ly hinder their landing. Narses being herewith much perplexed, John, who knew those parts exactly, advised him to march with the army by the Sea-shore, the people there being their subjects; and to be attended with some ships, and many boats, with which boats they might make a bridge over the currents of those rivers, and so make their passages: Narses followed this advise, and got to Ravenna with his whole ar∣my. CHAP. XVII. DUring the wars, came to Constantinople Ildigisall, a Lombard. The King∣dome of the Lombards of right belonged to him, but Anduin forced it from him, whereupon he fled his country. Justinian entertained him with favour, & made him Captaine of one of the Cohorts, called Scholae, which guard the Pal∣lace. He had three hundred followers his country men, who had been bred sometime with him in Thrace. Auduin demanded him of the Emperour, as a reward due to his freindship, and late confederacy; but the Emperour would not deliver him to him. This Ildigisall afterward grew discontented at the meanness of his entertain∣ments; which Goar perceived, a Goth, taken in Dalmatia, in the warrs of Vitigis, and sent Prisoner to Dalmatia, being a man proud and valiant, and repining at his condition, and upon the late revolt of the Goths in Italy, he was discovered to plot against the Roman State. This Goar perswaded Ildigisall to run from Constantinople, promising to accompany him; and so with some few with them they came to Apri, a City in Thrace, joyned with some Lombards they found there, and taking many Horses from the Emperours Horse-pastures in Thrace, they went forward. The Em∣perour commanded the Companies in Thrace and Illyrium to oppose these Fugi∣tives. First they were fought with by Cuturgurian Hunnes, lately planted in Thrace by the Emperour (as hath been sayd) But they beat these Hunnes and killed many, and then past through Thrace with their Troops, none disturbing them. In Illyrium they found an Army levyed against them, commanded by Aratius, Recithangus, Leonianus, Arimuth, and others: Who having rode all day, resolved in the even∣ing to lodge in a woody ground, and taking with them each three or four Souldiers, went to drinke of the River, being extreamly thirsty. Ildigisall and Goar, understan∣ding of their being there by their Scouts, sell suddenly upon them, and killed them all; and thenceforward marcht on at their ease, the Souldiers perplexed, and without Commanders ryding back againe. They went then to the Gepaedes: from the Gepaedes was also fled one Ʋstrigoth, the onely Son of Elimund late King of the Gepaedes, who being suppressed by Thorisin, and but a Boy, fled to the Lombards: but the Lom∣bards,
Gepaedes, and the Emperour making peace, and swearing a perpetuall amity, both the Emperour and Auduin, Prince of the Lombards, sent to Thorisin to deliver to them their common Enemy Ildigisall, requiring thus, for an expression of their new made amity, the betraying of a poor man come for refuge. Thorisin deman∣ded herein the opinion of the principall Gepaedes; who plainely disadvised it, pro∣testing to chuse rather to perish with their Wives and Children, then to be guilty of so foule an impiety. The Prince being unable to doe it without the consent of his Subjects; and unwilling to revive the Warr with the Romans and Lombards, sent to Auduin, and demanded of him Ʋstrigoth, the Son of Elimund, provoking him to a like fault, and to betray servant for servant, that his owne loathnesse in the like absurdity might check his request to another. But Auduin consented, and they both resolved upon this unjust act, and not daring to acquaint their Subjects with it publiquely, each treacherously killed his Enemy; I forbeare to tell the manner, the reports differing, as happens in all secret actions. And this was the fortune of Ildigisall and Ʋstrigoth. But in Ravenna, Valerianus and Justinus the Generalls, and the remainder of the Roman Army joyned with Narses. Nine dayes after Ʋsdrilas a Goth, Commander of the Garrison at Ariminum, wrote this Letter to Valerianus: After you had filled the World with rumours, and possest Italy with phantasmes, thinking to scare away the Goths with your bigg looks; now you have enclosed your selves in Ravenna, that an Enemy may not see your faint hearts, which you cover with the same brave countenance, and lye with your mingled multitude of Barbarians upon a Countrey, wherein you have no right: For shame rise from thence and fight, shew your selves; keep us not thus under a tedious expectation: We attend you like specta∣tors in a Theatre to see a sight. Narses laughed at the Letter, and the vanity of the Goths, and forthwith began his journey, leaving Justinus in Ravenna with a Garrison. At Ariminum he found the Bridge newly taken up by the Goths, and his passage not easie; by the Bridge it selfe was never any passage but by one man a breast, unarmed and a foot, with much adoe, though none disturbed; but now numbers opposing, it was not possible to ferry over. Narses came to the place where the Bridge had been, and studyed up∣on some expedient in this difficulty. Thither came also Ʋsdrilas with some Horse, to observe the Romans proceeding. A Souldier of Narses let flye an Arrow amongst them, and killed a Horseman; whereat Ʋsdrilas removed in some haste, and put himselfe within the Towne, and immediately at another Gate sallyed with others of his best men; thinking to take Narses suddenly, and to cut him in peices, being now searching in another part of the River for a passage. But some Herulians by accident encountred, and killed him; and a Roman knowing him, brought his head to Narses; which filled them with courage, to see God fight for them, and the Goths having a plot upon their Generall, to lose their owne Commander sudden∣ly, not by any humane designe or providence. But Narses medled not with Ari∣minum, though Ʋsdrilas were slaine, nor with any other Enemy-towne, that he might not retard his maine designe, nor distract it by any by-businesse. And the Enemy in Ariminum, having lost their Commander, gave no impediment to him in the making a Bridge, by which he past the River at his ease. He left Via Flaminia, and took the left hand way; for the Enemy had taken the strong Rock of Petra pertusa, described by me before, and all other pieces upon Via Flaminia, which made it un∣passable for the Romans; and therefore he left the shorter, and went the quieter way. CHAP. XVIII. TOTILAS, hearing what had happened in Venetia, stayd for the Army with Teias about Rome. Who being all come up save two thousand Horse, without staying longer for them, he martcht away with the rest, purposing to fight with the Romans at his best conveniency. In his way, hearing the
news of Ʋsdrilas, and how the Enemy was past the River at Ariminum, he marcht through Tuscany to the Appennine, and in a Village there called Tagi encamped. Afterward came Narses, and sate downe upon the Apennine also, in an even peice of ground, twelve miles and a halfe from the Enemy. About the place were many little round Hills, being the Tombs of the Gaules slaine by Camillus and the Romans, and they are to this day called Busta Gallorum; Busta in Latine being the remain∣ders and reliques of a funerall Pile. Narses sent some unto Totilas to desire him to to lay aside Hostility, and to entertaine at last peaceable counsells, representing how impossible it was for him, having under him but few men, and them not held together by any Law, to contend long with the whole Roman Empire. And he direct∣ed his Ambassadors, if they saw Totilas resolved upon War, to bid him instantly ap∣point a day for a pitcht Battell. They did acccordingly, and Totilas with a brave countenance told them, that by any means they must have Warr. Noble Sir, then quoth they, what time appoint you for the Battell? Eight dayes hence, quoth he, we will meet you. Narses hearing this report from the Embassadors, suspecting some cunning in Totilas, prepared, as to fight the next day: And he was in the right; for the next day Totilas came with his whole Army. And they lay one a∣gainst the other about a flight shot off: Both parts had a minde to possesse a little Hill, to gaine advantage of upper ground to shoot downe on the Enemy, and there being also no beaten way to the Roman Campe but by that Hill (the Campe being compassed by those round Hills I mentioned) they esteemed it an important place, for the Goths to gaule the Romans every way, and for the Romans to prevent that inconvenience. Narses in the night time sent fifty choice men, who surprized the place, none opposing. Before the Hill, and neer the beaten way opposite to the Goths Quarters runs a Brook; by this the fifty Romans stood close, body to body, putting themselves into a square forme. In the morning Totilas perceiving them, sent a Troop of Horse to beat them away; who rode against them furiously and with clamour, as if they would drive them away at the first onset: But they stood thick and firme, and fenced close with their Sheilds, which clashing together, and charging their Lances in sit time, all at once in order, they bravely resisted the Goths hot assault; frighting their Horses with the noise of their Sheilds, and the men with the points of their Lances. The Horses flew back, having space enough to retire, and the men crying aloud to them, could not be heard; but were thus beaten off. They came on againe, and found the same entertainment, and went off; and failing often, in the end they gave it over. Totilas commanded out another Troop of Horse, who sped as the former, and so did others after that; and Totilas having tryed many Troops, and doing no good, in the end quitted the businesse; whereby these fifty men got much reputation, but especially Paul and Ausilas; who drawing their Cimiters, layd them before them; then made many shots upon the Enemy, which killed many both men and Horses; and their Quivers being empty, they took up their Swords and Sheilds, and alone opposed the assailants, cutting off with their Swords their Lances heads. And Paul having bowed his Sword with cut∣ting the Lances, he threw it away, and snatcht from the Enemy four Lances, and by his valour was the greatest cause of their despairing. Narses for this service made him one of his Targeteirs. In the meane time both parts prepared for the Battell. Narses spake thus to his Souldiers. When a Battell is to be with equall powers, happily it is necessary with encou∣ragements to get some advantage of the Enemy for the Victory: But you, fellow Souldiers! being to fight with men inferiour in valour, numbers, all kinde of preparations, need no more but with Gods propitious to begin this Battell. Ever then with your prayers making him your assistant, march on with a noble scorn a∣gainst these theeves, the ancient Slaves of our Emperour, and now Fugitives; though for a time they have troubled us, having gotten to themselves a Tyrant pickt out of their multitude. Indeed reasoning probably, it is most strange that these men should so much as stand in ranck against us. They are weary of living, and like brutes and mad men run upon a manifest death; and from that reasonlesse resolution, as they can have no hopes, so they care not what befalls them, being men brought hither by God to be punished for their ill government. When men have a sentence against them above, they run themselves into their just chastise∣ment
You do likewise hazard in this Battell for a lawfull State, but they are Rebels, and struggle against the Lawes. They thinke not to leave their estates to their Posterity, and therefore live in momentany comforts, which they know will be lost with their owne breath: So that they are to be despised. Men without Law and Government all good hopes faile, and Victory abandons, which uses not to forsake the good cause. Totilas also, seeing his Troops apprehensive of the Roman Army, used this ex∣hortation. I am now, fellow Souldiers! to make to you my last Speech; we shall need no more after this day, which certainly will conclude the fortune of the Warr. Both our selves and the Emperour are even so spent with toyles, fights, and other necessities, that he that beats his Enemy, shall have need to fight no more, and he that is beaten will have a faire excuse to be quiet. When men reap from their affaires miserable fruits, they dare no more returne to them, but even in occa∣sions vehemently pressing, their judgements start back upon the memory of their former misfortunes. So that now it is you must fight, reserve nor your valour for any other time, and endure now the labour, not preserving your bodies for another hazard; and spare not Armes nor Horses, as things that will no more be usefull to you. Fortune having ruined all the rest, hath left us this day as the utmost of our hopes. Use now your courage, venture boldly; our hopes hanging upon such a haire, we must not be remisse for the least moment of time. The point of opportunity being past, the greatest endeavours afterward faile; the nature of these affaires not admitting stale valour; all must be unseasonable that comes after the occasion. So that let us doe effectually now, that we may finde the benefit of what we doe, and assure our selves that running away is most ruinous. Men leave their rancks and flye, that they may live; but when flying brings certaine destruction, he that stands the danger is safer then he that flyes. And let us despise our Enemies, a mingled multitude of many Nations. Such Au∣xiliaries are neither faithfull, nor powerfull. As they are of severall Nations, they have severall intentions also; and thinke not that the Hunnes, Herulians, and Lombards will hazard to the death, or esteeme their lives at a lesse rate then the Romans Money. They make a countenance of fighting, but will turne cowards when they please; either after receite of their payes, or upon their Commanders direction. The most agreeable things not done freely, but upon the necessity ei∣ther of compulsion or hire, please not, but become greivous at last. Consider all this, and fight with alacrity. The Battells were thus put in order: they stood both in front, as deepe and as long as they could make it. The left wing of the Romans Narses and John had, neer the Hill, with the choicest men of the Army, being both followed with many Lanciers and Targettiers, and excellent Hunnes, besides their Souldiers on the List. In the right wing were Valerianus, John Phagas, and Dagisthaeus, with the rest of the Roman Souldiers. The Battalion was of eight thousand foot, and the Archers of the List; and between the same and both the wings were placed the Lombards, Herulians, and other Barbarians; all whom Narses caused to alight from their Horses, and to serve as footmen, that if they should turne willing Cowards, they might flye but slowly. The left wing he put into the forme of a Wedge, and he set there fifteen hundred Horse-men, whereof five hundred were to relieve the Romans, in case they should be put to the worst; and the other thousand in the fight to get the backs of the Enemies foot, and to gaul them. Totilas placed his Army in like manner, and rode about, with his countenance and words animating his Souldiers. Narses did the like, holding out to them gilt Chaines and Bridles, as the Prizes of their valour that day. CHAP. XIX. BOth the Armies a while stood still, expecting each their Enemies assault: Then a Goth named Cocas, much esteemed for valour, rode up to the Roman Army,
challenging any to fight with him. He had been a Roman Souldier, and revolted to Totilas; to whom Anzalas an Armenian, and Lancier to Narses rode out. Cocas spurd on to give the first blow with his Lance, ayming at his belly; Anzalas turn'd his Horse aside, and avoyded the blow, then thrust his Lance into his left side, at which the Goth fell downe dead, and the Romans shouted. Then Totilas put him∣selfe between the Armies, not to fight a Duell, but to dally out the time, under∣standing the two thousand Horse to be at hand, untill whose coming he would put off the Battell. He concealed who he was, wearing a Gilt Armour, and from his Headpeice and Lance hung downe streamers of purple; and he was a gal∣lant sigh, being bravely horst. He acted his feats of Armes skilfully, winding his Horse round in a circle; then turning short, and making many such circular passages: He tost his Lance into the ayre in his full carriere, then caught it as it came downe againe, and removing it skilfully from one hand to another, he took much pride in his dexterity therein; lying upon his back, and putting himselfe upon his Buttocks and bowing this way and that way, like a Youth exactly taught all the tricks of a Dancing schoole. He spent a great part of the afternoone in these exercises; then to gaine more time, sent to the Roman Army, offering a Parley. Narses sayd, he juggled, being before all for Warr, and now making Propositions when the Bat∣tells were to joyne. In the meane time came the two thousand Horse, which when Totilas understood, and it being Dinner time, he caused the Army to draw off, and he went to his Tent; where in his owne quarter he found the two thousand Horse. He commanded his Troops to dine, and himselfe put on another Armour, then led out suddenly against the Enemy, thinking to surprize them unprepared: But Narses fearing what happened, forbade his men to retyre to their Dinner, or afternoons repose, or to put off their Corslets, or to unbridle their Horses; commanding them in their rancks, with their Armour on, to take a bit, and to have a perpetuall eye upon the Enemies returne. They stood in the same order still, saving that Nar∣ses put both the wings, with an addition of four thousand Foot, into the forme of a halfe moone. The Goths Infantry stood behinde their Horse, to receive them being routed within their rancks, and joyntly to renue the charge. Totilas commanded his men, not to use their Arrows but their Lances; which senslesse stratagem ruined him, making hereby his Army inferiour in their offensive weapons, as in all things else. For the Romans used, according to the occasion, their Arrows and Lances, and came up to the Sword, and did all which the present occasion required, either charging on Horseback, or on foot, to their best advantage; and sometimes com∣passing the Enemy, sometimes standing his charges. But the Goths Horse, without their Foot, came on with unadvised fury, trusting onely to their Lances; and be∣ing in the midst of the Romans, they found their errour, being ingaged among eight thousand Foot: By whom being gaulled on all sides, they despaired: Our Archers drawing home the two ends of their Bowes even to their foreheads, and round like a halfe moon; so that the Goths, before they could touch the Romans Horse, had lost many men and Horses. And after much mischeife sustained, they came late up to the Romans Battalion of Horse; where the Romans and Auxiliaries strove with equall valour, each one receiving the Enemy bravely, and repelling them. Then the Evening coming on, the Goths began to retyre, and the Romans to pursue; the Goths being not able to stand after their first furious charge, but turning about in confusion, daunted with the Romans numbers and good order: And they gave o∣ver fighting; thinking that some Spirits fell upon them, and that Heaven it selfe fought against them. When they came to their Foot, there their mischeife encreased; for they came not in any orderly retreat, as to take breath for a new charge, or for any other point of Warr, but ran in among them so confusedly, spoyling many, that they opened not their rancks to receive them, but ran away with them for company, and it growing darke they destroyed one another. The Romans killed them in this feare, sparing none, and none daring to look them in the faces, who exposing themselves to their Enemies, were pursued with terrours, and mastered with cowardise. Six thousand were slaine, and many taken Prisoners, and not long after put to the Sword. Among them perished many Roman Souldiers, who had re∣volted to Totilas. And now the darknesse concluded the fight. Totilas fled in the
darke with five men, of whom Skipuar was one; he was pursued by some Romans, who knew him not; among whom was Asbades a Gepaede, who had overtaken him, and was making a blow at him: but a Gothish Boy following his flying Ma∣ster, cryed out, Thou Dog! Doest thou run after thine owne Master to kill him? But Asbades thrust his Lance forcibly into Totilas, and was himselfe hurt in the foot by Skipuar, that he could follow no further; Skipuar also being wounded, stood still: And the foure men with Asbades followed no further, but carryed off Asbades. Those who accompanyed Totilas rode on amaine (thinking the Enemy pursued still) and drew him after them, mortally wounded, and ready to expire. Having run about ten miles, they came to a Towne called Caprae; there they rested, and dressed the wound of Totilas, who soon after gave up the ghost: There they buryed him and went away. Such a conclusion of his life and raigne had Totilas, having been King of the Goths eleven yeares; an end not suitable to his former a∣ctions and successes. Fortune in him insulted upon the fraile condition of man, shewing her strange proceeding, and absolute will. Shee had without any apparent merit bestowed on Totilas a long time of happinesse; and now upon the sudden she hurryed him at her owne pleasure into cowardise, and an ignoble death. These are things to men incomprehensible, but in all ages have been discoursed of accor∣ding to mens conceits and fancies, to comfort their ignorance with some seeming probabilities. But the Romans knew not of the death of Totilas, till a Gothish wo∣man told it, and shewed his Grave; who distrusting the report, opened the Grave, digged up the Coffin, and took out the body, and finding it to be Totilas, they put him into the ground againe, and reported all to Narses. Some report this over∣throw otherwise, that the Goths did not make that unadvised retreat; but that in the first skirmishing with the Romans, suddenly an Arrow, and by chance lighted upon Totilas. For being armed like a common Souldier, and rancked among them in the Battalion to conceale himselfe, he could not be knowne, nor purposely shot at. But that being mortally wounded, in great paine he gallopt away with some few with him to Caprae, and, after much misery and languishing, dyed under the cure. And that the Goths amazed to see their King thus mortally wounded, and gone off, being otherwise too weak, then became wholly out of heart, and fell into that a∣stonishment and shamefull running away. CHAP. XX. BUT howsoever this fell out; Narses rejoycing at the successe, took the True course, to attribute all unto God: And he took order in the pre∣sent occasions; and first, to be rid of his unrulely Lombards, who were infinitely disorderly, and burned houses, and ravished Women that fled in∣to Churches. He bestowed store of money on them for their Service, and sent them home; commanding Valerianus, and Damianus, his Sisters Son, with their Troops to conduct them out of the Roman Confines, that they might do no mischiefe in their way home-ward. And so soon as these were out of the Roman Territories, Valerianus besieged Verona; and the Garrison in it came to some Capitulation with him for rendring the Town: But the Francks Garrison'd in the Townes of Vene∣tia hindred it, seeking with all their endeavour to get the whole Country to them∣selves; whereupon Valerianus retired without effecting any thing. The Goths who fled from the overthrow, went over the River Poe, and put themselves into the City of Picenum, and other Townes about it, and made Teias their King. He with the Treasures left by Totilas in Picenum, sought to draw the Francks to his aide, and governed the Goths as he could in that Estate, assembling them together. Narses advertised thereof, commanded Valerianus to keep his Troops about the River Poe, to make the Goths rallying difficult: Himselfe with the rest of the Army marcht towards Rome. In Tuscany he took in Narnia, and put a Garrison into Spoletum, with direction to reedifie the Walls demolished by the Goths. He sent Troops also to attempt Perusia, commanded by two Fugitive Romans, Meligedius, and Ʋlithus; who being one of the Life-guard to Cyprianus,
was wonne by the allurements of Totilas to murther him, Commander of the Ro∣man Garrison there. Melegedius accepted the offers of Narses, and consulted with his own Followers to yeild the Town; which Ʋlithus with his Friends openly op∣posing, was slain in the Fight, and the Town was rendred to the Romans. Thus by Gods just Vengeance was Ʋlithus slain in the very place, where he had murthered his Commander Cyprianus. The Goths Garrison'd in Rome, hearing of the approach of Narses, put in rea∣dinesse to encounter him, as they could. At his first taking Rome, Totilas had burnt most of the Buildings of the City; and then considering how the Goths had not men enough left to Guard the whole Circuit of it, he took in with a lesser Wall a small part thereof, about Adrians Tomb, joyn'd it to the City Walls, and so made it as a Castle; wherein the Goths laid their things of Value, and guarded it careful∣ly, neglecting the rest of the Walls. Yet then desirous to try the Enemy, they left a few to guard that Castle, and put themselves upon the Battlements. The Circuite of Rome so vast neither could the Romans encompasse, nor the Goths guard; so that the assaults, and defences were accidentally in severall places, as the occasions were. Narses charged one part with multitudes of Archers; in another John, Sisters Son to Vitalianus, fell on with his Troops. Another part Philimuth and his Herulians infested, and they were far distant from one another: the Goths bravely resisting their Charges; and being assembled all where the Romans fell on, the rest of the Walls were empty. Dagisthaeus, with Narses consent, took some Troopes with the Ensignes of Narses, and John, and scaling Ladders, and set upon a part quite destitute of Guards, and at his ease he mounted by his Ladders, none resisting; and then set upon the Gates: the Goths seeing this, left their Guards and ran all a∣way; some to their new Castle, others to Portus. Writing this, it comes into my thoughts, how Fortune plaies with poor men; changing her looks with the times and places, and varying suddenly not only her own humour, but even the value and worth of the men. Bessas formerly lost Rome unworthily, and afterward recove∣red Petra in Lazica very bravely. And on the contrary, Dagisthaeus poorly ran a∣way from Petra, and now soon after recovers Rome it selfe to the Emperour. These things have been done from the beginning, and will be, while there is Fortune a∣mong men. Narses then marcht against the new Castle; But the Goths yeilded it and themselves,Anno 26. Just. Rome now had been taken five times in his Raigne. upon assurances for their Persons; Justinian being now in the 26th. yeare of his Reigne. Thus was Rome taken five times in his Reigne, and Narses sent the Keyes of it to the Emperour. To the Roman Senate and People, this Victory proved an extream ruine; So to men that must have a mischiefe, even their seem∣ing good Fortunes turn to their destruction; that having had a faire course, they both lose it, and undo themselves. For the Goths, now despairing of the Domi∣nion of Italy, in their flight killed all the Romans they found; And the Barbarians of the Roman Army also, at their entring the City, used them all as Enemies. Many Senators also confined by Totilas in Campania, and now repairing to Rome (when they heard it to be in the Emperours possession) the Goths quartered in the Townes of those parts, killed, and left not one Patritian alive. Maximus was then slain, whom I have mentioned formerly. Totilas also, going against Narses, called for all the Sons of the principall Romans, and choosing out 300. of the goodliest of them, pretending to breed them, but indeed holding them for Hostages: And he sent them beyond the River Poe; whom Teias now finding there, killed them all. Moreover, Ragnaris a Goth, who commanded in Tarentum, and had compounded with Bacurius, (as I have said) to yield the City to the Emperour, and given six Goths for Hostages: Now hearing of the Election of Teias, and that the Francks were desired to aide him, and he immediately to march against the Romans, he re∣fused to perform the composition; and to get his Hostages again, he sent one to Bacurius for a convoy of Souldiers to Otranto, from whence (he said) he would go to Constantinople. Bacurius, not suspecting his plot, sent him 50. men, whom Ragnaris imprisoned, and sent word to Bacurius, that if he meant to have his Soul∣ders, he must restore to him his Gothish Hostages. Bacurius led out his Forces a∣gainst him, leaving some few to guard Otranto. Upon this Ragnaris killed the 50. Souldiers, and sallied out against the Romans, and in fight was defeated, lost many men, and ran away into Acherontia, Tarentum being blockt up by the Romans. The
Romans soon after took Portus by composition, and Nepa in Tuscany, and Petra Pertusa. Teias finding his Goths too weak for the Romans, sent to Theudebald King of the Francks, importuning him with the offer of great sums of Money to joyne with him. But the Francks took the resolution best for themselves, not to bestow their lives upon Goths nor Romans, but to adventure them onely in the Conquest of Italy for themselves. CHAP. XXI. BUT Narses (hearing how Totilas had layed the most part of his Treasures in the Castle of Cuma in Campania, with a strong Garrison under his owne Brother & Herodian) sent to besiege the sayd Castle, staying himselfe at Rome to repaire the ruines, and sent others to besiege Centumcellae. Teias fearing the losse of this Castle, and the Treasures; and having no hope from the Francks, commanded his Troops to be ready for a Battell with the Romans. Narses finding his intention, commanded John and Philemuth, to martch with their Forces into Tuscany, to stop the Enemies passage into Campania, and to assist in the taking of Cuma. But Teias left his neerer way, which was to the right hand, and made a huge compasse; passing along the Sea coast of the Jonian Gulfe into Campania. Narses thereof advertised, remanded John and Philemuth, and sent for Valerianus, who besieged Petra-Pertusa, and with his whole Army, in order to fight, martcht into Campania. Mount Vesuvius in Campania (as I have sayd before) often sends out a noise like the lowing of Oxen, which is ever accompanied with a vomit∣ing out of huge quantity of Cynders. Besides (as Mount Aetna in Sicily) in the middle it hath made it selfe hollow from the top to the bottome, and below the fire burnes perpetually: The fire is so deep, that peeping in from the top, you cannot easily discerne it. When the Mountaine vomits, the flame forces off peices of rocks from the highest ridges of it, shooting up the smaller pieces farr above the Moun∣taine, and scattering the greater round about. From the top also of this Mountain runs a Torrent of fire to the foot of it, and something further, as in Mount Aetna. This fiery stream on either side makes high bancks, undermining the ground below; and when the flame comes upon it, it lookes like a flood of water set on fire. So soon as the flame is quencht the stream stops its course; and the Sediment or Lees of that fiery substance looks like dry Mud, and heaps of Cynders. At the foot of the Mountaine are wholesome Springs, from which comes the River Draco close to the City of Nuceria: On either side of this River both Armies encamped; it hath a small stream but not to be past, being deep, as having worne out the ground under the bancks very low. The Bridge which is upon it the Goths had gotten, and being en∣camped neer it, they had made upon it wooden Towers, and many Engines, and set up Balistas to shoot downe upon the Enemy. This River being such, there was no possibility for a close standing Battell. So that each part got as neer as they durst to the banks, and plyed one another with Arrows. Some Duels there were also, sometimes Romans and sometimes Goths pasting over the Bridge, and challenging all comers. Two moneths were thus consumed; and while the Goths were Masters of the Sea, their Campe being neer the Sea, was supplyed with provisions: But after the Romans had gotten their Shipps by the Treason of the Commander of them a Goth, and were re-enforced also with many other Ships out of Sicily and other Ro∣man Dominions; and that Narses had set up wooden Towers upon the Rivers bank, the Goths hearts were absolutely dejected; and for feare and famine were faine to flye up to a Mountaine neer there, called Mons Lactis. The Romans for the fastnes∣ses could not come at them: But the Goths being there in more want, and having no way to get any provision for themselves or their Horses, repenting their coming up, and choosing rather to dye by fight then to starve, came suddenly upon the Romans, who stood against them as they could, being taken unexpectedly, not be∣ing embattailed, nor under their severall Captaines; not any way in order, nor at all observing what was commanded them. The Goths quitted their Horses, and stood in a deep Battalion; the Romans left their Horses and stood in front likewise. This
fight, and the valour of Teias in it, deserves a long discourse; being equall to that of the ancient Heroes. Despaire made the Goths venture all, and the Romans stood them, though seeing them mad, yet ashamed to yeild to beaten men; and so the one weary of their lives, the other for demonstration of valour, fought with much fury, beginning in the morning betimes. Teias accompanied with some few stood in the first ranck in open view, holding out his Sheild and shaking his Lance. A great number of Romans knowing that by his fall the Battell would be ended, combined themselves against him, some charging, some throwing their darts at him. Which he received all upon his Shield, and then slew out, and killed many. His Sheild being stuck thick with Darts, he gave it to one of his Targetiers and took another. He continued thus a third part of the day, when he had twelve Darts sticking on his Sheild, that he could not move it as he would, nor beat off the Assailants. Yet he quitted not his ranck, nor gave the Enemy an inch of ground; he did not so much as turne his body, or rest his back upon his Sheild; but stood upright, as if he were pitcht into the ground, killing with his right hand, and warding with his Sheild; and calling by name his Targetier to give him a new Sheild, for his old was loaded with Darts. And in that instant, his breast lying open, was hit with a Javelin, upon which he immediately dyed. The Souldiers put his head upon a long Pole, and shew∣ed it to encourage the Romans, and to cause the Goths to despaire, and to quit the fight. But the Goths, though they saw their King slaine, yet gave it not over, and at night both retyred, and lay in their Armour. Early the next day they began again, and fought till night, not turning to any side, nor giving back; and though many were lost, yet their savage hatred held them still buckled to one another: The Goths knowing it to be their last fight, and the Romans disdaining to be overmatcht. At last the Goths sent Agents to Narses, to tell him; That they perceived their fight to be with God himselfe, and saw the power which stood against them; and their true estate now, by their former successe; that they would lay aside desperate resolu∣tions, upon condition not to be put under the subjection of the Emperour, but to live free with some other Barbarian Nation. They intreated the Romans also to af∣ford them a peaceable retreat, and in a moderate consideration of their fortune, to bestow their owne Goods upon them for their journey, such as they had left in any Castles of Italy. Narses held a consultation hereupon, where John advised him to grant the Petition, and to contend no more with men weary of their lives, nor to stirr a courage growing from desperation, which commonly proves fatall, both to the men possessed with it, and to such as encounter them. To moderate men (quoth he) it is enough to be Victorious, whereas the desire of too much may end in some inconvenience. Narses allowing the advice, they agreed upon conditions. That the Goths should have their Goods, and immediately go out of Italy; and that they should never bear Armes against the Romans. About a thousand Goths of this Company went away to Picenum, and the parts beyond the River Poe, commanded by Ildulph and some others; the residue stayd and ratified this agreement by their oaths: And the Romans took in Cuma and all the rest. And so ended the eighteenth year of the Gothick Warr, written by Precopius. Finis Lib. 4. ell. Goth. Δόξα σοὶ ὁ Θεὸςν ἡμῶ, δὸξα σοί FINIS.
