P559C 99833192 37667
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF MR. Tho. Whitchurch, October the 15th. 1691. AT CHALFONT St. PETER'S. By HENRY PARSLEY, A. M. Rector of Hedgerley, in the County of Bucks. LONDON, Printed by W▪ and J. Wilde, for G. Conyers in Little-Britain, 1692.
Imprimatur, Ex Aedibus Lambh. Augusti 11mo. 1692. Ra. Barker.
TO Mr. Richard Whitchurch. SIR, I Here present you with a Dis∣course which was preached at the Desire of your Father, and is now published for the Satisfaction of some of your Relations, and as a last∣ing Testimony of that Esteem and Re∣spects I have for your self. The Sub∣ject is of the greatest Concernment (how meanly soever it may be handled) and if well thought upon and considered, would have a mighty Influence upon us in the
due Conduct and Government of our Lives: Which that it may have, is the hearty Prayer of, SIR, Your Obliged Friend, and Humble Servant, HENRY PARSLEY.
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. THOMAS WHITCHURCH. REV. XIV. 13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labours, and their Works do follow them. IT is the common and universal Judg∣ment of Mankind, a Truth generally re∣ceived, and which cannot be contradict∣ed by any, that to be in such a State or Condition, as is not obnoxious to Pain and Trouble; and where true and real Happiness
is to be found, is the true Interest and ought to be, nay, is the constant Aim and Desire of all men, as they are reasonable Creatures; for the Soul of Man can never be so far corrupted, as not to design in all its deliberate and advised Actions, its own Happiness and Felicity as its End; insomuch, that those who have made it their Business to understand Humane Nature, have thought it enough barely to intimate and need∣less to prove this Point, because it is already by every one confess'd, no Notion more com∣mon, or more generally owned, than this, viz. That every Man desires to be free from Pain, Grief and Trouble, from any thing that is uneasie and vexatious to him, and to live in an Estate of Delight and Happiness. There is another universal Judgment of all Mankind, not denied by any man that will give himself leave to consider and weigh the worth of things; and that is this, that the greater, and more durable Delight, is to be chosen before the shorter and the less; for Delight and Happiness being in the Opinion of all Men, esteemed a thing innoffensively good, of which there can be no noxious or harmful Excess, it followeth, that the more of this excellent Con∣dition any man enjoyeth, it is so much the better for him, or he is so much the happier.
Now if we look into all those outward things that 'tis possible for us to enjoy here in this World, we cannot find Happiness inscrib'd upon them, much less the greatest Happiness, Riches, Honours and Pleasures here, as they are unsatisfactory to the Soul of Man, when enjoyed; so they are uncertain, and easily in∣terrupted, and oftentimes intermixt with Trou∣bles, or Evils, of one sort or other; either by some Casualty  Accident they may be taken from us, or else we by Diseases and Sicknesses made unfit to enjoy them; or at least, we are by Death utterly deprived of them. Now there∣fore, if we will be wise, we must chuse some∣thing for our Happiness that is more pleasura∣ble and satisfactory, more lasting and durable, and that is a virtuous Life and Actions, a Life lead according to God's Will and Command, to Right Reason and true Religion; and this will even here, amidst the Troubles and Affli∣ctions of this Life, delight our Souls with so∣lid Joys, and go along with us into the World to come, to our unspeakable Comfort; for (saith the Text) Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their Labours, and their Works do follow them. From these Words, I shall endeavour to describe unto you, the Happiness of those that die in the Lord, after
they are delivered from the Burden of the Flesh, and to prove that in Heaven God hath provided for virtuous men, an Estate of Happiness, that is in all respects the greatest that possibly can be imagined or enjoyed. And this you cannot but grant, if you consider those Parts and Properties of it, which in the Text are either explicitely or implicitely affirmed concerning it. As, I. The First Property thereof, is the Ab∣sence of Grief, and Security from it: Th est from  Labours. II. he Second s the actual Possession of Joy and Happiness; for Blessed, or hap∣py are they, saith the Text; which Bles∣sedness, without doubt, shall be in the highest , and greatest Measure, suitable to the Goodness of God, who gives it, and to the Capacities of those who are to receive it. III. Thirdly and Lastly, This Blessedness shall be of the greatest Duration; and this is also implied in the Text, for o∣therwise there cannot be a Freedom from all Sorrow, if it were possible for their Happiness to be interrupted.
1. The first Property of this Happiness, is, that they have the Absence of Grief, and Secu∣rity from it; They rest from their Labours: This is necessarily supposed to a State of Happiness, for that cannot be where Pains or Sorrows are mixt, or fill any part of the Soul, there being . Foundation for true and real Happiness, where the Place is already possest with Grief: For, as the School-men use to argue, that the Privation r Absence of Cold, is necessarily required for the introducing of Heat; so they affirm also, that the Absence of Grief or Sorrow is as necessary for the Production of Delight and Pleasure. Free∣dom from Evil is the Ground or Basis of Delight, and is in many places, of Scripture expresly as∣serted to be part of the Happiness of the Blessed n Heaven; especially by St. John, who we know, in the Gospel, was a Person so very dear to our Saviour, that he chose him out of all his Disci∣ples, more particularly to shew unto him those things that were to come to pass at the end of the World. He saw the Heavens and the Earth fly away from before the Face of God, and there was no place found for them, Rev. 20.11. He saw also a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and a new Je∣rusalem coming down from God, richly adorned, as a Bride in expectation of her Bridegroom. Rev. 21. Ver. 1, 2, 3. And I heard (saith he) a great Voice
out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God: And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain. Behold, here you have a par∣ticular Revelation of the first part of the Happi∣ness of good men in Heaven, which is a Securi∣ty from Grief; and that so clearly and plainly delivered, that there can be no doubt of it. For this came not, like the Oracles of old, in a soft Murmur or Whisper; but he heard a great Voice, and that declaring the Mind of God, not in dark Speech, or Words capable of various Construction, but in plain down-right. Terms, There shall be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor Crying, nor Pain. The Words you see are general and full, and can be meant of nothing else than a perfect Freedom from all Evil. But to discourse a little more particularly of this Point, The Evils to which we are here subject, and which in Heaven we shall be delivered or freed from, are these two, (1.) From the Evil of Sin, and from all Tempta∣tions to it. (2.) From the Evil of Affliction, or Punishment for Sin. (1.) From the Evil of Sin, and from all Tem∣ptation to it: We shall be there out of a possi∣bility
of ever sinning any more; free even from all Temptation to it. Now Sin is the great E∣ good Men complain of, and are afraid of, and notwithstanding all their Vigilance and Care, they may sometimes fall into Sin, of an Offence against God; I say sometimes, though very ely, for if it be often and generally so, they cease to be good Men; but whenever it is, it creates Grief and Trouble to them. The Life of a Christian is a continual Warfare, the Enemies he is to encounter are insinuating and powerful: He is to fight against his own Lusts and Passi∣ions, and evil Concupiscences, to mortifie Pride, to subdue Anger, to banish the least Thoughts and Motions of Malice and Revenge out of his Mind: He is to arm himself against ill Examples, and to overcome the Suggestions of Satan, who is most busie, and most subtle in making all the other Temptations, we may meet withal, operative and effectual upon us, by his Seductions and Delu∣sions, and but too often successful. So that where∣as our Souls ought to be consecrated as a Holy Temple unto the Lord, free from all Pollution of n, from all sorts of Intemperance, Injustice and Uncharitableness, and full of Purity, Love and Charity, we do here obtain these but in an imper∣fect degree, and they are often interrupted; which makes the good Man cry out with the Apostle,
Who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? and the though his Faith, and Courage, and Constancy, he daily gets ground of his spiritual Enemies; yet it is but by little and little, and he is in perpetual Danger, still being surpriz'd into some little Com∣pliances, at least contrary to the Will of God, and by degrees perhaps, without his extraordina∣ry Watchfulness, and God's Grace, into greater. This is our Portion here, and out Lot is this; but when we arrive unto those Regions of Bliss and Glory that are above, have once weathered these short Storms, prov'd our selves good and loyal Subjects to God Almighty, in fighting a∣gainst his and our Enemies (I mean our irregu∣lar Passions and Appetites) and overcoming them too, in great measure; if the general Bent and Inclination of our Souls have been to serve, and to please God, He will graciously forgive the little Follies and Imperfections of Humane Nature, and receive us into his Favour, never to be for∣feited any more; where we shall neither sin, nor have any Temptation to sin; but be under an happy Impossibility of offending God. Thus shall we be freed from the Evil of Sin. (2.) In Heaven we shall also be free from the Evil of Affliction, or Punishment for Sin: For I reckon all the Miseries of this Life, all the Im∣perfections of it, both of Mind and Body, viz. the
imperfection of our Knowledge, the Diseases and Infirmities of our Bodies to be the Effects of Sin, and a Punishment of God for it. Whatsoever is inful and burthensome to Nature, is a Fruit of Sin, and Mark of our Rebellion against God. Now, as in Heaven there is an absolute Freedom n all Sin, so there will be also from all Imper∣fection, Pain, and Misery, which are the proper Attendants and Consequents of Sin. There shall be no Blindness in the Mind, no Perverseness in the Will, no Error in the Judgment, no Disorder  the Affections, no Wearnss in seing God. There we may hope to be so happy, as to know without Mistake, to judge without Partiality, and to be Wise without Folly: Love is there without Hatred, Jealousie or Envy; Joy with∣out any Sighing or Sorrow, Praises without Com∣plaints, Obedience without Reluctance; in one ord, perfect Purity and Holiness without Spot or Blemish to sully the Glory of it. As this low∣ Region of the Air, we see is the Place of Clouds and Darkness, Thunder and Lightning, Storm and Tempest; but to the Dwelling of the Sn and fived Stars, none of these pitchy Va∣ours ascend to obscure their brightness, or trou∣ble their Peace; just so i ths World the Scene of Misery and Vexation, Confusion and Disor∣der; our Bodies are tossed with several Storms,
and our Souls many times hurried with more vi∣olent Tempests, the fierce Gusts of their own Passions; but when we ascend to Heaven, that Region of Light, we shall be out of the reach of these Troubles, and find our selves in a State of perfect Rest and Joy, without the least Dis∣gust to abate our Contentment. Now this Free∣dom from the Sins and Follies, the Troubles and Inconveniencies, the Sicknesses and Diseases, im∣perfections, that we are here liable to, must needs be very delightful. Suave mari magno, turbantibus aequora nautis, E Terra alterius magnum spectare laborem. It is a pleasant thing (saith Lucretius) for one that has been in a troublesome and tempestuous Sea, and is himself arriv'd safe on the Land, to look back and behold the Troubles and Dangers those are exposed to, who are yet toss'd upon the Waves; ot th it can be pleasant for one Man to s ther in Distress, but a Joy to be in Security, and to view those dismal Danger which he himself hath so narrowly escaped. S likewise it is pleast to the Blessed in Heaven, after they are themselves in Safety and Security, to remember all the Inconveniencies, Hazards, and Afflictions which they were here exposed to
in this Life, and those eternal Torments they re obnoxious to, and which is the miserable Lot and Portion of others, and they themselves,  the Mercy and Goodness of God, have so rly escaped. This very Consideration must needs afford them fit Matter of Praise, and Thanksgivings to God, who hath placed them in a blessed Estate, not obnoxious to any of their mer Griefs, Sicknesses, or Pains; and hath also redeemed them from the dreadful Region of Darkness, and brought them to his own mar∣llous Light. This then is the first Property of the Happiness of those that die in the Lord,  the Absence of Grief, and Security from Evil. They rest from their Labours. The Second Property of those that die in  Lord, is the actual Possession of Joy and Happiness; for Blessed, or happy, are they (saith the Text.) And this Happiness, it may be rea∣ly suppos'd, will principally consist, In the Perfection of our Knowledge, our Understandings being enlarged and widend, shall  a right Knowledge, and clear Sight and Vi∣ of God. We here know but in part, and see through a Glass darkly: But when that which is  is come, then that which is in part shall be  away, 1 Cor. 13. v. 9, 10, 11. There the Joy of the Righteous shall be great from the Pos∣session
of God himself, by the clearest Know∣ledge, and purest love of his Excellencies. They see him as h is, 1 John 3. v. 2, 3. i.e. We shall not behold him, or know him as we do now, by Similitudes, Resemblances, and Expressions bor∣rowed from other things (which is all our Na∣tures are here capable to bear;) but by a clear Non of him formd in our Minds, whereby they will be fill'd with a Knowledge of him so clear, distinct and strong, that will even turn  n his own Nature Life and Happiness. The holy Soul shall there see the King in his Beauty, all the Perfections of that infinitely glorious and blessed Being in their Brightness and Purity. And this Sight will cause the most ardent Love, by which there shall be an intimate, or vital Union between the Soul and its Happiness, and from thence will spring perfect Delight, Psal. 16.1. For  the Presence of God there is fulness of Joy, and at his Right Hand there are Pleasures for ever∣more. And it cannot be otherwise, for how pleasant must it needs be, to be delivered from the Imperfections, Errors and Mistakes concern∣ing Persons or Things here; nay, of God him∣self: As to Persons, we sometimes judge falsly here, and most often; sometimes too severely, at other times too favourably; too severely, ei∣ther through mistake, not knowing from what
Principles the Actions of Men proceed, or from want of Charity to derive them from the best;  favourably, out of Partiality or Ignorance:  some Men may seem a great deal better than  are, and others a great deal worse. Now  Mistakes on both sides will be there taken ay, and every one shall appear as he is really a himself, and be judged accordingly. So that ough a Man should have here the Applause of  whole World, yet if he be inwardly bad and vicious, he shall be miserable, and though  be condemn'd and hated of all, yet if he be cerely good and vertuous, he shall be happy. And then, as to our Judgment of God, in the Dispensations of his Providence, we are some∣times at a Loss, how they can consist with a God of infinite Goodness and Justice; but there the Intricacies of God's Providence shall be un∣d, the Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness  God in hi darkest Dispensations, and most un∣chable Actions, shall be cleared up. There our Understandings shall be extraordinarily and su∣pernaturally illuminated, and our Knowledge be derfully encreas'd and advanc'd, and our Minds dingly pleased and delighted, both by the Repetition and new Variety of Contemplation. here we shall be freed from all those Mists and Vapours that here becloud our Reason, and hin∣der
us from the best Exercise thereof, the Love of God, and Contemplation of his Perfections, which must needs be very delightful: for if the Light of the Sun be so pleasant, that every Morn¦ing revives the World, and renders it new to us, which was buried in the Darkness of the Night; how infinitely pleasant will the Light of Glory be, that discovers the absolute and universal Ex∣cellencies of the Deity; such as are his pure and unspotted Holiness, his immense Wisdom and Understanding, his Almighty Power, and his infinite Mercy? Oh! how inexpressibly great is the Happiness that proceeds from the Illuminati∣on of a purify'd Soul, when such is the Amia∣bleness of God, that his infinite and eternal Feli∣city ariseth from the Fruition of himself, as ours does from the Enjoyment of him; so that our Happiness will be of the same Nature, though not in the same Degree with God's himself. For we shall (as our Saviour hath promised in the fore-cited Place) see God as he is, i. e. we shall have as real an Enjoyment of him, and as sensibly perceive it, as we do now any Good in this World, though the manner of it is not certainly known. Let us therefore conceive with ou selves, as well as we can, what his infinite Per¦fections are, his Wisdom, his Goodness, his Pow∣er, his Unchangeableness, his Immortality and
Bliss, and then make account there will be a live∣ly Communication between us and all these, which will make us Partakers of his Happiness: We shall not only enjoy such good things as flow from his greatest Favour and Love; but in our Measures, and according to such Capacities as he will give us, be what he himself is, bear some similitude to him in Wisdom, Goodness, and Happiness; we shall be filled with Divine Joys and Pleasures, by being filled with a great sense of him, and strong Love to him, and a lively Resemblance of his blessed Nature, immutably and immortally, without any Change, and with∣out any End. There, if we live and die good Men, we shall enjoy all the Effects of an holy Friendship (if I may so speak) with infinite good∣ness, and receive such Communications from his boundless Love, as shall make us really and sub∣stantially happy, like as he himself is. This hen is one part of the Happiness of the Blessed (and a great one too) viz. it consists in the Per∣fection of their Knowledge. 2. Another Part of the Happiness of Heaven consists in the Union of Affection among the lessed Inhabitants thereof; a want of which, causeth a great part of the Troubles of this Life: Those who serve God faithfully here, shall then go to the Company of the Prophets and Apostles,
and all the holy Men of God, that have been in all the Ages of the World, to those pure and immaculate Beings, full of Love, to their Ma∣ker; and of Kindness and Charity one towards another, no Animosities or Divisions shall be there, nothing that interrupts their Peace: Pee∣vishness and Passion, Mis-judgings, Mis-constru¦ctions, hard Censures of each others Actions, too much Self-Love, Difference in Judgment, Pride and Emulation imbitters mens Converse here; but there Corruption on all sides shall be removed, their Judgments and Affections united, and their Dispositions exactly suited; they shall be free from all manner of Injury, Envy, Suspition, or Uncharitableness. The Prince of Peace reigns in the Heavenly Jerusalem, and preserves an everlast∣ing Serenity and Calmness; the mutinous Spirits that rebell'd, were presently chas'd from thence into this lower Region, where they brought Trouble and Disorder: there is not, there cannot be the least Jar or Discord between those happy Inhabitants, an inviolable Love unites them all, they enjoy without Envy; for infinite Blessed∣ness is not diminished by the Number of Posses∣sors, the Inheritance in Light is common to all. Although the Angels are distinguished by their several Orders and Ministrations, yet a Chain of holy Love and Charity binds all their Affections
together; and though the Saints shine with dif∣ferent Degrees of Glory, yet, as in a Chorus of Musick, the different Voices make one entire Harmony; so there they are all united by the most ent Love and Affection: There where there  no cross Interests to contend with, no Ma∣ or Envy, no Mistake or Prejudice, no Storms or Tempests of unruly Passions, or inordinate res to ruffle or discompose their Happiness to  Eternity. There the Righteous shall enter  those blessed and peaceful Habitations, where e of those Jars and Contentions, with which s World is exercis'd, disturb their Rest; no sputes or Controversies, no Ill-will or want of rity marr that everlasting Q which they always enjoy, when they adore the God of Peace, and follow the Lamb, the Prince of Peace. The tests and Divisions amongst us, must needs ke all the Sons of Peace grow weary, and with h the Psalmist, that they had Wgs like a ve, that they might fly away, and be at est,  hasten their Escape from the stormy Wind  Tempest, and make them long for those cool  Shades of the Grave, and for that Peace  is in the Region beyond it, that Peace which  never be interrupted; which bing m o he . Property of the Happiness of the blessed,  That it shall be of the logest Duration, and
that is Eternal and Everlasting; without which, it could not indeed be the greatest Happiness: for such a Life cannot be the most happy, which is not secure of its own Eternity. If therefore a∣ny thing be design'd for the full Satisfaction of Humane Nature, it must be a Delight that shall last for ever, and that is such, that it must needs be satisfactory, seeing no man can wish for more than eternal Happiness. The most full Enjoyment of all the good Things this World affords, is nor to be called or accounted Happiness, not only be∣cause they are vain and empty of true Satisfacti∣on, but also because not permanent and lasting; they are soon gone, soon decay'd, and quickly parted withal; Riches are not for ever, neither doth a Crown endure to all Generations, Prov. 27.24. but Heaven is an Inheritance as safe as great. Here we are subject to Time, that carries us and all our Goods down its swift Stream; but there Eternity, that is fixt and unchangeable, embraces us in its Bosome. As God's liberal Hand be∣stows, so his Powerful preserves our Happiness; the Blessed shall sing everlasting Hymns of Glory, and Songs of Thanksgiving to the great Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, who hath pre∣pared and purchased that Felicity for them, and hath brought them to the secure Possession of it. But when we have said all we can of the Happi∣ness
of Heaven, we must acknowledge that we  infinitely short of what it is in it self. It is pared in Scripture to a Crown, a Kingdom, ast; but is indeed much more than all this:  a Kingdom without Cares, a Crown with∣out a Cross, a Feast without Satiety. It is call∣ed by these Names, because these are the great∣ things this lower World hath. These Words amongst us sound high, and speak Power, and our, and Plenty, and Pleasures, and what  World calls good, and therefore Heaven is represented by such things which we understand and regard. God Almighty saw our Infirmity, that we cannot well Judge of Delights that are purely Intellectual and Spiritual, and hath so far descended to us, as to draw us sme Sc of Heavenly Joys in the Shapes and Figures of our  earthly Pleasures; such are th of ast∣ings, the Possession of Riches, Honours and the e, but then these are but low and hort Re∣prestions of the things themselve; such  of Heaven, as the Tabernacle and Temple a∣g the Jews were, o this ad the other World. They were Images in little, but came greatly  of what they represented  these things  Heaven; for without any such  deceitful gs, there shall be abundance f Peace, and ness of Joy, an exceeding and eternal weight
of Glory. Finally, In the present State, we are not capable to receive the full Knowledge of Heaven; what we understand, is infinitely de∣siable; but th most glorious part is still undis∣coverd. The Apostle tells us, in the First E∣pistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 2. Ver. 9. Eye hath not s, our Ear heard, neither hath i entred into the Heart of Man, to conceive what God hath prepar∣ed for those that love him. We have reason to break forth in the Language of the Psalmist, and say, How great is thy Goodness, O Lord! which th  ld up for them that fear thee. We have nothing else to do but to supply the Defects of our Understanding with an holy Admiration, and make good use of what is discovered to us. As, 1. From what has been said, we may learn this great Truth, that Heaven alone is the Place of Happiness and that tis only the good and he  Christian, that shall be in , only such w s good Works do ow ; not that the best Works of the  Men  any such Condition; but that these Works which also are persed by the Grace and Assistance of God, do qualifie them for that Happiness which is purchased for them by the Merits of Jesus Christ. If ever therefore we expect to arrive at Heaven and Happiness as our
End, we must endeavour after Holiness and Righteousness, as the V through Jesus Christ our Lord; and let  ing divert us from it, neither the Hopes of , not the Smiles or Trowns of this World. If this Principle be but nly fixed in us through God's Grace, the greatest Difficulties, not the hardest Labours ill scarcely discourage our Resolution, or hin∣ our Endeavours to obtain it: If it be diffi∣cult for Mankind to reduce their natural Inclina¦tions to a Compliance with Christ's Precepts, to deny the inordinate Appetite of sensual Pleasure, to deny unlawful Gains and Interests to the De∣sire of Wealth and Riches, to mortifie Pride, to subdue Malice, Anger, Revenge, and other sinful passions; to retain Piety towards God in a pro∣fane and wicked Age; Truth and Justice to∣wards Men in a deceitful and injurious VVorld: if it be difficult thus to do, yet he that hath nly fix'd this Principle in his Mind, that this is the Way to Heaven, and Heaven alone the Place of Happiness, will attempt to make his way thither, through these or any other Difficul∣ties, in the View of the Glory set before him. For, 2. A Prospect of this Happiness should recon∣cile our Minds to any Condition, to any Circum∣stances of Life, which the Divine Providence
may think fit to bring us to. We are to re∣member, that God sent us into the VVorld for Religion, we are but to pass through our pleasant Fields, or our hard Labours; but to lodge a little while in our fine Fields, or our meaner Cottages; but to bait in the way at our full Tables, or with our spare Diet. Let us not therefore have any great Esteem for the things of this VVorld; there is no other reason why they should be loved or valued by us; but as they conduce to our chief End, which is God and his Glory, and our Happiness and Felicity. VVe should here imitate the Traveller, who, when fix'd in his Determination of arriving at some certain Place, if he meet with two or three several VVays, desires not this more than that, but on∣ly as this may more readily bring him to his Rest: He cares not much whether the VVay be plain or hilly, whether it lead to the Right Hand, or the Left, all is indifferent, so it brings him whither he would go. After the like manner we are to behave our selves in the Use of the things of this World; we are not much to love the good things thereof, nor fear the Evils of it; but free from both, make only choice of that which leads to our Salvation, and fits us for that Country we are seeking: If Po∣verty or Meanness brings us to God, we are to
embrace it with both Arms, and esteem it;  Riches or Honours would withdraw us  him, we must trample them under foot, and cast them from us; if Sufferings and Af∣ftions, Disgraces and Neglect, the unjust Re∣proches and Calumnies of men, assist us to  Heaven, we are to rejoyce thereat, and to ive them with all Submission and Willing∣ We are neither to desire or abhor the d or evil in this Life, but as it unites or se∣es us from God, as it brings us nearer to,  drives us farther from our supream Happi∣ness, always remembring that compleat Happi∣nes s only there to be expected, where our ey ends. And who would not contented∣ go through a Prison to a Palace, a barren Wil∣ness, to a Land of Promise? Who would be uneasie under all that Load of Afflictions that may befall him here, by the Malice and Contri∣vance of evil men? Nay, who would not en∣de the Cross, and despise the Shame, for the  that is set before him? Did we always thus act, how unmov'd would the Rumours of Wars, and Devastations leave us, which invade and agitate mens Breasts, and disturb their most pleasant and compos'd Hours? We should let him alone to rule the World that made it; to take care of us, who hath engag'd it, whose
Providence watcheth over us, and whose Eter∣nal Happiness awaits us. Were we but once arriv'd at a true Indifferency of Mind, Acquies∣cence in, and ready Compliance with the Infi∣nite VVisdom, Power and Goodness of God, and feared Doing instead of Suffering Evil; how serene! how full of Tranquility-should we be amidst the Changes, Tumults, and Commoti∣ons of this stormy Region, this uncertain State, and how absolutly resign'd to the VVill of God in all things? 3. From what hath been said concerning the Nature of the Ha iness of Heaven: This should en us to endeavour after that Frame and Temper of Mind here, those good Disposi∣tions of Soul, as may fit us for the Enjoyment of it. For instance, Does the Happiness of Heaven consist in the Perfection of your Know∣ledge? eg of God, that he would open your Eyes here, enlighten your Understandings, and translate you from Darkness to Light. Believe and consider, that wilful and gross Ignorane here, is but a bad Preparation for Perfection of Knowledge hereafter, and that those are not like∣ly to come to Heaven, that will not be at the Ps to understand  very first Principles of their Religion. And this, as it will put you upon endeavouring after Knowledge, so it will
stir you up to practice and live up to the Know∣ledge of those things, which God hath been pleased most clearly and plainly to reveal in his VVord; for without Practice, all the Know∣ledge in the VVorld signifies nothing, and the y way to encrease in Knowledge, is to pra∣ctice what we already know; to him that hath shall be given, is as true of Knowledge as of Gce. Further, Does the Happiness of Hea∣ consist in a clear Knowledge and Sight of God, and in an Imitation of his Perfections? Then endeavour to turn away your Eyes from beholding Vanities: Make it your Business to follow after Holiness, without which, no man all see the Lord. Labour to see God here, that to you may be the fitter to see and enjoy him heafter; to see him in his Works, to search af∣tr, behold and admire that infinite Power, Wis∣m and Goodness, which are visible and legible  the VVorks of Creation and Providence; but re especially, study to see and know God as e hath reveal'd himself in his VVord, to see his Holiness in his Precepts, his Justice in his Threat∣nings, his Grace and Goodness in his Promises;  so by a Sight of the Righteousness and Equi∣ of his Commands, you may be brought to an rvation of, and an hearty Compliance with  Divine Will here, and be in a good Capacity
for ever to adore, admire and imitate the Di∣vine Perfections hereafter. Finally, Does the Happiness of Heaven consist in a Union of Af∣fections amongst the blessed Inhabitants there∣of? Let us then endeavour to remove far from us, all Anger, Malice and Revenge, all those hateful Qualities that will render us sit only for the Converse of wicked and apostate Spirits, and endeavour after such calm and quiet, such charitable and peaceable Tempers, as may make us with infinite Delight, when we go away from this wrangling and contentious World, conseit our selves with the blessed Inhabitants of the other. I should now conclude, had not Custom made it almost necessary to say something upon these Occasions, which I shall do very briefly of  deceased Friend and Neighbour. He  take his Sickness very patiently, in that  a perfect Resignation of himself  God: He was very sensible of his approach¦ing End, and earnestly desired to receive  Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which he did with great Devotion. He express'd imself very charitably of all, and said, He ow'd o Man the least ill will; but was in perfect Charity with all the World, forgiving all those that any ways offended him, and if he had
given Offence to any, desiring the like from them; relying upon the Merits of Christ for the Pardon of his Sins, and the Salvation of his Soul. I might perhaps say a great deal more; but I love not to speak much on these Occasions, and what I have here to add, is only this, That He was a kind Husband to his Wife, an indul∣ge Father to his Children, and a good Neigh∣bour to his Friends and Acquaintance. But to conclude, That which now only remains to be done, is from this Instance of Mortality here be∣fore us (whose Soul we hope is at rest with God) earnestly to exhort you to think on your own Mortality, and to prepare for Immortality: In this short Life, to prepare for an endless one,  it may be happy. This Life is in it self  worth any thing; but the right use of it is o ite Importance. It is like the very first step  ght or wrong Way, tending to a Palace  Prison, which indeed is a small thing in it  but its Efficiency and Tendency is of as mu Concern as the whole Way and End it se. Which Preparation, is in short, by a For∣saking all former Sin and Wickedness, which God will pardon for Christ's Sake, and an Em∣bracing of Vertue and Goodness. This is that only which will be accepted of God and not bare Repentance, without Amend∣ment,
unless it be where God sees good Fruits would follow. We are to endeavour to forsake all Sin, and sincerely to practise our most excel∣lent Religion; live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, which will bring here with it God Blessing, with the Peace and Satisfaction of a good Conscience, and qualifie us for that Hap∣piness which Christ hath purchased for us, and will give to all such as are meet to be Partakers of it. FINIS. Some Books Printed for George Conyers, in Little-Britain. A Guide to young Communicants: Or plain Directions so the Receiving of the Lord's Supper. In twelve Questi∣ons and Answers; with Meditations and Prayers, &c. Price A Guide to the Alar: Or, A Preparation for a worthy Re∣ceive, of the Lord's Supper; with Meditations and Prayers for every Day of the Week Price 1 s. The  Man's Path way to Heaven: Wherein a Man may see plainly whether he shall be saved or damned. By Ather Dnt. A Tratise of Prayer. By George Bright, Dean of St. Aph. Rector of Loughborough, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Ma∣jesty.
