P890 12610752 64356
Navil Payn's Letter, AND SOME OTHER LETTERS That Concern the Subject of his LETTER, With short Notes on them for the clearer Information of the Members of Parliament. In order to Navil Payn's Trial. ADVERTISEMENT. A fuller Account is intended of what past in the Committee and Parliament upon the subject of Dangers, by Invasions from Abroad, or Insurrections at Home, with such Ad∣ditions as will give further Light to that Matter, parti∣cularly to some Passages of Payn's Letter that have occa∣sioned so much Noise. THe following Letters are mark'd by the Alphabet for Distinctions sake. The Letter A had enclosed in it the Letters B and C. The Secretary produced in Parliament the Original Letter C, but not the Originals of A and B, hav∣ing left them at London, but now he has got them. The Letter A with the other two in it were taken at, or going from London to France by the way of Holland; it was directed to Monsieur Vincent Nerieux Marchante in Roterdam, with these words under, Mrs. van den Anchore. It is known that this is an ordinary Direction for such sort of Letters from London to Paris, which seem to be the usual Conveyance for Scots Letters too: As appears by the Duke of Gordon and Doctor Cockburn's Papers now in the Advocat's Hands. A: I Have had none from you since the 5th, of this Instant, You'r Its plain enough that this Letter was written from London. stile, so that my Payn. Friend grows very impatient, but I have sent your last with that of Melfort's Letter to Payn was delivered by Mr. James Smith Son to Mrs. Smith. David's, and by this time I suppose he is satisfied; for I am informed all mine came safe to Him. But I have sent you his to let you see what he says in his Fanatick Hu∣mour, for I know he is troubled he has no Answers, for his Friends here that write to him constantly by me, and I am assured they take
it very ill, and think him or me in fault that sent them. Therefore I earnestly beg of you to Solicit David to say something for they are good Friends of your The late King. Brothers and not to be Slighted My old Who she is, is no Mistery. Countess also writ you her self, but I never heard whether you received it, and every week I have her duty to your Brother and Queen. Sister and Service to you, and always says she lives no longer than she hears your good Family is in Health, and I am indeed very much concerned least I hear you are ill since your last in which you assure of the pain in your head which grieves me to the Heart, For I prefer it before my own Therefore Gods Sake let me have the sa∣tisfaction of hearing from you as often as you can: I have not fail∣ed a post since my Friend went and all double. I have very little news but This Paragraph and the enclosed Letters show the time in which this Letter was written tho' it be not dated. one thing I cannot ommit to tell you, that one Pain a Mad Jacobite, is removed to the Castle of Stirling, and that the Lord Seaforth is to by tryed for his life, and many more such as these are likely to have their due reward, As to our Parliament Sea-more made a speech, and told them of the House that the French was making great preparation, which must be provided against both with a Fleet and Money; but this is thought was only to presse for raising Money, so that I think to Comfort you, we have no Because the Fleet only, and not Money alone could hinder a Descent in Scot∣land. fears of that. Dear Aunt I have sent you That is the Letter C which is from the Nephew Mr. Payn, whose Letter is to his Aunt too. one of Nephews, and beg you to do what you can for one in his Circumstances for I cannot chuse but love him. I am told that Mrs It appears elsewhere who Mrs. Mowet is, and that it is a man and no mean man. Mowet cannot be long out of the That is in Prison, see the beginning of the Letter C. Doctors hands so very ill she is. But more of this from my That is one under the Name of Gray the Writer of the Letter B. and of the Let∣ters D. and E. apparently an English man. Friend that I hope will be here ere this come to your hands if his health will permit, so that if you write, your's will meet him in Town, if it please God to whom I resign all my Friends and Affairs: I was to see for Answer of Mr. Iske for whom I left the Letter of mony business to get Answer, but could not light of him, but he had your Letter, but I will by the next Post, Pardon this long Scroll, and give me leave to continue my humble Thanks and be Honoured with the title of Madam your most Grateful, Humble, Servant, That is Mary Brown, as will appear by the Cover to the Letters D. and E. Mary B. There is found among Mrs. Smiths Papers, a Letter dated the 4th. February, the Direction of it is torn, but so much remains—Son to the—Robert Jameson in Edinburgh. It is written by the same Hand with the Letter A. and Signed M. B, in stead of Mary B. It is plain that this M B. is at London, and manages the Corre∣spondence betwixt Aunt at Paris and Nephew Payn here, with the assistance of Mrs: Smith. The Letter is thus; the Blanks are Words that cannot be read. Loving Mother, Feb: 4. I have this day by a Honest fast Friend sent you 50 Drames of the best Balm of Gilead that I could get, you will certainly have it, do not you Trouble your self for a day I have taken care you should have no Trouble, for God sake say what you can to my Sick Friend for me, for I am so oppressed that I cannot write to her, but Pray let her send me a Note under her hand at the Receipt of her present, and then I shall have as much more when is satisfied, but the Note must be made to me for I had Orders, this is desired, and Pray let her thank Mr. Friend which said little of it to me, but my Aunt assured me he did so much in it to my Aunts Brother and David that they could Refuse no longer, for he was very plain with
them, and I find is so in all their Affairs, which I think is Just. I saw one that came from my Aunts Brother this Week, but I hear no∣thing of my poor Brother which Distracts me, but they are all well and in good Heart but no more, but to his Business I hear sad News of Sick No doubt the late Arch∣bishop of Glasgow, who be∣ing then Prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, had leave from the King to re∣tire to Holland, Friend that the Doctors says she must change the Air, I wonder you say nothing of it since Lady L. tells all Pray let me know the  let not Mr. L. know I tell you Pray let me hear from you by which you will Oblige your Grateful Daughter and Obliged Friend for ever whilst M. B. The back of this Letter being Torn, there appears only—Son to the—Robert Jameson in Edinburgh. The Secretary was obliged at London to restore the Originals of the Letters D. and E. of which he produced the Copies in Parliament, but when he had them they appeared to him to be written by the same Hand with the Letter B. (of which he has the Origi∣nal) And therefore by one under the Name of Gray, for so the Letter D is signed, it is evident by the Letters themselves that this Gray is an English Man, and the Concerter and Manager of the whole Business, it seems he was lurking in the North of England when he wrot the Letters B, D, E. for they are dated the 4th. and 25th. of December, that is on Sundays, which is the day after the Post day at Edinburgh, which is Saturday It is evident by the Letter B that he was going into Scotland; and by the Letters D and E that he actually went to Scotland. It is otherwise known that an English Man of such a Character came to Edinburgh about the time here spoke of, and that he keeped no mean Company there. December 4: B I Had yours this morning with That is, it seems one to himself. one to Mr. Gray, I am strang∣ly Amazed I have none from your It is plain the Letter has been written to Mary Brown Aunt, I cannot find the meaning on't and never man had more need of Comfort than my self at this time, I have Letters from your That is, Mrs. Smith Mary Brown's loving Mo∣ther. Mother and Macgill my Lord Mel∣forts Page confesses that he brought Letters from his Ma∣ster to a Noblemen under the Name of Balfour, Mrs. Ford ownes that she received the Letters from him, and deli∣vered them to Mrs. Smith who absconds. It seems too otherwise clear enough who Balfour is, and that he and Mrs. Mowet are one. Balfour which would strike That is the News menti∣oned in the Letter A and the putting in of the new Agents mentioned in the Letter C. to wit, the Advocate and Justice Clerk, which was done in the end of Mr. John∣stouns Month, a Week or two before the date of this Letter. Terrour into any man, but I'm resolv'd what will Befate, To enter into that Cursed That is Scotland which shews he was then in the North of England. Countrey and put my luck to the last Tryal. I do not know what can be the meaning of those I wish so well to teaze me at such a distance, it shall not break the Respect I have for those, I'm obliged to. Your Friends fa∣vouring me at this distance, and so little Merit of mine, all Obli∣gations being on that side, makes me the unhappiest man in the World, I only wish it were in my power, my Life should not be too dear a Sacrifice. You may assure your self I am ever your servant, and you tell me you have not seen my Wife nor heard from her Bro∣ther, 'tis no matter I care not how few you see of my Acquaintance, and pray tell all I am still in That is in London. Town. Be sure you write to your and my That is their commen Aunt at Paris. Complaint that she may be sensible how I re∣sent not hearing from her, and that I do not altogether deserve ill us∣age after the Charges I have undergone and the Hazards I have ris∣qu'd for their sakes, once more I am for ever yours.
C. December 3. 1692 I Am forced in ill for want of better Paper Payn Writs to the same Aunt. dearest Aunt to let you know that I am obliged to Change That is change his open prison of Blackness for close Prison in Stirling Castle. The King had ordered this on the 14 of November. The Councils Order is on the 29. and was given out on the 1st of De∣cember, two dayes before the date of this Letter, he was actually sent to Stirling on the 6th. my bad Lodging for worse, being relapsed into my old He had been closs Priso∣ner before in Edinb. Castle. Distemper again, my Phi∣sicians being resolved not to let any Breathing visit me till it please God to restore me to my perfect Health, they alledging that my keeping too much Company doth great Mischief. All my Conso∣lation in this miserable condition is that Mrs. This Name is in several other Letters. Friend is just come into the Neighbourhoood, and tho I fear I shall not be so happy to see her, yet my Dearest Cozen I doubt not will do it speedily; For so it is contrived to be by my dear and diligent Friends Negotiation, who is the very Life and Vigour of all your The late King. Brother's Affairs here and the prop of his Family Runing, going and spending her self to the last penny in his Service. And but for hers in the first place, and Mrs Mowats in the second, your poor He himself, for he writs to his Aunt. Nephew might have pe∣risht long ere this for mere Its known they neglected to send him money. want, to no great Credit no more than Advantage of your Brother, for tho he may have many more able, he has not a faithfuller Servant in the World. Oh His Fanatick Humour in Letter A. God how can he be so despised amongst his Relations when their Enemies consider him so much, and all their honest Acquaintance that knew him have some esteem at least for him. This is all I will and less I cannot say for all the strange Regardless usage he has met with∣all from Its known that in the late Reign Melfort was his Ene∣my David, and let it stand as it doth since Mrs. Mowat This word is thus spell'd in other Papers of Payns Hand-writing lately seised in his Chamber Wrights me word she and Mrs. Mowet and Melfort begin to be reconciled, and so Payn hopes to be reconcil¦ed with Melfort too. Its plain Mowet is a man, and a man of Note. him begin to understand one another better, and are like to be perfect Friends, which for your Brother's sake I hope will continue real on that side, as I am sure it is on this. She and Mowet and Little-John here are Balfour, and Little-John in Letters D. E. and their reconciliation there as here is the foundation of all. Its known who among the disaffected party were recon∣ciled this last Winter. Litlejohn has had a meeting too, where all things have been so explained between them that I hope will produce a lasting Concurrence in diligence for your Brothers Service, to which sole end all my Endeavours therein have tended, and now I assure you See in Letter E. I thank God &c. all things here are in perfect order for bringing on the That is the Invasion, see trade Letter E. Tryal, as speedily as your Brother pleases, and the sooner the bet∣ter I am sure, for his The King. The Com∣missions for the new Advo∣cate and Justice Clerk were Signed on the 28 of Novem∣ber, that is 6 dayes before the date of this Letter. Adversary is very diligent in searching out new Agents, that are like to be more able and faithful to him than those he has hitherto imployed, and I assure you succeeds ex∣treamly in his design, and has in a manner united all the Presbyterians. Its known that by the Changes made in the Spring before they were somewhat cooled in their zeal which this new change revived again. Mechanicks, by this means to be intirely his, so the cause may grow worse, but cannot mend by delay of the Tryal. And as It seems he is answering Letters. for Compositions and Bargains with particulars, it is of little or no importance, since mens several Interests and designs are so different, that they are impossible to be Reconciled before the Restauration. cause be ended and he walk the Exchange again. In the mean time care must be had that his The known Cant for a Declaration. Letters of Attorney be fairly and fully drawn, as my thinks is casie to be done, and I would have sent a Draught as I told you in my last, but that I cannot with all my Di∣ligence procure a Copy of the last to make a true Judgement why it is so universally cryed out upon by those of the Creditors have seen it. But now I must to T closs Prison, and so have no more an opportunity to Tamper. Bed and mind no more Business perhaps while I live, but yet cannot Die an Honest man if I do not with all the Earnestness of my The Word sole for Soul is written so too in the Papers that were seised in his Cham∣ber. Sole recommend to your The late King, Queen and Melfort. Bro∣ther, The late King, Queen and Melfort. Sister, The late King, Queen and Melfort. and David, the diligent No do Mrs. Smith who has all along taken care of him, and is an active stir∣ring Woman. Gentlewoman
I mentioned before, as the most useful person beyond all Compa∣rison of any body they have here. The four persons men∣tioned may well be supposed to be two Noblemen with the late Archbishop of Glasgow, & a Lord the known Friend and Correspondent of the Nurse, that is of the Countess of Er∣rol, now Governess to the pretended Prince of Wales at Paris. This Mrs. Mowat Litlejohn the Sick Minister, and Nurses Friend, nay all our Relations here; not only continually allow, but by dayly Proofs will testify. This makes me Beg that since there is the That is, Sir Jmes Rochied Town Clerk of Edinburgh▪ who dyed about a week be∣fore the date of this Letter. Clerk of the Town she Mrs. Smith lives in E∣dinburgh. lives in newly Dead, the place may be procured for her Mr. Patrick Smith Ad∣vocate who absconded. Husband or Mr James Smith her Son. Son It appears not to whom the late K. James was to write, but the Magistracy only can put in the Clerk. The standing Ma∣gistracy was then under Pro∣cess, and in a few dayes after thrown out: The Letter then was to come to those who could influence the new in∣tended Magistracy. a Line from your Brother doth it, and I am very sure it is impossible for him to imploy his Pen more The Town Clerks place is one of the most Beneficial places in the Kingdom, and is during Life. deservedly the Mo∣tion I assure you comes not in the least from her, she being the most Disinterest Creature breathing, but was of her own accord propos¦ed by Mrs. Mowat, who also said she would Wright to secure the Fa∣vour for fear of some bodies It is evident the late Kings Friends here were in Factions amongst themselves about the disposing of the Clerks place, and that Payn finding his Party not strong enough to carry it for his Friend, would have Assistance from France; and would  it Aily, least some other pretenders should worst him there also. interposing between your Brother & David to prevent so just a Request in her behalf as this is For Gods sake propose it earnestly in Mrs. Mowets and my name, to your Bro∣ther and David, and Interest too therein your That is the late Queen, see in∣comparable Ldy in Letter E. Excellent Sister, and if ever I was so happy to do or endeauour any thing was Its known that in the late Reign the Queen reckoned herself obliged to Payn, and protected him ac¦ceptable to her, may her Memory thereof plead for me in this Re∣quest. Dear Aunt lay all nice or Timerous reserves by, and press it home as an Honest matter, and the most earnest desire of your Dutiful Nephew. Adiew my service to L. David and L. Nurse, joyn her in the matter I beseech you for her Friends sake and mine Melfort and the Countess of Errol. I's plain that the Letter C, is written by Mr. Payn by the Declarations of those that know his hand writing of which some have seen him writ, and by comparing it with other Letters and Papers written and signed by his own hand, nor does he deny it in private to his Friends. To show that Payn is capable of the Foly of writing such a Letter it can be proved by the Persons Oath to whom he spoke and who told it at the time, that on the 5th. of December, which was two days after the date of his Letter he said to one whose Office as well as his Alledgiance obliged him to a Discovery that an Invasion was designed. That the late King James had his Officers ready both in England and Scotland, and that the Invasion would be certainly some time in the Spring, and possibly sooner than was apprehended. To show too that Payn was in use to borrow such Names as Aunt Mowet, Cousen or Brother &c. There follows the beginning of a Letter of his written by his own hand and in all appearance to Madam Smith for the Letter was found amongst her Papers, its dated the 26th. of Febrwary Last. Dear Madam. I Had nothing to add, so only writ one Letter per Carrier last Week, and in the enclosed to my Neice you will perceive my thoughts of Mrs. Mowets Father should they not be your or hers, however send them forward for they are easilier amended by her Letters to my Aunt then the ommission would be to my The late King. Cousen whom it impors to know matter of Fact truely in so considerable a suit as his is. And for my own part I hardly believe that generous L. L. makes so right a guesse, at the designs of that man as his Daughter doth; I wish I may be deceived, &c. what is more is private business.
The Letters D. & E. that follow were taken and came to the Secretaries hand in the same manner with the former Letters A. B. C. They were under a Cover dated the 30th of December and writen at London directed to Monsiur Vincent Nerieux as the other Cover, but under to Mr. Robert's. The Covert is signed Mary Brown and writen by the same Hand with the former Cover; There is nothing more material in the Cover, I have not heard from you, says she, these two Mails but this came to my hand to night &c.—to night the 30th of December that is on a Fryday the day on which the Post Arrives from Scotland and goes for Holland. The enclosed Letter D. is directed for Mrs. Little, and dated the 25th of December the day after the Post day at Edinburgh as has been observed, and writen by the same Hand with that of Letter B. D. December 25th. I Had a It seems Mrs. Little is my Lady Melfort, and that she writ the whole Letter, to which this is an Answer, but that David her Husband dictated the half of it. Letter half from you and half from David as I take it tho written with your own hand. I sent Dowglas seems to be Payn, see the beginning of the Letter A. Dowglas his from David and am much obliged for my own. I have perfectly cured the disease between Balfour and little John, and shall work on till I find the bottom of my The late King, the same with Brother in Payn's Let∣ter, to Aunt, and with Cousin in his other Letter to Ma∣dam Smith. Couzins Affairs. I fancy I shall meet with things as I would wish, but I wonder I hear not ofter from you, Mr. A Earl well known. Courtney writ to Mr. Tate. so did my patient and her son. I'm Surprized there should be no Return, 'twill discourage the like practice and I can assure you Courtney is troubled at it and with Reason, for he is both considerable and has He has been sometime in Prison. suffered much, so pray consider this for the example is of importance, as for myself I am overwhelmed with grief for the loss of poor Mrs Probably an Earl who died much about the time of this Letter. Gypps to whose family I owe so much. I have writ several to David and one to Mr. Tate since I came here. I The reason of the Com∣plaints here and elsewhere that Answers came not, seems to be Megill, Melforts Page his slowness, who was long on his way from Paris, with a rat numbers of Letters. Beg where I make any demand in mine I may have either a Condescending or a refuse∣ing answer pray let me know how my undertakings are relisht, and how I stand with my Couzen, my service to Balby I am yours Gray. I wish you a Merry Christmass. The Letter E. enclosed in the Letter D. was directed for Mr. Ford, and of the same date and Hand writing. The Secretary declared that he had seen Letters signed David Foord Writen by my Lord Melforts own hand. E, December. 25th. I Had yours for James Balfouer and Gray the writer as hath been said, seems to be in the North of England, and and therefore upon the re∣cept of Melforts Letter for Balfour was oblidged to send an expresse to Balfour who lives in Scotland. sent it express to him when the return is made you shall have it with all imaginable care I have I thank God perfectly Cemented the difference between Bal∣four Pain Mowet and litle John. and little John having both their engagements solemnly made mutually and with a joint Payn lasting Concurrence. Concurance to Pain your Brothers service. serve my Cousen, to the last last drop of their Blood. Penny of their Stock, and their Opinions and Demands un∣der their hands which I thought the surest way of dealing: I Pain, all things  are in perfect & order. thank God your Estate in these parts is in very good condition and the Of men of interest or Courage, Ge∣nerality of all that have stock or dare any way venture are resolv'd to joyn you so that An invasion, Pain trial. Trade is in a fair way of succeeding here. I have now at this time a Messinger with James Balfour, after whose return I shall make little stay in these parts, you shall know by me what you may rely on where the The Cant is trade mony and paymasters is men and Officers, Money shall be raised, and who the chief Paymasters, which is all I can do.
I wonder you do not make Returns to Courtney my patient and Her Son, since they are considerable enough to deserve it, for Gods sake give no cause of disgust, but let the Labourers be encouraged, since a bare acknowledgment of their Service will do it. A Correspondence betwixt London and the North. Correspondence is desired from hence with Bristole, and 'tis left to my management to settle, 'tis of too great importance for me to take upon me. Therefore I humbly desire your advice and my Cosens orders whom I shall trust with it at that place and to whose hands it shall be committed. I was Its plain he had been in Scotland. received by James Balfouer and little John with all the demonstrations of Friendship possible placing an intire trust in me as to the managements of my Cosens Affairs, and by all their adhe∣rents, thy express a very great sense of your past services, and abili∣ty to serve my Cusen in the future, But you This as well as his stile shows he is no Scotch men know the humours of that country people better then I. Let me hear from you if you please how I shall proceed at my re∣turn to Bristol, I dare not appear here for their Creditors; for those that arrested my Father ly still in wait for me. My humble duty to my Cosen and his incomparable Lady, and let them know I shall never fail to serve them with my life and Fortune. Sir, I am very much your servant, and sensible of the favours you have done me. Adiew. The Secretary Declared in Parliament that he was obliged at London to restore the Originals of the Letters D. and E. but that he was ready to attest upon Oath that the Copies produced were true Copies of the Letters showen to him as Originals, and which he indeed believed to be Originals. And for a confirmation of the Truth both of the Originals and Copies of the Letters D. E he offered to have the following matter of Fact verifyed upon Oath by the persons concerned who had indeed been Examined by the Committy. The matter of Fact is this, upon Information given at Edinburgh in December last that on Captain Maire who has lived for the most part in England was going thi∣ther upon some unaccountable Designe, four Officers were privatly ordered to catch him and search him for Letters which they accordingly did, on the 26th of Decem∣ber seising on him not far from the Borders: They found on him only one Letter which they read, and finding nothing in it but as they imagined about Trade, they nei∣ther keeped him nor it. But its plain that this was the Answer which Gray's express was to bring from Balfour, and consequently the Answer to my Lord Melfort's Letter which Gray had received and sent to Balfour, and which Answer Gray sayes should be sent to Melfort with all imagineable care: For the Letter which the Officers read was signed Balfour, and directed to Gray, as they owned at their Return to Edinburgh be∣fore they or any other could know the import of their Error, and which they now owned again to the Committee. The Time too quadrats, Gray says on the 25th of Decem∣ber that he had sent an Express to Balfour, which possibly he had sent the day before or sooner, or only the same day; but at which time soever he sent the Express its no Mat∣ter, he sayes expresly in his Letter of the 25th. I have now at this time a Messenger with James Balfour; so the Answer might well be found with a Bearer on the 26th. which is confirmed too by the Character of Maire, who has now fled for it. To all this it is added that it can be made appear by other proofs than those here mentioned that there was a Designe in the North this Winter. That one was sent from the Late King to mannage and carry on that Design. That his Instructions were con∣sulted and concerted by those about the Late King and the French Ministry: That my Lord Melfoort was the Original Procurer of these Instructions. That the nature of the Design and the Character of the person employed were of a Peece that is equally bad, that the person employed did actually come to the North. That he is an English man, That he returned to London in the Spring, and in all probability will be found where  the Reconciler Gray is to be found.
ADDITIONS for Clearing some Particulars in the Preceeding LETTERS. AN Original Letter from Mr. Payne to Mrs Smith Directed thus. May 19. 1692. For the ever, by me Honoured, Dear Mrs. Elizabeth Smith. And Sealed with his own Seal, and carrying a Token of Payns own Hair inclosed. F Dear Madam, 19 May. 1692. I Write this my last Letter perhaps with a Paper with my own flying Seal to it, keep them together as a Memorandum from Your Humble Servant Hen: Payne. Dear Madam, 29 May. 1692. AFflict not your self for me, I am in the Providence of GOD be where I will: Keep the last and this Note of mine tho I dye before I see you, for I must confess I never knew so Fast and True a Friend as your self to my Master and to me for his sake: And should L. L. Mrs. Mowet, and all the rest of our Friends forget it, which I am almost perswaded they can never do; yet my dear Master and Mrs. will u∣pon sight of you by my Aunt, who will be easily found out, and this Note, esteem and reward you and yours for your Charity; I know they will in spight of Envy: And should my Nephew forget all the Charity and Good you have shewed to me, and not take more pains for you than himself, I shall wish all Friendship from GOD and Man may fail him in his greatest distress. My Service to Bailie Chancelour. I am sure on extream occasions he will supply me with some Guinies, for he said in a Note of his, he had told Doctor McGie so My Love, Duty and Service too to you, your Good-sister, Brother, my Little Wife, James, Archibald, Mrs. Ann and Mrs. Lilias; as also, to your Goodman unknown, or any other I have forgot, is all I have time to say, perhaps, in these my last Lines: Tho I do not dispair neither to prove my self as true a Friend as ever was born before I dye, being obliged to be so, if living; and if dead, GOD wit∣ness against their Falshood that pretend to be my Friends now that are not, so when I am no more Henry Payne to you and yours. My Service to Lady Lockhart whom I so esteem that it troubles me have not Answered her last Letter, with a thousand Thanks for the Favours of it, Beg her to believe one of my greatest Afflictions is to lose the op∣portunity of her Favours, but my Prayers and good Wishes shall forever attend her and hers. Oh GOD! Thoughts oppress me, and I could with a great dale of Joy and Good∣will remember many more, but have not time; yet the honest Captain Mair, Pat∣ton, Mrs. Hamiltoun and Family; Mathew of the same Name must not be but Salu∣ted as great Obligers of me: As to C. Mairs, tell him I hope he will revenge my Quarrel upon some of the Blades, and be as great a Man by that and other his Virtues, as he desires and truely merits. Tell Lord Balcaskie I wonder he forgot where he had placed so many Obligations, but I wish both him and his well. To Mr. Robert Blackwood my Service, and a thousand Thanks tho that is not the payment he shall have if I live, but he as all others must trust me at this time. The Alarm comes stronger and stronger; so good Madam forgive my hast, and present my faithful Service to the Governours Lady and Daughter, thanking them for all Charities, I beg they would
take in to their custody all my things that are not their's, or other peoples, and to keep the Table, Stands, Glas and Cabbinet, as a Memorandum of Gratitude for all their Charities; more I need not say their: Spare no Money or Charges to let me hear from you as often as may be, for that will be my only Comfort. My Service to Madam Mowet and to the Excellent L. L. tell them I am no more troubled at this than another would be at losing a Bodle, except it be because I cannot frequently know how they and other Friends do. To all the Susterers for me I beg my Service and true Friendship may be presented: For had they not been my Friends they had never been suspected for the Trick has been put upon me; and being so, no Mis-hap shall ever make me be Ungrateful for the Kindness design'd to theirs and Your Humble Servant Follows the Beginning of another Original Letter from Mr. Payne to Mrs Smith, dated the 29th of December 1692. G. Dear Madam, I Wish with all my heart there were proper words in the World, or that I had them at least to express the Gratitude I owe to your Ladiship for the boundless Friendship you so constantly express to me a poor miserable Stranger so persecuted that if God had not raised me such a Charitable Friend as your self, must have Languisht in this unpresedented Restraint without knowing how to cry for Help, and have been heard except by that God Himself who has Inspired you with so much Charity as thus to be concerned for me. May it be His Blessed Will that I may live to shew, I would be suf∣ficiently Grateful if I cold: And in the mean time accept my worthless tho hearty thanks for all their Favours, and most particularly for giving Mr. James Smith these to frequent Trobles he can inform you fully of my present Condition. And by him I have sent an order for paying the next or any other Money may be sent for me to your Ladiship having also received by him from you Twenty Dollers. Follows another Original Letter of Mr. Paynes, wherein three several times the word Write is Spelled Wright. H. Honoured Madam, I Have had two Biles broke out upon me on each wrest one; and either they occasi∣oned a Feaver, or a Feaver occasioned them; so that it was impossible for me to put Pen to Paper the last Week: But now I thank God I am much better, tho' it is very painful to me to Wright: I had your Good Cheece, and all you sent per Carrier safe: And must desire you to send me 5 Pounds in by him this time: I wish too you would be so kind to see the Governour from me; and thank him for all his Favours which indeed are many: He promised to speak to Mr. Johnstone from me; and as he finds him, I shall Wright, or not Wright to him. For I have all my Life time avoided making Court to no purpose: Therefore beg you would by any Means get the Secretary inquired into, how he is Instructed concerning me: As also take Advice whether I should apply to Parliament or no. I protest I can hardly hold my Pen to Thank you for all Favours; and to present my Service to all Friends, therefore par∣don me that I abruptly am forced to say, Dear Madam, Adieu.
Letter from the Lady Largo 4 May. 1693 Payn's Letters is like to bring Trouble to severals, the Poor Woman that took care of him is like to suffer severely she is forced to flee, I fear Coats Trouble will be un∣avoidable tho it's brav'd out as yet— Another of hers 9th May 1693 Now to come to your own private Concerns, I believe your man Coats will be Imprisoned for his Bills, there's uncustomed Goods taken that will break him, and he cannot go out of the way since all the Partners would suffer; So he must ap∣pear every day on the Change, but God knows the disquiet he suffers for tho they do not yet know the Goods to be his, yet being in their Hands it's certain they will know: And be the worse, he will not write to his Factor, for all Letters are opned, and that may hazard the breaking of his Credit: But he begged that I might tell Mr. Best his Condition that so he might informe and Advise— Letter from London taken upon the Lady Largo's Women dated 9th May 1693— I Am informed the Duke of Gordon is an Enemy to David and speaks meanly of our Relation which I am unwilling to believe— The differences betwixt the Duke of Gordon and my Lord Melfort and how ill sa∣tisfyed he is with the Usage he met with from the Late King is well known. Payne in his Treatise in Answer to Kings Book written with his own Hand and Self∣ed in his Chamber, speaking of Sir Philem-O—Neal sayes a blacker and more Hellish Sole never Animated a Human Body— EDINBƲRGH, Printed by George Mosman, According to Order, 1693.
