R1043 12059744 53202
ANTIPAS OR, The Dying Testimony of Mr. James Renwick Minister of the Gospel, who Suffered at the Grass-Market of Edinburgh, Feb. 17. 1688. His Sentence was founded on these following Heads 1 Because he could not own James the VII, to be his Lawful So∣verain. 2 Because he taught the Ʋnlawfulness of Paying the Cess, ex∣presly exacted for Suppressing of the Faithful and free Preach∣ing of the Gospel. 3 Because he taught, that it was the People's Duty, to carry Arms at the Preaching of the Gospel (when it was Persecuted) for De∣fending of themselves, and resisting of unjust Violence. Gen: 4.10 And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy Brothers Blood cryeth unto me from the Ground. psal. 78, 64. Their priests fell by the sword. ps: 79 2. The Dead Bodies of th servants, &c. 3 Their Blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem. Lam: 2 20 Shall, the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord. Rev. 2 10 Be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a crown of Life. Rev. 6 9 I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain, for the word of God, and for the Testimony which they held. 10 and 11 verses, &c, Rev: 7.13 What are these &c, and whence came they? 14 v. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, &c.
The Dying Testimony of Mr. James Renwick Minister of the Gospel, to the Truths and Duties for which he was Judged, and others Contraverted in our time, who Suffered at the Grass-Market in Edinburgh, Fe∣bruary 17th. 1688. Emitted from his own Hand the day before his Suffering, &c. My Dear Friends in CHRIST, IT hath pleased the Lord to deliver me up into the Hands of Men, and I think fit to send you this Salutation, which I expect will be the last, when I pose my Heart upon it, be∣fore God; I dare not desire to have escaped this Lot, for no less could have been for his Glory and Vindication of his Cause on my behalf: And as I am free before him of the Pro∣phainity, which some either naughty wicked, or strangers to me, have Reported that I have been sometime Guilty of; So he hath kept me from the Womb, free of the ordinary Poluti∣on of Children, as these that hath been acquainted with me throu' the Tract of my Life do know, and now my Blood shall either more silence Reproaches or more Ripen them for Judgment, but I hope it shall make some more, sparing to speak of those who shall come after me; and so I am the more willing to pay this Cost, for their Instruction, and my Suc∣ceeders ease, since I came to Prison; The Lord hath been wonderfully kind to me, he has made his Word to give me Light, Life, Joy, Courage, and Strength, Yea, it hath dropped with sweet Smelling Myrrh unto me; particularly these passages and promises, Gen: 22: 12. latter part of the Verse. For now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld
thy Son, thine only Son. Neh: 8.10. later part of the Verse. Nei∣ther be you sorry, for the Joy of the Lord is your Strength. Job 3, 17. There the Wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest. 18. There the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor. Job 23.10. But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as Gold. 11. My foot hath held his steps, his ways have I kept, and not declined. 12 Neither have I gone back from the Commandment of his Lips, I have esteemed the words of his Mouth more than my necessary food. 13. But he is of one mind, and who can turn him? and what his Soul desireth, even that he doth, 14. For he performeth the things that he is appointed for me: and many such things are with him. Psal: 105, later part of the Verse. The word of the Lord tryed him. Luke 21.12: But before all these they shall lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into Prisons, being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Name sake. 13. And it shall turn to you for a Testimony. 19 In your patience possess ye your Souls. The Gospel according to S. John. Heb: 12.13. To the General Assembly and Church of the first Born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spi∣rits of Just Men made perfect. Jam: 1.12, Blessed is the Man that endureth Temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. Peter 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you. 8. Be sober, be vigilent, because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lyon, walketh about seeking whom he may devour. Rev: 3.8. I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; for thou hast a little Strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denyed my Name. 10. Because thou hast kept the word of my Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. 11. Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast
which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. 12. Him that over∣cometh, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God, & the Name of the City if my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of Heaven from my God: and I will write upon him my new Name. Rev, 19.20. And the Beast was taken, and with him the false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his Image. These both were cast into a lake of Fire burning with Brimstone. 21. And the remnant were slain with the Sword of him that sat upon the horse. Which Sword proceedeth out of his mouth: and all the Fowls were filled with their flesh. And many other Scriptures. O what can I say to the Lords praise! it was but little that I knew of him before I came to Prison; I have found sensibly much of his divine strength, much of the joy of his Spirit, and much assurance from his Word and Spirit, con∣cerning my Salvation, my Sufferrings are stated upon the Matter of my Doctrine, for there was found with me, the Sum of my last two Sermons at Braids-Craigs, which I wrote alter I Preached them; The former therereof was upon Ps: 46.10. Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted a∣mong the Heathen, I will be exalted in the Earth. And the later upon Heb: 10: 38: Now the just shall live by Faith: but if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. And so I was examined upon the Application made therein unto the Sins of the time: All which I owned once and again, as it is to be seen in my Indictment, and I being tried, and an Assize set; I adhered to my former Confession Explicitly, so my Sentence of Death was drawn forth, upon these three Heads. First, Because I could not own James the VII, to be my lawful Soverain.
Secondly, Because I taugh, tthe unlawfulness of paying the Cess expresly exacted for suppressing the Faithful, & free Preaching of the Gospel. Thirdly, Because I taught, it was the Peoples duty to carry Arms, at the Preaching of the Gospel, now when it is persecuted for Defend∣ing of themselves, and resisting of unjust violence. I think such a Testimony, is worth many Lives, and I praise the LORD for his enabling me to be plain and positive in all my Confessions; for therein I found Peace, Joy, strength and boldness. I have met with many Assaults in Prison, some from some of the Indulged Party, and some from some of the Prelaticks; but by the strength of God I was enabled to stand, that they could neither bow me nor break me: I was also Assaulted by some of the Popish Party, I suppose they were some of the Ecclesiastical Creatures; but they found none of their own Stuff in me, I told them after sundry De∣batings, That I had lived and should die an Enemie to their way: Howsoever some that knew me not, Reproached me vvith Jesuitism: I was pressed by Sundry to seek a Reprive, and my Ansvver vvas alvvays, That I adhered to my former Confession, and if they pleased to let the appointed time of my Death stand, let it stand, and if they pleased to protract it. Let them protract it, for I was ready and vvilling both to live and to die, Hovvbeit their came a Reprive for eight days but I had no hand in it; They still urged, vvould I but say that I desired time for Conference vvith some Persons anent my Principles: I Ansvvered, That my Time vvas in the Lords Hands, and I vvas in no Hesitation or doubt about my Principles my self, I would not be so rude as to decline con∣ference with any, so far as it might not be inconvenient for me in my present Circumstances, but I will seek it with none. I have no more to say upon this Head, but my Heart
doth not smite me for any thing in the Matters of my God, since I came to Prison: And I can further say to his praise with some Conscienciousness of Integrity, That I have walked in his Way and kept his Charge, though with much Weak∣ness, and many infirmities, whereof ye have been Witnesses. Now my dear Friends in precious Christ, I think I need not tell you; that as I have Lived, so I Die in the same perswasi∣on, with the true Reformed and Covenanted Presbyterian Church of Scotland, that I adhere to the Testimony of the Day, as it is held forth in our Informatorie Vindication, and in the Testimony against the present Toleration; and that I own, and Seal with my Blood all the precious Truths, even the Contraverted Truths that I have Taught: So I would exhort every one of you, to make sure your Personal Recon∣ciliation with God in Christ; for I fear many of you have that yet to do, and when ye come where I am to look pale death in the Face, ye will not be a little Shaken and Terrified, if ye have not laid hold on Eternal Life. I would exhort you to much Diligence in the use of the means, to be careful in keeping up your Societies, to be frequent and fervent in secret Prayer, to Read much the Written Word of God, and to ex∣amine your selves by it: do not wearie to maintain in your places and stations the present Testimony; for when Christ goes forth to defeat Antichrist; with that Name Written on his Thigh and on his Vesture King of kings, and Lord of lords, he will make it Glorious in the Earth, and if ye can but Transmit it to the Posterity, ye may count it a great Generations work, But beware of the Ministers, that have accepted of this Toleration, and all others that bend that way, and follow them not, for the Sun hath gone down upon them. Do not fear that the Lord will cast off Scotland, for he will certainly return again, and shew himself Glorious in our Land, but watch and pray, for he is
bringing on a sad overthrowing stroak, which shall make many say, That they have easily got thorow, that hath got a Scaffold for Christ, and do not regard the present suffer∣ings of this World, for they are not worthy to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed, I may say to his praise, that I have found his Cross sweet and lovely unto me; for I have had many Joyful hours, and not a fearful thought since I came to Prison; He hath strengthened me, for to outbreath Man, and outface Death. And I am now longing for the joyful hour of my Dissolution, and there is nothing in the World, that I am sorry to leave but you, But I go to better company, & so I must take my leave of you all. Farewell, beloved Suffer∣ers, and followers of the Lamb; Farewell Christian intimats; Fare∣well Christian and Comfortable Mother, and Sisters; Farewell sweet Societies; Farewell desireable General Meetings; Farewell Night∣wandrings, in cold and weariness for Christ; Farewell sweet Bible, and Preaching of the Gospel; Farewell Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all Sublunarie things; Farewell Conflicts with a Body of Sin and Death.—Welcome Scaffold, for precious Christ; Welcome Hea∣venly Jerusalem; Welcome innumerable Company of Angels; Wel∣come General Assembly, and Church of the First-Born; Welcome Crown of Glory, white Robes, and Songs of Moses and the Lamb; And above all, Welcome O thou Blessed Trinity and one God! O E∣ternal One! I commit my Soul into thy Eternal rest Feb, 13th. 1688. JAMES RENWICK My Dear Friends in Christ, I See now what hath been the Language of my Reprive, it hath been, that I might be further Tempted and Tryed, and I praise the Lord he hath assisted me, to give further proofs of stedfast∣ness; I have been often assaulted by some Popish Priests, but the last time they came, I told them, I would Debate no more with such
as they were, and that I had Lived and would Die a Presbyterian Protestant, and testifie against the Idolatrous, Heresies, Supersti∣tions, and errors of that Antichristian way; but Yesterday I was cast into deep Exercise, and made to dwell under an Impression of the Dreadfulness of every thing, that might grieve the Spirit of God. I found Sin to be more Bitter than Death, and one Hours hiding of Gods Face, more insupportable. And then at Night, I was called before a part of the Council, and the Chancellor produced the Infor∣matorie Vindication, and asked if I knew it; I answered, I knew it; And being interrogat, I confessed that I had a great hand in Writting of it, they pressed me to tell my Assistances, I told them they were those whom they persecuted, but would satisfie them no further; they also urged me upon pain of Torture; to tell where our Societies were, who kept our General Correspondances, and where they were kept. I Answered, though they should Torture me, which was contrar to all Laws after Sentence of Death, I would give them no further notice than the Books gave, I was moreover threatned to tell of my Haunts and Quarters, but I refused to make known to them any such thing; So I was returned to Prison. Such Exercise as I had, was very needful for such a Tryal; And I would rather en∣dure what they could do unto me; Then, have dishonoured Christ, Offended you, and brought you into Trouble:—But I hope within less than three days, to be without the reach of all Temptations. Now I have no more to say, Farewell again, in our Blessed LORD JESUS. James Renwick. Feb. 15th. 1688.
