R1713 13224403 98568
A BLAST blown out of the NORTH And Ecchoing up towards the SOUTH, To meet the CRY of their Oppressed Brethren. Being a Relation of some of the Sufferings and other Exercises of several of the People of God in scorn called Quakers in and about Richmond, Massam, Coverdale, Wens∣leydale and Swaledale, and some others of the adjacent Parts and Places in the North Riding of the County of York, since the be∣ginning of the year 1660. Prov. 10. 7. The Memory of the Just is Blessed; but the Name of the Wicked shall Rot. Job 18. 7. The Light shall be dark in his Tabernacle, and his Candle shall be put out with him. Vers. 16. His Roots shall be dryed up beneath, and above shall his Branch be cut off. Vers. 17. His Remembrance shall perish from the Earth, and he shall have no Name in the Street. Vers. 20. They that come after him shall be astonied at his Day, as those that went before were afrighted. Vers. 21. Surely such are the Dwellings of the Wicked, and this is the Place of him that knoweth not God. Prov. 10. 23. It is a Sport to a Fool to do Mischief; but a Man of Ʋnderstanding hath Wisdom. Vers. 25. As the Whilewind passeth, so is the Wicked no more; but the Righteous is an Everlasting Foundation. Printed in the Year 1680.
TO THE READER FRIEND; THat part of this ensuing Treatise which relateth to the Sufferings of the Lord's People in Scorn cal∣led Quakers, in the years 1670, and 1671. (hereafter mentioned) upon the Act entituled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, was for the most part of it save what is now altered by reason of Time and the Death of some of the Persecutors, and other Matters) drawn up and made ready in or about the year 1671. or beginning of the year 1672. (as is remembred) and after several Examinations of the same, as to the Truth and Certainty thereof, was in∣tended for the Press; but the within-named James Metcalfe dying, and the within-named William Thorna∣by the Informer removing to London, whereby the Persecution of the said People in that behalf and in those Parts seemed to cease, the Printing of what was so drawn up was for that time suspended, & the rather for that it was in the View and stood in the Faith and Belief of the Compiler of those Papers, that there might be a further Opportunity rendred for that purpose; and that the within-named Joseph Craddock (to the filling up of the measure of his former Wickedness) would (ere his Death) be concerned in the further
Persecution of some of the aforesaid People, called Quakers, or some other such like Wicked Act; and that the Compiler of the said Papers might also come to be therein concerned, which thing is accordingly now come to pass; for he is one of the Prisoners here∣in after named: whereupon the aforesaid Papers so drawn up, or the things therein contained upon a new review, with some Alterations and Additions of things not then known or come to hand, are thought good to be Printed, to which are also added and be∣fore the same joyned some former Sufferings and Ex∣ercises of the aforesaid People, or some of them, as followeth. R. R.
A Blast blown out of the North, and Ecchoing Up Towards the South, to meet the Cry of their Oppressed Brethren. A brief Relation of some of the Sufferings of some of the Lord's People in Scorn called Quakers, at and near Bellerby in the North Riding of the County of YORK, the 13th Day of the 3d Moneth, in the Year 1660. UPon the said day several of the said people from several parts in and about Richmond, Massam, Coverdale, and some other of the adjacent Places, being met together at the House of Ralph Ainsley in Bellerby aforesaid, to wait upon and worship the Lord, two men came and called Ralph Ainsley, and told him, They had Order to break up the Meeting; but before Friends in the House had any notice (for Ralph then being busie set∣ting up Horses had not told them) there came divers Armed Men Rushing to the Door, crying, Where are these Rogues? We have Order to break up your Meeting; some of them saying, We will cut you as small as Bread. Whereupon one of those People so met, went to the Door to understand the Real Cause of their so coming, and whether they had any Order to hinder the said peaceable Mee∣ting, or they in their own Wills had taken in hand to do it; who in Meekness spoke to them and told them, That they were there met
in the Fear of the Lord, without the least thought of Harm to any Creature. And another of the said People, who were so met at the said House, being at the Door, spoke to some of them, desiring to see their Order for so doing; and one of them drew his Sword, and said, That was his Order: And their Fury was such, that they would not hear what was in Soberness spoken to them, but fell a beating of them and other Friends; and after several had been beaten, one of the men said, He would shew their Order; but be∣fore it could be read Friends were so hurryed and beat away, that none of them could either see the Extent of it, or tell from whom it came; only some of them said, it came from William Dalton, one of the then Commissioners of the Militia. And while these things were thus doing at the Door (Friends in the House not ful∣ly knowing the Matter, but what they might understand from the Noise and Tumult they heard) presently came in some with Swords and Pistols, and haled several forcibly out, and beat some of them, and haled some down to the Ground, to the shedding of Blood, whilst others turned out their Horses loose into the Street, which by beating, pricking with Swords, shooting with Guns and Pistols, the Owners had much ado to get their Horses again, by means whereof divers Friends, after the breaking up of the said Meeting, were prevented for some time of departing out of the Town: And se∣veral were beat in the Street with Swords and Staves, some bunched, some fired Guns and Pistols charged with Powder at them, to the hurting of some of them. And some (besides the Hurts themselves sustained) had their Hats and Clothes cut, some thrown down by the Hair of the Head, some stoned, and with luch like Usage driven and hurryed away in a Violent and Bruitish Manner. And after they had been thus Hurryed, Beaten, Abused and Driven away, and were thereupon drawing Home-wards; as those whose Way lay towards Marrick and Richmond were staying and hovering one upon another, that they might see how each other did, or had escaped, and being about to part as their several Wayes lay towards their respective Dwellings, presently some of the fast Rude Vio∣lent People on Horseback, and some on Foot, with Swords, Guns, Pistols and Staves, came riding and running after them unto a Moore which lay in the Way, near a Mile from the Town aforesaid, and there fell violently again upon them, striking & beating both Young
and Old Men and Women in a most Inhuman and Cruel Manner, riding and running up and down, beating them, to the sore hurting of many, and to the shedding of the Blood of some; for several were beat down to the Ground, insomuch that some were for some time sensless, and not able of Body to remove till helped by others; yea, their Cruelty was such, that they spared none, no, not young tender Maids, nor antient Women, but gave them several Blows, to the bruising of their Flesh, making as it were even a Sport of such Cruelty; all which to particularize, would be both too hard or difficult, and too tedious: Yet to the intent that such a Suffer∣ing, so notoriously wicked and cruelly inflicted, without any just Cause or Provocation, upon an innocent People (for no other Mat∣ter but simply meeting together to wait upon and worship the One, True and Living God) may not wholly be cast into Oblivion, I shall make mention of some, who being yet alive, and of good Report and Cre∣dit in their Generation, may be (if queried of) Witnesses of the same, that is to say: Thomas Whitton of Pattrick Brunton, when the Men came to the Door, threatning to break up the Meeting, upon desiring to see their Order for such Actings, one drew his Sword, and said, That was his Order. William Lofthouse, now of Bishopdale (then of Stainton) recei∣ved several Blows on his Back, and had his Cloathes cut, and was cast down by the Violence they used. His Son, Edward Lofthouse, received several Strokes on his Back and Arms with a Sword and Pike-staff, and a great Stroke on his Head with the Butt-end of a Musquet or Fowling piece, besides se∣veral Thrusts with a Sword, running through his Cloathes, though not to the Wounding of his Body. Robert Gosling of Richmond (a tender man) was by the Violence of several Blows about his Head, Arms and Shoulders, with Staves, &c. beat down to the Ground, where for some time he was be∣reaved of Sence, and not able to Recover, till helped up by others; by reason of which Usage, much Weakness hath since been, and yet is upon him. Phillip Swale of Hartford, a man well known unto many men of several Qualities, and of good Repute, being Serviceable in his
Generation, received a sore Blow on his Back with a Stone, and se∣veral Blows on his Head and Back with a Sword. William Orton of Marvick, when he did go to take his Horse, they beat him sore with Swords, Pikes and Guns, that they much bruised his Arms and Shoulders; and when he led his Horse away they beat him and his Horse with much Cruelty; his Wife also was beaten. John Key (then also of Marvick) was beaten on the Moor with Swords and Staves, and pushed with a Pike, that his Head, Arms and Shoulders were sore bruised, and was twice beat to the Ground, in such sort that some who saw it, thought he should never have risen again. Christopher Terry, now of Rippon, was beat in the Town and on the Moor, so that they fell'd him twice to the Ground, and his Head was cut, and it and other parts of his Body sore bruised. William Beckwith had Powder shot in his face, that sore hurt his Eyes. Anthony Raynold of Snape, as he was going away a man with a long Staff gave him several Blows, that he fell to the Ground, and after he was fallen did also beat him. Marmaduke Beckwith (now of High-Burton, and Brother of the afore-said William Beckwith) going in the Town to get his Horse, a Man in great Rage said, Thou Dog, cannot thou speak, and took him off the Ground by the Hair of the Head, and cast him down at his Feet, and then Fudded him sore with his Foot or Feet on his Head, both before and behind, that it swelled, and much Hair came off; and also fudded him in like manner on his Back. Mary Chaytor (of Richmond, afore-said) received several Blows on her Arms, Neck and Back with a Staff, to the sore bruis∣ing and blackening of her Flesh. Sarah Kirkby, then of the same place, received several Blows on her Arms with a Staff, and a sore Blow on her Shoulder with a Musquet or Fowling piece, by which Blows her Flesh was sore bruis∣ed and blackened. But the Particularizing of so much Cruelty in such an Assembly, being both too tedious, and also too difficult, what is before men∣tioned in that behalf shall suffice: only this know, that there were many others, both Men and Women (some whereof are dead,
others yet living) that might have been mentioned, and who suf∣fered very cruelly at the hands of the aforesaid Persons, by being beat down, some till they lay sensless, struck with Swords, Guns, Staves, and in a most inhumane manner; yea, many of them as cruelly (if not some more cruelly) than those mentioned before, all which would be too tedious to relate, and that for no other Cause (as is before related) but only for meeting together to wait upon the Lord: Neither could they charge them with tho Breach of any just Law, nor had any words from them that might in the least pro∣voke them to this Cruelty, but in Meekness and Patience suffered what the other in their mad Fury were permitted to do unto them, rejoycing (as themselves, or some of them testified) that they were counted worthy to suffer for his sake, who in the dayes of his Humiliation suffered the Contradiction of Sinners; further also te∣stifying, that they wished no Evil unto those, by whom they thus suffered, but desired they might come to see the Evil of their Do∣ings, and Repent, and is not here made mention of or revived with intent to call the Parties therein concerned to an Account to their Prejudice; but only to the Intent that so cruel an Act of the Unrighteous, and patient Suffering of the Innocent and Harmless, may not be cast into Oblivion, but left to Posterity to judge, by the same in this behalf, of the Fruits of the True Spirit, and of the False. In the same Year 1660. and in the 3d Moneth of that same Year, and as is supposed, about the same time, that the aforesaid business at Bellerby was acted, came George Fawcett of Ballowfield in Wensley∣dale, in the aforesaid County of York, then a Chief Constable, with a Sword about him (being a rude Boisterous kind of Young man) to Burton, in or near Bishopdale in the North-Riding, of the aforesaid County of York, bringing with him a Rude Wild Compa∣ny of men, like himself, with Staves, Clubs, &c. where some of the People in Scorn called Quakers were peaceably met toge∣ther, to wait upon and Worship the Lord, according to that Ma∣nifestation of his Will discovered to them; and in a Rude and Boiste∣rous manner broke up their said Meeting, and did Abuse, Hale and Beat in or after a Violent Inhuman manner those so met toge∣ther, and very Uncivilly, Boisterously and Savagely behaved them∣selves
towards them; and particularly one among the rest (to wit) John Hudson of Burton aforesaid, having, as is remembred, a long Hazle Staff in his hand, some-what in length resembling a Hunting Pole, which, as is remembred, he took by the small end in both his hands, and there-with he smote Samuel Watson of Knight-stainforth (who was then among the aforesaid People, so peaceably met toge∣ther to wait upon the Lord, as aforesaid) so violently upon or about the Head, that with the Violence thereof, he (to wit) the said Samuel fell to the Ground, and in that Condition for some consider∣able time lay as one in a manner dead, or bereaved of his Life, to the terrifying of those who had so rudely behaved themselves, and also of the doer thereof; and several of them began to shrink, or as it were draw back or aside, and excuse themselves, as not having a hand in it, fearing as it should seem, that he had been dead; but after he, through the Mercy of God was in some sort recovered, they (to wit) the wild Company, returned to their former Barba∣rous Behaviour and Deportment again, Hailing, Beating, Mis-using, Punching, and Driving several of the said People, so met as afore∣said, in a Barbarous, Inhumane and Uncivil manner out of the Town, not leaving them (as is remembred) until they set a great part of them some considerable space out of the same, & after they had a little left them (as is remembred) the said Samuel going to Prayer, some of the aforesaid Rude Company, came again, and in a Rude, Un∣civil, Uncomely, Inhumane manner behaved themselves towards the said People, both Men and Women, which is now too hard to be particularized; only one William Farnaby drawing his Knife, cut several of the Horses Bridles: And so after much Abuse, having driven away the said People, they (to wit) the rude Multitude depart∣ed, many of them Glorying in what they had so done; but the just Re∣venger of the Upright, who knows how to deliver the Righteous, and how to reserve the Wicked to the day of Judgment to be punished, though he may, and doth oft-times (as in this Case he did) spare long, and give a large time, yea, several Years to Repent in; yet if they will not Repent, and be Reconciled, so as the Lord may pass by and Pardon them, and Heal them, he doth sometimes bring them to become Examples of his Wrath, as may be observed in this man, (to wit) John Hudson, who was the man that smote down the said Samuel Watson, who though he lived several Years after, yet going to Richmond about some Business in the Year 1678. in or about the 6th Moneth of the same Year, and about the 17th day of
that Moneth (as is remembred) and being going overthwart the Market-Place of the same Town, as though he intended to go to∣wards the Door of Anne Hopps, Widow, another man being with him, as he drew near the said Door, suddainly he fell down flat upon his Face, and there finished his days: The said Anne Hopps, being by, who saw it, and gave the Relation of it, and was never by her seen more to move. And thus he (who some time before had in the Wickedness of his Mind smitten down an Innocent man, with∣out any just Cause or Offence given or administered unto him, so that he lay for a considerable time as a man wholly dead, or without Life, yet by the Mercy of God was recovered) was by the hand of the same just God (against whom he had sinned in this behalf) smitten down, so that he never rose again; which may be a Caveat, and ought to give Warning to all men of what Degree or Conditi∣on soever they be of, to beware and have a care what they do, and how they behave themselves; for though the Lord by many may be looked upon, as one that delayes his coming, yet at last he may be expected to come unto such, and when he comes his Reward is with him, to give unto every man suitably, as his Works shall be; Tri∣bulation and Anguish to every Soul that doth not Righteously; but Peace and Joy to the Upright in Heart: So while there is a time let all men prize it. Upon the 31th Day of the 6th Moneth, called August, in the Year 1662. being the first Day of the Week, came James Met∣calfe of Nappa, in the Country of York, and then in the Commission of Peace to the Door of James Wetherald in Askrigg in the same County, where some of the People of God in Scorn called Quakers were peaceably met together, only to wait upon and worship the One, True and Living God in Spirit and Truth, according to his will and those manifestations of him they had received. And though he the said James Metcalfe had often known or heard of their so peaceably meeting together at that place before that time, and for no other purpose save only (as aforesaid) to wait upon and wor∣ship the Lord; yet to the intent to render the said People more O∣dious or Dangerous, or else to render his Appearance the more Ter∣rible, he brought with him a great Company of Armed men; and being on this wise come to the Door of the said House, they caused
Friends by the said Armed men to be had out, and brought before them; where upon Promise made to appear before the said James Metcalfe the next day, they were all, save Richard Robinson, let go, and him the said James Metcalfe committed to the Custody of Richard Besson of the same Askrigg, then Constable, who let him go Home also: and coming again the next day, the said James Met∣calfe committed Nineteen of them to the Common Jayle at York, and Four to the House of Correction, until the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be held for the North-Riding of the said County of York. But by the Kindness of the said Constable, Rich. Besson, to whose Charge they were committed, they were stayed at Home most part of a Moneth; and then through the Threatnings of the said James Metcalfe, sent to Prison until the said Sessions, where, after much Discourse, those Persons here after-named, with others, were fined, and the Fines levied as followeth. First, Richard Robinson of Countersett in Wensleydale was fined 2 l. for which he had a Mare distrained by Christopher Todd of Middleham, Edmond Blades and Bartholomew Blades of Askrigg, aforesaid, or some of them, about the 3d day of the 11th Moneth, in the Year 1662. worth, by the Owner's Estimation of her, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Richard Rowth of Hawes was fined 10s. for which the aforesaid Persons, or some of them, did distrain and take a Cow, at or about the same time, worth about 3l. 10s. Bartholomew Harryson of Countersett and Isabell his Wife, being fined either of them 12d. had distrained for the same by the afore∣said Persons, or some of them, about the time aforesaid, some Cloth and Apparel; but the same was released by a Neighbour, and returned back again, only the party got some other Commodities, and stayed so much as the Fines came to, in Payment for the same. James Gurnell of Marsett, fined 10s. had four Pewter Dishes and one Riding-Coat distrained, and taken for the same, by the aforesaid Edmond and Bartholomew Blaydes, the 13th day of the Moneth aforesaid, worth about 1l. 9s. Mary Lambert of Busk fined 10 s. had Stockings distrained and taken for the same, by the aforesaid Edmond and Bartholomew Blaydes, worth about 12 s.
There were several other Persons at that time fined, besides what is before-mentioned, so that the Fines in all came to 19 l. 13 s. But whether any of the Residue was distrained for or no, I know not. Now followeth an Account of some of the Sufferings, and other Exercises of several of the said People of God in Scorn called Quakers, which hath happened unto them since the beginning of the Year 1670. in and about Rich∣mond, Massam, and some of the adjacient Parts, and Dales, within the North Riding of the aforesaid Coun∣ty of York, occasioned by the Proceedings of Joseph Craddock, now living, and James Metcalfe deceased: Together with some few others in the Commission of Peace, within the said Riding; and also by the Proceedings of the Mayor and Recorder of the said Town of Richmond, upon the Information of William Thornaby the Elder, Inn keeper of the aforesaid Richmond, and late one of the Serjeants there (but cast out of that Place for his Evil Carriage and Misdemeanours) together with his Son, and other Agents and Emisaries of his, who being given up to Spoil and Destruction, did with Covetousness seek after their Neighbours Goods, and did greedily endeavour to catch them by any means, not regarding what became of the Owners, so they could but get their Prey; taking their oc∣casion by, and Encouragement thereunto from the late Act of Parliament, Entituled, An Act to Prevent and Sup∣press Seditious Conventicles, &c. FRom which (I say) according to that Construction, they pas∣sed upon it, and Use they have made of it, such Loose and Dissolute Persons, as the said Thornaby, being a man of a desperate Condition, hath been Emboldened under the Notion of An Informer
for the King, to commit such Gross and Horrid Villanies, as in the times of a more Sober and Christian-like Dispensation or Distribu∣tion of Law and Justice, could be looked on by Sober and Discreet Persons (as it is by such at this day, whose Hearts have been sad∣ded to see it) to be no less than Theft and Robbery: And that Act (according to that Construction they have passed upon (and use they have made of it) no better or other than a Cloak for such to Act by or under; who would have acted as badly before, but that they feared Punishment by a Law; nay, some known Thieves condem∣ning their Doings in this behalf, disdaining to act so grosly upon an Innocent Harmless People, as they (in this Case) did upon us, being Encouraged thereunto, as will appear by the Sequel of this Discourse, which is no other than Truth, and not all that might be truly said of their Evil Actions in this behalf neither) by such whose Endeavours should have been to Suppress Vice and Encourage them that do Well; for to this end only should the Magistrate bear his Sword, and not to set up and carry on the Interest of False Swearers, and other Injurious Persons, whose Proceedings in this behalf they Countenanced and Encouraged, under pretence of putting that Act in Execution, made (as appears by the Title and Preamble thereof) To Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles (Only) and to provide a more speedy Remedy against the growing and dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries, and other Disloyal Persons, &c. And if made only for such as are Dangerous, Seditious, Disloyal, Contrivers of Insurrections and Plotters, and such as are only Pretenders to Tender Conscience (but are not really Conscientious) and for such as are Disturbers and Breakers of the Peace, according as the same ought to be; then not for Peaceable Harmless People, such as the Harmless People called Quakers are, and have been, who make, and have made it their Endeavours only to Serve, Wait upon and Wor∣ship the One, True and Living God in Spirit and Truth Really; and not in or under a pretence only of Religious Exercise, do they meet together under that Pretence, to Plot or Contrive Insurrecti∣ons, neither to stir up any Sedition, or Disturb or break the Peace, or offer Violence to any, as Experience on their behalf doth wit∣ness, who have given their Cheeks to the Smiter, and their Heads to them that have plucked off the Hair, not answering again. Nei∣ther is it to be believed that a Christian-Parliament (and such the
Parliament of England would be thought to be) who are guided in the Counsel, Wisdom and Fear of the Lord, and therein direct∣ed, will ever make Laws to limit the Lord God to this or that Form, or to this or that Way of Worship, and that he shall either be Served and Worshipped in such a Way as they have prescribed, that is to say, according to the Liturgy of the Church of England (the Inventions of men) or he must not be served at all; for this were to limit the holy One of Israel, and to make God, even the Living God, Subordinate to Sinful Man; but rather to let him have his Liberty to be served and worshipped as he will, and in what way he most delighteth and chuseth; For doth not the Wind blow where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but neither knowst from whence it is, nor whither it goes? and so are all they that are born of the Spirit: And therefore not to be restrained under great Mulcts and Punishments; for this was never the Practice of the People of God in any Age, but the contrary. Neither can they which practise such things now claim any Interest or Part with the People of God in this Age, nor in the Scriptures of Truth, and Writings of the Prophets and Holy men of God, who were never Persecutors, but on the contrary were Persecuted, even as it is at this day; He that lives after the Flesh Persecutes him that lives after the Spirit. And therefore, I say, in Christian Charity (considering they pro∣fessed themselves to be Christians that made it) might the said Act (if we did not know their Intent in making it) be looked on only to concern Seditious, Turbulent, Unruly, Peace-breaking Per∣sons, whose Actions demonstrate them to be so; and only to be made and intended for such, rather than for Harmless Innocent Self-denying People, such as the Innocent People called Quakers are, and have been; whose Endeavours (I say) both now, and at all times, ever since they were a People, have been, and yet are, To keep a Conscience void of Offence, both towards God, and towards Man; and not to Plot and Contrive Insurrections: Neither have our Meetings been, or yet are a Terror to the People among whom we live or reside, and have our Converse, they being gene∣rally otherwise perswaded of us, and know or believe us to be other∣wise minded; yet against & upon us in particular (& that to the dissa∣tisfaction of the good People in this part of the Nation, among whom we live) hath the Force of the said Act been put in Execution, and
the said Thornaby employed himself, his Son, and other his Agents and Emisaries, as Informers, to subvert and destroy the Estates of many. And as a beginning to his Actions, he the said Thornaby, together with one Matthew Chawder of Reeth in Swaledale, in the County and Riding aforesaid, upon the 15th of the 3d moneth, called May, in the year 1670. (he the said Thornaby having the same day been at Richmond Meeting) did come to the House of one Elizabeth Cherry Widow in Swaledale aforesaid, where finding to the number of Seven Persons (besides those of the Family) of the aforesaid Peo∣ple called Quakers, met together to wait upon and worship the One True and Living God in Spirit and Truth, according to his Will, they the said Thornaby and Chawder the Informers went to the before∣named James Metcalfe; and swore to the number of Seventeen Per∣sons; by which it may easily be perceived, what manner of Persons employ themselves as Informers, which ought not, neither heretofore have been thought worthy to go unpunished. And as a further Evi∣dence of their wilful and desperate Wickedness and Perjury, at the same time swore, That one Thomas Kipling was then at the said Mee∣ting; who the same Day and at or about the same Hour was at Newcastle upon Tine, about Thirty Five Miles from the said Eliza∣beth Cherry's House (as was after proved.) And further also swore at the same time, That Richard Robinson of Healaugh Park in Swaledale aforesaid, was then also there. And when the said Thornaby came about ten dayes after to distrain the Goods and Chattels of the said Richard Robinson, for a Fine of 5 s. by their said Oathes imposed upon him, he confessed openly, He had never seen the Face of him the said R. R. before; and so in effect confessed himself Forsworn, & gave his own Oath the Lye (as it well deserved) for the said R. R. was not at the said House when the said Thornaby was there, as was also proved. Likewise they the said Thornaby and Chawder further swore at the same time against William Orton and John Key, then both of Marrick, for Preaching and Teaching in the said Assembly; whereas upon an Appeal made by the said Wil∣liam Orton and John Key, upon the Distress of their Goods and Chattels taken for the Fines of 20 l. apiece imposed upon them by reason of the said Oaths, it was plainly proved there were no Words spoken by the said William Orton and John Key; or either of
them, in way of Preaching or Teaching; but what was spoken, was spoken in way of Discourse between the said William Orton and John Key on the one part, and the said Thornaby and his Agents on the other part: Nevertheless the said James Metcalfe upon the In∣formation and Oathes aforesaid, without any other manner of Con∣viction, and without calling or summoning the Parties accused to appear and answer personally before him according to Law, did issue forth a Warrant, whereby he gave power to the Constables, Churchwardens (so called) and Overseers, to distrain for the seve∣ral Fines imposed by him on the said Seventeen Persons, so reported by the aforesaid false Information to be at the said Elizabeth Cherry's House. And lest he the said James Metcalfe should come short in Wickedness, or otherwise, that he might gratifie the Informers, he directed his Warrant to the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers, and more especially to the said Thornaby, whom he terms a Gentleman, and Chawder, whom he calls a Yeoman, giving unto them thereby also power to distrain as well as the other, and also more SPECIAL Power, inasmuch as the Warrant was more especially directed to them; although that very Act by which they did pretend to proceed, doth give the Power of Distress only and joyntly to the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers, and to no other: And the Appointment of One, is the Exclusion of Another, according to that Rule or Maxim in Law, Designatio unius est exclusio alterius; as when an Act of Parliament (which is the Introduction of a Novel Law (as this is) giveth the Power and Interest to one certain person, by that express Designation of one, all others are excluded: for 'tis a further Ground in Law, Expressum facit cessare tacitum; That which is expressed makes that which is implyed to cease. Read Hawkes his Grounds of the Laws, fol. 448, and 466. Cooke's Comm. fol. 183. Ployd. 106. Stradling's Case. And also further by the said Warrant in the King's Name commands them to distrain the Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid Richard Robinson for a Fine of 5 s. imposed by him the said James Metcalfe, upon the said Richard Robinson, under pretence that the Wife of the said Richard was at the aforesaid Meeting; against whom the said James Metcalfe had no Information, neither did she stand Convicted before him. And here all may see what manner of Man the said James Metcalfe was, and whether fit to be in the Commission of Peace or no, and
what he would have done, if not restrained by a more secret Hand: For if the Law, by which, in this behalf, he pretended to proceed, were not strict enough to answer His Will, and the Informers Ends; he would (as in this Case he did) add to it, to make it worse: And whether these things be according to Justice, and conducing to the Honour and Reputation of the King, his Govern∣ment and Parliament, and to the Advancement of his Interest in these Nations, let the Wife in Heart judge: And whether they which act such things could or can be truly said to be the King's Friends, and to Love and Honour him, and seek the Conservation and Advancement of his Interest and Government, who so grosly and in the Face of a wise People Abuse him (who is said to be The Foun∣tain of Justice, and should Act no Ʋnjust Thing) by sending forth such Warrants in his Name, and acting such things under the Notion of his Authority, as are quite contrary to Law, and conducing very much to the Subversion of Justice, Truth and Righteousness; which things flourishing and abounding in any Kingdom, causes Happiness, and gives Satisfaction to the Good People thereof; but being subverted and turned backward (as in this Case) many times brings Ruin: But the afore-mentioned Proceedings, False Oathes and Informa∣tions, being in part laid before and presented to the view of some more Eminent Persons (Members of the then Parliament) who appeared Haters and Detestors of such Illegal and Unjust Proceed∣ings, and from whom better Returns of Justice was expected) their Advice was, To indict the said Thornaby and Chawder of Perjury, which being accordingly done, the said Chawder, knowing himself guilty, Fled; but Thornaby being an Impudent Person, appeared at the next General Quarter-Sessions of the Peace for the said Riding, held at Richmond, where the Grand Jury, upon Evidence sworn and examin'd, found the Indictments (there being two) against Thornaby; whereupon the said Thornaby, by the Advice of Joseph Craddock and one William Robinson also in the Commission of Peace, who it seems feared the Justice of some then present, did put in his Traverse to the said Indictments, they or the one of them promi∣sing him All the Favour the Court could shew him; and further told him, That if he did not Traverse the said Indictments, Ignominy would follow, or to that purpose; whereupon he was bound over to traverse the said Indictments at the next Quarter-Sessions of the Peace
for the said Riding, which was holden at Thursk in the said Coun∣ty; where it was the Endeavours of some then present (who may since have seen the Bad Effects of that Action of theirs) to quash the Indictments, which they did for some Defect (as was pretended) in Form; nevertheless, it was assented unto, That Thornaby should be indicted again at the next Sessions; which being effected, and the Indictments preferred, and the Witnesses sworn, and Grand Jury also, who was gone forth to examin the Witnesses in order to the finding of Thornaby Guilty or Not Guilty; whick Joseph Crad∣dock knowing, who had seen the Indictments, and knew them to be punctually proved, together with James Metcalfe, at the Instance of the said Thornaby, sent for the said Indictments to the Grand Jury, who not knowing their Intent in sending for them, did send the same accordingly unto the said Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, who kept them, and would not return them back again, nor suffer the said Thornaby to come to his Tryal, nor the Grand Jury to proceed and discharge themselves of that Oath, which but a little before the Court had imposed upon them, touching Thor∣naby's Tryal; neither would they deliver the Indictments to those that paid for them, and who suffered by Thornaby's False Oaths; but by all Means, like the Jews of old, sought how to deliver or free Barrabas, and give up Truth unto Suffering: For when Justice was desired according to Law, the said Joseph Craddock domineeringly began to accuse Friends of Malice for prosecuting of Thornaby; though such as suffer (as those who prosecuted in this behalf had done, having their Goods taken from them by reason of the said False Oathes) have always and at all times in the Laws of England, and by the Impartial and Unbyassed Ministers thereof, been thought worthy and been adjudged to have Just Cause to complain, for to redress and remedy Wrongs and Injuries, and to punish Offenders and Perjuries, and to Answer all Just Complaints was the said Law pro∣vided; and such Complainings and Proceedings, whether by In∣dictment or otherwise, howsoever grounded upon a real Suffering (as in this Case it was) have not heretofore, neither at this time honestly can be accounted Malice, especially in so weighty a Matter as that is, wherein Life, Liberty and Estate is concern'd, and especially when the Punishment desired and endeavoured to be inflicted upon the Offender, for his False Oath (though it be of Dangerous
Consequence to all men) is no other or greater than simply such as may disable and stop him from wilfully sinning against his own Soul, and de∣sperately running into those Evils which are of bad Consequence both before God and Man. But on the contrary, Malice is not hid in such, who contrary to their Duty and Oath deny or defer to do Justice upon Offenders, yea, even in Criminal Causes for the King, because of their particular Envy to them which prosecute. And as a farther Evidence of his Evil Will and Desire of Ruin to the Suf∣ferers; or otherwise, to the Intent to render them more odious, there∣by to get a Cloak for his illegal Proceedings; he the said Joseph Craddock further upon the Bench said, That if they (to wit, the Qua∣kers) had Power, they would Cut all their Throats: which Report of his, as it is most False, so it gained him as little Credit, the peo∣ple generally before whom he spoke it being otherwise perswaded of us, as a people that had known our Deportments better than to believe such Lyes. But on the contrary, he the said Joseph Crad∣dock, together with the said James Metcalfe, and all others that joyned with them in this Business, did more plainly make it appear, that they sought the Loss, Ruin and Destruction of the Quakers, and not only of them, but by these Examples leave a Gap open, which being entred in at, may tend to the Ruin and Destruction of all Men, of what Degree or Condition soever. For if Perjury may escape, and go unpunished, and be Tolerated, Encouraged and Protected in one man; by the same Rule, and with as good Authority may it (to wit, Perjury) be Tolerated and Encouraged in every man; and if by False Swearing they may Rob one Man of his Goods, by the same Rule, and with as good Authority may they do it to another; and hereby no man comes to be safe either in Life or Estate: for if the Law, which is or should be the Guard of every man's Life, Liberty and Estate, be broken upon one, by the same Rule, and with as good Authority, may it be broken up∣on all; and then what is become of those good and wholsome Laws, heretofore made for the Protection of Men in their Lives, Liberties and Estates, and for the Punishment of Transgressors and False Swearers? or were they made for some, and not for others, and so consequently against some, and not against others, according to the Wills and Fancies of the Ministers thereof? Was not, nay is not Justice to be done to all the King's Subjects, without Re∣spect
of Persons? Read the Oath appointed for all the Justices, Rastal, fol. 244, and 245. Mag. Char. Chap. 29. Stat. Rich. 2. Chap. 4. Rastal, 332. Nay, Though Letters or Commandments should come from the King to the contrary, yet were they to go forth to do Justice, notwithstanding such Letters and Commandments. And are not the same Laws in force yet? if not, shew us when repealed, and when there was a Law made for Judges and Justices in such Ca∣ses to deny and defer to men Justice and Right, as here in the Case of Thornaby Justice and Right was both denyed and deferred; and so in effect the said Joseph Craddock, and the rest that joyned with him in protecting Thornaby, are become more guilty than the Qua∣kers, of that which he slanderously endeavoured to cast upon them, that is to say, Cutting of Throats, or Taking of Life. For if what the Learned Cooke saith in Adams and Lambert's Case, be true, viz Panis pauperum, vita pauperum et qui, defraudat eos vir sanguinis est; Then Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, and all others who joyned with them in protecting Thornaby from coming to condign Punishment for his False Oathes, and thereby encoura∣ged him to persevere in his said Wicked Practices, to the Taking, Spoiling and Destroying of his Poor and Harmless Neighbours Goods, to the disabling some of them to get competent Sustenance for themselves and Children, and that without Just Cause, will have much ado to clear themselves from being Men of Blood, or Blood∣guilty or Blood-thirsty Men. And here by the Protecting of Thor∣naby in his said Perjury (as well as in other Cases) it may plainly be perceived, That it was not so much Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe's Zeal to put the Laws in Execution, and increase the King's Revenue by getting of Fines, and his Honour by distributing Justice impartially, that made them so forward, as it was their Envy and Evil Will against the Quakers, so called; for if it had, they would have done Justice upon Thornaby for his False Oathes, according to Law; 5 Eliz. chap. 9. 14 Eliz. chap. 11. and not have protected False Swearers under the Notion of doing Service for the King, who is Dishonoured by such Services, and his Name Abused by such Applications; neither would they have hindred the King of such a Considerable Sum of Money, as upon proof of the said Perjury had been due unto him by the said Law. But I may truly
say, Justice is turned backward, and Equity cannot enter; for if it could, False Oaths and Perjury would not be made the Instruments of ruining men in their Estates, as in this Case they were and have been. And now whether such Actions, and the Proceedings be∣fore mentioned, were not and are Dangerous Practices, and of Bad Consequence, against the growing and encreasing Evils; whereof a prudent Parliament had more need to provide a speedy Remedy, than against the Peaceable Meetings of the Lord's Peo∣ple; let the Wise in Heart judge. For by the latter God is Ho∣noured, his Name and Power Exalted and Magnified, his Truth Spread and Increased; and by the Protection, Toleration and En∣couragement thereof the Kingdom and Government may expect to be Blessed and Established: But by the former, as God is Dis∣honoured, so the King and his Authority is Abused, his Laws Vio∣lated, his Subjects Ruined, and their Liberties Infringed, and therefore have need to be remedied. For it is an antient but ho∣nourable Rule or Maxime, Salus populi suprema lex; i. e. The Safety of the People is the chiefest Law. But this seems with these men and in this matter to be laid waste or disregarded, while the Hedge, which the Law sets for the Protection of every man's Life, Liber∣ty and Estate, comes thus to be thrown down, and laid open for every Wild Bore and Ravenous Beast, such as the said Thornaby, even as it were the very Scum and Off-scouring of men, by False Oaths or otherwise, to enter in, root up and lay waste the Rights and Interests of Honest, Harmles, Self-denying People, such as the Law in it self principally delights to honour, and for whose on∣ly Protection the same Law appears to have been chiefly made: For even upon these Encouragements, and the Oaths and Informa∣tions of the said Thornaby and other his Agents and Emisaries were all those Goods taken, and Spoil ensuing made, most whereof by Warrants from Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe in the Coun∣try, and by Thomas Craddock and John Bartlett in Richmond; for no other Offence but only for peaceably meeting together, simply to wait upon and worship the One, True & living God in Spirit and Truth according to his Will, and not for Plotting or Contriving In∣surrections, neither for any Sedition or Dangerous Practices; these or any of them being not so much as by the said Informers, or any of them, laid to their Charge.
And first, Taken from the before-ntioned Richard Robinson of Healaugh Park in Swaledale by Warrant from the said James Metcalfe, grounded  false Oaths and Informa∣tions of William Thornaby, Matthew Chawder, for a Fine of 5 s. imposed upon himself, who was proved not to be at the said Meeting when Thornaby and Chawder were there; and for a Fine of 5 s. for his Wife, against whom James Metcalfe had no Infor∣mation, neither did she stand convicted before him, yet by his Warrant did Henry Watson Constable, and William Thornaby, (about the twenty fifth day of the third moneth, 1670.) take Pewter from the said Richard Robinson, worth about 19 s. By the same Warrant did the same Constable, at or about the same time, distrain and take from Robert Addeson of Healy, three Pewter Platters and one Brass Pot, worth about 12 s. And about the same time did the same Constable and Informer, by the said Warrant, distrain a Mare of one Nicholas Rawes in Swaledale aforesaid, for a Fine of 5  imposed upon him, worth about 2 l. 10 s. Also the same Constable, about the same time, and by the same Warrant, did distrain and take from Simon Harker of Swaledalc aforesaid, for a Fine of 5 s. one Brass Pot, worth about 7 s. Upon the 22d day of the 3d Moneth, called May, 1670. did William Thornaby, Elder, and Henry Spence, both of Richmond, Informers together, with James Metcalf of Bainbrigg, Constable, and one Robert Jackson of the same place, came to the House of Thomas Fawcett of Hawes in Wensleydale, where finding some of the aforesaid People called Quakers peaceably met together, to Wait upon and Worship the Living God, according to his Will, in the Way of his Commandments; he, the said Thornaby, and other his Agents begun to take the Names of some of them so met, but not coming to his Purpose, in respect he did not know them all; and thereupon going away he met with one Thomas Shore, a most No∣torious Bad Man (who to the Countrie's great Satisfaction was afterwards for his bad Carriage removed by the Justice of Charles (then Lord St. John) now Marquess of Winchester) who gave him Information of the Names of several so met, which he had not before got; upon which Information, together with what he had got before, he, the said Thornaby, together with the said Henry
Spence, went to before the said James Metcalfe, and desperately Swore against a great Number of Persons, (many whereof he knew not) That they were at an Ʋnlawful Assembly or Conventicle, at the place aforesaid (though such as meet to wait upon the Lord, have not heretofore been accounted an Unlawful Assembly, but Encou∣raged, Heb. 10. 25.) and particularly against one Thomas Winn of Grisedale, and Thomas Bedam's Wife of Hawes, neither of whom the said Thornaby or Spence saw there; for the said Thomas Winn was not that day in Wensleydale, as might have been proved. And for a further Evidence of this mans Wickedness, he the said Thornaby coming into an Assembly afterwards, where many of the said Peo∣ple he so Swore against was present, he voluntarily Swore, He knew not a Face among them but Three, viz. Richard Robinson, Bartho∣lomew Harryson and John Thompson. And yet upon these mens Oathes and Informations, together with the Oathes and Informati∣ons of others, after given, and without calling the Parties accused before him, did the said James Metcalfe issue forth his Warrants, by which these Goods and Chattels here-after-named were taken from the People following in Wensleydale. And First, James Metcalfe of Bainbrigg and Anthony Swinbanke of Mosedale, both Constables for Bainbrigg aforesaid, with others, upon the 7th day of the 4th Moneth, 1670. by the Warrant or Warrants aforesaid, did take from Oswald Routh of Hawes aforesaid Three Kine, and the next day one Mare. And the 5th day of the 8th Moneth, 1670. the said Constables or their Agents, took from him Brass and Pewter, altogether worth about 12 l. 2 s. The same Constables, with others, upon the 4th day of the 4th Moneth, 1670. did take from Richard Routh of Hawes aforesaid, Brass and Pewter; and the 8th of the same Moneth Five Kine, al∣together worth 16 l. The 7th day of the same Moneth, 1670. did the same Constables take from Christopher Routh of Hawes aforesaid (now Prisoner) One Cow, worth about 2 l. 6 s. 8 d. And the 8th day of the same Moneth did the same Constables take from Richard Binkes of the same place One Mare and a Colt of about one year old, which was sold for 3 l. 18 s. 6 s. The same day the same Persons took from Thomas Reedham of the same place one Cow, worth about 2 l. 10 s.
They, or some, or one of them, also about the same time, took from Fancis Metcalfe of Mosedale in Wensleydale aforesaid one Cow, worth about 2 l. All, or most of which Goods so distrained and taken as aforesaid by Warrant from the said James Metcalfe, was either by Relations or Neigbours to the Sufferers bought of the Distrainers, though many of them at prety dear Rates, on purpose to save something for the Sufferers. The same James Metcalfe Constable and John Metcalfe Church-Warden (so called) both of Bainbrigg, and Francis Lambert of Marsett, Overseer, together with William Thornaby Elder, and Henry Spence, Informers; about the same time did take from John Thompson of Blean, Brass and Pewter, which they sold for 1 l. 5 s. And from Bart. Harryson of Countersett in Wensleydale, Pewter worth by Estimation 4 s. From Michael Pratt of Burgehill in the same Dale, Pewter worth, by Estimation about 15 s. The same Officers and Informers did also come into the House of Richard Robinson of Countersett at the same time, and some of the Officers often after, but never made any Distress. By Warrant from Joseph Cradock were these Goods following in and near Massam distrained, upon the Information of the said Wil∣liam Thornaby the Elder, his Son, and other his Agents, or some of them. Jane Bridgewater a poor Widow-Woman, for having a Meeting at her House in Massam had all she had distrained, but to what Value is Uncertain. Thomas Bridgewater of the same place had Goods distrained worth by Estimation about 2 l. Robert Lodge of the same place, for a Fine of 1 l. 10 s. had Hous∣hold Goods distrained worth by Estimation about 5 l. Anne Blackburne of High-Ellington, another poor Widow, had Houshold Goods distrained, worth about 3 l. 10 s. Thomas Whitton of Pattrick-Brunton had two Kine taken from him, worth about 5 l.
Marmaduke Beckwith of Aldburgh, had Houshold Goods distrain∣ed, but not taken away, for his Brother bought them, and let him have the Use of them, worth about 20 l. William Beckwith had Houshold Goods distrained worth 3 l. 10 s. Thomas Pratt, for a Fine of 10 s. laid on him, had Goods di∣strained and sold, worth about 2 l. Much also of the Goods afore-mentioned was bought by Neighbours and Relations to the Sufferers; not out of Envy to the Owners, but out of Pity and good Will to their Harmless Neigbours and Friends, on purpose to save something, if possible, out of their Ruins, having, many of them, their Hearts Sadded to see such Havock made. Taken in Coverdale upon the account aforesaid, the 10th day of the 7th Moneth, called September, in the Year 1670. Anthony Slay∣tor and Rich. Rinder Constables, by Warrant from the Lord St. John, distrained and took from Stephen Winn of Melmerby in Cover∣dale (now Prisoner) a piece of Cloth, worth about 13 s. Rich. Beck, Constable of Melmerby aforesaid, by Warrant from Joseph Craddock distrained and took from the said Stephen Winn two Kine and Houshold Goods, so that he neither left Dish, Dubler, Spoon nor Stool to sit upon; he also distrained and sold two pair of Looms, and other working Instruments, and Yarn, he being a Weaver, and Stuff upon the Beam, an unwrought part of it be∣longing to others, for whom he wrought it, valued together about 7 l. 10 s. 6 d. The 16th day of the Moneth and Year aforesaid, and by the same Warrant, as was supposed, did Simon Winn Constable, distrain and take from Richard Geldart of Carleton in Coverdale aforesaid, five Kine and two Heiffers, well worth 13 l. And the 25th of the same Moneth and Year, and by the said War∣rant of Lord St. John did the said Constables distrain and take from William Hornor of Woodall in Coverdale aforesaid, seven Kine, one Mare, Houshold Stuff, two Stacks of Hay, and other two parcels of Hay, altogether worth about 26 l. And the same Constables also distrained from James Janson of the same place, Houshold Goods worth about 5 l. But most of the Goods afore-mentioned, which were taken by force of the Lord St. John's Warrant, and by the Constable who
distrained them by virtue of the said Warrant, sold to such as would buy them, but because not sold at dear Rates, were either by War∣rant from Ioseph Craddock distrained again, or otherwise by his means and cruelty forced to be compounded, bought and contracted for again, under pretence of a Combination to defeat the King, thereby afrighting the poor Innocent People, who had bought them out of their Bargains, to the subversion of Commerce and Dealing in this behalf, they knowing no Law to prohibit the Buyer from peaceably enjoying, and otherwise disposing of what he had so bought from those authorized to sell, as the Constables, &c. in this Case of force by the said Act and Warrants thereon grounded was said to be, neither any Law which binds the Constables to sell at dearer Rates than they can get: And it was also contrary to the Order of his Son Thomas Craddock at the Quarter-Sessions for the Town of Richmond to the Constable there, who affirming, That he could not get the Goods he had so taken in distress sold, or to that pur∣pose, (as is remembred) told him, He must sell them, though he sold Ten Pounds worth for Ten Shillings. And here all may per∣ceive their Evil-will to the Sufferers, and those that wished them Well; for if they could but perceive what most tended to their Dis∣advantage, they would chuse that which most conduced to their Ruin; for rather than they should forbear distraining, because they, to wit, the Constables, &c. could not get the Goods sold, few or none having a mind to buy such Ill-gotten Goods, they must have liberty to sell, though in a manner for nothing: But if any that bought them were judged to bear good Will to the Sufferers, they might be troubled, under pretence of Defeating the King, as those poor Buyers and Constable were, who all or some of them were had to the Sessions, and there threatned, and the Constable imprisoned and fined 20 l. as is remembred. And herein, as well as in other mat∣ters, the Malice of some men was made manifest; and that it was they in this sence that sought Life more than the Quakers. Upon the 2d day of the 2d Moneth called April, in the Year 1671. came one Richard Murrow, then of Burton in or near Bishop∣dale, Constable, now deceased, together with William Thornaby the Younger, of Richmond, (Son to the aforesaid William Thornaby the Elder) Informer, into the Assembly of the Lords People at the
House of Thomas Simpson in Burton aforesaid, where they were met in the fear of the Lord, and to wait upon him; and coming in, the said Constable seeing them met, in a Scornful manner said, They are pannelled; and when they had according to their former use ta∣ken the Names of those so met, the Constable said, He had a War∣rant to search and rifle among them; which some desiring to see, he refused, only pull'd out some Papers, but what was in them they did not know; and being advised, To take heed what he did, lest he run himself into a Snare, he refused to hear; and having searched the House, and not coming to his purpose, they went to the Stable, wherein were three Mares, one of the mans own who own'd the Stable, and two of his Friends, which they had borrowed, but the Door being bolted, and they not getting in, the said Constable returned and told the Owner of the House, He must open the Door; which not being done accordingly, but he advised, To take heed what he did; He Scoffingly refused the Advice, and said, He would have it opened, or he would break it; and further said, He would Charge others to do it for him; which he did, but they refused; at which he was grieved, and said, They had as good have held a Cow to the Bull, if he lived: By which may be seen his Forwardness, Envy and Malice, whom God did not suffer long to escape: where∣upon Thornaby the Informer said, Charge me, and I will do it, or to that purpose; but the other being as willing as he, they both went, and having got into the House took thence one Mare, which William Hornor had borrowed, with a Saddle and Woman's-Seat thereon, worth altogether about 2 l. And another which Stephen Winn had borrowed, with a Saddle and Woman's-Seat thereon, worth about 4 l. 10 s. And a little Mare belonging to the Owner of the House; all which they carried away to the Constable's House; but a little Girle pluck't off the Halter from the little Mare's Head, whereby she got away; which when the Constable perceived, he was grie∣ved, and came again to the Stable, and said, They had lost one of their Prizes; but she must be made good. Afterwards the same day by the Permission or other Assent or Agreement of the said Con∣stable, the said young Thornaby, the Informer, carried away the remaining two Mares towards Richmond, whither the next day, being the 3d day of the Moneth aforesaid, followed the said Con∣stable, and came to the House of old William Thornaby to lodge,
where the next Morning he got his Breakfast prety well, and was Cursing of the Quakers (so called) in the presence of one Thomas Winn, who gave the Relation of it; but going from thence to the Carriers House in that Town, about the sending of a Daughter of his to London, where he did also eat and drink, he suddainly fell down dead, over, upon or besides the Table, where he had been eating, and was about to count Money, and part of the Money fell from him. A True Evidence of God's Righteous Judgments upon him, who had so Audaciously behaved himself against his innocent Neigh∣bours, and may give sufficient Warning and Caution to such Of∣ficers and Constables in this day, and forever hereafter, as do not in a Moderate Fear abstain from such Actions as this man pursued, whose Intentions were Wicked; for when some of his Neighbours, (which were no Quakers, so called) asked him, What made him so Sawsie; he said, He had not been so Sawsie, but he would be; and sometimes said, They (to wit, the Informers, Constables, and the rest) would not leave them (to wit, the Quakers) all a Groat; and That they would take a Course with them, and such like Wicked Stuff, which were too long to relate; by which may be seen his En∣vy and Wicked Intentions; but God cutting him off in the midst of his Iniquity, before he had accomplished what in Evil Intent he aimed at, may signifie to all them that remain and imploy themselves in such Wicked Actions, and Spoiling of their Neighbours Goods (as this man did) who proffered to seek them in the Night-season; that it is not the Cloathing themselves with the King's Authority & Warrants, and saying, They have the King's Authority & Iustices Warrants; and that they must and will Obey; that will excuse and deliver in the Day when God comes to plead with men; for if that could have been an Excuse and brought Deliverance, then the most Mighty men that were in the Army of Nebuchadnezzar might have been excused, who had the King's Command, and that a Mighty King too, for the binding and casting of Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego into the fiery Furnace, and have pleaded, They could not help it; they were Compelled to it (as some in these dayes have said) But this Command, though from a Mighty King, as aforesaid, excused not the matter so, but that they suffered Death by Force of that Flame, which was appointed for the Destruction of others: Which Thing is Worthy to be ta∣ken notice of by all the Officers and Constables in England at
this day, to whom it hath been often in my Heart, It is a Figure; and therefore had need to be warned and advised by the same, that the Command they pursue be Righteous; and also, that what they do, be done in the fear of the Lord; for the Lord knows how to deliver the Righteous, as he did Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego, who could not bow to the King's Will in that day, no more than the Innocent People called Quakers can bow to the Wills of them that would limit the holy One of Israel at this day; and the same God also knows how to reserve the Wicked, as he did this Con∣stable, unto the day of Judgment, to be Punished, which we do not rejoyce over, as Glorying in any man Destruction, but only set forth to the end, that others may see and be warned, lest they likewise come into the like Condemnation. It is also worthy to be further taken notice of, That old William Thornaby's Wife and young William Thornaby's Mother, who was hardned in the Sin of her Husband and Son, having been visited with Sickness much of the time of their afore-mentioned Wicked Imployment, dyed the same day, and as was reported, about the very same Hour her Son was exercised in taking the Mares aforesaid: and the two Mares them∣selves, so taken as aforesaid, also shortly after dyed in the Possession of the said Thornabyes, or the one of them, as others so got before by them likewise did; and there was neither King nor Poor got any part out of them, but Thornabyes went with the whole, which both the said Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, notwithstanding their pretended zeal for the King, could dispence withal. Also the Goods of one James Calvert of Burton, in or near Bi∣shopdale, together with the Goods of a Friend there, called Jere∣miah Simpson, were distrained to a great value, by Warrants (as was said) from Joseph Craddock (for we were sometimes forced to take their Words, they being unwilling, and sometimes resusing to shew their Warrants) for the Offence (as it was called) of the afore-named Stephen Winn, who being at Prayer in the House of the afore-named Thomas Simpson in Burton aforesaid, where the Por∣sons distrained on were present; and the above-named Thornaby co∣ming in, and finding the said Stephen at Prayer, as aforesaid, after some seemingly wondering Expressions, he went away and Inform∣ed the said Joseph Craddock; but whether his Information upon Oath was, That he was Praying only, or that he was Preaching and
Teaching, we know not, having never seen the Information, nei∣ther, may be, would he greatly scruple what he Swore, as may be perceived by his former deportment; but whatsoever he Swore, it was Prayer only that the said Stephen at that time was exercised in, and for which Offence it was said, the Goods were distrained; by which it may be perceived, that neither Law nor Scripture was any Limit to these men in their Proceedings; for the Apostle saith, 1 Tim. 2. & 8. I will therefore, that men Pray every where, lifting up holy Hands, without Wrath or Doubting. And the very Law by which they did pretend to proceed imposeth no Penalty upon any for the meer Act of Prayer; and if it did, yet it were contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, 2 Thes. 5. 17. who commands To Pray without ceasing, and also to Christ's, Luke 18. 1. and contrary to Law also, as appears by Shepheard in his Grand Abridgment, part 3. pag. 9, & 274. Nay, though a Statute should be made to prohibit men to Pray to God, yet the same were void, as appears by the places afore-cited, and those quoted by him: Read also the Epistle to the English Translation of the Mirrour of Iustice. And as if this were not Wickedness enough, they imposed the Punishment of that which they call the Fault of one upon another, contrary to the Scripture, which they have sometimes (though falsly) called their Rule, which saith, It shall no more be said, the Fathers have eaten a sowr Grape, and the Childrens Teeth are set on Edge; for every man shall dye for his own Iniquity; and the Soul that Sins shall dye, not another; and it is also a Rule in their own Law, Nemo pro Alieno delicto Punitur: But they neither regarded Scripture nor the Law, further than they will suit their Envy and Covetous Ends. For ha∣ving sometimes (but falsly) condemned the Quakers, so by them called, for Denying Prayer; they in this case Condemn, and go about to Punish for Praying; and so are all found in the Confusion, Lyes and Falshoods. The Constable of Bellerby, with others, about the times above∣said, or some of them, did distrain and take from Ralph Ainesly of the same place, by Warrant from the Lord St. John, Pewter worth about 16 s. and after that, by Warrant from Joseph Craddock, two Kine, one Mare, two Stacks of Hay, and a Burden of Hay off his Wife's Head, together with three Burden Ropes and two
Hay-Spades (by which it appears they will leave little) altogether worth at least 16 l. 10 s. More taken in Swaledale. Upon the 21th day of the 12th moneth, called February, in the year 1670. came Henry Watson Constable, Henry Thwaite of Reeth in Swaledale Overseer, William Thornaby the Elder, William Thor∣naby the Younger and one John Allison Informers, to the aforesaid House of Elizabeth Cherry Widow in Swaledale, and under Pre∣tence of the Lord St. John's Warrant, and to seek for a Meeting, they broke the Door of the said House after they had been infor∣med by one of their own Company which was in the House, That there was no Meeting there; and having so broken the Door, by another Warrant from James Metcalfe, they distrained and took out of the House in Bedding, Wearing-Apparel and other things belonging to this poor Widow and her Children, to the value of about 16 l. The same persons also (save Henry Watson) the same day, by Warrant from the said James Metcalfe, did distrain of Jeoffrey Lonesdale of Healy in Swaledale, Stockings, Wearing Apparel, Bedding, and other things, worth by estimation 20 l. The 1st day of the 1st moneth (called March) following, did the same Henry Watson, Henry Thwaite and one Mark Hutchinson, by Warrant from the said James Metcalfe, distrain of Ralph Pea∣cock of Winterings in Swaledale, six Beasts, worth about 14 l. Which with some of the other there taken aforesaid, they sold to such as would buy them, but at what Rates hath not as yet been to the Compiler hereof known. Upon or about the 19th day of the 12th moneth (called Februa∣ry) 1670. came William Thornaby the younger and Iohn Allison, both of Richmond, Informers, together with the above-named Henry Thwaite Overseer, to the House of the said Elizabeth Cher∣ry, under pretence to search for a Conventicle, where finding none besides those of the Family, save Ia. Longstaff and the said Widow Cherry's Sister, and Elizabeth Orton, who was there visiting the
said Widow Cherry's Daughter, then very Weak, and not likely to live, which Thornaby perceiving would have gone into the inner Rooms, under pretence to see if there were no more there; and said, He had a Warrant from the Lord St. John, to break open the Doors; she bid him shew it; who pulling it forth began to read it; she said, He might read what he would, for she could not read, but said, William Orton was a little off intending to go home, we shall call him in to read it; which being done, and William being come into the House to read it, told them (having read it) that that Warrant did not concern that place nor any other, except there were an un∣lawful Assembly; nevertheless Widdow Cherry opened the Doors for their satisfaction, who searching found no more: only Katherine Longstaff who came to see her sick Kinswoman, and Edward Wil∣liamson came into the House while they were searching, which when Thornaby perceived he began to set down their Names, but Kathe∣rine Longstaff refused to tell hers, being, as she signified to them, one that frequented their Parish Church, and came but to see her Kinswoman, whereupon the said Thornaby and Allison went to the aforesaid James Metcalfe, who as one fit for their design, answer∣ed their Ends, and granted forth a Warrant against William Orton and his Daughter, not knowing either her Name or Age, and fined them together 10 s. Katherine Longstaff 5 s. James Longstaff 5 s. and Edward Williamson 5 s. and further also fined William Or∣ton for the House 9 l. and James Longstaff 5 l. and Widow Cher∣ry the rest. Whereupon William Orton, Katherine Longstaff, the Constable, and some other Neighbours went to the said James Met∣calfe, and told him of the Informers unjust Swearing against them, and Katherine Longstaff also carryed a Certificate under the Priest of the Parish his Hand, signifying that she was no Quaker (so called) but frequented their Church, and another, that she had received the Lords Supper (as they called it) nevertheless the said James Metcalfe would not recall his Warrant, whereupon William Orton put in his Appeal, and the next general Quarter Sessions held at Thrusk had a Tryal with the Informer, where the Records of the pretended Conviction being read, there proved but five Persons in it, whereof Widdow Cherry Owner of the House was one, which not being according to Law must needs be void, the Act by which they pretended to proceed, requiring that there be five Persons
besides those of the Family: Whereupon the said James Metcalfe (being still willing to assist the said Informers in their Unjust pro∣ceedings) would not acknowledge that the said William Orton did Appeal from him, though himself at the same Sessions had delivered the same Appeal, together with the pretended Record of Con∣viction into the Court, whereupon (to his shame) William Orton did prove in open Court, that he did appeal from him, and that he drew the Appeal in James Metcalfes own House, by his Instructions, and by a president the said James Metcalfe gave him to draw it by; Also the said William Ortons Counsel urged that there ought to be Witnesses besides the Informers; but the said James Metcalfe be∣ing willing still to carry on the Informers unjust designs (though all the Bench was against it, seeing their Illegal Proceedings) said, That Old William Thornaby was Informer, and Young William Thornaby and Allison were Witnesses; which was not Truth; for Old William Thornaby was not at Widow Cherry's House that day, neither had Iames Metcalfe any Information from him touching that matter. Whereupon the Justices ordered, That William Orton should have his Money upon his Appeal again; and that the Conviction was Illegal. Nevertheless by what is here expressed may easily be perceived how the said Iames Metcalfe endeavoured himself (though often to his shame) to vindicate and carry on the Interest of those Ʋnjust In∣formers and False Swearers; for when Truth would not do it, he would so far dishonour himself as to tell Lyes on their behalfs, as in this his saying, That Old William Thornaby was Informer; who neither was there, nor saw the matter done, neither gave Evidence nor Information of it; and also refused to acknowledge the Appeal, which he himself had been assistent in drawing, as abovesaid. And in all things demeaned himself as one that delighted to make himself con∣cerned in carrying on the Informers Interest, or otherwise desirous to do his Neighbour a Mischief.
Sufferings in and about Richmond on the same Account. Jane Chayter Widow, and John Chayter her Son, both of Rich∣mond, upon the Information of the aforesaid William Thornaby was by John Bartlet Mayor, fined 30 l. for having a Meeting in their House the 13th of the 3d Moneth, 1670. and though the said Mayor, when he came in found none but his Harmless Neighbours waiting upon the Lord in Silence, yet by Warrants from him did Mich. Fawcett and Richard Hogg, Constables, with others, take Stuff and other Goods, so that the Damage did amount to the Sum of 20 l. About the 10th day of the 7th Moneth, in the Year 1670. the said John Chaytor upon the account of meeting with the People of God in Scorn called Quakers, was fined 2 l. and had Goods taken out of his Shop for the same, by Warrant from the said Mayor and Recorder, by the aforesaid Constable and others, worth about 3 l. Thomas Johnson of the same place, about the same time fined 1 l. 10 s. had Goods taken out of his House by the said Constables, upon Warrant from the aforesaid Mayor and Recorder, worth about 1 l. 15 s. Mary Adamson of Richmond, about the same time fined 10 s. had Goods taken out of her House worth about 14 s. Isabel Williamson, a poor Woman of the same place, who had little but her Hand-labour to relieve her self with, was by the parties aforesaid fined 5 s. and had by the said Constables her Wear∣ing-Apparel distrained, worth about 1 l. Robert Cutter of Ravensworth near Richmond, for being at a Mee∣ting at the House of the said Widow Chaytor, about the 15th day of the 3d Moneth 1670. was fined 5 s. for which Corn was taken from him, by Warrant from one William Robinson, worth about 13 s. The same Robert Cutter about the 10th day of the 7th Moneth, 1670. was fined 2 l. for which he had Corn taken from him, by Warrant from the aforesaid William Robinson, worth about 2 l.
About the 26th day of the 8th Moneth, 1670. the said John Chay∣tor was fined 2 l. 5 s. for which, by Warrant from the aforesaid Mayor and Recorder, the said Constables did take Goods out of his Shop, worth about 3 l. 5 s. Thomas Iohnson the same time fined 2 l. 10 s. had Goods taken by the said Constables upon like Warrant, worth about 3 l. 10 s. Iohn Hopps of Richmond fined also 1 l. 5 s. had Goods taken out of his Shop, by the same or like Warrant, worth about 1 l. 15 s. And at another time for a Fine of 10 s. had Goods taken out of his Shop, by Warrant from the aforesaid Recorder, worth about 1 l. 4 s. The aforesaid Thomas Iohnson about the same time, by the same Warrant and Officers, and for the like Fine of 10 s. had Houshold Goods taken from him, worth about 14 s. Mary Adamson aforesaid fined 1 l. 10 s. had Houshold-Goods taken out of her House, worth about 2 l. Also, Iane Chaytor, Mother of the said Iohn Chaytor, for meeting with the aforesaid People was fined 2 l. 10 s. for which Goods was taken out of the Shop of the said Iohn Chaytor, worth to the value of 3 l. 5 s. The aforesaid Iohn Chaytor, for having a Meeting at his House the 12th day of the 12th Moneth called February, in the Year 1670. was fined by Thomas Craddock Recorder for Richmond, aforesaid, upon the Information of the aforesaid W. Thornaby, the Sum of 20 l. for which he had Shop-Goods distrained and taken from him upon the 21st & 22d dayes of the 2d Moneth, in the Year 1671. by Henry Shaw, Iames Sayer and others, by Warrant from the said Thomas Craddock, worth about 33 l. The said John Appealing, had his Tryal at the next Quarter-Sessions held for the said Burrough of Richmond, where the Jury found for the said John Chaytor, and against the Informers; so that up∣on their Verdict, the said John should have had all his said Goods (so distrained as aforesaid) again: But one of the said Constables (to wit, Henry Shaw) having within the time limited by the said Act for Appeal, sold the Goods amounting to the value of 33 l to the Informer Thornaby, as was said for 20 l. the said Thornaby and Shaw pretending, that the said Goods so sold was disposed of that
they could not be had again. All  the said John Chaytor had or could get without Suit , which he was not willing to make use of; notwithstanding their bad dealing with him, was only 20 l. the pretended Price the Goods were sold for: So that his Loss in this particular, besides Charges of the Appeal, amount∣ed to the Sum of 13 l. Also the said Iohn Chaytor for having a Meeting in his House on the 25th day of the 4th Moneth called June, 1671. was fined 20 l. for which by Warrant from the said Thomas Craddock, he had Shop Goods to wit, a certain Commodity called Battery) distrained and taken from him by Henry Shaw, Robert Burton and James Sayer, Constables, to the value of about 20 l. 16 s. which Goods being delivered to Richard Dawson, then Mayor of the said Town of Rich∣mond, he kept to his own Use, and as is supposed, paid down the 20 l. they were distrained for, at the next Sessions held for the said Town: But his Wife Isabell Dawson being troubled at such Unjust Dealings and Proceedings against an Innocent People, upon the ac∣count of their Consciences, would not have had her Husband to have dealt so by them, or in that kind concerned himself with them (as I think I have heard) but he not regarding her, or not submitting to that wholesome Advice, given by her unto him, did continue the said Goods in his own Possession, with intent (as it should seem) to convert the same to his own use. But some time after being out of his Mayorality, he dyed, and his Estate thereupon coming to be di∣vided between his Children and Widow, she the said Isabell, then his Widow, desired, that the same parcel of Goods so taken from the said John Chaytor (if it were possible) might be made parcel of her share of her said deceased Husband's Goods, which thing did accor∣dingly fall out; and being in her own Possession, or at her Dispose, she did enquire of the said Iohn Chaytor, the Value and Quantity or Weight of the said Goods, so taken from him; which when she understood, she did Fully restore unto him in Weight, Worth, or other∣wise, the Whole Value or Quantity of the said Goods: Which thing we do not here make mention of, and Report as being a Suffering, or an Act whereby the said Iohn Chaytor did come to any Loss, for that was made up and Re-pay'd by her in manner as aforesaid; but this we make mention of and Record to the intent, that so Noble an Act of
this Woman, so truly worthy and deserving Commendations in this behalf, might not be hid in obscurity, but that the same might be published, to the intent, that how far soever this Testimony of the hard Usage of the Lords People, by the hands of Unreasonable and Wicked men may go, this good Deed of this Woman, so truly wor∣thy, as aforesaid, may in this behalf be also born Testimony of; that so no one Person herein concerned may want of that due Weight and Measure that of Right belongs to them; but that as the Wicked and Unreasonable meet with the Report of their Wickedness and Unreasonableness to their Shame, so the Good Deeds and Upright Dealings of the Honest and Truly Conscientious, may also commend them to their Praise, knowing, and being further perswaded, that as this Woman, or any other comes to be led and guided by that Principle of Truth and Righteousness in their Inward Parts, that led and guided her at this time, to the doing of this Worthy and truly Commendable Act, the same Principle will never leave them, as they are guided by it, until it hath led them unto the Light of Life, and brought them unto the Banqueting-house of the Lords Love, and to that which is truly Praise-worthy before him; but be∣ing disobeyed and rejected, will become their Condemnation, not∣withstanding any former notable Act done by them; therefore let every such one mind to keep to the same, and whilst they have a time to prize it. More taken in Burton, Coverdale and Wensley∣dale upon the like Account, as followeth. Upon the 4th day of the 10th moneth, 1671. George Ryder Constable of Burton aforesaid, and Thomas Crookey Overseer, by Warrant from James Metcalfe, did distrain and take from Thomas Simpson of the same Burton, two Kine and four Sheep, worth 6 l. 10 s. The pretended Crime being because some Friends met at his House to wait upon the Lord the 17th day of the 9th moneth in the year 1670. which was informed against as an Unlawful As∣sembly.
And upon the same day the Constable did distrain and take from Jeremiah Simpson of the same Burton, and Brother of the said Thomas Simpson, several Implements of Houshold-stuff to the value of 4 s. Upon the 7th day of the 10th moneth, 1671. by the same War∣rant from James Metcalfe, came Iohn Watson and Thomas Stephen∣son Constables of Melmerby in Coverdale, and Iohn Smithies Over∣seer, with William Thornaby the younger and Henry Spence Infor∣mers, to the House of Stephen Winn in Melmerby aforesaid, who was from home, and none in the House but his own Family, except two or three Women that came with their Work to bear Stephen Winne's Wife Company; the Constable Iohn Watson said, He might see what Company there was, and he must see if there were not a Conventicle: To which Stephen Winne's Wife replyed, It is not usual where People come together to worship God, to follow their Outward Employments, as you see we do (they being then at Work) or words to that purpose; and further told them, There was no Conventicle: To which William Thornaby the younger said, There were three (meaning the three Women that were come in) and there might be other two within, and then there will be a Conventicle; and read a Warrant for breaking in, if refused to enter where such Meeting is known to be: but this Warrant could not reach then to that Place, because there was then no Meeting known to be there, as indeed there was none at that time, which they likely before∣hand knew well enough. But they having another Design, and the Constable too willing and ready to comply with the Evil Intent of the Informers went to an inner Door, which being locked they vio∣lently broke open, and broke and spoiled some things thereby; but finding none, the Constable bid to open the next Door, which Stephen's Wife (who perceived their Design) refused, only told them, There was none there; but that would not serve, for that Door was broken open also, and being broken, then William Thor∣naby began to pull the Bedding off the Bed, and opened a large Chest, and groaped in the Corners of it, and sought a Box to the bottom in which was some Linnen, more like one that was seeking for MONEY than a MEETING: And the said Thornaby sought the Buttery, to see what he could find there worth carrying away, and gathered their Wearing Apparel together; and when one that
saw it told him, He was a right Plunderer; the said Thornaby reply∣ed, It might not be the last time he might Plunder there; though then they took what they well could; for of Bed-Clothes and Yarn they took to the worth of about 4 l. And the said Stephen Winne being a poor man, was by this and the like former Cruelties, left in Want of Necessaries for his poor Family, not having any manner of Bed-Clothes for him and his said Family to lie on, be∣sides the Abuse his Wife sometimes sustained from the said Infor∣mers, and their Affrighting of his Children by their Boisterous De∣portment, who, or one of them this time so vehemently cryed, that Henry Spence the Informer, a Wicked and Bad Man, desired them to get done, he could not endure to hear the Child cry so: and by this Cry, which made even the Wicked and Ungodly relent, it may easily be perceived, their Deportment was Wicked and Un∣comely. Upon the 5th day of the 11th moneth (called Ianuary) 1671. Anthony Swinbank of Mosedale Constable, Geoffrey Dnsdall of Gayle and Richard Metcalfe of Aporset, the one being a Church∣warden (so called) and the other an Overseer, did by Warrant from the aforesaid Iames Metcalfe, dated (as was said) a year be∣fore, distrain and take from the aforesaid Christopher Routh of Hawes in Wensleydale five Beasts, worth about 9 l. And we were further informed from a Credible Hand, That the said Iames Metcalfe Urged or Threatned the Constable to distrain, who being unwilling thereunto alledged, He knew not the Goods, or to the like purpose (as is remembred) then Iames Metcalfe told him, He knew his Neighbour Francis Metcalfe's Goods; to which (as we had notice) the Constable replyed, He (to wit, Francis Metcalfe) was grown poor, and had not a Cow but as he hired: then Iames Metcalfe asked, If they did not bring the Milk into Francis's House? The Constable said Yes: James Metcalfe replyed, She might be distrained, or to this purpose, as is remembred. Which much manifests the continued Wickedness of this man (to wit, James Metcalfe) he appearing as one that had shut out all Pity, and given up himself to answer the Informers Ends, and made himself Instrnmental towards the Ruin of his Neighbours, whom God suf∣fered not long to escape; for shortly after this he dyed, and was
cut off to the Informers Loss, who not long after sled or departed out of these Parts, one of his chief Props and Supports being on this wife fallen. And there were several others that had Fines imposed on them; some the Constables or other Officers would Labour or endeavour with Kinsfolks, Relations or Neighbours to lay down, and have sometimes laid it down themselves, rather than they would levy for the same, & sometimes Neighbours out of kindness have driven away and hid the Parties Goods that were to be distrained, and that with∣out the Owners Consent or Knowledge; nay, against their Wills, be∣cause they would not have seen such spoil & havock made of the Goods of those whom they knew to be Peaceable and Harmless People, and Laboured, and do Labour in Honest things to be serviceable in their Generation. And several of the said Officers have expressed the trouble which was upon them to be concern'd in such things as tend∣ed to the Injury of their Honest and Harmless Neighbours: By which it is manifest, that according to the Interpretation they put upon the said Act, or rather by the Use made of it, the Honest and Con∣scientious were and are Troubled, Burdened and Oppressed; and the Envious, Cruel, Unmerciful and Covetous Strengthened, Up∣held and Encouraged. Now the hand of the Evil Doer should not be strengthened. And this will be found a Truth, That to Justifie the Wicked, and Condemn the Righteous, are both an Abomination to the Lord. All which Goods so as aforesaid taken, and Spoil before-mention∣ed made in the Interest of Honest, Harmless, Self-denying People, was for no greater, or other Crime or Offence, save only for peace∣ably meeting together, simply and Innocently to wait upon and worship the One, True and Living God in Spirit and Truth, accor∣ding to his Will; and for such meeting together and Praying before him, according to the Apostles Doctrine, and neither for Plotting, Contriving Insurrections, or other dangerous Practices, these or any of them, not being so much as laid to our Charge; but if they could but find to the Number of Five of us, or above, sometimes fewer, as may be perceived before, besides those of the Family, peaceably sitting together, waiting upon the Lord, or the like num∣ber visiting a Sick Friend or Neighbour, or doing the like Christian, Humane and Neighbourly Duty, yet this was made occasion great
enough for them to inform upon, and for some of the Justices (so called) to issue out Warrants upon, to take and to Spoil our Goods; yea, so great hath been the Envy of some of them (to wit, Joseph Craddock and James Metcalfe, (as the Constables have reported) that they, or the one of them, to wit, Joseph Craddock, hath commanded them (to wit, the said Constables) To distrain what∣soever Goods they found upon their Land, whom the Warrants were against, or in their Possession, be it whose it would: So that if any Neighbours or Relation, in Compassion to the Sufferers, and their innocent Children, for their Sustenance would have lent them a Cow to give them Milk to live upon, when their own was ta∣ken from them, or a Horse or a Mare to ride upon, they have been affraid to do so by reason of such Threatnings and of A∣ctions brought forth suitable to the same; for some were ta∣ken upon the like account as the Mares from Stephen Winn and William Horner; though the Act by which they did pretend to pro∣ceed, imposeth the penalty of Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of none save upon the proper Goods and Chattels of the Offen∣der only; neither is the Land in this behalf a Debtor, or the Goods there upon lyable to distress, if not the Goods of the Offender, as aforesaid. And hereby the Officers who had a mind to do wickedly have been Encouraged; and those who had not a mind to do so wickedly, were sometimes through fear compelled to take the Goods of others: as they did Yarn out of the House of a Weaver, brought him to work, and Stuff already wrought for others, thereby ministring occasion to People, seeing their Goods so taken from them to leave working with them, hereby endeavou∣ring as it were to stop Trading with them, and hinder a lively-hood or the Issues of Life from coming to them, and so are the men that in this case are found more Guilty of endeavouring to take Life then the Quakers, making the Informers Word and Oath, how false so∣ever, a sufficient ground for Conviction, and that without calling the partyes accused before them, to make their defence according to Law, and either to confess or deny the Fact. But this, though according to Reason, and to the Law both of Nature and of Nati∣ons they out-run; yet nevertheless for and notwithstanding all the Spoil that this Informer Thornaby did make, and Goods he thus (as aforesaid) got from Innocent People; and for and notwithstand∣ing all the assistance and encouragement that the said Joseph Crad∣dock
and James Metcalfe offered him, such was the Judgment of God upon him, that though he sometimes (as was said) got both the King's part and the Poor's part (as 'tis called) unto himself, yet instead of satisfying Debts, and growing Rich thereby, he run so far into Debt, and was active in so many Dishonesties, that he durst not frequently, as formerly, shew his Face. And it is to be noted, that the said William Thornaby the Elder coming upon a time, together with the Constable of Bainbrigg, in∣to the Honse of one Dorothy Todd in the same Bainbrigg, where was a Meeting of the said People in Scorn called Quakers, about his aforesaid Wicked Enterprizes, where the Compiler of these Paper, was present; he the same Compiler was moved of the Lord to tell him, (to wit, the said Thornaby) That the Lord God was intended, or would shortly bring a Ruin, Desolation or Destruction upon him, and his Family or House, or something to that or the like purpose, as is remembred; which shortly after came to pass; for he, to wit, the said Thornaby never came in that place again; But his Wife being dead, as aforesaid, and he by reason of his Debts, and other Mis∣demeanours, not daring well to shew his face, as at other times, went for a time skulking up and down, being often observed to shift or remove in the Evening, which gave occasion of bad suspition to People; and at last the aforesaid Ja. Metcalfe (one of his chief Props) being dead, as aforesaid, he, to wit, the said Thornaby Cheating an Excise-man of his Horse, and other things, by borrowing the same of him, and going away there-with, as was reported, he went or removed himself up to London, and being come thither, applyed himself to the then Attourney General of the King (as was said) Labouring with him to get all the remaining Fines (then ungot∣ten, and which had been Charged, by reason of his Informations, and the Information of his Agents, as aforesaid, upon several of the aforesaid People called Quakers, Inhabiting in and about the places before-mentioned) Levied for; but failing of his Intent, or meeting with a Repulse therein, he applyed himself in or about the afore∣said City of London to a Bad, Dishonest, Cheating kind of Life, as was said; and after his continuing therein some time, at last dyed miserably in Prison, as was reported. And his Children being as it were despised with many for their Father's Acts, became scattered here and there, bearing the Reproach or Ignominy of their said
Father's Dishonesty: And thus, or in like mannrr, as we are infor∣med, was the End of this Thornaby. And his Son young William Thornaby yet remains as we hear, leading a Life not much unlike the Practices he learned of his Father, as we are informed. All which might be sufficient Cautions to forewarn all those that remain from having a hand in such like Actions, as these men before-menti∣oned (who are now gone) pursued, lest they fall by that Hand, and come into the same Condemnation, and under the like Lash and Reproach, as these men did. Nevertheless, the said Joseph Craddock yet remains, and not (as it seems) being content with the Wickedness he hath already committed against the Lord's People, neither taking that Exam∣ple by other men's Harms as will be sufficient to him, to make him beware what he doth in that behalf; but posting on to the filling up of that measure of Wickedness that is yet behind; and being Commissary to the Bishop of Chester, within the Arch-Deacony of Richmond, in the Diocess of Chester aforesaid, hath himself or his Officers, or those that act under the Umbrage of him, cast several of the aforesaid People called Quakers (being most of them of those that suffered as aforesaid) in Prison at or near Richmond aforesaid, upon Writs of Excommunicato Capiendo, to wit, Richard Robin∣son of Countersett, John Fothergill of Garr End and Christopher Routh of Hawes, all in Wensleydale, who were committed the 4th of the 11th moneth, 1678. and Stephen Winne and Richard Geldart both of Carleton in Coverdale, and two of the aforesaid Sufferers, who were committed the 15th day of the 1st moneth last past, and most of them without being personally cited, or having any Sum∣mons served on them, or ever hearing of that Proceed, until they were either Arrested (as was John Fothergill, Stephen Winne and Richard Geldart) or within two dayes thereof (as was Richard Robinson) the Cause of whose Commitment, as alledged by the Procurers thereof, or some of them, is as followeth, viz. The said Richard Robinson for Non-payment of an Assessment of 10 s. imposed upon him towards the Repair of the Steeplehouse at Askrigg, and other Matters joyned with the same, as Money for Destroying of Foxes, &c. all which he could have paid save that for the Repair of the Steeplehouse, if the same had been districtly assessed.
John Fothergill for an Assessment of 5 s. imposed on him for the same Use, but never demanded on him (as he affirms) neither did he hear of the same until he was Arrested, which was very Unjust. It had been but reasonable to demand or acquaint the Party with what they expect from him, before they endeavour to punish for Non-payment of that which they never demanded of him. Stephen Winne and Richard Geldart, for not going to the Steeple∣house, nor receiving the Sacrament (so called) or some such like things. And having thus imprisoned them, endeavour to make their Bonds as hard as they can or lies in their power, by Threatning the Goaler to keep them strait; yet nevertheless the Just and Holy God is with them, and hath hitherto kept them from bowing or being bowed under them, or defiled with them; and He that hath hitherto kept them, we hope will still be with them, so that we hope the Wicked One will not prevail over them, to make or com∣pel them (notwithstanding all their Endeavours) to do that which tends to the Defilement of their Consciences, or lessening of that Testimony which God in this behalf hath given unto them. NOw it were convenient to discover what all those Fines before mentioned, for which the Distresses since the beginning of the year 1670. were taken did amount to, to the intent it might appear, whether those Persons before mentioned (to wit, Joseph Craddock, James Metcalfe, Thomas Craddock, and the rest, that made themselves so Active in the Matters aforesaid, have dealt truly with the King and the Poor, in rendring to each their respective Parts of the same; but being that we cannot do the same, because the Quantity of all the said Fines so distrained for hath not as yet (that we remember) come to our Knowledge, neither know we how all the Goods were by those that distrained the same sold, therefore shall cast up as near as we can the
true Value and Worth of the said Goods; according to that Estimate that the Owners of them have respectively given in, and do find them upon Examination to amount (besides the Distresses taken in the Town of Richmond) to about the sum of 234 l. 9 s. 8 d. Besides paid by James Calvert of Burton 10 l. which in the whole will make the sum of 244 l. 9 s. 8 d. Now seeing the King was by the Act of Parliament to have one Third Part of the said Fines, and the Poor another Third Part, the Question will be, How much of the aforesaid Sum they severally got? for it cannot be rea∣sonably expected, but that the Value of the Distress so taken, being great, the Fines for which the same was taken (though we cannot acertain them all, because we know them not all) must also be Considerable. But for the Town of Richmond; we find that the Fines for which those Distresses there taken were levyed, do amount to the Sum of 57 l. 5 s. that 20 l. which Rich∣ard Dawson was said to pay for the Goods taken from John Chaytor, and which his Widow after his Death resto∣red, either in Quantity, Quality or Worth, being in∣cluded. And then out of this Sum of 55 l. 5 s.— The King's Part will be 18 l. 8 s. 4 d. The Poor's Part—18 l. 8 s. 4 d. The Question will be, How this last was paid? which Thomas Craddock and the Officers concerned must An∣swer.
THe Compiler of these Papers did receive the Account of all the Sufferings within mentioned (but what himself was a Winess of, or Sufferer in) from the hands or by the Information of the Sufferers themselves, or such Persons as were appointed by them, or took it upon them to collect and make known the same; and is now, after several Examinations thereof, as to the Truth of it, committed to publick view, and owned by us whose Names are hereunto subscribed, and who were Witnesses of, or concerned in some part or other of the same Suf∣ferings and Passages, as a true Testimony and Relation of the same. Richard Routh, Richard Binks, Thomas Whitton, Oswald Routh, Richard Robinson, John Key, Thomas Johnson, Robert Cutter, John Chaytor, James Janson, James Longstaff, William Horner. now Prisoners. Stephen Winne, Christopher Routh, John Fothergill, Richard Geldart, Richard Robinson, THE END.
