s2227 99826832 31241
A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE AGAINST COMPREHENSION. Occasioned by a late PAMPHLET Intituled The Peaceable Design, Being a Modest Account of the Non-Conformists Meetings, with some of their Reasons for Non-conformi∣ty: And the way of Accommodation in the Matter of Religion. Humbly propo∣sed to Publick Consideration by some Mi∣nisters of London, against the Sitting of Parliament, in the Year, 1675. Titus 1.13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.
A Discourse against Com∣prehension. 'TIS an amazing Reflection (but that nothing seems strange in these last and worst of Days) that Persons otherwise of un∣doubted Loyalty, should so far be a Con∣tradiction to themselves and their for∣mer Actions, as out of a vain compliance with some People, and thereby to ob∣tain the Title of Moderate Men, to be encouragers of those Designs, which, if duely prosecuted according to some Mens intentions, are inevitably de∣structive both to Church and State. That there should be Ambitious, Co∣vetous, Discontented Persons, who ha∣ving flourished under the late Rebelli∣on, do endeavour to repeat it, is no wonder. But that any of those Loyal Sufferers, who have sufficiently smarted under the late Troubles, that those should so tamely contribute to their own and
the Churche's ruine, is not so easily un∣derstood. That the N. C. have formerly found Friends and Favourites amongst some Privy-Counsellors, and others of the Nobility,Pag. 2. is easily granted. (And therefore the Author of Good-Will amongst Protestants, who so boastingly urgeth this Topick, might if he pleas'd, have kept his Quotations in his Common-Place-Book.) The generous disposition of those noble Spirits, naturally Compassionate towards all suffering Parties, and the great comparative Meekness and Inno∣cency that appear'd in those first Dissen∣ters, are a ready Apology for the Indul∣gence that was then shewed them. But now since by their Fruits we do know them: Since their Principles are ex∣plain'd into such dismal Practices (of which it were a happy thing if the sad experience of these Kingdoms would suffer us to be ignorant) the Loyal Nobility and Gentry, much less the Clergy, have little cause to be fond of these People, who are still disturbing
Authority with their impertinent, I pray God they do not prove destructive, Cla∣mours. That this may not be rejected as the melancholy reflexion of a discontented Brain, I shall consider the intended Relaxation with all imaginable strict∣ness. The Matter of Fact is this. The Non Conformists have mov'd, that two Declarations in the Act of Uniformity, may be dispensed with. They are these, I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all, and every thing contain∣ed, and prescribed in, and by the Book, Intituled, The Book of Common-Prayer, and Administration of the Sa∣craments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church, according to the use of the Church of England; together with the Psalter or Psalmes of David, pointed as they are to be Sung or Said in Churches; and the form or manner of Making, Or∣daining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. I A. B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretence whatsoever, to take Arms a∣gainst the King; and that I do abhor that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by his Autho∣rity against his Person, or a∣gainst those that are Commissi∣onated by him; and that I will Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it
is now by Law established. And I do declare that I do hold, there lies no Obligation upon me, or any other Person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Cove∣nant to endeavour any Change or Alteration of Government, either in Church or State; and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and impo∣posed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. What Private designs are hereby promoting, we must leave to Almighty God and the Event of things: But as to the Publick, there can be no war∣rantable Reason for such Dispensation; but either the unlawfulness or inexpedi∣ency of these Declarations.
The unlawfulness of them will never be pretended by any true Son of the Church of England. For this were in short to give up the whole Cause; and to lay the charge of Schism at our own Doors. Because, that Church which requires any thing unlawful, as a con∣dition of her Communion, is doubtless Schismatical. But since those Laws and Constituti∣ons, which were at first Legally esta∣blish'd, may by the alteration of Cir∣cumstances, be very burdensome to the Subject, and as such ought to be Re∣pealed; let us consider the justness of their pretences herein. And if upon inquiry it do appear, that the conti∣nuance of these Declarations is as ne∣cessary for the preservation both of Church and State as their first enforce∣ment; I do then humbly petition Au∣thority to consider the excellent words of this present Votes of the House of Com∣mons, Feb. 5. 1662. against Indulgence. Parlia∣ment. It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law
at one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the Reasons of Uniformity continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the Execution of it. It will expose your Majesly to the rest∣less importunity of every Sect or Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the Church of England. As to these Declarations; the Assent and Consent in the former, and the Re∣nunciation of the Covenant in the later, are thus rationally grounded. The end and design of Government is, Salus Publica; it is to take care, Ne quid detrimenti capiat communitas: Or in the Apostles phrase, That we may live a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesly. For the obtain∣ing of which happy end, his Sacred Majesly, who is Cuslos utriusque tabulae, out of a due care of his People, by the advice of his Council, hath Enacted: That no Man be admitted into any Office Sacred or Secular, who, when his Place requires it, refseth by Oaths,
Subscriptions, or Declarations, to give assurance to the Publick, that he is Or∣thodox and Peaceable. Now since different Opinions and Practices in matters of Religion (espe∣cially when cherished and indulg'd) do naturally improve into contentious Disputes; and those Disputes, if not restrain'd, break out into Civil Wars. For, Mr. Newcomes Serm. before Parl. Sept. 12.1644. pag. 36. Men will at last take up Swords and Spears instead of Pens; and de∣fend by Arms what they cannot do by Arguments. Since things are thus; 'Tis at least Prudence, if not Duty, in the Supreme Power, to remove the occasion of this Ruine, by enjoyning the Publick practice of these Duties in one Uniform way; that all his Subjects may speak the same thing; and that there be no Divisions amongst them, persectly joyn'd together in the same Mind and in the same Judgment. And therefore the Act for Unifor∣mity most prudently enjoyneth, That no Man be permitted the publick Ex∣ercise of his Ministry, till in this first
Declaration, he hath given his unfeign∣ed Assent and Consent to the use of all and every thing in the said Book con∣tained and prescribed: I say unfeigned; Hypocrisie being hateful both to God and Man, and destructive to humane Society. As to the other Declaration in brief thus. It being notoriously known with what design the Covenant was first Im∣posed; even the ruine of that Covern∣ment which the Kings of England in their Goronation-Oath do swear to Main∣tain: And the sad Effects being as Ob∣vious, to which that League was in a great measure Instrumental, Authori∣ty could do no less, without being wanting to its own Preservation, than to require an assurance from all Per∣sons to be admitted into the Ministry; that there lies no Obligation from this Oath, to endeavour any Alteration of Government either in Church or State. In which words whoever refuseth to
declare doth in effect assure us; That though at present restrained, yet he is still obliged, when occasion shall offer it self, in his Place and Calling to root out Popery, Prelacy, i. c. Government by Arch Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Chap∣ters, &c. If it be replied, That there is no Al∣teration of Government intended by these moderate Dissenters, whose Com∣prehension is desir'd; but that it is an∣other Clause in the Declaration, which justisieth their refusal, viz. There lies no Obligation on me or any other Person, &c. Which, say they, cannot safely be declar'd, because, though they do not approve the whole Oath; yet there are several indispensable Duties con∣tained in it, which can never be re∣nounced. To this I Answer: The Alcoran, Romish Breviary, or Missal, may by any one that hath sub∣scrib'd them be lawfully renounced; and yet doubtless there are in them se∣veral Duties of Morality, whereto he was obliged before, and to which he was
further obliged by his own Personal act in subscribing, as being a part there∣of. Yet may he renounce In hac for∣ma. And so it is with the Covenant; which may in like manner be renounc'd, notwithstanding those good things that are contained in it. The reason is, Because Subscription was to the Totum complexum, i. c. to the whole Frame of the Covenant as such; and therefore the Abrenunciation of it must be to the whole as such: The Obligation where∣of being renounc'd, must reach to eve∣ry Branch and Clause therein; so as no Man standeth obliged to the perfor∣mance of any one Branch thereof (though otherwise not only lawful, but even necessary upon some other ac∣count) as it is a Branch of the Covenant. As to that trifling Scruple; That though they themselves are not obliged by it, yet it is too much considence to declare; There lies no Obligation on any other: This, I say, scarce deserves Confutation. For, since Nemo tne∣tur ad impossibile, and Juramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis; if it be in it?self
an unlawsul Oath (as hath upon occasion been sufficiently prov'd) it can neither oblige them, nor any other whatsoever, to any thing but Repen∣tance. But the most plausible Pretence in behalf of these Dissenters (and which it seems hath influene'd some loyal No∣ble Breasts) is this. The Union of Protestants in his Ma∣jesties Kingdom's, is a very bleassed and desirable Work; and accordingly it is the Duty of every good Subject, in his Place and Calling, faithfully to pro∣mote it: This being the most effectual Method to suppress the common Ene∣my the Papists; who are doubtless more encourag'd by our Divisions, than any other Motives or Endeavours of their own Party. And therefore were there but some little Relaxation granted, whereby the most eminent Presbyteri∣ans might be receiv'd into the Church; What a consternation would this strike into the Papal Faction? What signal Service might the Church of England receive from these famous Champions,
whose Zeal and Learning are so noto∣rious to the World? This is their Plea: The weakness of which may thus easily appear. The Union of Protestants, Reforma∣tion of abuses of Religion, with such like specious Names, being the usual Vizards wherewith Men of insatiable Avarice or Ambition disguise their base unworthy Intentions, that the ugli∣ness thereof may not appear to vulgar Eyes: It concerns Authority to be very deliberate in their Councels, and not be too forward, upon every slight pre∣tence, to innovate good Laws, for the sad consequents of which Change they can never be answerable to Church and State. Few are of so weak Capacity, but pub∣lick evils they easily espie; fewer so pati∣ent, as not to complain, when the grie∣vous inconveniences thereof work sensible Smart, saith judicious Mr. Hooker. Hence it is that the very name of Re∣formation carrieth with it a great deal of outward Glory and Lustre, silling the Hearts of Men with expectation
of much Happiness to ensue, and in that Hope is evermore entertain'd with general Applause, especially of the Vulgar sort: And therefore Covetous, Ambitious, Disconted Persons, have al∣ways improv'd this Inclination to their own advantage. So that seldome hath any Sacrilegious or Seditious attempt appear'd abroad in the World, and been countenanced either by the Great ones, or the Many, which hath not been uther'd in by this piece of Hypocrisie; although upon the Post-fact we have sad∣ly experienc'd; that the pretence of a thorough Reformation serveth as a Foil to set off the blackest Crimes that ever the Christian World was guilty of. This general Consideration first pre∣mised (and 'tis no unseasonable Resle∣ction) to the present Proposal, I thus Answer. That the Union of Protestants is indeed a very blessed and destreable Work, as being the most effectual
Method to suppress the common Ene∣my the Papist; and accordingly that it is the Duty of every good Subject in his Place and Calling faithfully to promote it. Thus far is easily grant∣ed. But then whether this Comprehen∣sion be so suitable a method to promote that blessed Work; or wether these Presbyterians would be so considerable a support to the Protestant Cause, were the Walls of the Church, like those of Troy, pull'd down to receive them, may best be judg'd by their own Confession. For now they begin to speak plain. The Mask of Hypocrisie by long wear∣ing is grown so thin and useless, that it is fit for nothing but to be thrown by. That which so falsly and invidiously hath been objected against the Prelates, is too sadly true of these Presbyterians, They have a Pope in Their Belly. This, you'll say, is a very harsh and uncharitable Reslection: And I do ac∣knowledg the Charge, were I not able thus to prove it. In this very Pamphlet, call'd the The Peaceable Design, p. 71, I sind these words.
Such a Toleration only is desir'd, as is con∣sistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation. But what shall we say then to the Pa∣pists, which is the Objection hit still in their Teeth, that plead for Moderation? Why, we will not baulk the delivery of our Opinion. There are two part we profess of that favour or condescention we seek from the higher Powers: The one consisting of a Composition with those, whose Principles are fit and capable of it: And the other consisting of Forbearance towards those, whose Principles will allow them no more. The Papist in our account is but one sort of Recusants, and the conscientious and peaceable among than must be hold in the same Predicament with those among our selves, that likewise refuse to come to Common Prayer. And a little after—But as for the Common Papist, who lives innocently in his way, he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration.
From whence I thus Argue. Those who affirm Popery to be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Goverment of the Nation, these are no faithful Friends to the Protestant Cause. But these Presbyterians, who desire this Comprehension, they affirm Popery to be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation. Therefore, these Presbyterians who de∣sire this Comprehension, they are no faith∣ful Friends to the Protestant Cause. The Major I think cannot be deny'd. For, the Articles of our Faith being designedly Establish'd by our first Re∣formers, in opposition to Popery (most of the Popish Tenets being condemn'd therein) those who affirm Popery to be consistent with them, are Betrayers of the Reformation.
The Minor is thus proved. Those who admit a Toleration of Popery, and yet at the same time-profess; That such a Toleration only is desir'd, as is consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation; those affirm Popery to be consistent with the Ar∣ticles of Faith, a good Life, and the Go∣vernment of the Nation. But these Presbyterians who desire this Comprehension, they admit a Toleration of Popery; And yet at the same time profess that such a Toleration only is desir'd as is consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nations. Therefore these Presbyterians, who desire this Comprehension, they affirm Popery to be consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Government of the Nation. The Major is clear and imquestion∣able, as likewise the Minor, which is thus prov'd from their own words. That they admit of a Toleration of
Popery, is plain from the fore-cited Ex∣pressions, viz.Peaceable Design. pag. 72. * As for the common Papist, who lives inno∣cently in his way, he is to us as other Separatists, and so comes under the like Toleration. That such a Toleration only is de∣sired, as is consistent with the Articles of Faith, a good Life, and the Govern∣ment of the Nation (the latter part of the Minor) these are the very words of the Pamphlet. This acknowledg'd agreement be∣twixt Popery and Presbytery, doth de∣servedly require some further Reflexi∣ons, which I shall give my Reader in the words of a most Learned, and (if I am not misinform'd) Right Honourable Person; by transcribing part of his Letter; the Title of which is as fol∣loweth.
A LETTER Sent from beyond the SEAS To one of the CHIEF MINISTERS OF THE Non-Conforming PARTY By way of Reply to many Par∣ticulars, which he sent to the Au∣thor in a Letter of News. Useful for these Distempered Times. By a Lover of the Establish'd Government both of Church and State. Anno. Dom. M.DC.LXXIV.
a Toleration as that was, knowing that it must needs tend to the ruine of the Church of England, which is the prin∣cipal Butt of all their Envy and Ma∣lice; as being the main Support and Credit of the Reformed Religion eve∣ry where, and the only Hedg against Popery it self in our unfortunate Bri∣tish Isles. We meet with not a few Priests of several Orders, that have the confi∣dence (in our most familiar Confe∣rences) to tell us; that by the just Judg∣ment of God upon our Church, the time of her Ruine is at hand: The Na∣tion it self being over-spread with Schism and Atheism, and the Hearts of the Faithful being disposed by the Spirit and Providence of God to reem∣brace the holy Catholick Truth. And therefore they freely confess, that this time of Distraction is their Harvest; and withal express their Intentions and Zeal to transport themselves into England at the Critical time of Tole∣ration, that they may be Fellow-La∣bourers with your selves in that Har∣vest.
They seem to Lament as much, and Complain as fast, of the prodigi∣ous increase of Schism and Atheism among us, as you are wont to do of the daily growth of Atheism and Po∣pery. And whilst you both complain alike, and in the formality of your com∣plaints both alike reflect upon the Church of England; it is She only that is the Sufferer, and She only that truly laments the Growth, and at the same time sets up Banks to hinder the perfect Inundation of all the three a∣mong us. As for Schism among Protestants, you were the first Fathers, and conti∣nue the chief Fautors thereof; all the inferior Sects having sprung from you, and dividing both from you, and one an∣other, under pretence of the same Rea∣sons, for which you profess to divide from the Church. And 'tis from you, that even the Quakering Sect it self (the Dregs of Schism) have learn'd to talk of Illumination, and the Spirit. And therefore if you be not Schismaticks, then
make themselves Popular and Power∣ful; that they may afterwards act with good Colour whatsoever their In∣terest shall suggest. And furthermore to consider; That the great pretenders of the Spirit, and power of the Christian Religion (which with respect to Magistrates teacheth nothing but to Obey or Suffer) should notwithstanding Preach up Rebellion a∣gainst their Lawful Prince; Fight him from Field to Field; remove him from Prison to Prison, and at last most Bar∣barously put him to Death; is such an absurdity against the Principles of right Reason; so repugnant to the Laws of our own Nation, and so inconsistent with the Peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel; that besides the Atheists it hath made, it hath, and ever will constrain Men of honest Principles and just Resent∣ments, to Persecute you with Satyrs and Exclamations to the end of the World. I am consident, I do not unjustly charge you in any particular, especial∣ly with the Murther of the King. For there were no Accessaries in the Mar∣ther
of that sacred Person; neither was it the last stroke only that fell'd the Roy∣al Oak; but you and the Independants, like the two Sacrilegious Priests of Ju∣piter, are equally gilty of the Crime; the one for binding the direful Victim, and the other for putting the Knife to his Throat. But to be short; where I am so unac∣ceptable, I'le conclude my Argument with a Fable. A principal Ship, which for many years had been Sovereign of the Seas, was at last Attaqued by a Tempestuous Wind, which the Devil raised, and notwithstanding all the help that could be made to save her, was dri∣ven by the force of that malignant Wind, and split upon a Rock. The ve∣ry same instant she dashed upon the Rock, the Wind ceased; and being af∣terwards cursed by the Sea-Men, for the Wrack of the Royal Charles (for so the Capital Vessel was called) answer∣ed: You charge me most unjustly, my Friends; it was not I, but the Rock, as you saw, that split your Ship,
The Moral of this Parable is very obvious; and if the Application there∣of, or any thing else that I have writ∣ten, may conduce to awaken your Con∣science, and reclaim you from Schism, I shall think my pains well bestowed. But if you and your Seditious Brethren will still persevere to assault the Church on one hand, as fast as the Romish Priests do undermine Her on the other, Her day's are like to be but few and evil; and except God incline the Heart of our Magistrates to put the Laws in Execution against them, and find some effectual means to reduce you, you may live to see her Ruine accomplished, which you both alike desire and ex∣pect. How numerous you are, the World can gess; and if the Accounts, which we receive from the Fathers of Intelli∣gence, of several Orders, be credible; there are at least three Thousand of them, which find entertainment and success in our Nation. But in the mean time, till her hour is come, she strugleth a∣gainst both, like her Saviour against
the Pharisees, whose true Disciples in part you both are: They representing those sworn Enemies of the Gospel, by the Gabala of their ridiculous and im∣pious Traditions; and you representing them in their Hypocrisie, Pride, Envy, Evil-speaking, moross and censorious Dis∣positions, &c. (which are sins scarce consistent with Humanity, much less with Grace) as likewise in observing many Fasts, and making long Prayers, with design not to serve God, but to de∣lude the People. And therefore I won∣der not that you are such malignant E∣nemies to the Church of England, since that Pharisaical spirit, which reigneth so much amongst you, is a wicked Pu∣sillanimous spirit, that affects to be seen in the Head of Parties, and Di∣ctate amongst the Ignorant; and loves as much to Rule, as it hates to Obey. But would you once be so sincere, as to subdue your Pride; lay aside your Pre∣judice; inform your Ignorance; and for∣sake your dearly beloved Interest for the Truth: It would not be long ere we should see you joyn with the Church of
England, without troubling our Sena∣tors to bring you in, with an Act of Comprehension. Your Pride appeareth in Heading of Parties, and in the Pleasure you are seen to take in the Multitudes, that run after you; and in your Boasting, that without you, the Souls of People would starve for want of Knowledg. Your Prejudice is an effect of your Pride, and discovers it self together with your Ignorance, in not submitting to those Invincible Reasons which you cannot answer. And as for your Interest, the great∣est Paradox of all, that is evident e∣nough to me, who have so often heard many of you glorifie your selves in the Number and Riches of your Followers, boast of their Affection to your sacred Persons, and brag of the great Sums you have Collected in your Congregations; which makes the King's Chappels (as you Arrogantly call your Conventicles) better Places than most of the Churches of which he is Patron. And therefore never complain that you live either
worse, or at greater uncertainties than you did before. For by your pretensions to Poverty and Sufferings, and by other unworthy Arts, you have so wrought your selves into the esteem of your Disciples, that few of them are either so Covetous or so Poor, but they will Pinch at Home to supply you. There are several Orders of Fran∣ciscans here, who have renounc'd not only Parsonages, but all Temporal E∣states, and Possessions whatsoever; and by their Vain-glorious Sanctity and Au∣sterities, they have got, like you, such fast hold on the Souls of the People (which is the fastest hold of all)that they can easily make most of them dispose of their Children, Cashier their Ser∣vants, and settle their Estates as they please; and by these Tricks do more effectually promote the Interest of Rome, than all the Parish-Priests with∣in the Pale of that Church. And really, when I consider what Influence these Sanctimonious and Self-denying Zealots have o're all Families
in all Places where they live; how they steal away the Hearts of the Peo∣ple from their Parish Priests, and Drain their Congregations; and how the deluded People had rather give them the worth of a Shilling, than the Dues of Two pence to their own Cures; it makes me often run the Parallel be∣tween you and them, and think; what a Politick and gainful Pretence you have got to renounce your Livings, for to secure your Consciences, and to Preach the Word like the Primitive Apostles; when God knows, 'tis not out of Love to the People, but to your selves. And I protest to you, were I a Man to be Maintain'd by the Pulpit, and consulted my Prosit more than the Goodness of my Cause, I should take the same Courses that you do; I should rather be Mr. M. than Dr. A. of Ply∣mouth; and should chuse the plentiful Income of that dull Zealot Dr. Man∣ton, before that of his most Learned and Religious Successor of Covent-Garden.
But though you Live very well, and better indeed than most of the Mini∣sters of the Church, yet the Mischief of it is, you are uncapable of Digni∣ties; which makes you such Acrians, and upon all occasions openeth your Throats as wide as Sepulchres, against the Bishops and the Church. You know what an History of Bi∣shops Mr. Prin hath wrote, and what a fair Collection the Learned Smec. hath taken out of him; as if when a Bishop is defective, either in Piety, Learning, or the Skill of Government, it were not the deplorable Unhappiness, but the fault of the Church of England. Should an Heathen, or Mahumetan, make such an Historical Collection of scandalous Christians, either in this or former Ages, you would not be per∣swaded for all that, to prefer the Al∣coran before the Gospel, or the most ex∣alted Paganism whatsoever, before the Christian Religion. Therefore Wise and Sober Men will make no Inference but this, from such a malicious enumeration of Particulars:
That Corruptions will creep into Go∣vernment, notwithstanding all the care that can be used to the contrary; and that by the favour of Princes (who hear with other Mens Ears, and often receive undeserved Characters of Men) sometimes Ambitions, sometimes Igno∣rant, and sometimes Slothful, Impru∣dent, or Debauched Persons, will be prefer'd to the most Honourable Digni∣ties in the Church. But this, as often as it happens, is the Misery of the Church of England, which all true Church Men lament; though the Men of the short Cloak take all such occasions to expose her to the Scorn of the Com∣mon People, who judg by Sense and not by Reason; and who are taught by you, to make no distinction between the Bishops and the Church. But were all her Bishops the best Ghri∣stians, the best Scholars, and the best Governours in the World; and should the Royal hand place her Miters on the Heads of none but Jewels, Whitgift's, Andrew's, Hall's, Usher's, Morton's, Taylor's, and Sanderson's, yet that Un∣christian
spirit of Envy and Discon∣tent, which informs the Non-Con∣formists, would still slie upon her with open Mouth, like Beasts upon the Saints of old condemn'd to the Amphi∣theater; and make her, as she hath al∣ready been for almost Forty years, a Spectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men. The wicked Lives of scandalous Bi∣shops and Priests, if there be any such, are her sad Misfortune, but cannot justifie the Schism you are guilty of; who are bound to hear even them, as much as the Jew's were bound to hear the Scribes and Pharises, those Hypo∣crites that sate in Moses's Chair. —If either this, or any thing else, a thousand times better than I am able to Write, may prove effectual to reclaim you from Schism; I shall be as glad, as to see some other of our Friends reformed from Drun∣kenness, Swearing, and Unclean∣ness: Which are very grievous and dreadful Sins, but yet not more dam∣nable in their Nature, nor more de∣structive
to the Christian Religion, nor more deeply rooted in the Soul of Man, than that of Schism. From which I pray God by the Power of his Grace to Preserve me, and Reform you, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whose Prote∣ction I commit you and rest, Your most Affectionate Cosin, and Humble Servant. Saumur, May, 7. 1674. FINIS.
