S22B 99829703 34146
ENGLISH WORTHIES, IN CHURCH AND STATE.
Anglorum Speculum, OR THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND, In Church and State. Alphabetically digested into the several SHIRES and COUNTIES there∣in contained; WHEREIN Are Illustrated the Lives and Characters of the most Eminent Persons since the Conquest to this present Age. ALSO An account of the Commodities and Trade of each Respective County, and the most flou∣rishing Cities and Towns therein. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Passinger at the three Bibles on London-Bridge, William Thackary at the Angel in Duck-lane, and John Wright at the Crown on Ludgate-Hill. 1684.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, I Here present you with an abstract of the Lives and Memoir's of the most famous and Illustrious Per∣sonages of this Realm, since the Con∣quest to this present time; for order sake I have digested it Alphabetically into the several Shires and Counties contained in this Kingdom; which I
hope will find a kind acceptance, there being nothing of the same method now Extant. Dr. Fuller in his large History in Folio, did go a great way in this mat∣ter, but here is included the Lives of many more eminent Heroes and gene∣rous Patrons, (which I hope their memory may survive in succeeding Ages) this being done with that bre∣vity, which may be more beneficial to the Reader. Here you have the Original or rise of most of the Eminent Families in this Kingdom. Also, an Epitome of the most ma∣terial matters in Church and State, containing the Lives of the most Emi∣nent
Fathers in the English Church, and the most Flourishing Statesmen in the latter times; Also the most famous Authors, as well Divine as Histori∣cal; together with the Lives of the most Memorable Persons in the Law, Mathematicks, Geographers, Astro∣nomers, Poets, &c. which have made this Kingdom known throughout the World. I need not inlarge, or give any further Incomium upon this subject, but referr you to the Table first, and then to the Book it self, which I hope will find that kind acceptance, that may ingage me in some further proce∣dure that may please my Countrymen, which I shall alwayes endeavour to
do in plainness and brevity to the Readers satisfaction, and in the mean time, am Yours to command G. S.
An Abstract OF THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND. CHAP. I. The Design of the Work. THE Rooms of the House being described by others, 'tis my intention to describe the Furniture, viz. the Commodities, with the Persons of Quality, &c. of the several Shires of England. But it may be asked Cui bono? To what good end? I Answer. 1. To gain some Glory to God. 2. To preserve the Memories of the Dead. 3. To present Examples to the Living. 4. To entertain the Reader with Delight. 5. To procure some honest profit to my self. The matter is either Real, viz. The Commodi∣ties and Observables of every County, or Personal,
the Characters of those worthy Men, who were Natives thereof. CHAP. II. The Real Topicks insisted on, in the Respective Counties. 1. THE Native Commodities; Of which, if any be general to all England, it is entered in that County where there was the first, or else the most and best of that kind. 2 The Manufactures, Admirable for Rarity and Variety; Of which, such as are not properly Natural, but Mixed, are pro∣miscuously placed. 3 Medicinal Waters, Wonder∣ful for Colour, Tast, Odour, Sound, Heat, Weight, Motion and Effects. The last is proper for my Pen. 4. The Wonders, or Rarities, which are Transient or Permanent. The Wonders of England are as conside∣rable for kind as those of other Countries. 5. The Buildings; of which the Churches are most admi∣rable. 6. Local Proverbs, and there are Six essen∣tials of a Proverb, that it be Short, Plain, Common, Figurative, Ancient and True. I have only insisted upon the most considerable Local Proverbs, that suggest to us some Historical Hint, and have declined all such as are Narrow, Frivolous, Scurrillou and Scanda∣lous. 7. Medicinal herbs, which if rare and very useful are placed next the Medicinal Waters, in the re∣spective Counties.
CHAP. III. Of the first Quaternion of Persons. Viz. 1. Princes since the Conquest. 2. Saints, who generally may be divided into those of Fiction, Faction, Super∣stition, or Real existence. 3. Martyrs. 4. Confessors. FOr the First, I take notice of the Legitimate Issue; as to Saints, I am sorry that the Lives of some of them, are so darkened with Needless, if not False Illustrations, to their Dishonour, and the De∣triment of Church History, which has arisen from the Ignorance or Disingenuity of the Writers of their Lives, or for want of true matter, or for hope of gain, or lastly for this, that they saw it pleased the People. Whence it is true, what Melchior Canus says,Lib. 11. c. 6. I speak it to my grief that the Lives of the Philosophers are more gravely Written by Laertius, than Saints are by Christians. Our Catalogue contains only English Saints, wherefore Anselm is left out as being a French-Man, since whom the Pope has been very sparing to confer the Honour of Saintship; because, the multitude of Saints, abates Veneration, and would overcharge the Calender, that already labours with the Sacred burden; besides the charge of Canonization is great, and his Holiness unwilling to bestow it gratis; and lastly, Protestants shrewdly suspect that some unworthy Persons have been served with the Dignity by that Servant of the Servants of God, there∣fore none are Canonized while their Memories are
on the Must, immediately after their Deaths, before the same be fined in the Cask, with some competent time. As to the third, viz. Martyrs, who have lost their Lives for the Testimony of a fundamental Truth; those our Land hath produced, are either Brittains, who suffered under Dioclesian, or Saxons Massacred by the Danes, or lastly English Martyred by the Papists, since the year 1400. I shall treat of the last, the two former being done already. For the last, viz. Confessors, they are such who have lost all but Life, for the truth, and escaped Martyr∣dom very narrowly; who were as Wax, ready for the Signature of Death; But, Threatned folks Live long, yea threatned Elijah by Gods Miraculous Pro∣vidence, never died. CHAP. IV. Of Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, before the Reformation. THere have been four Popes Englishmen, and but six Germans, tho Germany be five times bigger then England, which boasts of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, formerly accounted Pope of England. As for Cardinals, they were anciently no more then Curats, made by Bishops, as well as by the Pope. For, there were founded, anciently, in the Church of St. Pauls, two Cardinals chosen by Dean and Chapter, out of the twelve petty Cannons, whose Office was to look to those of the Quire, to give the Eucharist, to the Minister of that Church and his Servants, to hear Confessions, appoint Penance, and to commit the Dead to convenient Sepulture, and two of them lie buried in the Church of St. Faiths.
This Custom of Cardinal-making was in many other Countries, but afterwards, was appropriated to Rome, where they are divided into Bishops, who are Assessors with the Popes Priests, who are Assist∣ants, and Deacons, Qui serviunt Servo Servorum Dei, who are Attendants on his Holiness. The Bishops are seven, viz. Bishop of 1 Hostia, 2 Sabine, 3 Porto, 4 Alba, 5 Preneste, in which three last places, these Englishmen respectively have been Bishops, viz. R. Kilwardby, Nic. Breakspeare, Bernar. Anglicus, and Sim. Langham. 6 Rufine, 7 Tusculane. Cardinal Priests are accounted twenty eight, amongst whom Steph. Langhton was Card. of St. Chrysogon, An. 1212. Tho. Woolsey of St. Cecily, 1515. John Morton, of St. Anastasia, 1493. Will. Alan of St. Martin in the Mount, 1587. Ancherus, 1261, and Chr. Bambridge, 1511, of St. Praxis Boso, of St. Crosses Jerusalem, 1156. Rob. Curson, 1211, and Rob. Summercote, 1234, of St. Steph. in Mount Celius. Th. Bourchier, of St. Cyriacus in the Baths. Rob. Pullen, of St. Eusebius, 1144. Boso, of St. Puntiana, 1160. John Fisher, of St. Vitalis, 1535. Of Cardinal Deacons, there are sixteen, whereof Boso was the only English∣man, and Card. of St. Cosmus and Damian. Their habit is Scarlet. Pope Paul II. made it Penal, for any beneath their Order, in Rome, to wear a Red hat. The Cardinal-Bishops took place of the Emperour before his Co∣ronation, and of other Kings. The Popes were to be chosen by, and out of that Order. The Cardinal-Deacons were oftentimes elected to the Popedom before the Cardinal-Priests. There is at this day, a Brother of the late Duke of Norfolk enjoys the Title and Dignity of Cardinal. 'Tis alledged by some that Englishmen being of a different Religion from his Holiness, and in a manner, exiles abroad,
and not furnished with sufficient Estates, are there∣fore seldom honoured with that Dignity, which has been fatal to several Englishmen; for Card. Mackels∣field was buried four Months before his Cap was brought him; Card. Sertor died in Italy in the juncture of time, inter pileum Datum & Susceptum. Card. Fisher, when his Cap was come to Calis, had his head strucK off at Tower-Hill. Card. Somercot was Poysoned, in the Conclave, to prevent his Election to the Popedom. Card. Evosham was sent the same way, on the same occasion. Card. Bambridge was Poisoned at Rome, by one of his Servants, being an Italian. As for Prelates, the Catalogue shall begin about the time of King H. 3. And continue to the 1. El. CHAP. V. Since the Reformation. SUch Prelates are the same with the last mentioned in Title, but not in Tenure; in Dignity, tho not in Doctrine, holding their Places of the King, and pro∣fessing the Protestant Religion, these Hundred and thirty years. Amongst these many are allowed, even by Malice it self, for their Living, Preaching and Writing, to have been the Champions of Truth, and Ʋnity, verifying the Observation of Forreigners, That the Clergy of Brittain is the Glory of the World. These Prelats we digest in five Companies, under their respective Arch-Bishops. 1 Arch-Bishop Cran∣mer's. 2 Arch-Bishop Parker's. 3 Arch-Bishop Whit∣gift's. 4. Arch-Bishop Abbot's 5. Arch-Bishop Jux∣ton's, whose Chairs were shaken, in the late Troubles.
I know the Man, to whom Mr. Charles Herle, (Pre∣sident of the Assembly,) said, somewhat insultingly, I tell you news, last Night I buried a Bishop (dashing more at his Profession then Person) in Westminster Abby, to whom the other replyed, Sure you buried him in hope of Resurrection. CHAP. VI. Of States-men. UNder this head I intend to Write of those who have been, by their Princes Favor preferred to the Offices and Dignities of Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord Admiral of England, Secre∣tary of State, to whom some Lord Deputies of Ireland are added. The word Chancellour is deri∣ved by some, à Cancellendo, from Cancelling things amiss, and mitigating the rigour of the Common Law by the Rules of Equity. The Chancellour is the highest Officer of the Land, and his Jurisdiction is either ordinary in the exercise of which he is to proceed, according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm; or Extraordinay, and as to this he proceeds Secundùm Aequum & Bonum, in the Court of Con∣science, where three things are to be judged, Covin, Accident, and Breach of Confidence, Cook, Jurisd. of Courts. He also keeps the Great Seal. As for the Antiquity of the Office, King Ethelred appointed the Abbot of Elye, Quatenus Ecclesiam de Elye, extunc et semper, in Regis Curia Cancellarii ageret Dignitatem, which albeit it was void in Law to grant the Chan∣cellourship in Succession, yet it proveth that then, there was a Court of Chancery. The Lord Keeper is in effect the same with the Lord Chancellour: save that
some will have the Lord Chancellors Place, ad termi∣num Vitae, and the Lord Keepers, ad placitum Regis. Sure it is, that because Nicholas Heath, late Arch-Bishop of York, and Chancellour of England, was still alive, tho outed of his Office, Sir Nich. Bacon was made Lord Keeper, and in his time, the Power of the Keeper was made equal with the Authority of the Chancellour, by Act of Parliament. The Catalogue begins with Sir Tho. Moor, before whom Clergy-Men were Chancellours, and these are entered, under the Title of Eminent Prelats. As for the Lord Treasurer, His Office was ever beheld as a Place of great Charge and Profit. One well skill'd in the Per∣quisits thereof, said, The value of the place was worth some thousands of Pounds, to him, who (after Death) would go instantly to Heaven, twice as much to him who would go to Purgatory, and a Nemo scit, to him who would adventure to go to a worse place. The Catalogue begins at Will. Lord Paulet Marquess of Winchester, because, before him, Clergy-Men generally enjoyed the Dignity. As to Secretaries of State, there are two of them, Principal Secretary, and the Secretary of State, the first for Forraign, the other for Domestick business, as some would have it; their Salaries were in the late Kings time, some two hun∣dred Pounds a Piece, and five hundred Pounds apiece, for Intelligence and secret Service; the Catalogue begins with Th. Cromwel, in the reign of H. 8. Lord Admiral follows, the Original of which word is Amir, in Arabick, a Prince and , in the Greek, belonging to the Sea; the Occasion of the composition of the two Languages seems to be the extent of the Sultans Dominions in the time of the Holy War from Sinus Arabicus, to the North Eastern part of the Midland-Sea, where a Barbarous kind of Greek was spoken, and we do not mend the matter in pro∣nouncing
Admiral for Amiral. There was a Trium∣virate of Admirals, for the North, South, and West; The Jurisdiction of the first reached from the Mouth of the Thames, to the outmost Orcades, and had Yarmouth for his prime residence. The second, from the Thames Mouth, to the Lands end, his station at Portsmouth. The third, from the Lands end, to the Hebrides, his station Milford Haven. Rich. Fitz Allen, Earl of Arundel was made the first Admiral of all England, John Vere Earl of Oxford was 1. H. 7 Admiral of England, and kept it during his Life, afterwards, according to the pleasure of the Prince, Men took their turns in that Office; because of this uncertainty there are some Admirals inserted under the Title of States-Men, and Vice-Admirals, under the Topic of Seamen. As for Lord-Deputies of Ireland, they were constituted, upon the Conquest of that place, by H. 2. and have there continued the same Power under that and the other titles of Lord Liue∣tenants, and Lord Chief Justices, with this difference, that a Lord Lieutenant might have made a Deputy; and as to the last, there was sometimes one, and at other times two Lord Chief Justices of all Ireland. The Word Lieutenant denotes the largeness of his Power, which represents the Kings. Ireland was divided in former times into many petty Kingdoms, yet, before H. 8. the Kings of England were con∣tent with the Title of Lords of Ireland. King Henry assumed that of King, for Quod efficit tale, est magis tale, and the Commission whereby King H. 2. made Will. Fitz Adelm his Lieutenant of Ireland, hath this Direction, To the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Kings, &c.
CHAP. VII. Of Judges and Writers on the Common Law. CApital Judges are 1. The Chief Justice, of the Kings Bench. 2 Of the Common-Pleas. 3. The Chief Baron of the Exchequer. The first is called the Lord Chief Justice of England, to whom the Chief Justice of the Com. Pleas is inferiour in Place, tho in Profit he be above him, so that some have, out of design, quitted that, to accept this; Amongst whom was Sr. Ed. Montague, in the reign of H. 8, who, in defence of his Choice, said, I am now an old Man, and love the Kitchin above the Hall. The Chief Baron is employed in the Exchequer, about the Kings Re∣venue. The Catalogue begins about the time of E. 1. As for Writers of the Common Law, I have placed them with the Judges. CHAP. VIII. Of Souldiers and Seamen. I Begin with the first at E. 3. As for Seamen, 'tis agreed there are the best of that Profession in England. The four first Circum-Navigators of the World were, 1. Magellanus a Spaniard. 2. Sir Francis Drake, an English Man. 3. Sir Th. Candish an Engl. 4. Oliver Noort, an Hollander. This last had an Englishman, one Capt. Mellis Pilot. The Catalogue begins in the time of E. 3.
CHAP. IX. Of Writers on the Canon and Civil Law, Physick, Chymistry and Chyrurgery. IN the days of Queen Eliz. some able Civilian was wont to be joyned in Commission with the Ambassador, then they were deservedly dignified, tho in the late times disgraced by those who aimed at no less then Universal Confusion. I have given a List of some eminent Civilians and Canonists; as also of Physicians, and of the most noted Chymists and Chyrurgions that occurr. CHAP. X. Writers. OF whom Gildas leads the Army, and they are either such as wrote before or since the Refor∣mation, the former being either Historians, Philolo∣gists, or Divines. The two last are hinted at by Dr. Collins, as comprised under the words of the Rom. 16.11. Apostle, Salute Philo∣logus and Olympas. As for History, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, it has been Written by many, tho farced by the Monks before the Refor∣mation, with Fictions. To these we have added Poets, which Profession was not a little honoured by King James, who waved his Crown, in the two and twenty shilling Pieces, and wore the Laurel in his new twenty shilling pieces. Tho Poets being always poor, Bays were rather the Emblem of Wit then Wealth, since King James no sooner began to wear
them, but he presently fell two shillings in the Pound in publick Valuation. Some are of Opinion that there is always one Laureal Poet in England. And there is at this time Mr. Dreyden. one of a profound knowledge and most solid Judgment, whose Memory, in spite of the teeth of Time, will always last to all succeeding ages. Musick is nothing else but Wild Sounds civilized into Time and Tune; so extensive that it stoopeth to Beasts and mounteth as high as Angels, for Horses will do more for a Whistle then for a whip. And We know no more what Angels do above, Save only that they Sing and that they Love, Musick was taught, with other Learning by the Bards, and long after 'twas no small honour to the profession, that King Hen. 8. could sing his part and used to compose services for his own Chappel, which you may imagine were in b acre, since he was naturally well vers'd in that Key. Since the Reformation were some Romish Writers, who were banished, with whom I knock off. CHAP. XI. Of Publick Benefactors. BUilders of Churches lead the Van. The Proverb is, Pater Noster built Churches, and Our Father plucks them down; to confute this, some have endea∣voured to pluck down both Churches and Our Father. And as this is Sacrilegious and Irreligious, so it is no
less unjust to Violate the Monuments of those who were the Founders and Benefactors, which was very much practised in the late times, when the bones of Henry Keble, Ld. Major of London 1511, who rebuilded Aldermary Church, were, sixty years after, inhu∣manely cast out of the Vault wherein they were Buried. Free Schools and Colledges come in the next place, from which I pass to Bridges which keep our Island a Continent to it self. There is a Memo∣rable passage in History of Q. Maud, for being to pass the River Ley about Stratford, she was almost drowned in the riding over it, but this proved the bad cause of a good effect, for hereupon she built the beautiful Bridge there for the benefit of Travellers. I will, in the next place visit Almshouses, which ought not to be abolished, tho some corruptions should continue in their foundations. Let the Charita∣bly minded do what, when, where, how, to whom and how much God and their own Goodness shall direct them. Schoolmen reduce corporal Charity to seven Heads, Visito, Poto, Cibo, Redimo, Tego, Colligo, Condo. That is, Visit men in Misery, give Drink to the thirsty, Meat to the hungry, Rescue the Captive, cover the Naked, dress the Wounded, bury the Dead. Which works are placed like the seven Planets, whilst to Redeem Captives, stands like the Sun in the midst of all the rest. I could wish, that there were in London a Corporation of able and honest Merchants impowred to receive and imploy the charity of well affected People for a General Goal-delivery of all English Captives in Tunis, Tripoli, Algier, Sally, &c. For why should the Romanists be more charitable then we? When their Religion was publickly currant in England, the Order of the Holy Trinity was instituted for The Redemption of Captives. I have
distinguished the Benefactors since, from them, be∣fore the Reformation. Of the Stating of the Word Reformation. We may take notice of three distinct Dates and different degrees of our English Reformation. 1 The Civil part thereof, when the Popes Supremacy was Banished in the Reign of K. Hen. VIII. 2. When the Church-service was reformed, as far as that age would admit, An 1. Ed. 6. 3. When the same (after the Marian interruption) was resumed and more refined, in the Reign of Q. El. The first of these I may call the Morning Star. The Second, the Dawning of the Day. The third, the rising of the Sun. As to the Prelats and Writers, in Q. Maries days, their inclinations are discovered in their Writings and by their Actions. CHAP. XII. Memorable Persons. THE former Heads were like Private Houses, but this Topick is like a publick Inn, admit∣ting all Comers and Goers, having any extraordinary (not vicious) Remark upon them. Such therefore, who are over, under, or beside the Standard of Com∣mon Persons, for strength, stature, fruitfulness, viva∣city, &c. are lodged under this Head; under which I also repose such Mechanicks, who have reached a clear note above others in their Vocation, and Emi∣nent improvers of Arts, being Founders of that Accession, which they add thereunto.
CHAP. XIII. Of Lord Mayors of London. AFter the Death of the King, the Lord Majors Office and Authority continues a whole year, whereas most other Offices determine with the Kings Death. Younger Sons are raised to this Dignity by their own Vertue, which affords an Illustrious Example, and gives the greatest Encouragement to all well-disposed Youth. Some Shires are destitute of this Honourable Office, tho 'tis probable they may come to arrive at the Priviledge of Majorality; for Sir Richard Chiverton, Skinner, descended of a right Ancient and Worshipful Family, having been lately the first in Cornwal, has opened the door there, for others to follow after him. Some, in London, have refused the Office, and Fined, and thereby have Charitably increased the Stock of the City. CHAP. XIV. Why a Catalogue of the English Gentry in the Reign of H. 6. is inserted in this Book. IN the days of H. 6, under pretence of routing out Felons, Outlaws, &c. Opposition was made to the House of York; which was the Occasion that a List of Gentry was made. As to the Method of the Catalogue, among the Commissioners, the Bishop of the Diocess is first put, after whom follow Earls, Barons, Knights of the Shire. Note here, that in the time of H. 6, de such a place, was left off, and the addition of Knight or Squire was assumed, tho not generally in all places.
CHAP. XV. Of Sheriffs. SHeriff is a Reeve or Overseer of a Shire, in Latin Vicecomes, or Deputy of an Earl or Count, who anciently presiding over a County, gave names both to the Place, and deputed Jurisdiction. In the year 888. K. Alfred first divided England into Shires. The Clerk of the Peace for each County in Mich. Term, presents to the Lord Chief Justice, six or more names of able Persons for the Office of Sheriff, of whom three are presented to the King, who pricks one to stand Sheriff, for the County. His Power is to suppress Riots, secure Prison∣ers, distrain for Debts, execute Writs, return Knights and Burgesses for Parliament, empannel Juries, attend the Judge, see the Execution of Ma∣lefactors, &c. By 4. H. 4, 5. Sheriffs are to abide within their Counties. 'Tis observed by some, that anciently the Office of Sheriff was Honos sine onere, in middle times Honos cum onere, and in our days Onus sine Honore, a burden without honour. CHAP. XVI. Of the Coats of Arms of Sheriffs. ARms seem to have been Jure Divino, to the Jews, and their use is great both in War and Peace; without them an Army neither has Method, nor strikes terror, and in peace Arms distinguish one Man from another. Arms assumed according to one's
fancy are but personal, but Arms assigned by Princes are Hereditary. The plainer the Coat is, the more Ancient and Honourable; two Colours are necessary and most highly honourable, tho both may be bla∣zoned with one word, as Varrey, (formerly born by the Beauchamps of Hatch in Wiltshire, and still quar∣tered by the Duke of Somerset) three are very ho∣nourable, four Commendable▪ five Excuseable, more disgraceful. One said of a Coat, that it was so well Victualled that it might endure a Siege, such was the Plenty and Variety of Fowl, Flesh and Fish there∣in. Or and Azure are the richest, Argent and Sable the fairest Coats. The Lion and Eagle are the most Honourable, the Cross the most Religious bearing; a Bend the best Ordinarie, being a Belt athwart, as a Fess is the same about the middle. Herbs Vert (being natural) are better then Or. There are Rea∣sons rendred for some bearings. Thus whereas the Earls of Oxford anciently gave their Coat plain, quarterly Gules and Or, they took afterwards in the first a Mallet or Star Argent, because the Chief of the House had a Falling-Star, (as is said) alighting on his Shield as he was fighting in the Holy-land. Now for the Arms of Sheriffs, we have added them, ever since the first of King Richard 2. I will con∣clude this Discourse with a Memorable Record. Claus. 5 H. 5. Membr. 15 in the Tower.The King to the Sheriff Health▪ &c. because there are divers Men, as we are informed, which before these times in the Voyages made by us have assumed to themselves Arms and Coat-Armours, where neither they, nor their Ancestors in times past used such Arms, &c. and Propound with themselves to use and exercise the same in this present Voyage,
which God willing we intend to make. And altho the Omnipotent disposeth his favours in things Na∣tural, as he pleaseth, equally to the Rich and Poor; yet We willing, that every one of our Liege Subjects should be Esteemed and Treated in due manner, according to the Exigency of his State and Condi∣tion: We Command thee, that in every place with∣in thy Bailiwick, where by our Writ we have lately shewn, you cause to be Proclaimed, that no Man, of what State, Degree or Condition soever he be, shall take upon him such Arms or Coats of Arms, save he alone, who doth possess, or ought to possess the same, by the right of his Ancestors, or by Donation and grant of some, who had sufficient power to assign him the same; and that he that useth such Arms or Coats of Arms, shall, on the day of his Muster, manifestly shew to such Persons assigned, or to be assigned by us, for that purpose, by vertue of whose gift he enjoyeth the same, those only ex∣cepted who carried Arms with us at the Battle of Agincourt; under the penalties not to be admitted to go with us, in our aforesaid Voyages, under his Command, by whom he is for the present retained, and of the loss of his wages, as also of the rasing out and breaking off the said Arms called Coat-Armours, at the time of his Muster aforesaid, if they shall be shewn upon him or found about him. And this you shall in no case omit. Witness the King, at the City of New Sarum, June the S∣cond.
CHAP. XVII. Of the Alterations and Variations of Surnames. SUrnames of Families, have been altered, and new Names assumed, chiefly for Concealment in time of Civil Wars, or Advancement, when any were adopted into an Estate; besides, the same Surname is found diversly written, because Time teacheth new Orthography, and Writers have not been very Critical in spelling them. Lastly, ancient Families have been removed into several Counties, where several Writings follow the several Pronunciations. So the Names of Villiers and Roper are variously Writ∣ten, as Villars, Rooper, &c. CHAP. XVIII. Of Modern Battels. SUch have been since the beginning of the Civil Wars in England. I have endeavoured to pre∣sent these Battels, according to plain Historical truth, without any partial Reflections, and in descri∣bing of them, I use the Word Parliament according to the abusive acceptation.
CHAP. XIX. Of the number of Counties in England, and why the Worthies are digested County-wise. OF English Shires or Counties, there are nine and thirty, at this day, which by the thirteen in Wales, are made up fifty two; among which Bark∣shire, from the Conquest, till the year 1607 had no Count or Earl thereof, tho in the times of the Saxons, it had an Officiary Count. The Worthies in this Work are digested Coun∣ty-wise, because, First, the Method being new, may be acceptable for its Novelty. Secondly, it is as informative to our Judgments to order them by Counties as Centuries. Here you may behold how each County is innated with a particular Genius, inclining the Natives thereof to be dextrous, some in one profession▪ some in another; and how the same County was not always equally fruitful in the production of worthy Persons, but, as trees are observed to have their bearing and barren years, so Shires have their rise and fall, in affording Famous Persons. CHAP. XX. Of the Clergy. IT was fashionable for the Clergy, (especially Regular) to have their Surnames, from the places of their Nativity; As Richard Bishop of London, quitted Angervill, tho his Father Sir Richard Angervill was a Knight of Worth and Worship, to be called
of Bury, where he was born, and William Bishop of Winchester waved Pattin, to wear Waynfleet, tho he was eldest Son to Richard Pattin, an Esquire of great Ancientry. Sometimes the place of one's birth is rendred uncertain, when several places have the same name. One instance of many, William of Wickham was the famous Founder of New Colledge in Oxford: But how can his Cradle be certainly fixed in any place, when it is equally rock't betwixt twenty Villages of the same Denomination? In inquiries of this Nature and Difficulty, 'tis best to have recourse to the Cir∣cumstances in the History of such a controverted Person. Where two or more places claim the birth of the same Person, my usual expedient is to insert the Character at large, of the controverted Person in that County, which produceth the best Evidence for him, yet so, that I also enter his name with a reference in the other respective places, which with probability pretend unto him. But many multiply differences in the places of Mens birth by mistake. The Papists can tell you a Tale how the Men of two Towns in Germany fell out and fought together, whilst one of them was for Martin, the other for Luther, being but the several Names of the same Person. If one Author affirms Bishop Jewel born at Buden, another at Berinerber, let none make strife betwixt these two Writers, the former naming the House and Village, the later the Parish wherein he was born. As for the Sons of Ministers, tho some unchari∣tably think them generally unfortunate, by the sequel of this Treatise it will plainly appear that they have by Gods Blessing, proved as eminent as any who have raised themselves by their own endeavours. For Statesmen, George Carew, Privy Councellor of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and as able a Man, as the Age he lived in, produced, was Earl of Totnes, the same place whereof his Father was Arch-Deacon. Sir Edwin Sandys, Son to Arch-Bshiop Sandys, was a Man of such Merit, that England could not afford an Office which he could not manage. For Lawyers, Sir Th. Richardson, lately, and the never sufficiently to be commended Sir Orlando Bridgeman, now Lord Chief Justice, with many others. For Seamen, Sir Francis Drake, that great Scourge and Terrour to the Spanish Pride. But the Sons of Ministers have never been more Successfull, then when bred in the Pro∣fessions of their Fathers. Thus of the Prelatical Clergy we have Francis Godwin a Bishop, the Son of a Bishop, and Dr. John King, Son to the Reverend Bishop of London. And of others, we have three Generations of the Wards, in Suffolk. As many of the Shutes, in York-shire, no less painfull then Pious and able in their Professions. Let me add, that there were at one time three Fellows of Kings Colledge, Sons of eminent Divines, and afterwards Doctors of Divinity, viz. Sam. Collins, Th. Goad, and Will. Sclater. And I believe there were not severally in their Generations, Men more Signal, in their diffe∣rent Eminencies. CHAP. XXI. General Rules for the Author, and Readers ease. I Have ranked all Persons under their respective Titles, according to their Seniority of the Ages they lived in. I have endeavored to Time Eminent Persons by one of these Notations, First, that of their Morning or Nativity, the second, that of their
Noon or Flourishing, the last, that of their Night or Death. By AMP. (i. e. Ampliandum.) prefixed to the Names of some Persons, I understood a further Enquiry to be made about the places of their Birth. AMP. also is used in the Arms of Sheriffs, where there are different Coats of very Ancient Families, and largely diffused, as Nevil, Ferrers, Basset, &c. S. N. (i. e. Second Nativity) is likewise to denote the place of Advancement of some Eminent Persons, where the place of their Birth is not known. REM. (i. e. Remove) for the like Reason, when I place any Person of Worth in a County, where he was not Born, but was a Sojourner only. Where the same Persons may be ranked under divers Topics, I bring them under that, which is the most Eminent. CHAP. XXII. Of Precedency. I Place 1. Princes, Good manners obliging all other Persons to follow them, as Religion ob∣liges me to follow Gods Example, by a Loyal Re∣cognition of that Original Precedency, which he has granted to his Vice-gerents. 2. Saints, 3. 4. Martyrs and Confessors. 5. Eminent Prelats, 6. States∣men. 7. Capital Judges. In the next four, I have not used so strict a Method, reckoning Soldiers, Seamen, Civilians, Physicians, sometimes one first, sometimes another. 'Tis a Politick and Peaceable Custom of the Skinners and Merchant-Taylors of London, to take place alternately, to prevent suits
and quarrels, betwixt their Companies, about pre∣cedency. 12 learned Writers. 13 Benefactors to the Publick. Lastly Memorable Persons. CHAP. XXIII. Of borrow'd Authorities in this Work. I Tell you my Tale and Tale-Master, First to vindi∣cate the Writer, secondly the better to inform the Reader. The Authors I use may be reduced to three Heads. 1. Printed Books. 2. Records in publick Offices. 3. Manuscripts, in the possession of private Gentle∣men. 4. Instructions received from the nearest Relati∣ons to those persons whose Lives we have presented. The printed Books are cited in the Margin. As for Records, Mr. William Riley Master of those in the Tow∣er had great care in securing, dexterity in finding, di∣ligence in perusing them, and courtesie in Communica∣ting such Copies of them as my occasions required. For the Records of the Exchequer, I was assisted by Mr. High-more of the Pipe-Office, Mr. John Wit, and Mr. Francis Boyton, & the learned Knight Sir Winkfield Bodenham. Besides, I repaired to the Originals in the Exchequer, for better information. I have added Church Registers, tho no Records in Law, yet of great force in History; but the Civil Wars have occasion∣ed great loss of these. Lastly the Instructions of the nearest Relations. I have met with many who could not, never with any who would not further me with Information. 'Tis observable, that Men an hundred years since and upwards, have their Nati∣vities fixed with more assurance then those born some eighty years since. To conclude, my Pains, Brains and Books are no
more mine then theirs to command who Courte∣ously have conduced to my instruction. CHAP. XXIV. Of a Two-fold English Gentry, viz. by Nation and Profession. I Begin with the Ancient Britains who Inhabited the South, and were succeeded by the Saxons in the West. As for the more Ancient Romans, their Descendants are not by any Character discernable from the British. The Off-spring of the Saxons are the main bulk and body, not of the Gentry but of the English Nation. These, tho pitifully dispersed by the Conqueror, yet by God's Goodness, King Henry I. his favour, their own patience and diligence, put together the Planks of their Ship-wrackt Estates and afterwards recovered a Competent condition. The Danes were rather Inroders here then Inhabitants, of whose Extraction there are therefore few in our Age, among whom the Denizes (often Sheriffs in Devon and Glocestershire) appear the principal. As for Fitz-Harding, the younger Son of the King of Denmark, and direct Ancestor of the truly Honou∣rable George Lord Berkley, he came long since, when he accompanied the Conquerour. They seem to err who are of Opinion, that those Names which end in son, as Johnson, Thomson, &c. are of Da∣nish Origination, since the Danes had no such Names in use among them as John or Thomas, &c. The Normans, after the Conquest became the only visible Gentry of this Nation, and still continue more then a moiety thereof. There are some Surnames of the good Families in England now extant, which tho
French, are not to be recovered in the Lists of such as came over with the Conqueror, and therefore we suppose them to have remained of those Gentlemen which from Hanault attended Queen Isabel, Wife to King Edward II. Of this sort was Deureux, Mollineux, Darcy, Coniers, Longchamp, Henage, Sa∣vage, Danvers, &c. Of the British or Welsh, af∣ter their Expulsion hence by the Saxons, some sig∣nal persons have returned again, and by the Kings Grant, Matches, Purchases, &c. have fixed them∣selves in fair Possessions in England, especially since the beginning of the Reign of their Countrey-man King Henry 7th. rewarding the Valour of ma∣ny Contributing to his Victory at the Battle of Bos∣worth. Of the Welsh now re-estated in England and often Sheriffs therein, some retain their old Surnames, as the Griffins in Northamptonshire, the Griffiths and Vaughans in Yorkshire; some have assumed New ones, as the Caradocks, now known by the Name of New∣tons in Somersetshire. Many Scotch, long before the Union of the Two Kingdoms under King James, seated themselves in this Land, resorting hither for Succour from their Civil Wars. Distress at Sea hath driven others in, as the Stewards, High-Sheriffs in Cambridgeshire. As o∣ther Accidents have occasioned the coming in of the Scrimpshires, an hundred years since High Sheriffs in Staffordshire, more lately the Napers in Bedfordshire, and before both the Scots-Hall in Kent. As for the Irish of any Eminency, their Religion and Inclination have drawn them to other Countries rather then England. Of the Italian Nation, very few have founded Fa∣milies in England, yet have we a Sprinkling of Ita∣lian Protestants, Castilian, a Valiant Gentleman of Barkshire, the Bassanoes, Excellent Painters and Mu∣sicians
in Essex, which came into England under King Henry 8; and since, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Horatio Palavicine (Receiver of the Popes Re∣venues) Landed in Cambridgeshire. And the Caesars, (al. Dalmarii) still flourishing in Hartfordshire in Wor∣shipful Estates. The High dutch of the Hans Towns, anciently much conversed in our Land, known by the Name of Ea∣sterlings, invited hither by the large Priviledges our Kings conferred upon them, so that the Steel-Yard was the Gold-yard unto them; But these Merchants moved round in their own Sphere, matching among themselves, without mingling with our Nation. Only we may presume that the Easterlings, commonly called the Stradlings, formerly Sheriffs in Wiltshire, and still fa∣mous in Glamorganshire, with the Nestphalings, late∣ly Sheriffs of Oxfordshire, were originally of German Extraction. The Low Countrey-men frighted by Duke of Alva's long-Nose and longer Sword, flocked hither, under King Edward the VI. fixing themselves in London, Norwich, Canterbury and Sandwich. But these con∣fined themselves to their own Church-discipline, and advanced not forward by Eminent Matches into our Nation. Yet I behold the worthy Family of de la Fountain in Leicestershire, as of Belgian original, and have read how the Ancestors of Sir Simond D'us in Suffolk, came hither under King Henry VIII. from the Dunasti or D'us in Gelderland. As for the Spaniards, tho their King Philip match∣ed with our Queen Mary, yet few of any Eminence now extant (if I well remember) derive their Pe∣digrees from them; by reason of their short Reign and the ensuing Change of Religions. Probable it is we might have had more Natives of that Kingdom to have setled and flourished in our Nation, had he
obtained a Marriage with Queen Elizabeth, as he de∣sired. Of the Portuguese, few have fixed their Habitations here, yet is the want of the Number of these abun∣dantly supplyed with the Transcendent Quality and most Noble Vertues of our gracious Queen, who as Cynthia, dispenses her Royal Influence to the lesser Stars, and Strikes with Love and Veneration the Hearts of all. The May's (who have been Sheriffs in Sus∣sex,) are of the Portugal Race. Come we now to the second Division of our Gen∣try, according to the Professions whereby they have been advanced. And, Note, such Professions found most of them Gentlemen, being the (younger) Sons of Wealthy Fathers, able to give them liberal Edu∣cation. Their Blood lighted them, and their Professi∣on set them up in a higher Candlestick, making a Conspicuous Accession of Wealth and Dignity. Thus all behold Isis encreased in Name and Water, after it's Conjunction with Thame at Dorcester, whilst few take notice of the first Fountain thereof many Miles more Westward in Gloucestershire. The Study of the Common-Law hath advanced very Ancient Fami∣lies in England. It seems they purchased good Titles, made sure Settlements, and entail'd Thrift with their Lands, on their Posterity. Sir Edward Coke hath prevented my Pains, and given in a List of such Prin∣cipal Families. 'Tis admirable, that there is not a great and Numerous House in England, wherein there is not one, Anciently or at this day Living, thriving and flourishing, by the Study of the Law. Especially if to them be added those who have rais∣ed themselves in Courts of Judicature. The City hath produced more then the Law in Number, and some as broad in Wealth, but not so high in Honour nor long lasting in time, who like
Landfloods, soon come, and soon gone, have been dry∣ed up before this Generation. Yet many of these have continued in a certain Channel, and carried a constant Stream. The Church before the Reformation, advanced many Families. For tho Bishops might not marry, they preferred their Brothers Sons to great Estates, as the Kemps in Kent, Peckhams in Sussex, Wickhams in Hampshire, Meltons in Yorkshire. Since the Reformation, some have raised their Families to a Knightly and Worshipful Estate, as Hutton, Bilson, Dove, Neil, &c. For Sheriffs, San∣dys in Worcester & Cambridgeshire, Westphaling in Here∣fordshire, Elmar in Suffolk, Rud in Carmarthenshire. Of the inferiour Clergy, Robert Johnson attain'd such an Estate, that his Grandson was Pricked Sheriff of a County, but declined the place as being a Deacon. The Civil Law hath preferred few. The most Eminent in that Faculty before the Reformation be∣ing Persons in Orders abstained from Marriage; since the Reformation, there are Worshipful Families raised thereby. The professors of Civil Law were e∣qually Contemned with Gods Ministers, during the Civil Wars, the Promoters whereof having a con∣stant Pique at all Civility and Order. But by the Return of our Brittish Sun, those Clouds of Barbarity are dispelled, and Regularity of Motion and good Order is introduced into the vast Sphere of his Domi∣nion, and the joyful Seasons of Peace and Plenty are by his kindly Influences restored. Physick hath promoted more, and that since the Reign of King Henry 8. Before whose time, there was one a Doctor of Physick, Father to Reginald, first and last Lord Bray. This Faculty hath much flourished the three last fifty years, Sir William Buts,
Doctor Wendy, and Doctor Hatcher have raised Wor∣shipful Families thereby. Some have rais'd themselves by Sea-service and Letters of Mart. Amongst those, most remarkable the Baronets Family of Drakes in Devonshire, some∣times Sheriffs there. Some have raised themselves by their Atten∣dance at Court, here younger Brothers have found their Birth-right. Many have advanced themselves by their Valour in Forraign Wars, especially in France, as the Knolls, a Noble Family, and the Caveleys often Sheriffs in Cheshire. Clothing as it affords Coats to most People, so it has given Arms and Gentility to many Families in this Land. As on the Springs of High-Sheriffs in Suffolk. The Countrey with her two full Breasts of Gra∣sing and Tillage, hath raised many Families. Some have had two Strings to their Bow. As the Chichlies in Cambridgeshire, are Descendants from a Lord Major; allied also Collaterally to an Arch-bishop of Canterbury. We may observe how happy a Liberal Vocation has proved to Younger Brethren; with which agree the School-Boys Exposition of these Verses. Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus Honores, Cum Genus & Species cogitur ire pedes. The Study of Physick giveth Wealth, The Study of Law giveth Honour. When High-birth and Beauty, having no other Calling is compelled to go on Foot.
Barkshire. BARKSHIRE hath Wiltshire on the west, Hamp∣shire on the South, Surrey on the East, Oxford and Buckinghamshire on the North. 'Tis in Form of a Lute, the Belly towards the West, the Neck extending to the East. In length about forty Miles, viz. from Cole∣shul to Windfor, and about twenty Miles in the broad∣est part. Very plentiful of Grass, Grain, Fish, Fowl, Wool and Wood, &c. The Natural Commodities are first, Oakes; of Trees, Barkshire hath abundance in all kinds. The Oaks in Windsor-Forrest, (as all other English Oak) are the best, 1. for firmness, for, when entred with Bullet, it remaineth firm round about it, whilst all the Oak does cowardly split about the passage. 2. For con∣venience of Portage, our four principal Forrests ly∣ing either on the Sea or Navigable Rivers, viz. New-Forrest on the Sea, Shire-wood on the Trent, Dean on the Severn, Windsor-Forrest on the Thames. Secondly, Bark. Whence the Name of this County, It is essential for making of good Leather; for, he that stays for Leather-shooes made without Bark, may long time go Bare-foot. Thirdly, Trouts. A dainty Fish, being found in the swiftest Streams and on the hardest Gravel. Of this kind there are Great and Good in the River of Kennet nigh Hungerford. They are best in May and de∣cline
with the Buck. After their full growth, they decay in goodness, tho their Head still thrive. Note, a Hog-back and little Head is a sign any Fish is in sea∣son. As for Manufactures, the chief is Clothing: For the Antiquity of it. 1. Cloth, is of the same date with the Civility of our Land; indeed the Britains went naked, which Custom a Beggar continuing, gave a reason thereof, by saying, All my Body is Face. 2. Fine (narrow) Cloth, begun about, 1. E. III. 3. Broad-cloth (wherein the Wealth of England is folded up) began in the Reign of Henry 8. Jack of Newbury, ('tis said) was the first that introduced it. Minerva was held the Foundress of Weaving, so great is the ingenuity thereof. For Buildings, Windsor-Castle, a Royal Seat ever since the Conquest, brought to modern Beauty, chiefly at the cost of E. 3. It is a Castle for Strength, and a Palace for State, and hath a Colledge, Chappel, and Alms-House. In this Palace is most remarkable, the Hall for Greatness, Winchester-Tower for height, and the Terrace on the North-side for Pleasure. Nor boasteth it so much that it consisteth of two Great Courts, as that it contained two Great Kings, John of France, and David of Scotland Prisoners therein together, as also that it was the Seat of the Honou∣rable Order of the Garter. Many pleasant Seats are in this County, on the Ken∣net and Thames, which seem dutifully to attend at di∣stance on Windsor-Castle, as Alder-maston, Ingle-field, &c. For Proverbs. One is peculiar to this County, viz. The Vicar of Bray, will be Vicar of Bray still▪ Bray is a Village here, named from the Bibroges, an∣cient British Inhabitants. The Vivacious Vicar living under Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth was a Papist then Protestant, then Papist then Protestant again. He found the Martyrs fire (near Windsor) too hot for his Temper, and being Taxed for a Turn-coat, Not so, said he, for I always kept my Principle, to live and dye the Vicar of Bray. General Proverb. I. When our Lady falls into our Lords lap: Then let England beware of a sad Mishap; Al. Let the Clergy-man look to his Cap. This Prophecy about 130 years old implies that the Blessed Virgin offended with the English, for abolishing her Adoration, watcheth an Oppertunity of Revenge on this Nation: And when her day (25th. of March) chanceth to fall on the day of Christ's Resurrection, some signal Judgment is intended to our State and Chuch-men especially. Such co-inci∣dence has hap'ned just fifteen times since the Con∣quest. An. 1095. when King Rufus made a fruitless Invasion of Wales. 1106. King Henry 1. subdueth Normandy, and D. Robert his Brother. 1117. the same King Henry forbideth the Popes Legate to enter Eng∣land. 1190. and King Richard 1. Conquereth Cyprus, in his way to Palestine 1201. in King John's days, The French invade Normandy 1212. King John resign∣eth his Kingdom to the Pope. 1285. Nothing re∣markable but Peace and Plenty. 1296. in the Reign of Edward 1. War begun with Scotland which ended in Victory. 1380. The Scots do much harm to us at Peryth Fair. 1459. Lancastrians worsted by the York∣ists, in fight. 1543. King Henry 8. entred Scotland, and burnt Edenburgh. Hitherto this Proverb has had but intermitting Truth at the most, seeing no Constan∣cy in Casualties. But the sting (will some say) is in the taile thereof, And I behold this Proverb born An.
1554. For then Queen Mary setteth up Popery and Martyreth Protestants. 1627. 3. Car. 1. The un∣prosperous Voyage to the Isle of Rees. 1638. 14. Car. 1. The first Cloud of Trouble in Scotland. 1649. The first compleat Year of the English Common-Wealth (or Tyranny rather) which since, blessed be God, is returned to a Monarchy. The next Concur∣rence will be in the Year 1722. But it matters not tho our Lady falls in our Lords lap, whilst our Lord sits at his Fathers right hand, if to him we make our Ad∣dresses by serious Repentance. II. When Hemp is spun, England is done. I look upon both this and the for∣mer to be coyned by a Roman Mint-Master, and even of the same Age. It is faced with a Literal, but would be faced with a Mystical sense. When Hemp is spun, when that Commodity is spent, and none left for Sails, Cordage, &c. England (whose strength con∣sists in Ships) would be reduced to a doleful Conditi∣on. But know, under HEMPE are couched the Initial Letters of Henry 8. Edward 6. Mary, Philip, and Elizabeth, as if with the Life of the last, the Happiness of England should expire, which Time hath confuted. Yet to keep this Proverb in Countenance, it may pretend to some Truth, because then England with the Addition of Scotland, lost its Name in Great Britain by Royal Proclamation. III. When the Black Fleet of Norway is come and gone, England build Houses of Lime and Stone, For after Wars you shall have none. Some make it fulfill'd in 88, when the Spanish Fleet was beaten,Lord Bac. Ess. p. 215. the Sur∣name of whose King was Norway. 'Tis true the English afterwards built handsome Houses of Lime and Stone. But the remainder, After, Wars
you shall have none, was proved false by the Civil Wars. IV. England is the Ringing Island. So called by rea∣son of the most tuneable Bells which it affords. V. When the Sand feeds the Clay, England crys Well-a-day. But when the Clay feed the Sand, It is merry with England. That is when the Season is very wet, the Sandy Ground amounting to about a fifth part only of the English Soil, is rendred fruitful, yet cannot make any Com∣pensation to the damage received in the Claiy ground, being about four fifth parts of the whole; and on the other side, by reason of this Disproportion a drought never causeth a dearth in England. VI. England were but a fling (i. e. a slight thing) Save for the crooked Stick, and the grey Goose-wing: That is, the use of Archery. On which they deservedly put a great Value, because they were therein so much skill'd. VII. England is the Paradise of Women, Hell of Horses, Purgatory of Servants: Law and Custom allows the Women desirable Advantages, allowing the third of their Husbands Estates with the fairest respect and kindest usage: As to Horses, besides over∣violent Riding, Racing and Hunting, they are Tor∣mented in Carts and Waggons. For Servants, whe∣ther Apprentices or Covenant Servants we conceive the Proverb to be Erroneous; since Apprentices are well used for their Money, and other Servants for their Fidelity. VII. A Famine in England begins first at the Horse-Manger: That is, if Peaseor Oats, Horse-Grain be dear, it will not be long ere Wheat and Rye be so too. VIII. The King of England is the King of Devils: That is, the Mobile has as great an Ambi∣tion to be Worshipped by Christ's Vice-gerant, as ever
the Devil had to have our Saviour fall down before him: But this is only a Conjecture, and such a one as probably has need of a Fuller to reduce to a genuin Colour; but I am told, he is resolved not to meddle with it. The German Emperour is termed, King of Kings (or free Princes) the King of Spain, King of Men; because they willingly yield their Soveraign rational Obedience. The King of France, King of Asses: And here 'tis very likely the Devil has made the Ass, two Appellations grating on, not gratify∣ing a well disciplin'd Ear. As to the first, S. Gregory gave the English better Language, when he said Angli veut Angeli, English men were as Angels. IX. The English are the French mens Apes: This is charged up∣on the English with some Truth. Since they imitate the French in two particulars, 1. In their Language (Which if Jack could speak, he would be a Gentleman) 2. In their Habits, accounting all fineness in Confor∣mity to the French Fashion. They learn their Fashi∣ons from them, to whom by their Conquests, they taught Obedience. X. The English Glutton: This Vice has been charged on the English, which we are more willing to excuse than confess, more willingly to con∣fess than amend; true it is England is, as it were a large Cook-shop, and it is no reason any should starve therein, which justifies Moderation, but does not ex∣cuse Excess. XI. Long-beards, Heartless, painted Hoods, Witless, Gay-coats, Graceless, make England Thriftless. This tho false acquaints us with the Eng∣lish Habit in former Times. The English were wont to nourish their Hair, conceiving it more amiable to their Friends, and terrible to their Foes. Their Hoods, were Colour'd or stain'd: And Gallantry began to creep in with their Gay-coats. This Proverb was made by the Scots, when they obtain'd a Victory over the English in the Reign of Edward 2.
XII. He that England would win, Must with Ireland first begin. 'Tis observed that Subjects at a great distance from their Prince, are most apt to swerve from their Al∣legience, being not so nearly influenced by the Beams of Majesty, as others, who besides the Sense of their Duty that inwardly perswades them to Obedience, have Royal Terror without, encamping as it were round about them to restrain them from Violence. XIII. In England a Bushel of March-dust is worth a Kings Ransome. A dry March being Beneficial to Clay-ground, of which England does most consist. XIV. England a good Land and a bad People. A French Proverb, 'tis well they being such Admirers of their own, will allow any goodness to another Country. XV. The High Dutch Pilgrims when they beg, they sing, the French whine and cry; the Spaniards curse, swear and blaspheme; the Irish and English steal. This is Spanish. The Italians are not mentioned, be∣cause they seldom go out of their Country. There was occasion to make Felony highly Penal, in Eng∣land; to restrain the Pezantry somewhat addicted thereunto; but may Honesty in themselves, and Cha∣rity in others hinder the Progress and prevent the Consequences of that Sneaking Trade. Princes. John Eldest Son of King E. 1. and Queen Eleanor born at Windsor, dyed in his Infancy, 1273. an. ult. H. 3. and was buried August 8. in Westmin∣ster, under a Marble Tomb, inlaid with his Picture, in an Arch over it. Eleanor Eldest Daughter to King Ed. 1. and Queen Eleanor. born at Windsor, An. Dom. 1266. After∣wards was Married by Proxy (a Naked Sword in∣terposed
between her and his Body) to Alphons King of Arragon, who dyed An. 1292, before the Consummation of Marriage. This Princess was after∣wards Married to Hen. 3. Earl of Berry in France, from whom the Dukes of Anjou and Kings of Sicil are descended. She died in 27th. year of her Fathers Reign, Anno Dom. 1298. Margaret third Daughter of E. 1. and Queen Elea∣nor, born at Windsor, An. 3. E. 1. 1275. At fifteen she was Marryed at Westminster, July 9. 1290. to John II. Duke of Brabant, by whom she had John Issue III. Duke of Brabant, from whom the Dukes of Burgun∣dy are descended. Mary, sixth Daughter of King Ed. and Queen El. born at Windsor, April. 12. 1279. at 10 years of Age was made a Nun at Amesbury in Wiltshire, meerly to gratifie Queen Eleanor her Grand-mother. The o∣ther Children of this King, probably born in this Ca∣stle, viz. Henry, Alphonse, Blanche, dyed in their In∣fancy, who Cleansed at Font did draw untainted Breath, Not yet made bad by Life, made good by Death. The two former were buried with their Brother John, at Westminster, in the same Tomb, but where Blanche was interr'd is unknown. Edward III, Son to E. 2. and Queen Isab. born at Windsor Oct. 13. 1312. a Pious and Fortunate Prince, was Passive in the deposing of his Father, Practised on in his Minority by his Mother and Mortimer. His French Victories speak both of his Wisdom and Va∣lour. And tho the Conquests by H. 5. were thick∣er, his were broader (in France and Scotland) tho both in length alike, as lost by their immediate Suc∣cessors. He was the first English King which Coyn∣ed
Gold. He first stamped the Rorse-Nobles, having on one side, Iesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat,Cambd. Rem. tit. Moneyar▪ and on the Reverse, his own Image, with a Sword and Shield siting in a Ship Waving on the Sea. Hereupon was made the English Rhym, in the Reign of H. 6. For four things our Noble sheweth to me, King, Ship and Swerd and Power of the Sea. He had a Numerous and Happy Issue by Phillippa his Queen, after whose Death, being almost 70 years old, he cast his Affection on Alice Pierce his Para∣mour to his Dishonour, it being true what Epictetus returned to Adrian, the Emperour, asking of him what Love was. In Puero, Pudor; in Virgine, Ru∣bor; in faeminâ, Furor; in juvene, Ardor; in Sene, Risus. In a Boy, bashfulness; in a Maid, blushing; in a Woman, fury; in a young-Man, fire; in an old Man, folly. However this King had few Equals, none Superiors for Wisdom, Clemency and Courage. He died An. Dom. 1378. William, Sixth Son to E. 1. and Queen Phil. born at Windsor. He had a Brother, born at Hatfield, of the same Name, who died in his Infancy, as this William also did. As for King Edwards Female Chil∣dren, Isabel, Joan, Blanch, Mary▪ and Margaret, 'tis believed they were born in France. Henry VI, Son to H. 5. born at Windsor, was fit∣ter for a Coul than Crown, of so easie a Nature that he might well have Exchanged a pound of Patience for an ounce of Valour. He Marryed Margaret Daugh∣ter of Reinier King of Jerusalem, Sicily and Arragon; Puissant only in Titles. Through Home-bred Dis∣sentions he not only lost the Forreign Acquisitions
of the Father in France, but also his own Inheri∣tance in England, to the House of York. Her Death or Murder rather happened 1471. This Henry was twice Crowned, twice Deposed, and twice Buried (first at Chestry, then at Windsor) and once half Sainted. Our Hen. VII. cheapned the price of his Canonization, but would not come up to the Sum demanded. However this Henry was a Saint with the People, repairing to his Monument from the farthest part of the Land. He was the last Prince whom I find expresly born at Windsor. It seems that afterwards our English Queens grew out of Conceit with that place, as unfortunate for Royal Nativities. Saints. Eng. Mart. Margaret Alice Rich, born at Abbington, in this County, and were successively Prioress of Catesby in Northamptonshire. They were Sisters to St. Edmund. The former dy∣ing An. 1257. the latter. 1270. Both were Ho∣noured for Saints, and many Miracles were reported done at their Shrine.Math. par. Major. An. Dom. 1217. St. Edmund Son to Edw. Rich and Mabel his Wife, born at Abbington and bred in Oxford. Edmunds-Hall, in that University which probably, was not built by, but Named in Memory of him. He was Canon of Salisbury and afterwards Arch-bishop of Canterbury, but after 10 years, deserted this Function, being offended at the Ambition and Extortion of the Popes Legate in England; he therefore, going into France sighed out the Remainder of his Life at Pontiniack, (some say, at Soissons) where he dyed An. 1240. Pope Innocent IV Canonized him 6 years after his Death, that
(as some affirm) he might not be tormented with his Ghost. Lewis King of France, a year after, tran∣slated his Corps, and three years after that, be∣stowed a most Sumptuous Shrine of Gold, Silver and Chrystal upon it. And the 16 of Nov. is the Festival appointed for his Memorial. Martyrs. At Newbury, in this County,Fox. Act. & Mon. p. 817. there were 6 or 7 score Persons, (being betrayed by a Lewd Person whom they admitted into their Society) Abjured, and besides there were three or four burnt, whose Names, tho not known are no doubt written in the Book of Life. The day of the Gospel dawned as soon in this Coun∣ty as in any place of England. The Honour of the Seniority, in this kind belongs to Newbury; the Mo∣tive used by Doctor Will. Twit to quicken the pace of his Parishoners there, that Town (as he said) being the first Fruits of the Gospel in England. At Windsor, of a Company of Godly Persons there, four were Arraigned and Condemned by Commis∣sioners, whereof three were put to Death, viz. Anth. Parsons Priest, being fast'ned to the Stake, he laid a good deal of Straw on his Head, saying, This is God's Hat,Fox. Act. & mon. p. 1211. I am now Arm'd like a Souldier of Christ. Rob. Testwood, a Singer in Windsor-Quire. There hap'ned a Contest betwixt him and another of that Society, Singing an Anthem together to the Virgin Mary. Rob. Philips, on the one side of the Quire. O Redemtrix & Salvatrix. Rob. Testwood, on the o∣ther side, Non Redemtrix nec Salvatrix. Whoever had the better then, God be thanked the Nons have got now the better of the Os in England. He was
also accused for diswading the People from Pilgri∣mages, and for striking off the Nose of the Image of our Lady. Hen. Palmer Church-Warden of Wind∣sor who had Articled against their Superstitious Vicar for Heretical Doctrine. When an account was given of the patient Death of these three to King Hen. VIII▪ he was pleased to say, Alass poor Inno∣cents! This was Pity, but could be no Protection, yet, by this Occasion others were preserved. This storm blown over, Barkshire enjoyed peace for twelve years, viz. from An. Dom. 1544. till 1556, when Doctor Jeffrey the Cruel Chancellour of Sarisbury renewed the Troubles of Nembury, and caused the Death of Julins Palmer. See his Character, (being born in Coventry,) in Warwickshire. John Gwin. Th. Askin. All three Burnt July 16. 1556. in the Sandpits near Newbury, enduring the Fire with such incredible Constancy,Fox. Act. & Mon. p. 1934. that it confounded their Foes and con∣firmed their Friends in the Truth. Confessors. John Marbeck, a skilful Organist in Windsor-Quire, who not perfectly understanding the Latin Tongue, did out of the Latin with the help of the English Bible make an English Concordance, commended high∣ly by Bishop Gardiner, yea by King Hen. VIII. saying, He was better employed than those Priests who accused him. Marbick was a very Zealous Protestant, of so sweet a Nature, all good Men did love, and few bad Men did hate him. Yet he was Condemned An. 1544. on the Stat. of the six Articles to be Burnt at Windsor, but was pardoned, some say for the Love Gardiner bore to him, some, that his Accusers, out
of Remorse of Conscience procured his Pardon, o∣thers that they intended to reserve him for a disco∣very of others. 'Twas a pardonable mistake of Mr. Fox in affirming this Marbeck was burnt, which he afterwards amended. Some Cavil, and tell us, That, Many who were burnt in Fox's time, in the Reign of Queen Mary, drank Sack in the days of Queen Elizabeth; but Humanum est errare, Protestants disclaim infallibility, and will reclaim their Errors when known. Robert Bennet Lawyer, in Windsor, a zealous Pro∣fessor of the true Religion, when Mr. Testwood was Condemned, was sick of the Plague in the Prison of the Bishop of London, and by that means preserved, receiving a Pardon after his recovery. Cardinals. This County affordeth one who might have been a Cardinal, but would not, viz. William Laud, who at the proffer said, That the Church of Rome must be first mended before he would accept any such Dignity. Prelates. Will. Reading, a learned Benedictine, employed by King Henry II. in many Embassies,Math. West. Flor. Hist. and by him promoted to the Arch-Bishoprick of Bourdeaux, where he died in the Reign of King Richard I. John de Bradfield, or De Lato Campo, born (likely) at Bradfield in Berks.AMP. He was Chanter and Bishop of Roche∣ster. He had another Sur-name, viz. De Hoe, but the same Character, viz. A man of honest Conversation, good Learning, and Moderation in all things. Richard Beauchamp, Brother to William Beauchamp,
Bar. of St. Amaud of Widehay in this County, was bred Doctor in the Laws, and became Bishop first of He∣reford, then of Salisbury. He was Chancellour of the Garter; which Office descended to his Successours, Windsor-Castle the Seat of that Order, being in the Diocess of Salisbury. He built a beautiful Chappel, (on the South-side of St. Marries Chappel) in his own Cathedral, where he lyeth buried. His death hap'ned, An. Domini, 1482. Since the Reformation. Tho. Godwin, born at Oakingham in this County,Godwin Cata∣logue of Bishops of Bath, &c. was of Magdalen-Col∣ledge in Oxford, maintained there for a time by the Bounty of Doctor Layton Dean of York, till at last he was cho∣sen Fellow of the Colledge. Afterwards he was School-Master of Barkley in Gloucestershire, then he studied Physick, which proved Beneficial to him, when for∣bidden to teach School in the Raign of Queen Mary. Bonner threatning him with Fire and Faggot, caused him often to obscure himself. He was an Eloquent Preacher, Tall and Comely in person, which much in∣deared him to Queen Elizabeth. For eighteen years together he was one of the Select Chaplains, which Preached in Lent before her Majesty. He was first Dean of Chirst-Church in Oxford, then Dean of Can∣terbury, and at last Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being Aged and Diseased, he was necessitated for a Nurse to marry a second Wife, which was represented to the Queen, to his disgrace, as if he had married a Girl of Twenty. But the Earl of Bedford intervening, Ma∣dam (said he to her Majesty) I know not how much the Woman is above Twenty, but I know a Son of hers is but little under Forty. He died at Oakingham, of a
Quartane Feaver, Nov. 19. 1590. And lyeth buried under a Monument in the South-side of the Chancel. Th. Ramme born at Windsor, was admitted in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, An. Dom. 1588. whence he was Chaplain first to Robert Earl of Essex; then to Charles Lord Mountjoy, both Lord Lieutenants in Ireland, af∣terwards he was made Bishop of Fernos, and Laghlin in that Kingdom, both peaceably enjoyed, An. 1628. Will. Lawd born at Reading in this County, of ho∣nest Parents, bred in S. John's Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became President: Successively Bishop of S. David's, Bath and Wells, London, and at last Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. One of low Stature, but high parts; piercing Eyes, chearful Countenance, where∣in Gravity and Pleasantness were well compounded, admirable in his Naturals, unblameable in his Mo∣rals, being very strict in his Conversation. Impar∣tial posterity will allow his Name to be reposed among the Heroes of England, seeing such as behold his expence on S. Paul's, as but a Cypher, will assign his other Benefactions, a very valuable Signification, viz. His erecting and endowing an Alms-house in Reading, his encreasing of Oxford Library with Books, and S. John's Colledge with beautiful Buildings. He was beheaded, Jan. 10. 1644. States-men. Sir John Mason Knight born at Abbington, (where he was Benefactor to a beautiful Alms-house) bred in All-Souls in Oxford. King Henry VIII. coming hi∣ther was so highly pleased with an Oration Mr. Ma∣son made unto him, that he instantly gave Order for his Education beyond the Seas, as con∣fident he would prove an able Minister of State.Sir Jo. Hay∣ward E. . He was Privy-Councellour to Henry 8. and Edward 6. One maketh
him Secretary of State: Another, but Master of the Requests: He continued Councellor to Queen Mary,Stow, E. 6. p. 612▪ and Queen Elizabeth, to whom he was Treasurer of the Houshold, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford. He having no Child adopted his Nephew.Cambd. Eliz. He was a Man of Gra∣vity, and great Learning. He died, 1566, and lyeth buried in the Quire of S. Paul's, a part of whose Epitaph, (in English) is thus; He saw five Princes which the Scepter bore, Of them was Privy-Councellor to four. Sir Th. Smith Knight born in Abbington, bred in the University of Oxf. God and himself raised him to the Eminency he attained unto, unbefriended with any Ex∣traction. Emulating Sir Th. Smith Senior Secretary of State, he had equalled him in Preferment, if not prevented by Death. This Sir Thomas was Master of the Requests, and Secretary to King James. He di∣ed, Nov. 28. 1609. and was buried in the Church of Fulham in Middlesex, under a Monument erected by his Lady, Frances Daughter to William Lord Chandes, and since the Countess of Exeter. Souldiers. Henry Ʋmpton, Knight, born at Wadley in this Coun∣ty, was Son to Sir Edward Ʋmpton, by Anne (the Relick of Jo. Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) eldest Daughter of Edward Seymor D. of Somerset. He was employed by Queen Elizabeth Ambassadour into France, where in the Month of May, An. 1592. be∣ing sensible of some injury offered by the D. of Guise to the Honour of the Queen of England he
sent him this Challenge. Forasmuch as lately in the Lodging of my Lord Du Mayne, and in Publick elsewhere, impudently, indiscreetly, and over boldly, you spoke boldly of my Soveraign, whose sacred Person, here in this County, I represent. To maintain both by Word and Weapon her Honour, (which never was called in Question by people of Honesty and Vertue) I say, you have wick∣edly lyed, by speaking so basely of my Soveraign, and you shall do nothing else but lye, whensoever you shall dare to tax her Honour. Moreover that her Sacred Person (being one of the most Complete and Vertuous Princess that lives in this World) ought not to be evil spoken of, by the Tongue of such a perfidious Traitor to her Law and Country, as you are: And hereupon I defie you and Chal∣lenge your Person to mine, with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it either on Horse-back or on Foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality of Person between us, I being issued of as great a Race and Noble House (everyway) as your self. So assigning me an indifferent place, I will there maintain my Words, and the Lie which I gave you, and which you should not en∣dure, if you have any Courage at all in you. If you con∣sent not to meet me hereupon, I will hold you, and cause you to be generally held for the arrantest Coward, and most slanderous Slave that lives in all France. I expect your Answer. I find not what Answer was returned: This Sir Henry dying in the French Kings Camp before Lo∣fear, and his Corps brought over, was buried in Far∣rington Church, July 8. 1596. He had allowed him a Barrons Heirs, because dying Ambassadour Leigier. Writers. Hugh of Reading, quitted his Ex∣pectances of a fair Estate,S. N. and embra∣ced a Monastical life, till at last he be∣came
Abbot of Reading: He is highly commended by the Learned, and writ a Book of Questions fetcht from the Scripture. Roger of Windsor, Chanter of the Convent of S. Albans, was the Kings Historian: He flourished, An. Dom. 1235. Robert Rich Son to Edward, and Mabel his Wife, Brother of S. Edmund Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, was born at Abbington in this County. He wrote a Book of the Life, Death and Miracles of his Brother; and died about the year of our Lord, 1250. Richard of Wallingford, a Black-Smith's Son was bred at Merton-Colledge in Oxford a Monk, at last Ab∣bot of S. Albans, where being a good Mathematician especially, as to the Mechanick part thereof, he made a Clock with much Pain, more Cost, and most Art:Bale, Scrip. Brit. cent. 5. Numb. 19. Being a Calender as well as Clock, shewing the Fixed Stars and Pla∣nets, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, &c. but my Author did not inform me, if the Canonical hours were mark't on the Clock: He died An. Dom. 1326. Since the Reformation. Henry Bullock, probably born in this County,AMP. where his Name appears in a Worshipful Estate. He was bred a Fellow and Doctor of Divinity in Queens-Colledge in Cambridge, a general Scholar, familiar with Erasmus, calling him Bovillum in his Epistles to him. At Car∣dinal Wolsey's instance, he wrote against Luther, tho otherwise his Affections were biased to the Protestant Party. When he died is unknown. Will. Twis born at Spene, an ancient Roman City, bred at New-Colledge in Oxford, and there became a
General Scholar. Good at plain Preaching, better at Disputing, and best in Living. He became Preacher in Spinhamlands. Towards his Death he was slighted by Sectaries, it being usual for New-lights to neglect those who have born the heat of the Day. His Latin Works speak him able in Controversie. He was Moderate Prolocutor in the Assembly of Di∣vines. And dying in Holborn, he was buried at West∣minster, An. Dom. 164- Will. Lyford born at Peysmer and bred at Magdalen-Coll. in Oxf. Proceeded there Batchelour of Divinity 1631. He was also Fellow of that Foundation. He was troubled in Conscience for having Resigned his place for Money to his Successour, but before his Death he made Restitution. He had a comely Coun∣tenance and modest Mind, a Courteous Carriage and meek Spirit. He was afterwards Preacher at Shir∣burn in Dorsetshire, and tho both Pious and Painful, he had his share of Obloquie from such factious Per∣sons as could not abide the wholsome Words of sound Doctrine. He dyed about 1652 tho his Me∣mory lives in his Learned Works. Romish Exile Writers. Th. Hyde born at Newbury, bred Master of Art in New-Coll. in Oxf. was made Canon of Winchester and chief Master of the School there. He with Jo. Martial, about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz. went beyond the Seas. This Hyde is Charactered by one of his own profession, to be A Man of upright Life, of great Gravity and Severity He wrote a Book of Consolation to his Fellow Ex∣ile, and dyed An. Dom. 1597.
Benefactors to the Publick. Alfrede, the fourth Son to King Athelwolf, born at Wantage. An excellent Scholar, tho he was past 12 years of Age before he knew one Letter. He was a Curious Poet, an Excellent Musician, a valiant and successful Souldier, fighting seven Battles against the Danes in one year, at last Conquered them and reduced them to the Profession of Christianity. He gave the first Institution or (according to others) the best Instauration to the University of Oxford. A Prince who cannot be Painted to the Life with∣out his Loss, no Words reaching his Worth. He di∣vided 1. every natural day (as to himself) into 3 parts, viz. 8 hours for his Devotion, and 8 for Bu∣siness, and the remainder for Sleep and Refection. 2. His Revenues into 3 parts, one for War, a se∣cond for his Court, and the third for Pious uses. 3. His Land into 32 Shires. 4. His Subjects into Hun∣dreds and Tithings, consisting of 10 Persons mutu∣ally Pledges for their Good Behaviour. He left Learn∣ing where he found Ignorance, Justice where he found Oppression, and Peace where he found Destra∣ction. And having Reigned 34 years, he dyed and was buried at Winchester An. 901. He loved Reli∣gion more then Superstition, favoured Learned Men more then Lazie Manks, which may be the cause he was not solemnly Sainted with other Saxon Kings, who did not so much deserve. Since the Reformation. Pet. Chapman born at Cokeham, bred an Iron-monger in Lond. at his Death bequeathed five pounds a year to two Scholars in Oxford; as much to two in Camb.
and five Pounds a year to the poor of the Town of his Nativity, besides sixty Pounds to the Prisons of Lond. &c. The time of his Death is unknown. Jo. Kendrick born at Reading, bred a Draper in Lond. His State may be compared to the Mustard-seed, from a small,Math. 13.32. encreasing to a prodigious bigness. If Benefa∣ctors were digested as David's Wor∣thies,2 Sam. 23.19 Mr. Kendrick would be (if not the last of the first) the first of the second three. His Charity began at his Kindred, proceeded to his Friends and Servants (to whom he left large Lega∣cies) concluded with the Poor, on whom he bestow∣ed above 20000 Pounds, Reading and Newbury shar∣ing the deepest therein; as appears by his Printed Will. He dyed 30 Sept. 1624. and is buried in St. Christophers, Lond. to the Curate of which Parish he gave 20 Pounds a year for ever. Rich. Wightwick Batchellor of Divinity, was Rector of East-Isley in this County. His Be∣nefice not very great may appear a Bishoprick by his Bounty to Pembroke-Coll. in Oxf. to which he gave 100 Pounds a year for 3 Fellows and 4 Scholars. When he dyed is unknown.S. N. Memorable Persons. Tho. Cole commonly called the Rich Clothier of Read∣ing. He is reported a Man of vast Wealth, main∣taining 140 Menial Servants, besides 300 poor Peo∣ple, whom he set on Work, insomuch that his Wains with Cloth filled the High-way from Read∣ing to Lond. to the stopping of King H. I. in his Progress, which King gratified Cole with a Standard-yard, the length of his Royal-Arm; but the Truth is, was the Arm of E. I. which was the Adequation
of a Yard. This whole story is uncertain, yet Cole may be accounted Eminent in this kind. Jo. Winscombe commonly called Jack of Newbury was indeed the most considerable Clothier England ever beheld. He kept 100 Looms in his House, each of them managed by a Man and a Boy. In the Ex∣pedition to Flodden-field, against Ja. King of Scot∣land, he marched with 100 of his own Men well Mounted, to shew that the Painful in Peace, could be Valiant in War. He Feasted King Hen. 8 and his first Queen Kath. at his own House, yet extant at Newbury, the Church of which he built from the Pulpit to the Tower Inclusively. He dyed about 1520, some of his Name and Kindred of great Wealth in this County. As to the Gentry in this County, Will. Fachel or Vachel was right Ancient, having an Estate in and a∣bout Reading. And the Family of the Pusays is so Ancient, that they were Lords of Pusay (a Village near Faringdon) long before the Conquest in the time of King Canutus, holding their Lands by the Tenure of Cornage, viz. by Winding of a Horn, (when the Enemies made their Approach) which that King gave their Family, and which their Posterity still Extant at this day do produce. But generally the List of Sheriffs is the most Comprehensive Catalogue of the English Gentry. Noted Sheriffs. Will. Briewere of mean Extraction, yet he was such a Minion to King Rich. I. that he created him Baron of Odcomb in Somersetshire. One Fulk-paynel gave this William the Town of Bridg∣water, that he might procure for him the King's fa∣vour which he had lost. Seeing he left no Son, partition
was made of his Inheritance amongst his Daughters, married into the Honourable Families of Breos, Wake, Mohun, La-fert and Percy. Phillip Son of Rob. and Alan de Marton, joynt She∣riffs in this County. Rog. Bishop of Covent. & Lich. Sher. in this County. He was Surnamed de Molend, aliàs Longespee, and was Nephew to King Hen. III. Phil. de la Beach. The Seat of this Fa∣mily was at Aldworth, where their Sta∣tues on their Tombs are yet extant. They were most Valiant Men, & their Male issue was extinct in the next Kings Reign, whose Heir General was marryed to the Ancient Family of Whitlock. Th. Chaucer sole Son to Geffery Chaucer the Famous Poet, from whom he inherited fair Lands at Dunning-Castle in this County, and at Ewelme in Oxf. He married Maud Daughter and Coheir of Sir. Jo. Burwash, by whom he had Alice married to Will. de la Pole D. of Suffolk. He lyeth buried under a fair Tomb in Ewelme Church with this Inscription. Hic jacet Th. Chaucer, Armiger, quondam Dominus istius villae, & patronus istius Ecclesiae, qui ob. 13. Nov. An. Dom. 1434. & Matilda uxor ejus, quae ob. 28. Apr. 1436. Th. Wickham, Kinsman and next heir to Will. VVickham that famous Bishop of VVinchester, who (notwithstand∣ing above 6000 pounds bequeath'd in Legacies) left to Thomas 600 pound Lands a year. As for his Arms, viz. Arg. 2 Cheverons, S. between 3 Ros∣es G. The most ingenious Sir Isaac VVake concei∣veth those Cheverons (or Couples in Architecture) given him in Relation to the two Colledges he built in Oxford and VVinchester. Jo. Gowfere, or Golofre, the first who is Styled Esquire as he was She∣riff.
This Addition grew afterwards more fashion∣able, for after that Jack Straw (one of the Grand∣founders of the Levellers) was defeated, the Eng∣lish Gentry, to appear above the Mobile, did in all publick Instruments insert their Native or acquired Qualifications. Sir. Jo. Howard, Knight, Son to Sir Rob. Howard, soon after was Created a Baron by Edw. IV. and Duke of Norfolk by King Rich. III. as Kinsman and one of the Heirs of Anne Dutchess of York and Norfolk, whose Mother was one of the Daughters of Th. Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. Soon after he lost his Life in Bosworth-field, in the Quarrel of him who had given him his Honour. From him descended the Noble and Nu∣merous Family of the Howards, of whom four Earls, viz. Arundel, Notingham, Suffolk and Barkshire, and two Barons, viz. Mowbray and Estrick sat in the last Parliament of King Ch. I. Verstegan the great An∣tiquary will have their Name to be Holdward, that is, Keeper of a Castle (or Trust) and they have well answered unto their Name. Did not Th. Howard Earl of Surrey well Hold his ward by Land, when in the Reign of King H. 8. he Conquered the Scots in Floddon-field, and took James IV, their King, Prison∣er? And did not Charles Howard (afterward Earl of Nottingham) hold his ward by Sea in 88. when the Armado was defeated? Humph. Foster. Ar. Afterward Knighted, lies Bu∣ried in St. Martins in the Fields, Lond. with this In∣scription. Of your Charity pray for the Soul of Sir Humphrey Foster Knight, whose body lies buried here in Earth, under this Marble Stone, who deceased 18 Sept. 1500. On whose Soul Jesu have mercy, Amen.
Robert Harecourt, Knight, right An∣cient is this Family in France, which is said to have flourished there 800 years. Of this Family (whose Arms is G. two Bars, O.) a younger Branch coming over at the Conquest, fixed it self at Staunton Harecourt in Oxford-shire: In the Reign of King Jo. Richard Harecourt of Staunton, marrying Orabella, Daughter of Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, had the Mannor of Bosworth in Leice∣ster-shire, for his Wives Portion. Robert Harecourt was made Knight of the Garter by E. 4. From him Lineally descended the Valiant Sir Simon Harecourt, lately slain in the Wars against the Rebels in Ireland, whose Son a hopeful Gentleman enjoys the Mannor of Staunton to this day. Jo. Basket, an Esquire of Remark and Martial Acti∣vity in his younger days, and after, removed to Devnish in Dorsetshire, to whom he going into France, committed the Care of that Country. Will. Essex, Ar. a worthy Man, of great Command in this County, (whereof he was four times Sheriff) and the first of his Family who fixed in Lambourn therein; for he married Elizabeth, Daughter and sole Heir of Tho. Rogers of Benham, whose Grand-father Jo. Rogers had married Elizabeth, Daughter and Heir of Jo. Shotesbroke of Bercole in this County (whose Ancestors had been Sheriffs in Bark-shire, An. 4.5. and 6. E. 3.) by whom he received a large Inheritance. This Will. (afterwards Sir Will.) was Son to Th. Essex, Esquire, Remembrancer and Vice-Treasurer to E. 4. who died Nov. 1. 1500, and lyeth buried in the Church of Kensington, Middlesex: He derived himself from Henry de Essex, Bar. of Rawley, and Standard-bearer of England, and his Posterity have lately assumed his Coat, viz. Arg. an Orle G. There
was lately a Baron of this Family, with Revenues of a Baron. Humph. Foster, Knight, a Lover of Protestants in the most dangerous times, and spake to the Quest, in the behalf of Mr. Marbeck, that good Confessor. Yea, he Confessed to Henry 8. that never any thing went so much against his Conscience, as his attend∣ing (by Command) the Execution of three poor Men Martyred at Windsor. Francis Inglefield Knight, afterwards Privy-Councellour to Queen Mary, and so zealous a Romanist, that after her Death he left the Land with a most large Inheri∣tance, and lived for the most part in Spain. He was a most industrious Agent to solicite the Cause of the Queen of Scots: He was a great Promoter of, and Be∣nefactor to the English Colledge at Valladolid in Spain, where he lyeth interred. A Family of his Alliance is still Worshipful, extant in this County. Jo. Williams, Knight, was before the Expiration of the year of his Sherival∣ty made by Queen Mary, Lord Wil∣liams of Tame in Oxford: In which Town he built a small Hospital, and a very fair School. He with Sir Henry Bennyfield were Joynt-keepers of the Lady E∣lizabeth, whilst under Restraint, being as Civil as the other was cruel to her. Bishop Ridley when Martyr∣ed, requested this Lord to stand his Friend to the Queen, that those Leases might be confirmed, which he had made to poor Tenants; which he promised and performed accordingly. Henry Norrice, Son-in-Law to the Lord Williams aforesaid, was by Queen Elizabeth created Bar. of Norrice in Ricot, in Oxford. He was Son to Sir Henry Norrice, who suffered in the Cause of Queen Anne Bullen,
Grand-Child to Sir Edward Norrice; who married Friswide Sister and co-heir to the last Lord Lovell. He was Father to the Martial Blood of the Norrices, Elizabeth his Grand-Child, sole Daughter and Heir unto Francis Norrice Earl of Bark-shire, and Baroness Norrice, was married to Edward Wray Esquire, whose only Daughter Elizabeth Wray, Baroness Norrice late∣ly deceased, was married unto Montague Bartue Earl of Lindsey, whose Son a Minor is Lord Norrice, at this day. Edward Ʋmpton Knight, this ancient Name was extinct in the days of our Fathers, for want of issue Male, and a great part of their Lands devolved by an Heir general to G. Puffen of Wadley Esquire, whose Care is commendable in preserving the Monuments of the Ʋmptons in Farrington Church, and restoring such as were defaced in the Civil War. Besilius Fetiplace: The Seat of the Family was at Lee, thence called Besiles Lee in this County, until Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Will. Bes. last of the Name was married to Richard Fetiplace, whose Great-grand-Child was named Besile, to continue the Remembrance of their Ancestors. Richard Lovelace Knight, a brisk Gen∣tleman in the Reign of Queen Eliza∣beth, making use of Letters of Mart, had the Success to seize on a large Remnant of the King of Spains Fleet charged with Silver. King Charles created him Lord Lovelace of Hurley. Sir Jo. Darell, Baronet: Of which Order, Note the Qualifications, Service and Dignity: For the first. 1. They were to be Men of honest Reputation. 2. Descended at least of a Grand-father that bare Arms. 3. Having Estate of 1000 pounds a year, two Thirds thereof at least in Possession, the rest in Reversion expectant, on
one Life only, holding in Dower or Joynture. As to the Second, 1. Each of them was to advance to∣wards the planting of the Province of Ʋlster in Ire∣land, with Money enough to maintain 30 Foot for three years, after the Rate of eight pence a day for each Man. 2. The first years Wages was to be paid down on the passing of their Patent, the Remainder as they contracted with the Kings Commissioners, Authorized to treat of, and conclude the same. For the last, viz. their Dignity. 1. They were to take place, with their Wives and Children respectively, immediately after the Sons of Barons, and before all Knights-Batchelors of the Bath and Banneret; save such Solemn ones as afterwards should be created in the Field, by the King there Present, under the Standard Royal displayed. 2. The Addition of Sir was to be prefixed before their Names. 3. The Honour was to be Hereditary, and Knight-hood not to be denied to their eldest Sons, of full Age, if desiring it. 4. There was added to their Arms a Bloody hand in a Canton, or Escutcheon at their Pleasure. The King did undertake, that they should never exceed 200, and none were to be substituted upon a Vacan∣cy. And that no other new Order should be super∣induced. Battles. Newbury, I. 1643. Sept. 20. Earl of Essex having raised the Siege of Glocester, and returning towards Lon∣don was followed by the Kings Army; both sides might be traced by a Tract of bloody Foot-steps, especially at Auborn in Wilts, where they had a smart Encounter. At Newbury the Earl made a stand: Here hap'ned a fierce Fight on the East side of the Town. The Parliament was conceived to lose the most, the King the most
considerable Persons, amongst whom the Earl of Car∣narvon and Sunderland, the Viscount Faulkland, Col∣lonel Morgan: Victory and Loss was equally shared on both sides, which were so filled with their Supper, that the next day they had no Stomach for Break∣fast, but keeping their Stations were rather content∣ed to Face then Fight one another. Newbury, II. Essex recruited from London, gave the King Battle. The Fight was as long and fierce as the former, but the Victory more clear on the Par∣liaments side. The Royalists at Night hung lighted Matches on the Hedges (so to simulate their aboad thereabouts) whilst they drew off, securing their Cannon in Dunnington-Castle (the Governour where∣of, Sir Jo. Bois, did the King Knights Service) and re∣turned in as good Order as their Condition was capable of. Many here lost their lives, as if New∣bury were so named by a sad Prolepsis, fore-signi∣fying, that that Town should afford a New-burying-place to many slain in two Bloody Battles. Bedfordshire. BEdfordshire hath Northamptonshire on the North, Huntington and Cambridgeshire on the East, Hart∣fordshire on the South Bucking. on the West. Of an Oval Form, from North to South, about 22 Miles in length, & 15 in breadth. The Soyl consisteth of a deep Clay, and some Sand (between Woburn and Potton) afford∣ing
Fair and Pleasant, as the other part both of fruit∣ful and profitable Places for Habitation. Natural Commodities are, Grain as Wheat and Barley. Where Note that much of that which Originally grows here is car∣ried to Hartfordshire, and from thence to London, where it carries credit for Hartfordshire Wheat, &c. Ful∣lers-Earth, at Woburn, (whence 'tis called Woburn's-earth) of great use in Drapery, wherefore the Transportation thereof is prohibited by Stat. Larks, the most and best about Dunstable. As for Manufactures the Inhabitants take a Writ of ease. Buildings. A Fair Chappel and Monument at Maldon, erected by Th. E. of Elgin, to the Memory of his Lady Diana Cecil. Taddington, Amphtil and Woburn car∣ry away the credit amongst the Houses of Nobility in this County. Wonders. At Harold (or Hareles-wood) the River of Ouse An. 1399. parted asunder, and became passible on foot for three Miles. A sad Omen of the Wars be∣between the two Houses of York and Lancashire. Al∣so there's a Rivolet near Asplly that is of a Petrefy∣ing Nature, converting Wood to Stone. Proverbs. I. As plain as Dunstable Road; this Road being broad and beaten. II. As Crooked as Crawley Brook;
being Meandrous. III. The Baylif of Bedford is coming. The River of Ouse running by is called Baylif of Bedford, which swelling in the Winter, and coming down on a suddain, arresteth the Isle of Ely with an Inundation. Princes. Marg. Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Darby, Great-great Grand-child to E. 3. and Mother to H. 7. and Allied to many Forrain Princes. She may be Rank'd also under the Topic of Benefactors. There is an Expression of her Humility and Cha∣rity. That if the Christian Princes would agree to March with an Army for the Recovery of Palestine, she would be their Laundress. She founded the two fair Colledges of Christ and St. Johns in Camb. be∣sides a Professor of Divinities Place. This Lady too High for a mean Man to Commend, is long since gone to the Great God to reward. Saints. Ainulph of Royal British Blood, a Holy Hermit. Ainulphs-bury (a Town in the Confines of this and Huntingtonshire) was erected in his Memory, part whereof (corruptly called Ainsbury) is now extant under the Name St. Neots. Martyrs. Th. Chase an Ancient and Faithful Minister, Hang'd at the Bishops Prison in Woburn. His Executioners, to palliate their Murder, and asperse his Memory, gave it out that he destroy'd himself. A loud Lie, seeing he was so loaden with Chains that he could
not lift up his own Body. His Death hap'ned in the Reign of King Hen. 7. An. Dom. 1506. Prelates. Silvester Everton, (al. Eversden or Everseen.) From Everton a Village in this County. Memorable for his preferment, and very able to discharge the Lay∣part thereof, receiving the great Seal An. 29. H. 3. Was well versed in the Customs of Chancery. The same year he was chosen Bishop of Carlile, and conse∣crated the year following. He, with other Bishops made an Address to H. 3. boldly requiring that all Forreigners and Ʋnsufficient Persons might be put out of their Bishopricks, to whom the King replyed. And thou Sylvester of Carlile, who so long Licking the Chancery, was the little Clark of my Clergy-men, it is sufficiently known unto all, how I advanced thee to be a Bishop, before many Reverend Persons and able Di∣vines. I find no Bishop born here since the Refor∣mation. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir Jo. Cokeyn Knight, Chief Bar. of the Ex∣chequer, in the Reign of H. 4. founded a Worship∣ful Family at, and imparted his Surname to Cokeyn-Hatley in this County, tho he was born in Derby∣shire. q. v. Edw. Wingate, Esquire, born here, where his Fami∣ly flourished at Hartington. He was bred at Greys-Inn, in the Study of the Common-Law, whereof he wrote, besides others, a Book ntitled, The Reason of the Common-Law, and is lately deceased.
Writers. Jo. Dunstable, My Pen now fears Surfeiting; (for he was John of all Arts,) and therefore I refer you to his 2 Epitaphs on his Tomb in St. Stephen's Wal∣brook Lond. He dyed An. 1455. Since the Reformation. Geo. Joy born in this County. A great Friend to Mr. Tindal, and therefore hated by Woolsey, Fisher and Sir Th. Moor. The particulars of his Suffer∣ing, if known, would justly advance him into the re∣putation of a Confessor. He Translated part of the Bible, and wrote several Books. He dyed and was buried in his Native Country An. ult. E. 6. 1553. Fr. Dillingham, bred a Fellow in Christs-Coll. Camb. An Excellent Divine and Subtile Disputant; was chosen to be one of the Translators of the Bible, and being richly Beneficed at Wilden in this County, dy∣ed a single Man, leaving a fair Estate to his Brother Mr. Th. Dill. chosen a Member of the Assembly, tho he appeared not, but remained Pastor of Dean the place of his Nativity. Will. Sclater born at Layton-Buzard was Son to Anth. Sclater Minister thereof for 50 years together, who lyed near 100 years of Age. Will. was bred in Eaton, then in Kings Coll. of Camb. where he be∣came after some years Doctor of Divinity. Being afterwards Preacher in the West he incurred great Vex∣tion and Danger, but came off by God's goodness. He was reconciled to the Ceremonies of the Church (after he had Studied the Point with all Imaginable Exactness,) and drew others over by his Example.
He was Subject to the Stone, which he called Flagel∣lum Studiosorum. Jo. Lord Pawlet preferred him to Limpsam living in Som. from thence, for his Health, he returned to Pitmister, (where he had formerly been Minister,) and there dyed An. Dom. 1627. and 50th. of his Age, leaving behind him his Comment on the Rom. & Thess. a Treatise of Tithes or the Ministers Portion, &c. Benefactors. Sir Will. Son to Will. Harper, was born in Bedford, but bred a Merchant-Taylor in London, where he was chosen Lord Mayor. He erected and endowed a Free-School in Bedford, where he lyeth buried. Hen. Grey, Son to H. Grey, was born at Wrest. Rich. Grey 3d. Earl of Kent of that Family wasted most of his Estate, and gave the King and others what re∣mained thereof, not regarding Sir H. Grey his Bro∣ther (by a 2d. Venter) of Wrest, in this County, who therefore declined the Honour. Thus the Earl∣dom of Kent lay asleep in the Family of the Greys almost 50 years, viz. from 15. H. 8 till 13 of Queen Eliz. when she advanced Reginald Grey, Grandfather to Sir H. Grey aforesaid (who had Recruited himself with Revenues) to be Earl of Kent, An. 1571. Regi∣nald dying Childless within the year, Hen. his Bro∣ther (the Subject of our present description) suc∣ceeded to this Honour. A Person truly Noble, ex∣pending the Income of his own Estate and his Ladies Joynture (Mary the Relict of Edw. E. of Darby) in Hospitality. He was a Cordial Protestant, on the same Token that being present at the Execution of Queen of Scots, when she requested the Nobility there, to stand by and see her Death, he (fear∣ing something of Superstition) hardly assented there∣unto.
On the other side he was as far removed from Faction, deserving the Character given him by Mr. Cambd.Brit. Kent. A Person highly Ho∣noured with all the Ornaments of true No∣bility. He left no Issue, except some will behold him, in some sort Parent of Sidney-Coll. in Camb. as one of the Executors to the Foundress thereof, who both proved and improved her Will, besides her Per∣sonal Benefaction thereunto. And being the Survi∣ving Executor, he did Perpetuate the Fellowships (formerly) Temporary, according to his Trust. He dyed An. 1613. Fr. Cleark, Knight, born at Eaton-soton, in the Lord∣ship called the Paersonage. A Noble Benefactor to Sidney-Coll. augmenting all the Scholarships of the Foundation, and erecting a fair Range of Buildings. So skilful he was that he computed to a Brick what was necessary for the finishing thereof. He founded four new Fellowships. The Gift was felt before the Giver (a meer Stranger) was seen. He dyed An. Dom. 163. Memorable Persons. A Woman lived, dyed and is buried at Dunstable, (where is her Epitaph) who had 19 Children at 5 Births, viz. 3.3.3.5 and 5. Noted Sheriffs. The Family of the Blundells, whereof Sir Edw. Blundel behaved himself right Valiantly in the Expe∣dition to the Isle of Ree. Rich. Basset and Albericus de Veer. The last of whom was made, by Maud the Emp. E. of Oxford. And the first was his under-Sheriff in this County.
Hen. de Essex. Bar. de Raleigh in Ess. and Hereditary Standard-bearer of England. He in the Battle at Cole∣shul in Flintsh. between the English and the Welsh ca∣sting away his Courage and Banner together, occasion∣ed a great overthrow of the English, and was there∣fore challenged in Combat by Rob. de Momford Knight, and by him overcome in Duel. His Inheri∣tance was forfeited to the King, and he himself made a Honourable Retreat into a Convent, and under a Coul betwixt Shame and Sanctity blushed out the Re∣mainder of his Life. Dav. Archdeacon, whose Ancestors probably ha∣ving been Ecclesiasticks left him that Surname. Rob. Braybrook and Hen. Fil. Hen. Br. and Rob. Pater. A lo∣ving Re∣ciprocation of Sheriff and under-She∣riff, betwixt Father and Son. Under-Sheriff to his Father, that was his Duty. Under-Sheriff to his Son, that was his Courtesie. Indeed I can Name one un∣der-Sheriff to his own Father, being a Gent. of right Worthy Extraction and Estate, which Son af∣terwards became, Lord Ch. Justice and Treasurer of England. Edward Eldest Son to the King. A great Honour to this Shire and Buck. where he was Sheriff for five years to∣gether. Yea the Imperial Crown found him in that Office when it fell unto him, Barthol. de Fowen being under-Sheriff. Th. Hoo. A famous Man, whom King Hen. 6 made Knight of the Garter and Lord Hoo and Hastings. He left four Daughters thus Married. 1. Anne to Sir Jeffrey Bullen. 2. Eleanor to Sir Rich. Carew. 3. Jane to Rob. Cople Esquire. 4. Eliz. to Sir Jo. Devenish. From the first of these was Queen Eliz. descended. Some
of the issue Male were lately extant in Hartford∣shire. Jo. Wenlock, was returned Knight of the Town of his Principal Residence, to the Parl. 12. H. 6. and afterwards created Bar. of Wenlock and Knight of the Garter, fought Valiantly and lost his Life in the Bat∣tle of Teuxbury. He dyed without Issue, and his E∣state came to E. 4. From his Cousin and Heir-gene∣ral the Lauleys in Shropshire are descended. Sir Jo. St. John, Knight, Father, Son and Grandson were of the same Name and Dignity. The Father, Sheriff in the time of H. 7. was Son to Sir Oliver St. John by Marg. Daughter and Sole Heir to Sir Jo. Beau∣champ. She was afterwards Married to Jo. D. of So∣merset, to whom she bare Margaret Mother to King Hen. 7. Will. Gascoine was a younger Brother of Ganthorp-house in Yorkshire, and was setled at Cardington in this County, by marrying the Inheretrix thereof. He was afterwards twice Sheriff, under H. 8. Knigh∣ted and Comptroller of the House of Cardinal Wool∣sey. A rough-Man, preferring rather to profit than please his Master. The Prelates Wisdom knowing Thrift to be the Fuell of Magnificence often advised with this his Servant. His Name and Estate are Ex∣tinct in this County. Jo. Mordant, Ar. of Ancient Extracti∣on, married one of the Daughters and Heirs of Hen. Vere of Addington in Northamptonshire. By Aged Persons he was remem∣bred by the Name of John of the Woods (I was born under the shadow and felt the warmth of them) So great a Master was he of Timber in that County, be∣sides large Possessions in Essex and elsewhere. King Hen. 8. owning him deservedly for a Wise Man crea∣ted him Bar. Mordant of Turvey.
Will. Windsor, Knight, descended from Walt. Fitz Otho, Castle keeper of Windsor in the time of Will. the Conquerour, and was by King H. 8. created Bar. Windsor of Bradenham in Buckinghamshire. Ancestor to the present Lord Windsor, descended from him by an Heir general, so that Hickman is his Sur∣name. Fr. Russel, Knight, Son to Jo. Lord Russel afterwards Earl of Bedford. Succeeding his Father in his Honour, so great was his Hospitality, that Queen Eliz. was wont to say of him, That he made all the Beggars. He founded a small School at Wobourn, and dying in great Age and Honour, was buried at Cheneys, 1585. Oliver St. John, Ar. By Queen Eliz. made Lord St. John of Bletso in this County, and left two Sons who succeeded him to this Honour. First John whose only Daughter Anne was married to Will. Lord Esfing∣ham, & was Mother to Eliz. now Count. Dowager of Pe∣terborough, his Second Son Oliver, blessed with a Nume∣rous Issue and Ancestor to the present Earl of Bulling∣brook. Will. Dormer, Knight, was Son to Rob. by Jane Newdigate his Wife. He had by Mary Sidney his Wife, a Daugh∣ter married to the Count of Feria, when he came over hither with King Phil. This Count, under pretence to visit his Sick Lady remaining here, did very ear∣nestly move a Match betwixt King Philip his Master and Queen Eliz. which took no effect. He then also mediated for Jane Dormer his Grand-mother and other Fugitives, that they might live beyond the Seas, and receive their Revenues out of England, which the Queen refusing, the Count moved Pope Pius IV to Excommunicate her tho his Wife opposed it,
Buckinghamshire. BƲckinghamshire is 44 Miles in length, from North to South, in breadth 15 Miles. Fruitful, espe∣cially in the Vale of Alesbury, the County is named from the chief Town, both from Buccen a Saxon word signifying Beeches, here abounding. The best and biggest Sheep are in the Vale aforesaid, and at Wi∣combe there is kept abundance of Tame Pheasants. As for Manufactures, this County liveth more by its Lands then Hands. Proverbs. I. Buckinghamshire Bread and Beef. The first Fine, the latter Fat. II. Here if you beat a Bush, 'tis odds youl'd start a Thief. In former times Trees and Bu∣shes abounding yielded the Rogues Shelter. Saints. St. Edburg Daughter to Redwald, King of the E. Angles, embraced a Monastical life at Alesbury, where her Body being buried was afterwards removed to Edburgton (now Edburton) in Suff. her Native County.
St. Rumald, Rumbald or Grumbald. The Name's enough, in allusion to these Variations of his Name, let me tell ye, 'tis said, that assoon as Born he cryed out three times I am a Christi∣an. Martyrs. Jo. Scrivener, Martyred at Amersham, An. Dom. 1521. His own Children were forced to set the first Fire upon him. For which was pretended the Law Deut. 13.6. Thine Hand shall be first upon him. Prelates. Rich. Wendover, Rector of Bromley in Kent, where the Bishop of Rochester hath a Palace, which See being Vacant, he was chosen Bishop thereof; but Edmund Arch-bishop of Cant. refused to give him Consecration, because he was Unlearned. Wendover appealed to the Pope, and procured Consecration by his Authority, and supplyed by Publick good∣ness what he wanted in Literature, wherefore, af∣ter his Death, he was by express Mandat of H. 3. Buried in the Church of Westminster as another Je∣hoiadah. Jo. Buckingham bred at Oxford. A great Dispu∣tant and good Scholar, as his Works do declare, Preferred Bishop of Lincoln, but after removed by the Pope to Litchfield, a place of less credit. Buck∣ingham being for the best or none, resigned An. 1397. and dyed a private Monk at Cant. where he lies buri∣ed in Christ-Church. He indented with the Prior and Convent at Canterbury to build him a Chantry-Chappel near his Sepulcher, which I find not performed. Jo. Young born at Newton-longvile, and bred at
New-Coll. in Oxf. where, in the Register, there are 10 Youngs reckoned Fellows of that Foundation, of which one said, that seeing the Colledge was always New, well may many Fellows be Young therein. This John became Warden thereof, and afterwards was made Bishop of the fair City Callipolis in Greece, by vertue of which Titular Dig∣nity he had a Vote in General Councils. He was made Master of the Rolls An. 1. H. 8. and dyed or resign∣ed his Place eight Years after. He lies buried in New-Coll-Chappel. Jo. Holyman born in Codington, bred in New-Coll. Oxf. Afterwards Benedictine in Reading was by 1. Queen Mary made Bishop of Bristol upon the Depri∣vation of Paul Bush. He lived peaceably and dyed seasonably before the end of Queen Maries Reign. 1558. Since the Reformation. Jo. Harley born in the Parish of Newport-Paganel, bred Fellow, then School-Master in Magd. Coll. Oxf. in the days of H. 8. A hearty (because concealed) Protestant. For in the first week of the Reign of Edw. 6. he Publickly Preached Anti-papal Doctrine, whereupon the Vice-Chancellour hurried him up to Lond. for an Heretick, there to Answer for his con∣tempt. But the case was altered, and Harley preferred to be Tutor to the Sons of John E. of Warwick, and thence he was made Bishop of Hereford. He dyed about the 50th. year of his Age, before the then fu∣ture troubles, An. Dom. 1554. Of whom a Scho∣lar of his Flos Domui Harlaeus, Socius Ludique Magister, Celsus deinde Throno, celsior inde Polo.
Rob. Aldrich born at Burnham, and bred in Kings Coll. in Camb. and Proctor there, An. 1525. Eras∣mus stileth him Blandae eloquentiae juvenem. He was afterward School-Master, then Fellow and Provoster of Eaton, and at last Bishop of Carlile, An. 1537. by King H. 8. He was never a through paced▪ Papist, (much less a Persecuter of Protestants) tho a com∣plyer with some superstitions. He dyed at Horn-Ca∣stle in Lincolnshire An. 1555. Will. Alley born at Wickham, bred first at Eaton then in Kings Coll. where he was admitted An. Dom. 1528 Being first Batchelor of Arts he became Lectu∣rer in St. Pauls, whose Lectures are extant in Print. He was consecrated Bishop of Exeter July 14. 1560. and dying 1576 lyeth buried under a fair Marble in his own Cathedral. Rich. Cox. born at Whaddon, and bred for some years in Kings Coll. in Camb. when Card. Woolsey had erected Christ-Church in Oxf. he removed hither the most hopeful Plants of Cambridge, and this Rich. Cox. amongst the rest. He became afterwards School-master of Eaton, where he had Haddon for his Scho∣lar. Hence he was sent to be instructor to Prince Edw. At last, he was preferred Bishop of Ely 1559. continuing 21 years he dyed An. Dom. 1580. Th. Bickley born at Stow, bred first Chorister, then Scholar, then Fellow in Magd. Coll. Oxf. He brake the consecrated Host with his hands, and stamp'd it under his feet in the Colledge-Chappel. Afterwards he fled over into France, and there lived all the Reign of Queen Mary. Returning into England, he be∣came Chaplain to Arch-bishop Parker, who preferred him Warden of Merton-Coll. wherein he continued 20 years. When he was above 80 years of Age he was made Bishop of Colchester and lived 11 years in that See. He dyed 1596. He led a single life and
left an 100 Pounds to Merton-Coll. and other Mo∣nies to Pious uses. Jo. King born at Warnhall, Rob. King the last Ab∣bot of Osney and first Bishop of Oxford being his great Uncle, was Dean of Christ-Church, then Bishop of London being full fraught with all Episcopal Quali∣ties. He dyed An. Dom. 1618. being buried in the Quire of St. Pauls, with this Epitaph, RESƲR∣GAM. His Faith standing over him for an Hearse, as is expressed in an Elegy made upon him. Rich Montague born at Dorney, bred at Eaton, thence successively, he was chosen Fell. of Kings Coll. in Camb. of Eaton, Parson of Standford Rivers in Essex, Ca∣non of Windsor, Parson of Petworth, elected Bishop of Chichester, and at last of Norwich. He spent much on Reparations. He was exact in Latin and Greek, and in Vindication of Tithes wrestled with the great Antiquary of England. Of Books, he wrote a Trea∣tise called Appello Caesarem, which (without his intent) occasioned much trouble in this Land; and began an Ecclesiastical History, and set forth an Apparatus, which (if finished) might be put in the Ballance with Baronius his Church Annals; they would have swayed with them for Learning and weighed them down for Truth. Hen. King. D. D. Son to the forementioned Jo. King Bishop of Lond. and his Wife (of the ancient Family of the Conquests) born where his Father was, And as was the Father, so was the Son Pious and pros∣perous, till the Calamities of the time involved him. In order to the cure of the seeming Consumption of Episcopacy (An. 41.) Men of unblamable Life and Eminent Learning were Elected Bishops, amongst whom King Ch. advanced this our Doctor, Bishop of Chichester, yet was not the Mouth of Malice stopp'd, which having a Damnable Appetite was ready to swal∣low
them down at a Morsel. Since, God hath re∣warded his Patience, giving him to live to see the Restitution of his Order. In his Youth he delight∣ed in Musick and Poetry, when elder he applyed him∣self to Oratory and Philosophy, and in his reduced Age fixed on Divinity, and his Printed Sermons on the Lords Prayer, &c. will report him a Man that brought forth his Fruit in due Season. Writers on the Law. Sir Geo. Crook, Knight, Son to Sir Jo. and Eliz. Ʋmp∣ton his Wife, was born at Chilton An. 2. Eliz. bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner Temple, and the Kings Serjeant, Justice of the Com. Pleas 22. Jac. then Chief Justice of England. 4. Car. His Ability is sufficiently attested by his Reports. His judgment was against Ship-money. The Coun∣try-man said That Ship-money may be gotten by Hook but not by Crook. His Piety is evidenced by his Cha∣rity, building a Chappel at Beachley in Buck. and a Hospital in the same Parish with a liberal Revenue. When old, he sued out a Writ of Ease, and after∣ward dyed at Waterstock in Oxford-shire. 82. Aet. An. Dom. 1641. Edw. Bultstrode, Esquire; bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws, in the Inner Temple and Justice in North-wales hath written a Book of Reports of Judg∣ments given in the Kings Bench, in the Reigns of King Ja. and King Ch. and is lately deceased. Souldiers. Sir Will. Windsor, Knight, Ancestor to the right honourable Th. Windsor Hickman Lord Windsor and fixed at Bradenham. He was deputed by E. 3. (in
his 47 year) Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, when in Broyls; the Irish Tyrannizing, and the English dege∣nerating into their Manners. He contracted with the King for 11213 pounds, 6 shillings 8d. a year, to defray the whole charge of that Kingdom, and un∣dertook the Custody of the Land in a defensive War, and used discretion with his Lance, in abating the Irish Feaver. Yet the Scabs of their Boggs and Hair of their Woods, that gave the Natives Shelter af∣forded him no access. He resigned his Office 1. R. 2. Arth. Gray Bar. of Wilton, (whose Father had his Habitation at Waddon near Buck.) had but a small Estate left him by his Father Will. Lord Gray, who had spent the best part of his Patrimony, to redeem himself being Prisoner in France. Our Arth. intend∣ing to advance his Fortune by his Valour, followed the War under his Father and was present at the Siege of Lieth, 1560, where being shot in the Shoul∣der, he was inspirited with an Antipathy against the Scots. Being Lord Liuetenant of Ireland An. 1580. before he had received the Sword or any Emblems of Command, he unfortunately fought the Rebels at Glandilough to the great loss of English Blood. Yet recovering his Credit he finally suppressed the Re∣bellion of Desmond. Returning into England, the Queen relyed chiefly on his Counsel for ordering our Land-forces against the Spaniards in 88. (a year Cri∣tical for Church-differences, which this Lord would have been glad to have seen decided in favour of the Anti-prelatical party.) He was the only Man defend∣ed Secret. Davison censured in the Starr-Chamb. a∣bout the business of the Queen of Scots; in which de∣fence he shewed both great Courage and Eloquence. And was always ingenuous, accounting Candour an Essential of true Nobility. An. Dom. 1593.
Writers. Roger de Wendover, Benedictine of St. Albans, and the Kings Historian. It having been a Custom that a Monk of St. Albans should be called to that Service. The Chronicles being finished, were lockt up in the days of the King and his Son. This Rog. began his Chron. at the Conquest, continuing it till the Year 1235. and 19 H. 3. tho it is now Father'd upon Math. Pa∣ris who made some Addition to the same. Jo. Amersham, Monk in St. Alb. so intimate with Jo. Wheathamsted Abbot thereof, that they two were as One; justifying against Priscian, the saying, Duo Amici Vixit in eodem Conventu. Amersham caressed his Friend, whilst living, and Shielded Wheathamsted,Shield of Wheath. a Treatise. when dead against the Darts of his inveterate Enemies the Monks. He flourished An. Dom. 1450▪ Math Stokes, born in the Town, and bred in the School of Eaton, until he was admitted in∣to Kings Coll. in Camb. An. Dom. 1531. He after∣wards was Fellow there, and at last Esq. Bedle and Register of the Ʋniversity. He collected a Catalogue of the Chancellours, Vice-ch. and Proctors, with great Industry and Fidelity. A Zealous Papist, tho he li∣ved many years in the Reign of Queen Eliz. Since the Reformation. Walt. Haddon born of a Knightly Family in this County, bred at Eaton, afterwards Fell. of K. Coll. where he proceeded Doctor of Law, and was the Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen Vice-Chancellour of Camb. 1550. then President of Magd. Coll. in Oxf. which place he waved in the days of Queen Ma.
and sheltered himself in obscurity. Queen Eliz. made him one of her Masters of Requests, and employed him in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her Ma∣jesty being demanded whether she preferred him or Buchanan for Learning, returned, Buchananum omni∣bus antepono, Haddonum nemini postpono. Indeed he was a most Eloquent Man and a pure Ciceronian in his Stile, as appears by his Writings. He lies buried in Christ-Church Lond. Lawrence Humphred bred in Magd. Coll. in Oxf. a General Scholar, able Linguist, deep Divine, pious to God, humble in himself, Charitable to others. In the Reign of Queen Ma. he fled into Germ. where he was Fellow-Commoner with Mr. Jewel (whose Life he wrote) in all his Sufferings. Here he Translated Origen de Rectâ Fide and Philo de Nobilitate out of Greek. Returning into England, in the Reign of Queen Eliz. he was made President of Magd. Coll. in Oxf. and Dean of Winchester. Tho he scrupled some Ceremo∣nies, yet he was much molested in his Colledge with a Party of Fierce Non-Conformists. He dyed Anno Dom. 1589. Roger Goad born at Houton, admitted Scholar in Kings Coll. in Camb. 1555. Afterwards was School-master in Surrey, but being made rather to Govern Men then Boys, he was thence Elected into the Pro∣vost-ship of Kings Coll. wherein he remained 40 years. He was thrice Vice-Chancellour of Camb. a Grave, Sage and Learned Man. By his Testament he gave the Rectory of Milton to the Colledge, and dying on St. Marks day An. 1610. he lyeth buried in a Vestry on the North-side of the Chappel. Jo. Gregory born Nov. 10. 1607. at Amersham of Mean and Honest Parents, and bred in Christ-Church in Oxf. where he Studied 16 hours a day for many years together. A general Scholar and Exquisite
Linguist, his Modesty setting the greater Lustre o his Learning. His Notes on Doctor Redleys Book of Civil-Law gave the first Testimony of the Pregnan∣cy of his Parts. He was first Chapl. of Christ-Church, then Prebendary of Chichester and Sarum. He dyed 1646. and was buried at Christ-Church in Oxf. His Posthume Works are set out by Jo. Gurgam. dedicated to Edw. Bishop Esquire, who relieved Gregory in his greatest Distress. Sam. Collins Son to Baldwin (Preacher, Prodigi∣ously Bountiful to the Poor, whom Queen Eliz. cal∣led constantly Father Collins.) born and bred at Eaton. Hence successively chosen Fellow, Provost and Regi∣us Professor of K. Coll. in Camb. Of admirable Wit and Memory, and a most fluent Latinist. Of his Lectures (which he constantly read twice a Week for 40 years together) there were not two, which did not Critically differ. He used all his Friends to decline his Election to the Bishoprick of Bristol, as being in profit inferiour to the place he en∣joyed. In these troublesome times he lost his Church but kept his Choir, wherein he dyed about 1651. Will. Oughtred, branch'd from a right Ancient Fa∣mily in the North, born and bred in Eaton, becam Fell. of K. Coll. and at last Beneficed by Th. Earl Arundel at Albury in Surrey. Prince of Mathematici∣ans in our Age and Nation. This Aged Simeon had a strong Persuasion that he should behold Christs a∣nointed restored to his Throne, which he did to his incredible Joy, and then had his Dimittis out of this mortal life, June 10. 1660. Romish Exile Writers. Th. Dorman born at Amersham, Nephew to Th. Dorman, a Confessor in the Reign of H. 8. and Cordi∣al
Protestant, tho through weakness he did abjure the Realm. This Th. junior was bred at Barkhamsted-School (founded by Doctor Incent) in Hartfordshire under Mr. Reeve a Prot. School-master, but this Dorman turn'd tail,2. and be∣coming a great Romanist fled beyond the Seas, where he wrote Against Alex. Nowel the English Calvanist. He flourished An. 1560. Memorable Persons. Jo. Mathew, Mercer, Son to Th. Mathew, was born at Sherington, Lord Mayor of London An. Dom. 1490. the first Batchelor that ever was chosen into that Of∣fice, a singular Example for above 120 years, when Sir Jo. Leman (also Batchelor) enjoyed the same Dig∣nity, 1616. Dame Hester Temple, Daughter to Miles Sands Esq. was born at Latmos, and Married to Sir Th. Temple of Stow, Baronet. She had four Sons and nine Daugh∣ters, who Married and Multiplyed exceedingly, in∣somuch that she saw 700 Extracted from her Body. Which Off-spring if contracted into one place had been enough to have peopled a City of Competent Proportion. Noted Sheriffs. Jo. Croke Ar. afterwards Knighted, Son of Sir Jo. Croke, one of the six Clerks in Chanc. The Name was assumed by their Ancestors for that of Le Blount, which they concea∣led in the Civil Wars between York and Lanc. As for this Sir John Sher. of Buck. he was fortunate in an Issue, happy in the knowledge of our Municipal-Law. Of whom Sir Jo. Croke his eldest Son, Speaker of
the House of Commons in the Parl. 43. Eliz. re∣ceived this Elogium from her Majesty. That he had proceeded therein with such Wisdom and Discretion that none before him had deserved better. Rob. Dormer Ar. Jun. 10. 1615. made Baronet by King Ja. and 30 of the same Month, Baron Dormer of Wing in this County. His Grand-child Robert was An. 4. King Ch. I. created Viscount Ascot and Earl of Carnarvan, and lost his Life fighting for him who gave him his Honour, in the first Battle of Newbury. Being a little before his Death desired to make a Suit to the King, he replyed I will not dye with a Suit in my Mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven. By Anne Daughter to Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, he had Charles now Earl of Canar∣van. Edw. Bulstrod Ar. Whose Arms are Ancient, viz. S. a Buckhead, Ar. attired O. shot the Nose with an Ar∣row of the 3. headed and featherd of the 2. a Cross pa∣tee fitchee betwixt the attire O. Hen. Longvile Ar. Had to his 4th. Son Sir Mich. Longvile who Married Susan sole Daughter to H. Earl of Kent. Now when the Issue in a direct line of that Earldom failed in our memory, Mr. Selden proved that the Barony of Ruthyn parcel of the Earldom, ought to descend to the Son of the said Sir Michael, and thereupon he sat as Baron Ruthyn in the late long Parl. His sole Daughter and Heir was Married to Sir Henry Yelverton of Earton in the County of Northampton Ba∣ronet, a worthy Gent. of fair Estate. Benedict Winchcombe, whose Arms I re∣present in gratitude to the Memory of his Ancestor so well deserving of New∣bury, viz. Az. on a Chev. engrail'd between 3 Birds O. as many Cinqfoiles of the 1. on a chief of the 2. a fl. de luce between 2. Spears-heads of the 1.
Edward Coke, Knight, the English Tre∣bonianus, famous for his Comments on the Common-Law. The Court-party to prevent his Election as a Member of Parliament got him prickt Sheriff, whose Oath he scrupled to take, because (amongst other things) the Sheriff is bound thereby to prosecute the Lollards, wherein the best Christians may be included, but no excuse could serve, so that his Friends must behold him who had been Lord Chief Justice attend on the Judges of the As∣sises. Francis Cheney, Knight. A noble Ancient Name. There was a Family of the Cheneys flourishing in Kent, giving for their Arms Az. 6. Lyons Ramp. Arg. a Canton Ermin. Of this House was Hen. Cheney High-Sheriff of this County and Bedf. An. 7. Eliz. and not long after, created by her Baron of Tudding∣ton in Bedf. tho in his Youth wild and venturous, witness his playing at Dice with Hen. 2. King of France, from whom he won a Diamond of great worth at a cast, and being demanded what shift he would have made to repair himself, in case he had lost the cast; I have (said the young Cheney in an Hyperbolical Brave) Sheeps-tails enough in Kent, with their Wool, to buy a better Diamond then this. His reduced Age afforded the befitting fruits of Gravity and Wisdom. And this Lord deceased without Issue. As for Sir Fr. Cheney, Sher. he was Father to Charles Cheney, Esquire, who by his Exquisite Travelling hath Naturalized Forreign Perfection to himself, and is Ex∣emplarily happy in a Vertuous Lady, Jane, Daughter to the truly Noble Will. Marquess of New-Castle, and by her of hopeful Posterity.
Cambridgeshire. CAmbridgeshire hath Lincolnshire on the North, and Suffolk on the East, Essex and Hartfordshire on the South, Huntington and Bedfordshire on the West, in length 35, in breadth not full 20 Miles. Plenti∣ful in Provision, the South part of Bread and Beer, and the North of Cattle. The Grain here is so good that it outselleth others in 6 pence in the Bushel. The late draining of the North part of the County was not very grateful to the poor, knowing that it is Felony to take another Mans Bullock from his Pa∣sture, but a Trespass of an inferiour Nature to take a Pike out of his Fish-pond. An. 1659. the Coun∣try suffered a great loss by an Inundation, upon the dissolution of a great Snow, yet their Industry pre∣vented a Relapse into their former Condition. The Northern-part is called the Isle of Ely or Eely from the abundance and goodness of Eeles there, with which the Courts of the Kings of England were An∣ciently supplyed. Of other Natural Commodities, there are a great many Hares, and lately there was a Hare-park nigh New-Market preserved for the Kings Game. There is also plenty of Saffron which was at first planted in Essex. Willows abound in the
Isle of Ely, affording Fuel for their Fire; of which Tree it is a by-word in this County, that the profit of Willows will buy the Owner a Horse before that by other Trees he can pay for his Saddle. Manufactures here are Paper and Baskets. Of Buildings Cambridge is the chief credit of this County, as the University is of Cambridge, which may be said a Town in an Uni∣versity, as Oxford is an University in a Town, in Camb. the Colledges being more separated from the Town have the better Conveniency of Walks and Gardens. Ely-Minster in this Town a great Beau∣ty, has a Lanthorn which is a Master-piece of Archi∣tecture, wherein the labour of 20 years and 52094 Pounds 18 Shillings 10 Pence /2 2/4 was expended. When the Bells ring the Wood-work thereof open∣eth (the perfection of structure) and exactly chock∣eth into the Joynts again. Rare also is the Art in the Chappel of St. Maries, the Pattern of that in Kings Coll. in Camb. And in Bishop Wests Chappel the Master-Masons of King Ja. upon narrow inspe∣ction, found finer work therein than in King Hen. 7 his Chappel at Westminster. Wonders. The Devils-ditch an Artificial Wonder, conceited by the Country People to be made by the Devil, tho it be the Work of some of the Kings of the East-Angles, probably made to divide and defend their Dominions from the Kingdom of Mercia, or possibly to employ the People, and to divert them from insurrections. Proverbs. I Cambridge requires all to be equal. The same de∣gree
levelling all Scholars, so that the Seniority of years ought not to make any difference. II. Cam∣bridgeshire Camels. Probably the Fen-men stalking on Stilts may be so called from their apparent big Sta∣ture. III. A Boisten Horse and a Cambridge Master of Art, are a couple of Creatures that will give way to no body. It shews store of Spirit when a Man will not be put out of his way, for every Swelling emptiness that meets him therein. IV. A Henry-Sophister. So they are called who after 4 years standing, stay themselves from Commencing Bachelors of Art, to render themselves (in some Colledges) more capa∣ble of Preferment. For after the Suppression of Monasteries by King Hen. 8. Learning was at a loss, and the University stood at a gaze what would be∣come of her. Hereupon many Students stayed themselves some 2, 3, some 4 years, as who would see, how their Degrees (before they took them) should be rewarded and maintained. Martyrs. Will. Flower, born at Snow-hill, bred first a Monk Ely, became afterwards a Secular Priest and Prote∣stant, and after many Removals, fixed at last  Lambeth. He then contracted the Guilt of an abominable Act, by wounding a Popish Priest dangerous∣ly with a Wood-knife, so that his Blood spirted i∣to the Chalice. Of this having solemnly repente he was put to Death for the Testimony of the Truth His right hand, before he went to the Stake, was cut off, by order of the Judges for his Barbarous fact Yet tho his right hand suffered as a Malefactor, then wanted not those who maintained that Martyr be longs to the rest of his Body.
Prelates. Steph. de Fulborn was made Bishop of Waterford, and Lord Treasurer of Ireland; and after, Arch-bishop of Tuam, and (twice) Lord Chief Justice of that Kingdom. He dyed 1288. and was buried in Trini∣ty-Church in Dublin. Nich. of Ely, obtruded by the bold Barons as Chan∣cellour on H. 3. but by him displaced, yet appear∣ing a Man of Merit was by him advanced into the Office of Lord Treasurer, and made Bishop of Wor∣cester, then of Winchester. Here he sate 12 years, and that Cathedral may challenge his Interment, having his Heart inclosed in a Wall, tho his Body be buri∣ed at Baverly in Surry, 1280. Will. of Bottlesham (Contract Botsam) of the Town so called, the Nursery of refined, Wits afford∣ing a Triumvirate of Learned Men born there, viz. this Will. Jo. and Nich. Bottlesham. Will. was by the Pope made Bishop of Bethlehem in Syria, then 1385 of Landaff, thence removed to Rochester. A famous Preacher, Confessor to R. 2. and a learned Wri∣ter. Once a Fellow of Pembhall, he dyed 1399. Jo. bred in Peter-house in Camb. to which (and to the whole University) he was Benefactor, Chap∣lain to Th. Arundel Arch-bishop of Cant. by whose means he had been preferred to the See of Rochester, if Johns Death had not prevented the same 1401. Nicholas, a Carmelite bred in Camb. afterward re∣moved to Paris, where in Sorbon he commenced Dr. of Divinity. Returning to Camb. he became Prior of the Carmelties (since Queen Colledge) whereby he wrote many Books. Buried in his own Covent 1435. These three were Contemporaries. Th. of New-Market, (or Th. Merks) of this Coun∣ty,
bred in Camb. An Excellent Humanist and Di∣vine (having left some learned Books to Posterity) advanced to be Bishop of Carlile. Famous for his Loyalty to R. 2. was at last confined to a Titular Grecian Bishoprick by H. 4. He dyed about 1405. Th. Thirlby Doctor of Laws, born in the Town and bred in the University of Camb. Very able in his Faculty and more than once employed in Em∣bassies by H. 8. (who preferred him Bishop of Win∣chester, the Land of which See he wasted) with this success, that his Name and Alliance is Extinct. From Winchester he was removed to Norwich, from thence to Ely. His Vice was rather Prodigality than Cru∣elty, for he wept at Arch-bishop Cranmer's Degra∣dation. After the Death of Queen Ma. he was as Violent in his Opinions, but not so Violent in his Expressions; always devoted to Queen Ma. but ne∣ver invective against Queen Eliz. He lived in free Custody, dyed and is buried at Lambeth, 1570. Since the Reformation. Godfrey Goldsborough born in Camb. bred in Trinity-Coll. and afterwards Fellow thereof. At last was Consecrated Bishop of Gloucester 1598. One of the second set of Prot. Bishops, after those in the Mari∣an Days, and before those who come within our memory. He gave 100 Marks to Trinity-Coll. and dyed An. 1604. Rob. Townson, D. D. born in Camb. and bred a Fellow in Queens Coll. being admitted at 12 years of Age. Of so happy a memory that when D. D. he could say by Heart the second Book of the Aeneads, which he learnt at School, without missing a Verse. He was an excellent Preacher. He attended King Ja. his Chaplain into Scotland, and after his return,
was preferred Dean of Westminster, then Bishop of Salisbury. He was Hospital and Generous. He dy∣ed and was buried An. Dom. 1622. Th. (Son to Will.) Westfield, D. D. born An. Dom. 1573. in Ely, bred at Jes. Coll. in Camb. where he was Fellow. He was Assistant to Bishop Felton, whilst Minister of St. Mary-le-Bow in Cheapside, af∣ter Rector of Horsney and great St. Barth. Lond. where in his Preaching he went through the 4 Evan∣gelists. He was afterward made Arch-Deacon of St. Albans, and at last Bishop of Bristol. The Parl. had a good Opinion of him, as appears by this Order, 13. May 1643. From the Committee of Lords and Com. for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates. Ʋp∣on information in the behalf of the B. of Bristol, That his Tenants refuse to pay him his Rents, it is ordered by this Committee, that all profits of his Bishoprick be re∣stored, and a safe Conduct be granted him, to pass with his Family to Bristol, being himself of great Age and a Person of great Learning and Merit. Jo. Wylde. By his Will he desired to be buried in the Cathe∣dral-Church, near the Tomb of Paul Bush the first Bishop. And as for my Worldly Goods (the words of his Will) which (as the times now are) I know not well where they be, nor what they are, I give, &c. to my Wife Eliz. He dyed June. 28. 1644. and lyeth bu∣ried according to his own desire. An Anagram made on him by his Daughter was. Thomas Westfield. I dwell the most safe. Statesmen. Jo. Tiptoft, Son and Heir of Jo. Lord Tiptoft, and Joyce his Wife, Daughter and Coheir of Edw. Charlton Lord Powis, by his Wife Eleanor, Sister and Coheir of Edmund Holland Earl of Kent) was born at Ever∣ton
in this County. He was bred at Baliol-Coll. in Oxf. where he attained to great Learning, and by H. 6. was afterwards created first Viscount, then Earl of Worcester, and Lord High Constable of England, and by E. 4. Knight of the Garter. The Skies began to Lowre and Threaten Civil Wars and the House of York fell sick of a Relapse. Mean time this Earl could not be discourteous to Hen. 6. who had so much ad∣vanced him, nor disloyal to Edw. 4. in whom the Right of the Crown lay. For an Expedient he quit∣ted his own, and visited the Holy-Land. At Rome (in his passage,) by an Elegant Latin Speech he drew the Admiration of all the Auditors, and Tears from the Eyes of the Pope Pius II. He returned from Christs-Sepulchre, to his own in England, in an unhappy time, if sooner or later, he had found Ed∣ward on that Throne to which now H. 6 was re∣stored, and whose Restitution was only remarkable for the Death of this Worthy Lord. Treason was charged on him for secretly siding with King Edw. On this account he lost his life. The Ax then did at one blow cut off more Learning in England then was left in the Heads of all the Surviving Nobility. His Death hap'ned on St. Lukes day, 1470. Edw. Lord, Tiptoft his Son was restored (by Edw. 4.) Earl of Worcester, but dying without Issue, his Inheritance fell to his three Aunts, Sisters to the Learned Lord aforesaid, viz. 1. Philip married to Th. Lord Ross of Hamlake. 2. Joan, Wife of Sir Edm. Inglesthrop of Borough-green in this County. 3. Joyce married to Sir Edw. Sutton, Son and Heir of John Lord Dud∣ley, from whom came Edw. Sutton Lord Dudley and Knight of the Garter. Jo. Cheeke, Knight, Tutor to Ed. 6. and Secretary of State, born in Camb. Of him see our Church-Hi∣story.
Souldiers. When the rest of the East-Angles cowardly fled away in the Field from the Danish Ar∣my, the Men of the County of Camb. did manfully resist; whence it was,Bromp. Chron. p. 887. that whilst the English did rule, the praise of the People of Cambridgeshire did most eminently flou∣rish. At the coming of the Normans, they made so stout a Resistance, that the Conqueror who did fly into England, was glad to creep into Ely. Cambridgeshire∣men commonly passed for a Proverb, tho now like old Coyn, almost grown out of request. Indeed the Common-people have Robust bodies able to carry 8 Bushels of Barley on their Backs, whereas 4 are found a sufficient Load for Men of other Counties, and I doubt not but if there were occasion their Arms and Hands would appear to be as good as their Backs and Shoulders. Writers. Math. Paris, probably born in this,AMP. and bred-in the next County, where the Name is right Ancient, long before they were setled at Hildersham, which accrued to them by their Marriage with the Daughter and Heir of the Buslers. He was a Monk at St. Albans, skilled in Poetry, Oratory and Divinity, as also in Paint∣ing, Graving, &c. But his Genius chiefly disposed him to the Writing of Histories, wherein he wrote a large Chronicle from the Conquest unto the year of our Lord 1250. where he concludes with this Distich:
Siste tui metas studii, Maee, quietas, Nec ventura petas, quae postera proferat aetas. Matthew here cease thy Pen in peace, and study on no more, Nor do thou aim at things to come, which next Age hath in store. Yet resuming the Work he continued it to 1259. A catching disease with Authors (my self being con∣cerned) to obey the importunity of others, con∣trary to their own inclination. His History is im∣partially and judiciously (save whereby he indulgeth too much Monkish Miracles) and no Writer so plainly discovereth the Pride, Avarice and Rapine of the Court of Rome, so that he seldom kisseth the Popes toe without Biting it. The Papists insinuate a suspicion that such Reflections are forged, but all the Candour imaginable has been used in the Editi∣ons of that Author, first by Math. Parker and then (and especially) by Doctor Will. Wats. This Mat∣thew left off living and writing, An. 1259. Tho he had sharp Nailes, he had clean Hands, strict in his own and striking at the loose Conversation of others, and for his Eminent Austerity was not only employ∣ed by Pope Innocent 4. to visit the Monks in the Diocess of Norwich, but also was sent unto Nor∣way to reform the Discipline in Holni a fair Co∣vent. Helias Rubeus (in Engl. Rous or Red,) bred D. D. in Camb. A great Courtier and Gracious with the King, Wrote a Book contra Nobilitatem inanem. 'Tis thought he flourished about the year 1266. Jo. Eversden, was bred a Monk in Bury-Abby, whereof he was Cellerer or Caterer, but his moun∣ting
above this mean Employ, he buried himself in Ptry, Law and History, whereof he wrote a fair Volume from the beginning of the World. Being a Monk he was not fond of Fryars. And observeth, that when the Franciscans first entred Bury, An. 1336. there hap'ned a hideous Hericano, levelling Trees, Towers, &c. Yet went they out with a Calm, at the time of the Dissolution. This John flourish∣ed under King E. 3. and dyed about the year 1338. Rich. Wetherset commonly called of Cambridge, where he was Chancellour. A great Scholar and deep Divine, it being said, That he conformed his Di∣vinity to Scripture, and not to the Rules of Philosophy. He flourished under E. 3. An. 1350. Will. Caxton of Caxton, a diligent and learned Man, bred beyond the Seas, and lived 30 years in the Court of Marg. Dutchess of Burgundy, Sister to King E. 4. whence I conclude an Anti-Lancastrian. He continued Polychronicon unto the end of that King, with good judgment and fidelity. He Col∣lected and Printed all Chaucer's Works, and on ma∣ny Accounts deserved well of Posterity, and dyed about 1488. Since the Reformation. Rich. Huloet, born at Wishich and brought up in good learning. He dedicated to Th. Goowrich a Book called The English and Latine A. B. C. a Book which (probably) related to the Elemental Grounds of Religion. He flourished An. Dom. 1552. Jo Richardson, born of Honest Parents at Linton, bred first Fell. of Emanuel, then Master of St. Peters, and at last of Trinity-Coll. in Camb. where he was Regius Professor. No dull Man as some supposed. For at an Extraordinary Act of Divinity at Camb. before
King Ja. strongly alledged in opposition to Doctor Davenant then Answerer, vigorously pressed the pra∣ctice of St. Ambrose Excommunicating of Theodosius the Emperor, insomuch that the King, in some Pa∣ssion returned, profectò fuit hoc ab Ambrosio insolentis∣simè factum. To whom Doctor Richardson rejoyned, Responsum verè Regium & Alexandro dignum, hoc non est Argumenta dissolvere sed dissecare. And so sitting down he desisted from dispute. He was employed one of the Translators of the Bible, being a most excellent Linguist. He dyed An. 1621. Andr. Willet, D. D. born at Ely, bred Fellow of Christs-Coll. in Camb. succeeded his Father in the Parsonage of Barley in Hartfordshire, and became Prebendary of Ely, Bountiful above his Nobility, notwithstanding his numerous Issue. Admirable his Industry in his Synopsis, Comments, &c. His Death hast'ned by a fall (by which his Neck was broken) hap∣ned 1621. Sir Th. Ridley, Knight, Doctor of the Laws, born at Ely, bred at Eaton, was Fellow of Kings-Coll. in Camb. A general Scholar. He was afterwards Chan∣cellour of Winchester and Vicar General to the Arch∣bishop of Cant. His Book called the view of Eccle∣siastical Laws has embalm'd his Memory to Posterity. He dyed Jan. 22. 1629. Arth. Hildersham, born at Strechworth, descended by his Mothers-side from the Blood-Royal, being great-great-Grand-child to Geo. Duke Clarence, Bro∣ther to E. 4. Yet being bred in Christs-Coll. he entred into the Ministry. He dyed An. Dom. 163. Vid. Eccl. Hist. R. Parker born in Ely, (Son to Mr. Parker Arch-Deacon there, who refused the Bishoprick) was bred in and became Fellow of Caius-Coll. an excel∣lent Herauld, Historian and Antiquary, Author of
the Manuscript called Scletos Cantabrigiensis, which is fleshed with much Matter, and hath furnished me with the Nativities of several Bishops who were Masters of Colledges. Which Book I heartily wish Printed for the good of Posterity, I disclaim Pol. Virgils who burnt rare English Manuscripts of Histo∣ry, after he had served his own turn with them. Mich. Dalton, Esquire, bred in the Study of the Municipal-Law in Lincolns-Inn. His Gravity graced the Benches of Justice in this County, where his Judge∣ment deservedly passed for an Oracle in the Law, having enriched the World with two excellent Trea∣tises called the Office of Sheriffs, and the Justices of Peace. Here note that King Ja. first made such Ju∣stices in Scotland. He dyed before the Civil Wars in England. Th. Goad, D. D. Son to Rog. Goad (for above 40 years Provost in Kings-Coll.) bred a Fellow under his Father, then Chaplain to Arch-bishop Abbot; Rector of Hadley in Suff. Prebendary of Cant. A great and General Scholar, exact Critick, Historian, Poet, Schoolman and Divine. Of a commanding presence, an uncontroulable spirit, impatient of oppo∣sition; loving to steer the Discourse (being a good Pilot to that purpose) of all the Company he came in. He dyed about 1635. Andr. Marvail born at Mildred, and bred Master of Arts in Trinity Coll. in Camb. was afterwards Mi∣nister of Hull, Facetious in discourse, Grave in his Car∣riage, an excellent Preacher, using all due Study before-hand; he was wont to say, he would cross the Proverb which called Saturday the working-day and Monday the holy-day of Preachers. He was drown'd in Humber 1640. His Excellent Comment on St. Peter is desired.
Benefactors to the Publick. Hugo de Balsham, Founder of Peter-house in Camb. (the first built Colledge in England) and finished it 1284. and bestowed much Land upon it. He sat 28 years in the Bishoprick of Ely, and dyed the 6 of June, 1286. Sir Will. Horn, Salter, Son to Th. born at Snail-well, Knighted by King Hen. 7. 1487. was Lord Mayor of London. He gave bountifully to the Preach∣ers of St. Pauls-cross, and bestowed 500 Marks to the mending of the High-ways between Camb. and London. Sir Will. (Son to Jo.) Purcase, born at Gamlingay, bred Mercer in London, and Lord Mayor thereof 1497. caused Morefieds under the Walls to be made plain ground, to the great pleasure, since to the great profit of the City. Sir Th. (Son of Jo.) Knesworth, a Fishmonger in London (whereof he was Lord Mayor) 1505. ap∣pointed the Water-Conduit at Bishop-gate to be built. Note Cambridgeshire, in the compass of 18. years, affordeth 3 Lord Mayors and Benefactors which no other Shire ever produced. Since the Reformation. Jo. Creane, born at Wisbeech, bred an Apothecary in Camb. very diligent in his Youth. He lived and dyed in Doctor Butler's Family, to whom he left the main Body of his Estate. Having a large heart he annually very Nobly treated all the Oxford-men at the Commencement. At his Death he gave 3000 Pounds to Charitable uses, bestowing the house he lived in, after his Wifes death on the publick Pro∣fessor
of Physick. To Wisbeech he gave 100 pound to build a Town-hall, besides what he gave to Cam∣bridge, Lin, Ipswich. He left 100 pound to be lent Gratis to an honest man, the better to enable him to buy good Fish and Fowl to the University. He be∣queathed to Doctor Wren B. of Ely and Doctor Brownrigg B. of Exeter, 100 pounds a piece by his Will, and as much by the Codicil annexed thereun∣to. Besides his concealed Charities, his hands were always open to all the destressed Royalists. He dyed in May, 1650. Memorable Persons. Will. Collet born at Over, bred a Clerk in London, was made Keeper of the Records in the Tower, of unparalelled Dexterity in that Office; he abominated their Course, who by a Water would refresh a Re∣cord to make it useful for the present and useless ever after, nor would he practise with a Pen on any old Writing, under pretence of mending it. He may be called Caterer to Selden and other Antiquaries. He dyed 1644. Edward Norgate (Son to Rob. D. D. of Bennet-Coll. and bred by Nich. Felton B. of Ely, his Father in Law) was a Limner, the best of our Age, em∣ployed into Italy to purchase Pictures for E. of A∣rundel. Returning by Marseilles, and his money fail∣ing him, he used to walk a long time with a swift pace on the Exchange there every Morning and Evening. A civil Monsieur observing him told him, That if Will. would convert his Reciprocal into a Progressive Motion di∣rected to his own Country, he would provide him a light Habit and competent Money for a Footman. To which Proposal consenting he footed it through France, (being more than 500 English Miles) and returned
safely into England. Where he was generally employ∣ed to make the Initial Letters in the Patents of Peers, &c. He was an Excellent Herauld by the Title of and which was the Crown of all a very Honest Man. Exemplary his Patience in Sick∣ness, tho a Complication of Diseases seized on him. He dyed at the Herauld Office. 1649. Noted Sheriffs. Th. Eliot, Mil. born some say in Suff. had his Habitation in this County, be∣ing well skilled in Greek and Latine, he was the Author (among other excellent Books) of Defensori∣um Bonarum Mulierum, or the defence of good Wo∣men, an excellent Latine and English Dictionary, the Stock on which B. Cooper grafted his Dictionary. He dyed 1546. and was buried at Carlton in this County. Th. Cromwel, Ar. made Baron of Okeham, was Chancellour of the University. Edward North, Mil. skilled in the Law, and an able Manager of Publick Affairs, was employed in the Court of Augmentation. Made by Queen Ma. Baron of Ca∣tlidge in this County. A considerable Benefactor to Peter-house in Camb. where under his Picture there is this Distich: Nobilis hic vere fuerat si Nobilis ullus, Qui sibi principium Nobilitatis erat. He was Father to Roger Lord North, and Great-Grand-Father to Dudley Lord North now survi∣ving. Jo. Huddleston, Mil. To whom Queen Mary came privately (when Jane Grey
was proclaimed Queen) to Saltston, and rid thence behind his Servant (the better to disguise her self) to Framlingham-Castle. She afterwards made him her Privy-Councellor and among other Great Boones, bestowed the bigger part of Cambridge-Castle (then much ruined) upon him, with the Stones whereof he built a fair House in this County. I behold his Family as Branched from the Huddlestons in Cumb. Jo. Cuts Mil. A most Bountiful House-Keeper, to whose House Queen Eliz. (whilst there was Peace with Spain) consigned the Spanish Ambassador in the Sickness at London. This Spaniard being first Scandalized at the Knights short Surname, was afterwards very well satisfyed with his large Entertainment. Where note that the Spanish Gentlemen have generally long names tho short Commons. Hen, Cromwell Mil. Son to Rich. Cromwell Esquire Sher. 32 H. 8. to whom his Valour and Activity so endeared him as he bestowed on him so much Abbey-land in this County, as at this day is worth 20000 Pounds a year. He was not allied (tho acquainted) with Th. Lord Cromwell the Mau∣ler of Monasteries; Cromwell the pretended protected Grand-Child to this Sheriff having on a certain occasion owned, that, that Lord was not related to his Family in the least degree. Jervase Clifton Knight (By King Ja. created Ba∣ron of Leighton) had a fair Estate at Barrington in Som. whence he removed to Huntingtonshire on his match with the Sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Hen. Darcy of Leighton-bromswold. Kath. sole Daughter to Jervase was married to Esme Steward D. of Lennox, to whom she bare the truly Illustrious James D. of Richmond.
Sim. Steward Knight, lived, after he was knighted, a Fellow-Commoner in Trinity-hall. The sixth in lineal descent from John Steward who married Talmach a Maid of Honour to Queen Joan and Swore allegience to H. 4. Cheshire. CHeshire lyeth in form of an Axe, having Lanc. on the North, Darby and Staff. on the East, Shropshire on the South, Denbigh, Flintshire and the Irish Sea on the West, the longest part 44, and the broadest 25 Miles. The County was reputed a Palati∣nate before the Conquest, and it is much to Lanc. in that honour, being related to Che. as the copy to the original being Palatinated but by E. 3 Granting that the D. of Lanc. should have Regal Jurisdiction So fully and freely as the Earl of Chester. And whereas Records are written in the Comon Law. Contra Coronam & Dignitatem Regis, n this County they run thus, Con∣tra Dignitatem gladii Cestriae. It aboundeth with all Necessaries for Mars life. All the Rivers here either rise or through some Pool. And of Lakes of this Che∣shire abounds, and therefore has great plenty of Carps, Tenches, Trouts, Eels.
The Gentry are Remarable for their Numerous∣ness Antiquity (many of their Ancestors being fix∣ed here before the Conquest) their Loyalty and Hos∣pitality. One said pleasantly that it appears they are good House-keepers by the Wheaton-sheaves so frequently given in their Coats of Arms; The Ori∣ginal whereof was in Conformity to Hugh Kivelios the fifth Earl, who gave Az. 6. Garbs (or Sheaves) O. Natural Commodities are Salt, Cheese (whence, some say, is the Word Cheshire 9. Chees-shire.) Where∣of the best of England is made here, yet are not their Cows Housed in the Winter. Milstones, great and good in Mowcop-hill. For Buildings, Beestones-Castle situated on a steep Hill, carried away the credit, Erected by Raynulf the third Earl of Chester, a beau∣tiful structure; levelled to the ground since the late Wars, of which Leland Prophesies a Restauration. As for Wonders, it is said there is a Pool adjoyning to Brereton, wherein great Logs of Timber are seen to swim for certain days together before the Death of any Heir of that House, but I have heard this con∣tradicted by the Right Honourable Lord Brereton, now living, who told me that lately some Persons con∣cerned in the Event, upon observation of the Critical time, could not behold the prodigy, and that the time of the motion of those Logs is as uncertain, as the Original cause of loosness is. Proverbs. I. Cheshire chief of Men; which Challenge the Men of Cornwall or Kent are ready to Answer. But, ra∣ther than any difference shall arise Wise-men will allow of many Chiefs. Indeed the Cestrians have in all their Undertakings demeaned themselves Valiantly. King Rich. II, in dangerous times, sent for 2000 of
them, to attend him, and in time a suspicious Parl. the Number was doubled. Pity it was their Valour was once wasted against themselves in the Terrible Battle beteen H. 4. and H. Piercy, Sirnamed Hotspur. Of which Drayton, There Dutton Dut∣ton kills,Polyal. a Done doth kill a Done. One side fought for Mortimer, who should be King by Right, the other for H. 4. who was Actu∣ally so. The Loyalty of the first side is not so much impeached by the Voice of Fame, as it is disproved by Voice of the Law which Supposes Treason may be committed against one that is only a King de facto; which Limitation was more Applicable to R. 3. than it was to H. 4. II. Better Wed over the Mixon than over the Moor. Over the Mixon, that is at home, Mixon being the Compost, in the Yards of good Husbands. The mean∣ing is, the Gentry in Cheshire find it more profitable to Match within their County, than to bring a Bride out of other Shires, being more easily acquainted and put to less Charge at home. Cardinals. Will. Makilsfield, probably born in this County, tho reputed a Conventrian, because then Cheshire was in the Diocess of Coventry and Liech. See his Chara∣cter in Warwickshire. Prelates. Will. Booth first bred in Greys-Inn in London in the Study of Com. Law, till, upon proffer of a Chan∣cellours place in St. Pauls, he took orders. After∣wards consecrated Bishop of Liechfield, and six years after Translated to York, and after twelve years
dyed and was buried in St. Maries Chappel in South∣well 1464. Lawr. Booth half Brother to Will. was bred and be∣came Master of Pemb. Hall in Camb. and was Chan∣cellour of that University. He made the Composi∣tion between the University and the K. Coll. and was an Eminent Benefactor to his own, bestowing thereon all the Tenements (since Alienated) be∣twixt it and St. Botolphs Church, amongst which was St. Thomas Hostle. He Exonerated the Colledge of a Pension of five Pounds, which he redeemed, and conferred thereon the mannor and Patronage of Over∣ton Waterfield in Hunt. He was preferred Chancel∣lor to Marg. Queen to H. 6. and An. 13 E. 4. made Lord High Chancellor (it seems his Publick Spirit was neither for York nor Lanc. but England) having first been Bishop of Durham, afterwards Arch-bishop of York, and built in the first the Gate of Aukland-Colledge, and bought for the latter the Mannor Ba∣terfed nigh London. He kept the Master-ship of Pemb. Hall till the day of his Death that place be∣ing Ambitious of his Patronage. Jo. Booth Brother to Lawr. aforesaid, Batchelor of Laws, was consecrated Bishop of Exeter, An. 6. E. 4. 1466. He built the Bishops Chair, or Seat in his Cathedral, which hath not its equal in England, but the softest Cushion belonging to it was taken away, when Bishop Vescy Alienated the Lands thereof. When the Bishop had finished this Chair, he could not qui∣etly sit down therein, such were the troubles arising from the Wars between York and Lanc. Therefore retiring to his Private Habitation at Horsley in Hamp∣shire, he dyed 1478. and was buried in St. Clem. Danes in London. These three Brothers had an eldest Bro∣ther Sir Roger Booth Knight of Barton in Lanc. Father of Margaret Wife of Ralph Nevil third Earl of West∣merland.
Th. Savage, born at Maklefield. His Father (a Knight) bred a Doctor of Law in Camb. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Rochester and at last Arch-bishop of York. A greater Courtier than Clerk, dex∣trous in managing secular Affairs, a mighty Hunts∣man. He was the first who was privately installed by his Vicar. He maintained a Numerous Family, and built much at Scroby and Cawood. He dyed 1508. his Body being buried at York, his heart at Makle∣field, in a Chappel of his own Erection. Since the Reformation. Will. Chaderton D. D. of worthy Extraction, in this County, bred a Fellow and Mr. of Queens Coll. in Camb. and chosen first the Lady Margarets, then the Kings professor in Divinity, to whom Doctor Whit∣aker succeeded. Made Bishop of Chester An. 1579. then of Lincoln. 1594. He dyed 1608. His Virtuous Grand-Daughter married to Mr. Jocelin Esquire, writ The Mothers Legacy to her unborn Infant, and dyed in Travel. Will. James D. D. born in this County, and bred in Christs-Church in Oxf. was President of the Uni∣versity Colledge, and Dean and Bishop of Durham. He had been Chaplain to Rob. Dudley Earl of Leicester, and Ministred Comfort to him near the hour of Death. He was a Principal means of recovering Durham-house to his See, which House was granted by E. 6. to the Lady (afterwards Queen) Eliz. for Term of Life, and lay neglected till Bishop James regained it and repaired the Chappel to his great cost. He once entertained Queen Eliz. very much to her Satisfaction. Otherwise it was with a following Bishop of that See, being reproved by King Ja. for some neglect of his Officers, he Survived that re∣proof not a full Twelve-month.
Jo. Richardson, born in this County of a most Worshipful and Ancient Family, bred in the Uni∣versity of Dublin, where he was Graduated Doctor in Divinity, and afterwards was made Bishop of Ar∣dagh in Ireland, in the late Rebellion he came over into England. A Grave Man and good Divine, ve∣rifying the Rule, Bonus Texturius bonus Theologus, for he carried a Concordance in his Memory. The Larger Annotations, especially on Ezekiel an Elaborate Work Challenge him, in a great measure for the Au∣thor. Our Bishop, who had been relieved had his bounty to bestow on others, and by his Will bequeathed a considerable Legacy to the Colledge of Dublin. He dyed An. 1658. Aet. 74. Statesmen. Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, extracted from an An∣cient Family in this County, so Eminent a Lawyer, that Queen Eliz. made him her Solicitor, then Master of the Rolls, then Keeper of the Great Seal An. 38 of of her Reign. A man of great Wisdom and Gravity, quick Wit, solid Judgment, ready Ʋtterance, and great integrity. An. 1. Jac. he was made Lord Chancellor (the same in effect with Lord Keeper) and of Lord Elismer, he was created Viscount Brackley 1616. Great was the Con∣tention for many years together betwixt this Lord of Equity and Sir Edw. Coke the Oracle of Justice at West∣minster-Hall. His civil Death (by Resignation) hap'ned a few days before his Natural Death, after which his Body was buried in Duddleston in this County. He left a fair Estate to his Son, who was afterwards Created Earl of Bridgewater. When he observed King James to be profuse to the Scots he advised him to preserve his Crown-lands, seeing he or hs Successors might meet with Parliaments which
would not supply his occasions, but on such Condi∣tions as would not be very acceptable. It was an ordinary Speech with him Frost and Fraud end in Foul. He dyed 1616. Capital Judges. AMP.Sir Humph Starkey, probably born in this County, so skilled in the Law, that he was preferred Bar. of the Exchequer about  He. 7. Whereas that Age was justly complaining of the Extortions of the Kings Officers (as Empson and Dudley, &c.) nothing of that nature is laid to his charge. He dyed An. ult. H. 7. was buried in Leonard Shore-ditch. Where his Epitaph begins, O∣rate. Sir Hen. Bradshaw Knight, so noted a Lawyer that An. 6. E. 6. he was Ch. Bar. of the Exchequer de∣meaning himself therein to his great Commendati∣on. I have cause to conceive that this Judge was outed of his place 1. Ma. finding no more mention of him. Sir Randel Crew, so great a Lawyer that 22 Jac. was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. and therein served two Kings, (tho scarce two years in his Office) with great Integrity. He declared his Judgment against the project of the LOAN, and thereupon he was by Writ discharged from his place, after which he lived long at Westm. much praised for his Hospitality. The Gown being put off, he had a warm Suit remaining, I mean a fair Estate, parti∣cularly Crew-Hall in Cheshire. He it was that brought the Model of excellent Building into these Remoter parts. He had a Vertuous Lady, very Essential to the Integrity of a Married Judge, lest what Westmin∣ster-Hall doth conclude Westminster-Bed-chamber do
revoke. He had a Brother Sir Th. Crew a Learned Serjeant in the same Profession, whose Son Geo. Crew, instrumental in the Kings Restauration is designed for some Title of Honour. Sir Humph. Davenport, bred in the Temple, a Stu∣dyed Lawyer and upright Person, Qua∣lities which commended him to be chosen Baron of the Exchequer.Q. Souldiers. Sir Hugh Calvely, born at Calvely, of whom 'tis said that he could feed as much as two, and fight as much as ten men, his quick and strong Appetite could digest anything but an injury, so that killing a Man is reported the Cause of his quitting this Country and going for France, where he became such an ex∣cellent Souldier, that he converted the most difficult Atchievments into easie performances by his Martial Valour. He was one of 30 English in France, who, in a Duel, encountred as many Britains. He reveng∣ed the Blood of the English, who whilst his Hands were tied behind him, were slain before his Face. An. ult. E. 3. 'Twas he that, after an unfortunate Voy∣age of the English Nobility An. 1. R. 2. took Bark∣bulloign and 25 other French Ships, besides the Castle of Mark, lately lost and by him recovered; And in the next year, he spoiled Estaples, with the plunder of which he enriched the Calicians for many years after. He Married the Queen of Arragon, whose Arms are quartered on his Tomb. His Death may be Collected about 1388. After which time no men∣tion of him, and it was impossible for such a Spirit to be, and not to be Active. Sir Rob. Knowles, Knight, born of mean Parents in this County; yet did not the Weight of his low
Extraction depress the Wings of his Martial mind, who by his Valour wrought his own Advancement. He was another of the 30 English spoken of imme∣diately before. Afterwards he was a Commander in the French War, under King E. 3. where beha∣ving himself like a true Son of Mars, he drove his Enemies before him, like Sheep, overturning like another deluge, Cities, Towns, &c. so that many years after, the Sharp points and Gableends of over∣thrown houses were commonly called KNOWLES MITRES. His last Service was the suppressing of Wat Tiler and his Rebels. The Citizens of Lond. in expression of their Gratitude, Enfranchised him a Member thereof. His Charity was as great as his Valour, and he rendred himself no less loved by the English than feared by the French. He gave bounti∣fully to the Building of Rochester-Bridge, founding a Chappel and a Chantry at the East end thereof, with a Colledge at Pontfract in Yorkshire, where Con∣stance his Lady was born, endowing with it 180 pounds a year. He dyed at his Mannor of Scone-Thorp in Norf. in Peace and Honour, being about 90 years of Age, and is buried in White Friers in London. Jo. Smith, Captain born in this County, spent the most part of his life in Foreign parts. First in Hungary, under the Emperor, fighting against the Turks, three of which he himself killed in single Duels, and there∣fore was Authorized by Sigismund King of Hung. to bear three Turks heads as an Augmentation of his Arms. Here he gave intelligence to a besieged City, in the Night, by Significant Fire-Works formed in the Air, in Legible Characters. Thence he went into Ame∣rica about the end of the Reign of Queen Eliz. such his Perils and Preservations, they seem to most Men above belief. They are mentioned in a Treatise done by himself. He was very Instrumental in setling
the Plantation of Virginia, whereof he was Gover∣nour, as also Admiral of New-England. When old, he lived in London where being High-minded and Poor, he was exposed to the contempt of disingenu∣ous persons. Yet he efforted his Spirits with a Com∣memoration of the Days of Old. He was buried in Sepulcher-Church-Quire. A Line of his Rauting Epi∣taph follows. Here lies one Conquer'd that hath Conquered Kings. Physicians. If this County bred no Writers in that Faculty, the Wonder is the less, if it be true what I read, that if any here be Sick They make him a Posset and tye a Kerchief about his head, and if that will not mend him, then God be merciful to him. This may be true of the Common People, the Gentry having the help (no doubt) of the learned in that Profession. Writers. Th. Ecleston, bred a Franciscan in Oxf. wrote a Book of the Succession of his Order in England, &c. and another de Impugnatione Ordinis sui per Dominica∣nos, these two sort of Friers Whipping one ano∣ther with their Cords to the mutual wounding of their Reputations. He dyed An. 1340. Since the Reformation. Ralph Radcliffe who converted a Demolished House of the Carmelites into a Grammer-School, wrote a Treatise of the Burning of Sodome, another of the Afflictions of Job, and a third de Triplici Memoriâ, Of
the Threefold Memory, denoting probably such a dif∣ference, as there is between Wax, Water and Iron, in re∣ceiving an impression. He flourished under E. 6. 1552. and 'tis likely he dyed before the Reign of Queen Mary. Jo. Speed, born at Farington, first a Taylor did no more than cut his Coat according to his Cloath, when, being obedient to the Impulses of a Vigorous mind, and assisted by Sir Fulk Grevil, a great Favourer of Learning, he designed the Maps and Composed the History of England and made the usual Geneaologies, formerly prefixed to all English Bibles, having a pa∣tent granted to him by King Ja. in reward of his great Labours. Thus he Exchanged a Manual for a Manly Trade and made no greater hast than good Speed. He dyed in London An. 1629, and was buried in St. Giles without Criple-Gate. Jo. Dodd, born at Shotliedge, bred in Jesus-Coll. A witty, Learned and Godly Divine. Minister suc∣cessively of Hanwell in Oxf. Fenny Compton in Warw. Canons Ashby and Fausly in Northam. tho for a time silenced in each of them; yet even then he did in∣struct by his holy Demeanor and Pious Discourse. A good Chymist to extract Gold out of other Mens Lead, and how loose soever the Premisses of other Mens discourse, Piety was always his unforced con∣clusion thereupon. When others meditated mischief in the Civil-Wars, he confined himself to the Medita∣tions of Sanctity and Innocency. V. Clarks Lives. Benefactors. Sir Rich. Sutton, born at Presbury, of a Plentiful Estate and bountiful Hand. It hap'ned that Will. Smith Bishop of Lincoln began Brason-Nose-Coll. but dyed before the finishing of one Nostril thereof. Sut∣ton
being his Executor Compleated the Foundation, with his own Liberal Additions thereunto. He dy∣ed about the middle of the Reign of H. 8. Since the Reformation. Rob. Brassy, born at Bunbury (i. e. Boniface-bury) bred D. D. in Kings Coll. in Camb. whereof he was Provost. Being Learned and Stout he Publickly pro∣tested against the Visitors of the University in the Reign of Queen Ma. as to his own Colledge, thereby taking off the Edge of these Persecuting Commissi∣oners. When many Doctors of Camb. were resol∣ved to sell their Right in Strbridge-fair, for a Tri∣fle to the Towns-men, he dashed their designs, which Manly Opposition prevented the Vice-Chancellours holding the Stirrup to the Mayor. He dyed An. Dom. 1558. and lies buried on the South-side of the Chap∣ple. Geo. Palin, born at Wrenbury, was bred a Mer∣chant in London, free of the Company of Girdlers. We may call his Benefactions the Golden-gridle of Cha∣rity, for with our Saviour he went about doing good. To Wrenbury he gave 200 pounds to purchase Lands for the relief of the poor. For building an Alms∣house in and about London 900 pounds. To St. Johns Coll. in Camb. 300 l. To the Hospital of St. Th. in Southwark, 50 l. To the Preachers at Pauls-Cross, 200 l. Toward a Chime in Bow-Church. 100 l. To six Prisons in and about London 60 l. To Bra∣son nose-Coll. in Oxf. two Scholarships, to each year∣ly 4 l. To the Coll. of St. Jo. Bap. in Oxf. 2 Scho∣larships of the same value. To Christ-Church-Hos∣pital, 300 l. To the Church and Poor of Wrenbury, to buy them Gowns, 70 l. &c. He dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King Ja.
Jo. Brereton, Knight, a Branch of that well spred-tree in this County, one of the first Scholars of the Foundation of Sidney-Coll. then having studied the Law, went into Ireland and was at last made the Kings Serjeant therein. Having got a good Estate, he gave well nigh 3000 l. to Sidney-Coll. after 40 years absence. A pure Gift because 'twas loaded with no Detrimental Conditions in the acceptance. He dy∣ed about the year 1633. Jo. Barnston D. D. born of an Ancient Family, a Fellow of Brason-nose Coll. in Oxf. and Chapl. to Chanc. Egerton Being Judge of the Consistory, when a Church-Warden was Sued for a Chalice stoln out of (his House not the proper place of) Custody, Well (said the Doctor) I am sorry the Cup of Ʋnion should be the cause of difference among you, I doubt not but either the Thief will out of Remorse restore it, or some other as good will be sent unto you, and according by his secret Charity the Doctor provided another. He founded an Hebrew Lecture in Brasen-nose-Coll. and dyed An. 1642. Memorable Persons. Will. Smith, an Ancient Surname in this County, was made Pursuivant of Arms by the Name of Rau∣garagon. He wrote a Geographical and Historical Description of this County set forth by Mr. Crew. Will. Web. M. A. was Clerk of the Mayors Court in Chester, and under-Sheriff in this County 13. Jac. He compiled a Descripton of Cheshire and Chestern. Randel Crew Esquire, second Son to Sir Clisby who was Son to Judge Crew, drew an exact Map of Che∣shire with his Pen, which the Gravers skill could but little improve. He went beyond the Seas, where he was Assassinated by some French-men and hon∣ourably
buried with general Lamentation of the Eng∣lish at Paris, 1656. Noted Sheriffs. An. 56. Hugh de Hatton, whose An∣cestors had Lands at Hatton in this County, by the Grant of Will. the Conq. From him is Lineally descended the Learned and Religious Sir Christ. Hatton, Knight of the Bath, (who set forth Pious Meditations on the Psalms) created by King Ch. I. Bar. of Hatton in Kerby, in Northamp. The Original of the Conquerors Grant is in this Lords Possession, and was preserved in the Civil-Wars, tho his Library was then Plundred. 3. Sr. Hugh Cholmly (or Cholmondesly) bought his Knighthood in the Field at Leigh in Scotland. He was five times High-Sheriff of this County, (and sometimes of Flint-sh.) and for many years one of the two Dep. Lieutenants thereof. He was President of the Mar∣ches of Wales, under the Right honourable Sir Hen. Sidney Knight. He was esteemed (for 50 years) a Father of his Country and dying An. 157- was bu∣ried in the Church of Malpass, under a Tomb of Alabaster, leaving a Son Heir to his Vertues and Estate. Jo. Savage direct Anchestor to Sir Th. Savage Knight and Bar. created by King Ch. I. Baron Savage of Rock Savage in this County. This Lord. (a great Statesman) married Eliz. Eldest Daughter and Co∣heir of Th. Lord Darcy of Chich. Viscount Colchester, and E. of Rivers, Honours entailed on his Posterity, and now enjoyed by the Right Honourable Th. Savage E. of Rivers.
Battles. Rowton-heath 1645. Sep. 24. His Majesty being in∣formed that Col. Jones had seized the Suburbs and strong Church of St. Johns in Chester, Marched Northward for the relief thereof. Poins a Parlia∣ment-General pursued his Majesty. At Rowton-heath within three Miles of Chester, the Kings Army made a halt, whilst his Majesty with some Prime Persons marched into the City. Next day a fierce Fight hap∣ned on the Heath, betwixt the Kings and Poins's Forces, the latter going off with the greater loss. 'Twas conceived that had the Royalists pursued the Single Enemy, before they were recruited, they had finally worsted him, which Fatal Omission (oppertu∣nities omitting of no after-games) proved their over∣throw. For next day Col. Jones drew out his Men into the Field, so that the Royalists being charged on the Heath, in Front and Rear, and having no Foot, were defeated before a considerable party of Horse (designed for their Relief) were sent from Chester, who came too soon to engage themselves, as they came too late to Succour their Friends. Here fell the youngest of the three Noble Brethren, who lost their Lives in the King's Service, Bernard Steward Earl of Liechfield.
Chester. CHester is a fair City on the North-side of the River Dee, so Ancient, that the first Founder thereof is forgotten, much beholden to the Earls of Chester for Encrease and Ornaments. The Walls thereof were lately in good repair, especially be∣twixt the New-Tower and the Water-gate. For An. 1569. a Personal Fight hap'ning betwixt the two Sheriffs thereof, Rich. Massey, and Pet. Lycherband, they were fined to mend that part of the Wall. The East-gate was committed formerly to the Custody of the Earl of Oxford; Bride-gate to the Earl of Shrews∣bury; Water-gate to the Earl of Darby; and North-gate to the Mayor of the City; which is built in form of a Quadrant, having four Streets that meet in the middle thereof, affording a Pleasant Prospect. Here, under the Rows (or Galleries, a kind of Build∣ing peculiar to this City) the Passengers may walk dry, in wet Weather, without coming into the Streets. As for Buildings, St. Werburges Church is a fair Structure, (whereof the Tower begun 1508. is un∣finished) built long before the Conquest, and being ruined was repaired by Hugh Lupus first Earl. It was afterwards made by King Hen. 8. one of his five Royal Bishopricks, Oxf. Glouc. Brist. and Peter∣bur.
being the other 4. whose Ecclesiastical Juris∣diction were not confirmed by the Pope, nor Baro∣nies by the Parliament. These owed their being solely to the Kings Prerogative. And therefore when some Anti-Prelatists, in the late long Parl. 1641. endeavoured to overthrow their Baronies for want of Confirmation in Parl. upon better Considera∣tion they desisted from that design as unfesible. Proverbs. I. When the Daughter is stoln, shut Pepper-gate. The Mayor of Chester had his Daughter stoln through that Gate, whereupon he caused that shut, with all other Gates in the City. Martyrs. Geo. Marsh, condemned by Bishop Coats, burnt without this City, near to Spittle Boughton. See his Charact. in Lanc. Prelates. Geo. Dounham, D. D. Son to Jo. Dounham, Bishop of Chester, was born in this City, and bred in Christs-Coll. in Camb. made Fellow thereof 1585. and chosen Logick Professor of the University. Was as well skilled in Rhetorick as Logick, tho 'tis seldom seen that the Clunch-fist of this Art (good to knock a Man down at a blow) can so open it self as to Smooth and Stroak one with the Palm thereof. That the Doctor could do both, his Oration prefixed to his Treatise of Logick, does sufficiently Witness. He Preached the Sermon Apr. 17. 1608. at the Conse∣cration of Ja. Montague Bishop of Bath and Wells,
irrefragably proving therein Episcopacy jure divino. After which he was made Bishop of Derry of Ire∣land, to which London-Derry had been added a little before. He endeavoured by his Gentleness to Ci∣vilize the Wild Irish, and proved very successful therein. Sea-men. Dav. Middleton one of those who effectually con∣tributed his Assistance to the making of Through-lights in the World, I mean New-discoveries in the East and West Indies, v. his Printed Relation. His dan∣gers were great and many among Canibals and Por∣tugals, Crocodiles and Hollanders, yet at last he did settle the English Trade at Bantam, about 1610. Sir Hen. Middleton, Knight, younger brother (as I take it) to the former under-went great Pains and Perils, in advancing the English Trade. Remarkable his Voyage into the Red-Sea, which had like to have proved the Dead-Sea unto him. Here he was tolled to Land at Moha, by the Treacherous Aga, and had eight of his Men Barbarously Slain, himself and se∣ven more Chained up by the Necks. The pretence was, because that Port was the Door of the Holy-City, and it is Capital for any Christian to come so near thereunto. Then was he sent above 160 Miles to the Basha, at Zenan in Arab. Jan. 1611. in which City, tho but 15 deg. N. Lat. from the Equator, there was Ice, at that time, of a Fingers thickness, in one Night, as the said Sir Hen. did relate. At last the Basha giving him leave, he sailed East-ward and repaired himself by a gainful Composition with the Indians, for the losses he had sustained by the Turks. His Ship called the Trades encrease, well answered the Name thereof until it pleased God to visit his
Men with a strange disease, whereof 100 English deceased, the grief whereat was conceived the cause of this Worthy Knights Death, May 24. 1613. whose Name will ever survive, whilst Middletons-Bay (from him so called) appeareth in the Dutch Cards. Writers. Roger of Chester, a Benedictine Monk in St. Wer∣burges, wrote a British Chron. from the beginning of the World, which (after an addition of 25 years) he Entitled Polycratica Temporum; the Stile pure Latine. He dyed about 1339. and was buried in Chester. Randal (or Ranulph) Higden (commonly called Ran▪ of Chester) bred a Benedictine in St. Werb, not only vamp'd the History of Rog. aforesaid, but com∣posed One of his own, Commendable for his Method and Modesty therein. He continued 46 years a Monk and dyed 1363 and was buried in Chester. Hen. Bradshaw, a Benedictine in this City, and dili∣gent Historian, wrote a Chronicle, and the Life of St. Werburge in Verse. A pious Man for the Age he lived in. He flourished about 151. Since the Reformation. Edward Brierwood, bred in Brason-nose-Coll. in Oxf. Being Candidate of a Fellowship and loosing it, he af∣terwards applyed himself so seriously, to his Studies, that he became a most accomplished Scholar in Logick (Witness his Treatise thereof) Mathematicks, be∣ing afterwards Lecturer thereof in Gresham-Coll. and Languges of which he wrote his Enquiries. He maintained against Mr. Byfield, That we are not bound to a Jewish exactness, in the observati∣observation
of the Sabbath. He dyed about 1633. Jo. Downham, younger Son of Will. Bishop of Che∣ster, bred in Camb. B. D. became a profitable Preach∣er in London, and was the first who commendably discharged the Eminent Lecture behind the Exchange, plentifully endowed by Mr. Jones of Monmouth. He is Memorable to Posterity for his worthy work of the Christian Warfare. He dyed about 1644. Benefactors. Will. Aldersea, a Pious Man, was Mayor of the City, 1560. and compleated the Lame List of Mayors out of the Records. He dyed Oct. 12. An. 1577. and lies buried in the Chancel of St. Oswals. Sir Th. Offley, bred a Merch. Taylor in London whereof he became Lord Mayor An. 1556. in his Mayoralty began the Custom of the Night-Bell-man. He was the Zaccheus of London for his high Charity, bequeathing the half of his Estate (being 5000 pound) to the Poor, tho he had Children of his own; yea he appointed that 200 pound (left to his Son Hen.) should be taken out of the other half, and employed to Charitable uses. He dyed 1560 and was buried in the Church of St. Andr. Ʋndershaft. Mr. Hugh Offley Leather-Seller, Sheriff of London An. 1588. (buried in the same Church) gave 600 pound to the City to put forth young Men. Mr. Rob. brother to Hugh, gave 600 pound for 24 young Men in Che∣ster, whereof 12 were Apprentices. On the first of these I suppose these Rhythms were made. Offley three Dishes had of daily Roast, An Egg, an Apple, and the third a Toast. Feasting himself moderately, that he might feed others by his Bounty.
Jo. Terer, Gent. Erected a seemly Water-work, built Steple-wise at the Bridge-gate, which serves to convey the River-water through Pipes, to the Citi∣zens Houses in Chester. His Son endeavoured, and I believe effected the like, for the Conveniency of the middle part of that City. Cornwal. COrnwall hath its Name from the Form and In∣habitants thereof. Cornu signifying a Horn, and Wale, Strangers, for such were the Inhabitants of this County reputed by their Neighbours. It hath Devonshire on the West, divided from it by the Ri∣ver Tamer, encompassed with the Sea on all other sides, affording plenty of Harbours, where Forreign∣ers touch, in their passage to or from Spain, Ireland, the Levant, the E. or W. Indies. The Language hath some Affinity with the Welsh, and is Copious to express the Conceits of a good Wit, tho (as 'tis said) affording but two Natural Oaths or three at the most. The Natural Commodities are Diamonds, which well cut, and set off with a good Foyl may at the first sight deceive no unskilful Lapidary. Am∣bergreese, not engrossed here, but casually found by small parcels, of which the best, greatest and last quantity that ever this Age did behold, was found on the Coasts of this County An. 3. Cor. I. in the Mannor of Anthony, belonging to Sir Rich. Carew.
The Name is as much as Grey-Amber. A rare Cor∣dial for refreshing the Spirits and Sovereign for Strengthening the Head, besides the Fragrant Scent, especially when Compounded with other Ingredients. Apothecaries hold it at five Pounds an ounce. Gar∣lick, good Sauce to some, and good Physick to many. The best grows at Stratton in this County. Pilch∣ards are taken in great plenty in these parts, driven to the Shore by the Tunne and Hake. A small Fish, tho 'tis said there have been seen many Pilchards an Ell long; their Numbers are incredible, employing very many People to dress and dry them, and then (by the Name of Fumadoes) with Oyland Lemon, &c. they are Meet for the Mightiest Don in Spain. It is suspected they daily decay, their Shoals usually shif∣ting Coasts & Verging more Westward to Ireland. O∣ther Fish here be which turn to good account, save the Star Fish esteemed contagious. Blew-Slate, which is thin, clear, light and lasting, is commonly found un∣der the Walling-Slate, when the depth hath brought the Work-men to the Water. Great store of them are Transported into France and the Low-Countries. TINNE. Whereof the most and best in Christendom is produced in this County. Yea, it was the only Tinne in Europe, until a Fugitive Miner, running hence, discovered Tinne in Voieland, in the Confines of Bo∣hemia. Vast their expences in making their Addits or Accesses to the Mine with Dressing, Breaking, Stamping, Drying, Crazing, Washing, and Melting. As for Buildings, Mount-Eedgecombe was Built by Sir Rich. Edgecombe, Knight, who in the Reign of Queen Ma. (about 1555) gave Entertainment at one time forsome good space to the English, Spanish and Dutch Admirals, and many other Nobles, at Mount Edgecombe, a Square-structure, having a stately Hall, affording a
delicate sound as one entreth it, a Parlour and Dine∣ing-room, giving a large Prospect both of Sea and Land. The high Situation giveth Health, as the Neighbour-River Wealth; two Blockhouses great safety, and the Town of Pilmouth good company un∣to it. The ground about stored with Wood, Tim∣ber, Fruit, Deer and Conies, sufficient Pasture, Mea∣dow and Arable Land, Marl, Stone, Lime, &c. 'Tis said the D. of Medina Sidonia, Admiral of the Sp. Fleet, An. 88. beholding this House at a distance, was resolved to have it for his own Possession in the Partage of this Kingdom. For Waters, I know none Medicinal, tho Dr. Hall, Bishop of Norw. af∣firms St. Maderus Well to have Miraculously cured a Criple washing therein. As for Wonders, the first is big with a Fiction, viz. the Hurlers which are Stones, whom Traditi∣on reporteth to have been men judicially hard'ned for Hurling on the Lords-Day. We may believe them to have been set for Bounds, or a Monument, in memory of some Victory. The next Main Amber, that is, in Cornish, a Stone set up (as some think) by Ambrose that Valiant Britain. It was a Master-piece of the Mathematicks and Critical Proportions, being a great Stone of so exact position on the top of a Rock, that any weakness, by touching it, might move, and yet no force remove it. Yet I am in∣formed that some Souldiers of late have utterly de∣stroyed it. In Turkey, there was a Tomb erected near the High-way, on some Person of Quality, on the Chapiter of which was written in the Turkish Lan∣guage, the Brains are in the Head, which in process of time, a cunning Fellow unriddleing broke the Globe or Chapiter, and found it full of Gold. But the pretence for demolishing Main Amber was Re∣formation, and that ever this should be advanced
by Devastation and Deformity is indeed a Wonder. Proverbs. I. By Tre, Poland Pen, you shall know the Cornish∣men. These Constituting their Ancient Surnames, as Tre-lawney, Pol-wheel, Pen-tire, &c. II. To give one a Cornish-hugg. The Cornish are Masters of Wre∣stling, so that if the Olympian Games were in fashion, they would come away with the Victory. Their Hugg is a cunning Close with their Fellow Comba∣tant. Figuratively applyed to deceitful dealing. III. Hengsten-down well ywrought, is worth London-Town dear ybought: Denoting the vast Treasure of Tinn, that formerly was, or the Diamonds that now are found in this Down. IV. Tru-ru Triveth-eu Om∣dina giveth Try-ru, that is, Truru consisteth of three Streets, and it shall in time be said, Here Truru stood. V. He doth Sail into Cornwall without a Bark. Italian. The Periphrasis of a Cuckold, and 'tis a bare allusi∣on to the Name, and not any reflection on the Coun∣ty of Cornwall. VI. He is to be summoned before the Mayor of Halgaver. An imaginary Officer, before whom Slovens are Arraigned, Tryed, Condemned and Executed more to their Scorn then Hurt. VII. When Dudman and Ramehead meet. Two Forelands 20 Miles asunder, the Periphr. of an impossibility. Yet have these two Points met (tho not in Position) in Possession of Sir Pierce Edgecombe. Saints. St. Kiby, Son to Solom. D. of Cornwall, Travelled into France to see and converse with St. Hilary of Poictiers, and was by him made Bishop (as Leland affirms of the Isle of Anglesey) after which he co∣verted
the Northern parts of Wales, and confirmed the rest in Christianity. Of whom, in that Isle there is a threefold Memorial, 1. Point-Hilary, 2. Caer-Gu∣iby. 3. Holy-Head. Ʋrsula, Daughter to Dinoth D. of Cornw. is said to have carried over out of Britain 11000 Maids of prime Quality, besides 60000 of meaner Rank, to be married to so many in Little-Britain in France; but they were partly Drowned, and partly slain by the Huns of Colen (where there is a Church dedicated to their Memories) An. 383. St. Meliorus Son to D. Melianus, beheaded by Ri∣nald his Pagan Brother in Law, An. 411. at whose Tomb Miracles were reported to have been done. Prelates. Will. de Greenvil, born of a Worshipful Family, be∣came Can. of York, Dean of Chichester, Chancellor of England (under King E. 1.) and Arch-bishop of York; but not confirmed till he had paid 9500 Marks, Then was he confirmed by the very hands of Pope Clem. V. By this payment being reduced to Po∣verty, and relieved once by the Clergy of his Province, he craved another help of their Hand under the new Name of a Subsidy. He was a great favourer of the Templars. At the Council of Vienna, he took place next the Arch-bishop of Triers. He dyed at Cawood. 1315. and was buried in the Chappel of St. Nicholas, leaving the Reputation of an able States-man and no ill Scholar. Mich. Tregury, bred in Oxf. where he was so emi∣nent, that he was commended to H. 5. fit to be a Forreign Professor. And accordingly was made (the first) Professor in the Colledge of that Kings Erecti∣on in Cane in Normandy, 1418. Hence H. 6. prefer∣red him B. of Dublin in Ireland.
Jo. Arundel, of Ancient Parentage, of Lanhearn, bred in Oxf. was by H. 7. preferred Bishop of Coven∣try and Lich. An. 1496, thence Translated to his na∣tive Diocess of Exeter. He dyed at Lond. An. 1503 and lieth buried in St. Clem. Danes. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. There is a Tradition, that a Giant with a Black∣bill in his Hand standeth at Polston-bridge, ready to knock down all the Lawyers that should offer to plant themselves in Cornwall. The truth is, there have been but few here Eminent in that Faculty. Yet have we, Will. Noy born in this County, bred in Lincolns-Inn, a most sedulous Student, constantly conversant with Ancient Records, verifying his Anagram. W. Noy. I Moyl in Law. He was for many years the stoutest Champion for the Subjects Liberty, until King Ch. entertained him to be his Attorney. 'Twas an ingenuous Expression he used, when the Gold∣smiths of Lond. at the Pixe or Weighing Gold in the Star-Chamb. pretended the Scales exact to the two hundreth part of a Grain, I should be loath (said he) that all my Actions should be weighed in those Scales. Souldiers. King Arthur, Son to Ʋther Pendragon, was born at Tintagel in this County, and proved afterwards Monarch of the Britains. He may be termed the British Hercules.Q 1. For his Illegetimate Birth. 2. His painful life; one painful for his 12 Labours, the other for his 12. Victories against the Saxons. 3. His Violent death,
as Lamentable tho more Honourable, being Murdred by Mordred. As for his Round-Table there is very little of Probability in it. The Cornish men having al∣ways esteemed Men of Valour, ever made up that Martial Kings Van-guard; but afterwards in the time of Canutus, they were appointed to make up the Rear of our Armies. But it is to be pityed that these People, misguided by their Leaders, have so often abused their Valour in Rebellions, and particu∣larly in the Reign of H. 7. at Black-Heath, where they did the greatest Execution with their Arrows, re∣ported to be the length of a Taylors-yard. However they have since plentifully repaired their Credit, by their Exemplary Valour and Loyalty in the late Ci∣vil-Wars. Souldiers. Jo. Arundel of Trerice, Esquire, 14. H. 8. took Prisoner Duncan Camble a Scot (accounted their Ad∣miral by his Country-men, a Pirat by the English, and a Valiant man by all) in a Sea-fight. This Valiant Enterprize, represented with Advantage, by the D. of Norfolk, to the King, was by him highly praised and rewarded. Civilians. Jo. Tregonnel, born in this County, and bred in Oxf. where he proceeded Dr. of the Laws. He was em∣ployed to be Proctor for King H. 8. in the Cause of his Divorce from Queen Kath. Dowager, and be∣ing Dextrous and Diligent in that Service, he was re∣warded by Knight-hood and a Pension of 40 Pound a year. And afterwards resigning that, and paying down 1000 pounds, he got a Grant of the Demesne
and Site of Middleton a Mitred Abby in Dors. pos∣sessed at this day by his Posterity. He dyed about the year 1540, and is buried under a fair Monument in Middleton-Church. Physicians. Atwell, Parson of St. Tue, well seen in the Theorie, and happy in the Practice of Physick. He mostly for all Diseases Prescribed Milk, and often Milk and Apples. He bestowed his pains gratis on the Poor, and taking moderately from the Rich, left one half of what he received, in the Houses he vi∣sited. As for the profits of his Benefice, he poured it out with both hands, in Pious Uses. He lived about the year 1602. Writers. Hucarius the Levite lived at St. Germans in this County, a Pious and Learned Man, Eminent in his Function of Divine Service, and wrote 110 Homilies, besides other Books. He flourished 1040. Jo. Cornwall Studied at Rome, and was Familiar with Pope Alex. 3. He wrote against Pet. Lumbard that Master of Sentences, a Book called De homine Assumpto. He also wrote a Book of Philosophy and Heresies. He flourished under King Hen. 2. An. 1170. Sim. Thurway, first bred in the English Universities, then in Paris, admired for his Logick, firm Memo∣ry and Fluent Expression; yet most Profanely he advanced Aristotle above Moses and himself above both. He lost at one instant both Reason, and Speech, (a judgment adequate to his Crime) 1201. Mich. Blannpayn was bred in Oxf. and Paris. A
good Rhyming Poet as any of that Age. In de∣fence of Cornwall, against Hen. of Normandy, he has this Verse. Piscibus & Stanno nusquam tam fertilis Ora. But his Vein lying more in Satyr, he gives this Cha∣racter of his foresaid Antagonist. Est tibi Gamba Capri, crus Passeris & latus Apri, Os Leporis, catuli Nasus, dens & gena Muli; Frons Vetulae, tauri Caput, & color undique Mauri, His Argumentis quibus est Argutia Mentis, Quod non à Monstro differs, satis hìc tibi monstro. He flourished An. 1350. Godfrey of Cornwall, bred a Doctor in Paris and Oxf. and afterwards a Carmelite of no mean esteem. He wrote a Book against the Constituting of two Provincials of that Order in England. This Solemn Doctor flourished An. 1310. Jo. Trevisa, born at Caradock, bred in Oxf. was Vicar of Berkley in Glouc. and Chaplain to Thomas Lord Berkley, at whose instance he Translated the Bi∣ble into English, without leave of his Holiness or Au∣thority from a Publick Council; whose Translation is as much better than Wicklifs as worse than Tyndals. He dyed about the year 1400. Since the Reformation. Jo. Skish, Secretary to Card. Woolsey, wrote a Chronicle out of many several Authors. He flou∣rished An. 1530. Bartholomew Traheron, well descended and bred in Oxf. and beyond Seas. After which he became Libra∣ry-Keeper
to E. 6. and Dean of Chichester. In the 1. of Queen Mary he passed unto Germany, and there lived by his Pen, 1556. Rich. Carew, Esquire, Son to Th. Carew and Eliz. Edgecombe, was born at Anthony, of right Worship∣ful Parentage, and honoured his Extraction with his Learning. He was bred a Gentleman-Commoner of Oxf. where being but 14 years old and yet three years standing, he disputed Extempore before the Earls of Leicester and Warw. with the matchless Sir Ph. Sidney. He is celebrated by Cambden for his ju∣dicious Description of Cornwall, set forth 1602. He dyed about the middle of the Reign of King James. He or his Son is said to have introduced the use of Gambadoes in the West, which serve both for Boots and Stirrups. Ch. Herle, descended of a Worshipful Family, and bred in Exeter-Coll. was at last Richly Beneficed in Lanc. A good Scholar and esteemed by his Party a deep Divine, and (after the Death of D. Twis) President of the Assembly. He dyed about 1655. Memorable Persons. Jo. Bray, Tenant to Mr. Rich. Carew, carried up∣on his Back, An. 1608. at one time, by the space well near of a Butt-length, six Bushels of Wheaten-meal, and upon them all the Miller, a Lubber of 24 years of Age. Jo. Roman, the Cornish Milo, so used to Burdens in his Child-hood, that when a Man, he would bear the whole Carcase of an Ox, and yet never tugged thereat. Veal,Q. an old Man of Bodmin was in the Mechanical Arts what Georgias of Leontium vaunted of the Liberal Sciences, ignorant in none.
Edw. Bone of Ladock, Servant to Mr. Courtney, tho Deaf and Dumb from his Cradle, could learn and express to his Master any News that was stir∣ring in the Country. Remarkable his attention at Sermon, looking the Minister stedfastly in the Face whilst it lasted, to which his Zeal, his honest life was answerable. Noted Sheriffs. Roger de Prideaux, an Ancient Name and Eminently flourishing in this Age. Jo. Arundel, Knight, was forewarn∣ed Car. Surw. of Cornw. That he should be slain on the Sands. This made him shun his House at Ef∣ford, as too near the Sea, and remove himself to Trerice; But fata viam invenient, for being this year Sheriff, and the Earl of Oxf. Surprising Mount Michael (for the House of Lanc.) he was concerned by his Office to endeavour the reducing thereof, and lost his Life in a skirmish on the Sands thereabouts. Thom. Grnvil, whose Coat of Arms differs some∣what from that of the Greenvils. The Merits of this Ancient Family are so many and great that ingrossed they would make one County proud, which divided would make two happy. I will therefore part what I have to say thereof, betwixt Cornwall and Devon∣shire. Note Rich. D. of Cornwall was High-Sheriff of this County, for term of his Life, a strange Precedent, seeing for the last two years he was King of England and Sher. of Cornwall. We account therefore the following Persons unto H. 7. to be his Deputies. Ja. Tirrel, Knight, born in Ess. Active in the Mur∣der
of the Sons of E. 4. keeping the Keys of the Tower, and standing himself at the Foot of the Stairs, whilst Mr. Forrest and J. Dighton stifled them in their Beds. King Rich. accounting Cornwall the Back∣door of Rebellion, made this Knight the Porter there∣of. He was executed for Treason in the beg. of H. 7. 12. Jo. Basset, in whose time was the Commotion at Bodmin, headed by Fla∣mock a Lawyer and Mich. Joseph a Black∣smith, and it was not the Work of Posse Comitatûs, but of Posse Regni to encounter them. Yet march∣ing to Kent, they were at last suppressed at Black∣heath. 4. Rich. Chamond, Esquire, a Justice of Peace almost 60 years, saw above 50 several Judges of the Western circuit, was Uncle and Great-Uncle to at least 300, and saw his Youngest-Child above 40 years of Age. 19. Will. Mohun, descended from the Ancient Lords of Dunster and Earls of Som. was Grand-father to Jo. Lord Mohun of Oakehampton, (descended by a Coheir from the Courtneys Earls of Dev.) and Great-Grand-Father to the Right Honourable Warwick Lord Mu∣hun. 2. Fr. Godolphin, practised a saving way of making Tinn of what was rejected for refuse before. He furnished Mr. Carew with his Survey of Corn. His Abilities were intailed on Sid∣ney Godolphin, Slain in at— Dev. valiantly Fighting for his Master. 10. Will. Wrey direct Ancestor to Sir Chichester Wrey, who tho scarce a Youth in Age, was more than a Man in Valour, in his Loyal Service. He Married Ann Daughter of Bourchier Earl of Bath. 12. Richard Roberts was afterwardsQ.
created Baron, and was Father unto the Right Ho∣nourable the Lord Robertes Earl of Radnor and Baron of Turo, President of his Majesties most Honoura∣ble Privy Council, and lately Deputy of Ireland, a Person of great Learning, singular Ability and Integrity. The Battles. The Battle of Liskerd (or Bradock-down) where on the Kings side, Sir Ralph Hopton commanded in Chief, was fought to the great loss of the Parlia∣ment-Party, their whole Army being Routed. The Kings Forces had the Execution of them which they performed very sparingly. They took 1250. Pri∣soners, most of their Colours and all their Cannon, Am∣munition, and most of their Arms. Stratton-Fight succeeds Tuesd. 16 May 1643. The Kings Forces were in want of Ammunition, and were to hew out their Way up a Steep Hill, and were exposed to all disadvantages, their Horse and Dragoons about 500 and Foot about 2400. The Parl. side had plenty of all Provision, and were advanta∣giously Brocadoed, on the Top of the Hill. Their Horse indeed not many (having lately sent 1200 to surprise the Sheriffs and Commissioners at Bodmin.) but their Foot 5400. Yet notwithstanding the great inequality, the Kings Forces by several Avenues forcing their Passage, after a doubtful Fight (where∣in Sir Jo. Berkeley relieving Sir Bevil Greenfield's Party, took Maj. G. Chudleigh Prisoner) gained the Top of the Hill, which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook. The Assailants loosing but few Men and no conside∣rable Officer, killed of the Enemy about 300, ta∣king 1700 Prisoners, all their Cannon and Ammuni∣tion. Sir Ralph Hopton, for this good Service, was
afterwards, at Oxf. created Baron of Stratton, by Let∣ters Patent. But he dying Issuless in Flanders, the Ho∣nour has been conferred by King Ch. II. on Sir Jo. Berkeley, younger Son of Sir Maurice Berkeley of Bruiton in Som. He had been one of the four Tetrachs or joynt-Managers in Chief of Martial Matters in Cornwall, and was highly Instrumental in reducing of Exeter. Afterwards An. 1644. Essex with all his Forces, followed the King into this County, till he pen'd himself in a narrow place (or rather large Pound) so that being surrounded on all sides with the Sea and the Kings Souldiers, he (with some Private Com∣manders) Shipped himself for Plimouth, thence for Lond. whither also their Horse forced their passage under the Conduct of Sir Will. Belfore. The Foot left behind submitted to the King. Cumberland. CƲmberland hath Scotland on the North, Northum. and Westm. on the East, Lanc. on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West, in Form, not unlike a half-Moon, which from its Tips may be about 40 Miles, and not above 26 Miles in breadth. A hard but pleasant Soyl producing these Natural Commodities, Pearls, found by the River Irt, where Mussels, Oy∣sters, &c. gaping for the Dew are in a manner im∣pregnated
therewith; so that some think, that as Dew is a Liquid Pearl; so a Pearl is Dew Consolidated in these Fishes. Black-lead, digged up about Keswick, the only place, (as I am informed) where it is found in Europe. Copper, the Mines were renewed about the beginning of Queen Eliz. in whose time Lapis Calaminaris, the other ingredient of Brass was found in England. Hence it is that She left more Brass, than She found Iron-Ordnance in England. In this Coun∣ty the Copper Mines, after a long neglect, were re∣found by Th. Shurland and Dan. Hotchstabter of Aus∣purg in Germ. but they are since discontinued, and probably the burying of so much Steel in the Bowels of Men, during the late Civil-Wars, hath hindred the digging of Copper out of the Entrails of the Earth. As for the Buildings in this County, they are rather for Strength than State, by Reason of the Vicinity of the Scots. The Cathedral of Carlile may pass for the Emblem of the Militant Church, being Black but Comely; still bearing the Signs of its former Burning. And of Rose-Castle the B. Seat, the Prickles, in the Ruins thereof, only remain. The Houses of the Nobility and Gentry are built Castle-wise, and in the time of the Romans, this County being a Limitary, abounded▪ with Fortifications. Of strict Wonders this County affordeth none; yet the Moss-Troopers are worth the noting, as strange in their way of li∣ving. They were Borderers, who before the Reign of King Ja. lived by Hostile incursions upon their Neighbours. A Nest of Hornets, strike one, and stir all of them about your Ears. Yet if they promised a safe Conduct to a Traveller, they would perform it with the Fidelity of a Turkish Janizary. When it was in their Power, they would out of their com∣mon Stock purchase the Pardon of any of their Com∣plices who was Condemned. At their greatest
height, they had two great Enemies, the Laws of the Land, and the Lord Will. Howard of Naworth. They were at last suppressed by the Wisdom, Va∣lour and Diligence of the Right Honourable Ch. Lord Howard E. of Carlisle, who look'd upon them as Traytors and Out-Laws, which were supposed by the Ancient Law to bear Wolves-Heads, which any one might have cut off. And Me∣rito sine Lege pereunt,Bract. l. 3. Tract. 2. qui secundum Le∣gem vivere recusârunt. Proverbs. I. If Skiddaw hath a Cap, Scruffell wots full well of that. These being two Neighbouring Hills, if the for∣mer be Cap'd with Clouds, 'twill not be long  Rain falls on the other. Spoken of Sympathy in ∣fering by Reason of Vicinity. II. Tum tua res agit▪ &c. When thy Neighbours House doth Burn, Take heed the next be not thy Turn. Whereof Cumberland had sad Experience, in the Ci∣vil-Wars, paying dear for their Neighbourhood with Scotland. III. Ingleborrow, Pendle and Penigent are the highest Hills between Scot∣land and Trent. Yet is Plynillimon-hill in Wales the Monarch of all Mountains South of Scotland.
Saints. St. Herebert Priest and Confessor, lived a Hermite near Keswick, and by the Prayers of St. Cuthbert obtained a joynt Death with that Saint. An. Dom. 688. St. Alkike, a Hermite near Carlile, whose Soul St. Goderic said he saw ascending into Heaven in a spherical Form. Martyrs. In the Days of Queen Ma. the People here, be∣ing partly nuzelled in Ignorance, and partly favour∣ed by the B. of Carlile (who Crowned Queen Eli∣zabeth) I find only Eliz. (Married to Jo.) Foster who Travelled to, and Married in Lond. when being Examined and mo∣ved to Desert her Answers, I will not (said she) by Gods Grace. She was Burnt in Smithfield, Jan. 27. 1556. Prelates. Rog. Whelpdale, bred in Oxf. and Prov. of Queens Coll. there. Was a good Divine, Mathematician, and Logician, as appears by his three Respective Trea∣tises 1. De Deo invocando, 2. De Quanto & Conti∣nuo. 3. Summulae Logicales. By King Hen. 5. he was preferred B. of Carlile. 1414. and dyed at Lond. 1422. being buried in St. Pauls. Rog. Layburn, descended of a Noble Family, near Carlile, expiring when Eliz. sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Fr. Leyburn was Married to Sir Th. Dacre last Baron of Gilsland and Graystock, This Ro∣ger
was bred Fell. in Pemb. Hall, and D. D. and at last B. of Cartile, 1503. After which he accepted of the Master-Ship of Pemb. Hall, which is called Epis∣copale Collegium. He dyed An. 1509. Since the Reformation. Edmund Grindall. born at St. Bees, bred Schol. Fell. and Mr. of Pemb. Hall. in Camb. and Procter of the University. In the Reign of Queen Ma. he fled be∣yond the Seas, and when in Frankford, he endea∣voured to Compose the differences there. Return∣ing home he was successively B. of Lond. A. B. of York and Cant. by Queen Elizabeth; yet by the mis∣chievous Practises of his Enemies he lost that Queens Favour. 1. Because he would not let the Lord of Leicester have Lambeth-house. 2. because he would not permit Julio the Earls Italian Physician Marry a∣nother Man's Wife. It was objected against him that he was a fierce Defender of Factious Prophesying. Being Blind, and therefore willing to Resign his place to Dr. Whitgift (who refused it) the Queen was pleased to say, that, As She made him, so he should die an Arch-bishop. He left what he had to Pious Uses in both Universities, and the Foundation of a fair Free-School in St. Bees. Hen Robinson, D. D. born in Carlile, Fellow, then Prov. of Queens Coll. in Oxf. was at last B. of Car∣lile 1598. being esteemed by Queen Eliz. a Man of great Learning, Integrity and Sufficiency for that See, which (as she told himself when he did Fealty to her) She was resolved to furnish with a Worthy Man for his sake who first set the Crown on her Head. He dyed An. 16- Rich. Senhouse D. D. born of Worshipful Paren∣tage at Netherhall, a Valiant Man in his Youth, bred
a Fellow of St. Johns-Coll. in Camb. became an excel∣lent Preacher. He was Chaplain to King Ch. I. whilst Prince, and Preached his Sermon at his Co∣ronation. He was preferred Bishop of Carlile, and dyed An. 1626. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir Rich. Hutton, born at Perith of a Worshipful Family, and bred in Jes. Coll. in Camb. diverted from Divinity by the importunity (chiefly of Geo. E. of Cumb.) became Barrister in Greys-Inn, and 'twas ob∣served he seldom or never took Fee of a Clergy-man. Afterwards being Recorder of York, he was Knight∣ed and made Judge of the Com. Pleas, and continued, tho his opinion was against Ship-money, the King u∣sing to call him the Honest-Judge. He dyed about the beginning of the Civil-Wars, and was buried at Dun∣stans in the West, An. Dom. 1638. Sir Jo. Banks, born at Keswick, and bred in Greys-Inn, was Knighted by King Ch. I. and made his At∣torney and then Chief J. of the Com. Pleas, and dy∣ed in the heat of the Civil-War. He ordered by his Will that his Body should be buried under a Plain-Monument, with the Motto, Non nobis Domine, &c. He gave thirty Pounds a Year with other Emolu∣ments in Pious uses, and chiefly to set up a Manu∣facture of Course Cottons in Keswick. Civilians. Geo. Porter born at Weery-hall, of gentile Extra∣ction, was Fellow of Queens Coll. in Camb. Dr. and Prof. of Civil-Law therein for above thirty years, so that according to a Constitution of Theodosius. He might have been made one of the Principal Counts
of the Empire. He was called the Patron of Infirmi∣ties, because of his Charity in excusing Mens failings. He wanted not for Valour, for being assaulted by three Rogues, he drove them away with his Stern looks and long Sword. He dyed An. 16. Writers. Jo. Canon, (probably was born at Canonsby in this County, of whom Bale, He turned a Minotaure, I should say Minorite, &c. yet he was, famous in the University of Paris for his Learning. He flourished under King E. 2. 1320. Will. Egremont, fixed himself at Stamford, became an Augustinian Eremite, and proceeded D. D. Beyond the Seas he was made Episcopus Pissinensis, and with that (poor) Bishoprick held the Suffragans-Ship un∣der Hen. Beaufort B. of Lincoln. He left behind him many Learned Books. He flourished under King R. 2. An. 1390. Jo. Skelton, See his Character in Norf. Since the Reformation. Rich. Crakenthorpe, D. D. descended of an Anci∣ent Family, bred Fell. in Queens Coll. in Oxf. An. 1. Jac. went over Chaplain to the Lord Evers, sent Am∣bassadour to the King of Denmark. Here he attain∣ed to a great easiness in the Latine Tongue, and kept Correspondency with Persons of Eminent Learning. He was an excellent Logician (witness his Work in that kind) and became Chaplain in Ord. to King Ja. and Rector in Black-Notley in Ess. His Posthume Works, viz. Vigilius dormitans, in defence of Justini∣an the Emp. and the Answer to the Manifesto of the Arch-bishop of Spalato find an Universal and Grateful Reception.
Salkeld, a Branch of a Worshipful Family, bred beyond the Seas either Jesuit or secular Priest. Com∣ing over into England to angle for Proselites, his Line broke and he was cast in Prison. Whence, be∣ing brought to King Ja. by his Arguments (with a Benefice bestowed on him in Som.) he became a Pro∣testant. He was not a little proud, that that King was pleased to Stile him the Learned Salkeld. See his true Character in the Book he wrote of Angels. He dyed 1638. Gerard Langbain D. D. born at Kirk-Banton, bred first Fellow, then Provost of Queens Coll. in Oxf. A Skilful Antiquary and ingenious in his Writings. In his Works concerning the Dissent of the Gallican Churches from the Council of Trent, he makes it ap∣pear that the History of that Council is not so com∣pleat as is generally believed. He dyed young An. 1657. Benefactors. Rob. Eaglesfield, Pious and Learned in that Age, Chapl. and Confessor to Philippa Queen to King E. 3. founded Queens Coll. in Oxf. for a Provost and 12 Fellows, appointing that those of Cumberland and Westm. should be proper for Preferment in his Foun∣dation, Alledging that those Counties were Desert Pla∣ces, and the Minds of the Inhabitants uncultivated. But prevented by Death, he only left to this Colledge the Mannor of Renwick in this County with the im∣propriation of Burgh under Stanmore. He ordered that in the Hall they should speak either Latin or French. He bequeathed his Colledge to the Honora∣ry Patronage of the Queens of England. He dyed about the year 1370.
Memorable Persons. Maud, Daughter of Th. Lord Lucy, and Heir of Anth. Lord Lucy, and Bar. of Cokermouth, the Wi∣dow of Gilb. Humphrevile Earl of Angus was the se∣cond Wife of Hen. Piercy E. of Northum. Who, when she saw that she should die without Issue, gave to E. Hen. her Husband the Castle and Honour of Co∣kerworth, &c. upon Condition that his Issue should bear the Arms of the Lucies, (viz. G. 3. Lucies (or Pikes Hauriant Arg.) quartered with their own Arms of the Percies, and incorporated into one Coat in effect; and for it levyed a fine in the Court of R. 2. This promise the Piercies have bonâ fide performed. She dyed about 1382. Noted Sheriffs. An. 21. Rob. de Vaus. al. de Vaux or de Vallibus, a right Ancient Family, still extant in this County, Beu-Castle Church is thought to have been of their erection. This Rob. was Father to Jo. de Vallibus, on whose Loyalty and Valour K. Hen. 3. relied. The Lord Vaux of Har∣rowd of Northamton-sh. doth hence fetch his Extra∣ction. An. 8. Walt Epis. Carliel no great Clerk. Being made Lord Treasurer of England, he avowed his Accounts even, when ju∣stly charged with 100 pound debt to the Exchequer; upon which he resigned his Bishoprick and became a Fryar at Oxf. where he dyed 1248. An. 2. Andr. de Harcla, behaved himself right handsomely in the Service of King E. 2. especially at the Battle of Borough∣bridge,
where he killed Humph. Bohun Earl of Heref. and took Th. Plantagenet Earl of Lanc. &c. Prisoners. In reward whereof he was created Earl of Carlile, and had the Isle of Man bestowed upon him. But he turned Apostate from his Allegiance, and lest the Nobility should by secret Sympathy suffer in his dis∣graceful Death, the Earl was first parted from the Man, and his Honour severed from his Person, by a solemn Degradation, having his Knightly Spurs hew'd off, which done, he was hang'd, drawn and quar∣tered. 16. Rich. Duke of Glouc. had a La∣bell for the difference of his Arms, tho he was but third Son to the King, for in his own Ambition he was not only the Eldest but the only Child of his Father, as it appeareth by his project, not long after, to Bastardize both his Bre∣thern. And now did he begin to take this County in his way, to the Crown, by securing it in the time of his Shirivalty, in order to his higher Ad∣vancement. 21. Th. Wharton by H. 8. Created first Lord Wharton of Wharton in West∣merl. gave the Scots such a Blow at Solemn Moss that K. Ja. 5. soon after dyed for Sorrow thereof. The Scots then preferred rather to be taken Prisoners, than to fight under their distasted Ge∣nera, Ol. Saint-clere, a Man of Low-birth and High∣pride.
Derbyshire. DErbyshire hath Yorkshire on the North, Noting∣hamsh. on the East, Leic. on the South, and Staff. and Cheshire on the West. The River South Darwent falling into Trent, runneth through the mid∣dle thereof. It is in length 38 Miles, and 29 Miles in the broadest part thereof. The South and East thereof are very Fruitful, whilst the North part (called the Peak) is Poor above and Rich beneath the Ground. Yet is the fair Pasture near Haddon, (be∣longing to the Earl of Rutland) so Rich▪ that one proferred to surround it with Shillings to purchase it, which because to be set Side-ways (not Edgeways) was refused. Of Natural Commodities, there is in this County the best Lead in England. The Mi∣ners as a particular Common-wealth are Governed with Laws peculiar to themselves, often confirmed by Act of Parl. Of which Laws one is this, 16 E. 1. c. 2. That whosoever Stealeth Oar twice shall be fined, and the third time struck through hit Hand with a Knife unto the haft into the Stow, and shall there stand untill Death, or loose himself by cutting off his Hand. As for Buildings, there is Chatsworth, erected by the Mag∣nificent Lady Eliz. Cavendish Countess of Shrewsbury: A Stately Structure upon the Bank of Darwent;
The Garden on the backside, with an Artificial Rock compleateth the place with all Pleasure. Of Wonders, the Chief is Maim or Mam Tor, that is the Mother-Hill, from which incredible heaps of Sandy Earth fall, yet it is not visibly diminished; And Buxtom Well dedicated to St. Anne, sending forth both cold and warm Water, by which Queen Mary Queen of Scots received much refreshing,De Mir. pecci. of which Mr. Hobbs, Huc Mater fieri cupiens accedit inanis, Plenaque discedit puto nec veniente Marito. Where Wives may breed tho desperately Bar∣ren, Sans Husbands help, as Conies in a Warren. Saints. St. Alkmund, Son to Alred King of Northum. slain in Battle, occasioned by the Vice-Roy of Worcester, in pursuing of his Title to some Lands, was not∣withstanding reputed a Martyr. However it was believed Miracles were done at St. Alkmunds Church, where his Body was interred, whither the Nor∣thern People made Pilgrimages, till discomposed by the Reformation. Martyrs. Joan Wast, a blind Woman in Derby, and an In∣nocent tho no Fool, was burnt for the Testimony of the truth, by the Command of B. Bains. Cardinals. Rog. Curson, of Worshipful Extraction, bred in
Oxf. was afterwards Doctor in Paris, and lastly a Cardinal in Rome, by the Title of St. Steph. in Mount Celius, He Accompanied Pelagius when the City Damiata in Egypt was taken under Jo. Brenn King of Jerusalem. He wrote many Books, and came over into England as the Popes Legate, in the Reign of H. 3. Phil. de Repingdon (or Repton) became D. D. in Oxf. A great Assertor of the Doctrine of Jo. Wickliff. but he recanted An. 1483. and became a Persecuter, wherefore he was termed (by those he molested) Rampington. He was made Abbot of Leicester An. 1400. Chancellor of Oxf. 1405. Bishop of Lincoln 1408. and was created by Pope Greg. 12. Card. of St. Nerius, &c. tho he had solemnly sworn he would make no more Cardinals till the Schisme in Rome were ended. He resigned his Bishoprick An. 1420. Prelates. Will. Gray, Son to the Lord Gray of Codnor, was as Honourable. He first studied in Baliol-Coll. in Oxf. then at Ferrara in Italy, where he was an Auditor of Guarinus of Verona. He was made by King H. 6. Procurator in the Court of Rome, and was freely Elected to the Bishoprick of Ely. An. 9. E. 4. 1469. he was Lord Treasurer, the last Clergy-man that e∣ver was preferred to that Office, until Bishop Jux∣ton in our daies, enjoyed it. He dyed 1478 and lies buried in the Church of Ely. Since the Reformation. Geo. Cooke. D. D. Brother to Sir Jo. Cooke Secr. of State; was born at Trusley and bred in Pemb. Hall in
Camb. and then Minister of Bigrave in Hertf. Hence successively made Bishop of Bristol and Hereford, a Grave, Meek man and much beloved. He was in the same Condemnation with the rest of his Bre∣thren, for subscribing the Protest in Parl. in defence of their Priviledges; so that to prevent his want, he was relieved by his Rich Relations. He dyed a∣bout the year 1650. Statesmen. Sir Jo. Cook, younger Brother to Sir Francis, was born at Trusley of Ancient and Worshipful Parentage. He was bred Fell. of Trin. Coll. in Camb. and there became an Eminent Rhetorick Lecture. And having Travelled beyond the Seas, he returned Rich in foreign Language, Observations and Experience. Be∣ing related to Sir Fulk Grevil Lord Brook, he was made Secretary of the Navy, then Master of the Re∣quests, and at last Secr. of State. He was a good Protestant, and dyed 1644. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Jo. Stathom, born in the Reign of King H. 6. wrote an Abridgement of the Laws, much esteemed for its Antiquity, tho (as I heard) not much fol∣low'd, at this day; in which Book I found a passage, viz. that the Miller of Matlock took Toll twice, because he heard the Rector of the Parish Read— Tolle, Tolle, that is, Crucifie him, &c. A Felonius Fruit of Latine Service. Sir Anth. Fitz, Herbert, Son of Ralph H. Esquire, was born at Norbury. He was first the King Serj. at Law, and then 14. H. 8. One of the Justices of the Com. Pleas. He wrote that Treasure of the Com∣mon-Law,
de Naturâ Brevium and a choice Abridge∣ment of the Laws, &c, And 'tis Pity that there is not due and speedy care taken for the setting forth a new and more Correct Edition of the latter. He lies in∣terred in Norbury-Church. Sea-Men. Sir Hugh Willoughby, Extracted from a Right wor∣thy and Ancient Stock at Riseley in this County, was An. ult. E. 6. Employed for the North-East Passage, and made Captain Gen. of a Fleet for Discovery of unknown Countries. Their Commission bore date from the year of the World 555. because they might have occasion to present it to Pagan Princes, They departed from Debtford May 10. 1553. & steering N. N.E. by a Tempest Aug. 2, they lost the Bonaventure, the two other Ships, viz. the Bona Esperanza, Admiral, and the Good Confidence (which were all that were left) being Shattered. Sir Hugh, holding on his Course, descried a Land 160 Leagues from Synam (an Isle belonging to the King of Denmark) in lat. 72. deg. Which therefore was then called Willough∣by-land; But in Jan. 1554. He with most of his Company was Frozen to Death in the River or Haven called Arzina in Lapland. And the Bonaventure re∣turning safe performed afterwards Great Service in opening the Trade to Moscovy. And now for your Diversion. Note that in Lapland it is Death to Mar∣ry a Maid without her Parents or Friends Consent, wherefore, the Rights of all being saved. The Maid must run with her Sweet-heart (not for Tryal of Skill, but of her Will) and having the Advantage of a considerable part of the Race, has it meerly in her own choice, to signifie her dislike of his Person by out-running him, or her consent to Matrimony
by a Voluntary Hault (under pretence of tying her Garter) before she comes to the end of the Race. All Parties being hereby concluded, it is Penal for the Man to renew the motion of Marriage, after a Repulse in the manner aforesaid. Physicians. Th. Linacer, born in Derby, bred in Oxf. and be∣yond the Seas, was the first Restorer of Learning in our Nation; a Man of an honest Conversation. His Translation of Galen is not inferior to the Original, in Purity of Style. King Hen. 7. and 8. were both his Patrons; He founded two Publick Lectures in Oxf. and one in Camb. for Physick. 'Tis said that a little before his Death he turned Priest, and began to Study the Scripture, with which formerly he was unacquainted, insomuch that, reading the 5, 6 and 7 Chapters of St. Math. he vowed that either this was not the Gospel or we were not Christians. He dyed An. Dom. 1524. and lieth buried at St. Pauls under a stately Monument built by Dr. John Caius another Phoenix of the same Profession, springing from Li∣nacer's Ashes, and coming into general Credit after his Death. Writers. Th. Asburn, D. D. was one of the Synod which Condemned Wickliff for Heresie. Yet he asswaged the fury of the enraged People, when they threat∣ned to burn the Convent about the Augustinian Fry∣ers Ears, because Pateshul one of their Order, in a Sermon Preached by him, had some passages in Wick∣liff's Favour.
Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. Eliz. Hardwick, (whose third Husband was Geo. Earl of Shrewsbury) a Lady of undaunted Spirit founded a stately Alms-house for 12 poor People in Derby. The Queen of Scots having been committed to her Husband the aforesaid Earl, Queen Eliz. ask∣ing the Countess (at Court) how that Queen did, Madam (said she) she cannot do ill while she is with my Husband, and I begin to grow Jealous, they are so great together. Upon which the Queen gave Order that the Queen of Scots should be removed into the Custody of others; and 'tis probable the Earl thought himself well rid of her, whose Custody was both Chargeable and Dangerous to him. There is a Free-School in Derby built by that Cor∣poration, endowed with 60 pounds a year, in which I believe Mr. Fletcher, (thrice Bayliff of that Town) was very Instrumental. 'Tis a noted Priviledge of that Town, that none of the Townsmen pay Toll at Lond. tho in some cases the Londoners pay Toll at Derby. Stow relates that divers well disposed Citizens of Lond. desirous (as yet) not to be named,Surv. Lond. being born in or near to Ashburn in the Peak in the County of Derby, combining their loving Bene∣volence together, have Builded there a Free-School-house, with convenient Lodgings for a Master, and Liberal Maintenance allowed thereto. Noted Sheriffs. Jo. Vernon, Arm. related possibly to Sir Geo. Vernon, who in the beginning
of Queen Eliz. for his vast Revenues and Retinue, was called King of the Peak, and left two Daughters Coheirs, Eliz. married to Sir Jo. Manners, Ancestor to the present Earl of Rutland, and Marg. to Th. Stanley, a younger Son of the House of Darby. Yet the Alliance of this John (in this and the Neigh∣bouring Counties) will remember their Motto Ver non semper floret. Devonshire. DEvonshire hath the Narrow-Sea on the South, the Severn on the North, Cornwall on the West, Dorset and Som. on the East. The second County in England for greatness, and bears a Square of fifty Miles. And generally answers in Fruitfulness, to the Spur of Industry. The Natives are generally Dexterous in any Employment; and Queen Eliz. was wont to say of their Gentry. They were all born Courtiers with a becoming Confidence. The Natural Commodities are Silver, formerly found, in great plenty in the Parish of Comb-Martin in the Reign of E. 1. but the Mines lay long neglected; and were re-entred upon (in the Reign of Queen Eliz.) by an Artist who presented a Silver Cup made thereof to the Earl of Bath. The next is Tinn in great plenty. I wish there were an Artifice to Sever the Gold and Silver from the Tinn without wasting: Till this be done, I desire some Invention might prepare Sea-coals
for the melting thereof, for the saving of Wood, and of the Tinn it self. Herrings were formerly taken in great plenty at Limmouth. The Manufa∣ctures are Bone-lace, made at Honyton and weekly re∣turned to Lond. As for Buildings, there is Bediford-Bridge a stately Structure, far from the Road, con∣sisting of 24 Pears, is said to have been finished by Sir Theobald Greenvil the Goldneyes and Oketenets. As for Houses of the Gentry, Wenbury-house is almost Corrival with Greenwich it self for the pleasant Pro∣spect thereof. For Wonders, there is in the Parish of North-Taunton, a Pit, but in the Winter a Pool, maintained commonly by the fall of Rain-Water, which yet before the Death of a Prince or other Accident of great importance as an Insurrection, &c. has been observed to overflow its Banks, even in a dry Season. The next is the Hanging-stone, upon which a Thief resting, with a Sheep tyed about his Neck, was Strangled, the Sheep strugling and get∣ting over the Stone on the further side. The Gub∣bings, are a kind of Scythians within England, Exempt from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Civil Order, who have all things in common, and multi∣ply without Marriage, living by Stealth, and secu∣ring themselves by their swiftness. Proverbs. I. To Devonshire Ground, that is, to improve Ground by paring off the Top-Turf and burning it. II. A Plimouth Cloak, i. e. a Staff. For Gentlemen Landing there, if unprovided, have leisure to repair to the next Wood to cut a Staff, when they are unable to recruit themselves with Cloths. III. He may re∣move Mort-Stone, which is a Huge Rock in Mort∣bay, which the people merrily say none can remove,
save such who are Masters of their Wives. IV. First hang and draw, then hear the Cause by Lidford Law. There was a Court of Stanneries formerly kept at Lidford which I believe to be traduced by the Proverb. Saints. Wenefride Boniface, born at Kirton, was employ∣ed by Pope Greg. 2. to convert the Germans, of whom he Baptised 100000. He was killed at Borne in Friesland An. 755. Whose Nephew. Willibald descended of high Parentage, was also profitable in the German Conversion. He was made Bishop of Eystet in Germany, and dyed in Peace An. 781. Martyrs. Agnes Prest, lived at Northcot in Cornwall, and was indicted before W. Stanford Judge of the Assise An. 2. and 3. P. and M. Her own Husband and Chil∣dren being her greatest Persecuters, from whom she fled because they would force her to go to Mass. But being presented to the Bishop of Exeter, she was by him Condemned for denying the Sacrament of the Altar, after which she refused Money from well af∣fected People, saying; She was to go to that City where Money had no Mastery. She was burnt without the Walls of Exeter in Sohenhay, Nov. 1558. Aet. 54. Confessors. Jo. Molle, born in or near South-Molton, bred in France, where he became perfect in the Language, spent his Youth in Military Employments, and in
his reduced Age was made an Examiner in the Court of Th. Lord Burgley and President of the North. Af∣terward being Governour to the Lord Ross, he went to Rome with him, where that Lord was Courted and Mr. Molle imprisoned in the Inquisition, the Priests in vain hacking at the Root of his Constancy. He con∣tinued 30 years in Prison, and dyed 1638. Aet. 81. Cardinals. Will. Courtney, born (probably) at Okehampton, Son to Hugh Courtney Earl of Devonshire, was suc∣cessively Bishop of Heref. Winch. and Cant. and at last made Cardinal by the Pope. A great Opposer of John of Gaunt, Wickliffs Patron. Prelates. Rob. Chichester, descended from a Noble Family still flourishing at Rawleigh, was first Dean of Sa∣risbury, then Bishop of Exeter. He bestowed much Money in Building and Adorning his Cathedral. He dyed and was buried 1150 on the South side of the High Altar. Gilb. Foliot, born at Tamerton-Foliot, Abbot of Glouc. then Bishop of Heref and Lond. He was observed when a Common-Brother to inveigh against the Prior; when Prior, against the Abbot; when Abbot, against the Pride and Laziness of Bishops; but when he him∣self was Bishop all was well; However the less he then had in Satyrs, the more he had in Elegies af∣terwards bemoaning the badness of the Age he lived in. He is said to this Challenge of Satan, O Gil∣berte Foliot, dum revolvis tot & tot, Deus tuus est Ash∣tarot, to have returned this Answer, Mentiris Daemon, qui est Deus Sabaoth, est ille meus. He was a Loyal
Man and a great Enemy to Becket's pride. He dyed 1187. Whose Cousin was, Rob. Foliot, Arch-deacon of Oxf. was first Tutor to Becket. And afterwards promoted to the See of Hereford. He wrote amongst others, a Book of the Sacrament of the Old Law. There was also one Hugh Foliot, Arch-Deacon of Shrewsbury and Bishop of Here∣ford. Will. Brewer, born in this County or in Som. made Bishop of Exeter 1224. was sent to conduct Isabel Si∣ster to King Hen. 3. to be Married to Fred. the Emp. whom he afterwards attended to the Holy-Land. In his See, he founded a Dean. and 24 Prebendaries al∣lowing the latter four Pounds a year. He dyed An. 1244. Will. de Ralegh, Canon of St. Pauls, then succes∣sively Bishop of Norwich and Winch. tho King Hen. 3. opposed his Election to the last; but the Pope pre∣sented by Raleigh with 600 Marks, did the Work. This great Expence made him run in Debt. When the Priest brought the Eucharist to him, lying on his Death-Bed he would rise out of his Bed to meet him, saying, I have need to come to thee, and cometh thou to me?Matth. 3. He dyed An. 2249. Rich. Courtney, allied to the Earl of Devonshire. A Man of great Learning, and skilled in the knowledge of both Laws. Was at the instance of King H. 5. preferred Bishop of Norwich An. 1413. being highly favoured by the Prince and beloved of the People. He dyed of a Flux at the Siege of Harflew in Nor∣mandy in the second year of his Consecration, and was buried in Westminster. Ja. Cary, was at Rome made Bishop of Lichfield, and afterwards (at Florence) of Exeter, being then as good a See as Lichfield. He dyed at Florence 1419 ha∣ving enjoyed neither.
Jo. Stanbury, born in the Farm of Church-hill in the Parish of Bratton, bred a Carmelite in Oxf. was a Man of great Learning. King Hen. 6. made him the first Provost of Eaton, being much ruled by him in ordering that his new Foundation. Being kept from the Bishoprick of Norwich by Will. de la Pool D. of Suffolk, he was made Bishop of Bangor An. 1453. and afterwards Bishop Hereford. He very Loyally adhered to King H. 6. in all his Adversity, and was taken Prisoner in the Battle of Northampton, being the Kings Confessor, and Consequently tyed to Personal Attendance. He dyed An. 1474. and was buried at Ludlow. Pet. Courtney, Son to Sir Ph. Courtney, was born at Powderham. He was first Arch-Deacon, then Bishop of Exeter, where he finished the North-Tower, and gave Peter Bell thereunto. He was Translated to Winchester An. 1486. Since the Reformation. Jo. Jewel, born at Buden a Farm possessed above 200 years by his Ancestors. Was admitted into Mer∣ton-Coll. at 15 years of Age, and having touched at all Humane Arts, he Landed at Divinity. He was after his return into England from Germany prefer∣red Bishop of Salisbury. Of him may be said Nomen Omen, Jewel was his Name, and Precious his Vertues. V. Eccl. Hist. Jo. Prideaux, born at Hartford, and bred Scholar and Fell. of Exeter-Coll. in Oxf. Canon of Christ-Church, and above 30 years Professor in that Univer∣sity. An excellent Linguist, and of a becoming Fe∣stivity, of so admirable a Memory, that he retained what ever he Read. The Welsh have a Proverb, He that hath a good Memory giveth fw Alms, remembring
what and to whom he had given before, but this Doctor Crossed this Proverb with his constant Cha∣rity to all in want. His Learning was admired by Forreigners. He would forgive the greatest Injury upon the least shew of the Parties Sorrow. Episco∣pacy in England being grievously wounded by Ma∣levolent Persons, King Ch. I. conceived that the best Wine and Oyl that could be poured into those Wounds, was to select Persons of known Learning & unblameable lives, to supply the vacant Bishopricks, amongst whom Dr. Prideaux was made Bishop of Worcester. But alas, all in vain, such the Fury of the times, He dyed 1650. Of whom, amongst others these Ver∣ses were made, Desine mirari caecos▪ errasse tot Ignes, In Promptu causa est, Lux Prideauxus obit. He was Honourably interred at Bredon in Worc. Statesmen. Sir. Arth. Chichester, Knight, descended of an An∣cient Family dwelling at Rawley, spent his Youth first in the University, then in the French and Irish Wars, where by his Valour he was effectually assistant first to Plough that Barbarous Nation by Conquest, and then to Sow it with Seeds of Civility, when by King Ja. made Lord Deputy of Ireland; where in his first year he Established two new Circuits for Justices of Assize, viz. in Connaught and Munster. He redu∣ced the Mountains on the South of Dublin into the County, of Wicklow. So observant his Eye over the Actions of suspected Persons, that Tyrone was heard to complain that he could not drinks a full Carouse of Sack, but the State was within few Hours Advertised
thereof. Being made a Lord and called home, he was sent Ambassadour to the Emperor. When he was besieged in the City of Manichine (which he Seasona∣bly Victualled) by Count Tilley; he sent him word that it was against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassadour; Tilley returned, That he took no notice of that; the Lord Chichester replyed to the Messenger, Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he has sent me on fruitless Messages, your General should have known that I had been a Souldier as well as an Ambassa∣dour. He dyed An. 162- Capital Judges. Sir Will. Herle, Knight,Q. was made An. 1. of King E. 3. Chief-Justice of the Kings-Bench, in Hill. Term, and Chief-Justice of the Com. Pleas Jan. 29. before the end of the said Term. He dyed about 9 of E. 3. He was owner of Illfracombe in this County, the Mannor whereof was held by his Issue till the Reign of King Hen. 7. A Family of his Name, and I believe of his Linage hath a Worshipful Existence in Cornwall. Sir John Cary, Knight, born at Cockington, was made Chief Bar. of the Exchequer An. 10. R. 2. For his Loyalty to his Master, he lost his Office, Goods and Lands An. 1. H. 4. Yet afterwards, King H. 5. restored all his Estate to his Son Sir Rob. Cary, upon his vanquishing a certain vain Glori∣ous Champion of Arragon. This Judge dyed An. 1404. Sir Will. Hankford, born at Amerie, was made Chief-Justice of the Kings Bench An. 1. H. 5. which place he adorned with great Learning and Integrity. Af∣terwards being discontented, he charged the Keeper of his Deer-Park to shoot any Man he should find there,
and stood not being spoken unto. The next night, being dark, he presents himself, and refusing to stand, the Keeper accordlingly Shot him dead. This hap∣ned An. 1422. Sir Jo. Fortescue born of a right Ancient Family (whose Motto is, Forte Scutum salus Ducum) was Lord Chief Justice and Chancellor of England, whose Learned Commentaries on the Law make him Famous to all Posterity. Another Sir Jo. Fortescue was Privy Councellor, Overseer of Queen Eliz. her Liberal Studies, and Chancellour of the Exchequer and Dutchy of Lanc. Sir Hen. Fortescue was a Valiant Commander under H. 5. in the French Wars, by whom he was made Governour of Meux in Berry. Sir Adrian Fortescue, Porter of Calice, came over with Hen, 7. by whom he was Created Knight Banneret. Sir Hen, Fortes∣cue was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, highly esteem∣ed for his many Vertues, especially for his Sincerity in so tempting a place. Sir Lewis Pollard of Kings Nimet Serj. of Law and one of the Judges of the Kings Bench in the time of H. 8. was a Man of singular Knowledge and worth. He had by his Lady Eliz. 11. Sons, whereof four were Knighted, viz. Sir John of Ford, Sir Richard and Sir George. All the rest especially John Arch-Deacon of Sarum, were well Advanced, and 11. Daughters Married to the most Potent Families in this County, so that by this Match, almost all the An∣cient Gentry in this County are allied. This Memo∣rable Knight dyed An. 1540. Sir Jo. Doderidge, bred in Oxf. a General Scholar, was second Justice of the Kings Bench. His Soul consisted of two Essentials, Ability and Integrity, holding the Scale of Justice with a steady Hand. He is Famous for the Expression, That as Old and infirm as he was,
he would go to Tyburn on Foot, to see such a Man hang'd, that should proffer Money for a place of Judicature; it being necessary that those who buy such Offices by whole Sale, should sell Justice by Retail, to make themselves Savers. He was commonly called The Sleeping Judge, because he would sit on the Bench with his Eyes shut; a Posture of attention. He dy∣ed, leaving no issue, 1628. and was interred in our Lady's Chappel in Exeter. This County, for Lawyers is next to Norfolk. Three Serjeants were made at one time, Serj. Glan∣vil Sen. Dew and Harris, of whom it was said, One gained, One spent, and One gave as much as the other Two. The Town Tavistock furnisheth the Bar at this time, with a Constellation of Pleaders, wherein the biggest Stars are Serj. Glanvil, and Serjeant May∣nard. Souldiers. Sir Rich. Greenvil, Knight, lived and was Richly Landed at Bediford. He was one of the 12 Peers who Accompanied Rob. Fitz-Haimon in his Famous Expedition against the Welsh, and received in his Partage, (when the Conquered Country was divi∣ded) good Land at Neath in Glamorganshire. But he bestowed all his Military Acquests in Founding and Endowing a Monastery dedicated to the Virgin Ma∣ry, at Neath, for Cistertians. He afterwards lived at Bediford under the Reign of W. Rufus. 1100. and may seem to have Entailed Valour on his Name and still Flourishing Posterity. Ja. Lord Audley had his principal Mansion at Bar∣stable. Famous for his Valour at the Battle of Poicti∣ers in Fr. where the Black Prince rewarded him with a yearly Pension of 500 Marks, which he gave to
his four Esquires, having (as he said) received this Honour by their means. For which he begged the Prince's Pardon, because he gave it away with∣out his License, and withal represented to him the Merit of his Esquires, and his Resolutions to spend his own Estate in the Prince's Service. The Prince Extolling his Bounty as well as Valour raised his former Pension into 1000 Marks. This Noble Lord dyed about the beginning of King Rich. 2. Th. Stuckley was a younger Brother of an Ancient and Worshipful Family near Illfracombe. One of good parts but great Ambition. Having spent his Patrimony, and undertaking the Plantation of Florida, he blushed not to tell Queen Eliz. That he preferred rather to be Soveraign of a Mole-hill, then the highest Subject to the greatest King in Christendom, and that he was assured he should be a Prince before his Death. I hope (said the Queen) I shall hear from you when you are Stated in your Principality; I will Write unto you (quoth Stuckley.) In what Language? (said the Queen) He returned, In the Stile of Princes, To our dear Sister. His fair Project of Florida being blasted for lack of Money, he went into Ireland, where mis∣sing the Preferment he expected, he went over with a Treacherous Intent into Italy. There he wrought himself with incredible Dexterity into the very Bo∣som of Pope Pius 5. Vaunting that with 3000 Soul∣diers he could beat all the English out of Ireland. The Pope loading him with the Titles of Bar. of Ross, Visc. Murrough, Earl of Wexford, Marq. of Lemster, furnished him with 800 Souldiers paid by the King of Spain for the Irish Expedition; but Stuckley chose rather to Accompany Sebastian King of Portugal with two Moorish Kings into Africa, where, behaving him∣self valiantly with his 800 Men in the Battle of Alcaser, he was slain An. 1578. In vain he had given good Coun∣sel
to these Furious Kings to refresh their faint Soul∣diers before the Fight; for rushing on after their first Landing, they buried themselves together in the same Ruin. A fatal Fight, wherein one Day was slain, Three Kings that were, and One that would be fain. Geo. Monk highly descended, Commenced Captain in the Martial Ʋniversity in the Low Countries, no per Salum but from a private Souldier. Being Go∣vernour of Scotland, no Power or Policy of O. C. could fright him thence; from which as a Castle he took the Prospect of our English Affairs. He per∣ceived that since the Martyrdom of King Charles, se∣veral sorts of Government (like the Sons of Jesse be∣fore Samuel) passed before the English People, but neither God nor our Nation had chosen them. He re∣solved therefore to send for the Heroick David out of a Forraign Field; as well assured that the English Loyalty would never be at rest, till fixed in the Cen∣ter thereof. He secured Scotland in faithful Hands, to have all his Foes before his Face, and entreth Eng∣land with a strong Army (in Reputation) consisting of excellent Foot but Lean tired Horse; compleated by the Wise Conduct of their General. The Loyal English did rather Gaze on, then pray for him, as ignorant of his intentions; the private Man, as the A∣postle observes, not knowing how to say Amen to what is spoken in an unknown Language. Now began the English to be sensible that they were deluded with the Pretences of Religion and Liberty into Atheisme and Vassalage, and therefore Remonstrating their Grievances they refused farther payment of Taxes. Lambert cometh forth of Lond. abounding more with outward Advantages then General Monk wanted; Dra∣gon-like
he breathed out nought but Fire and Fury, chiefly against the Church and Clergy. But he met with a St. George, who struck him neither with Sword nor Spear; but gave his Army a mortal wound with∣out wounding it; his Souldiers dwindled away, and Lambert was too Weak to stop them. The Hinder∣part of the Parl. plyed the General with many Addres∣ses. He returned an Answer neither granting nor de∣nying their desires; giving them hope too little to trust, yet too much to distrust him. He was an absolute Rid∣dle and no Ploughing with his Heifer to Expound him. Indeed had he appeared what he was, he had never been what he is, a Deliverer of his Country. But such must be as Dark as Midnight, who mean to At∣chieve Actions as bright as Noon-day. After he had pulled down the Gates of Lond. he sided effectually with the City which was then able to make us a hap∣py or unhappy Nation. Immediately followed that Turn of our Times which all the World doth be∣hold with Wonder. And may the same Divine Pow∣er, which restored▪ our Gracious King, restore the Understandings of those who Split their Allegiance and set Religion and Loyalty by the Ears, and are well ver∣sed in most Distinctions but that between themselves and their Ignorance. Our Noble General was made D. of Albemarl and Master of his Majesties Horse, &c. And carried the Scepter with the Dove thereupon, (the Emblem of Peace) at the Kings Coronation. Seamen. Will. Wilford, born nigh Plymouth, was a valiant and successful Sea-man. After the French in the Raign of H. 4. had by a suddain invasion burnt several Hundreds of Houses in Plymouth, on that side of the
Town called since Britain side. He took 40 Ships on the Coast of the Britains and burnt as many at Pe∣narch, repaying the Monsieurs in their own Coyn. He dyed about the beginning of the Raign of Hen. 8. Sir Humph. Gilbert, born at Green-way, the Seat of his Family for a long time An. 1569. Valiantly and Fortunatly served in Ireland, and afterwards led nine Companies to the Assistance of the Hollanders. An. 1583 he set forth with five Ships, to make Discove∣ries in the North of America, where he took Livery and Seisin in due manner and form, for the Crown of England. In his Return to England he met a great Sea-Lyon which passed the Ship making a hor∣rible roaring. (Such a one (we read) was taken at Sea, An. 1282. and presented to Pope Martin the fourth) instantly a terrible Tempest arising, Sir Humphrey said Cheerfully to his Companions, We are as near Heaven here at Sea as at Land. And a little after his Ship with all therein Sunk, tho the other that was in their Company recovered home. This hap'ned An. 158. —Cock. was in 88. a Cock of the Game being the only Man of Note amongst the English, who figh∣ting a Volunteer in his own Ship, lost his Life to save his Queen and Country. Sir Fr. Drake. Of him see the Holy-State, only take these Verses on his Corps. Tho Rome's Religion should in time return, Drake none thy Body will ungrave again; There is no fear Posterity should burn, Those Bones which free from fire in Sea remain. Sir Walt. Raleigh, born at Budeley of an Ancient Family, but decayed in Estate, and he the youngest
Brother thereof, was bred in Oriel-Coll. in Oxf. and thence coming to Court found some hopes of the Queens favour; this made him Write in a Glass-Window, obvious to the Queens Eye. Fain would I Climb, yet fear I to fall; under which her Majesty perceiving it, did Write, if thy Heart fails thee Climb not at all. But his Introduction into Court is said to have Born an elder date, from the time he spred his Plush-Cloak for her Majesty to step upon over a Wet-Place. Yet the Wise Queen in rewarding him made him to purchase by Pain and Peril as well as Comple∣ment, what Places were bestowed upon him. He seem'd to be born to that only which he went about, so Dexterous he was in all his Undertakings, in Court, in Camp, by Sea, by Land, by Sword, by Pen; witness in the last, his History of the World. Of his Detra∣ctors he was wont to say, If any Man accuseth me to my Face, I will answer him with my Mouth, but my Tail is good enough to answer to such who traduce me behind my Back. Civilians. Jo. Cowel, born at Yarnesborow, after various Pre∣ferments was Vicar Gen. to Arch-bishop Bancroft; Skilled in the Common as well as Civil-Law; he was a great Champion of the later, to the displeasure of a Great Oracle of the former, so that in Derision he was by him called Dr. Cow-heel. Yet that well dressed is so good Meat, that a Cook may lick his Fingers af∣ter it. He wrote Instit. juris Angl. and an Intepre∣ter of the hard words of the Com. Law. His Book was Condemned, upon Complaint in Parl. because he asserted a double Prerogative in the King, whereof one was unlimited. He dyed An. 1611. Arth. Duck, born at Heavy-tree, was Chancellor
of Wells and Lond. and Mr. of the Requests. His discourse as to the Matter had a Masculine strength. He dyed about 1648. and left a great Estate to two Daughters. Writers. Rog. the Cistertian lived at Ford-Abbey, and wrote many fond Falsiries of St. Ʋrsula; but he lived most∣ly in the Low-Countires. He flourished An. 1180. un∣der H. 2. Jo. de Ford, Abbot of Ford, after Travelling re∣turned stored with good manners and stock'd with good Learning. He was Confessor to King John, and wrote many Pious Works. He dyed about 1215. Rich. Fishaker, a Dominican Fryer, was for his Learning and Preaching as highly esteemed as any of that Age. He dyed 1248. and was buried at Oxf. Jo. Cut-clif, born at the Mannor of Gammage, be∣ing a very sincere Man, opposed himself against the Manners of the Clergy, and wrote against the Pope himself. Rich. Chichester, descended of an Ancient Family at Raleigh, being a Monk in Westminster, spent his time in Reading Scripture and good History. He wrote a Chron. from Hegist the Sax. to 1348. He dyed a∣bout 1355. Nich. Ʋpton, of an Ancient Family, Canon of Sa∣lisbury, writ a Treatise of Heraldry, which he pre∣sented to Humph. D. of Glouc. He flourished un∣der H. 6. 1440. Since the Reformation. Rich. Hooker, born at Heavy-tree, and bred in Oxf.
was Mr. of the Temple, when Travers was Lecturer. Here the Pulpit spake pure Canterbury in the Morn∣ning and Geneva in the Afternoon, until Travers was silenced. His Book of Ecclesiastical Polity is prized by all Generally, save such who out of Ignorance can∣not, or Envy will not understand it. But some quarel with the Title, and alledge that the Discipline jure di∣vino ought not to bow to Humane inventions. He dyed at his Benefice in Kent, 1599. leaving the Memory of an Humble, Holy and Learned Divine. Sir Will. Cooper erected his Monument. Nath. Carpenter, Chaplain to Arch-bishop Ʋsher wrote of Logick, Mathematicks and Divinity and dyed about 1636. His Funeral Sermon was made upon that Text, Behold a true Israelite, &c. Benefactors: Pet. Blundel of Tiverton, Clothier; erected a fair free School in that Town, and allowed it a Compe∣tent Maintenance and Lodgings for a Master & Usher. He bestowed two Scholarships and two Fellowships on Sidney-Coll. in Camb. providing Tiverton Scho∣lars should be elected therein. 'Tis thought he dy∣ed about 1596. Memorable Persons. Hen. de la Pomeray, Lord of Pomeray, when Rich. I. was imprisoned by Leopold D. of Austria, expel'd the Monks out of Michaels-Mount in Cornwal, that there he might be a Petty Prince by himself. But after he heard that King was enlarged, he laid Vio∣lent Hands on himself; as Howeden affirms. But o∣thers say, that having killed the Kings Serjeant who had arrested him and despairing of pardon, caused himself to be let Blood to Death.
Jo. de Beigny, Knight, Lord of Edge-Lifford long'd earnestly for his youngest Son, employed in the Wars against the Saracens in Spain, and used to say, Oh that I might but once Embrace my Son, I would be content to dye presently. And afterwards, his Son re∣turning unexpectedly, he expired with an Extasie of Joy. He flourished under King E. 3. —Child, of Ancient Extraction at Plimstock, hunt∣ing at Dart-More, lost his Company and Way in a bitter Snow, and having killed his Horse, he crept into his hot Bowels for warmth, and wrote this with his Blood. He that finds and brings me to my Tomb, The Land of Pemstock shall be his Doom. The Monks of Tavistock finding him Frozen to Death, and being too Nimble for the Men of Plimstock, bu∣ried him and the Abbot accordingly, got that Rich Mannor into his Possession. The Bridge built in the place where the Monks passed over the River, is cal∣led Guils-Bridge to this day. Nich. and Andr. Tremane, were Twins alike in all Lineaments, and felt like pain tho at a distance, and without any intelligence given, they equally desired to Walk, Travel, Sit, Sleep, Eat and Drink toge∣ther. In this they differed, that at New Haven in France, the one was a Captain of a Troop, the o∣ther but a private Souldier. There they were both slain together 1564. Noted Sheriffs. 2. Rich. Comes, that is Earl, viz. of Devonshire, who Married Avis Daugh∣ter and Heir of Reginald E. of Cornwal the base Son of Hen. 1
27. Will. Brewer, whose Mother unable to main∣tain him, cast him into the Brakes in New-Forrest where Hen. 2. found him. He was made by Rich. 1. Baron of Odcomb, and his Inheritance was by his Daughters and Heirs derived to Breos, Wake, la Fort and Percy. Will. Yoo, His Worshipful Family, (in this County) give for their Arms Ar. a Cheveron, S. between 3 Turky-Cocks in their pride proper. Jo. Damerel; Throwely in Dartmore his Chief Mannor came to his Family by Match with the Eldest Daughter and Coheir of Moeles (who Married Avis sole Heir to Sir Will. le Prouze in the Reign of E. 2.) her two younger Sisters being Married to North-coat and Wi∣bery, amongst whom a great Inheritance was divided, and by a Writ of Partition (An. 14. E. 3.) Throwe∣ly fell to the share of Damerel. Rich. Edgecombe, Knight, being Zea∣lous in the Cause of the Earl of Rich∣mond (afterwards King H. 7.) was too cunning for those whom King Rich. sent to appre∣hend him; for upon their approach, he tumbled his Cap with a Stone in it, into the Water, which, by the noise it made, and the Swimming of the Cap in∣duced them to believe he had drowned himself. He built a Chappel in the place where he had lurk'd. King Hen. 7. rewarded his Loyalty by bestowing the Castle of Totnes upon him. Pet. Carew, Knight, had much ado to save his Life, when Imprisoned for his Complyance with Sir Tho. Wyate. Af∣terwards he did signal Service in the Irish Wars. He dyed 1575. Rob. Dennis, Knight, erected An. 1592.
a fair Almshouse in the Suburbs of Exeter, for 12 poor Aged Men allowing to each an Herber, and 12 pence weekly. The Family (descended from the Danes) is now extinct, the Heir General being Mar∣ried into the House of the Rolles. Amias Bampfield, of Ancient and Worthy Extra∣ction, one of whose Ancestors Married to a Daugh∣ter and Coheir of the Lord Semaur, whereby a fair Inheritance at South-Molton in this County accrued to this Family, i which Church this Amias with his Father lyeth. Pttimore near Exeter, hath been their prime Habitation ever since the time of King E. 1. Exeter. Exeter is of a Circular Form, Situated on the Top of a Hill, and since Nature is the Scavenger there∣of, is a very cleanly City. As for Manufactures, Cloathing is plyed in this City with great Industry and Judgment, the return of Serges alone in this Ci∣ty amounting weekly (tho Trading be now Sick) to 3000 Pounds. This City was highly Commen∣dable for its Loyalty when besieged by Perkin Wer∣beck in the Reign of H. 7. and by the Western Re∣bels in the Reign of E. 6. and in our time by the Parl. Forces in the Reign of King Ch. I. Their Valour was invincible in the two first, and their Loyalty unstained in the last; rewarded by their Enemies with the best made and best kept Articles. Of Buildings, the Ca∣thedral is a most Beautiful Structure. Here also is that Castle which (when R. 3. ask'd its Name) was called Rugement to the great astonishment of that Usurper, who had heard he should never prosper
after he had met Rugemont or rather Richmond (in K. 7.) In this City 13 Churches were exposed to sale by the Publick Cryer, and bought by well affected Persons who preserved them from Destruction. For Wonders, take this one, when Exeter was besieged by the Parl. Forces, so that only the South side to∣wards the Sea was open unto it, an incredible Num∣ber of Larks were found in that open quarter, which were sold for two pence the dozen, and tho it may be alledged that they were ighted thither by the shooting, or that (being Winter) they shelrted themselves in the Southern parts, or lastly that they were invited thither by some sort of Seeds that had been there lately sown, yet the Cause of Causes was Divine Providence providing a feast for many poor People. Princes. Henrietta youngest Child of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at Bedford-house in this City, An. 1644. June 16. After her long and sad Night of Affliction, the Day dawn'd with her in her Bro∣thers happy return. Since she is Married to the D. of Orleans. I had the Honour to be once Chaplain to that Princess. Prelates. Bartholm. Iscanus, the Oracle of Learning and Re∣ligion in his time, was Bishop of Exeter and oppo∣sed
Beckets insolence. He dyed An. 1185. Having been intimate with Baldvinus Devonius of poor Parentage, a Man of great Learning and Merit made Bishop of Worcester, then Arch-bishop of Canterbury. An Eloquent Man and Pious Preacher. He attended King Rich. 1. into Palestine, and dyed there 1190. Walt. Bronscombe, of mean descent, by his own In∣dustry raised himself to be Bishop of Exeter, where he built and endowed a Hospital. He also founded a fair Colledge at Perin in Cornwall. He instituted an Annual Festival to the Angel Gabriel, and left Land to defray the cost of the Solemnity, tho I believe it was only observed in his own Diocess. Yet he is said to have compassed the Mannor of Bishops-Clift to his Church by indirect means. Writers. Joseph Iscanus was a Golden Poet in a leaden Age. This our English Maro had for his Mecenas, Baldwin Arch-bishop of Cant. The Dutch-men Printed a poem of this Joseph, under the Name of Cornelius Nepos, who lived in the Days of Tully. Will. of Exeter D. D. in Oxf. and afterward Ca∣non of the Cathedral in Exeter being back'd with Pope John 23 he was able to undertake Will. of Ock∣am (a much more Learned Man than himself) who cryed up Poverty in opposition to the Papal Pomp. He flourished An. 1330. under the Raign of E. 3. Since the Reformation. Rich. Martyn, bred in the Court and in the Inns of Court was accounted one of the greatest Wits of that Age, King Ja. being much delighted with his
Facetiousness, a quality which (with his other Abi∣lities) commended him to be chosen Recorder of Lond. He is Eminent for the Speech he made in Parl. An. 10. Jac. when account was taken of 40 Gentlemen in the House of Commons, which were not 20 and some of them not 16 years of Age. Formely (said the Recorder Martyn) it was the Custom of Old Men to make Laws for young ones; but now Nature is invaded and inverted, seeing young Men Enact Laws to govern their Fathers. He dyed 1616. Whose Kinsman Will. Martyn, bred a Student in the Laws, wrote a Treatise Of the Kings of England since the Conquest. By a Passage in which reflecting on the Royal Family or the Scotch Nation, he irrecoverably lost King Ja. his Favour. He dyed 1616. Will. Tucker, D. D. Dean of Lichfield, wrote a Book de Charismate, Of the Kings of England their Gracious healing of the Evil; dedicating the same to Queen Eliz. in which he vindicated such Cures from Imposture and the Usurpation of the French; &c. His Congee d'elire was signed to Elect him Bishop of Glocester, but it was revoked by King James; so that the Doctor may be said to have worn half a Mi∣tre. Jo. Berkham, set forth Doctor Crackenthorp his Po∣sthume Works, and was helpful to Jo. Speed in Composing his English History, yea he wrote the whole Life and Reign of King John, which of all in that Book is the most profoundly Pen'd. Mr. Guil∣lim in his Heraldry was much beholden to this Doctor's Emendations. He was a greater Lover of Coyns than Money. That excellent Collection in Oxf. Library was his Gift to the Arch-bishop, before the Arch-bishop gave it to the University. He dyed 1641.
Benefactors. Joan Tuckvile, Widow, procured the Possession and Consecration of a Parcil of Ground for the in∣terment of such as were Executed at Heavy-tree, al∣lowing Land to buy a Shroud for every one of them. She dyed about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz. Dorsetshire. DOrsetshire, hath Devonshire on the West, Som. and Wiltshire on the North, Hampshire on the East, and the Narrow-Sea on the South, in length 40 and in the broadest part 26 Miles. It aboundeth with all the necessaries for Man's Life, & has plenty of Sheep, Timber, Freestone, nor wanteth it Veins of Marble in the Isles of Purbeck. There is also Salt made in this County, and it can cloth it self with its own Wool, of which Broad-Cloth is here made. And to all this, an excellent Air and the Conveni∣ency of Navigation. The Natural Commodities are Tenches abounding in the River Stowre; Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, carried to Lond. from Poole and the Isle of Wight, and at Lond. it is worth 30 Shillings the Tun. Hmp betwixt Bemister and Byrd-port. Wild-Madder, at Hod-Hill, &c. For Buildings Lulworth-Castle
and Sherburn-Lodge are most Eminent. In∣deed the Rhyme holds true Generally of English Structures. The North for Greatness, the East for Health, The South for Neatness, the West for Wealth. Proverbs. I. As much a Kin as Lenson-hill to Pilsen-pen. Spoken of those who are Neigbours and no Relati∣ons. The first of these two Hills is wholly, the other partly in the Parish of Broad-Windsor, (where∣of once I was Minister;) yet Sea-men make a Rela∣tion betwixt them calling the one the Cow, and the other the Calf, as being Eminent Sea-marks. II. Stab'd with a Byrdport Dagger. That is Hang'd; the best Hemp growing about Byrdport. III. Dor∣setshire Dorsers, i. e. Panniers. Saints. Edward Son to Edgar King of England, was in his In∣fancy whipt by Elfrida his Mother-in-law with Wax-Candles, so that afterwards he could never endure the sight of any such Candles. When he was King, Elfrida managed for the most part all the Affairs of State, and afterwards caused this Edward to be Stab'd at Corfe-Castle, whither he had come to visit her. An. 978. Intending by that Murder to make way for her Son Ethelred to the Kingdom. He was buried at Shaftsbury, which formerly was called St. Edwards.
Cardinals. Jo. Morton, born at St. Andrews Milborne, of a Worshipful Family still Extent, was made Bishop of Ely, 1578. He proposed the Marriage of Eliz. Eldest Daughter to E. 4. of the House of York to Hen. Earl of Richmond (H. 7.) of the House of Lanc. which Alliance this Earl did account his surest Title to the Crown. The Bishop was made by that King, Chan∣cellour of England and afterwards Arch-bishop of Cant. He was a great Instrument in advancing a Vo∣luntary Contribution to the King through the Lands, persuading Prodigals to part with their Money, be∣cause they did spend it most; and the Covetous, be∣cause they might spare it best. This Bishop with vast cost cut a new Channel in the Fennes. He en∣joyned his Executors to maintain 20 poor Scholars in Oxf. and 10 in Camb. 20 years after his Death, which hap'ned 1500. Prelates. Jo. Stafford, Son to Humph. 6th. Earl of Staff. was born at Hooke, made Bishop of Wells, and was 18 years Chancellour of England, and at last Arch-bi∣shop of Cant. He dyed at Maidstone, 1452. Rob. Morton, Brother to Card. Morton, was made by his Means Bishop of Worcester 1486. He dyed 1497. and lyeth buried in St. Pauls in Lond. Ja. Turbevil, of a Worshipful Family in this Coun∣ty, was made Bishop of Exeter 1556. at which time it was said he was a Baron, but a Bare one, so miserably had that Cathedral been Polled. Yet he obtained (amongst other Lands) the Restituti∣on of the fair Mannor of Crediton (or Kiron) from
Queen Mary, which was again alienated in the Reign of Queen Eliz. This Bishop staved off Persecution from those of his Jurisdiction. He was deprived in the beginning of Queen Eliz. Since the Reformation. Th. Winniffe, born at Sherborne D. D. & Chapl. to Prince Henry, for a passage in his Sermon about Gon∣domer, was committed close Prisoner to the Tower, and during his imprisonment a Great Lord begg'd his Church-preferment; No (said King Ja.) I mean not thus to part with the Man. At which the Lord said he intended only to try the Kings Resolution; and that he knew the Doctor to be a Man of great Me∣rit. He was chosen Bishop of Lincoln, 1642. He dyed An. 1654. and was buried at Lamburn in Ess. the Conclusion of his Epitaph being Anima haec recep∣ta in Coelos non Laudationem quaerit sed Imitationem. In the same place had his Father been buried. Souldiers. Th. Basket, Esquire, of Divelish, much confided in, for his Wisdom and Valour by King Hen. 8. He was commonly called Little Mr. Basket the Great Souldier. He dyed about 1530. Jo. Russel, born at Kingston-Russel, bred beyond the Sea, was a Man of great Accomplishment, and was recommended by Phil. King of Castile (Father to Ch. 5. Emp.) to Hen. 7. as a Person of Great Abilities; he could see more with his one Eye than many others could do with two. King Hen. 8. made him Comptroller of the Houshold and Privy Councellor, and An. 1538. erected him Lord Russel, and made Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share
of the Golden Showre of Abbey-Lands fell into his Lap. King E. 6. (who made him Earl of Bedford) sent him down to suppress the Western Commotion and relieve Exter, which he performed with great Wisdom, Valour and Success. He dyed 1554, and was buried at Cheineys in Buck. Sir Rich. Bingham, born at Bingham's Melcom, de∣scended from Will. de Bingham, who held Lands in this County in the days of H. 3. was at the Siege of St. Quintin in Fr. the sacking of Lieth in Scotland, served in Candy under the Venetians against the Turks, then returned into the Netherlands. His Judgment was much relied upon in 88, about ordering the Land-Army in Tilbery-Camp. He was a Man of great Valour and Success in all his Undertakings. Being afterwards president of Connaugh in Ireland, he drove away O-Rork that dangerous Rebel. But his Acti∣ons there, being represented to Queen Eliz. as cruel, he was outed of his Offices, and kept in Restraint, till Tyrone troubled Munster; then he was sent Mar∣shal of Ireland, and General of Leinster, and had in all Probability suppressed that Rebel, if he had not been prevented by Death at Dublin. His Monument is at Westminster Abbey. Sea-men. Rich. Clerk of Weymouth, Master of the Delight, An. 1583. went with Sir Humph. Gilbert for the disco∣very of Noremberg, but his Ship was cast away 70 Leagues from Land. The Company got into the Ship-boat having but one Oar, and continued there four days without eating any thing save the Weeds they found in the Sea. After five Days Rowing, a Spanish Ship meeting them brought them to Biscay. The Visitors of the Inquisition were diverted by the
Masters favour; after which Rich. and his Compa∣ny came by France into England. Geo. Summers, Knight, born in or near Lyme, first discovered the Bermuda's nam'd the Summer Islands. He was a Lamb on Land, and a Lyon at Sea. He dyed about 1610. Note, that amongst 12 of Th. Cavendishes Men who were killed by the Spaniards at Cape Quinterno; four of them belonged to this County, viz. Will. King∣man in the Admiral, Will. Biet of Weymouth in the Vice-Ad. Hen. Blacknals of Weym. and Will. Pit of Sherburn in the Hugh-Gallant. The Survivours being 15 in Number revenged their Death upon 25 Spa∣niards, and in spite of above a 100 remaining Spani∣niards, watered at the aforesaid Cope. Civilians. Sir To. Ryves Dr. of the Laws, was born at Little Langton; a General Scholar and pure Latinist, Wit∣ness his Book of Sea-Battles. Afterwards he was made the Kings Advocate, and indeed he had been formerly Advocate to the King of Heaven in his Book entitled the Vicars Plea, a Treatise of much Law, Learning, Reason and Equity. We have good proof of his Valour in the late Wars. He dyed a∣bout 1652. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. Rob. Rogers born at Poole, was Leather-Seller in Lond. dying a Batchelor bequeathed 333 l. for build∣ing of Alms-houses in Pool, 150 l. for Prisoners (nei∣ther Athists nor Papists) 20 Nobles a Man. 100 l. for poor Preachers, to each Man 10 pound. 100 l. to decay'd Artificers, charged with Wife and Children.
400 l. to the Merchant Adventurers, for the relief of old and support of young Free-men. 500 l. to Christs-Hospital 600 l. to Erect Alms-houses in and about Lond. 200 l. for a weekly Dole of Bread to the Poor. 400 l. to the Leather-Sellers in trust for maintain∣ing of two Scholars in each University, &c. He dyed An. 1601. and lies buried in Christ-Church in Lond. Memorable Persons. Th. de la Lynd Gent. kill'd a White Hart in Black∣more-Forrest, which King Hen. 3. had reserved for his own Chase. Hereupon he and the whole Coun∣ty (for not opposing him) was fined, and the fine is paid into the Exchequer at this day, by the Name of White-Hart-Silver. Arth. Gregory, of Lyme, could force the Seal of a Letter with admirable Art. Secr. Walsingham made great use of him about the Pacquets sent to Queen Mary of Scotland, for his Service therein had he a Pensi∣on paid him. He dyed at Lyme about the beginning of the Raign of King Ja. Will. Englebert, born at Sherborne was an incompa∣rable Ingineer much used in 88, and had 100 Marks Pension paid him yearly, which he proffer'd to wave for a License to serve Forraign Princes, but was deni∣ed. He dyed at Westminster about 1634. Noted Sheriffs. 8. Jo. Newburgh. The Family of the Newburgs derive their Pedigree from a younger Son of H. the first Earl of Warwick, of the Norman-line, and 'tis said they held Winfret with the whole Hundred (by the Gift of Hen. 1.) by
the Service of Chamberlain in Chief, of the King, and under the Reign of Edw. 1. by Grand-Searjeanty, viz. by holding the Laver for the King to wash in, upon his Coronation day. 4. Egidius Strangways. Thomas was the first Advancer of this Family in this County, whose Heirs built a fair Seat at Milbery. Th. More, Knight, dwelt at Melplash, having in a Frolick let loose many Malefactors, was glad to pro∣cure a Pardon by the Mediation of Will. Pawlet, Lord Treasurer, afterwards Marq. of Winch. to whose Son, (Sir Thomas) he gave his Daughter in Marri∣age. Durham. DƲrham, (a Bishoprick) hath Northumb. on the North, Yorkshire on the South, the Germ. Sea on the East, and Cumberl. and Westm. on the West, in form Triangular. After the Bishop had been de∣prived of his Vote in the House of Lords, the People, for some years had no Representatives in Parliament. Princes. Cicely Nevil, youngest Daughter and Child to Ralph Earl of Westmerland (who had 21) was mar∣ried
to Rich. D. of York, and beheld her Eldest Son Edward King of England and enriched with a Nume∣rous Postery. Yet were her Afflictions great; for she saw her Husband kill'd in Battle, her second Son Geo. D. of Clarence cruelly Murdred. Edward her Eldest Son cut off by his intemperance in his Prime: His two Sons Butcherd by their Uncle Richard who was killed at the Battle of Bosworth. Under all she carried a Steady Soul, and lived to see Eliz. her Grand-Child Married to Hen. 7. She lived 35 years a Widow and dyed An. 10 of that King, and was buried with her Husband in the Quire Fortheringhay-Church in Northam. Which Quire being demolished in the days of King Hen. 8. their Bodies lay in the Church-Yard, without any Monument, until Queen Eliz. coming thither in Progress gave order that they should be interred in the Church and two Tombs to be Erected over them. The Dutchess Cicely had a Pardon from Rome, hanging about her Neck, plainly Legible. She was a bountiful Benefactress to the Queens Coll. in Camb. Saints. —Venerable Bede, born at, and a Monk in Girway, now Yarrow, the most General Scholar of that Age, expounded almost all the Bible, Translated the Psalms and New-Testament into English, and lived a Com∣ment upon those Words, Shining as a Light in the World, &c. Phil. 2.15. Credible Authors report he never went out of his Coll. tho both Cambridge and Rome pretend to his Habitation. He dyed An. 734. and his Corps was removed to Durham.
Confessors. Jo. Wickliffe, published Opinions distasteful to the Church of Rome, and wrote 200 Volumns, besides his Translation of the Bible into English. Having suf∣fered much Persecution from the Popish Clergy, after a long Exile he return'd in safety, and dyed at his Living at Lutterworth in Leicestershier An. 1387. His Bones were taken up and burnt 42 years after his Death. Prelates. —I shall begin with four Nevils of Honourable Extraction. 1. Ralph Nevil, born at Raby, Lord Chanc. under King Hen. 3. and Bishop of Chichester. 1223. built a fair House for himself and his Successors in Chancery-lane in Lond. which House is since called from the Earl of Lincoln (once possessor therereof,) Lincolns-Inn. He was chosen afterwards Arch-bishop of Cant. but the Pope stopped his Consecration, as being apt to dissuade King Hen. from paying the Pension granted to his Holiness by King John. Then being elected Bishop of Winch. he was obstructed by the King. He built St. Michaels Chapple without the East-gate of Chichester. and dyed at Lond. 1244. 2. Alex Nevil 3d. Son of Ralph Lord Nevil, born at Raby was Arch-bishop of York, where he beauti∣fied Cawood Castle. Being Loyal to R. 2. he was forced for Protection to flee to Pope Ʋrban, who Translated him to St. Andrews in Scotland. But this Nevil chose rather to be Minister at Lovaine, where he dyed. 3. Rob. Nevil, sixth Son of Ralph first Earl of Westmerland, by Joan his Wife, Daughter of Jo. of Gaunt, was Bishop of Sarisbury An. 6. Hen. 6. 1427.
He founded a Convent at Sunning in Barkshire. From Sarisbury he was Translated to Durham, where he built the Exchequer at the Castle-gate, and added, (in allusion to his 2 Bishopricks) 2 Annulets to his Arms. He dyed An. 1457. 4. Geo. Nevil, fourth Son to Rich. Earl of Salisbury was born at Middle∣ham, and consecrated Bishop of Exeter, when he was not as yet 20 years of Age, and five years after was made Lord Chancellor of England, and aftewards Arch-bishop of York, making a prodigious Feast at his Installing; yet at last falling into the displeasure of E. 4. he was slenderly dieted, not to say Famished, in the Castle of Calis; for after his enlargement he dyed Heart-broken at Blyth, and was buried in the Cathe∣dral of York. 476. There was another Nevil Bro∣ther to Alexander, who was chosen Bishop of Ely, but dyed before Consecration. Since the Reformation. Rob. Horn, bred in St. Johns- E. 6. made Dean of Durham.  he became head of the Episcopal  in Germ. Returning into England  of Winch. 1560. A worthy Man,  Papists and Sectaries, who sported  and twitted his Person as Dwarf,  Case, when they were not able to find  Jewel. Whatever his Mould might  of good Metal, as being of a Sprightu  Wit. He dyed 1589. Jo. Cosen, was born in Norwich, one  are sufficiently made known in his  Great his Constancy in Religion, th he was ∣der'd by some silly people as declining  Religion. As for his urging of some
made his Purgation effectually, clearing himself from the least Imputation of any Fault; yea whilst in France, he was the Atlas of the Prot. Religion, supporting the same with his Piety and Learning, and daily add∣ing Proselytes (not of the meanest Rank) thereunto. Since the Kings Restauration he was preferred Bishop of Durham. When some Propositions of the Pope in favour of Protestants were made mention of, by one in his presence; he said, We thank him not at all for which God hath always allowed us in his Word; for he would grant it so long as it stood with his Policy, and take it away so soon as it stood with his Power. Civilians. Rob. Cosen, Dr. of Law, was born at Hartly Poole. His Father a Person of Quality, a valiant Captain in Musslborough field, was drowned in the River Tweed. Richard, at 12 years of Age was admitted into Tn. Coll. in Camb. He became a General Scholar, Geometrician, Musitian, Physician, Divine, but chiefly Civil and Canon Lawyer. He was Chancellor of Worcester, then Dean of the Arches. He defended the High Commission and Oath ex Officio, against a Book called the Abstract, which one observed was ab∣stracted from all Wit, Learning and Charity. Some laid to his Charge that he gave many Blank Licences for Marriage, whereas there was but one which a Fugitive Servant stole from the Register. He had (according to his Wish) a sweet and quiet departure, and his la Words (to his Friends) were, Remem∣ber your Mortality and eternal Life. He gave 40 l. to the building of a Chamber in Trin. Coll. and 15 l. a year for the maintainance of two Scholarships therein. On him these Verses were made by the University of Camb.
Magna deos inter lis est exorta, creatas, Horum qui lites Dirimit, ille deest. Cosinum petiere Dii Componere tantus, Lites, quod vere jure peritus erat. Writers. Jo. of Darlington, Confessor to Hen. 3. and Arch∣bishop of Dublin; and Collector of the Pope's Peter∣pence through Ireland, wrote many Books and dyed in Lond. 1284. Will. Siveyar (in lat. Severus) born at Shinkley, was Son to a Sive-maker, was Bishop of Carlile 1496. and Translated to Durham. He dyed An. 1505. Note Sir Empson was also the Son of a Sive-maker and his Contemporary. Since the Reformation. Th. Jackson, bred in Oxf. where falling into the River he was taken up for dead by some Fisher-men, who were rewarded with a Revenue during his life. He was chosen President of Corp. Christi-Coll. where he dyed 1640. He was a Pious Man, profound Writer and painful Preacher. Sam. Ward, born at Bishops-Middleham, Mr. of Sidney-Coll. in Camb. was imprisoned in the late times, before which he was counted a Puritan, and Popish whilst those days lasted; yet was he a true Pro∣testant at all times. He dyed An. 1643. Memorable Persons. Anth. Lord Gray, (Earl of Kent) Son of Geo. Gray Esquire, was born at Branspath. He studied Divi∣nity
and became Rector of Burbach in Leicestershire. And upon the Death of Hen. Earl of Kent, his Kins∣man, the Inheritance and Honour descended upon him. Yet after that he abated nothing in the constancy of his Preaching, but improved that accession of Great∣ness to make his Goodness the more Illustrious. When Summoned as a Peer to Parl. he excused himself by reason the indisposition of his Age. By Magdal. Puresoy his Wife he had Hen. the 9th. Earl of Kent. He dyed An. 164- In this County the Bishop is Sheriff Paramount, whose Deputy never accounts in the Exchequer, but makes up his Audit to the Bishop. Essex. ESsex hath Kent on the South, Suffolk on the North, Cambr. Hartf. and Middlesex on the West. A fair County 35 Miles Square, affording all things necessary for Mans Subsistence, save that the Eastern part thereof is not very healthful in the Air thereof. The parts adjoyning to the Sea are called the Hundreds of Essex, and Vulgar Wits, will tell you, that the Stock of poor people in these parts is Five Hundred Cows, which is no more than five. The Natural Commodities are Saffron about Wal∣den. Oysters, the best in England, bred near Col∣chester. King Ja. was wont to say he was a Vali∣ant
Man that first adventured on the Eating of them. Hops, which are said to grow best where Vines will not grow, and are wholesome, if unmixed, &c. ac∣cording to Stat. 1. Jac. c. 18. Puits, in the Puit-Island near Harwick; a kind of Birds which are delicate Food when fatted. As for Manufactures, Bays, Says and Serges are made in Colchester, Coxal, &c. And there is Gun-powder made in Mills erected on the River Ley, between Waltham and Lond. Of Buildings, 1. Audley-End built by Th. Howard Earl of Suff is the best Subjects House in this Island. 2. New-hall, built by the Ratcliffs Earls of Suff. bought by Geo. Villiers D. of Buck. surpasses for the pleasant approach thereunto and the adjoyning Parks. 3. Copt-Hall, (or Coppice-Hall) seated on a Hill in the midst of a Park, was built by the Abbot of Wal∣tham and enlarged by Sir Th. Heneage. In which there is the most Proportionable Gallery in England. An. 1639. a Hericano forced the Stones of the great East-Window, like Pellets, quite through this Gal∣lery in length 56 Yards. Dr. Jackson about the same time observed the like Wind as Ominous and Pre∣saging our Civil Dissentions. To proceed to more Wonders, the huge Bones which were digged out at the Ness near Harwich, were generally thought to be Bones of Men; tho it be more probable they were Bones of Elephants brought over by the Emperor Claudius. The Story of the Anatomy of Bones in the Abbey of Waltham-Cross, which being touched, in one part fell all into Powder, is con∣firmed by Publick Fame, with several instances of the like Nature.
Proverbs. I. Essex miles, that is very long Miles, Compa∣ratively to those of Middlesex II. Essex Calves, the fattest, fairest and finest in Engl. III. The Weavers Beef of Colchester, That is Sprats the Wea∣vers Food, such Beef-eaters and such Beef being nu∣merous in, and about that City. IV. Jeering-Coxhall, it was true by way of Catachresis in Queen Maries daies, for then the Inhabitants of that Town were very serious, some in suffering and others in shifting Martyrdom. V. He may fetch a flitch of Bacon from Dunmoe. It was a Custom formerly, that who∣ever did swear before the Prior of the Convent at Dunmoe, That they never made any Nuptial Transgres∣sion, might demand a Gammon of Bacon. Princes. Hen. Fitz. Roy, (Natural) Son to H. 8. and the Lady Talbois, was born at Black-more Mannor, An. 1519. He was created Earl of Nottingham and D. of Richmond. Bastard in him was not Boes art, i. e. an abject Nature, but Besteaerd the best disposition; since he purchased a Reputation by his Martial Acti∣vity and Learning. He Married Mary Daughter to Th. D. of Nrf. and dyed An. 1536. and was buri∣ed in Framlingham in Suff. Saints. St. Helen was born at, (and Daughter to Coel King of) Colchester. She was Mother of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, and is famous to all Poste∣rity for finding out Christs-Cross on Mount Calvary.
Hence the Arms of Colchester, a Cross enragled between four Crowns. By the Pagans she was Nick-named Stabularia, she having found the Stable of Christs-Nativity. Whose Son St. Constantine was born at Colchester. V. Eccl. Hist. St. Ethelburgh, Sister to Erkenwald, Bishop of Lond. was Abbess of the Nunery of Barking, where she led an Austere Life, and dyed 676. Whose Sister, Hildetha succeeded her and dyed 700. Theorithoid a Holy Nun of the same place, dyed 678. Edilburge (Wife to Ina King of the West Saxons) a Nun at Barking, was reputed a Saint after here Death, An. 740. Wolfhild a Barking Nun dyed An. 989. This Nunery was valued at 1000 l. yearly rent at the Dissolution. St. Ofith, Daughter to the King of the E. Angles, was abbess of a Monastery of her own founding at Chich. She was beheaded by the Danes, about 870. after which she was able to carry her own head no further than 3. furlongs; and if St. Deni's carried his head further, you may imagine his was the lighter Head of the tw. St. Neots, first an Eremite (in Cornw.) then a pro∣fitable Preacher of the Gospel; a Zaccheus for Sta∣ture and Piety. He moved King Alfred to found (or restore) the University of Oxf. for which his Me∣mory is sacred to all Posterity. He dyed An. 883. and was buried at Eynsbury since St. Neots in Hunt. Martyrs. Jo. Lawrence, being very feeble had a Chair at the Stake, the little Children crying God strengthen you.
Th. Hawkes Gent. having promised to give his Friends a Token of the comfort of his Conscience; whilst burning, raised himself up and clapped his Hands over his Head to the Admiration of all the be∣holders. Rose Allin a Virgin endured the Burning of her Wrists with incredible Patience, as afterwards the burning of her Body with a Christian Constancy. These are the most Noted of 44 Martyrs in this Shire. Confessors. Rich. George, Labourer of West-Barfold. Of three several Wives he had, two of them were Burnt, and himself the third imprisoned for Religion. His Burning was prevented by Queen Maries Death. Cardinals. Th. Bourcher, Brother to Hen. first Earl of Ess. was successively Bishop of Worc. Ely, Arch-bishop of Cant. (for 51 years) by the Title of St. Cyriacus in the Baths, He married H. 7. to the Daughter of E. 4. and applyed himself Politickly to the Power of that Prince. Yet 'tis said Praestitit hic praesul nil tanto sanguine dignum. What was 100 pounds and a Chest given by him to Camb.? He saw the Civil Wars between York and Lanc. begun, continued and concluded. Many Noble Prelates were his Contemporaries, and after his de∣cease, Cardinal Pole, a Man of Noble Extraction.
Prelates. Rich. de Barking, became Abbot of Westminster, and Councellor to Hen. 3. Ch. Baron of the Exchequer, and Lord Treasurer of England. He dyed An. 1246. and was buried in Westm. Church. Jo. de Chesill, was Bishop of Lond. and twice Chan∣cellour, and afterwards Lord Treasurer of Eng∣land. Jo. Waltham, Mr. of the Rolls, Keeper of the Pr. Seal and Bishop of Salisbury, was Excommunicated by Courtney Arch-bishop of Cant. for refusing to be visited by him after the Popes death. Yet he dyed Lord Treasurer and was by R. 2. his Order buried amongst the Kings in Westm. 1395. Roger Walden, a poor Mans Son, was Dean of York, and at last Treasurer of England, during the Exile of Th. Arundel Arch-bishop of Cant. he called Synods, &c. in that See, till the Arch-bishops Restoration; then being poor he was made by Arundels means Bishop of Lond. and dyed 1404. Since the Reformation. Rich. Howland, born at Newport-Ponds, consecrated Bishop of Peterborough, dyed June 1600. Jo. Jegon, born at Coxhall Mr. of Bennet-Coll. and thrice Vice-Chancellour of the University of Camb. He was both Grave and Facetius. The Mulcts of the Undergraduats were by him one time expended in new whiting the Hall of the Coll. Whereupon a Scholar hung up these Verses on the Skreen
Dr. Jegon, Bennet-Colledge Master, Brake the Scholars-head and gave the Walls a Plai∣ster. To which the Doctor Annexed, Knew I but the Wagg that writ these Verses in a Bra∣very. I would commend him for his Wit, but whip him for his Knavery. He was made Bishop of Norwich (by King Ja.) as being mighty Zealous for the Church of England. He dyed An. 1618. Sam. Haresnet, born at Colchester, was Bishop of Chich. then of Norw. and at last Arch-bishop of York and Privy Councellor to King Ch. II. He founded and endowed a fair Grammer-School at Chigwell. He bequeathed his Library to Colchester, provided they were kept in a decent Room, for the use of the Cler∣gy of that Town. He dyed An. 1631. Augustine Linsel, D. D. born at Bumsted, was ex∣act in Greek, Hebrew, and all Antiquity.  was Bishop of Peterborough, and thence removed to Here∣ford, where he dyed 163- Statesmen. Sir Th. Audley, Keeper of the Great Seal 1532. was An 24. H. 8. made Knight of the Garter, Lord Chancellour of England and Baron Audley of Audley End, in this County. He got a Grant of the Priory of the Trinity, (now Dukes Place) in Ealdgate Ward Lond. the first that was dissolved; He had one only Daughter, who was Married to Th. last D. of Nor∣folk.
He dyed 1544. and was buried in the Church of Saffron Walden. He founded and endowed Magd. Coll. in Camb. for the maintenance of able Poets. Sir Rich. Morison, Knight, skilled in Languages and in the Laws,A. M. P. was fre∣quently employed Ambassadour by H. 8. and E. 6. unto Ch. 5. Emp. &c. He began a Beau∣tiful House a Cashobery, but before he had finished it, and after he had fled beyond the Seas, he dyed in Stras∣burgh An. 1556. Sir Anth. Cook, Knight, Great-Grand-child to Sir Th. Lord Mayor of Lond. was born at Giddy-Hall. He was one of the Governours to Ed. 6. whilst Prince. His Daughters were Learned in Greek and Latine, and Poetry; of whom Mildred was Marri∣ed to Will. Cecil Lord Treasurer, and Ann to Nich. Bacon Lord Chanc. of England; and Katherine, to Hen. Killigrew. This Kath. being unwilling, her Husband Sir Hen. should be sent Ambassadour to France, wrote to her Sister Mildred these Verses. Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda remitti, Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola oror, Sin male cunctando retines, vel tran Mare mittes, Tu Mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla soror. It si Connubiam, tibi pax sit & omnia loeta, Sin mare Cecili, nuntio bella, Vale. This Sir Anth. dyed An. 1576. leaving a fair Estate to his Son. Sir Th. Smith, Knight, born at Saffron-Walden, was by order of King Hen. 8. brought up beyond the Seas. He was afterwards Secr. of State to Queen Eliz. and a great Benefactor to both Universities. He dyed An. 1577. Th. Howard,S. N▪ second Son to Th. last
D. of Norf. by Marg. Heir to Th. Lord Audle, was by Queen Eliz. made Baron of Audley, and Knight of the Garter, and King Ja. who beheld his Father a State Martyr for the Queen of Scots (An. 1. Regni,) advanced him Lord Chamberlain and Earl of Suff. any (An. 12) Lord Treasurer of England. When made Chancellour of the University of Camb. he an∣swered the Orators Speech, by telling him, Tho he knew no Latine, he knew the Sence, (to make him well∣come) and that he would serve the Ʋniversity faith∣fully, &c. Upon which the Vice-Chanc. Hasnet re∣quested him to entertain King Ja. at Camb. which accordingly he did, in a very Magnificent Manner, at the expence of above 5000 l. Hence, after his Death, Th. his second Son, Earl of Barkshire suc∣ceeded him in the Place. He dyed at Audley-End, An. 1626. being Grandfather to the Right Honourable Ja. Earl of Suff. Rich. Westory, probably Son to Sir Je∣rom,A. M. P. Sher. in this County, An. 21. Eliz. impaired his Estate to improve himself with Publick Accomplishments, and was no looser when made Chancellour of the Exchequer, and An. 4. Car. I. Lord Treasurer of England. He was created Earl of Portland An. 18. Car. I. and dy∣ed An. 163- Capital Judges. Sir Jo. Bramstone, born at Maldon and bred in the Middle-Temple, was by King Ch. I. made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. One accomplish∣ed with all Qualities requisite for a Person of his place. Having Married Serj. Bruertons Widow he paid near 3000 l. to Sidney-Coll. which that Serjeant bequeathed by his Will imperfect in it self and invalid in the
Rigour of the Law. His opinion was for Ship-mo∣ney, which cost him much trouble. He dyed about 1646. Souldiers. Rob. Fitz. Walter, born at Woodham-Walters, high∣ly beloved by Rich. 1. and King Jo. until the latter banished him, because he would not Prostitute his Daughter to his Pleasure. The French entertain'd him joyfully, till upon a Truce betwixt France and England, an English Man Challenged any of the French, and was answer'd and unhorsed by this Fitz-Walter. Hereupon King Jo. sent for him, and re∣stored his Lands to him, with License to repair his Castles, and particularly Bainards-Castle in Lond. He was Vulgarly Stiled, The Marshal of Gods Army and Holy-Church. He dyed An. Dom. 1234. and lyeth buried in the Priory of Little-Dunmow. Sir Jo. Haukewood, Son to Gilbert a Tanner, was born at Sible Heningham, and bound an apprentice to a Taylor in Lond. Afterwards he served King E. 3. in the French Wars, and was Knighted for his Valour. Then he served the City and (then) Free-State, of Florence, which rewarded his Gallant Service with a Rich Statue, and Sumptuous Monument wherein his Ashes remain honoured at this day. He had a Son born in Italy, Naturalized An. 7. H. 4. He dyed very Aged. An. 1394. 18. R. 2. Th. Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter and Earl of Suss. was twice Deputy of Ireland. A most Valiant Man, by whose Diligence and Prudence the threatning Clouds of Rebellion were dispersed in his time. Af∣terwards, at the Court of England, he opposed Rob. Earl of Leicester. He dyed An. Dom.— and was buried in the Church of St. Olives Hartfleet, in Lon∣don.
Sir Fr. Vere, rigid in Nature, and undaunted in dangers, served on the Scene of all Christendom where War was acted. One Master-piece of his Valour was at the Battle of New-port, where he was attend∣ed by the Ragged Regiment. Another was when for three years he defended Ostend against a strong Army. He dyed in the beginning of the Reign of King Ja. His younger Brother Sir Horace had as much Courage, and more Meekness; so Pious that he first made his Peace with God, before he went out to War with Man. He always tun'd his Temper to a Tenor-pitch. He was the first Baron of King Ch. I. his Creation. Some years after coming to Court he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so that he dyed before Night, An. Dom. 163- Both lived in War much ho∣noured; dyed in Peace much Lamented. Hen. Vere was Son of Edw. Earl of Oxf. (whose Habitation was at Heningham-Castle,) a Stout and Resolute Man, and the last Lord Chamb. of England of this Family: Who said to a certain Lord who Commended his White Feather, It is a fair one, and if you mark it, there is nere a Saint in it. Indeed his Family was ever Loyal to the Crown, deserving their Motto VERO NIL VERIUS. This Hen. be∣ing a Colonel at the Siege of Breda did overheat his Blood, and a few days after, dyed 16— Physicians. Will. Gilbert, born in Colchester, was Physician to Queen Eliz. He was a great Chymist and Loyal Sub∣ject. He dyed 1603. and lyeth buried in Trin. Church in Colch. His Memory will never fall to the Ground, being supported to Eternity by his incomparable Book de Magnete.
Writers. Gervase of Tilbury, is reported Nephew to King Hen. 2. He was a Favourite to his Kinsman Otho the 4th. Emp. who made him Marshal of the Arch-bishop∣rick of Arles. He wrote a Chron. of England, and added illustrations to Geffrey Monmouth. He flourished An. 1210. under King Jo. Ralph of Cogshall Abbot wrote Chronicles and Ad∣ditions to Radulphus Niger. He resigned, and dyed about 1230. Rog. of Waltham, (within 12 Miles of Lond.) was Canon of St. Pauls, wrote many worthy Books flou∣rishing under H. 3. An. 1250. Jo. Godard, a Cister. Monk, and great Mathema∣tician, wrote some Treatises which proved his skill and improved the Age he lived in. He flourished An. 1250. Aubrey de Very, descended from the Earls of Oxf. Born at Great Bentley, wrote a Learned Book of the Eucharist, and was an Augustinian of St. Osiths. He flourished An. 1250. Th. Maldon, D. D. one of great Reputation for Learning, was Prior of the Monastery at Maldon; He dyed 1404. Th. Waldensis Son of Jo. Netter was a most profes∣sed Enemy to the Wicklifites, and Champion of the Pope. Under King Hen. 4. he was sent Ambassa∣dour for advancing an Union in the Church 1410. He was Confessor and Privy Councellor to H. 5. whom he Taxed of too much Lenity to the Wicklif∣ites, and was the occasion of Burning those poor Christians (under H. 6.) against them he wrote much. He dyed in his journey to Rome. An. 1430
and was buried at Roan, leaving behind an Opinion of a Zealous Sanctity. Since the Reformation. Th. Tusser, born at Riven-hall, was successively a Musician, School-master, Serving-man and a Specula∣tive Husbandman; but a Practical Loyterer in Agri∣culture. He dyed about 1580. Fr. Quarles, Esquire, born at Stewards, was Secr. to Bishop Ʋsher and a very good Poet, who seems to have Drank of Jordan in stead of Helicon, and slept on Mount Olivet for his Parnassus; using no less Devotion then Invention. He dyed about 1643. Joseph Mede, born near Bishop Stratford, wrote de Sanctitate relativâ; he was a Learned man, good Preacher and Charitable to the Poor. From that place of Scripture, Judg. 3.30, And the Land had est 80 Years, he observed, that that was the longest Term of Peace that ever the Church of God did en∣joy. And seeing the same Lease of Halcyon-days was expired in England since 1. Eliz. he grievously su∣spected some strange Concussion in Church and State; which came to pass accordingly. He was a Mille∣nary, and was as much dishonoured by some Furi∣ous Followers, as ever Aristotle was by Ignorant Pre∣tenders to his Philosophy. He dyed An. 1638, leaving near 3000 l. to Christs-Coll in Camb. where he was bred.
Benefactors. Rich. Badew, chosen Chanc. of Camb. An. 1326. erected Ʋniversity-Hall in Milne-Street, which after∣wards was burnt, and Mr. Badews interest therein was resigned to Eliz. Countess of Clare. Since the Reformation. Walt. Mildmey, Knight, born at Chelmsford, under H. 8. and E. 6. had an Office in the Court of Aug∣mentations, and having absconded in Queen Maries days, was afterward in Queen Eliz. Reign made Chanc. of the Exchequer. He founded Emmanuel Coll. in Oxf. He was Obnoxious to the Queens displeasure upon a Suggestion that he was over Popular, yet up∣on his Death (1589) the Queen professed her grief for the loss of a Grave Councellor. Dorothy Petre, Daughter to Sir Will. Secr. of State, and Sister to Jo. Lord Petre. Her Husband Nich. Wadham founded, she finished, both richly endowed Wadham-Coll. in Oxf. Th. Eden, D. L. born in Sudbery, bestowed 1000 l. on Trin. Hall in Camb. He dyed An. 164. Memorable Persons. Matilda Fitz-Walter (Surnamed by some, The Fair, by others, The Chast,) Daughter to Sir Rob. of Wood∣ham, is said to have been the occasion of the  War in the Reign of King John, who assaul  Chastity, and Banished her Father, the mo
to obtain her Consent, yet still found her the Tal Maid (her Anagram) both in Stature and Stoutness of her Vertuous Resolution. That King being so Baffled procured one to Poyson her in a Poached Egg, 1213. and was buried in Little Dunmow-Church. Note, that he who procured her Poysoning in her Meat, was Poysoned in his own Drink afterwards. Sim. Lynch, Gent. born at Groves, was 64 years Minister at North-weal, and 61 Husband to his Wife Eliz. He dyed 1656. Rob. Darcy, in the Reign of H. 6. of an Ancient Family, left by his Will 40 Marks to be disposed for 2000 Masses for his Soul, &c. and a Butt of Malmsy to the Earl of Essex and Lord Dinham, and a Pipe of Red-wine to Sir Th. Montgomery and Sir Th. Tirrel, for their pains in Supervising his Will. Noted Sheriffs. An. 7. Will. de Longo Campo, Bishop of Ely, was Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land, tho a Norman by Birth, and utterly ignorant of the English Tongue. It seems Chancery Suits in those days were Penned and Pleaded in French. 1. Hugo de Nevil and Johan. de Ne∣vil. Hugh attended King Rich. 1. and slew a Lyon in the Holy-Land, a great Benefactor to Waltham-Abbey, where he was buried. John his Son Inherited his Fathers Vertues. Their Issue Male is long since Extinct. Walt. de Baud an Ancient Name which hath flourished 12 Generations, from the year 1174. until 1550. The Bauds held Land in this County, of St. Pauls, by paying a Fee Buck and Doe in their Seasons. They
were paid alive at the High-Altar with great Cere∣mony, the Keeper and Horners in Lond. then blow∣ing their Deaths. 29. Phil. Son to Sir Phil. Bottiller who lies buried in Walton-Church in Hartf. These Butlers are branched from Sir Ralph Butler Bar. of Wem in Shrop. soon after the Norman Conquests, and still flourish at Wood-hall in Hartf. 2. Hen. Marny, Ar. was ('tis suppo∣sed) Servant, afterwards Executor to the Kings Mother Marg. Countess of Richmond. He was Knighted, made Chanc. of the Dutchy, and Created Lord Marny by H. 8. His Daughter and Heir was Married to Th. Howard Visc. Bindon. 6. Will. Fitz Williams Ar. (after∣wards Knight) bequeathed 100 l. to poor Maids Marriages, 40 pounds to the Universi∣ty, 50 l. to mending of the High-ways betwixt Chig∣well and Copers-hall. 25. Brian Tuke, Knight, was Treasurer of the Chamber to H. 8. He lies buried in St. Marg. in Loth∣bury Lond. Lealand says he was a very Eloquent Man and Bale affirms he wrote Observations on Chau∣cer, &c. 3. Sir Jo. Gates, descended from Sir Geffrey Marshal of Calis, and Capt. of the Isle of Wight. (who dyed An. 1477.) is charg∣ed with Sacrilege, and engaging in the Title of Queen Jane, for which he was beheaded An. 1. Ma. 1553. 1. Ralph Rowlet, Knight, Married one of the Daughters of Sir Anth. Cook. His Family is extinct, his Daughter Marrying into the Honourable Family of the Maynards.
12. Ja. Altham, Esquire (whose Arms were Pal∣ly of 6. Erm. and Az. on a Chief G. a Lyon Ramp. O.) was Ancestor to —now living at Mark-hall, made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King Ch. II. whose Accomplished Civility addeth much to the Hon∣our of his Family. Hen. Maynard, Knight, Father to Will. who was bred in St. Jo. Coll. in Camb. (where he founded a Logick Professor) and Created Bar. of Wicklow in Irel. and Easton in this County, whose Son Will. Lord May∣nard hath been so Noble an Encourager of my Studies, that my Hand deserveth to wither, when my Heart passeth him by without a Prayer for his good success. 15. Paul Banning, Knight and Bar. afterwards Visc. Banning of Sudbury, left a large Estate now discendible to the Wives of the Marq. of Dorchester, Visc. Grandison, the Lord Dacres of the South, and Hen. Murry, Esquire of the Bed-Chamber to King Ch. I. Jo. Lucas, Esquire, equalling his Ex∣traction with his Vertues, was at Oxf. made Baron by King Ch. I. The Battles. Tho now in this County, yet the Siege of Colche∣ster must not be forgotten. Know then that the Remnant of the Royalists routed in Kent, with much difficulty recovered this County, and not being able to march farther, or bid Battle to their Numerous Enemies sheltered themselves in Colchester, which in few days they fortifyed above imigination, tho the
Stone outside of the Wall remained ruinous. Nor was it General Fairfax they feared so much as Gene∣ral Famine, having too much of the best Sauce, and too little of the worst meat; insomuch that they were forced to make Mutton of those Creatures which kill Sheep, and Beef of Cattle which never wore Horns; till they were forced to submit to the worst of Conditions. Here those two worthy Knights, Sir Ch. Lucas and Sir Geo. Lisle (the one eminently a whole Troop of Horse, the other a Com∣pany of Foot) were cruelly Sentenced and shot to Death, whose Bodies have since had a Civil Resurre∣ction, restored to all possible outward honour by Pub∣lick Funeral Solemnities. Note, that An. 1581. in the Hundred of Dengy, and An. 1648. in the Hund. of Rochford, an Army of Mice shaved off the Grass at the bare Roots, which withered to dung, was infectious to Cattle. The March following numberless Flocks of Owls from all parts flew thither and destroyed them. Gloucestershire. GLoucestershire hath Worc. & Warw. on the North, and Wilt. on the East, Som. on the South, Heref. with the River Wye on the West, and is in length 48 miles & in the broadest part 28. The Severn runneth through it. 'Tis said this County was much more fruitful in former times than it is now. Tho
it affords not the best Tillage, yet for Pasturage there is Land near Slimbridge, where in the Spring time, let it be bit to the Roots (as is reported) a Wand laid along therein over-night will be cove∣red with new grown Grass by the next Morning. Which being represented to King Ja. in other Terms, viz. that the Wand could not be seen next morning, he replyed, I know a place in Scotland where if a Horse be left over Night, he cannot be seen in the Morning. But the difference is Palpable, between long Grass and long Fingers, or betwixt the Grass stealing out of the Earth without, and a Mans stealing of a Horse with a Felonious intent. The Natural Com∣modities in this County are, Tabacco which grew formerly about Winchcomb, but is since prohibited by Act of Parliament, Oak, the best in England is in Dean-Forrest in this County. In the Reign of Queen Eliz. the Spaniard sent an Ambassadour over purpose∣ly to get Oak destroyed (privately) in Engl. The next is Steel which was made in abundance by Sir Basil Brooke, who had a Patent prohibiting the im∣portation of Forraign Steel, but it was afterwards revoked. The Manufactures are Cloathing as good as any in England; the best Wool growing on Cots-wood-Hills in this County. Mustard, the best in Engl. at Tewksbury. Then Wine formerly growing here, witness the places called the Vineyards; and in this Shire there were Rent-wines paid in great Proporti∣ons. Sider a Liquor more proper for the English Climat. Of Buildings. The Abbey (since Cathedral) Church of Gloucester, is a Beautiful Fabrick consisting of a continued Window-work; where, if you speak against a Wall softly, another shall hear your Voice better a good way off then near hand, occasi∣oned probably by some hollow, behind the Wall. The City is bound by Act of Parl. to maintain and
repair this Church. As for Civil Structures, our late Wars laid a Finger on Barkeley; their Arms on Sudeley Castle, but their Loynes on Cambden-house (one of the newest and neatest in Engl. built by Bap∣tist Hicks, Visc. Cambden) pressed down to the Foundation. As for Wonders, there are frequently found at Aldersey Oysters, Cockles, &c. of Stone which are Lusus Naturae, and cannot in reason be sup∣posed to have been real Fish. The Higre, that is, the confluence of fresh and Salt Water in the Severn, which is attended with terrible Flashings and Noise, so that that River may seem to be troubled with a Fit of the Mother. The last is a kind of devouring Bird coming in the Harvest-time, (tho seldom) in∣to this County, which can cut an Apple at one Snap with its long Bill, which Rapacious Creature drinks up Hogsheads of Sider at the first hand. Proverbs. I. As sure as God's in Gloucestershire. This pro∣bably was superstitiously inferred from the Multi∣tude of Abbeys formerly Extant in this County. II. You are a Man of Duresley. This is taken for one who breaks his word, I hope the Inhabitants of Duresley will resolve to confute this Proverb by their Practice, whatsoever was the first occasion thereof. III. It is long in coming as Cotswold Barley. It is ap∣plyed to such things as are slow but sure; The Corn on the Wowlds being exposed to the Winds is back∣ward at first, but afterwards overtakes the for∣wardest in this County. IV. He looks as if he had lived on Tewksbury Mustard. It is spoken of such who have a severe or sad Countenance.
V. The Tracies have always wind in their Faces. Founded on a false Tradition, since Sir Will. Tracy was most active against four Knights, who killed Th. Becket; it is imposed on Tracies for Miraculous Penance, that whither they go by Land or Water, the Wind is ever on their Faces. Saints. Kenelme Son of Kenwolfe, King of Mercia, at 7 years of Age succeeded his Father, but was shortly after killed by Quenrid his Sister, and that Murder was wonderfully discovered (if the Legend be true) by a Dove that carried in Parchment notice thereof to Rome. As for Quenrid, when her Eyes fell out they Bloodied her Primer, whilst her Brothers Corps was Solemnly buried at Winchcomb, and had in holy Ve∣neration. Martyrs. Jo. Baynham Esquire, a Lawyer and a true Lover of the Gospel, was by Sir Th. Moores Order whipt at a Tree in Chelsey, then cruelly Rackt in the Tower in his sight, after which he abjured. But Recant∣ing his Recantation, he was after much cruel usage Burnt in Smithfield. Prelates. Tideman de Winchcomb, was made by R. 2. Ab∣bot of Benle, Bishop of Landaff, then of Worcester. He was also the Kings Physician; having a Plura∣lity of Cures both in Number and Kind.
Jo. Chedworth, Bishop of Lincoln was joyned in Commission by King Hen. 6. with the Bishop of Winch. to Regulate the Statutes of Eaton and Kings Colledges in Camb. He dyed An. 1471. Jo. Carpenter, born at Westbury was Bishop of Wor∣cester. He could not procure to himself the Ti∣tle of Bishop of Worcester and Westbury. He dyed 1475. Th. Ruthal, born in Chichester was made by King Hen. 7. Bishop of Durham, and by H. 8. Privy Coun∣cellour. He was grossly mistaken when in stead of a Breviate of the State of England, which he had drawn up, he presented H. 8. with his own Estate amounting to an invidious Sum, viz. of 100000 l. his Enemy Card. Woolsey glad at the mistake, told the King, he knew now where a Mass of Money was, in case he needed it. This broke Ruthal's Heart, who had paid the third part of the cost of making the Bridge of New-Castle over Tyne, and intended many more Benefactions, had not Death (1523) on this occasion surprised him. Since the Reformation. Edw. Fox. born in Duresley, was Almoner to King Hen. 8. He first brought Dr. Cranmer to the know∣ledge of the King. He was afterwards Bishop of Hereford, and was the Principal Pillar of the Refor∣mation, as to the Managery of the Politick part thereof. Of the many Books he wrote, that De differentiâ utriusque Potestatis was his Master-piece. He was employed on several Embassies into France and Germany and dyed An. 1538.
States-men. Sir Ralph Butler, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Sudeley in this County, was Lord Treasurer of Engl. He built Sudley-Castle the strongest and best Habita∣tion of a Subject in Engl. Being Summoned by E. 4. and suspecting imprisonment, he said, It is thou Su∣deley and not I that am a Traytor. And so resigned the same into the Kings hands to procure his Liber∣ty. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Anth. Fitz Herbert, Justice of the Com. Pleas, V. Derb. Edw. Trotman, born at Cam. wrote an Abridge∣ment of Sir Edw. Coke's Reports, his Endeavours be∣ing well esteemed by the Learned in that Profession. He was buried in the Temple-Church 1643. Souldiers. Sir Will. Tracy, of Todington, a Gent. of high Birth, State and Stomach, much in favour with King Hen. 2. was the forwardest of the four Knights who killed Thomas Becket. He had large Possessions in Dev. His intended Pilgrimages to Jerus. for Pe∣nance were ever crossed with advers Winds. He dyed An. 1180. Seamen. Will. Winter, Knight and Vice-Adm. of Engl. assaul∣ted the Fort of French in the Island of Inchkeith in Edenburgh Frith An. 1559. He (with Sir Th. Smith) demanded the Restitution of Calis, 1567. He con∣ducted
a great Treasurer of the Genoa Merchants safely into the Netherlands, in despite of the French opposing him, 1568. He (with Rob. Beale) was sent in∣to Zealand to demand the Restitution of some English Ships, 1576. He did signal Service, when the Sp. Fleet was fallen towards the Coast of Zealand, 1588. Lidney-house, the Seat of the Family, had produced ma∣ny more Mariners happy in Sea-Voyages. Writers. Osbern Claudian of Glouc. where he was a Bene∣dictine Monk, a Learned and Facetious Man, wrote a Comment on the Pentateuch, and on the Incarnati∣on, Nativity, &c. of Christ, besides his Pan-Ormia and others. Rob. of Glou. where he was a Monk, was a Rhymer but good Historian, flourishing under Hen. 2. and King Jo. 1200. Alan (Abbot) of Teuxbury, was intimate with Th. Becket, after whose decease, he, with three other of Becket's Evangelists, wrote the History of his Mock-passion and Miracles. He flourished under King Jo. An. 1200. Alex. of Hales as he followed Pet. Lombard so he did lead Th. Aquinas and other Schoolmen. He was the first that wrote a Comment on the Sentences, cal∣led the Sum of Divinity, at the Instance of Pope In∣noc. 4. For his Services he had the Title of Doctor Irrefragabilis. He dyed An. Dom. 1245. and was buried in Paris. Th. de la More, well descended, was famous in Peace and War, and brought honour out of Scotland on his Swords point being Knighted by E. 4 for his Va∣liant and Fortunate Service therein. He wrote the Manner of Deposition of E. 2. to whom he bore a
most Loyal Affection, and did the best Service he could on that Fatal occasion. He flourished An. 1326. Th. of Hales a Minorite, promoted the Fabulous point of Purgatory, with other Popish Positions un∣der E. 3. 1340. Th. Neale, born at Yate, and bred in Oxf. (where he was Prof. of Hebrew) dedicated his Translati∣on of some Rabbins to Card. Pole. He was a Man of fearful Nature, yet constant to the Rom. Persua∣sion, being Chaplain to Bishop Bonner. Papists ad∣mire him for his rare Judgment, and Protestants for his strange Invention in first eigning Math. Parkers Consecration at the Nags-head in Cheapside. He li∣ved in Oxf. 1576. Since the Reformation. Rich. Tracy, Esquire born at Todington was Son to Sir Will. the Confessor, to whose Zeal he succeeded, and wrote in the defence thereof several Treatises in English, amongst which was Preparations to the Cross. He wrote Prophetically before the Reign of Queen Mary. Note, that An. 1626. there was (amongst others) a Treatise called A Preparation to the Cross found in the Belly of a Cod, which was sold at Camb. Of which these Verses were written. If Fishes thus do bring us Books, then we May hope to equal Bodleys Library. Yet after that, some found the Cross in Camb. Sir Th. Overbury, Knight, born at Borton on the Hill, and bred in Oxf. hath given a Proof of his Accomplishments, in Poetry and Prose. He was the first Writer of Characters in Engl. so far as I have observed. He lost the favour of the Earl of Som.
by dissuading him from keeping Company with a Lady, Wife of another Person of Honour. He was committed to the Tower for refusing to be imployed Ambassadour to Russia. His strict Restraint encou∣raged his Enemies to Practise his Death, which was by Poyson effected, 1615. For which the Earl was banished the Court, and others were executed. Jo. Sprint, bred in Oxf. and Minister of Thornbury, became a Conformist of a great Dissenter, and wrote his Cassander Anglicanus (a Persuasive to Conformity) dedicated to Arch-Deac. Burton, whose Arguments had prevailed much with him in the Laudable Change of his opinion. He dyed about 30 years ago. Jo. Workman, born about Lasbury and bred in Oxf. and Preacher at Glouc. made a Counter-change to the former, renouncing all Conformity by reason of some Super-Canonical Ceremonies that were pressed by some. He was outed of his School for saying, That the Pa∣pists painted the Blessed Virgin more like a Curtesan than a modest Maid; and afterwards turn'd Physician. He dyed 1636. Rich. Capel, born in Glouc. and bred in Oxf. wrote a Pious Book of Temptations, asserting all Temptati∣ons to be injected solely by our own Corruption. Up∣on his refusing his assent to the Book of Sports on the Lords-day, he resigned his Benefice. He dyed An. Dom. 165- Benefactors to the Publick. Kath. Clyvedon, (or Dame K. Berkley) founded the fair School of Wootton-under-edge, which remains after the extinguishment of the vast Donations of the Berkleys to Monasteries.
Sir Will. Hampton, born at Minchen-Hampton, was a Fish-monger and afterwards Lord Mayor of Lond. 1472. He was the first that set up Stocks in every Ward, for the punishment of Vagabonds, &c. Since the Reformation. Th. Bell, twice Mayor of Glouc. was one of the first that brought the Trade of Capping into the City, and was Knighted by H. 8. He bought from the Crown, Blackfryers by the South-gate, where he built his House, and hard by it an Alms-house, endowing it with Com∣petent Revenues. His Daughter and Heir brought a fair Estate into the Families of the Dennis. He dyed in the beg. of the Reign of Queen Eliz. Edw. Palmer, Esquire, (Uncle to Sir Th. Overbu∣ry) born at Limington, in this County, where his Ancestry have continued ever since the Conquest, was a curious and diligent Antiquary. He spent vast Sums of Money in pursuance of a design to erect an Acade∣my in Palmers-Island in Virginia; but before it was finished, he was Transplanted to another World, 1625. Hugh Pirry, born in Wootton-under-edge, Merchant and Sher. in Lond. 1632. derived Water to the Town of Wootton at his own cost; and bequeathed 1000 l. for the building of an Alms-house there. Of 4 Daugh∣ters, the Eldest was Married to the Lord Fitz-Williams of Northam. He dyed An. 163—
Noted Sheriffs. An. 9. Walt. de Stuchesly, received the Kings Letters, enjoyning him to take an account of the Number and Names of all Villa∣ges, &c. (with the present Possessors) of the Coun∣ty. The Return whereof began thus, Nulla est Civi∣tas in Comitat. Glouc. &c. There is no City in the Coun∣ty of Gloucester; Gloucester having been since made an Episcopal See (and City) by H. 8. The like Returns were made through England. 5. Th. Berkeley de Cobberley used E. 2. very civilly, when Prisoner at Berke∣ley Castle, one of the Seats of that Right Ancient Family, who are descended from Rob. Fitz-Harding derived from the Kings of Denmark. The Crosses in their Arms, denote their Services in the Holy-war, as the Mitre signifies their Benefactions. Of this Fa∣mily was descended Will. Lord Berkeley, by King Hen. 4. made Visc. Berkeley and (by R. 2.) Earl of Nott. and (in the Right of his Wife Daughter of Th. Mowbray) D. of Norf. Hen. 7. made him Marq. Berkeley and Marshal of Engl. He dyed without Issue. At this Day there flourisheth many Noble Stems sprung thereof, tho Geo. Lord Berkeley, Bar. Berke∣ley, Lord Mowbray, Segrave, Bruce be the Top Branch. One who hath been so signally Bountiful in promo∣ting these (and all other) my weak endeavours, that I deserve to be Dumb if ever I forget to return him Publick thanks for the same. 43. Jo. Points, whose Ancestors are mentioned in Dooms-day-book, and were Seated at Acton in the days
of E. 2. when Sir Nich. Points Married the Daughter and Heir of Acton. 6. Will Kingston, Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower and Captain of the Guard to King Hen. 8. being persuaded by Card. Woolsey to beware of Kingston he declined the Town King∣ston in his way, but he dyed within a few days after he had been brought out of the North by 4. Anth. Kingston, the terrible Provost Marshal of the Kings Army in the Execution of the Western Rebels, who also dyed (as some say) for fear of Death in his way to Lond. having been apprehended for a Conspiracy against Queen Mary and the Go∣vernment.
Hantshire. HAntshire hath Berkshire on the North, Surrey and Suss. on the East, the Sea on the South, Dorcet and Wiltshire on the West, in length 54, and in breadth 30 Miles. It affords the best Wood for Fuel, the clearest Rivolets and a fair and fruitful Soyl, tho Sto∣ny in some places. The South-West of the County is called the New Forrest, made by Will. the Conqueror, where are Red Deer, for the maintaining of which Towns were laid wast. This County affords the best Honey in England on the Champain and the worst on the Heath. The Hoggs here make the best Bacon, be∣ing our English Westphalian. As for Cloth there is much made in this County. Of Buildings, the Ca∣thedral of Winchester yieldeth to none in England for Venerable Magnificence. The Tombs made by Bishop Fox, for the Dust of the Saxon Kings and Bishops of that See, were Barbarously thrown down in the beginning of the Civil Wars. As for Civil Structures, Basing built by the Marq. of Winch. was the greatest of any Subjects House in England. The Motto Love Loyalty written in the Windows, was much practised in it, when for Resistance on that account, it was lately levelled to the Ground. There
is a wonderful Oak said to be in this County, that puts forth green Leaves yearly on, or about Christ∣mas-day. It groweth nigh Lidhurst in the New-For∣rest. Proverbs. I. Manners make a Man, quoth Will. Wickham. II. Canterbury is the higher Rack, but Winchester is the better Manger. W. Edington Bishop of Winch. (the Author) gave this for a reason of his refusal of the See of Cant. III. The Isle of Wight hath no Monks, Lawyers nor Foxes, viz. in Proportion to places of the like extent. Princes. Hen. Eldest Son of King Jo. born at Winchester An. 1208. was a Pious but Poor King. He was at first postponed to King Lewis of Fr. and afterwards em∣broyled with the Barons Wars and imprisoned; yet at last he attained a comfortable old Age by the means of his Son Prince Edward. He would be governed by those he knew to be wiser than himself, the main cause of his Peaceable Death and Pompous Burial in the Abbey of Westminster of his own Foundation An. Dom. 1273. Eleanor Daughter to E. 1. was born at Winch. An. 1306. and dyed in her Infancy, and lyeth buried in St. Pet. Westm. Arth. Eldest Son to King Hen. 7. and Queen Eliz.
was born at Winch: An. 1486. being Partus Octome∣stris yet vigorous; He is more known to Pesterity by the Widow he left the Lady Kath. Dowager, than by any of his own Personal Performances. He dyed An. 1502. and lies buried in the Cathedral of Worc. Saints. Edburgh Daughter to King E. the Elder, at three years of Age took (you may believe it if you will) the N. Testament, leaving Jewels, presented joyntly by her Father: a great Argument of Radical Piety! afterwards she would steal the Nuns Socks, and re∣store them washed and anointed. She dyed 920. some of her Bones lying at Winchester (or Wilton) were Translated to Pilshore in Worc. Martyrs. Jo. Philpot, well descended, was Arch-Deac. of Lincoln and a Zealous Promoter of the Prot. Religion. For some Words he used in the Convocation, he was Martyred An. 1555. Kath. Gowches and her two Daughters Guillemine Gilbert and Perotine Massey, for absenting from the Church and denying the Real presence, were burnt for Hereticks, An. 1556. Add to these the Infant that by the force of the Fire burst of of his Mothers Belly, Pe∣rotine aforesaid, whose Husband was a Minister of Gods Word. The Babe being taken out of the Fire, was thrown in again by the command of Eliez Gosse∣lin Bailiff of the Isle of Guersney, where this hap∣ned.
Prelates. Will. Wickham, (the Long) Son to Sir Jo. Perrot; Long his Name and Long lasting his Memory, while the World endures for his 2 Foundations at Oxf. and Winchester in the first founding St. Maries Coll. He dy∣ed An. 5. Hen. 4. Jo. Russel born at Winchester, was Chanc. of Oxf. for Term of his Life. By E. 4. he was made Bishop of Lincoln, and by R. 3. Lord Chanc. of England, but opposing the Lord Hastings Death he was imprisoned. He dyed An. 1490. leaving behind him the Reputati∣on of a Pious, Prudent and Learned Man. Will. Warham, born at Ockley of Worshipful Pa∣rentage, was employed by H. 7. to Marg. Dutchess of Burgundy, and by him advanced Bishop of Lond. then Arch-bishop of Cant. but was Eclipsed by Wool∣sey, who had more Honour and more Envy. Being Prime Advocate for Queen Kath. (in the matter of her Divorce) he carried it so prudently, that he neither betrayed the cause of his Client, nor incurred the Kings displeasure. He fell into a Praemunire with the rest of the Clergy, and is said to have spent 3000 l. in repair of his Places. He dyed. An. 1533. Rob. Sherborn, was employed Ambassadour by H. 7. and by him made Bishop of St. Dav. then Chich. which Church he adorned. When 90 years of Age he resigned, and dyed An. 1536. Jo. White, was Bishop of Lincoln, then of Winch. upon which Bishoprick he entered upon condition to pay Card. Pole a yearly Pension of 1000 l. He wrote an Elegy on the Eucharist to prove the Corporal
presence, and Preached the Funeral Sermon of Queen Mary, wherein reflecting on Queen Eliz. he incur∣red her just displeasure. Whereupon he was im∣prisoned till his Death, An. 1560. Since the Reformation. Th. Bilson, born in Winch. was Bishop of Worc. then of Winch. As Reverend and Learned a Prelate as Eng∣land ever afforded, Witness his Works, Of the Per∣petual Government of Christs Church, and of Christs de∣scent into Hell. The new Translation of the Bible was by King Ja. command, ultimately committed to his and Dr. Smith's (Bishop of Glouc.) perusal. He dyed 1618. Hen. Cotton, born at Warblington, was Pr. Coun∣sellor to E. 6. and God-son to Queen Eliz. who pre∣ferred him Bishop of Salisbury, and pleasantly said, that formerly she had blessed many of her God-sons, but now her God-son should bless her. Another Cotton, about the same time, being Consecrated Bishop of Exeter, the Queen added that she hoped she had well Cottoned the West. By Patience his Wife he had 19 Children, and dyed 1615. Arth. Lakes, born in Southampton, was Dean of Worc. and Bishop of Bath and VVells. He answered St. Pauls Character of a Bishop, only he had no Wife. When Mr. of St. Crosses, he encreased the Diet, &c. of the poor Brethren. When Bishop, he kept 50 Servants in Charity. He was, in fine, a Pattern of Piety. He dyed An. 1602.
States-men. Richard Rich, Knight, well descended, was Sollici∣tor to H. 8. Upon his deposition chiefly, Sir Th. More was beheaded. Under Cromwell, he was a lesser Hammer to knock down Abbeys, some of which stuck (justly) to his Fingers. By E. 6. he was made Lord Chanc. of Engl. Being an opposer of D. Dudley he resigned his Office by Prevention, having got a fair Estate at Lees-Abbey in Ess. whereof he was Baron. He dyed in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz. being direct Ancestor to the Right Ho∣nourable Ch. Rich now Earl of Warwick: Will. Pawlet was Bar. of Basing and Marq. of Winch. in this County,S. N. de∣scended from the Powlets in Som. 'Tis said that com∣ing to Court upon trust, he prosper'd more than any Subject since the Conquest; living in the Harvest of Estates, viz. the time of the Dissolution of the Ab∣beys. He was Servant to H. 7. and for 30 years Trea∣surer to H. 8. E. 6. Queen Ma. and Queen Eliz. The latter in some sort owed their Crown to his Counsel, his Policy being the Principal Defeater of D. Dudley's design to Disinherit them. Having seen 103 of his Descendants, he dyed An. Dom. 1572. Aet. 97. Sir Th. Lakes, born in Southampton, was Secr. of Estate to King Ja. He could Endite, Write and Dis∣course at the same time. He was resembled to the Ship Swift-sure, and was withal one of great Secrecy, & a learned and good Man. He was one of the three Noble Hands who first led Mr. Geo. Villers into the
favour of King Ja. Yet he incurred the Kings Dis∣pleasure for the Offences of his Relations, tho the King even then gave him this Publick Eulogie in open Court, That he was a Minister of State fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe. Souldiers. Beavois Earl of Southampton, in the time of W. Con∣queror, was vanquished (with his English and Welsh Army) by the Normans, near to Carclis's, from whence he fled to Carlile. Note Beavoisses Sword (in Arun∣del Castle) is less than that of E. 3. in Westminster-Church. Sea-men. Sir Jo. Wallop, well descended, provoked with Prior Johns Piracy, Landed in Normandy with 800 Men, Burnt 21 Towns with Divers Ships. Where∣fore his Arms may appear prophetical, viz. Arg. a Bend-unde (i. e. Wave) S. Rob. Tomson, Merch. born in Andover, made a Voyage for the Discovery of Nova Hispania, of which (with the City Mexico) he wrote a De∣scription. He was imprisoned in Mex. then in Spain for speaking against Saint-worship. And after his Enlargement he was confined to Donna Maria de la Barrera, a Spanish Lady, with whom he had in Marriage 2500 l. besides Jewels.
Writers. Lamfrid of Winch. a Famous Doctor, flourished 980. Wolston of Winch. a Learned, good and Eloquent Man, tho his Eloquence was confined to Poetry, flou∣rished An. 1000. Jo. of Rasingstoak, Arch-Deac. of Leic. went to Athens, where he heard the Lectures of Constantine a Noble Woman (not 20 years old) of the Myste∣ries of Nature. He was the first Restorer of Greek in Engl. He was the Author of many Works and dyed 1252. Jo. of Hide, wrote Of the patience of Job, and of his own Convent, besides Homilies. He flourished An. 1284. Will. Lillie, born at Odiam, Mr. of St. Pauls School, wrote a Lat. Grammer revised by Erasmus. He flou∣rished An. 1522. Will. Alton, a Dominican, in his Sermons avouched the Blessed Virgin tainted with Original Sin. He flou∣rished An. 1330. Since the Reformation. Mich. Reneger, bred in Oxf. wrote a Book in defence of Ministers Marriage. Th. Sternhold, was Servant to H. 8. and a Legatee in his Will, by which 100 Marks were left to him as Groom of the Robes. He was also one of the
Bed-Chamber to E. 6. He Translated 37 Psalms in∣to English Meeter, which with the rest, have been called by some Geneva Giggs; and 'tis no wonder Libellous Verses or Songs were made on the Tran∣slaters of the Psalms, seeing Drunkards made them on David the Author thereof. He dyed An. 1549, be∣fore the Reign of Queen Ma. Dav. Whitehead, bred in Oxf. fled in the days of Queen Ma. into Frankford, where he was in great esteem. In the Reign of Queen Eliz. he refused the Arch-bishoprick of Cant. out of a desire of Pri∣vacy, and the Master-Ship of Hospital of the Savoy, which (had he been disaffected to the Government) he might have accepted without Subscription, but would not, affirming he could live plentifully on the Preaching of the Gospel. Being a great Di∣vine, he was chosen 1. Eliz. one of the Dispu∣tants against the Popish Bishops. His many Books extant testify his Learning and Religion. When the Queen told him, She loved him the better because he was unmarried, In truth Madam, (said he with a Conscientious Bluntness) I love you the worse because you are unmarried. He dyed An. Dom. 1571. Nich. Fuller, Minister of Allington, was an Excel∣lent Linguist, and his Books found good regard beyond the Seas, where they were reprinted. Dru∣sius charged him for being his Plagiary, tho Mr. Fuller, had never seen any of his Works. He was Eminent for his Humility, and dyed 1626. Th. James, born in the Isle of Wight, D. D. and Keeper of the Library in Oxf. was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parl. of Oxf. 1 Car. where he made a Motion that some might be Commission∣ed to peruse the Manuscript Fathers in all English Li∣braries
for detecting Popish Editions. He was Sub-Dean of Wells, and dyed 1628. Ch. Butler, wrote a Book of Musick, an Eng∣lish Grammer and a Treatise of Bees, whence were made these Lines Aut a Consiliis Apibus, Butlere, fuisti Aut a Consiliis est Apis ipsa tuis. He was a Pious Man, painful Preacher, and solid Di∣vine, Witness his Book of the Marriage of Cousen Germans approved by Dr. Prideaux. He dyed a∣bout 1640. Romish Exile Writers. Rich. White, born at Basingstoak, proceeded Dr. of the Laws in Padua, were he was afterwards Regius Professor. He wrote, amongst other Books a British and English History. He was made Priest, and was alive at Doway, 1611. Jo. Pits, D. D. born near Alton, after much Writing and Travelling was Confessor to the Dut∣chess of Cleve. One Book of his, de Illustribus An∣gliae Scriptoribus survived him, having caused all the rest to be Buried with himself. And because that single Book Treated of a Subject handled by ma∣ny, he with his Base sets off this Treble, viz. Pits the Drone, Leland the Bee, and Bale the Wasp make up
Three. He was at first Nephew to Sanders, and at last Dean of Liverdun in Lorrain where he dy∣ed 1616. Benefactors since the Reformation. Sir Will. Doddington, Sher. of this County An. 3. Jac. restored to the Church the Impropriations which be held. The Almighty God Polished him with the sharp Instruments of Affliction. He dyed about 1638. Jos. Diggons, a Dutch-man,S. N. lived at Whetham, became Barrester, and by his Will bequeathed to Clare-hall in Camb. (where he had been bred) his Real Estate to the value of 130 l. per An. for the founding of Fellowships, &c. He dyed 1658. Memorable Persons. One at Stockbridge made a Plough, which drawn by Dogs, and managed by one Man, could Till in one Day nigh an Acre of Light-ground in this Coun∣ty. But these were brought up to their Trade; I have heard of a Race of Beagles about Portsmouth that were Artists in hunting of Moles, tho they had never served an Apprentiship.
Note, that H. Ep. Winton, Cardinalis Angliae, An. 1445. was Son of Jo. of Gaunt, and the Popes Legate or General, who led an Army into Bohe∣mia.
Hertford-shire. HErtford-Shire, is so called from Hertford, the chief City therein, which gives a Hart, &c. for its Arms it hath Essex on the E. Middlesex; on the S. Buckingham on the W. Bedford and Cam∣bridge on the N. and is almost a Square of 20 Miles. The Garden of England for Delight. The Soyle tho fittest for a crop of Wood, bears good Grain. Of Buildings, 1. Theobalds, once in great∣est Credit, was built by Sir William Cecil, Lord Treasurer of England, and by his Son exchanged with K. James for 2. Hatfield-house, which was at first the Bishops of Ely, then the Kings, afterwards the Earls of Salisbury, and is inferior to none in England, being proud of the adjoyning Vineyard, the English Tempe. Of Medicinal Waters, there is one Well near Barnet, that springs from Allom∣veins. The Water coagulateth Milk, and the Curd thereof, is an excellent Plaister for green Wounds. Proverbs. 1. Hertford-shire-clubs and clouted Shoon. 2. Hert∣ford Hedge-hogs, Whereof there is plenty in this County, whose nudling on the Earth, may serve as a Metaphor for Covetousness. 3. Hertford-shire kind∣ness.
This is taken for a mutual return of Fa∣vours. Princes. William Second Son of K. E. 3. was born at Hat∣field, An. 9. E. 3. 1335. and died within a few days after. Edmund of Langley, Fifth Son to E. 3. was created Earl of Cambridge, An 36. E. 3. and Duke of York, An. 9. R. 2. He married Isabel, Daughter and Coheir of Peter K. of Castile, and they lye buri∣ed at Langley, together. He had Richard, Duke of York to his eldest, and died, An. 1402. Edmund of Haddam Son to Q. Katherine by Owen Theodor, half-brother to H. 6. and Father to H. 7. was solemnly created Earl of Richmond, at Reading, An. 31. H. 6. He died 1456. 'Tis said, the fair Cathedral of St Davids, was spared in the days of H. 8. for the Monument of this Prince, which was in the Quire, as the Church of Peterborough was saved by the Corps of Q. Katherine Dowager. Others say the Earl was buried at Carmarthen. Saints. St. Alban, born in Verulam, was Martyred under Dioclesian, An. 303. Note that there grows good Liquoras, on the ruinous Walls of that City. Popes. Nicholas, Son to Rob. Breakspear, born at Abbots-Langley, was Lay-brother in the Abbey of St. Al∣bans. He was afterwards Pope of Rome, by the Name of Adrian 4. having recommended himself
to the Chair, by his converting the Norwegians. He was Choakt with a Fly 1158. Whose Nephew Boso was made Cardinal. 1155. Prelates. Richard de Ware, (al. Warren, was made Abbot of Westminster, 1260, and afterwards Treasurer of England, to E. 1. He made that Pavement at Westminster, which is a Master-piece of Art. He died 1283. Ralph Baldock, wrote a History of England, and was made B. of London, by E. 1. He gave above 200l to repair the East part of St. Pauls, where, upon clearing the Foundation, there were a great number of Heads of Oxen found, which probably had been sacrificed to Diana. He died 1313. Jo. Barnet, was made B. of Worc. then translated to Bath and Wells, hence to Ely, and was Lord Trea∣surer of England. He died 1373. Th. Rudburn, was Chancellour of the University of Oxf. 1420. A great Scholar and Mathematici∣an. His mildness procured him the Love of per∣sons of Honour. He built a Tower over the Gate of Merton Coll. He wrote a Chron. of England, and was B. of St. Dav. He flourished 1419. Statesmen. Sir Edw. Waterhouse, Knight, born at Helmsted∣bury of an ancient Family, since the time of H. 3. His Father was Auditor to H. 8. who foretold that this Edward, (when but a Child,) would be the Crown of all his Fathers Children, and a Man of great Honour and Wisdom, fit for the Service of Prin∣ces.
And accordingly he grew in the Favour of great Persons, and Knowledge of the Affairs of State. Walt. Devereux E. of Essex lying on his death-Bed, said to him, Oh my Ned farewell, thou art the faithfullest and friendliest Gentleman that ever I knew. Sir Jo. Perrot Dep. of Ireland, would do nothing in State-Affairs without him. He was afterwards in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth Knighted, then made Privy-Councellor for Ireland, and Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer therein; Where he was highly instrumental, in modelling the Shires as they now are. He boldly signed the Instrument where∣in the Earl of Desmond was proclaimed Traitor, when other Privy-Councellours, dreading the Earls greatness, durst not do the same. He died at Wood-Church, 1591. leaving no Issue. Henry Cary, Visc. of Faulkland, in Scotland, was born at Aldnam. A most accomplished Gentleman, and compleat Courtier. He was made by K. James Dep. of Ireland. He married the Daughter and Heir, of Sir Lawrence Tanfield, Chief Bar. of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair Estate in Oxf. He died, 1620. Souldiers. Sir Henry Cary, was made by Q. Elizabeth, Lord Chamb. Baron of Hunsden. He said to his Ser∣vants, when they had drawn their Swords in his Quarrel, against one Mr. Colt, You Rogues, may not I and my Neighbour change a Blow, but you must inter∣pose? His custom in Swearing and Obscenity in Speech, tho it may induce some of the Modern im∣provers of such Liberal Arts, to Swear: He was a fine Gentleman, yet it made him seem a worse Chri∣stian, than he was, and a better Knight of the Car∣pet
then he could be. He might have been with the Queen whatsoever he would himself, but would be no more then what he was, preferring enough above a Feast in that Nature. He was a Man of great Candour, Loyalty and Courage; The first Northern Commotion was suppressed by him, after which the Queen sent him a Congratulatory Letter, in which she highly commended his Wisdom, Valour and Fidelity. When he lay on his death-Bed, the Queen was pleased to give him a Visit, and caused a Patent for the Earldom of Wiltshire be drawn up, and the Robes to be made, and both to be laid upon his Bed. But this Lord (whose Dissimulation was as his Latine) Madam (said he) seeing you counted me not worthy of this Honour, whilst I was living, I count my self unworthy of it, now I am dying. He de∣ceased 1596. and lyeth buried in Westminster-Abbey, being the direct Ancestor to the Earls of Dover and Monmouth. Physicians. Jo. Giles, born at St. Albans, was Physician to Philip K. of France, then D. D. and the first English Dominican. Rob. Grosthead B. of Linc. lying on his death-Bed, sent for him, and expected double comfort from him. He died 1253. Writers. Alex. Nequam was born in St. Albans, to the Ab∣bot of which he wrote (for Admission) Si vis veni∣am, Sin autem, tu autem. To whom the Abbot re∣turn'd Si vis venias, Si Nequam, nequaquam.
One Philip accosts Nequam thus, Et niger & nequam cum sis cognomine Nequam, Nigrior esse potes, Nequior esse nequis: To whom Nequam rejoyn'd, Phi nota faetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis, Phi malus & Lippus, totus malus ergò Philippus. Yet Nequam was Miraculum ingenii. He was Canon of Exeter, and lyes buried at Worcester. William of Ware, was Instructor to Jo. Duns Scotus. He flourished under H. 3. 1270. Jo. Mandevile Knight, born at St. Albans wrote his own (Wonderful) Itinerary through Afric, &c. He was wont to say of that Age, Virtue is gone, the Church is despised, the Clergy doe err, the De∣vil reigns, and Simon is his Deputy. He died 1370. Nicholas Gorham, a Dominican bred in Merton Colledge, in Oxford, spent his life in France: He commented almost on all the Scriptures. He died at Paris, 1400. Jo. Whethamstead, was Abbot of St. Albans, in the adorning of which Church he spent above 6000 pounds. On the North side of the Church he set up the Statues of those Heathen Philosophers, who had testified of the Incarnation of Christ. Having written above 80 Treatises, he died 1440. Jo. Bourchier, Baron Berners, of an Honourable Family, whose ancient Seat was Tharfield in this County. For his good Service in mauling Mi∣chael Joseph the Black-smith, leader of the Cornish Rebells against K. Henry 7. 1496, he was made Chief Governour of Calis. He translated many
and wrote some Books. He was the second Author (the Lord Tiptoft being the first) since the de∣cay of Learning. He died 1532. 'Tis said the Berners Estate, is descended to the Knyvets in Norf. Since the Reformation. Th. Cartwright, of St. Jo. Coll. in Cambridge, (whence he fled in Q. Maries time,) was Marg. Professor in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. He was the Champion of the Presbyterian Party. He died An. 1603. Arthur Capel, Esquire of Hadham, was by Char∣les 1. created Baron 1641. After the surrender of Oxford, he retired to his House from whence he went to Colchester. His Loyalty to his Master was proof against all Batteries and Sollicitations of his Enemies. He was beheaded 1648. Undaunted on the Scaffold. Hence one alluding to his Arms (a Lyon Ramp. in a field G. betwixt 3 Crosses) made these following Lines. Thus Lyon-like Capel undaunted stood Beset with Crosses in a field of blood. He wrote a Book of Meditation, wherein Judicious Piety is discovered. Edward Symonds, born at Cottered, bred in Cam∣bridge, wrote a Book in Vindication of K. Charles, and was Instrumental in setting forth his Majesties Book called . He died 1649. Benefactors. Nicholas Dixon, Parson and Clerk of the Pipe-Office,
Under-Treasurer and at last Baron of the Exchequer, contributed to the building of Chesnet-Church. He died 1448. Sir Ralph Josceline, born at Sabridgeworth, Draper and twice Mayor in London, was made Knight of the Bath, by E. 4. He repaired the Walls of the City. He died 1478. Jo. Incent, Dr. of Law was born at Berkhamsted founded a fair School there, confirmed by Act of Parliament, allowing the Master 20, l. the Usher 10 l. per An. He died in the Reign of E. 6. Sir Th. White, born at Rixmansworth, was Merchant Taylor in London, where he was Lord Mayor, An. 1553. He built Gloucester-hall, and endowed St. Jo. Coll. in Oxford. He bestowed great sums of Money on several Corporations, for poor Freemen. Since the Reformation. Richard Hale, Esquire, born at Cudicot, was Grocer in London. He founded a fair School, allowing 40 l. a year to the Master at Hartford. He died An. 160. Whose Family doth flourish with Worship at Kings-Walden. Edward Bash, Knight, was born at Aldnam, gave 20l. per An. for the maintenance of a School-Master at Stansted, besides his benefaction to Pet. House in Cambridge. He died 1605. Noted Sheriffs. An. 16. Henry Cock, Knight, was Cof∣ferer to Q. Elizabeth and K. James, who lay in his House at his first coming out of Scotland to London. His Daughter was married to the Lord Delaware.
44. Edward Denny, Knight, presented K. James at his first coming out of Scotland, with a gallant Horse, rich Saddle and Furniture. He was created Ba∣ron Denny of Waltham. Th. Connisby, Ar. being told that his potent Adversary had prevailed to make him Sheriff, said, I will not keep a Man the more, or a Dog the fewer on that account. Hereford-shire. HEreford-shire, hath Worc. and Shrop. on the N. Glouc. on the E. Mounm. on the S. Breck∣nock and Radnorsh. on the W. in Form almost a cir∣cle of about 35 miles Diameter. The great Age of the Inhabitants is a sign of the goodness of the Air, Serj. Hoskin entertain'd K. James with a Morish Dance of 10 aged people, all of them making up more then 1000 years. This County exceeds in 4 W's. Wood, Wheat, Wooll and Water. Much Syder is made here, so that the County deserves the Name of Pomerania. Cambden says, This County is not con∣tent to be accounted the second in England. Salmons are here in season all the Year long, and are found in the River Wy. As for Wonders, Bone-Well, near Richard's Castle, is always full of Bones of lit∣tle Fishes of which it can never be emptied, but that they return again. An. 1461 three Suns appeared at the Battel fought betwixt E. 4. and Ja. Butler
Earl of Ormond, &c. An. 1575 Marcley-Hill shaked and roared for 3 days together, and raised it self into an higher Place. Proverbs. 1. Blessed is the Eye, that is betwixt Severn and Wye. It is intended to signifie either the blessedness of Pleasure or Safety. 2. Lemster bread and Weably Ale, viz. the best. Saints. Ethelbert K. of the E. Angles was murdered at Sutton-Wallis, by Quendred Wife to Offa K. of Mercia, An. 793. and was buried at Hereford. Th. Cantilupe, well descended, Chanc. of Oxford and B. of Hereford. He died about 1282 in Tusca∣ny, whence his Bones were immediately sent into England. He was Canonized by Pope Jo. 22. Note, his Father possessed Abergavenny Castle. He was so highly honoured by the Bishops of Hereford that (waving their ancient Arms) they assumed those of Cantilupe) viz. G. 3 Leopards Heads inverted, each with a Flower de Luce in his Mouth. He was the last English Man who was canoniz'd. Martyrs. Sir Jo. Oldcastle, Sheriff of Hereford. An. 7 H. 4. was Lord Cobham in Right of his Wife. A valiant Man but a Wicklevite, so that he lost his Life on that account. v. Eccl. Hist.
Cardinals. Adam de Easton (or Eaton) first very Poor and mean, was D. D. in Oxford. Afterward he was made Cardinal at Rome by the Title of St. Cicilie. Pope Ʋrban who created, did likewise annihilate him, confining him for 25 Years to an empty and dark Abyss (or Dungeon) for suspicion of some Treachery, as for the like reason he caused five o∣ther Cardinals to be put in a Sack and cast into the Sea, in that manner sending them as joynt Ambassadours to Neptune. According to the anci∣ent Roman Law De Sicariis, a Cock, &c. ought to have been put in the Sack with the Car∣dinals, and 'tis very strange that The Pope assumes to himself his Name and Authority. Peter (understanding the usefulness of that Creature) should have been so ill-natu∣r'd as to withhold that Herauld of Re∣pentance from his devoted Servants. By Pope Boniface Successor to Ʋrban, our Cardinal was restored to all his Dignities, and sent over into England to R. 2. with ample commendation. He died 1397. and was buried in the Church of St. Cicilie. Jo. Breton,S. N. Dr. of the Laws was Famous in that Profession, and lived in the Reign of E. 1. by whose Authority he wrote a Treatise of the Laws of England, the Tenor whereof runneth in the Kings Name, thus, We will, &c. His Work, after great variation of the Laws, is still in great and general repute. He was made B. of Hereford, by H. 3. He died about 1275. Adam de Orlton, D. L. born in Hereford, where he was Bishop. He Murdered E. 2. being moved thereunto by this Riddle. Edwardum occidere noli∣te timere bonum est.
Jo. Grandesson, born at Ashperton, of high Ex∣traction, and B. of Exeter, would not suffer the Arch-bishop of Cant. to visit his Diocess. He ar∣ched the Roof of his Cathedral, builded and endow∣ed a rich Colledge of St. Mary Ottery, to which Benefactions he was enabled by perswading all the Secular Clergy to make him sole Heir to their e∣states. He died 1369. Since the Reformation. Miles Smith, D. D. born in Hereford, was the Son of a Fletcher, and bred in Oxford. The last Translation of the Bible was referred to the review of B. Bilson, and this Doctor, who made the Preface to it. He was preferred B. of Glouc. by K. Ja∣mes. He was a Man of great meekness. He died 1624. Souldiers. Rob. Devereux, Son to Walt. E. of Essex, was born at Nethwood. He was a Master-piece of Court and Camp. He entered the Court with the Advanta∣ges of Pity (for his Fathers sake) Kindred (by his Mothers side) Favour (as being Son in Law to Leicester) Merit, being a Beautifull, Courteous and Noble Person. The Queen afterwards made him the wanton to her fond Affection. When the Earl privately left the Court, to see some Military Service in France, the Queen passionately in Love with his Person grievously complained of his ab∣sence, and often said, We shall have this young Fellow knockt on the head, as foolish Sidney was by his own for∣wardness, and was restless till his return. He was then in the Zenith of Reputation, when he return'd
Victorious from Cadiz, tho he very quickly awake∣ned the Queens jealousie by his Popularity. His de∣clination commenced upon his unfortunate Expe∣dition into Ireland, which with his absence from the Queen, and his ensuing return to Court, with∣out leave, were without any difficulty by his Ene∣mies laid hold upon as a sure Foundation, on which they might build the Earls Ruin; and he himself did not a little contribute thereunto, when he headed a Company of disaffected Persons, who with their Swords in their Hands, required that Evil Coun∣cellors might be removed from the Queen, under that Pretence affording their zealous, tho too weak assistance, to the distressed Essex; But the Gun-pow∣der of their zeal did no other Execution than blow their own Heads up into a vain expectation of the Conquest of Terra incognita, their Designs into a final disappointment, and the once beloved Earl into the final displeasure of the Queen, 1600. He was valiant, liberal to Scholars and Souldiers, no∣thing distrustful, if not too confident of Fideli∣ty in others. Revengefulness was not bred, but put into his Disposition. When one flattered him to his Face for Valour, No, said he, my Sins ever made me a Coward. In a Word, his failings were neither so foul nor so many, but that the Character of a right worthy Man belongs to his Memory. Writers. Roger of Hereford, bred in Camb. wrote a Book of Judicial Astrology, and was skilful in Metalls, &c. by which he was acceptible to the Nobility. He Flourished 1170. under H. 2. William Lemster, D. D. in Oxford, was a Fran∣ciscan.
He wrote Collations on the Master of Sen∣tences, and Questions in Divinity. Since the Reformation. Richard Hackluit, of Ancient Extract, bred in Oxford, was Prebend of Westminster. He set forth a Collection of the English Sea Voyages; a work of great Honour in England. He died in the begin∣ning of King James, leaving a fair Estate to his Son a Spend-thrift, who said, he had cheated the co∣vetous Ʋsurer, who had given him spick and span∣new Money for the old Land of his Great Grand-Father. Jo. Guillim, of Welsh Extraction, Born in this County, was Pursuivant of Arms, by the name of Portsmouth, then Roueroix. He wrote that Learned Treatise, called the Display of Heraldry, of which one Writes. But let me tell you, this will be the harm, In Arming others you your self disarm. — Sic vos non vobis, &c. He died about the end of King James. Jo. Davies of Hereford, was the great Master of the Pen in England, for fast, fair, close, and va∣rious Writing, and could Flourish with his Fancy (in Poetry,) as well as with his Pen. He died in the midst of the Reign of King James. Romish Exile Writers. Humphrey Ely, Bred in Oxford, was Professor of the Canon and Civil Laws at Pont-muss in Lorain.
He Died and was Buried there 1604. with two Epitaphs, viz. He eased others of Poverty, being himself almost pinched therewith, and Wonder not that England is clouded with Heresies, — here her Son lies. Benefactors. Jo. Walter, Born in Hereford, Bred in London, was Clerk of Drapers-Hall. Having vowed he would give the surplusage of his Estate to Pious uses; Accor∣dingly he built and endowed a fair Alms-house in Southwark, another at Newington, (both in Surrey) on which and other Pious Uses he expended well nigh 10000 l. whereof 20 l. per an. he gave to Hereford, he died and was Buried at London. 1656. Memorable Persons. Rosamund, Daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, was a Mistress-piece of Beauty, (and therefore Con∣cubine to H. 2.) and Mother to William Longespee Earl of Salisbury. King Henry is said to have Built a Labyrinth at Woodstock, to hide this his Mistress from Jealous Juno, (Queen Eleanor) who (yet) getting access to her, caused her death. She was Buried at Godstow-Nunnery near Oxford, with this Epitaph, Hîc jacet in Tumbâ Rosa Mundi non Rosa munda, Non redolet sed olet, quae redolere solet. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln caused her Bones to be scattered, which afterwards were gathered by the Nuns, and put into a perfumed Bag, where they continued till the Reign of H. 8.
An. 8. Rich. de Baskevil, from a Town in Nor∣mandy so named. Whose Ancestors, immediately after the Conquest, were Benefactors to the Abbey of Saint Peters in Glouc. Note, This County had She∣riffs long before H. 2. 26. Walter Devereux. Probably the same who Married Anne Daughter and Heir to William Lord Ferrers of Chartley, and in her right was Created Lord Ferrers. He was Father to John Lord Ferrers of Chartley, who Married Cecily Sister to Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and was Father to Walter Devereux Lord Ferrers, Created Viscount Hereford by King Ed. 6. and was Father to Sir Richard Devereux Knight; Father to Walter Deve∣reux first Earl of Essex of that Family. 14 Ja. Baskevile. 18 Jo. Mortimer, 19 Richiard de la Bere. a Leash of Valiant Knight Batchelors) were by H. 7. (an. 1.) made Knights Bannerets. 11. Richard Cornwall, Knight, attended the Duke of Suffolk into France An. 15. H. 8. at what time they took the Town of Roy, of which Sir Richard took possession. Sir James Crofts was priviledged from being Sheriff, by his attendance on the Court and Camp. For his supposed complyance with Wyate, he was convicted of High-Treason under Queen Mary; but was restored by Queen Elizabeth, and made Governor of the Town and Castle of Barwick. He behaved himself Valiantly at the Siege of Lieth, yet in the Second assault, when the English were worsted, the blame fell on him (as if he favoured the French, and maligned the Lord Grey then General) so that he was outed of his Go∣vernment of Barwick, yet he continued Privy-Coun∣cellor and Controller of the Houshold to the Queen.
He was one of the Commissioners in 88 to Treat with the Spaniard in Flanders. His inheritance is lately devolved to Hen. Crofts D. D. and Dean of Hereford. 40 Thomas Conisby Founded a place in Hereford for poor People. 43 Jacob Scudamore, was Father to Sir. Jo. Crea∣ted by King Charles Viscount Slego in Ireland. This Lord was employed Leiger Ambassadour in France, and during the Tyranny of the Protectorian times, kept his secret Loyalty to his Soveraign, Hospitality to his Family, and Charity to the di∣stressed Clergy. Huntington-shire. HƲntington-shire, is surrounded with Nothampton, Bedford, and Cambridge-shires, and is hardly 20 miles in length. The goodness of the Land may be collected from the plenty of Convents erected there∣in, the fourth part of the whole having been Abbey-Land. All England can hardly shew, in so short a distance, so pleasant a Park as Waybridge, so fair a Meadow as Portsholme, and so fruitful a Town for Tillage as Godmanchester, all three situated within 3 miles. Of Buildings, Kimbolton-Castle was the Joynture of Q. Katherine Dowager, where she wept out the remainder of her Widowhood. It came afterwards, by Gift, to the Wingfields, from them by Sale to the Montagues; Henry
late E. of Manchester, who spared no cost which might add to the Beauty thereof. Hincing-Brooke, once a Nunnery, and which I am confident, will ever be a Religious House, whilst it relateth to the truly Noble Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich, the owner thereof. It sheweth one of the Magni∣ficent Rooms which is to be beheld in our Nation. The House and Chappel in Little-Goddin the inheri∣tance of Mr. Ferrer, where three In the be∣ginning of the long Parliament. nu∣merous female Families lived (all from one Grandmother) in a strict discipline of Devotion, rising at mid∣night to Prayers, and employing their needles to bind Bibles, &c. whereof one most exactly done was presented to K. Charles. The Marriage of all the younger of those Virgins confuted the Cavill, that their Society was an Embrio Nunnery, and that there was a Pope Joan therein. For Medicinal Waters, there are Hail-Weston, near St. Neots. 2 Fountain-lets, one sweet, conceived good to help the dimness of the Eyes, the other somewhat Salt, esteemed Soveraign against Scabs and Lepro∣sies. Proverbs. 1. This is the Way to Beggars Bush. Spoken of Spend-Thrifts. Beggars Bush is a Tree growing between Huntington and Caxton. 'Tis said that K. James being in Progress in these Parts, with Sir Fr. Bacon, the Lord Chancellor, and having heard that Morning how Sir Francis had prodigi∣ously rewarded a mean Man for a small Present, Sir Francis (said he) you will quickly come to Beg∣gars Bush, and I may even go along with you, if both be so bountiful. 2. Ramsey the Rich. 'Twas a rich
Abbey once of 7000 l. yearly Revenue, the only 1983 l. at the Dissolution. Saints. St. Elsled, Daughter of Ethelwold, E. of the E. Angles, (Founder of the Monastery of Ramsey) was Abbess of Ramsey. When her Steward com∣plained to her that she had exhausted her Coffers with her profuse Charity, she with her Prayers pre∣sently recruited them to their former fulness. (But I doubt the Reader has not so much Faith as she had Charity.) When her Candle casually went out as she read the Lesson, there came such a brightness from the fingers of her right Hand, that it enlightned the whole Quire, which is as true as the New-lights to which our Modern Sectaries do pretend, having Revelations at their finger ends. She died An. 992, being buried in Lady-Church at Ramsey, with high Veneration. Prelates. Will. de Whitlesey, is said to have been 3d. Master of Pet. House in Cambridge. He freed Oxford from the Jurisdction of the B. of Lincoln, allowing the Schollars leave to choose their own Chancellour. He was successively B. of Rochester, Worc. Lond. and Arch-bishop of Canterbury. An excellent Scholar, an Eloquent Preacher, and his last Sermon most re∣markable to the Convocation on this Text, And the Truth shall make you free, Jo. 8.2. Whence ('tis said) he inferred the exemption of the Cler∣gy from payment of Taxes, save with their own free consent: But that Sermon de privilegio, non duceba∣tur ad consequentiam, the Clergy in the contempo∣rary
Parliament paying a yearly Tenth to E. 3. He died 1375. Since the Reformation. Fran. White, born at St. Neots, was successively B. of Carlile, Norw. and Ely. He encouraged the Students of Caius Coll. (where he was bred) to ply their Books, by his own Example, telling them that from a poor Scholar, in that House, by Gods Blessing on his Industry, he was brought to that Preferment. He reduced many Romanists to our Church. This our Jonathan with his Armour-Bearer, Dan. Featly, D. D. were in their disputes, joyntly Victorious o∣ver the Romish Philistines. He died 163. leaving some Learned Works to Posterity. Writers. Hen. Saltry, a Cistertiar, wrote a Book in mainte∣nance of Purgatory. He flourished, 1140. Geo. of Huntington, a Bendictine Monk in Ram∣sey, where he became Prior, was one of the most Learned Men in that Age, being through-paced in 3 Tongues, Latin, Greek and Hebrew. When the Jewes were banished England, he purchased many of their Rarities, for the use of his Convent. He flourished under H. 3. and died in the Reign of E. 1. 1280. Hugh of St. Neots, was a Carmelite in Hitching in Hartford-shire, and D. D. in Camb. Of whom Bale (tho none of the best Bail,) affirms, That living in the Egyptian Darkness, he sought after the light of Truth. He wrote a Comment on St. Luke, and died, 1340. and was buried at Hitch∣ing.
William Ramsey, Abbot of Crowland, wrote the Life of St. Guthlake, St. Neots, St. Edmund the K. all in Verse, wherein he did trip now and then, as being through-paced in Poetry, born with a Poeti∣cal Licence in his Belly, and consequently a Parce precor Lector— in his Mouth. 'Tis said he paid 40000 Marks for the engagment of his Convent and all within the compass of 18 Months, but he was assisted therein by H. 2. who to expiate the Blood of Becket, was contented to be melted into Coyne, and was prodigiously bountiful to some Churches. Will. died 1180. Hen. of Huntington, (where he was Arch-deacon) wrote an Excellent History of the Sax. Kings, therein shewing more Modesty and less Super∣stition then most of his Contemporaries. He flouri∣shed under K. Stephen, 1248. and died about 1260. Rog. of St. Ives, was active against the Lollards and Sir John Old-Castle, against whom he wrote, flourishing in 1420. Since the Reformation. Jo. Young, a Monk in Ramsey, at the Dissolution saved many Hebrew Books of the noble Library of Ramsey. He flourished, 1520. Jo. White, Brother to Fr. B. of Ely, was bred in Camb. and made aftewards Vicar of Eccles in Lanc. then Chaplain in Ordinary to K. James, and shortly after died at London, and was buried in St. Maries Church Woolnoth, 1615, leaving Learned Works to Posterity. Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet, born at Cunnington, descended by the Bruces from the Blood-Royal of Scotland, was bred in Trin. Coll. in Camb.
and became a most Eminent Antiquary, whose Me∣mory is Famous to this and Forreign Nations for his Collection of his Library at Westminster, contai∣ning Original Manuscripts, wonderful for their Ra∣rity, Variety and Method. And what addeth a Lustre to all the rest, is the favourable access there∣unto for such as bring any Competency of Skill with them, and leave Thankfulness behind them. Here I Register my self amongst the meanest of those who through the favour of Sir Th. Cotton, (inheriting as well the Courtesie as Estate of Sir Robert) have had admittance into that worthy Trea∣sury, from which the grandest Antiquaries have fetched their Materials. Cambden to him, to him doth Selden owe,— their Glory— No Won∣der, there was a Design driven on in the Popes Conclave, after the Death of Sir Robert, to compass this Library to be added to the Vatican. Fine Sharpers! with their Solemn Hue, and Cry, Have you any Knives to Grind? Whereas they only in∣tended to blunt their Edge by their Index Expurga∣torius. Their Project having miscarried to the Honour of the Nation, and advantage of the Pro∣testant Religion. Those Ʋseful Instruments, remai∣ning in safer Custody, will serve upon occasion, to pair the Nails, (if not to cut the Fingers) of Sanctified Ambition. From this Library, Secreta∣ries of State, &c. have recovered lost Originals. This Sir Robert was a Man of publick Spirit, it be∣ing his principal endeavour in all Parliaments (wherein he served so often) that the Prerogative and Priviledge might run in their due Channel, and in truth he did cleave the Pin betwixt the Soveraign and the Subject. He was wont to say that He had the least share in himself, whilst his Country and Friends had the greatest Interest in him. He died
at his House in Westminster, May, 6. An. 1631. & Aet. 61. Tho one may truly say, his Age was adequate to the continuance of the Creation, Such was his exact Skill in all Antiquity. By Eliz. Daughter and Coheir of William Brocas Esquire he had only one Son, Sir Th. now living, who by Margaret Daughter to the Lord Will. Howard (Grand-child to Th. D. of Norf.) hath one Son, Ja. Cotton Es∣quire, and 2 Daughters, Lucie, and Frances. The Posthume Works of this Worthy Knight, are lately set forth, to the great profit of Poste∣rity. Steph. Marshall born at God-Manchester, and bred in Eman. Coll. in Camb. was Minister at Finchfield, in Ess. and after long discontinuance, B. D. in Camb. To the long Parliament, he was, in their Fasts and Preaching, their Trumpet; in their Sick∣ness, their Confessor; in their Assembly, their Councellour; in their Treaties, their Chaplain; and in their Disputations, their Champion. He was of so supple a Soul, that he brake not a joynt, yea sprained not a Sinew, in all the alteration of Times; and his Friends put all on the account, not of his uncon∣stancy, but Prudence, who in his own Practice (as they conceive,) reconciled the various Lections of St. Pauls Precept, Rom. 12.11. , Serving the Lord and the times. He is said on his death Bed to have given full satisfaction to such who formerly suspected his sincerity to the Presbyterian Discipline, dying An. 1655. He was buried in the Abbey of Westm. Exile Romish Writers. Rich. Broughton, born at Great Steuckley, bred and made Priest at Rhemes in Fr. was afterward in Eng∣land
made Assistant to the English Arch-Priest, in propagation of the Roman Catholick Cause. He wrote an English Ecclesiastical Hist. from the first planting of the Gospel to the coming in of the Saxons. He was living in the latter end of K. James. Benefactors. Ambrose Nicholas, born at Needenworth, Salter, then Lord Mayor in London 1576. founded 12 Alm-houses in Mungwel-Street, with competent maintenance. Sir Wolstan Dixie, born at Catworth, Skinner, then Lord Mayor in London 1585. gave 600 l. to Eman. Coll. in Camb. to the founding of a Fellowship, e∣rected a Free-School at Bosworth in Leic. and en∣dowed it, where his Family flourish at this day in worshipfull Estate. Rich. Fishbourn, Gent. born in Hunt. gave 2000 l. for the buying of Impropriations in the North, and setling a preaching Ministery, where most want thereof; he bequeathed as much to the Company of Mercers, and the same sum to Huntington, with 1000 Marks to Christ-Church Hosp. He professed on his death-Bed, that to his Knowledge, he had got no part of his goods unjustly, having got it in the Service of Sir Baptist Hicks, after Visc. Camb∣den. Memorable Persons. Sir Oliver Cromwell, Knight, Son to Sir Hen. Knight of Hinching Brooke, gave K. James, and his Court a prodigious entertainment. He was an up∣right dealer; Sir Jo. Leamon (Lord Mayor of Lon∣don,
having bought the fair Mannor of Warboise of him, affirmed that it was the cheapest Land that ever he bought, and yet the dearest that ever Sir Oliver sold. None that bought of him was ever put to a three pence Charge to make good his Title. He was very Loyal, always beholding the Ʋsurpation and Tyranny of Nephew and Name-sake, with Ha∣tred and Contempt. He died 1654. Kent. KEnt, a Kingdom in the Sax. Heptarchie, hath the Thames on the N. the Sea on the E. and S. Surrey and Sussex on the W. in length 53 Miles, and in breadth 26. A considerable part of the County is called Weald, that is Wood-land Ground, the Inhabitants whereof are called Wealdish Men. The general goodness of the Soyl may be gathered from the greatness of the Kentish breed of Cattle. The natural Commodities are Cherries first planted here by K. Hen. 8. Saintfoine, or Holy Hay, a great Fertilizer of Barren Ground. Trouts at Forditch. Weld or Wold, a Seed sown with Barley, and peeping out of the Earth, when this is cut; The use of it is to dy the best Yellow. Then Madder for making Reds and Violets, where∣of there are Crop-Madder, betwixt 4 and 5 l. the Hundred, Ʋmber owe between 3 and 4 l. and Pipe or fat-Madder about 1 l. 10 s. It was some 2 years since sown by Sir Nich. Crisp. at Debford. The
next is Flax, the best in England. The Manufactures are Cloth in great credit. Thread at Maidston. As for Buildings, the Cathedral of Rochester hath a venerable aspect of Antiquity. The Kings Palaces here are 3. viz. 1. Greenwich, affording a most plea∣sant Prospect. 2. Eltham, not altogether so whol∣some, and 3 Otford, which Arch-bishop Warham did so enlarge and adorn, that Cranmer his Successor was in some sort forced to exchange it with H. 8. on no gainful Conditions. Cobham, the House of the late D. of Richmond and—the fair Mansion House of Sir Edward Hales Baronet, when finished will carry away the credit from all the Buildings in this County. A Wonderful Accident hapned Aug. 4. 1585 in the Hamlet of Mottingham in a Field be∣longing to Sir Percival Hart. Betimes in the Mor∣ning the Ground began to sink, 3 great Elm Trees were suddenly swallowed into the Pit, and before 10 of the clock, no part of them could be discer∣ned, the Concave being suddenly filled with Wa∣ter. The Hole was above 50 Fathoms deep. Ten yards distance from that place, there was another piece of ground sunk in like manner. Of Ships the most, best, and biggest, are built at Woolwich and Winter near Chattam. The great SOVERAIGN, built at Dulwich, a Lieger Ship for State is the greatest Ship our Island ever saw. I am informed that the Mystery of Shipwrights for some discents hath been preserved successively in Families, of whom the Pets about Chattam, are of singular re∣gard. Queen Eliz. erected a Navy-Royal (conti∣nued and encreased by her Successors) of the best Ships ever Europe beheld, whereas before her time our Kings hired Vessels from Hamburgh, Lubeck, and Genoa. The Model of our great Ships primitively were our own, and we have im∣proved
the Patterns of those Frigots that were taken from the Dunkerkers, in the daies of the D. of Buck. Lord Admiral, 2 of which still survive in his Majesties Navy by the Name of Providence and Expedition. The Navy-Royal exceeds all other Kingdomes, and States, in Europe for 1. Swiftness, 2. Strength, 3. Beauty, 4. Seamen, 5. Advanta∣gious Weapons, 6. Provision, 7. Contrivance, lastly, Government. Of Medicinal Waters, Tunbridge-Wells, are said to be discovered by a Footman to a Dutch Lord, observing the Water to be in tast like to the Spaw in Germany. Proverbs. 1. A Kentish Yeoman. That is, a Plain Man of Plentiful Estate. 2. A Knight of Cales, a Gen∣entleman of Wales, and a Laird of the North-Coun∣try; a Yeoman of Kent with his yearly Rent will buy them out all three. Knights of Cales were made by Rob. E. of Essex, An. 1596. to the number of 60, some whereof were Men of mean Fortunes. 3. A Man of Kent. This relates to the Liberty or Cou∣rage of the Kentish Men. As for the first, they know not the Tenure of Villanage; as to the latter, ever since the time of Canutus, till H. 2. they had the Precedency of marching in our English Armies, to lead the Van. 4. Neither in Kent nor Christen∣dom. 'Tis said, that H. 4. of Fr. Mustering his Souldiers at the Siege of a City found more Kentish Men therein then Forreigners of all Christendom besides, which (being but 70 years since) cannot be the Original of this Prov. more ancient in use. Of England (or English Christendom,) Kent was first converted to the Faith. This seems to be the true Original of the overb. According to some,
it is the Periphrasis of no where, Kent being the best place of England, Christendom of the World. 5. Kentish Long-Tailes. There's a Fable of the Pa∣gans tying Fish-tails to St. Austins backside, whilst he was preaching, in revenge whereof, real tails grew to the hinder-parts of the offenders. Some would found the Prov. on this Miracle, but the Scene of that Lying Wonder was pretended many Miles off, near Cerne in Dors. But I conceive it a Note of Disgrace which by Forreigners was first cast upon the English in general; For when there hapned a difference in Palestine, betwixt Rob. Bro∣ther of Lewis K. of Fr. and Will. Longespee E. of Salisbury, hear how the French-men insulted, O the Cowardliness of these fatal Long-tails! How happy, how clean would this our Army be, were it but purged from Tails and Long-tails. Math. Par. p. 790. That the English were hereby nicked appears by the Reply of the Earl, The Son of my Fa∣ther shall press thither to day, whither you shall not dare to approach his Horse-tail. Some will have the English so called, from the Bag they wore behind their Backs, whist the Monsieurs had their Lacqueys to carry their Baggage; The Proverb continues still in Kent, (likely,) because it lyes nearest to France. Others will have the Kentish so called, from dragging Bows of Trees behind them, which afterwards they advanced above their Heads, and so partly Cozened, partly Threatned K. Will. the Conq. to continue their ancient Customs. 6 Ken∣tish Gavel-kind. A Custom whereby Lands are e∣qually divided among all the Sons, and in default of such, among the Daughters, that is, Give all Kind, Kind signifying a Child in the Low-Dutch. This practice was derived to our Saxons from the ancient Germans. An. 18. H. 6. there was not
above 40 Persons in Kent, but all their Land was held by this Tenure; But on the Petition of divers Gen∣tlemen, this Custom was altered by Act of Parl. 31. H. 8. and the Kentish Lands for the most part re∣duced to an Uniformity with the rest of England. 7. Dover Court, all Speakers and no Hearers. Ex∣pressing a tumultuous Court once kept at Dover, and implying all irregular Conferences, &c. 8. The Father to the Bough, The Son to the Plough. That is, tho the Father be Executed for his Offence, the Son shall nevertheless succeed to his Inheritance, and hold it by the same Services by which his Fa∣ther did hold the same, tho the Goods and Chat∣tels be forfeited. But this holds only in Felony and Murder, and not in the Case of Treason, nor peradventure in Piracy, which belongs to the Ju∣risdiction of the Court of Admiralty; Neither doth it hold where the Offendor will not abide his lawful Tryal, For in these Cases the real Estate of the Offendor shall be forfeited. 9. Tenterdens Steeple is the Cause of the Breach in Goodwyn Sands. It is used in derision, when one assigns for the Cause of any Acccident, that which is ridiculous and im∣pertinent. This Proverb was at first a serious asser∣tion of an old Man of Kent, for said he, those Sands were firm Lands before that Steeple was built, which ever since were overflown with Sea Water. And some affirm that the Money which was collected for the Fencing of East Banks against the Eruptions of the Sea, was commuted by the B. of Roch. to the Building of Tenterden Steeple; By which diversion of the collection, the Sea afterwards brake in upon Goodwyn Sands. 10. A Jack of Dover, that is, Food that is unsavoury by reason of frequent dressing, Crambe bicocta; and is appliable to such who use Tautologies.
Princes. Jo. Eltham, 2 Son to K. Ed. 2. by Isab. his Queen, was born at Eltham, and afterwards created E. of Cornwall. A Spritely Gentleman. He died in the prime of his Age, in Scotland, An. 10. E. 3. After him all the Younger Sons of Kings were created Dukes, except exspiring in their Infan∣cy. Bridget of Eltham, 4th. Daugh. of K. Ed. 4. and Eliz. his Q. was a Nun at Dartford, in this County, founded by K. E. 3. Edmund youngest Son to K. Hen. 7. and Eliz. his Q. was born at Greenwich 1495. He was created D. of Som. and died in his Infancy An. 15. H. 7. 1500 at Bish. Hatfield in Hartf. which then was the Nur∣sery for the Kings Children. Henry VIII. Son of K. H. 7. born at Greenwich, was a Prince in whom great Vertues and no less Vices, were in a manner equally contemperated. Pol. Virg. He was a Man of an Uncomptrolable Spi∣rit, carrying a Mandamus in his Mouth, sufficiently sealed when he put his Hand to his Hilt. He awed all into Obedience, which was Great in a King and Necessary in a Father of his Countrey. In a Play of K. Hen. VIII. there was a Weak whining Boy that personated that King; One of his Fellow Actors perceiving him to Act rather like a Mouse then a Man told him, if you speak not HOH with a better Spirit, your Parliament will not grant you a penny of Money. He died Jan. 28. 1546. v. Lord Herbert's Hist. Q. Mary, Eldest Daughter to K. Hen. 8. and Q. Kath. of Sp. was born at Greenwich, Feb. 18. 1518. She derived a Great Spirit from her Father, and her
Devotion from her Mother. She attained to the Crown, by complying with the Gentry of Norf. and Suff. promising them to continue Religion, as Established by K. Ed. 6. after the breach of which Promise she never prospered, losing successively the Hearts of her Subjects, the hopes of a Child, the Company (not to say Affection) of her Husband, the City of Calais, her Mirth, her Health and her Life, which ended, Nov. 17. 1558. Q. Elizabeth, 2d. Daughter to K. Hen. 8. was born at Greenwich, Sep. 7. 1533. She was Heir to the Learning, Bounty, Courage and Success of her Father; Besides Goodness, wherein she was Daugh∣ter to her Mother. Her Learning appears in her 2 Lat. Speeches to the University, and a third lit∣tle better then Ex tempore to the Poland Amb. Her Bounty was founded on Merit, and ordered with Moderation, seeing that is the best Liberality that so enricheth the Receiver that it doth not impoverish the Giver. Her Courage was undaun∣ted, never making her self so cheap to her Favou∣rites, but that she still valued her own Authority. A prime Officer (with a White Staff) was com∣manded by the Q. to conferr a Place then void on one of her Servants whom she commended unto him; Pleaseth your Highness, Madam, (saith the Lord) the disposal thereof pertaineth to me by ver∣tue of this White Staff conferred upon me. True said the Queen; yet I never gave you your Office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the Quorum: But of the Quarum, Madam, (returned the Lord) presuming on the favour of her High∣ness. Hereat the Q. in some Passion snatching the Staff out of his Hand; you shall acknowledge me, said she, of the Quorum Quarum Quorum, before you have it again. The Lord waited Stafless al∣most
a day (which seemed so long to him as if the Sun stood still) before the same was re-conferred upon him. Her Success was admirable, keeping the K. of Sp. at Armes-end all her Reign. She was well skilled in the Queen-craft, and by her Policy and Prosperity she was much beloved by her Peo∣ple; insomuch that since it hath been said, That Q. Eliz. might Lawfully do that which K. James might not. Her Popularity having sugared many things, her Subjects thanking her for taking those Taxes which they refused to pay to her Successor. She died at Richmond, March, 24. 1602. Mary Daughter to K. James, and Anne of Denm. his Q. was born at Greenwich Apr. 8. K. James was wont pleasantly to say, He would not pray to the Virgin Mary, but he would pray for the Virgin Ma∣ry; viz. his own Daughter. She died in her In∣fancy, and was buried at Westm. Sophia, Youngest Daughter to K. James and Q. Anne, was born at Greenwich, June, 22. 1606. and died 3 days after. She was buried nigh Q. Eliz. and is represented sleeping in her Cra∣dle. Charles, Eldest Son of K. Charles and Q. Mary, was born at Greenwich. An. 1629. A fright of his Mother is generally reported to have antedated his Nativity. The Popish Priests belonging to the Queen stood ready, watching to snatch the ROYAL BABE to their Superstitious Baptisme; But the tender Care of K. Charles did out-vigil their watchfulness, commanding Dr. Web, (his next Chaplain in attendance) to Christen the Child ac∣cording to the Church of England. This done, within few hours he expired, and lyes buried at Westm.
Saints. St. Elphage, well descended, bred at Glouc. be∣came a Monk at Glastenbury, whence he removed and built himself a Hut at Bath, which small Cell, in process of time, proved the beautiful Priory of that Place. Hence he was preferred B. of Winch. and at last of Canterbury, which City was in his time Decimated by the Danes, under pretence of Tribute detained. They saved the 10 th part of the Citizens alive, amounting to 804. Destroying 9 parts, no fewer than 7236. Elphage, unable to pay the Sum by them demanded, was after 7 Months Imprisonment, barbarously murdered near Greenwich, about 1013. His Corps first bu∣ried in St. Pauls, was removed to Cant. by the Com∣mand of K. Canutus. St. Agelnoth the Good, Arch-bish of Cant. is said to have given at Rome 100 Talents of Silver and one Talent of Gold, for the Arm of St. Augustine, B. of Hippo. He expended much in repairing his Cathedral lately destroyed by the Danes, assisted therein by the Bounty of K. Canutus. He died 1038. Martyrs. Will. White, a Wicklevite, and the first married Priest, since the Popes solemn prohibition there∣of, was constant to his Calling, and was as a Par∣tridge daily on the Wing, removing from place to place. He was seized, condemned and burnt at Norwich, 1428. As for Marian Martyrs, those in this Shire suffered either by the Cruelty of Griffin,
Bishop of Rochester▪ or Thorton Suffragan of Do∣ver. Confessors. Sim. Fish, Esq. a Lawyer, was forced to fly beyond the Seas for personating Proud Woolsey in a Trage∣dy. His Book called the Supplication of Beg∣gars approved by Hen. 8. was the occasion of his Return to England after 2 years absence. He esca∣ped the Hands of Men, (viz. Sir Th. More, and more Papists) and fell into the Hands of God, dying of the Plague. 1531. Sir Ja. Hales, J. of the Com. Pleas, a Man of sig∣nal Integrity, when the rest of the Judges (frighted with the Frowns of the D. of North.) subscribed the disinheriting of the Lady Mary and Lady Eliz. he only refused, as against both Law and Consci∣ence. Yet An. 1. Q. Mary, by urging some Laws of E. 6. he fell into the Displeasure of B. Gardiner, was imprisoned and so threatned by his Keeper that he endeavoured to have killed himself, which being set at liberty he afterwards effected, Drown∣ing himself in a small Water near his House. He had led a Godly Life, and suffered much for his Conscience. Cardinals. Jo. Kemp, born at Wye (where he built a fair Colledge for seculars) and bred in Oxf. was suc∣cessively B. of Roch. Chich. and Lond. afterwards Arch-bish. of York and Cant. Cardinal first by the Title of St. Balbine, then of St. Rufine in Rome; He was also twice Lord Chan. of Engl. according to these Verses.
Bis Primas, ter Praesul erat, bis Cardine functus. Et dixit Legem bis Cancellarius Anglis. Being of a Knightly Family he left it much impro∣ved by his bounty, and some of his Name and Blood flourish in Kent at this day. He died An. 1453. Rich. Clifford, born (probably) at Babbing was made B. of Lond. 1407. and sent by K. Hen. 4. as his Ambassadour to the Council of Constance, where he preached a Lat. Sermon before the Em∣perour and Pope. He acted as a Cardinal among the rest, in the Election of a Pope. He was a Pi∣ous Man, and much esteemed. He died 1421 being buried nigh Sir Christopher Hatton. Prelates. Ralph of Maydenstan, (Maidston) a very Learned Man and great Divine, was preferred, B. of Hreford, in the Reign of H. 3. 1234. He bought of one Mount-hault a Noble-man, a fair House and the Patronage of St. Ma. Mont-hauly, in Lond. leaving both to his Successors in the See of Heref. He turn'd his Mitre into a Coule, becoming a Fran∣ciscan first in Oxf. then in Glouc. where he died a∣bout 1244. Henry de Wingham, was made by H. 3. Chan∣cellour both of England and Gascony, Dean both of Totten-hall and St. Martins, and twice Ambassa∣dour into France. Being chosen B. of Winchester he refused that See, because he would not eject Ethelmar (Womb-Brother to K. Hen. 3.) he was therefore preferred B. of Lond. 1259. He di∣ed 1261 and was buried in his own Cathedral.
Hen. of Sandwich, Arch-Deac. of Oxf. was Consecrated B. of Lond. 1263. Ho joyn'd with the Barons against H. 3. for which he was Excommunicated by Othobon the Pope's Legate, He danced attendance at Rome almost 7 years before he could procure his Absolution. He died 1273. and was buried in St. Pauls. Rich. of Graves-End, made B. of London, An. 1282. first founded a Convent of Carmelits at Malden in Ess. He died at Fulham 1303. Sim. Mepham, bred in Oxf. was Arch-bish. of Cant. in the Reign of E. 3. He sued the Monks of Cant. in the Court of Rome, which Suit cost him 700 l. He made a magnificent Visitation of the Diocess South of Thames till he was resisted by Grandison B. of Exeter with whom the Pope sided. This broke Mepham's hert, 1333. Haymo of Hithe. B. of Roch. An. 12. E. 2. (to whom he was Confessor) erected the great Hall at his Palace in Halling, and erected and endowed the Hosp. of St. Barth. in Hithe. He resigned his Bishoprick before his death, which happened 1355. Whose Successor Jo. of Shepey, was Treasurer of England, and died 1360. Will. Read, built and furnished a Library in Mert. coll. He was by E. 3. preferred B. of Chich. He erected a Famous Castle at Amberley in Suss. He died 1385. Th. Kemp, B. of Lond. saw the wars between York and Lanc. begun, continued and ended. He curiously arched and leaded the Divinity Schools in Oxford, and built the Cross nigh the Church of St. Pauls. He died 1489. Ja. Goldwell, born at Great Chart, was Dean of Salisbury, Secr. to E. 4 and at last B. of Norwich.
He repaired the Church of Great Chart, and foun∣ded a Chappel on the South side thereof. He died 1498. Th. Goldwell, was by Q. Ma. prefered B. of St. Dav. and in the Reign of Q. Eliz. he went to Rome, where he procured Indulgences to such as should go in Pilgrimage to St Winifrid's Well in his Diocess. Since the Reformation. Jo. Poynet, was an exact Grecian and expert Mathematician. He presented H. 8. with a curious Dial, shewing with the Hours of the Day, the Change of the Moon, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, &c. He was made B. of Roch. then of Winch. but was forced to fly into high Germ. An. 1. Ma. Where before he had finished his Book begun against Th. Martin in defence of Mini∣sters Marriage, he died 1556. Rich. Fletcher Dean and B. of Peterborough, and at last B. of Lond. made a Speech to Q. Mary of Scots, before her death. He was a Man of Grace∣ful Countenance, and therefore favoured by Q. Eliz. tho he fell into her displeasure for entering into a second Marriage, and that with a Lady of none of the best reputation. He died with Grief 1596. Brian Duppa, D. D. the Worthy B. of Winch. was born at Lewsham. Statesmen. Sir Edward. Poynings, a Brave Souldier, ferreted Perkin Warbeck out of Ireland, and being a great Politician, he passed an Act
of Parl. in that Kingdom, whereby All the Sta∣tutes made in England before that time, were made of Force in Ireland; and that no Act should be propounded in any Parl. in Ireland, till first it be transmitted to England, approved there by the King, and returned thence under the broad Seal. After his Return into Engl. he was created Ba∣ron, and died in the beginning of H. 8. Sir Anth. St. Leger, was properly the first Vice-Roy in Ireland, seeing, during, his Deputy-ship, H. 8. (An. 33.) assumed the Title of King of Ireland. To him all the Irish made their Solemn Sub∣mission, yet they obtained from him some re∣laxation of the Laws of England. He seised all the Abbey-Lands in Ireland for the King's use. He made a Law that no Children should be ad∣mitted to Church-Livings. He Perswaded O Neil and O Brian to come over to England and do Homage to the King, and procure the Title of Earls. He died in the Reign of E. 6. Sir Hen. Sidney Son to Sir Will. of Penherst, was by Q. Eliz. made Knight of the Garter, Lord Pres. of Wales and Dep. of Ireland, where he made Annaly a Shire by the Name of the County of Longford. In a Parl. 11 Eliz. he a∣bolished the Usurped Captain-ships, &c. He cau∣sed an Act to pass, whereby the Lord Deputy was authorized to accept the surrenders of the Irish Seigniories, with power of regranting the same, &c. He provided that 5 of the best per∣sons of every Sept should bring in all the per∣sons of their surname to be justified by Law. A Law was made that there should be a Free-School in every Diocess. He vested in the Crown more then half of the Province of Ʋl∣ster, upon the Attainder of Shane O Nale.
He raised Customs upon the principal Com∣modities, and reformed the Abuses of the Exche∣quer in that Kingdom. He also established the Composition of the Pale in lieu of Purveyance and sesse of Souldiery, and caused the Statutes in his own time to be printed. He died at Worcester 1586. Having sought the Weal-Public more then his own private Advantage. Whose Son Sir Phil. Sidney, born at Pensherst, Sisters Son to Rob. E. of Leicester, bred in Christ-Church in Oxf. was a Gentleman of great Accomplishments and a sweet Nature. Being in Election to be K. of Po∣land, he chose rather to be a Subject to Q. Eliz. than a Soveraign beyond the Seas. He was so es∣sential to the English Court, that it seemed maimed without his Company, being a compleat Master of Matter and Language, as his Arcadia doth evidence. At last leaving the Court he followed the Camp, being made Governour of Flushing, under the E. of Leic. But the Walls of that City could not con∣fine the Activity of his Mind, which must into the Field, where, (before Zutphen) he was slain with a Shot, in a small Skirmish, which we may sadly term a Great-Battel, considering our heavy loss there∣in. His Corps being brought over into Engl. was buried in the Quire of St. Pauls. Sir Fr. Walsingham, Knight, originally descended from the Walsinghams in Norf. was bred in K. Coll. in Camb. and gave the K. of Spain's Bible to the Library thereof; after he had attained to great Experience by many Years travel beyond the Seas, he was made Secretary of State; Marvellous his Sagacity in examining suspected persons, ei∣ther to make them confess the Truth, or confound them by denying it to their detection; Cunning his Hands, who could unpick the Cabinets in the
Popes Conclave; quick his Ears who could hear at London what was whispered at Rome. And numerous the Spies and Eyes of this Argus, dispersed into all places. The Jesuites being out-shot in their own Bow, complained that he out-equivocated their Equivocation having a mental Reservation deeper than theirs. They tax him for making Heaven bow too much to Earth, oftentimes borrowing a point of Conscience with full intent never to pay it again; whom others ex∣cused by Reasons of State and dangers of the Times. He thought that Intelligence could not be bought too dear, the Cause that so great a Statesman left so small an Estate, and that so Publick a Person was so privately buried in St. Pauls, An. 1590. His only Daughter Frances was successively matched to three matchless Men, Sir Philip Sid∣ney, Rob. E. of Essex, and Richard Earl of Clanri∣card. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir Jo. Fineux, born (probably) at Swinkfield, (bestowed on him by Th. Criol a Lord in the Reign of E. 2.) was for 24 years L. Ch. J. of the K. Bench. viz. from 11 H. 7. to 17. H. 8. He was a great Benefactor to St. Augustines in Cant. and was of great Prudence, Justice, Piety and Humanity. He died about 1526. and lyes buried in Christ-Church in Cant. Sir Rog. Manwood, born at Sandwich, was by Q. Eliz. preferred second Justice of the Com. Pleas, and afterwards Chief Bar. of the Exchequer. He was one of the Commissioners who sate on the Tri∣al of the Q. of Scots. He wrote a Learned Book of the Forrest Laws. He erected and endowed a Free-School at Sandwich, and died An. 35 Eliz. 1593.
Sir Hen. Finch, Knight, of Right Worshipful Extraction (the ancient Surname being Herbert) was Serj. at Law to K. James, and wrote a Book of the Law which is much esteemed. He wrote also another learned Book of the Calling of the Jews, by which he was brought into some trouble, K. James, conceiving that Sir Hen. advanced the Com∣mon-Wealth of the Jews to the depressing Christian Monarchies. He was Father unto Sir Jo. Finch. L. Ch. J. and for a time Lord Keeper and Baron of Fore-ditch. Souldiers. In former times the leading of the Front in Ar∣mies absolutely belonged to the Men of Kent. When the Cornish had that priviledge in the time of K. Arthur, it was only Temporary; and when the Men of Archenfeld in Herford-sh. prescribed to have it, that was only local, as being confined to the Welsh Warrs. Seamen. Will. Adams, born at Gillingham, served the English Company of Barbary Merchants 10 years, and was for 14 years Employed by the Dutch in India. Being Pilot to their Fleet of 5 Sail he con∣ducted them to Japan, (being the first English-man who effectually discovered that Island) and in or∣der to the settlement of Trade, endured many Miseries. He died at Firando in Japan, 1612.
Civilians. Nich. Wotton, Son to Sir Rob. was born at Bockton-Malherb. He was the first Dean of 2 Metrapol. Churches, of Cant and York, and of those Cathe∣drals. Also Privy Councellour to 4. Successive Soveraigns, K. Hen. 8. E. 6. Q. Ma. Q. Eliz. was Employed 13 several times in Embassies to For∣reign Princes. He refused the Arch-Bishoprick of Cant. He died An. 1566. and was buried in Cant. Giles Fletcher D. L. and Brother to Rich. B. of Lond. was a most Excellent Poet, Commissioner into Scotl. Germ. and the Low Countrys, for Q. Eliz. and her Ambassador into Russia, Secretary of Lond. and Master of the Court of Requests. His Russian Embassy to settle the English Mer∣chandise was his Master-piece; to Theodore Juano∣wich D. of Muscovia. He came thither in 88. when some Hollanders envying the free Trade of the English, had done them bad Offices, and when a false report was generally believed that the Spa∣nish Armado had worsted the English Fleet. Yet our Doctor demeaned himself with such Cautious∣ness, that he procured many priviledges for the English Merchants, exemplified in Mr. Hackluit. Having returned home he gave God hearty Thanks for being rid out of the power of that Barbarous Prince, and wrote a Book called, The Russian Common-wealth, the printing whereof was not per∣mitted by Q. Eliz. Physicians. Rob. Floyd, of a Knightly Family, was bred in Oxf.
and beyond the Seas. A great Philosopher and Physician. He was of the Order of the Rosa-Cru∣cians. His Books are Mystical, as his Discourses were. He died An. 1637. Will. Harvey, born at Folkston, and bred in Caius-Coll. in Camb. where he proceeded Dr. of Physick, 5 years also he studied at Padua. He was afterwards Physician to Ch. 1. and was not only Dr. Medicinae but Dr. Medicorum. For this was he who first found out the Circulation of the Blood. Tho he lived a Batchelor, he may be said to have left three hopefull Sons to Posterity; his Books 1. De Circulatione Sanguinis, 2. De Gene∣ratione, 3. De Ovo. This Dr. had made a good pro∣gress in laying down a Practice of Physick, con∣formable to his Thesis, of the Circulation of blood; but was plundred of his Papers in the Civil War. Yet Posterity will acknowledge the improvements of this opinion as Superstructures on his Foundati∣ons, and thankfully pay the fruit to his Memory. He hath since been a second Linacre and great Benefactor to the Colledge of Physicians at Lond. He died An. Dom. 1657. Writers. Jo. of Kent, was sent Legate by Pope Innoc. 4. into Engl. He flourished 1248. Haimo of Feversham, went to Paris, where he was inter Aristotelicos Ari∣stotelissimus. He was Provincial, then General of the Franciscan Order in Engl. when on his death-Bed he received a Visit from the Pope. He died 1260. Having first corrected the Roman Breviary. Sim. Stock, lived an Hermite in a hollow Tree, (whence his name) tho B. D. of Oxf. He left behind
him many superstitious Books. Being 80 years of Age, he had a Revelation that before his Death he should behold a Holy Order of Carmelites come out of Syria, which fell out accordingly, Simon coming out of his Oak to meet them, which is as true as that he was fed 7 years with Manna in Mount Carmel. Th. Haslewood, an Augustinian Frier in Leeds, a good Scholar and fruitful Historian. He flouri∣shed under E. 2. 1321. in a Manuscript (in Librar. Cotton.) he mentions how Edw. the Black Prince took. K. Jo. of Fr. Captive, vanquished Hen. an Usurper in Spain, and restored Peter K. of Spain. Since the Reformation. Sir Th. Wiat, (Senior) Knight, was born at Al∣lington-Castle. Being Servant to H. 8. he fell into his disfavour about the business of Q. Anne Bullen, till by his Innocence, Industry and Discretion he extricated himself. He was one of great Learning, admirable Ingenuity, and answered his Anagram Wiat a Wit. He translated David Psalms into En∣glish Metre. Of him Leland Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast, And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbred feet, In English, Wiat both of them doth Coast, In whom all graceful Eloquence doth meet. Being sent Ambassador by Hen. 8. to Ch. 5. Emp. before he took shipping, he died of the Pestilence, An. 1541. Leonard Diggs, Esq. one of excellent Learning and
deep Judgment, was very skilful in Architecture and Fortification. He printed his Tectonicon, Prog∣nostick general, Stratiotick, &c. He flourished 1556, and died I think about the beginning of Q. Eliz. His Learning seems to run in the Blood of his Fa∣mily, Witness Sir Dudley Diggs of Chilham-Castle, made Mr. of the Rolls 1636. whose Abilities will be in perpetual remembrance. And the Son of this Knight wrote a Solid Treatise of the difference between King and Parliament. Th. Charnock, born in the Isle of Thanet, writes of his own Book of the Philosophers Stone. For satisfying the Minds of the Students in this Art Then thou art worth as many Books as will lie in a Cart. An. 1555. all his Work (carried on in pursuit of that Stone) fell on fire, and he himself, 3 years after, was (by a Gentleman that owed him a grudge) prest a Souldier for the relieving of Calice, and this unluckily fell out when he was within a Month (of his Reckoning) to be delivered, by the acquest of that immortal Elixir, from Poverty and Contempt, those unsupportable Appurtenances of Mortali∣ty. He saved nothing but the CAPUT MOR∣TUUM, and now his own projecting Head is dead. Fr. Thinne, was a Herauld, by the Title of Lan∣caster, about the end of Q. Eliz. afforded great assistance to Holinshed in his Works. Rob. Glover, born at Ashford, was Pursuivant Procullis, and then Som. Herauld. He attended the E. of Derby, when he carried the Garter into France to K. Hen. 3. He began a Catalogue of the English Nobility with their Arms, &c. He died
1583. and was buried in St Giles Lond. Whose Sister's Son Th. Miles, born at Ashford, set forth his Uncles Catalogue of Honour. He was Employed from Q. Eliz. to H. 4. K. of France, and discharged his Trust with so great Fidelity and incredible celerity, that in memory of his Service, he had given him for the Crest of his Arms a Chappeau with Wings, to denote the Mercuriousness of this Message. He died An. 16— Jo. Philpot, born at Faulkston, was first Pur∣suivant Extraord. by the Title of Blanch Lion, then in Ordinary by name of Rouge Dragon, and afterwards Somerset Herauld. He made Additions to the second Edition of Mr Cambden's Remains, and deserved highly well of the City of Lond. proving in a Learned Book, that Gentry doth not abate with Apprentiship, but only sleepeth, du∣ring the time of their Indentures, and awaketh a∣gain when they are expired. He contributed to the setting forth the aforesaid Catalogue. He died 1645. and was buried in Bennet Pauls-Wharf. Th. Playford, was chosen Marg. Professor in Camb. 1597. 'Tis said, Self-conceit, (a Chronical Disease in others) was in him, an Acute Distemper that vi∣olently seised his intellectuals. He died 160 and lyeth buried in St. Botolphs in Camb. Jo. Bois, D. D. (descended from Jo. de Bosco who entred England with Will. the Conq.) was Dean of Cant. Famous to Posterity for his Postils in defence of our Liturgy. So pious his Life, that his Adversaries were offended that they could not be offended therwith. A great Prelate in the Church did bear him no good Will, for mutual Ani∣mosities betwixt them, whilst Gremials in the University, the reason perchance that he got
no higher Preferment. He died about the year 1625. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir Jo. Philpot, (whose Family hath long resided at Ʋpton Court) was bred a Grocer in Lond. where∣of he was Mayor, 1378. He set forth a Fleet An. 2. R. 2 at his own cost to repress the Insolence of one John Mercer a Sco, who was taken with all his Ships arid rich Plunder therein. Two years af∣ter he conveyed an English Army into Britain, in Ships of his own hiring, and with his own Money released more then 1000 Arms there, which the Souldiers had formerly engaged for their Victuals. The Nobility accused him for acting without a Commission; Yea Pro tantorum sumptuum praemio vniam vix obtinuit. Will. Sevenock, born in Sevenock, gave 7 Acorns for his Arms, which if they grow as fast in the Field of Herauldry, as in the Common Field, may be presumed to be Oaks at this day. He was Grocer in, and (An. 1419) Lord Mayor of Lond. He founded at Sevenoc a fair Free-School for poor peo∣ples Children, and an Alms-house or 20 men and women, which at this day is well maintained. Since the Reformation. Sir Andr. Jud. born at Tunbridge and bred Skin∣ner in Lond. whereof he was Lord Mayor An. 1551. He built an Alms-House nigh Sr Helens in Lond. and a stately Free-School at Tunbridge, sub∣mitting it to the care of the Company of Skin∣ners who have expended of their own money 4000l. in maintainance of it, &c.
Will. Lamb, Esq. a Gent. of the Chappel to K. Hen. 8. was born at Sutton Valens, where he e∣rected an Alms-House and a well endowed School. An. 1557 he began, and within 5 months finished the fair Conduit at Holburn Bridge, and carried the water in Pipes of Lead more than 2000 yards, at his own cost, amounting to 1500 l. The to∣tal sum of his several gifts moderately estima∣ted exceed 6000 l, He died about 1580. and lyes buried in St Faiths Church under St Pauls. Frances Sidney, Aunt to the Renowned Sir Phi∣lip, was born (probably) at Penherst. She bestow∣ed on the Abbey-Church of Westminster a Salary of 20l. per An. for a Divinity Lecture, and Foun∣ded Sidney Sussex Coll. in Camb. She was Relict of Tho. Ratcliffe E. of Sussex. She died child∣less An. 1588. Sir Fr. Nethersole Orator of the University of Camb. was preferred to be Ambassadour to the Princes of the Ʋnion, and Secretary to the Lady Eliz. Q. of Bohemia; it is hard to say whether he was more remarkable for his doings or sufferings in her behalf. He married Lucy eldest Daughter of Sir Hen. Goodyear of Polesworth in Warw. by whose encouragement he hath founded and endowed a ve∣ry fair School at Polesworth aforesaid, and is still living. Memorable Persons. Simon Linch Gent. born at Groves, V. Essex. Mary Waters, born at Lenham had at her de∣cease, lawfully Descended from her, 367 Chil∣dren, 16 of her own body, 114 Grand-children, 228 in the 3 d. Generation, and nine in the fourth. She died 1620.
A Gentlewoman now alive being in extream A∣gony of Soul, held a Venice-glass in her hand, and said, I am as surely Damned, as this glass is broken, which she immediately threw with violence to the ground, yet was it taken up again sound and en∣tire. The Gentlewoman took no comfort thereat, but afterwards it pleased God she recovered from her sad condition. This she her self told to Th. Morton Bishop of Durham, from whose Mouth I have received this Relation. In the days of Q. Mary she used to visit the Prisons,and comfort and relieve the Confessors therein. She was pre∣sent at the Burning of Mr. Bradford. She died 1620. Nicholas Wood, born at Halingborne, had the Ca∣ninus Appetitus and could eat a whole Hog at a sit∣ting, at another time 30 dozen of Pigeons. He died 1630. An ingenious Yeoman in this County, used to Plough two Furrows at once, with two Ploughs curiously joyned. Noted Sheriffs. An. 1. Hubert de Burgo late Lord Lieu∣tenant to K. Jo. and L. Ch. J. of England. In this Year of his Sherivalty he not only vali∣antly defended the Castle of Dover against Lewis the French Kings Son, but also in a Na∣val conflict overthrew a new supply of Souldi∣ers sent to him for Assistants. Hubert de Burozo succeeded the former in his Office. No less a Cou∣ragious Judge, having advised K. Hen. 3. to cancell the Great Charter, alledging that since it had been granted by that King, during his Minori∣ty, it was of no Force in Law—
An. 20. Johan. de Northwood, of a right Ancient Family before the Conquest. Their chief Residence was Northwood in the Parish of Milto Church. One of their Heirs was married into the Family of the Nortons. 16. Rich. Waller, in the time of H. 5. took Charles, D. of Orleans, Prisoner, at the battel of Agin-Court, and brought him over to Eng∣land where he held him in honourable restraint at Grome-Bridge. He was a Benefactor to the repair of Spelherst Church. The Prince assigned to him and his Heirs an Additional Crest, viz. the Arms of France hanging by a Label on an Oak, with the Motto, Hic fructus Virtutis. From this Richard, Sir William Waller is lineally descended. 23. Will. Crowmer, was taken by Jack Cade, the Rebel, and committed by his Worship to the Fleet in London, because, (as Jack said,) he was guilty of Extortion in his Office, Jack having catch'd him would not leave him so, but being at∣tended with other venturous Lads, brought him to Mile-End, and there reformed the Gentleman by cut∣ting off his Head, which they set upon a long Pole on London Bridge. John Scot, Arm. was Knighted and was much trusted and employed by E. 4. who made him one of his Privy Council and Knight Marshal of Callis; and sent him (with others) Ambassadour to the Dukes of Burgundy and Brittain to bring back the Earls of Pembrook and Richmond. He lyeth buried in the Church of Braborne. An. 3. Rich. Blakenbury, was nearly alli∣ed to Sir Rob. Constable of the Tower, who dipped his fingers so deep in the Blood of King Ed. 5. and his Brother.
An. 5. William Boleyn, Mil. was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of R. 3. He married a Daughter and Coheir of Th. Butler E. of Ormond, by whom he had (among others) Sir Th. Boleyn E. of Wiltshire. 10 Jo. Peach (with the Kentish Gentry) made Perkin who landed then in Sandwich, shrink his Horns back again into the shell of their Ships, and brought 150 of Perkin's men up to London. He was Knighted for his good service. An. 5. Jo. Norton, Mil. went over a Captain with the 1500 Archers under the Conduct of Sir Ed. Poynings to assist Marg. Dutchess of Savoy against the D. of Guelders; where this Sir Jo. was Knighted by Charles, Young Prince of Castile and afterwards Emperour. He lyeth buri∣ed in Milton Church. 7. Th. Cheyney, Arm. Knighted by H. 8. was a Spritely Gentleman, living and dying in great Honour; a Favourite and Privy-Councellor to four successive Kings and Queens, viz. H. 8. E. 6. Q Mary and Q. Elizabeth. 11 Jo. Wiltshire Mil. was Comptroller of Calis An. 21. H. 7. He founded a Chappel in the Parish of Stove. An. 3. Moile Finch, Mil. married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to Sir Th. Heneage, Vice-Chamb. to Q. Elizabeth, and Chan∣cellour of the Duchy of Lancaster. She in her Wi∣dowhood, by the Special favour of K. James was honoured Viscountess Maidston, and afterwards by the great grace of K. Charles 1. created Coun∣tess of Winchelsey, both Honours being Entailed on the Issue Male of her Body; To which her Grand∣child, the right Honourable Heneage (lately gone Ambassadour to Constantinople) doth succeed.
Canterbury. CAnterbury an ancient City, during the Saxon Hep∣tarchie was the chief Seat of the Kings of Kent. Here Becket had his death, here Edward the Black Prince and K. Hen. 4. had their Interment. The Metropolitan Dignity first conferred by Gregory the Great on Lond. was for the Honour of Augustine afterwards bestowed on this City. It is pleasantly Situated, being surrounded with a fertile Soil, well Wooded and commodiously Watered by the River Stoure, (called Durrwhen in Brit. i. e.) a swift River, tho it needs scouring. Of Buildings, Christ-Church first dedicated, and (after 300 years Intermission to Th. Becket) restored to the Honour of our Saviour, is a Stately Structure, being the performance of several successive Arch-Bishops; it is much adorned with Glass Windows, painted with excellent Colours tho none of the best Fi∣gures. Yet 'tis said a Forraign Ambassadour proffe∣red a vast price to transport the East Window of the Quire beyond the Seas. As Pictures are the Books, painted Windows were in time of Popery the Library of Laymen. V. Somners Antiquities. Proverbs. 1. Canterbury Tales, a Book of Chaucer so called;
it is applied to all Feigned and Pleasant Stories, &c. such as the Miracles of Becket; some helpfull, as when perceiving his old Palace at Otford to want water, he struck his staff into the dry ground (still called St. Thomas his Well) whence Water runneth plentifully to serve that House. Others spitefull: as when (because a Smith dwelling in that Town had clogged his Horse) he ordered that no Smith afterwards should thrive in that Parish. Prelates. Steph. Langton, born in England, bred in Paris,S. N. was one of the greatest Scholars of the Christian World in his Age. He was conse∣crated Cardinal of St. Chrysogone, and then by the Pope intruded Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in defi∣ance of King John. He wrote Comments on all the Old, and some on the New Testament. He first di∣vided the Bible into Chapters, which Robert Ste∣phens a Frenchman subdivided into Verses. Others attribute the Division into Chapters to that able An∣tiquary Sir Henry Spelman, who was the Improver but not the Inventor. Langton divided also the King∣dom of England, reducing King John to sad extre∣mities. He died and was buried at Canterbury 1228. Souldiers. William Prude, Esq. Lieutenant Collonel in the Low Countreys was slain July 12, 1632 at the Siege of Mastricht. His body was brought into England and buried in the Cathedral of Canterbury, part of his Epitaph being
Stand Souldiers; ere you march by way of Charge, Take an Example here, that may inlarge Your Minds to noble Action— He fear'd not Death midst all Harms He bare as much of Piety as Arms. Now Souldiers on, and fear not to intrude The Gates of Death by th' Example of this Prude. He married Mary Daughter of Sir Adam Sprackling, Knight, and had Issue by her four Sons and three Daughters, his surviving Son Searles Prude having erected his Monument. Writers. Osbern of Canterbury, an admirable Musician, and therefore a great Favourite to Lanfrank the Arch-Bishop. He was the English Gen. 4.22. ju∣bal as to the curiosity of Musick in our Churches; An Art which never any spake against who understood it, otherwise Apollo is in a sad case, if Midas his Ears must be the Judges. He wrote the Life of St. Dunstan in Latine, flourished under William the Con∣queror An. 1070. Simon Langton, Brother to Stephen Arch-Bishop was, Arch-Deacon of Canterbury; who Carne & Sanguine revelante encreased both the Revenues and Jurisdiction of that Place to him and his Success∣ors. A troublesome Man he was, and a great Adver∣sary to King Joh. and would not be reconciled to that King tho he was urged both by the Command (under the pain of Excommunication) and Example of his Holiness. This caused him to trudge to the Court of Rome where he found little favour; For such who will be the Popes White Boys must watch∣fully
observe his signals, and charge when he char∣geth, and retreat when he retreateth. He wrote (besides other) a Book of the Penitence of M. Mag∣dalene, in relation (it seems) to himself, tho she found more favor in the Court of Heaven then he at Rome. He died 12— Benefactors to the Publick. Jo. Easday, of most honourable Extraction, bred in Cambridge, was Dean of Canterbury. He was the first Clergy-man who carried tidings of the English Crown to King Ja. He reduced the Court of Tri∣nity Colledge to a spacious and beautiful Quadrangle, and added a stately new Court at his own expence of above 300 l. He died 161— Lancashire. LAncashire hath the Irish Sea on the W. York-sh. on the E. Cheshire on the S. Cumberland and West. on the N. Being in length 50 and in the broad∣est part 31 Miles; Of a piercing Air which pro∣duceth fair Complexions and firm Constitutions in the Natives. Tolerably Fruitful. There are in this Countrey 36 Parishes, few, in so great a compass. But as Sir Tho. More, when Lord Chanc. every Morning in Term-Time, ask'd Blessing in Westm. Hall of his Father Sir Jo. More, then a puisne Judge So in this Shire some Chappels exceeding
their Mother Churches in Fairness of Structure and numerousness of people, owe their filial Relation, and still continue their dutiful dependance on their Pa∣rents. The Church of Manchester has 9 Chappels, which before the Civil-Wars were reputed to have had 500 Communicants a piece; a Lincoln-shire Church is best built, a Lancash. Church is largest bounded, and a London Audience consists of most intelligent people. The people generally devout are (as I am informed) Northward and by the West Popishly affected, which in other parts (intended by Antiperistasis) are Zealous Protestants. Hence it is that many Subtil Papists and Jesuits have been born and bred in this County, which have met with their Matches in the Natives of the same County. Of Natural Commodities, there are the most and best Oates. Allom found at Houghton. Oxen the fairest in Engl. with goodly Heads, the tips of whose Horns are sometimes di∣stanced 5 Foot asunder. The Manufactures are Fusti∣ans Jen. Ausburgh and Millain. The Cottons of Manchester carry away the credit in Engl. Other small Wares of that Town may be wrapt up in Manchester. Tickin, tyed with the Tape and bound about with the Poynts and Laces of the same place. Of Buildings Manchester (a College.) Church a great Ornament to this County, hath a Quire exceeding beautful, and for Wood-work an Excellent Piece of Artifice. The wonder of this County, is, that about Wiggin, Men go a Fishing with Spades and Mattocks, and find small Fishes in deadish water un∣er the tursie ground. Proverbs. I. Lancashire for Women. II. It is written upon a
Wall in Rome, Richester was as Rich as any Town in Christendom. Probably Richester was anciently an E∣minent Roman Colony; tho now it is not so much as a Mereate Town. Martyrs. Jo. Rogers, bred in Camb. an able Linguist and General Scholar, Converted from the Popish Religion, translated the whole Bible, and dedicated it to H. 8. Subscribing himself Th. Matthews. He fled beyond the Seas for fear of the 6 Articles, and returning in the Reign of E. 6. became a Preacher in Lond. and a great Stickler against Ceremonies. He was the first Martyr in Q. Maries days, he led all the rest, who if they had not been Flesh and Blood they could not have been burnt: and if they had been no more then Flesh and Blood they would not have been burnt. He was Martyred Feb. 4. 1555. Jo Bradford, born at Manchester, Lawyer and good Scholar, Commenced Mr. of Arts in Camb. by favour; He had been always a hard Student from his Youth. A most Holy Man, who secretly in his Closet would so weep for his Sins, one would have thought he would never have smiled again, and then appearing in Publick, he would be so harmlesly pleasant, one would think he had never wept before (V. Fox Mart.) He suffered 1555. Geo. Marsh, born at Dean, first Farmer, then (af∣ter the death of his wife) Student in Camb. became Curate to Mr. Lawr. Sanders the Martyr. If he made doubtful and fearful answers at his Examination, he made amends with his final Constancy, being Burnt and Scalded to Death (having a Barrel of Pitch placed over his head, an Accent of Cruelty pe∣culiar
to him alone) when he was Martyred at Winchester Apr. 24. 1555. Cardinals. Will. Alan, of Gentile parentage, bred in Oriel-Coll. in Oxford, became Head of St. Maries-Hall. therein. Then beyond the Sea, he became K. Pro∣fessor at Doway, Can. of Cambray, and Rhemes, and at last by Pope Sixtus 5tus made Card. Priest of Mar∣tins in Rome. He troubled the Church of Engl. li∣ning his Red Hat with the Black Offices he did a∣gainst his Native Countrey. He Collected the Eng∣lish Exiles into a Body, and united them in a Colledge, first at Doway, then at Rhemes, so great an Advancer, that we may behold him as a Founder of that Semi∣nary. He died at Rome an. 1594. and was buried in the English School. Prelates. Hugh Oldham, bred in Camb. a Pious Man and no ill Scholar, was B. of Exeter. A Foe to Monkish Su∣perstition, and a Friend to University Learning, Bountiful to Braz. Nose, and Corp. Chr. Coll. in Camb. He founded and endowed a School in Manchester, with a large Revenue. Dying Excommunicate 1520. (for not standing to the decision of Rome in a contest with the Ab. of Tavestock) he was buried in the Wall of the Chappel he had built by his own Ca∣thedral. Ja. Stanley, D. D. Brother of Th. E. of Darby, was by K. Hen. 7. his Kinsman by Marriage, prefer∣red B. of Ely. 1506. He lived at a distance from his Cathedral, with his Brother all the Summer, and in the Winter time at Somersham in Hunt. with one
who was not his Sister and wanted nothing to make her his wife save marriage. He died. 1515. Hen. Standish, a Franciscan, and D. D. in Camb. and afterwards made B. of St. Asaph, entered the Lists with Erasmus as a Dwarf with a Gyant, and pe∣titioned H. 8. to continue the Religion of his An∣cestors; and entring into Matters of Divinity cited the Colossians in stead of the Corinthians. He died 1535. Jo. Christopherson, Mr. of Trin. Coll. in Camb. an excellent Scholar, made and wrote a Greek Tragedy (so curiously that it seem'd printed) and present∣ed it to H. 8. He translated Philo and Euseb. into Lat. Besides his own Benefactions to the Masters Lodgings and Library, he was highly instrumental in moving Q. Ma. to her magnificent Bounty to Trin. Coll. In the visitation of Camb. he was very active in burning the bones of Bucer, being then E∣lect B. of Chichester. He no sooner put on his Epi∣scopal Ring, but presently began to wash his hands in the blood of poor Martyrs, An. 1. Eliz. he was de∣prived. He dyed in Restraint 1560. Since the Reformation. Ja. Pilkinton, D. D. of ancient Family before the Conquest, (when the chief of them then sought for, disguised himself a Thresher) has for his Motto, Now thus, now thus, in allusion to the head of the Flail, or to himself embracing the safest condition for the present. He was bred in Camb. and fled an. 1. Mar. into Germ. where he wrote a Comment on Ecclesi∣astes, and both the Epistles of St. Peter. After his return he was preferred an. 1. Eliz. B. of Durham. And 9 years after, the Northern Rebels came to Durham, and tore the English Liturgy. The Bishop
had fared no better, if they had found him. When the Rebellion was suppressed, the Bishop commenced a Suit against Q. Eliz. for the Lands and Goods of the Rebels attainted in the Bishoprick as due to him. But the Parliament interposing, on special considera¦tion, pro hoc tempore, Adjudged them to the Queen He died. 1576. Edwin Sandys, was born at Conisby. v. Eccl. Hist. Rich. Barnes, born at Bolde and bred in Oxf. was Suffr. B. of Nott. then B. of Carlile 1570, and at last of Durham. A Man of good Nature, but abused by his Credulity and Affection to his Brother Jo. Chancel∣lor of his Diocess, who (permitting base and disho∣nest persons to escape Scot-free for a piece of Money) was the cause of good Mr. Gilpins's suspension, yet the Bp. restored him afterwards and thus accosted him, Father Gilpin, I acknowledge you are fitter to be B. of Dur. then my self to be Parson of this Church of yours, I ask forgiveness for my errors passed; Forgive me Fa∣ther, I know you have hatched up some Chickens that now seek to pick out your eyes, but so long as I shall live Bp. of Dur. be secure no man shall injure you. He died in 88. Jo. Woolton, born at Wiggin, fled in Q. Maries daies, and after his Return was made Bishop of. Exeter, 1579. He endited Letters full of Wisdom and Piety not 2 hours before his death An. 1593. His daughter was married to Fr. Godwin Bishop of Hereford. Mathew Hutton, Marg. Professor and B. D. 1561 was chosen Bishop of Durham 1589. Tran∣slated to York 1594. He died 1605. V. Eccl. Hist. He gave 100 marks to Trinity College, in Cambridge, and Founded a Hospital at Wareton in this County. A learned and Pious Prelate. Martin Heton, Canon of Christ Church, was made Bishop of Ely, by Q. Elizabeth ('tis supected he used Simoniacal compli∣ance.)
He was the best House-keeper in that See within Mans remembrance. He died 1609. leaving two Daughters married in those Knightly Fami∣lies of Fish and Filmer. Rich. Bancroft, bred in Camb. was made by Q. Elizabeth B. of Lond. by K. James Arch-bishop of Cant. A great Statseman and grand Champion of Church Discipline. He was so habituated to the Poi∣sons of malicious Tongues, that they became Food unto him. Once a Gentleman presented to him a Libel which he found pasted on his Door, Who nothing moved thereat, Cast it (said he) to 100 more which lye here on a heap in my Chamber. Ma∣ny a Lye-bel or loud Lye was made upon him. He cancelled his first Will, wherein he left much to the Church, whereof a Scurrillous Pen, He who never repented of doing Ill Repented that once he had made a God Will. Whereas indeed suspecting a popular violence on Cathedrals, and fearing an Alienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to cancell his own, to prevent others cancelling his Testament. For by his second Will, he gave the Library at Lam∣beth to the University of Cambridge in case the Archiepiscopal See should be extinct. Which Clause secured that Library in the late Wars. He died An. 1610. and lyeth buried at Lambeth. Th. Jones, bred in Cambridge, commenced D. D. in Dublin, and was made B. of Meath 1584. and one of the Privy Council to Q. Elizabeth in Ireland. He was translated to be Arch-bishop of Dublin. 1605. and by K. James made Chanc. of Ireland. Sir Roger his Son was by K. Charles created Viscount Renelaugh,
Rich. Parr, bred in Oxford, was preferred B. of Man by the E. of Darby, Lord thereof. He died 16— Souldiers. Sir Will. Molineux, Knight of Sefton, was at the Battel of Navarret in Spain, made Knight Banneret by Ed. the Black Prince, An. 1367. He died at Cant. 1372. Whose descendant Sir Will. Molineux, Junior, flourishing under H. 8. brought the strength of this County to the Succour of the D. of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal service in Flodden-field. Writers. Hugh of Manchester, first a Dominican, then a Franciscan, having discovered an Impostor, wrote a Book de Fanaticorum deliriis, dedicating the same to E. 1. who sent him Ambassador to Philip K. of France to demand Lands which were detained from him in Aquitain. He died 1294. Rich. Ʋlverston, a great Antiquary, bred at Ox∣ford, wrote a Book entituled the Articles of Faith. He died (probably) about 1434. Th. Penketh, D. D. in Oxford, so deep a Scotist, and of so great a Memory, that had all the Books of Scotus been lost, he was reported by Forraigners, able to restore them every word. He was Professor at Padua, and after his return, Provincial of the Augustinians in England. He died and was buried in London, 1487. Jo. Standish, wrote a Book against the Translation of the Bible into English, and presented it to the
Parliament. He died 1556 near the end of Q. Mary. Since the Reformation. Th. Leaver, B. D. in Cambridge, fled in the Mari∣an days and became Pastor of the English Exiles at Arrow in Switz. He wrote a Book entitled The right path way to Christ. He died after his return into England, 1558. Will. Whitaker, born at Holme, died 1596. V. Ec∣cl. Hist. Alexander Nowell, born at Read. of a Knightly Family, and bred in Oxford, narrowly escaped be∣ing catched by Baner, whilst he himself was catching of Fish; being conveyed beyond the Seas by one Fr. Biwyer Merch. and leaving behind him a Bottle of Ale on the Grass, which afterwards was found no Bottle but a gun, such the sound at the opening thereof; which is believed the Original of Bottle-Ale in Engl. Returning An. 1 Elizabeth he was made Dean of St Pauls, and for his Meekness, Learn∣ing, Prudence and Piety, the then Parliament enioy∣ned him to make a Catechisme for publick use. He was Confessor to Q. Elizabeth. He gave 200 l per An. to maintain 13 Scholars in Brazen-nose College. He died at 90 years of age, not decayed in sight, 1601. Joh. Dee, Dr. in Oxford, was an excellent Mathematician and well skilled in natural Magick,S. N. and therefore by ignorant people suspect∣ed to be a Conjurer, which occasioned the seising of his Library, and his leaving of the Land. Af∣ter his return he was again haunted at Mortlack with the same scandal, but he gave such satisfacti∣on of the lawfulness and usefulness of his Studies, that the Queen (besides many New-years gifts (pre∣sented
him Warden of Manchester. All his Books speak him a Learned Man. He died about 1 year of King James. Roger Fenton, D. D. in Camb. was a Pious Mini∣ster in St. Steph. Walbrook London. He wrote a Treatise against Usury. He had set about study∣ing Dr. Felton's Funeral Sermon (who lay at the point of Death) Yet it pleased God this Dr. recovered, and preached Dr. Fenton's according to a former mutual agreement betwixt them, that the Surviver should Preach the others Funeral Ser∣mon. He died 1615. Robert Balton, born at Blackborne, had the 6 Pro∣perties of a good Scholar, viz. good natural parts, a Faithful Memory, Curiosity, (using withal) Study, Labour and Attention. He could speak the Greek and Lattin as well as English, and that Stilo imperato∣rio. He was chosen a Disputant before King James, and acquitted himself with great applause. He was afterwards Rector of Broughton. He died 1631. Jo Weaver, bred in Cambridge an Antiquary, com∣posed a Book of Funeral Monuments in the Diocess of Canterbury, Roch, Lond. and Norwich. He died about 1634. Ja Cudworth, D. D. and an excellent Preacher, fi∣nished some of Mr Perkins's Works. Lawr. Chaderton, Lawyer, was a Convert from the Romish Religion, which when his father (a rich Gentleman) heard, he sent him a groat in a poak to go a begging therewith. He was one of the four Representatives of the Nonconformists in Hampton Court Conference, and afterwards a Translator of the Bible; having preached one time for two hours space, he concluded That he would no longer trespass upon their patience, at which the hungry people cryed
out For Gods sake go on, which obliged him to an Extempore-continuance. After he had commenced D. D. he died 1640. Geo. Walker, born at Hauxhead, having the small-Pox in his childhood, (the standers by expecting his dissolution) started up out of a Trance with this ejaculation, Lord take me not away till I have shewed forth thy Praises, which made his parents devote him to the Ministery after his recovery. His Sermon, printed against the profanation of the Sabbath, &c. procured him much trouble and 2 years Im∣prisonment. He died 1651. Romish Exile Writers. Edw. Rishton, M. A. in Doway, and priest in Rome 1580. at his return to England was three years Prisoner. He died of the Plague at St. Manhow, 1585. Th. Worthington, well descended, was bred at Doway, B. D. and sent into England, in 88. where he was imprisoned in the Tower of London. He commenced D. D. at Triers. He wrote Notes on the Old Testament which came out in English at Rhemes. —Anderton, a Learned Popish Priest scurvi∣ly disappointed Mr. Bolton, his Prosylite who was to go over with him to the English Seminary. Benefactors to the Publick. Will. Smith, born at Farmeworth preferred by H. 8 B. of Lich. & Cov. & president of the Marches, Foun∣ded a Hosp. and School at Lich. and a School at Far∣meworth, allowing 10 l. per An. Salary for the
Master. He founded Brazen-nose Colledge in Oxford, before the finishing of which he died 1513. Molineux a preacher, about the time of H. 8. descended of the House of Softon built the Church there, and Houses for Schools about the Church Yard, and made the great Wall about Mag. Colledge in Oxford. Edw. Halsall, Esquire, Chamberlain of the Exchequer at Chester, founded a Free School in Halstall. Th. West, younger Brother to the Lord de la Ware, and Parson of Manchester became Heir to that Ba∣rony. For a Marriage-License from the Pope he built a Colledge for Priests in Manchester. Since the Reformation. Jo. Smith, finding Magd. Coll. in Cambridge, poor and empty, left it rich and full of Scholars, having served it all his life and bequeathed to it 600 l. at his Death. Geo. Clarke, Haberdasher, a devout Man, dying Issueless before the late Civil Wars, left to the Poor 100 l. per An. in Lands lying in Crompsal. Humph. Chetham, a Pious and prosperous Man, was High Sheriff of this County 1635. He gave by his Will 7000 l. to buy a Fee-simple Estate of 420 l. per an. for the Education of 40 poor Children in Manchester at School, from about 6 till 14 years of Age. He gave 1000 l. for Books to a Li∣brary and 100l. to prepare a place for them. He bequeathed 200l. to buy Books for the Chur∣ches of Manchester, Bolton, &c. He gave the re∣mainder of his Estate above 2000l. Debts, &c. being paid to the encrease of the Books in the Li∣brary.
Memorable Persons. Sir Edm. de Trafford and Th. de Ashton Knights descended, of great Wealth and Reputation were Famous Chymists. They procured a Patent from K. Henry 6. for trying their (pretended) Skill in turning base Metalls into Gold. Rich. Rothwell, is said to have dispossessed Jo. Fox near Nott. of the Divel, there passing betwixt them a large Dialogue. He died 1627. The Battels. At Preston in Anderness, Aug. 7. 1648. D. Hamilton entered England with an Army. Most beheld him as one rather cunning than Wise, yet rather Wise than Valiant. However he had Officers what did Ken the geat of feighting as weel as ony of oor Age. He would accept of no English assistance. Their Van and Rear were many Miles asunder, and they met the resistance of Maj. Gen. Lambert be∣fore they expected it. He at Preston gave the Scotch Army such a blow as stunn'd, it, tho it reeled, on some Miles more Southward into Stafford-shire, where at Ʋlcester, the Duke was taken prisoner and utterly defeated. As for the defeat of Ja. E. of Derby, ult. Aug. 1651. it amounted to no Battel by reason of the Vigilancy of Coll. Lilburn and others. This County may be called the Cock-pit of Con∣science, by reason of the constant Combats therein betwixt Religion and Superstition. A certain Im∣postor had almost made Eleanor Q. Mother mad, by reporting the Posthume Miracles done by her Husband H. 3. till Hugh of Manchester (of whom before) settled her judgment aright.
Leicester-shire. LEicester-shire, is almost circular in form, the Town of Leic. being the Center, and the River Soare the Diameter thereof. Having Linc. and Rut. on the E. Darby and Nott. on the N. Warw. on the W. and Northam. on the S. in length 33 and in breadth 27 miles. The South W. parts abound in Corn, the North. W. in Wood. The rest of the County having sufficiency of both. The natural Commodities are Beans, about Barton in the Beans, where they appear like a Forrest in the time of Harvest. Cole digged up at Cole-Orton which warms Cold-Orton (another Village) toge∣ther with the whole County. Of Buildings, the Parish Church of Bottsford is very fair and large, with a high Spire Steeple. At the suppression of the Abbeys, many ancient Monuments of the Alba∣nies and Roses were removed hither out of the Priory of Beaver, by the Command of Th. E. of Rut∣land. Then the Stone Tower built by William Lord Hastings at Ashby de la Zouch hath something Mo∣narchical, in Height, Strength and Workmanship a∣bove the ordinary Aristocracy of Fabricks. Also the Fair Palace built at Broadgate by Th. Grey, Marq. of Dorset challengeth the preheminence above the rest. As for Wonders, There is a Village in this
County called Charleton Curly, and all that are born therein have an harsh and ratling kind of Speech, and cannot well pronounce the Letter R. Which in all probability proceeds from a peculiar Intemperature of the Elements in that place. There was a Fellow of Trin. Coll. (likely a Native of Char∣leton) composed a Speech of competent length, without any R therein, which he could not pro∣nounce, his Speech having no Room for ER∣ROURS seeing there was an errour in his Speech. Proverbs. 1. Bean-belly Leicester-shire; for Plenty. 'Tis a merry saying, Shake a Leicester-shire Yeoman by the Collar, and you shall hear the Beans rattle in his Belly, tho at the same time they may have good Sil∣ver ringing in their Pockets. 2. If Bever have a Cap, You Churles of the Vale look to that. That is when Clouds hang over Bever-Castle it is a signe of much Rain, &c. Princes. Jane Grey, eldest Daughter of Hen. D. of Suff. by Fr. Bandon eldest Daughter to Mary, second Sister to K. Hen. 8. was born at Broadgate, near Lei∣cester. She lived many pious, but few pleasant days, whose Soul was never out of the Non-age of A∣fflictions, till death made her of full years to inherit Happiness. Whilst a Child, her Father's was to her an House of Correction, nor did she write Wo∣man sooner than she did subscribe Wife, and in obe∣dience to her Parents, was unfortunately matched to the Lord Guilford Dudley, (a pious Gentleman,) but Son to an Ambitious Father. She was Pro∣claimed,
but never Crowned Queen, living in the Tower longer a Captive than a Queen. Her Fami∣ly, by snatching at a Crown which as not, lost a Coronet which was their own. She suffered on Tower-hill 1554/5 Feb. 12. Kath. Grey, 2d. Daughter to Henry D. of Suffolk was married to the Lord Herbert Son to the Earl of Pembroke, who knowing the Case altered with that Family, brake the Marriage quite off. Thus she be∣came a Heraclita or Lady of Lamentation. The Ro∣ses of whose cheeks looked very wan and pale tho they wanted not for watering. Afterward Ed. Sey∣mour E. of Hertford married her privately without the Queens Licence, and concealed it till her pregnan∣cy discovered it. The English Proverb, It is good to be near a Kin to land, holdeth in private Patrimonies, not Titles to Crowns. Q. Elizabeth beheld her with a jealous eye, unwilling she should match either For∣reign Prince, English Peer, or any person whatsoever. The E. of Hartford being fined 15000l. was im∣prisoned with his Lady in the Tower, and severely forbidden her company. By bribing the Keeper he bought (what was his own) his Wives Embraces, and had by her a surviving Son Edw. Ancestor to the Right Honorable the D. of Som. She died Jan. 26. a Prisoner in the Tower, 1567, after 9 years Du∣rance therein. Whose Sister Mary Grey the Youngest, Frighted with the in∣felicity of her two elder Sisters, forgot her Honour to remember her Safety, and married one whom She could love, and none need fear, Martin Kayes of Kent, Esq. Serjeant Porter and died without Issue 20 Ap. 1578.
Martyrs. Hugh Latimer, born at Thurcaston, in his first Sermon, before King Ed. 6. declared his own Pedi∣gree to this effect. My Father was a Yeoman who had a Farm of 3 or 4l. a year, kept 100 Sheep and six Ser∣vants, and my Mother milked 30 Kine. He did find the King an HARNESS which I remember I buck∣led on, with himself and his Horse, when he went to Black-heath field. He kept me to School, or else I had not been able to Preach before the King's Majesty now. He married my Sisters with 5l. a piece, so that he brought them up in Godliness and the fear of God. He kept Hospitality for poor Neighbours and some alms, and all this did he of the same Farm, where he that now hath it payeth 16l p. an. and more, and is not able to do any thing for his Prince, for himself, nor for his Children, or give a cup of Drink to the Poor. He was bred in Cambridg, and converted under God, by Mr. Bliney from a violent Papist to a zealous Protestant. He was afterwards made Bishop of Worc. and 4 years after outed, for refusing to subscribe the 6. Art. He onely (of the Bishops of the new Learning in the time of H. 8.) urged that two Abbeys at the least, in every Dio∣cess, of considerable Revenues, might be preser∣ved for the maintenance of Learned Men therein, And swiming a good while against the stream, he was at last carried away with the Current. He was Martyred at Oxford, 1555. Prelates. Gilb. Segrave, born at Segrave, and bred in Ox∣ford succeeded a Kinsman (who on his death-Bed recommended him) in the Provost's place of St. Sepul∣hers
in York; and afterwards was Bishop of Lond∣don He died 1317. Walt. de Langton, born at West-Langton made by E. 1. Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield and Treas. of English. He lost the Favor of E. 2. for repro∣ving him when as yet but Prince for his debauche∣ry; and tho he never wholly regained that Prin∣ces good Will, 'tis said the surplusage of the Peo∣ple's affection to him did fill up that blank. Prodi∣gious his bounty in building and endowing his Ca∣thedral. He died 1321, and was buried in the Chappel of St. Ma. of his own erection. Rog. de Martival, Son of Sir Aukitell Mar. (whose Arms were Ar. a cinque-foil S.) was born at Nowsley. He was First Arch-Deacon of Leic. then Dean of Linc. and at last Bishop of Salisbury in the Reign of E. 2. 1315. He was the last heir male of his Race, and Founded a Colledge at Nowsley, for a War∣den and certain Brethren. His Estate descended to Joyce-de-Mart. his Sister married to Sir Ralph Hastings, lineal Ancestor to the now Earl of Hunt. and the Hazleriggs are at this day Possessors of the Mannor of Newsley. He died 1329. Rob. Wivil well descended, born at Stanton Wi∣vil, was made Bishop of Salisbury 1329. tho both a Dunce and a Dwarfe. He impleaded William Montague E. of Salisbury in a Writ of Right for the Castle of Salisbury, and it had been tried by a Com∣bat of their two Champions, had not the King in∣terposed and ordered that the Bishop should pay 2500 marks for the quiet Possession of the Castle.
Since the Reformation. Joseph Hall, born at Ashby de la Zouch, and bred in Em. Colledg in Cambridg, maintained there (with a Flourishing wit) That the World groweth Old. He was Minister at Halsted in Suffolk, where his Little Ca∣techisme did much good. He became D. D. and was at the Synod of Dort, and was preferred first Dean of Worc. then Bishop of Ex. then of Norwich, then of no place; surviving to see his Sacred Fun∣ction buried before his eyes. He may be said to have died with the pen in his hand He was com∣monly called our English Seneca. For his pure, plain and full stile. Not ill at Controversies, more happy at Comments, very good in his Characters, better in his Sermons, best of all in his Meditations. In his Will he affirms that he does not hold Gods House a meer Repository for the dead bodies of the greatest Saints. He died 1656. Statesmen. Geo. Villiers born at Brooksby, fourth Son to Sir Geo, being debarred (by his late Nativity) from his Fathers Lands, was maintain'd in France by his Mother, till he returned one of the compleatest Courtiers in Christendom. Sir Th. Lake Ushered him into the Court, whilst the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford led him by the one hand, and William E. of Pembrook, by the other, about the same time that Somerset began to decline. Soon after he was Knighted, created successively Bar. Visc. Villiers, E. Marq. D. of Buckingham. and Knight of the Garter, and had the Offices of Master of the Horse and Ad∣miral conferred upon him. He married his Neeces
to Honourable Persons, thereby both gratifying his Kindred, and fortifying himself with noble alli∣ance. King Charles had as high a kindness for the Duke as King James. had. Thenceforward he became Plenipotentiary in the English Court, some of the Scotch Nobility making room for him by their seasonable departure out of this Life. The Earl of Bristol was justled out, the Bishop of Linc. cast flat on the floor; the Earls of Pembrook and Carlile content to shine beneath him, Holland, behind him. But tho he was the little God at Court, he was the Great Divel in the Countrey; being perfectly ha∣ted by the Commonalty, and charged by them with all Miscarriages in Church and State. John Fel∣ton, apprehending himself injured, stabbed the Duke to the heart at Portsmouth 1620. His per∣son could not be charged with any blemish, save that some Criticks conceived his brows somewhat over pendulous, a cloud which in the Judgment of others, was by the beams of his eyes sufficiently dispelled. V. his Monument in the Chappel. H 7 Capital Judges. Sir Roh. Belknap, Chief J. of the Common Pleas An. 48. E. 3, was displaced An. 11 R. 2. For this King intending to make away certain Lords, viz. his Uncle the Duke of Glouc. the Earls of Arund. Warw. Darby, Not. demanded of his Judges whe∣ther he might by his Regal power revoke what was acted in Parliament. To this all the Judges answered affirmatively (Sir William Skipwith onely excepted) and subscribed it. Belknap to that his subscription added these words, There wants nothing but an hur∣dle, an horse and an halter, to carry me where I may suffer the death I deserve, for if I had not done this,
I should have died for it, and because I have done it I deserve death for betraying the Lords. In the next Parlament all the Judges were arrested, Sir Rob. Tresilian, Chief J. of the Kings Bench executed, and Belknap with others banished. Sir Robert Catelin descended of the ancient Fami∣ly of the Catelins in Northam. was born at Biby An. 1. Eliz. he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. He had aprejudice at all those who writ their Names with an alias, which made a certain person ask him what exceptions his Lordship could take at Jesus Christ alias Jesus of Nazareth. He died An. 16. Eliz. His Arms were Party par Cheveron Az. and O. which are quartered by the Right Honourable the Lord Spencer Earl of Sunderland, this Judges Daugh∣ter and sole Heir being married to his Ancestor. Some 40 years since a Gent. of his Name and Kin∣dred had a Cause in Kings Bench, to whom the Chief Justice therein said, Your Kinsman my Pre∣decessor—was a great Lawyer. My Lord (replied the Gent.) he was a very Honest man, for he left a small Estate. Writers. William Leicester (or De Montibus) D. and Pr. D. in Oxford, Eminent in Learning, and beloved by the Nobility, was known by the Name of Mr. Wil∣liam, an Evidence sufficient to avouch his Magiste∣riality in all Learning. He was Chanc. of Lincoln Church. He flourished under King Jo. Rich. Belgrave, wrote a Description of this Coun∣ty, Theolog. Determinations and Ordinary Questions. He was a Carmelite in Cambridge. He flourished un∣der E. 2. 1220.
Rob. de. Leic. a Fran. in Oxford, was one that brought Preaching into Fashion in that age. He wrote of the Hebrew and Rom. Chronological Com∣putation. He died at Lichfield 1348. Th. Ratcliffe, an Augustinian in Leic. a Man of great parts, wrote divers Books, and flourished 1360. Barth. Culie wrote of Generation and Corruption, flourished under E. 3. William De. Lubbenham, bred in Oxford, Provin∣cial of the Carmelites in Coventry, wrote upon Ari∣stotles Posteriors. He died 1361. Jeffrey De Harby, Provincial of the Augustines in Oxford, and Confessor, Privy Councellor to E. 3. wrote a Book in Praise of Poverty. He died 1361. William De Folvill, a Fran. in Cambridge, main∣tani'd that Children (under 18) might be admit∣ted into Monastical Orders. He died 1384. Hen. de. Knighton, Abb. of Leic. wrote his Hi∣story from William the Conqeuror to R. 2. in whose time he died. William Woodford, a Fran. of profound Learn∣ing, was depeuted by Th. Arundel Arch-bishop of Canterbury to confute Wickliffe's Opinions. Th. Langton a Carmelite in London wrote Of their Ordinary Acts, and Of the Trial of H. Crump. D. D. &c. He flourished under H. 4. 1400. Rob. de Harby, a Carmelite in Linc. wrote Ser∣mons of the Festivities of the Blessed Virgin. He flourished 1450. Rich. Turpin, born at Knaptoft, was one of the Gentlemen in the English Garrison in Calais in Fr. in the Reign of H. 4. He wrote a Chronicle of his time, and died 1541.
Since the Refomation. Hen. Smith, (called Silver-tongued) was Preach∣er at St Clement Danes. V. his Life writ by me. Jo. Duport, D. D. born at Shepshed, thrice Vice-Chanc. of the University of Cambridge, was one of the Translators of the Bible. He bestowed the per∣petual Advowson of the Rectory of Harston on Je. Colledge. He was happy in a Son Ja. Duport, D. D. and Greek Prof. in Trinity Colledge. He died 1617. William Burton, Esq. born at Lindley, 1575, wrote an Alphabetical Description of the Towns and Villa∣ges in this County. &c. whose Younger Brother Robert Burton, B. D. in Christ Church Oxford, wrote the excellent Book (called Democritus Junior) of the Anatomy of Melancholy. He died Rector of Segrave 1636. and had this Epitaph, Paucis notus, Paucioribus ignotus; Hic jacet Democritus Junior Cui vitam pariter & mortem Dedit Melancholia. Rich. Vines, M. A. born at Blazon, and bred in Magd. Colledg in Cambridg, was Schoolmaster of Hinckley, then Minister of St Lawrence Jury in Lon∣don. Being the Champion he was called the Luther of his Party, Employed by the Assembly in their Trea∣ties at Ʋxbridg, &c. He forsook the Mastership of Pemb. Hall for refusing the Engagement. Not a week before his Death, Preaching at St. Gregories, a rude Fellow cried out unto him, Lift up your Voice, For I cannot hear you, To whom Mr. Vines retur∣turned,
Lift up your ears, for I can speak no louder. He died 1655. Mr. Jacome Preached his Funeral Sermon. Jo. Cleaveland, Born at Hinckley (where his Father was Vicar) was Fellow of St John's in Cambridge, and Advocate General in the Garrison of Newark A General Artist, Pure Latinist, Exquisite Orator, and Eminent Poet. His lofty Fancy may seem to stride from the top of one Mountain to the top of ano∣ther, so making to it self a constant Champain and Level of continued Elevations. He died 1658. and was buried at Colledge-hill Church. Mr Parson in his Funeral Sermon forbore his Praises, seeing such who knew him not would suspect them far above, whilst such who were acquainted with him, did know them much beneath his true Desert. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir Jo. Poultney, Knight 4 times Lord Mayor of Lon∣don, built a Colledge to the Honour of Jesus & Cor∣pus Christi, for a Mr. and 7 Chaplains, in St Lawr. Church in Candle-wicke street in London An. 20 E. 3. which Church was named of him St Lawr. Poultney. He built the Church of Allhallows the less, in Thames-street, and the Monastery of White Friers in Coventry, and a Fair Chappel on the Northside of St. Pauls in London where he lyeth buried, having died 1349. He was a great Benefactor to the Ho∣spital of St Giles's in Holborn, and gave many great Legacies to the Relief of Prisoners and the Poor. Since the Reformation. Robert Smith, born at Mercate Harborough, Mer∣chant Taylor in London, Comptroller of the Cham∣ber
there, and one of the 4 Attorneys in the May∣ors Court, gave 750l. to purchace Lands for the Maintenance of a Lecturer in the Town of his Nati∣vity, &c. as appears by the Settlement. He died about 1618. Memorable Persons. Edm. Applebie, Knight, served at the Battel of Cressy An. 2. E. 3. where he took Monsieur Rob. du Mailart a Nobleman of Fr. Prisoner. An. 8. R. 2. he went into France with Jo. Gaunt D. of Lan∣caster to treat a Peace betwixt both Kingdom, and 9. R. 2 he accompanied the said Duke into Castile, who went over to invest himself in the said King∣dome in Right of his Lady Constance, Daughter and Coheir of Pet. K. of Castile. Jo. Herdwick Esq. born at Lindley, was the Man by whose Conduct Hen. E. of Richmond (afterwards H. 7.) in the Battel of Bosworth, got the Advan∣tage of Ground, Wind and Sun. He died 1511. Jo. Poultney, born in Little Shepey, used (in his sleep) to rise, walk, fight, &c. He was frozen to death with Sir Hugh Willoughby and the Fleet about Nova Zembla. Hen. Noel, Esq. Younger Son to Sr Ande. of Dalby, was for his Excellent Accomplishments, of the first Rank in Court, and being Gentleman to Queen Elizabeth did equalize the Barons of great worth in Magnificence and Expences. Being challenged by an Italian Gentelman to play at Bal oun he so heat his blood, that falling into a fever he died thereof, and by her Majesties appointment was buried in the Abbey of Westminster. An, 1596.
Noted Sheriffs. An. 16. Th. de Woodford was Coheir (with other 4 Brothers) to his Grand∣father. The Family is decayed, no part of the Lands is now in the Tenure of the Name, and some of the Male Issue descended from the 5 Brethren are now living in a low Condition, and no wonder they soon made a Hand of all where the Thumb was weakned to strengthen the 4 fin∣gers. An. 3. Th. Burdet, Mil. whose Grand∣child Th. was accused of Treason, attainted and beheaded 18. E. 4. for wishing the Horns of his (White) Buck in the Belly of him who advised K. Ed. 4 to kill him. But the true Cause of his Death seems to have been the bad opinion the K. had of him, for that he had ever been a faithful Friend to Geo. D. of Clarence the Kngs Brother and Enemy. He took Death patiently and Cheerfully, affirming he had a Bird in his Brest. (viz. innocency) that sung comfort to him. An. 2. Humph. Stafford, (afterwards Knight, Governour of Callais, coming over to England was slain by Jack Cade. Sir Humph. his Grand-child fixed himself at Blatherwick in Northam. where his Posterity doth flourish to this day. 34. Will. Hastings, Son to Sir Leonard, was made by K. E. 3. Lord Chamb. Baron Hastings of Ashby de la Zouch. An illustrious Person and Loyal to, and highly beloved by his Master. Rich. D. of Gloc. perceiving him to obstruct the Way to his Ambitious designs caused him to be beheaded. 1. E. 5. He was buried in Windsor Chappel. He was
Grand-father to Geo. Hastings first E. of Hunting∣ton. Edw. Hastings Mil. created by Q. Ma∣ry (for his Devotion) Baron of Loughbo∣rough, founded and endowed a Hosp. at Stoke Pogeis in Buck. He died without Issue, that Ti∣tle afterwards descending to a younger Branch of the same Honourable Family Hen. Hastings, 2 d. Son to Hen. E. of Huntington, who by his Virtues doth add to the Dignity of his Extraction. An. 5. Jo. Fisher, Arm. whose Father Th. a Valiant Coll. in Mussle-borough Field, having taken a Scotch-man prisoner, who gave a Griffin for his Arms, received of the D. of Som. his General, the Arms of his Captive, to be born within a Border Varrey. 14. Fr. Hastings (probably the same person with Sir Fr. 4th. Son to Fr. second E. of Huntington, whose Children agreed together in Brotherly Love tho not in Religion.) wrote a Learned Book in defence of our Religion, and was a great Benefactor to Eman. Coll. 28. Anth. Faunt, served the P. of Orange, and af∣terwards was chosen Lieutenant Gen. of all the For∣ces in this Shire to resist the Spanish Invasion. But his Election being crossed by Hen. E. of Hunt. (Lord Lieutenant of the County) he died of Melan∣choly soon after. 39. Will. Skipwith, Esq. afterwards Knighted was a person of much Valour, Judgment, Learning and Wisdom, Dexterous at making Epigrams, Poe∣sies, Mottoes, Devises, but chiefly Impresses.
Lincoln-shire. LIncoln-shire in Fashion resembles a Bended Bow, the Sea making the Back, the Rivers Welland and Humber the two Horns thereof. It is in length 60 and in the broadest part 40 miles, divided into 3 parts, viz. Holland (or Hay-land) on the S. E. Kesteven on the S. W. and Lindley on the N. to them both. The Natural Commodities are Pikes in that River near Lincoln, whence the Prov. Witham Pike England hath nne like. For Wild-Fowl this Coun∣ty may be termed the Aviary of England, for Va∣riety, Deliciousness and Plenty, 3000 Mallards with other Birds having been caught sometimes in Aug. at one Draught. Here is a Bird called the Kings-Bird, namely Knut, sent for hither out of Denmark for the use of Knut or Kanutus, K of Engl. Then Dotterels, Birds that are ridiculously mimical; as the Fowler stretcheth forth his Arms and Legs, going towards the Bird, the Bird extendeth his Legs and Wings, going towards the Fowler, till sur∣prised in the Net. But it is observed, that the Foolisher the Fowl or Fish, the finer the Flesh there∣of. Pippins, very good about Kirton in Holland. Note, when they are graffed on a Pippin Stock, they are called Renates. There are very good
Doggs in this County as Fleet-Hounds, Grey-Hounds originally employed in the Hunting of Grays, that is Brocks and Badgers, Mastiffs for Bull and Bear, the Sport being much affected therein, especially near Stamford. As for Buildings, no County af∣fords worse Houses or better Churches; and these are made of Polished Stone, imported from other Parts, so that what might seem a Parodox, is true here, The further from Stone, the better the Chur∣ches. The Cathedral of Lincoln, whose Floor is higher than the Roof of many Churches, is a Mag∣nificent Structure. Three other Bishopricks, viz. Ely, Peterborough and Oxford were carved out of this Diocess. Of the Houses of the Nobility, Tattershall (belonging to the Right Honorable the E. of Lincoln) has been advanced by degrees to the modern Magnificence thereof. Grimsthorp built by Ch. D. of Suff. to entertain H. 8. in his Progress into these Parts, is now in the Possession of the Right Honorable E. of Lindsey. For Won∣ders, At Fishtoft no Mice or Rats are found, inso∣much, that Barns built party per pale, in this and the next Parish, on one side are annoyed, on the other side (being Fishtoft Moiety) are secured from this Vermin. Some 140 years since at Harlaxton, there was found (turn'd up by one Ploughing the Ground) a Golden Helmet of Antick-fashion, stud∣ded with precious Stones, (probably of some prime Roman Commander. It was presented to Q. Kath. Wife to H. 8.
Proverbs. 1. Lincoln-shire Bag-pipes, which inspire the hea∣vy Heels of Country Clowns, overgrown with Hair and Rudeness, probably the Ground work of the Poetical Fiction of Dancing Satyrs. 2. As loud as Tom of Lincoln. This Shire carries THE BELL from all other places in England. 3. All the Carts that come to Crowland are shod with Silver. Crow∣land being a Mossy Ground, so that a Horse can hardly come to it. 4. 'Tis height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry. This Steeple seems crooked to the beholders and Eminency exposeth the upright∣est Persons to exception. 5. As mad as the Baiting Bull at Stamford. Will. E. Warren Lord of this Town, in the time of K. Jo. standing upon the Castle Walls of Stamf. saw two Bulls fighting for a Cow in the Meadow, till the Butchers Doggs pur∣sued one of the Bulls (running Mad) clean through the Town. The Earl being mightily pleased with the sight, gave all those Meadows (called the Castle Meadows) where first the Bull Duel began, for a Common to the Butchers of the Town (after the first Grass was eaten) on Condition that they find a Mad Bull, the day six Weeks before Christmass, for the continuance of that sport every year: But as for the Sober Bull of Stamford, he was not so frea∣kish as to leave his Cow, after such a fair riddance of his Horn-mad Corrival. 6. He looks as the Devil over Lincoln. Lincoln Minster being one of the Stateliest Structures in Christendom, 'tis supposed that the Devil (of Malice if you please) over∣look'd this Church when first finished with a tetric Countenance, as maligning Mens costly Devotion. 7. He was born at Little Wittham.
A Charitable Periphrasis of a Fool; tho probably the first Inventor of this Proverb was born near the same Village. 8 Grantham Gruel, 9 Grits and a Gallon of Water. Appliable to those who multi∣ply what is superfluous and omit what is necessary in their Discourse or Actions. 9. They held toge∣ther as the Men Marham when they lost their Com∣mon. Ironicall, that is, they were divided, &c. O∣thers take it to be an Expression of ill success. Note, This County is Famous for these here Natives, Contemporaries in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth Edward Clinton Lord Admiral, William Cecil Lord Treasurer, Jo Whitgift Arch-bishop of Canterbury and Peregrine Bartu Lord General in Fr. Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice Th. Wilson D. L. and Secretary of State. Princes. Henry eldest (surviving) Son of Jo. of Gaunt D. of Lancaster was born in the Castle of Bullinbrook. He was Couragious, Choleric and Ambitious, cun∣ning to catch, careful to keep, and industrious to improve all advantages. Being disobliged by R. 2. he complotted with a good part of the Nobility to depose him, whose Miscarriages, ill success and De∣bauchery exposed him to their Fury. After the Mur∣der of King Richard, Henry reigned with much opposition. He persecuted the Wickliffites (who had been patronized by his Father) thereby to be ingratiated with the Clergy. When Duke, he wore on his head an Antick hood. On his death-bed he complained of his Sufferings in Keeping, nothing bewayling his sin in getting the Crown. Fire and Faggot was kindled in his Reign in England to burn (Pardon the Prolepsis) poor Protestants, and
happy had it been, had they been quenched at his death, which hapned 1413. Saints. St. Botolph (probably of English Nativity) lived at and gave Name to Botolphs Town (corruptly Boston) in this County. Gilb. de Sempringham, of Noble Extraction, de∣formed in Body, but of Subtil Wit and great Cou∣rage, obtained Licence of the Pope to found those Hermophradite Convents of Monks, and Nuns under one roof, with no impregnable partitions. 'Tis said, he saw 13 Convents, 700 Monks, 1100 Nuns of his Order, of which the Convent Sempringham was the Prince residence. He died 1189. Hugh born in Lincoln was stoln and crucified, when 9 years of Age, by the Jews in derision of Christ 1255. Martyrs. Anne Akewe, Daughter of Sr. William Knight, was born at Kelsey in this County. She went to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire July 16. 1546. V. Ec∣cl. History. Cardinals. Rob. Somercot, a discreet and Learned man,AMP. was made Cardinal of St. Stephens, by Pope Greg. 9. An. 1231. He was a true Lover of his Countreymen, the Cause that his Cho∣ler was twice raised, when the Pope said in his presence, that there was not a faithfull Man in England, tho wisely he repressed his Passion. After
this Pope's death, he was the foremost of the 3 Elects for the Papacy, But the Italians were too hard for the Honest Englishman, being made away by Poison in the Holy Conclave, 1241. Prelates. William of Ganesborough, a Franciscan in Ox∣ford was sent over by King E. 1. with Hugh of Manchester to Phil. King of France to demand re∣paration for some Dammages in Aquitain. He was a mighty Champion of the Popes Infallibility. And for his good service Pope Boniface 8. prefer∣red him Bishop of Worcester. 'Twas a wag who said upon a Report of the close Imprisonment of Pope Urbane 8. Now it is true, Papa non Potest errare, that is, the Pope cannot straggle. This William died 1308. William Ayrmin, descended of ancient Family still extant at Osgodby, was Keeper of the Seal and Vice-Chancellor to King E. 2. 1319. and was about that time taken Prisoner by the Scots who slew 4000 Men of the English Army (being 8000 in all) near the River Swale. Afterward having recovered his Liberty, he was made Chancellor of England and Bishop of Norwich An. 18. E. 2. He gave 200l. to buy Lands to maintain Priests to say Mass for his Soul, and died 1337. at Charing Cross nigh London 'Tis he bestowed the Mannor of Silk Wil∣loughby in this County, on his Family, which with other fair Lands is possessed by them at this day. William Waynflet, (surnamed of the Town of his birth) Son to Richard Pattin an ancient Esq. (whose Posterity remain at Barsloe in Darbyshire) Found∣ed Magd. College in Oxf. V. Eccl. Hist.
William Lynwood, (probably) D. L. in Oxford, was Chanc. to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury and Keeper of the Pr. Seal to H. 6. and was Employ∣ed on several Embassies to Sp. and Portug. He wrote a Comment on the English Provincial Con∣stitutions, for which he was made Bishop of St. Dav. He died 1446. Will. Ascough, D. L. descended of a worship∣full and ancient Family now living at Kelsey, be∣came Bishop of Sarum, Confessor to H. 6. Jack Cade and his Crew (many of them being his Te∣nants) fell foul on this Bishop, being a learned, Pi∣ous and rich Man, three Capital Crimes in a Clergy man. They first plundred his Carriages of 10000 marks, and then dragged himself from the high Al∣tar to a hill hard by the Church, and there barba∣rously murdered him, tearing his bloody shirt in Pieces and leaving his stripped body stark naked the Place. 1450 Sic concussa cadit Populari Mitra tumultu Protegat optamus nunce DIADEMA, deus. Richard Fox, born at Grantham, for the Publick good was very instrumental in bringing H. 7 to the Crown, who made him Bishop of Winchester. He was bred in Cambridge and afterwards in Ox∣ford where he founded the Fair Colledg of Corp. Christi, allowing to it 401l. 18s. 11d. per An. He beautified his Cathedral, and made decent Tombs for the Bodies of the Sax. Kings and Bishops there, which were since barbarously demolished, when, blind with Age, he felt Woolsey's puls beat violently, through the extream desire he had of his civil or natural death, and having defeated that Cardinals design to effect the first (by rendring him
obnoxious to the Kings displeasure, and outing him of his See) he yielded to the latter An. 1528. Since the Reformation. Th. Goodrick (of Kirby) D. L. in Cambridg was em∣ployed in many Embassies and at last made Bishop of Ely by King Henry 8. and Lord Chancellor of England by King E. 6. Having resigned the place of Chancellour to Stephen Gardiner, his Death was very seasonable for his own safety. 1554. An. 1. Ma. Jo Whitgift, born at Grimsby and bred in Cambridg was Bishop of Worcester, then Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury (See my Eccl. History) I meet with this Ana∣gram. Joannes Whitegifteus, Non vi egit, favet Jesus. Indeed his politick patience was Blessed in a high Proportion. Jo. Still D. D. born at Grantham, was bred in Cambridg, for which he was chosen, to oppose all Comers for defence of the English Church, when towards the end of Queen Elizabeth there was an (unsucceeding) motion of a Diet which should have been in Germany, for composing Matters of Religion. Then An. 1592 being the 2d time Vice-Chancel∣lor of Cambridge, he was made Bishop of Bath and Wells, where he raised a great Estate from the Lead Mines (in his time) found in Mendip Hills; and laid the Foundation of three Families, leaving to each of them a considerable Revenue in a worship∣full Condition. He gave 500l. for the building of an Alms-houss in the City of Wells, and dying 1607 he lyes buried in his own Cathedral. Mart. Fotherby, D. D. born at Great Grimsby, of a good Family, and bred in Cambridg was Preband of Canterbury, then preferred by King Ja. Bishop of Salisbury. Having begun a Treatise against Atheists, he died 1619▪
Statesmen. Edw. Fines, Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Adm. of England for above 30 years, a Wise, Valiant and Fortunate Gentleman. The Master∣piece of his service was in Mussleborough Field, where the Victory over the Scots was from the Sea, and an execution on the Land. Queen Elizabeth created him Earl of Lincoln May 4. 1574. and indeed he had breadth to his heighth, a sufficient Estate to support his Dignity. He died 1585. and lyeth burd at Windsor. Th. Wilson, D Lbred in Cambridg was Tutor to H. and Ch. Brandons successively Dukes of Suff. He was made (in the Raign of Q. Elizabeth) Mr. of the Hospital of St Kath. the Quire which he took down as being (probably) past repairing. He at last be∣came Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth. He died 15- Th. Lord Bury (or Borough (Grandson to Th. cre∣ated Baron by King Henry 8) was born at Gains∣borough. He was sent Ambassador into Scotland 1593. to excuse Bothwel's lurking in England to ad∣vise the speedy suppressing of the Sp. Faction and to advance an effectual Association of the Protestants in that Kingdom, for their Kings defence, which was done accordingly. He was made Deputy of Ireland An. 1597▪ Where, after the expiration of a Months Truce with Tyrone,) he besieged the Fort of Black Water (the Key of the County of Tyrone) and took it by Force, and presently followed a bloody Battel, wherein the English paid dear for their Vic∣tory, losing many worthy Men, and amongst the two that were Foster brothers (the strongest Irish Relation) to the Erl of Kildary who so layd this
oss to heart, that he died soon after. Tyrone rebe∣eged Blackwater, and the Lord Deputy endeavou∣ing to relive it, was struck with an untimely Death. ote, That it brake the Heart of the Valiant Sir o. Norris (who had promised the Deputies Place o himself, as due to his Deserts) when this Lord Burgh was superinduced to that Office. William Cecil, our English Nestor (for Wisdom and Vivacity) born at Burn, was Secretary and Trea∣urer for above 30 years together. He steer'd the Court at his Pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Leice∣ter would endure no Equal, and Sussex no Superior herein, he by siding with neither, served himself with both. You may easily imagine how highly the Wise Queen Elizabeth valued so great a Minister of tate. Coming once to visit him when sick, and be∣ng much heightned with her Head Attire (then n Fashion) the Lord's Servant who conducted er throw the door, May your Highness (said he) e pleased to stoop; The Queen returned, For your Master's sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spains. All England in that Age was beholding to his Bounty (as well as the Poor in Standford, for whom e erected a fair Bead-house, acknowledging under God and the Queen, their Prosperity the Fruit of is Prudence. This Worthy Patriot died in 77 ear of his Age, Aug. 4. 1598. V. my Holy State. Capital Judges. Sir Will. de Skipwith, made Chief Bar. of the Exchequer An. 35. E. 3. condem∣ned Will. Wickham, B. of Winchester,REM. at he importunity of Jo. Gaunt D. of Lanc. where∣upon the Bishops Temporals were seised, and he de∣nied access within 20 miles of the K. Court.
Sir Will. Skipwith, Junior a Puisne Judge,AMP. would not comply for the im∣portunity of R. 2. nor the Example of his Fellow Judges (An. 10 Regn.) to allow, That the King by his own Power might rescind an Act of Parliament. May I move that every 4th. Link of the Collar of S S S Esses, (from St. Sim. Simplicius an uncorrupted Judge in the primitive times) may mind the Judges of this Skipwith. His Name hath flourished at Ormesby, ever since his time, in a very worshipful Condition. Sir Will. Husee, Knight of a worship∣ful Family in this County,AMP. was made Lord Chief Justice of the K. Bench An. 21. E. 4. Afterwards, upon a Question of great importance, he, with all the rest of the Judges, u∣nanimously resolved, That the Knights and Burgesses (formerly of the K. party) attainted by due Course of Law, should forbear to come into the House, till a Law were passed for the Reversal of their Attain∣ders, but (as to K. Hen. 7. who had been also At∣tainted) That the Crown takes away all defects, and Stops in Blood, and that by the Assumption thereof, the Fountain was cleared from all Attainders and Cor∣ruptions. He died An. 10. H. 7. Sir Edm. Anderson Knight, a younger Brother of a Gentile Extract at Flixborough was made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, An. 24. Eliz. He cen∣sured Secr. Davison (about the business of Q. of Scots) for indiscretion; telling him, that he had done Justum non justé. He checked Sir Edw. Coke, the Q. Solicitor, and H. Cuff (who was arraigned about the rising of the E. of Essex) for their Foolish Syllogismes used in Court. He was a great Promo∣ter of the Established Church Discipline, and severe against Brownists. He died An. 3. Jac.
Souldiers. Sir Fred. Tilney, Knight resided at Boston. A Man of mighty Stature and Strength. He atten∣ded K. R. 1. An. 119 to the Siege of Acon in the Holy-Land. 16 Knights are descended from in a direct Line successively, till at last their Heir Ge∣neral being married to the D. of Norfolk put a period to the Lustre of that ancient Fami∣ly. Peregrine Berty, L. Willoughby, Son of Rich. and Kath. Dutchess of Suff. was born near Hidleberg in the Palatinate.S. N. He gave good proofs of his Valour in France and the Low-Countreys, and was at last made Governour of Barwick. Not brooking the Obsequiousness of the Court, he was wont to Say That he was none of the Reptilia, which could creep on the Ground. The Camp was his proper Element, being a Gallant Souldier. When one sent him a Challenge, whilst he lay sick of the Gout, he returned this Answer, that altho he was lame of his hands and feet, yet he would meet him with a piece of Rapier in his teeth. Once he took a Genet mannaged for the War, which was intended for a present to the King of Spain and was desired by a Trumpeter from the General, to restore it, offering this Lord 1000l down for him, or a 100l. per An. during his Life, at his own choice. This Lord returned, That if it had been any COMMANDER, he freely would have sent him back, but being an HORSE, he loved him as well as the King of Spain himself, and would keep him. When he was at the Spaw in Lukeland for the Recovery of his health, The Queen wrote to him a very kind Letter,
wherein she enjoyns him to an especial care to encrease and continue his Health, and not to affect the satisfa∣ction of his own private contentation, beyond the at∣tending on that which Nature and Duty challenge from all Persons of his Quality and profession. Inviting him (in most gracious and obliging Terms) as one of her Best and Noble Subjects, to the Accep∣tance of some Employment at Home, tending to his own Honour, her Majesties Intrest and Security, and the general Peace of the Kingdom, at that time when a Second Spanish Invasion was expected. His Parents fled in the Reign of Queen Mary beyond the Seas. His Ancestors have flourished many years in this County, where he was Baron of Willoughby in Right of his Mother. He died 1601. Sir Edw. Harwood, born nigh Burn, was a Vali∣ant Souldier and a Pious Man. His having kil∣led a Man in a private Quarel put a period to all his carnal Mirth. No possible provocations could afterward tempt him to a Duell; He refused all Challenges with more Honour than others accepted them, it being well known that he would set his Foot as far in the Face of his Enemy, as any Man alive. He was one of the 4 standing Colonels in the Low Countreys, and was shot at the Siege of Mastricht 1632. Seamen. Job Haertop, born at Bourn went An. 1568 with Sir Jo. Hawkins his General, to make Discoveries in New Spain. He was chief Gunner in the Ship called Jesus of Lubeck. 8 of his Men were killed at Cope-verd, and the General wounded with poisoned Arrows, but was cured by a Negro drawing out the poison with a Clove of Garlick. He wrote a Trea∣tise
of his Voyage, wherein he makes mention of a Tree that affords a Liquor which is both meat and drink, yields both Needles and thred and Tiles for Houses; which may therefore be called the Tree of Food, Raiment and Harbour. Being with some o∣ther left on Land after many Miseries, he came to Mexico, and he continued a Prisoner 23 years, of which time he was 12 years in the Gallies, and 3 years a drudge to Hernando de Soria, who then sent him to Sea in a Flemish, which was afterwards ta∣ken by an English ship called the Galeon-Dudley, that safely landed him at Portsmouth December 2. 1590. Sir William Mounson, Knight of an ancient Fami∣ly was made Vice-Admiral An. 1602. (Sir Richard Leveson Ad. (by whose Diligence and Valour Tra∣ding was Killed on the Coasts of Portugal, and a Ca∣ract of 1600 Tun taken (which had in her 300 Sp. Gentelmen, and amounted to the Value of 1000000 Crowns of Portugall Account) tho the Marquis de Sanctâ Cruce lay hard by with 13 Ships, and all were secured under the Command of a strong Castle. In the Dispute, the Syllogismes of Fire and Sword which were used by the English, (tho the Premisses were opposed with the best Spanish Lo∣gic) were nswered by the Opponent, with a fair concessio  the Conclusion. The Goods gotten in the Caraight be valued, but the Good gained there∣by was estimable, for henceforward the Spanish beheld the English with Admiration, and quitted their thoughts of Invasion. This Worthy Knight died about the midst of the Reign of King James.
Writers. Gilb. of Holland, Preacher went to Clarvaulx in Burgundy where he was St. Bernard's Scholar. He was a Judicious, Learned and Eloquent man, and one who studied much the Holy Scriptures. Trithem. He continued St. Bernard's Sermons. He flourished An. 1200. and was buried in Gistreaux in France. Rog. of Crowland, a Benedictine, then Ab. of Friskney, wrote the Life of Th. Becket. He flouri∣shed 1214. Elias de Trekingham, a Monk of Peterboough, D. D. in Oxford a learned Man and a Lover of History, wrote a Chronicle from 626 till 1270. Hugh Kirksted, a Bernardine Monk (with one Serlo (made a Chronicle of the Cisternians from their first coming into England▪ when Walter, d'Espeke first founded their Abbey at Rivaux York-sh. He flouri∣shed 1220. Will. Lidlington, a Carmelite and Provincial of his Order in England refusing to subscribe to the decisions of the Synode at Narbone, was excom∣municated and banished from his Native Country. Then he lived at Paris and at last was preferred Prov. of the Carmelites in Palestine. Yet he died in England and was buried at Stamford. 1390. Nich. Stanford, a Bernardine a smart, solid and judicious Writer in that Age flourished 1310. Jo. Bloxham, had great Employment under E. 2. in Embassies; an acute Man, tho the Country Folk in this County, when they intend to Character a Dull Person, use to say of him That he was born at Bloxham, the Town of his Nativity. He flou∣rished 1331.
Jo. Hornby, a Carmelite D. D. in Cambridg, vin∣dicated the Seniority of his Order against the Do∣minicans and carried away the Conquest. He flou∣rished 1374. Jo. Boston of Bury, named from Boston and a Monk in Bury, wrote a Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers a Manuscript, whereof Bishop Ʋsher boasted he had the best Copy. He flourished 1410. Lawr. Holebeck, a Monk in Ramsey, wrote an Hebrew Dictionary very exact, according to those dayes, wherein what ever was not understood was generally accounted Hebrew. He died 1410. Bertram Fitzalin, B. D. in Oxford, then Carm. in Linc. where he built and furnished a fair Libra∣ry, at his own and his friends cost; adding some Books of his own writing thereunto. He died 1424. Since the Reformation. Edmond Sheffeild, (descended from Rob. Recorder of London, Knighted by H. 7. for his good service at Black-Heath) was born in the Isle of Axholm and by E. 6. created Baron thereof. Being a great Mu∣sitian he wrote a Book of Sonnets according to the Ital. fashion. He was slain at a Skirmish in Nor∣wich. 1449. He was direct Ancestor to the Hope∣ful E. of Moulgrave. Pet. Morwing, bred in Oxford fled into Germany in the Reign of Queen Mary and Preached to the En∣glish Exiles. He was a pure Latinist, in discours, and writing. Anthony Gilby, bred in Cambridg, much skilled in the 3 Learned Languages, was an Exile at Gene∣va, in the Reign of Queen Mary. Returning into England he became a Furious opposer of Church
Discipline Established in England. Jo. Fox, born at Boston, and bred in Oxford, fled beyond the Seas in the Reign of Queen Mary, where he set forth the Book of Martyrs in Latin, and after his return into England enlarged and twice revised the same in our Language. He was of prodigious Charity to the Poor. V. my Eccl. Hist. Th. Sparks, D. D. born at South Sommercot, bred in Oxford, was Minister of Bleachley in Buck. (an Impropriation restored to the Church by the Lord Gray of Wilton,) a Solid Divine and a Learned man, as by his Works doth appear. Being Champion for the Non-Conformists in the Conference at Hampton-Court, he was there Convinced of the Lawfulness of Ceremonies, so that some accounted him K. James's Convert. He afterwards set forth a Book of Ʋnity and Ʋniformity, and died about 1610. Dr. Tigh, born at Deeping and bred in Oxford, was Arch-Deacon of Middl. and Minister of Alhol∣lows Barking London. An excellent Textuary and profound Linguist, therefore employed by King Ja. in translating the Bible. He died about 1610 leaving to his Son Jo. of Carby, Esquire, 1000 l. per An. Fines Morison, Brother to Sir Rich. Lord Pres. of Munster, of worshipful Extraction, was bred in Cambridge. Having travelled to Jerusalem he printed his Observations in a large Book, which con∣tains no stretched Reports. At last he was Secr. to Char. Blunt, Dep. of Ireland, saw and wrote the Conflicts with, and Conquest of Tyrone. He died about 1614.
Benefactors to the Publick, since the Reformation. William Ratcliffe, Esq. 4 times Alderman of Stam∣ford, dying An. 1539. gave all his Lands in the Town (now worth 30l per An.) to the Mainte∣nance of a Free-School therein. Jane Cecil, Wife to Sir Rich. Esq. and Coheir to the Worshipfull Families of Ekington and Walcot, saw (being near 100 years of Age) the prefer∣ment of her Son Sir William Lord Treasurer of Engl. She Leaded and paved the Friday Market-Cross at Stamford, besides 50l. given to the Poor, &c. Her Will was made 1588, and dying she was buried in St. Martins in Stamford. Geo. Trigg, Gent. gave (An. 1586) 400l. to be lent out for ever, upon good security, without In∣terest to Poor young Tradsemen and Artificers in Stamford, and bestowed a Tenement upon the Par∣son and Poor of St Jo. in the same Town. Rich. Sutton, Esq. born at Knaith, a Souldier (Paymaster by Place) afterwards Merchant in London, had Company with another Merchant in Common that (in travelling with him) used to spend double to Mr Sutton, the one calling for half a pint, the other for a Gill of wine, &c. At last Mr Sutton hearing of his Death, and that he left but 50000l Estate, I thought (said he) he would dye no Rich man, who made such needless Expences. He be∣stowed all he had on the Charter-house or Sutton's Hospital, a Masterpiece of Protestant English Charity, wherein he appears Peerless in all Christendom. He died 1611. Rob. Johnson, born at Stamford, was Minister of Luffenham in Rutland. He could by his Argument surprise a Miser into Charity. He effectually mo∣ved
those of Vicinage, to contribute to the building and endowing of Schools, Whereof (finding none) he left as many in Rutland, as there are Market Towns therein. He was a considerable Benefactor to Em. and Sidney Coll. in Camb. and tho never dig∣nied higher than Arch-Deacon of Leic. he left an Estate of 1000 l. per An. to his Posterity. He died about 1616. Frances Wray, Daughter to Sir Chichester Wray, Lord Chief Justice, was born at Glentworth, and married first to Sir Geo. St. Paul, and afterward to Rob. Rich. E. of Warw. She was a great Bene∣factress to Magd. Coll. in Camb. She died in the beginning of K. Charles. Memorable Persons. Ja. York a Blacksmith of Linc. set forth a Book of Heraldry, called the Ʋnion of Honour, An. 1640, &c. Lincoln-sh. of singular use, tho he has not hit the Nail on the Head in every particular therein con∣tained. Noted Sheriffs. An. 17. Jo. Walch, of Grimesby fought a Combat with Mortileto de Vilenos of Navar, who had accused him of Treason, in which Combat the Navarois, was overcome and afterwards hang'd for his false accu∣sation. An. 2. Jo. Rochford, Mil. whose Arms are quartered by the E. of Moulgrave, Famous for his high Birth, Learning, long Travel through Fr. and Italy and his Translation of Josephus his Antiquities, Polychronicon, &c.
An. 2. Rob. Dimock, Mil. at the Coro∣nation of H. 7. came on Horse-back into Westm. Hall, where the K. dined, and casting his Gauntlet on the ground, challenged any who durst question the Kings Right to the Crown. An. 9.0. Husee, created by H. 8. the first and last Baron of Husee in Sheford en∣gaging with the Rebellious Commons An. 1537. was beheaded. An. 16. Th. Burge, Mil. descended from the Heir Gen. of the Lord Cobham of Sterbury in Surry, afterwards created Ba∣ron Burge or Burough by H. 8. His Grand-child Th. Lord Burge Dep. of Ir. and Knight of the Gar∣ter left no Issue Male nor plentiful Estate, only 4 Daughters, Eliz. married to Sir Geo. Brook. Fran∣ces to the ancient Family of Coppinger in Suff. Anne Wife to Sir Drue Drury and Kath. married to —Knivet of Norf. Mother to Sir Jo. Knivet Knight of the Bath. An. 9. Jervase Scroop, Mil. engaged with his Majesty in Edge-hill-fight where he received 26 Wounds and was left a∣mong the Dead. Next day his Son Adrian obtai∣ned leave to bury his Corps, which when he found, he perceived some heat therein, and by Gods Mercy he recovered and lived 10 years after.
Middlesex. IT is in Effect but the Suburbs at large of London, replenished with the retiring Houses of the Gentry and Citizens thereof, Palaces of Noblemen and 3 (lately) Royal Mansions. It is about 18 miles in length and 12 in breadth. It hath Hartford on the N. Buck on the W. Ess. on the E. Kent and Surrey on the S. The Air generally is most healthful, especially about High-Gate. The Na∣tural Commodities are Wheat, the best in Engl. growing in the Vale lying South of Harrow-the-hill nigh Hessen. Q. Eliz. received no Composition-Money from the Villages thereabouts, but took her Wheat in kind; one of those Villages being called Peri∣vale (or Purevale) from the cleerness of the Corn therein. Tamarisk, first brought over by B. Grindal out of Switz, and planted in his Garden and Ful∣ham. The Manufactures are Leather, in the true Tanning of which the Lord Burleigh was indoctri∣nated by a Cobler, exemplifying the same in toast∣ed Bread (called by him a tanned Toast) which if artificially done, will last (said the Cobler) many Mornings Draughts. Of Buildings, HAMPTON-COURT, built by Card. Woolsey who bestowed it on H. 8. by him erected into an Honour, & mightily encreased, and now continues, tho the other Royal
Palaces, (Holdenby, Oatlands, Richmond, Theobalds) have found their fatal Period. H. 8. enforrested the Grounds hereabouts. OSTERLY-HOUSE (now Sir Will. Waller's) was built in a Park, by Sir Th. Gresham, who here magnificently enter∣tained and lodged Q. Eliz. who found fault with the Court of this House as too great, affirming, that it would appear more handsome, if divided with a Wall in the middle. Sir Thomas being ve∣ry observant, had the Court made double against the next Morning, of which a Courtier then said, It was no wonder he could so soon change a Buil∣ding, who could build a Change. Another (reflecting on some known differences in this Knights Family) affirmed, That any House is easier divided than united. Proverbs. 1. A Middlesex Clown. Clown, i. e. Colonus one that Plougheth the Ground, of which Middlesex hath many of great Estates; and there are some of the Yeomantry in this County, as compleatly civil as any in England. 2. He that is a low Ebbe at Newgate, may soon be a float at Tiburn. This is too Satyri∣cal. Some will have Tiburn, so called from Tie and Burn, the poor Lollards having been the first who were tied up and burnt in that place. 3. When Tottenham-Wood is all on fire, Then Totten∣ham-street is nought but mire. That is, when that Wood of many 100 Acres on the top of a Hill hath a Mist like Smoak over it, generally foul weather followeth. 4. Tottenham is turned French. About the beginning of H. 8. French Mechanicks swarm'd in England to the great prejudice of English Artisans, which caused the Insurrection in London on ill-May∣day
1517. The City and Country Villages were filled with French Fashions and Infections. The Proverb is applied to such who contemning the Custom of their Country, make themselves more ridiculous by affecting forreign Humours and Habits. Princes. Edward, Sole surviving Son of H. 8. and Jane his Wife, was born at Hampton-Court, An. 1537. He succeeded his Father in the Kingdom and was most Eminent in his Generation, Whose Virtues were so resplendent, no faults (humane frailties ex∣cepted) appeared in him. He died July 5th. 1553. and pity it is that deserved the best, should have no Monument, indeed a brass Altar of excellent Workmanship under which he was buried (I will not say sacrificed with an untimely Death by trea∣chery of others) did formerly supply the place of his Tombe, which since is abolished under the no∣tion of Superstition. Being a Child he had more of Man in him than any of his Age; And his Good∣ness was no less conspicuous. In a Letter he wrote to Mr. Barnaby Fitz-Patrick, Gentleman of his Bed-Chamber, he charges him to regard the Scripture or some good Book, and to give no reverence to the Mass. (at which that Gentleman should chance to be pre∣sent in his Attendance on the French K.) To avoid the Company of Women as far forth as he might: Besides other Advertisments relating to the Publick, which are very judiciously penned. In another Letter to him, he congratulates his Constancy— and sends him an Account of the Great Tide which drowned the Isle of Doggs, Plumsted Marsh, Shippey and Foulness in Ess. as also Towns and Cities in Zealand, &c.
Martyrs. At Barnet, Islington and Stratford Bow there were more than 20 persons Martyred. Mr. Jo. Dendley burnt at Ʋxbridge began to sing a Psalm at the Stake, and Dr. Story (there present) caused a prick∣ley Faggot to be hurled in his Face. Now the sing∣ing Nightingale needed, no Thorn, but only the sleeping one to awake it. We may believe that this Martyrs Prick-song indeed made good Melody in the Ears of the God of Heaven. Smithfield near London being Bonners Shambles, and the Bone-fire General of England, no wonder if some sparks thereof were driven thence into the vicinage. Prelates. Richard Northall, a Carmelite and Chaplain to R. 2. was made B. of Ossory and Chancellour of Ireland, and at last Arch-Bishop of Dublin. He wrote a Set of Sermons for the whole year he died, 1397. Since the Reformation. William Wickham, (junior) born at Enfield, bred in K. Coll. Bishop first of Lincoln, then of Winchester, died of the Strangury 1596. having not made wa∣ter for 14 days together. 'Tis no ill Custom among the Modern Jews that they Praise God solemnly for their vents of ejection, as well as Mouths for the ad∣mission of nourishment. Souldiers. Falcatius, or Fulke de Brent, was Minion to King Jo. who gave him in marriage Marg. the Daughter of Warrin Fitz-Gerald his Chamberlain. He was
highly in favour with King Henry 3. who by the Valour of this General obtained the great Victory at Lincoln. Being afterwards slighted in time of Peace he embroyled the Nation, committing many Outrages and Felonies, for which he was condemned to perpetual Banishment. He went to Rome, where he lived obscurely, died miserably 1226. Sir Ralph Sadlier, born at Hackney, (where he was heir to a fair Inheritance) being servant to the Lord Cromwell was by him advanced into the service of H. 8. who made him Secretary of State, and employed him in the Scotch Affairs. The Pen and Sword met eminently in him: For in the Battle of Mussleborough, he ordered and brought up our scattered Troops, inviting them to fight by his own Example, and so for his Valour was made a Knight Banneret. Queen Eliz. made him Chancellour of the Dutchy. During his last Embassy into Scot∣land, his house at Standon in Hartfordshire was built by his Steward in his absence, far greater than him∣self desired, so that he never joyed therein and died soon after 1587. When this Knight attended the Lord Cromwell (before the Reformation) a Par∣don was granted for the Sins of that Family, for 3 immediate Generations expiring in R. Sadlier lately dead. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir Th. Frowick, Knight, born at Elinge, was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas 18 H. 7. and was accounted the Oracle of Law in his Age, tho one of the youngest Men that ever enjoyed that Of∣fice. He died 1506 and lyeth buried in Finchley Church. Elah his eldest Daughter was married to Sir Jo. Spelman (one of the Justices of the Kings
Bench) Grand-father to Sir Henry that Renowned Knight. Sir William Stamford, Knight, (born at Hadley) Son to Will. Merchant in London, was one of the Judges of the Com. Pleas; Famous for his Book of Pleas of the Crown. He died An. ult. Ma. 1558. Writers. Jo. Acton, D.L. in Oxford, became Canon of Lin∣coln. He wrote a Commentary on the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Otho, &c. and flourished under E 1. 1290. Ralph Acton, D. D. in Oxford, Preached the Gos∣pel of the Kingdom of God in the midst of the darkness of Roman Superstitions. He flourished under E. 2. An. 1320. Roger Twiford, D.D. an Itinerant Prea∣cher through the Diocess of Norwich,AMP. was commonly called GOOD LUCK. He flourished 1390. Rob. Hownslow, a Frier, then Provincial of the Or∣der of the H. Trinity, instituted for the Redempti∣on of Captives. By this Robert's diligence many were set free. He wrote many Synodal Sermons and Epistles to excite the Charity of Persons of Quali∣ty and others. He flourished 1430. Since the Reformation. William Gouge, born at Stratford Bow, and bred in Cambridge, read 15 Chapters of the Bible every day, and was afterwards Minister of Black-friers London. He died 1653 leaving the Examples of Humility, Faith and Patience to Posterity.
Benefactors to the Publick. A Hermite near the Hermitage, on his own cost, caused Gravel to be digged in the top of Highgate-hill (whence there is now a fair Pond of Water in that place) and therewith made a Causway from High-gate to Islington. Since the Reformation. Alice Daughter of Rob. Wilkes, was a poor Maid in Islington, where her Cap was casually shot through with an arrow without any hurt to her head. She was married to J. Owen (her 3d. wealthy Husband) and built at Islington near to the place of her delive∣rance an Alms-house by her well endowed. She expended to charitable uses 2300 l. and lyeth buried at Islington. Sir Jul. Cesar Knight, descended from the Dal∣marii in Italy, bred in Oxf. was Chancellour of the Dutchy of Lancaster and sworn Privy Councellour July, 6th. 1607. then preferred Master of the Rolls. A person of such prodigious Bounty that he might seem to be Almoner General of the Na∣tion. A Gentleman having borrowed his Coach, was so Rendevouzed about with Beggars in London, that it cost him all the Money in his Purse to satis∣fie their Importunity. 'Twas not without a good Omen that his chief House in Hartford was called Benington, the Bountiful Village. His Arms (G. 3 Roses Ar. on a Chief of the first, so many Roses of the Second) do Emblem the Fragrancy of the Memory he hath left behind him. He died 1636 and was buried in St. Helens London.
Memorable Persons. Pet. Fabel, a conceited person is said to have de∣ceived the Devil (at the Funeral) of K. James) with his merry devises. But as a Bishop in his Ser∣mon speaking of Brute his coming into this Land, said, it was but a Bruit; in like manner the best Comment upon this Peter is his own Surname. —Trestram, a Gardener at Branford, aged about 76 years, being seised with an extreme Fever and violent Inflammation of the Lungs, recovered after the loss of above 60 ounces of Blood in 3 days, let by Dr. Theod. Deodate Physician to P. Hen∣ry, and Lady Eliz. Antient Gentry since the time of H. 6. Will. Wroth, was Ancestor to Sir Hen. still living at Durance. His Grandfather Sir Th. fled for his Religion into Germany in the Reign of Q. Mary, and hath alone his Name remaining in this Coun∣ty. Jo. Shordyche, so called from Shorditch in London, whereof he was owner. His Progeny hath a con∣siderable Estate at Icknam, in this County. Note. The Gentry in Middlesex have a Priviledge above any County in England, that they are not Eligible (except also they be Freemen in London,) to be Sheriffs of this Shire. The Battels. Branford-Fight, 1642. Nov. 12 began on the South-West-side of the Town, near Zion-house; some Execution being done by great Guns, and a Boat
on the Thames with many therein sunk, and Captain Quarles (an active Citizen on the Parliament side) drowned. Then the Scene being shifted to the North-side of the Town, near Acton, the Kings For∣ces fell fiercely on the Regiment of Col. Denzil Hollis, then present in Parliament, and put them to the worst. Here the Welsh under — Salisbury their Leader, made true the Gr. Proverb. , he that flyeth will fight again. These who shewed swift heels at Edge-hill, used as stout Arms (as any) in this Fight; For formerly they were little better than Naked, whereas since they have recovered Armour to fence their Bodies, and Resolution to arm their Minds. Next day (being Sunday,) marched out the Militia of London. It is incredible how many Cart-loads of Victuals were carried out from London. In the Evening the Kings Forces drew off towards Kingston. The Number of the Slain on both sides amounted not to 1000, and the Reputation of the Victory on the Kings side was more than the Effect thereof, for then the Royalists did Nose and Beard the Populous City of London. Indeed the Accession of Citizens to the King answered not rational expectation, Many scores of Prisoners taken by the K. were by him freely dismissed without other Ransom, than a strict Oath to serve no more against him. Now what Oath-Office is kept in London I know not, nor what Pope therein had power to dispense with so sacred an Obligation. But these some Weeks af∣ter, appeared on the same side as fierce as before. This County is infested with Mildew when Corn is almost ripe for the Sicle, which a good Rain or strong Wind doth remove.
London. LOndon is the Second City in Christendom for great∣ness, and the First for good Government; but of so large a Reputation, that Some Strangers have con∣ceived London to be the Country and England the City. The River Thames may in some sence be called the Foundation of this vast and solide Stru∣cture; which River could not be removed by King Ja. (as the Lord Mayor told his Majesty) when he threatned to remove his Court from the City: and no wonder, seeing Thunder can make no impression upon it, and by Gods special Providence it can wash off the blackest marks and saddest effects of the Most dreadfull Fire. In reference to this River London may use the Millers Riddle, If I have Water I will drink Wine, but if I have no Water I must drink Water. This City is the Field of Art and Shop Ge∣neral of England, and Cheap-side, the best Garden, &c. the whole & every Part containing the greatest Va∣riety of Adventitious and no Natural Commodities. Of Manufactures the greatest is the Engine (for quenching of Scare-fires) the form whereof was first brought from Norenberg by one Mr. Jones a Merchant living in Austin Friers, who obtained a Pa∣tent of King Ja. that none should be made without
his approbation. William Burroughs City-Founder, living in Lothbury hath so compleated this Instru∣ment, that his additions amount to a new Invention, having made it stronger and easie to be cleansed; so that with the striking out of a wedge, it will cleanse it self in 4 minutes. As for Buildings, St. Paul's the Mother Church (having a Babe, viz. Saint Faiths in her Body) was lately struck with the Palsie or rather Death, as the Way to a Noble Resurrection; which is now so far accomplished, that it stands already on its Feet, or rather it is a∣rising with its Feet foremost, the Foundation being laid anew, and a considerable progress made in the rebuilding thereof. The Mony for defraying the Charges, is raised on Coals. The former Repa∣ration of this Church was a worthy Monument of the Piety and Charity of Arch-Bishop Laud. May they who have Plundered the Cloak and Cover of Saint Pauls be compelled to make him a new one of their own cost, at least to contribute more than ordinary Proportions thereunto. As for other Churches, Saint Clement's East-Cheap, the Monument of the Bounty of Baldwin Hamey Dr. in Physick, with other Parochial Churches which have at least their Fronts beautified, if not their Bodies rebuilt, may all of them have this Inscription, Heus Via∣tor! Anne bonis operibus effaetum est hoc seculum, which is written upon the Entry of Saint Gile's Church in the Fields. As for other Structures, The Bridge was made with great Cost, and is maintained with daily Charge. Some 20 years ago a Lamentable fire hap'ning there, could not be quenched, because of the great store of water which hindred all access thereunto. The Exchange was built by Sir Th. Gre∣sham Knight An. 1571. In imitation of that at An∣twerp, but so that the Copy exceedeth the Original.
The Tower was first founded by William the Con∣queror, finished by William Rufus, encompassed with a Ditch by William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, enlar∣ged by H. 3. fortified by E. 4. beautified by R. 3. repaired by H. 8. In which there is an Armory a Mine and a Ward-robe, for the keeping of Vests and Robes of State, &c. There is an Ʋnicorns Horn to be shewn amongst the Rarities of the Tower, and tho some are apt to believe that there never was any such crea∣ture as an Ʋnicorn, and others, that it is the same with a Rhinoceros; Yet (for the first,) the Indian Ox is famous for carrying one horn, and for the lat∣ter, the Ʋnicorn carries his Horn on his Forehead, and not on his Nose, as the Rhinoceros doth. The horn is an Antidote against poyson. Proverbs. 1. A London Jury, hang half and save half. This is such a Libell as comprehends in a few words, a large volume of Calumny. As if London Juries were for dispatching their business without any regard to Justice. 2. A Fool will not part with his Bawble for the Tower of London. 3. London Lick penny. The Countryman will tell you 'tis very true, and the Citizen on the other hand does know, that there is no less Truth in this, London Get penny. 4. London Cockneys. That is, such who are born with∣in the sound of Bow-Bell, are tender enough and sufficiently ignorant of Country businesses. One merrily perswaded a She-Citizen, that seeing Malt did not grow, the good House-wives in the Coun∣try did spin it. I knew as much said the Cockney, for one may see the threds hang out at the ends there∣of. 5. An ill word meets another, and it were at the Bridge of London. This is Scottish. The meaning seems to be, that on that Bridge, as being a narrow
Passage, Quarrels are apt to arise. 6. Billingsgate Language. Many rude Persons, especially Scolds, repair to that Place, and sometimes improve their smart Words into smarter Blows. 7. Kirbies Castle and Megses Glory, Spinola's Pleasure and Fishers Folly. These were 4 Houses about the City, where∣of the 2 first are forgotten. Spinola a Genoan was infected with the Italian Plague of Building. As for the last, it was built by Jasp. Fisher, free of the Goldsmiths, one of the 6 Clerks in Chanc. and J. of Peace, who was much in Debt; and it is called Devonshire House at this day. 8. He will follow him like a St. Anthonies Pig. St. Anth. is the Patron of Hogs, and therefore very well known by them; Besides the Protectors of Hosp. in Bennets-Fink in this City built to the Honour of St. Antho∣ny, used to garble the Live pigs in the Markets of the City, and such as they found starved or un∣wholsome, they would slit in the ear, tie a Bell about their necks, and let them loose about the City, through which they followed their feeders, that is, their Leaders. The Proverb is applied to servile Souls, &c. 9. He was born within the sound of Bow-Bell. This is the Periphrasis of a Londoner at large, born within the Suburbs thereof. Jo. Dun, Mercer, (1472) gave 2 Tenements to maintain the ringing of this Bell nightly at 9 a clock, which sounded to Servants a Retreat from their Work. William Copland the King's Merchant about 1520. gave a bigger Bell for the same purpose, and had the Hansel thereof himself, being first rang as a Knell at his Burial. 10. —St. Peters in the Poor, Where no Tavern, Alehouse or Sign at the Door. I conceive it is called in the Poor, because the Augustinian Friers professors of Poverty, possessed one moiety thereof; Their Signless Houses are a Sign of Rich and E∣Eminent
inhabitants. 11. To dine with Duke Hum∣phrey. This at first signified to dine well, viz. With that Hospital D. of Glocester, but since his death, it imports to be dinnerless, to walk in St. Pauls whilst others dine, it having been supposed that D. Humphrey was buried there, tho he was in∣deed buried in St. Alb. 12. I will use you as bad as a Jew. This had its Original at the Old-Jury in London, where the Jews were intollerably abused by the English, especially on Shrove-Tuesday. 13. Good Manners to except my Lord Mayor of Lond. 14. I have dined as well as my Lord Mayor of London. That is, as contentedly. 15. A old as Pauls Steeple, That is, only about 1040 years of Age. 16. He is only fit for Ruffians-Hall. Well-Smithfield (now the Horse-Market) was formerly so called; There the Hectors did meet for Trial of Skill at Sword and; Buckler; but since that desperate Traitor Rowland York, first used thrusting with Rapiers, that Sport is disused; and the Prov. only appliable to quar∣relsom people. 17. A Loyal heart may be landed under Traitors-Bridge. Q. Eliz. was compelled to go under that Bridge, when she was sent Priso∣ner to the Tower. 18. To cast Water into the Thames. 19. He must take him a House in Turn-a∣gain Lane. This in old Records is called Wind-a∣gain-Lane, and lyeth in the Parish of St. Sepulchres, and in it there is no through-passage. It is applied to those who take sinister Courses. 20. He may whet his Knife on the Threshold of the Fleet. It is applied to those who being out of Debt may defie Arrests, and are in no danger of Imprisonment in the Fleet or elsewhere. 21. All goeth down Gut∣ter-lane, (A small Lane in the City otherwise Gu∣thurum-lane.) Appliable to great Gluttons and Drunkards. 22. As Lame as St. Giles Cripple-gate.
St. Giles, a Noble Athenian, being Lame, waved all cure for his greater Mortification. It is spoken of such who for some light hurt, or out of Lazi∣ness lagg behind. 23. You are all for the Hustings. The Hustings is the highest Court in London, so cal∣led from the French word Haulser to lift up. The Proverb is spoken of those who are lifted up with the Wings of Pride and Ambition above the Level of their Birth and Estate. Princes. Kath. 3d. Daughter to K. Hen. 3d. and Q. Elea∣nor, was born at London, 1252. on St. Kath. Day. She dyed in her very infancy: Wak't from the Womb, she on this World did peep, Dislik't it, clos'd her eyes, fell fast asleep. She lyeth buried at Westminster. Joan Eldest Daughter of King Edward 2. and Queen Elizabeth, was born in the Tower of London about 1316, and was married to Dav. 2. King of Scotland. She did good offices betwixt the 2 King∣doms, and was therefore called Joan Make-Peace. Dying without Issue at London. she was buried in Gey-Friers. Kath. Youngest Daughter to King Henry. 7. and Elizabeth his Queen was born in the Tower of London Feb. 2. 1503. dying few days af∣ter. On whose Innocence and short life this Epitaph might be written: Here leth SHE was born and cry'd, Liv'd a few days, fell sick and dy'd.
Much differing from that of an Ancient Man. Here lyes the Man was born and cry'd, Liv'd 60 years, fell sick and dy'd. Anne Bollen, Daughter of the Lord Th. Bollen, Earl of Wilt-shire,AMP. was (Proba∣bly) born in London and became 2d Wife to H. 8. after he had made her Marchioness of Pembroke. She was accomplished in Body, Vertuous in Mind, and a great Promoter of the Gospel. The Inconstancy of her Husband's Affection, is conceived by most moderate Men her chiefest Crime and cause of her death 1536. Kath. Howard, Daughter to the Lord Edm. Howard, Son to Th. D. of Nor∣folk, was (probably) born in London,AMP. and became 5th. Wife to Henry 8. Whom you may imagine thus speaking on his Death-bed: Three Kates 2 Nans and one dear Jane I Wedded One Spanish, one Dutch and 4 English Wives, From 2 I was Divorced, 2 I beheaded One Died in Childbirth and one me survived. 'Tis said the Incontinency of this Kath. cost her her Life. The greatest good the Land got by this Match, was general leave to marry Cousin-Germans. She was beheaded 1540. Saints. St. Sedd. born in London, was very instrumental in the Conversion of the Mircians. St. Wulsine, a Benedictine Monk, was Ab. of Westminster, then translated to be Bishop of Sher∣burne
in Dorset-shire whence he drove all the secu∣lar Priests, as became a Champion for Monastical life. He is said to have seen Heaven open in the instant of his departure out of this Life, 985. Th. Becket a Merchants Son was born in London, in the place where now Mercers-Chappel is erected. He was slain on Innocents-day in his own Church of Canterbury, 1170. many Vows were made by superstitious Pilgrims to his Shrine. The Papists, in favour of Vows of that Nature, tamper to cor∣rupt Holy Writ, as in the Vulgar Lat. Prov. 20.25. Ruina est homini Devorare Sancta, &c. Which they read, Ruina est homini Devorare Sanctos, It is a snare to a man who often maketh Vows to Saints, and after Vows retracteth them. See my Ecc. Hist. Martyrs. William Sautre, (al. Chatris) Parish-priest of St. Osiths, London, was the first English Wickliffite who wast put to Death for his Opinion. He was charg∣ed with a relapse into Heresie after Abjuration. He was convicted in a Provincial Councel of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and burnt in Smith-field about Feb. 28. 1400. The close of the Arch-Bishops Sentence of Degradation, when Sautre was commit∣ted over to the Secular Court, endeth with this expression, Beseeching the Court aforesaid, that they will receive favourably the said William, &c. which was nothing but Cruelty in Masquerade. Jo Badby, an Artificer in Black Friers, London, was burnt about 1401. Hen. Prince of Wales (afterwards King Henry 5) being present at his execution promi∣sed him a Pardon and a Pension, on his Recantation, all which Badby refused. He was put in an empty Tun and the fire put there in; at the first feeling
whereof he cryed Mercy, Mercy (of God) which Prince Henry mistaking for a kind of Revocation of his Opinions, profered him the same Condition, a second time, which Badby again refused, and was Martyred. Prelates. Sim. of Gaunt, born in London was preferred B. of Salisbury by Edward 1. 1298. He gave the first leave to the Citizens thereof to fortifie that place with a Ditch and Walls, and no less was his care of the Church than of the City, making good Statutes, whereby it was ordered even unto our Age. He died about 1315. Jo. Kite, born in London, bred in Oxford, sent Am∣bassador into Spain, made a Titulary Arch-Bishop, and at last Bishop of Carlisle. He lyeth in the Church of Stepney. William Knight, bred in Oxford, was Secretary to Henry 8. and first employed to the Pope to men∣tion the Matter of his Divorce. After his Return he was made Bishop of Bath and Wells. In Wells he built a stately Cross to secure poor people from the Weather. He died 1547. Nic. Heath, one of St. Anthonies Piggs (i.e. Scho∣lar of that School in London) then bred in Cam∣bridge, was Almoner to Henry 8. and by him pre∣ferred Bishop, first of Roch. then of Worc. deprived by Edward 6. restored by Queen Mary who advan∣ced him Arch-Bishop of York and Lord Chancellor of England. A moderate Man yet infected with the Popish Bishops, he refused the Oath of Supre∣macy in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, for which he was deprived. He led a pious Life on his own Lands at Cobham in Surry, whither Queen Elizabeth came often to visit him. He died about 1566.
Since the Reformation. Jo. Young, D. D. was born in Cheapside and bred in Cambridge, was Bishop of Rochester, and refused the See of Norwich, saying — It was not so easie for an old man, since the Cushion was taken away from it. Meaning since Dr. Scambler had scambled away the Revenues thereof. He died An. 1605, and lyeth buried at Bromly Church in Kent. Will. Cotton, D. D. born in London, bred in Cam∣brigde, was made B. of Exeter Nov. 12. 1598. during his sitting there, Mr. Snape came out of Ger∣sey, and plentifully sowed the seeds of Non-confor∣mity in his Diocess, which the Vigilancy of this Prelate seasonably plucked up. Being enfeebled with the Apoplexy which deprived him of his Speech some days before his death, so that he could only say, Amen, Amen, he was rendred obnoxious to this malicious cavil, That he lived like a Bishop and dyed like a Clark, He died 1621. and was buried in the Quire of Exeter. Lancelot Andrews, D D. bred in Cambridge, was an unimitable Preacher, of whom Bishop Felton said, I had almost marr'd my own natural Trot by endeavouring to imitate his artificial Amble. See my Eccl. Hist. He died, 1626. Th. Dove, D. D. was made by Q. Eliz. Dean of Norwich An. 1589, then Bishop of Peterborough 1101. He died 1630 having raised his Family to a Knightly degree. Jo. Howson, bred in Oxf. was made B. of Oxford 1619. His Book of Divorce with his Sermons a∣gaist Popery, and his Stating of the Popes Supre∣macy in 4 Sermons to clear himself from the Im∣putation of Popery have made him Famous to all
Posterity. Being translated to Durham, he died 1631, and was buried in St. Paul's London. Jo. Davenant, D. D. Son to Jo. of Davenant Lands in Essex was Master of Q. Colledge in Cam∣bridge. He gave his Negative voice at an Election against a Mr. Jo. Gore. Kinsman, Cosen (said he) I will satisfie your Father, that you have Worth, but not Want enough to be one of our Society. Returning from the Synod of Dort, he was elected B. of Sarum 1621. Praefuit qui Profuit was the Motto written in most of his Books. He was humble in himself and charitable to o∣thers. Being invited by B. Field, and not pleased with some roisting Company, he embraced the next opportunity of departure. When B. Field proffered to light him with a Candle down Stairs, My Lord (said he) let us lighten others by our un∣blameable Conversation. He was a Man of great Candour, and Sincerity, who hated Flattery from his Child-hood. He dyed 1641 and was buried in his own Cathedral. Math. Wren, was bred in Cambridge, where at an Extraord. Philof. Act. before K. Ja. he noted the Prerogative of the King's Hounds, by vertue where∣of they could lawfully do that for which other Dogs were beaten. He preached a Sermon on Amoz 5.24. let Judgment run down like Waters, a little before the Draining of the Fens, suspected detrimen∣talto the University. He was B. of Norwich and Ely. He was imprisoned by the Long Parliament almost 15 years and his Cause never heard. He died 1661.
Statesmen. Sir Th. More, Son to Sir Jo. one of the Justices of the K. Bench, was bred in Oxford. He became Barrister and Judge in the Sheriff of London's Court, and never took a Fee from the Poor or Widow, &c. Being Member of the House of Commons, he ob∣structed H. 7. about Money for the Marriage of his Daughter Marg. a Courtier telling the K. that a Beardless Boy had obstructed his desires. K. Hen. 8. coming to the Crown, Knighted him and made him Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster, then Lord Chancellor of England. He demeaned himself with great Integrity. Refusing a complyance a∣bout the Queens Divorce, he resigned his Place. It was against his Mind that any should suffer for their Consciences; He rather soiled his Fingers than dirted his Hands, in the matter of the Holy Maid of Kent. He used to say, that his Natural Temper was so tender that he could not endure a Philip; yet he suffered 16 Months Imprisonment for refusing the Oath of Supremacy. When the Lieutenant of the Tower told him he was sorry his Commons were no better, I like (said Sir Th.) your diet very well, and if I dislike it, I pray turn me out of Doors. He was beheaded 153. He left but 100 l. per An. Estate, having perfectly hated Covetousness, as appears by his refusing of 4 or 5000 l. offered him by the Clergy. Of his Latine Books, Ʋtopia is the most considerable. His Daugh. Marg. for all Lear∣ning and Languagues the Miracle of her Age, was for her secresie entrusted by her Father with his most important Affairs. Erasmus hath dedicated some Epistles to her. Being well red in the Fa∣thers, she mended a depraved Place in St. Cyprian
(nisi vos sinceritatis) making it Nervos Sincerita∣tis. She translated Eusebius out of Greek, which (because done before) was not Printed. She bought her Fathers Head and kept it for a Relique till she was Questioned before the Council for the same. Th. Wriothesley, Knight of the Garter, was bred in Cambridge. He became an Eminent Lawyer. He was by Henry 8. created Baron of Tichborne 1543, and a year after Chancellor of England. From which Place being afterwards removed by Edward 6. he was created Earl of Southampton. He died 1550, and lyes buried at St. Andrews in Holbourn. William Paget, Knight, Privy Councellor to 4 successive Princes. King Henry 8. made him Secre∣tary, and employed him Ambassador to Ch. 5. Em∣peror and the King of France. King Edward 6. made him Chancellor of the Dutchy, Comptroller of his House and created him Baron of Beaude∣sert. Queen Mary made him Keeper of the Privy-Seal. Queen Elizabeth dispenced with his attendance at Court, in favour to his great age and highly re∣spected him. Duke Dudley in the daies of King Edward, ignominiously took from him the Garter of the Order, quarrelling that by Extraction he was not qualified for the same, no wonder if his Pride wrongfully snatched a Garter from a Subject, whose Ambition endeavoured to deprive 2 Princes of a Crown. This was restored to him by Queen Mary, as to a person who by his Prudence, had merited much of the Nation. He died 1563. and was bu∣ried in Lichfield. Th. Wentorth (of York-shire parentage) was bred in Cambridge, became a Champion Patriot on all occasions, and seemed to have a casting voice in the House of Commons. He was created Bar. and
Visc. Wentworth, Earl of Strafford and Lord Dep. of Ireland; where he vigorously endeavored the re∣duction of the Irish to Obedience to the King and profit to the Exchequer, but some believe the means he used for that good end were not Legal. Being charged in Parliament with many Crimes, he plea∣ded, that they amounted not to Treason. But the Parliament found an Almighty expedient of gi∣ving the Name and stamping the signature of Ac∣cumulative Treason on that Brave Gentleman's past Actions. By a Clause in the 25 of Edward 3. after an enumeration of many particular Treasons, it is in general Enacted, that whatsoever the Parlia∣ment should (hereafter) declare to be Treason should be accounted so, by Vertue of that Statute. It seems the Parliament did only pursue their pow∣er given them by that Act. But there are two things worth the consideration in this Case, first, According to the aforesaid Statute, Such Crimes as were afterwards to be declared Treasonable, ought to be of like Nature with those Treasons which are specified in the said Act. Secondly, If the Parliament had made those Misdemeanors Constructive Trea∣son before that my Lord Strafford had committed them, he could have had no colour for the Plea he made; But seeing where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; my Lord of Strafford at the time of his Misdemeanours committed was guilty of no Trea∣son; and if it was possible for him to become guil∣ty of the same, ex post facto, I leave to the Learned to determine. The Parliament provided his Con∣demnation should not pass into Precedent. Some hours before his suffering he fell fast asleep, al∣ledged by his Friends as an Evidence of the clearness of his Conscience. He was beheaded 1641. He hath an everlasting Monument in the great
Character given him, , Med. 2. p. 6. I looked upon my Lord of Strafford as a Gentelman whose Abilities might make a Prince rather affraid than ashamed in the greatest Affairs of State, &c. King Charles II. hath made his Son a Knight of the Garter. Lyonel Cranfield, Merchant, Man of a great Sense, was made by King James Lord Treasurer, Baron of Cranfield and Earl of Middlesex. Having lost the Treasurers Place by the means of the D. of Buckingham, into whose displeasure he had fallen, he was wont to say that the way to preserve Life was to get to be Lord Treasurer of England, for they never dye in their Place, which was true for 4 Successions. He was a Wise and Good Man. He dyed about 1644. Writers on the Law. Fleta, who being in the Fleet wrote an Excellent Treatise of the Common Law before the 14. R. 3. He lived about the end of E. 2. and beginning of E. 3. Christopher St. German, of an ancient Family, read constantly a Chapter in the Bible every night to his Family, lived and dyed unmarried without the least spot on his Reputation, gave Counsel and Help to all his People gratis. He was excel∣lently skilled in the Civil, Canon and Common Law and Scripture, Witness his Book of Doctor and Student. In his several Works he plainly ap∣peareth a Champion for the Reformation. He lived to be above 80 years Old, dying 1593. and was burid at St Alphage, London. William Rastal, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, wrote the Life, &c. of his Uncle More and
made a Comment on the Statutes of England. Being a zealous Papist, he fled (in the Raign of Ed∣ward 6.) into Flanders, where he wrote against Bishop Jewel. He died 1565. Souldiers. Sir Th. Roper, (the Surname formerly Furneaux) Son to Th. Servant to Queen Elizabeth, was Page to Sir Jo. Norrice, and was Captain of a Foot Company at 16 years of Age. Being Privy Coun∣cellour and having acquired the Reputation of a Valiant Souldier by his Services in Connaught, Ʋl∣ster in Ireland, and Brest in France, in his Voyage to Portugal, at Bergen in the Netherlands, &c. he was An. 3. Car. created Baron of Bauntree and Visc. Baltinglasse, in Ireland. When in Ireland he put himself in Irish Trouzes and was imitated by other English-men, which easie Habit tended  the more effectual execution on their Enemies. He died at Ropers Rest 164. and was buried in St. Jo. Church in Dublin. Civilians. Sir Hen. Martin, Knight, bred in Oxford, a great Ci∣vilian and an Eminent Advocate in the High Court of Commission, and afterwards Judge of the Pre∣rogative Court, and also of the Admiralty, so that as King James said pleasantly, He was a mighty Mo∣narch in his Jurisdiction over Sea and Land. He died 1642.
Physicians. Richardus Anglicus, bred first in Oxford, became afterwards in Paris one of the most Eminent Writers in the Profession of Physick.REM. He Flourished, 1230. Jo. Phreas, bred in Oxford, was afterward an Au∣ditor of Guarinus in Ferrara. He read Physick suc∣cessively at Ferrara, Florence, Padua and Rome. Pope Paul 2. made him Bishop of Bath and Wells, but he died (of Poison as is thought) before his Consecration, 1465. Andr. Borde, bred (I think) in Oxford, was Phy∣sician to Henry 8. His Book (the first written of that Faculty in English) was dedicated to the Col∣ledg of Physicians in London. He died in the Reign of Queen Mary. Writers. Nothelmus of London Bishop of London, then Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, wrote the Gests of Greg. the Great, &c. which are inserted in Bede's Church-History. He died 736. William Fitz-Stephen, descended of Norman No∣bility, was a Monk in Canterbury. He wrote (a∣mongst others) a Latin Book of the Description of London. He flourished, 1190. Albricius of London, wrote a work of the Original of Heathen Gods. He flourished 1217. William Sengham, (poor but Witty) wrote de Fide and Legibus,REM. affirming the Gos∣pel of Christ to be the onely Law for the Salvation of men, about the time that a Book called The Eternal Gospel (or rather the Infernal Gospel)
was obtruded on the World by the Friers. He flourished 1260. Laurentius Anglicus, bred in Paris, op∣posed the Mock-Gospel of the Friers and wrote against False Preachers,REM. but af∣terwards being frightned with the Popes Thun∣derbolts, he cowardly recanted. He flourished An. 1260. Nich. Lyra, a Jew by Nation, and born (proba∣bly) in the Old Jury, was converted by some Franciscans. He vigorously confuted the Jews. He wrote Commentaries on all the Old and New Testament keeping close to the Text, therefore un∣charitable the Censure Lyra delirat, tho sometimes he may be wide of the mark▪ He dyed in Paris 1340. Bankinus of London, an Augustinian Frier, a Violent Opposer of the Wicklevites, was stopped (some think Killed) by the Violence of an Earthquake, when ready to dispute against them in a publick Coun∣cil. He flourished, 1382. Robert Ivory, D. D. in Cambridge, and Presi∣dent Gen. of the Carmelites, adorned the Library of White Friers with his own and other Books, and dyed 1392. Juliana Barnes, of an ancient and Il∣lustrious Family,REM. the Diana of her Age for Hunting, &c. of which (with Haw∣king and Fishing) she wrote 3 Treatises. She wrote also a Book of Heraldry. She flourished 1460 under H. 6. Robert Fabian, Sheriff of London, 1493. wrote 2 Chronicles. 1. From Brutus to the death of Henry 2. another, from the 1. of King Richard to the death of King Henry 7. He was an Excellent Poet. A modern Master-wit, in the contest be∣twixt
the Poets of our Age, maketh Apollo to ad∣judge the Laurell to an Alderman of London, because to have most wealth was a sign of most wit. But had the Scene of this Competition been laid 140 years since, &c. Apollo would have given the Laurel to this our Alderman. He died 1512, and was buried at the Church of Alhallows. After his death Car∣dinal Woolsey, caused them to burn all the Copies of his Book which he could come by; because therein he had made too clear Discovery of the Revenues of the Clergy. Th. Lupset, Greek Prof. at Oxford, was known unto Erasmus. He was diverted from Divinity by Woolsey. He was in favour with Hen. 8. and died of a Consumption 1532. in Lond. and buried at St. Alphage. Since the Reformation. Jo. Rastal, Printer, undertook to prove Purgato∣ry by Reason. He was a Good Mathematician, and made a Comedy of Europe, Asia and Africa. He wrote a Book against Jo. Frith, (which he af∣terwards recanted) and a Book of the Terms of the Law, and an Index to J. Fitz-Herbert. He was Fa∣ther to Rastal the Famous Lawyer. He died and was buried at London 1536. Edw. Hall, bred in K. College, became a Judge in the Sheriffs Court. He wrote an elegant Hist. of the Warrs of York and Lanc. He died 1547, and was buried in St. Sithes Church. Will. Fulke, D. D. and Marg. Professor in Camb. when Young wrote a Book of Meteors. Being a solid Divine he confuted the Rhemish Translation of the Bible. He died 1589. Edm. Spencer, bred in Camb. A great Poet who imitated Chaucer, 'Tis said that he presented
Q. Eliz. with a Poem, with which she was so well pleased, that she commanded the Lord Treasurer Cecil to give him 100 l. and when he alledged that Sum was too much, then give him, (Quoth the Q.) what is Reason, but being delayed he presented these Lines to the Queen: I was promised on a time To have Reason for my Rhyme; From that time unto this Season, I receiv'd nor Rhyme nor Reason. Hereupon the Q. gave strict Order for the present payment of 100l. He was afterwards Secretary to the Lord Gray, Deputy of Ireland. He was an Excel∣lent Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher, Mathema∣tician, yet so poor (as being a Poet) that he was thought Fami non Famae scribere. Returning into England, he was robb'd by the Rebels of that lit∣tle he had, and dying for Grief in great Want 1598, was honourably buried nigh Chaucer in Westminster. The expence of his Funeral and Mo∣nument was defrayed at the sole charge of Rob. first of that Name, E. of Essex. Jo. Stow, bred at learning no higher then a good Grammar-Scholar, became an useful Historian; and very accurate in the Notation of Time. Besides his Chron. of England, he hath written a large Sur∣vey of London. He died 1605, and lyeth buried in the Quire of St. Andr. Ʋndershaft. There was a∣nother of his Name, a Monk of Norwich, 1440. Giles Fletcher, equally loved of the Muses and Graces, wrote a Poem entitled Christs Victory. Ha∣ving commenced D. D. he became Preacher first in St. Maries, then in Suff. where being slighted by his clownish Parishioners he fell into Melancho∣ly
and died (in a short time) 162— His Brother Phineas of Cambridge wrote an excellent Poem called The Purple Island, &c. Jo. Donne, a Man of excellent Wit, large Tra∣vail and choice Experience, in his reduced Age be∣came D. D. and Dean of St. Pauls. He died 1631. and lyeth buried in St. Pauls. His Life is written by Mr. Isaac Walton. Romish Exile Writers. Jo. Heiwood, writes of himself, that he applied Mirth, more then Thrift, many mad Plays, and did few good Works. His Jests were biting. He prin∣ted English Proverbial Epigrams and his pleasant Monumenta Literaria. After the Death of Q. Ma∣ry, (who highly favoured him) he fled for Re∣ligion. He died 156. Whose Son Jasper a Je∣suit was executed in the Reign of Q. Eliz. Maurice Chamnee, bred a Frier in the Charter∣house. He only escaped when 18 of his Order lost their lives (by him written) for refusing the Oath of Supremacy. 'Tis said he warped to the Will of H. 8. to preserve his Convent from Destruction. He dyed beyond the Seas 1581. Edm. Campian, bred in Oxf. being Deacon of the Protestant Church, he renounced that Order and fled beyond the Seas. A Man of great Parts and no less Ostentation. Coming over into England with Father Parsons to reduce it to the Church of Rome, he fetched over many (Neuters before) to his perswasion by his Ten Reasons in pure Latine and pithily penned. He was quickly caught by the Setters of Secretary Walsingham, imprisoned, examined on Matters of State, and saw rather than felt the Rack; but a while after he was engaged
in 4 solemn Disputations (in the Chappel in the Tower) to make good a bold Challenge he had made against all Protestants, concerning Scripture, the Church, the Sacrament and Justification; and 'tis said, whatever Questions he there answered, that he answered not the general expectation of his own Party. He was executed 1581. Benefactors to the Publick. Th. Pope, Knight, Architect (under God) of his own Fortune, employed (under the Lord Cromwell) an Instrument of the second magnitude, got his share at the dissolution of the Abbeys, and refunded a con∣siderable proportion for what he received for the Building & endowing of Trin. Coll. in Oxf. He died about the beginning of the Reign of Q. Eliz. There are in Oxford-shire, many descendants from him con∣tinuing in a worshipful Estate (the Chief of the Fami∣ly being the E. of Down in Ireland,) on the same token that K. James came in Progress to the House of Sir— Pope, Knight, when his Lady was lately delivered of a Daughter, who was presented to K. James with this Paper of Verses. See this little Mistress here, Did never sit in Peter's Chair; Or a Tripple Crown did wear, And yet she is a Pope. No Benefice she ever sold Nor did dispence with Sins for Gold, She hardly is a Sevenight Old And yet she is a Pope.
No King her Feet did ever kiss Or had from her worse Look then this, Nor did she ever hope To Saint one with a Rope And yet she is a Pope. A Female Pope you'l say, A Second JOAN No sure she is Pope Innocent or none. Th. Curson, Armorour, being much afflicted with a sad Accident (one having shot another in his Shop, tho during his absence) resolved to give all his Estate to pious uses, and accordingly disposed of some hundreds of pounds for the use of the poor in Alhallows Lumbard-Street (where he was born) and other Parishes. He died, 16— Edw. Allin, a Stage-Player and Roscius of our Age, built a fair Colledge at Dulwich in Kent, for the relief of poor people. The Poor of his native Pa∣rish of St. Botolph-Bishopsgate have a priviledge to be provided for therein before others. Thus he who out-acted others in his Life, out-did himself be∣fore his death, which hapned An. 16— Will. Plat, Son to Sir Hugh, Grandson to Sir Rich. Alderman of London, was bred in St. Jo. Coll. in Camb. He bequeathed thereunto Lands to main∣tain Fellows at 30 l. and Scholars at 10 l. per An. so many as the Estate would extend to. Between the said Collonel and Jo. Plat, Clerk (Heir to Will.) there was a Composition made of 4 Scholars at 10 l. and 2 Fellows at 50 l. per An. William also gave 30 l. yearly to the Poor of Hornsey and High-gate, with a Lecture founded therein. He died 1637. Alex. Strange, B. D. of Pet. House in Camb. was Preb. of St. Pauls, and 46 years Vicar of Lay∣ston, the Church whereof stood alone in the Fields,
For remedy of which he built at Buttingford (a thorough road Market, mostly in his Parish) a strong and neat Chappel from the Bounty others gave and he gather'd. And having laid the Foundation, he gave for his Motto Beg hard or Beggar'd. He also purchased Land out of his own Purse to pay for the reparation thereof: and promoted the building of a Free-School in the said Place, founded by some Sisters worshipfully born. Having lived a Peace-maker, he died 1650. Noted Sheriffs. An. 18. Philip Malpas, gave by his Will 125 l. for relief of poor Prisoners, and every year for 5 years 400 Shirts and Smocks, 40 pair of Sheets, 150 Freez-Gowns to the Poor. To 500 poor people in London every one 6sh. 8d. To poor Maids Marriages 100 Marks; to High-ways 100 Marks; 20 Marks the year to a Graduate to preach; 20 l. to the Preachers at the Spittle on the 3 Easter. Holy-days, &c. 20. Richard Rich, Mercer, founded Alms-Houses at Hodsden in Hartf. An. 17. Rich. awson bequeathed large Legacies to the Prisoners, Hospitals, to High-ways, &c. besides to Poor Maids Marriages 340 l. and his Executors to build a large House in the Church Yard of St. Maries Spittle, wherein the Lord Mayor and his Brethren do use to sit and hear Sermons on Easter Holy-days. 20. Th. Ilam new builded the great Conduit in the Cheap, at his own Charges, to the great conveniency of the City. An. 18. Henry Keble, gave to High∣ways 200 l. to Poor Maids marriages 100 Marks, &c. to 7 Almsmen in London 6
Pence the Week for ever. He was when living a great Benefactor to the building of Aldermary-Church, and by his Will gave 1000l. towards the finishing thereof. He was barbarously after re∣quited, his body being thrown out of his Grave, &c. Geo. Monox, reedified the Parish of Walthamstow in Ess. He founded there a Free-School and Alms-Houses for 13 poor people, he made also a Cawsey of Timber over the Marshes from Walthamstow to Lock-bridg. Note Mr. Camdens Verse in commendation of this City, Ʋrbs Pietate potens, numeroso cive superba, had the forepast thereof concerning their Piety expunged by the Index Expurgatorius printed at Madrid, 1612. the latter Moiety of their Pride remaining a piece of harmless Romish Spite. Westminster. WEstminster the greatest City in England next to London. It was anciently called Thorney, afterwards Westminster, for distinction from Saint Pauls formerly called Eastminster. As for Buildings, the Abbey Church is a stately Structure, built by Henry 3 and afterwards enlarged and beautified by the Abbots thereof. Adjoyning to it is the Chappel of King Henry 7. which Leland calls the Miracle of the World. A most Noble Pattern of cu∣rious
Architecture. In this Chappel the Founder thereof, with his Queen lyeth interred under a Monument of solid Brass most richly gilded and artificially carved, which cost but 1000l. pounds in the making, an argument of the great Value of Money at that time, and an instance of the thrift of Henry. 7. who would make a little Mony go far. Amongst the civil Structures, Westminster Hall is Eminent, erected by King William Rufus For the Hall to his own Court, built with Cob∣webless Beams conceived to be of Irish Wood. The next is White-Hall the Palace of our English Kings which is all Glorious within. Proverbs. 1. As sure as Exchequer pay, This being most true in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth began to be crost about the end of the Reign of King James, the Re∣venues of the Crown being then much abated. 2. There is no Redemption from Hell. There is a place by the Exchequer Court so called, formerly a Prison for the Kings Debtors, who never were freed thence until they had satisfied and paid all their debts. 3. As long as Meg of Westminster. In the Tower there is a great Gun called long Meg which in the days of Henry 8. lay a long time in Westminster. To this the Proverb seems to relate, and not to a Giant Woman whom some believe to be buried on the South side of the Cloisters, under a very long Marble. For it is more probable that many Monks were buried (in an infectious year which hapned) under that Stone.
Princes. Edward 1. surnamed Longshanks, was a Wise, Vali∣ant and Successfull Prince. He was so fortunate with his Sword in the beginning of his Reign, that he awed all Enemies with the scabbard before the end thereof. Edward sole Son to H. 6. and Marg. his Queen was born 13. October 1453. After the defeat of his Fathers Party at Tuksbury he told E. 4. that he came over into England to recover the Crown which his Ancestors for 3 Descents had no less righftully then peaceably possessed. Upon which King Edward presently dashed him on the mouth with his Gauntlet, and his Brother Richard Crook-back stab'd him to the heart with his Dagger. Edward V. Eldest Son of Edward 4. and Elizabeth his Queen was born November 4. 1471. He was murdered in the Tower by the procurement of his Ʋncle Protector. Elizabeth Eldest Daughter of Edward 4. and Eli∣zabeth his Queen was born 11 February 1466. after∣wards married to King Henry 7. Whereby the 2 Houses of York and Lancaster were united. She died in Child-bed after her safe delivery of the Lady Katharine. She lyeth buried with her Hus∣band Henry 7. in his Chappel. Cecily Second Daughter to Edward 4. by Elizabeth his Queen,AMP. led a single life for a long time, then wedded her self to a Lincoln-shire Lord, Jo. Baron (afterwards Visc.) Wells. She was little respected of King Henry 7 her Brother in Law, who knew if he had no issue by his Queen, then the Right of the Crown rested in her. She died without Issue.
CHARLES II. (Son to King Charles I. of Blessed Memory, and Mary Youngest Daughter to Henry 4. King of France) was born at St. James's, May 29. 1630. His birth was accompanied with two no∣table Accidents in the Heavens. The Star Venus was visible all the day long, and 2 days after there was an Eclipse of the Sun. Who seeing a Greater Sun appear In the English Hemisphear In Humble duty wav'd all Quarles, And resign'd the day to Charles. The Occurrences in the Life of this Pious Prince are full of Miracle and Amazement. He was 1. Jan. 1650, at Seoon Crowned King of Scotland, be∣ing before invaded by an Army under the Conduct of O. C. Soon after quitting that Kingdom he march∣ed for England, and 3. Sepember 1651 nigh Worcester was fought, and lost the day, tho he acted beyond the expectation of his friends, and to the great applause of his very Enemies. Narrow search was made after his Person, yea 1000 pounds pro∣mised to such who should betray him. Yet God (whose Angels were his Life-guard) miraculously preserving him out of the Hands of his Enemies, he safely passed over into France to the Queen his Mo∣ther. During his continuance beyond the Seas, great were the proffers tendered unto him if for∣saking the Protestant Religion; but as soon might the impotent Waves remove the most Sturdy Rocks, as they once unfix him; such his Constancy, whom neither the Frowns of his Afflictions, nor Smiles of Secular Advantages could make to warp from his first Principles. At last his Piety and Patience were rewarded by God with a Happy Restitution to
his Undoubted Dominions, and He after a long and tedious Exile, landed at Dover, May 25. 1660. to the great Joy of this Three Kingdoms. A Prince whose Vertues I should injure, if endeavouring their contraction within so narrow a Scantling. The great and various Dimensions of his Profound Wis∣dom, Solid Judgement and all other Royal Endow∣ments and Heroick Vertues can never be projected on a Plain nor delineated on Paper. And yet I cannot pass over that wherein he so resembleth the King of Heaven (whose Vice-gerent he is) I mean His Merciful Disposition, doing Good unto those who spightfully used and persecuted him. And now it is my hearty Prayer, That God who ap∣peared so wonderfull in his Restauration, would continue still Gracious to us in his Preservation, confounding the PLOTS of his Adversaries, that upon him and his Posterity the Crown may flou∣rish for ever. Mary Eldest Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St. James's, November 4. 1631. She was Married to Count William of Nas∣saw Eldest Son to Henry Prince of Orange, May 2. 1641. She endured her heavy Afflictions cau∣sed by the Murder of her Royal Father, and loss of her Husband, with a courage far surpassing the weakness of her Sex; and a little after had a Son November 1650. The complexion of the Times being altered in England She came over to congra∣tulate the Happiness of her Brother's Miraculous Restitution, and died 31 December following 1660, and was buried in the Chappel of H. 7. James 3d Son of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at St James's, October 13. 1633. He was commonly stiled Duke of York, tho not solemnly created until January 27. 1643. At the rendition
of Oxford he was taken Prisoner, and some 2 years after through the assistance of one Coll. Bamfield, made his escape, landing safe in Holland. Hence he went for France where he gained the Esteem of the whole Court, and before he arrived at the Age of 21 years, he was made Lieutenant General of the Forces of the King of France. This Trust he discharged to the Admiration of all, atchieving so many Noble and Heroick Exploits which ren∣dred him renowned through the Christian World. Yet such was the Ingratitude of the French that con∣cluding Peace with O. C. the Usurper they wholly forgot his former services, and consented to the expulsion of this Prince and his Royal Brothers out of that Kingdom. Soon was he Courted by Don Jo. D. of Austria into Flanders, where in the Action at Dunkirk, he far surpassed his former deeds, often forgetting that he was a Prince, to shew himself a true Souldier, (such his hazarding his person really worth 10000 of them) to the great Molestation of his true Friends. Since God out of his infinite Love to the English, hath safely return∣ed this Duke to his Native Country, I pray God he may long live to be the Joy and Delight of the whole Nation. Elizabeth, 2d. Daughter of King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St. James's, December 28. 1635. A Lady of a strong Judgment but weak Body, being of a melancholy temper (as affected, above her Age, with the sad Condition of her Fa∣mily) fell sick at Carisbroke-Castle in the Isle of Wight. After many rare ejaculatory expressions, abundantly demonstrating her unparalelled Piety, to the eternal honour of her own Memory, and the Astonishment of those who waited on her, she died December 8. 1650. and was interred in St Th. Chappel in Newport.
Anne 3d. Daughter to King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at St. Jame's March 17. 1637. She was a very Pregnant Lady above her Age, and died in her Infancy when not full 4 years old. Being minded by those about her to call upon God even when the Pangs of Death were upon her, I am not able, saith she, to say my long Prayer (meaning the Lords Prayer) but I will say my short one, Lighten mine Eyes O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of Death. This done the Little Lamb gave up the Ghost. Katharine 4th Daughter to King Charles I. and Queen Mary, was born at White-Hall, and survived not above half an hour after her Baptizing. Note that none of this Kings Children but P. Charles, were entered into the Register of St. Martin's in the Fields, tho I am credibly informed that at the Birth of every Child born at White-hall or St. James's, there were 5 l. paid for that purpose. Charles, Son to the Illustrious James D. of York, by Anne Daughter to the Right Honorable Edward Hide, E. of Clarendon and Lord Chanc. of England and Frances his Lady, was born at Worcester-House October 22. 1660. He was declared Duke of Cambridge, a Title which hath been only con∣ferred either on Forreign Princes or Persons of the Royal Blood. This Princely Infant died May 5. 1661. Saints. St. Wulsey, of great Reputation for Vertue and In∣nocency, was by St. Dunstan created first Abbot of Westminster. He died 960 and was buried in the same Monastery, and the 26 of September was kept by the Citizens of London with great Veneration of his Miracle-working Memory.
Note that Jo. Fecknam Abbot of Westm. in the daies of Q. Mary, was cruel to none, but Courteou and Charitable to all who needed his Help or Liberality, which is the Cause I meet with no Mar∣tyrs in this City. Prelates Since the Reformation. Rich. Neile, bred in Cambridge, was Vicar of Chesthunt in Hartf. then Dean of Westm. Through many Bishopricks of Coventry and Lichfield, Dur∣ham and Winchester, he was at last preferred Arch-Bishop of York, being also Privy-Councellor to K. James, and K. Charles. He died 16—▪ Jo. Warner, D. D. bred in Oxford, was prefer∣red B. of Rochester. He bestowed an excellent Font upon the Cathedral Church of Cant. Keeping good Hospitality in the Christmass at Brumley; as he fed many Poor, so he freed himself from much trouble, being absent when the rest of the Bishops subscribed their Protestations in Parliaments. He was an able Advocate for Episcopacy, in the House of Lords, speaking for them as long as he had any voice left him. He hath since seen the happy Resti∣tution of his Order, enjoying again his former Dignity An. 1661. Statesmen. Sir Fr. Bacon, Knight, Youngest Son to Sir Nich. Lord Keeper, was born in York-House 1560. He was bred in Trin. Colledge in Camb. and there first fell into a dislike of Aristotles Philosophy. Having afterwards attained to great perfection in the Study of the Common Law, he got no Preferment therein during the Reign of Q. Eliz. imputable to the Envy of a Great Person.
He was Favourite to the Earl of Essex, and more true to him then the Earl was to himself; for finding him choose rather destructive then displea∣sing Councils, he forsook not his Person, but his practices, & herein he was not the worse Friend for being the better Subject. By King James he was made his Solicitor, then his Attorney (then priviledged to sit in the House of Commons) and at last Lord Chancellor of England. He was a rich Cabinet filled with Judgment, Wit, Fancy and Memory, and had the golden Key, Elocution, to open it. He was singular in singulis, in every Science and Art, and being In-at-all came off with Credit. He was too Bounti∣full to his Servants, and either too confident of their Honesty, or too conniving at their Falshood. 'Tis said he had 2 Servants, one in all Causes Patron to the Plaintiff, the other to the Defendant, but take∣ing bribes of both, with this Condition, to restore the Mony received, if the Cause went against them. Such practices, tho unknown to their Master, cost him the loss of his Office. During his Solitude, he made many Excellent Discoveries in Nature. His vast Bounty to such who brought him Presents from great Persons, occasioned his want afterwards. He was the first and last Lord Verulam, as if it had been reserved for that ancient Roman Colony (of Verulam) to be buried in its reverend Ruins, and in this Peerless Lords everlasting Memory, much ad∣mired by English, more by out-landish Men. He died 1626, and was buried in St. Michael's Church of St. Albans. His Skull being afterwards found was by one King Doctor of Physick, made the Object of Scorn, but he who then derided the Dead, is since become the Laughing-stock of the living.
Writers. Sulcard of Westminster, a Benedictine Monk, one of great Wit, Meekness and Candour, was much esteemed by King Edward the Confessor. He Flou∣rished An. 1070 under King William the Conq. Gilb. of Westminster first Monk then Abbot, pub∣lished a Dialogue he had with a Jew in his return from France, and dedicated it to Anselm Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He died 1117. and was buried in Westminster. Math. of Westminster, a Monk and an accomplished Scholar. He rectified our English History, writing one History from the beginning of the World to Christ, a 2d from Christ's Nativity to the Nor∣man Conquest, a 3d from thence to the beginning of King Edward 2. adding afterwards to it his Life and that of E. 3. He named his Book Flores Hi∣storiarum, and died about 1368. Since the Reformation. Ben. Johnson, (whose Mother married a Brick∣layer for her 2d Husband) was bred in Westminster School, then in St. John's Colledg in Cambridge (be∣ing also honorary Member of Christ-Church in Ox∣ford) where he continued but few weeks for want of further maintenance, being fain to return to the trade of his Father in Law. He help'd at the new Structure of Lincolns-Inn, when having a Trowel in his Hand, he had a Book in his Pocket. Some Gentlemen afterwards manumised him free∣ly to follow his own ingenuous Inclinations. His Wit was Elaborate, wrought out by his own In∣dustry. He would sit silent in learned Company,
and suck in (besides Wine) their several Humors into his Observation. He was Paramount in the Dramatique part of Poetry, and taught the Stage and exact Conformity to the Laws of Comedians. His Comedies were above the Vulgar, (which are on∣ly tickled with downright obscenty) and took not so well at the first stroke as at the rebound, when beheld the second time; yea they will endure rea∣ding, and that with due commendation, so long as either Ingenuity or Learning are fashionable in our Nation. He died 1638, and was buried in the Ab∣bey-Church of Westm. Masters of Musick. Christopher Tye, Doctor of Musick in the Reign of H. 8. and E. 6. to whom he was one of the Gentlemen of their Chap∣pel and probably the Organist.S. N. Musick which received a grievous Wound in England at the dis∣solution of Abbeys, was much beholden to him for her recovery; such his excellent Skill and Pie∣ty, that he kept it up in credit in Court and in all Cathedrals during his life. He translated the Acts of the Apostles into Verse, and set an excel∣lent Composition of Musick of 4 parts to the seve∣ral Chapters, dedicated to E. 6. and printed 1553. Besides many Services and Anthems. Jo. Douland, was Servant in the Chappel to Q. Eliz. and K. James. He was the rarest Musician that his Age did behold, having improved his Skill by his Travels. A cheerful person truly answering his Anagram. Johannes Doulandus, Annos ludendo hausi. Christian K. of Denmark having obtained him of K. James, took him along with himself into Denmark. He died about 1615.
Benefactors to the Publick. Ja. Palmer, B. D. bred in Cambridge and main∣tained there by the Company of Carpenters in London who were since bountifully repaid, was Preacher of St. Bridgets in Fleet-street, tho se∣questred in those times; what he had formerly gai∣ned in that place, he hath since bestowed in buil∣dings and endowing, over against the New Chap∣pel in Westminster a fair Alms-House for 12 poor People, besides many and great gifts to Ministers poor Widows. To the Poor in his Alms-House he preached constantly twice a Week. He died 1659. Memorable Persons. Edm. Doubleday, Esquire, a Man of great Stature,S. N. Valour, Gravity and Activity, attended Sir Th. Knevet, No∣vember 4. 1605. when he searched the Cellar be∣neath the Parliament-House, where they found Guy Faux with his dark Lanthorn in the dead of the Night providing for the Death of many next Mor∣ning. He was newly come out of the Devils Closet (the inner Room where the Powder lay) Faux beginning-to bustle, Mr. Doubleday ordered him at his plea∣sure, up with his Heels, and there with the Trai∣tor lay the Treason flat along the Floor by Gods Goodness detected and defeated. Faux vowed that had he been taken in the inner Room, he had blown up himself and all the Company therein▪ Mr. Doubleday died 1618.
Norfolk. NOrfolk hath the German Ocean on the N. E. Suffolk on the S. Cambridg and a part of Lincoln-shire on the W. 50 miles in length and 30 in breadth. The Soile is various, comprehending all Kinds and Degrees, so that Norfolk collectively taken hath a sufficient result of pleasure and profit. This County hath the most Churches of any in Eng∣land (viz. 660) and tho the poorest Livings, yet the richest Clergy-men. Nor can there be given a greater demonstration of the Wealth and Popu∣lousness of this County, than that in the late Act for an Assessment upon England, at the Rate of 60000l. by the Month, for 3 Months; Norfolk with the City of Norwich is rated at 3266l. 13s. 4d. the highest Proportion of any Shire in England. The Natural Commodities are chiefly Rabbits, and Her∣rings caught nigh Yarmouth, besides the County shareth plentifully in all other English Commodi∣ties. 'Tis reported of a Gentleman in Norfolk that he made above 10000l ster. of a Piece of ground (not 40 yards square) which contained a sort of Clay for the making a choice sort of earthen ware. The Manufactures are Worsteds, (so called from Worsted a Village in this County) which first found a general repute in England
towards the end of King Henry 6. Worsted Stock∣ins were first made in England An. 1564. by Wil∣liam Rider Apprentice in London, who made a pair by an Italian Pattern and presented them to Wil∣liam Earl of Pembrook. Proverbs. I. Norfolk Dumplings. The fare they generally feed on. II. Norf. Wiles. Such the Skill of the Common People in the Common Law, who are said to study Law as following the Plough tail; and some would perswade us that they will enter an action for their neighbours horse but looking over their hedge. III. A Yarmouth Capon, That is a Red Herring. IV. He is arrested by the Baily of Marshland. That is, an Ague caused by the unwholsomness of the Air in the Marshes. Prelates Gilb. Berkeley, descended from the ancient Bar∣ons of that Name (as appeareth by his Arms) was made Bishop of Bath and Wells An. 1 Eliz. He died 1581. and was buried in his own Cathe∣dral. Jo. Aylmer, (brother to Sir Rob.) was born at Ayl∣mer-hall, and bred in Cambridg. He became Chap∣lain to H. Gray D. of Suffolk, and had the tuition of his Daughter the Lady Jane Gray. Flying in the Reign of Queen Mary he was wonderfully saved from the Searchers of the Ship, by a Merchant who put him in a great Wine-But which had a Partition in the middle, so that Mr. Aylmer sat in the hin∣der part, whilst the Searchers drank Wine which they saw drawn out of the head or other end
thereof. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth he was made Arch-deacon of Linclon and at last Bishop of London. He had a Son called Tob-el (i. e. God is Good) in memorial of a great deliverance bestowed on his mother, when being big with child of him, she was thrown out of a coach. This Bishop was a great Scholar and Divine. He was chosen a Di∣sputant at Westminster against the Popish Bishops An. 1. Elizabeth. He stoutly opposed the Non-con∣formists, and was fouly be-libelled by them. He died 1594. He left the main of his great Estate to Sam. his eldest Son (High-Sheriff of Suff. in the Reign of King Ch.) of his youngest Sons, Dr. Ayl∣mer Rector of Haddam in Hartford, was a very Learned Man and great Divine. Jo. Towers bred in Cambridge, became Chaplain to William Earl of Northampton, who bestowed on him the Benefice of Castle-Ashby in Northampton. He was preferred Dean, and at last B. of Peterbo∣rough. He was a good Actor when he was young, and a great Sufferer when he was Old, (dying about 1650) rich only in Children and Patience. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Ralph de Hengham, was made Lord Chief Justice of the K. Bench, An. 2 E. 1▪ and fined in 7000 Marks for bribery, and ejected out of his place 18 E. 1. He was afterwards made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, under the confidence generally conceived of his Amendment. He died An. 19 E. 1. and lyes buried in the Church of St. Paul's. William Paston, Esquire, born at Paston, was Serj. to H. 6. and was by him preferred second Judge of the Common Pleas. The King allowed him, besides the ordinary Salary, 110 Marks, with 2
Gowns yearly out of the Exchequer. He had been also in Grace with two former Kings, H. 4. & H. 5. This William married Agnes Daughter and Heir of Sir Ed∣mund Berrey, by which Marriage the Pastons Quar∣ter at this day, the several Coats of Hetherest, Wa∣chesham, Craven, Gebredge, Hemgrave and Kerde∣ston. He died at London 1444, and lyes buried in Norwich▪ Wolstan de Paston, his Ancestor, came into England 3 years after the Conquest, from whom all the descendants except this Will. were buried at Paston. Jo. eldect Son to Will. married Marg. the Daughter of Jo. Mautby, and William his se∣cond Surviving Son married Anne Daughter to Edm. D. of Somerset. Sir Ed. Coke, Knight, Son of Rob. Esquire, and of Winefred his Wife, was born at Mileham, and bred in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and in Clif∣fords-Inn London. Afterwards in the Inner-Temple. After 6 years he was called to the Barr, and for 3 years he was Reader in Lyons-Inn. He had 30000l. with his incomparable Wife, Bridget, Daughter and Coheir of Jo. Paston, Esquire. By her he had 10 Children. Then began Preferment to press upon him, being made Recorder of the City of Norwich, Knight of the Shire for the County of Norfolk, Speaker in the House of Commons, and successively the Queens Solicitor and Attorney. King James honoured him with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice first of the Common Pleas, then of the K. Bench. Thus beginning on a good Bottom left him by his Father, Marrying a Wife of Extraordi∣nary Wealth, having at the first great and gainful Practice, afterwards many and profitable Offices, being provident to choose good Penny-worths in purchases, leading a thrifty life, living to a great Age, during flourishing and peaceable times, no wonder
he advanced a fair Estate. Some falsly Character him a back-friend to the Church and Clergy, being a Grand Benefactor to the Church of Norwich, which he vigorously defended (and that gratis) a∣gainst a Frye of busie Informers and Devourers of Churches who intended to swallow down the Church Lands of Norwich under the obscure Title of Concealments. He freely gave the Benefices in his own Patronage to worthy Men, and used to say, That he would have Church-Livings pass by Livery and Seisin and not Bargain and Sale. Five sorts of people he used to fore-design to Misery. viz. Chy∣mists, Monopolizers, Concealers, Promoters and Rhy∣ming Poets. For three things he would give God solemn thanks, that he never gave his Body to Phy∣sick, nor his Heart to Cruelty, nor his Hand to Cor∣ruption. In three things he did much applaud his own success; in his fair fortune with his Wife, in his happy study of the Laws, and in his free coming by all his Offices, nec Prece nec Pretio, neither begging nor bribing for preferment. His parts were admirable, he had a deep Judgment, faithful Me∣mory, active Fancy; and the Jewel of his Mind was put into a fair case, a beautiful Body with a com∣ly Countenance. Being always neat he was wont to say That the out-ward neatness of our Bodies might be a Monitor of purity to our Souls. He always decli∣ned Circumlocutions. He commended Moderati∣on, saying, if a River swell beyond its Banks it loseth its own Channel. If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another Punish me, I will not Punish my self. He would never privately retract what he had publickly adjudged, professing, that he was Judge in a Court and not in a Chamber. He was wont to say, No Wise Man would do that in Prosperity, whereof he should Repent in Adversity.
He gave for his Motto, Prudens qui Patiens, and his practice was accordingly, especially after he fell into the disfavour of K. James. (See the Engl. Chron.) In his private Life he triumphed in his own Innocency, that he had done nothing illegal∣ly, calling to mind the Motto which he gave in his Rings, when made Searj. Lex est tutissima Cassis, The Law is the safest Helmet. And now he had lei∣sure to peruse 30 Books written with his own hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called his Vade Mecum containing the Remark∣ables of his life. His most Learned and Laborious Works on the Laws, will last  be Admired by the Judicious Posterity, whilst Fame hath a Trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein. His Judgment lately passed for an Oracle in Law, and if since the Credit thereof hath causlesly been que∣stioned, the wonder is not great. If the Prophet himself living in an incredulous Age, found cause to complain Is. 51.1. Who had believed our Report? It needs not seem strange that our licentious times have af∣forded some to shake the Authenticallness of the Re∣ports of any earthly Judge. He constantly had Prayers in his own House, and relieved the Poor with his constant Alms. The Foundation of the Charter-House had been ruined before it was raised, & crushed by some Courtiers in the hatching there∣of, had not his great care preserved the same. The Free-School at Theford was supported in its being, by his assistance, and he founded a School at his own cost at Godwick in this County. Dr. Whit∣gift (afterwards Arch-Bishop of Canterbury) was his Tutor, who sent unto his Pupil, when the Queens Attorney, a fair New Testament, with this Message; He had now studied Common Lawe∣nough,
let him hereafter study the Law of God. When he was under a Cloud at Court, and outed of his Judges Place, the Lands belonging to the Church of Norwich were again called into Question being begged by a Peer: Sr Edw. desired him to desist, telling him, that otherwise he would put on his Gown and Cap, and come into Westminster-Hall once again, and plead there in any Court in Justification of what he had done. He died at Stoke Poges in Buck. on Wedn. 3. September, being the 83 year of his Age; Whose last Words were, Thy Kingdome come, Thy Will be done. Sir Th. Richardson, Knight, born at Mulberton, (his Father being Minister thereof) was the Kings Serj. afterwards sworn Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas 1626. Speaker of the House of Commons 21 and 22 Jac. He married for his second Lady Eliz. Beaumont, the Sister (as I take it) of Mary Coun∣tess of Buck and the Relict of —Ashburn∣ham, Knight She was by King Charles created Ba∣roness of Craumont in Scotland, and (tho issuless by the Judge) the Honours descended to his Grand∣child. Souldiers. Rob. Vinile, when about to fight Tournboll the Champion of the Scoth Army, is said to have made his Way through a Mastiff, (the Champions attendant) by cutting him off at the Loyns, and then cutt Tournboll's head from off his shoulders. Sir Oliver Hingham, was born, richly landed and buried in Hingham. A Valiant Man, whom King Edward 3 left Governour of Aquitain in France. He gave the French (who had been drawn into Bourdeaux) such entertainment, that they drank
not so much Claret-wine in the City, as they left blood behind them, An. 13. & 3. He was afterwards made Knight of the Garter. His Monument has his Resemblance in Coat Armor, lively set forth in Metal with 24 Mourners about his Monument. Jo. Fastolf, Baron of Sineginle in France, was a Ward to Jo. D. of Bedford, sufficient to prove him an Englishman. Tho he was truly Valiant, the stage hath made him a Thrasonica Puff and Emblem of Mock-valour. He was made Knight of the Garter by Henry 6. and died about the second year of his Reign. Sir Clem. Paston, Knight, Grandson to Sir Jo. a favourite to Edward 4. was born at Paston. He was at the burning of the Conquest in France, and afterwards by Henry 8. was made Captain of one of his ships of war, and in a sea fight took a French gally and therein the Admiral of France Prisoner, called the Baron of Blancard, whom he brought into England and kept at Caster nigh Yarmouth, till he had paid 7000 Crowns for his Ransom, besides a Cup and 2 Snakes of Gold (of the Spoil of the Gally) bequeathed by Sir Clem to his Family. He received many wounds, and was left for dead in Musleborough Field in Scotland. He was the Gen∣tleman to whom Sir Wiat (when worsted at Lud∣gate) did willingly submit. He had the Com∣mand of some Ships of Queen Elizabeth at New-Haven and was Pensioner to 2 Kings and 2 Queens successively. At Oxnit he built a goodly house for Hospitality, and a Hospital hard by for 6 poor serving-men. He died 15— Seamen. No County in England doth carry a Top and Top
Gallant more high in Maritine performances than Norfolk. Witness Yarmouth's proportion in the Navy used by Edward 3. against—of about 700 Ships and 14500 Men. 43 ships with 1950 belong∣ing to Yarmouth; well nigh double to what London did afford, Yarmouth was very Populous in that Age, and (tho but one Parish) a lamentable Plague in one year did sweep thence 7000 men. Nich. of Lynne, bred in Oxford, accounted a Fran∣ciscan Frier, an Excellent Musician, Mathemation and Astrologer, is reported to have sailed to the Nor∣thern Islands in the World An. 30 E. 31, 330, and to have gone so far as the Pole Arctick, where he disco∣vered 4 In-draughts of the Ocean from the 4 Quar∣ters of the World. 'Tis said he wrote a Book of discoveries, called Inventio Fortunata. Chaucer makes an Honourable mention of him. He died 1360. and was buried in Lynne. Pet. Read, Esq. worthily served his Prince and Country, as also Ch. 5. Emp. who gave him the Order of Barbary, for his valiant deeds there and at Tunis. He died 1569. Writers. Jo. Baconthorpe, born at Baconthorpe, bred a Carme∣lite in Blackney. made more Books for weight & number then his Body could bear. His Soul had but a small Diocess (of a Body) to visit, & therefore might the better attend the effectual informing thereof. 'Tis said that the Heart of the D. of Hamilton was the largest, and that of the Lord Capel was the least that the Anatomist ever beheld, whence 'its inferred, That contracted Spirits act with the greatest vigorous∣ness. This Jo. was termed the Resolute Dr. He equally disliked Scepticks of none; and unconstant peo∣ple;
(successively) of all Opinions. He groped af∣ter more light than he saw, saw more than he durst speak of, spake of more than he was thank'd for by those of his superstitious Order. He died 1346. Jo. Colton, born at Tirington, was Chaplain to W. Bateman Bishop of Norwich, and first Master of Gon∣vil-Hall in Cambridge. For his Learning and Piety, he was by Henry 4 preferred Arch. Bishop of Ar∣magh and Primate of Ireland. He was employed to Rome in the Schisme between Pope Ʋrb. 6. and Clem. 7. which occasioned his writing a Learned Treatise De Causâ Schismatis, and another De Re∣medio ejusd. It seems he resigned his Arch-Bisho∣prick before his death, which hapned 1404. Alan of Lynne, in Cambridge, then a Carmelite in Lynne, made Indexes of 33 Writers he perused, a∣mong which were Augustin, Anselm and Aquinas. He Flourished. 1420. William Wells, born (probably) at Wells in this County, Provincial of the Augustinian Order in Lynne, D. D. in Cambridge, was an industrious Man and good Writer. He died and was buried at Lynne, 1421. Jo. Thorpe, born in Thorpe, was a Carmelite at Norwich and Dr. at Cambridge. Being a great Lo∣gician, he wrote a Book entitled the Labyrinth of Sophismes, and another called the Rule of Consequen∣ces, for which he got the Title of Doctor Ingenio∣sus, not Ingenuus; having a pound of Wit for a Drachm of good nature, and being a Violent Perse∣cutor of W. White and other Wicklevites. He died 1440. and lyeth buried at Norwich. Jo. Skelton, (Minister at Dis in Norf.) stiled himself the Kings Orator and Poet Laureat.AMP. Erasmus in a Letter to Henry 8. stileth him Britannicarum Literarum Lumen &
Decus. Besides a Satyrical Wit, (using biting dis∣course, scornfull laughter, and bitter Jests) which was unhappy to light on three Noli me tangere's, viz. the Rod of a School-Master, the Couls of Friers, and the Cap of a Cardinal; The first gave him a lash, the second deprived him of his livelyhood, the third almost outed him out his life. W. Lilly, with whom he fell foul, paid him sufficiently, when he told him, That whilst he was Ambitious of the Reputation of a Learned Poet, he was nei∣ther Learned nor a Poet. The Friers instigated Nix Bish. of Norwich to suspend this Skelton from his Benefice, for keeping a Concubine. And Cardinal Woolsey, his too Potent Enemy, being charged by him with too much truth, so persecuted him, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at Westminster. In his Restraint he died 1529. and was buried in St. Marg. Chap. with this Epitaph. Jo. Sceltonus, Vates Pierius, hîc situs est. On his death bed he declared he had kept the aforesaid supposed Concubine in notion of a Wife. Since the Reformation. Jo Barret, born at Lynne, bred a Carmelite in Cambridg in an ignorant and ambitious Age, was stoped by Arch-Bishop Cranmer, for Insufficiency. Afterwards having plyed his Book hard he became an admirable Scholar, and having Commenced Dr. was Preacher in Norwich, always making honoura∣ble mention of Dr. Cranmer. 'Tis charitably be∣lieved, that tho complying in the times of Perse∣cution, he returned to the truth in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Edm. Gourney, bred B. D. in Cambridge, was Prea∣cher in this Shire. An excellent Scholar, and in∣nocently
humorous. When I was collecting the Witnesses of the Truth in all Ages, even in the times of Popery, It is needless (saith he) for I know that I am desended from Adam, tho I can∣not prove my Pedigree from him. Yet he was born of as good a Family as any in Norf. He wrote 2 learned Treatises against Transubstantiation, and of the 2d. Commandment. He died in the beginning of the Civil Wars. Benefactors to the Publick. Godfrey Bollen, Knight, Son to Jeffrey, born at Sale, was Lord Mayor of London An. 1457. By his Will he bequeathed liberally to Prisons and Hospitals, &c. Besides he gave 1000l. to poor Housholders in London, and 200 l. to those in Norfolk. He was Great-Grandfather, by the Mo∣thers side to Q. Eliz. Ja. Hobart, Attorney Gen. and of the Privy Council to, and Knighted by H. 7. besides his ma∣ny Benefactions to his Parish-Church in London, built a fair Bridge over the River Wareney betwixt this County and Suffolk, and a firm Causey there by, &c. There are 3 Houses of his Issue in this County. Andr. Perne, born at Bilney, Mr. of Pet. House, Protector and Vice-Chancellor of Cambridge, and Dean of Ely, founded a Fellowship and Scholar∣ships in his Colledge, and encreased the Library with many rare Manuscripts. In the daies of Queen Mary he was the Skreen to keep off the Fire of Persecution, from many poor Protestants; so that by his Means, no Gremial of the Univer∣sity was Martyred therein. Indeed he altered his Religion 4 times in 12 years (from the last of H.
8. to 1. Elizabeth) a Pap. a Prot. a Pap. a Prot. and was a bending tho no smarting Willow, guilty of Compliance not Cruelty. Being very Facetious he called a Clergy-man Fool (who indeed was little better) who returned that he would complain thereof to the Bishop of Ely. Do (sayes the Dean) when you please, and my Lord Bishop will Confirm you. Yet at last, he himself ('tis said) was Heart-bro∣ken with a Jest of the Queens Jester, who (Arch-Bishop Whitgift and Dr. Pern being present) dis∣suaded her Majesty from going abroad in a wet day. Heaven (says he) Madam, dissuades you, it is cold and wet; And Earth dissuades you, it is moist and dirty; Heaven dissuades you, this heavenly Man Arch-Bishop Whitgift; and Earth dissuades you, your Fool Clod, such a Lump of Clay as my self. And if neither will prevail with You, here is one that is neither Heaven nor Earth, but hangs betwixt both, Dr. Perne, and he also dissuades you. He died soon after at Lambeth. Since the Reformation. Sir Th. Gresham, bred a Mercer and Merchant in London, the Wealthiest Citizen in England of his Age, Founded 2 stately Fabricks, the Old Ex∣change, a kind of Colledge for Merchants, and Gresham College a kind of Exchange for Scholars. As Vessels of Massy Gold need no burnishing, whilst Vessels that are only gilded are set off therewith: So let lesser Donations be set off with Rhetorical Praises, whilst those of this Knight are resplendent without any adventitious Lustre. He died 21 Nov. 1579. Sir William Paston, Knight (whose Ancestors were bountifull to the Abbeys of Saint Bennet in Holme and Bromholme in this County) erected a fair School with 30l. per An. at Northwalsham in
this County. He married Frances the daughter of Sir Th. Clear of Stokesby, and was great-grandfa∣ther to Sir William, the bountiful Promoter of all my weak endeavors. Henry Howard, Youngest Son of Henry Earl of Surrey, and Brother to Th. last D. of Norfolk, was born at Shotesham, bred in King's Colledg in Cambridge, then in Trin. Hall, being afterwards Chancellor of the University. A great Scholar, Witness his Learned Dispensative against the Poi∣son of supposed Prophesies, dedicated to Sir Fr. Walsingham. He lived privately in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth till King James advanced him in Honour and Wealth, creating him Baron of Marnehill in Dors. Earl of Northampton, Lord Pri∣vy Seal, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight of the Garter. He founded and endowed an Ho∣spital for 12 poor Women and a Governour at Rising in this County: Another for 12 poor Men, and a Governour at Clun in Shrop. another at Greenwich in Kent, for a Governour and 20 poor men, of which 8 are to be chosen out of Shote∣sham. He died 15 June 1614. and was buried in the ancient Chappel of the Castle of Dover. Memorable Persons. —Sharnborn, born at, and Lord of Sharn∣bourn a Mannor in this County; which Mannor William the Conquerour conferred on Warren a Norman Souldier Sharborn traversed his Title, and (being a Norfolk-man) durst go to Law with the Conqueror and question the Validity of his Dona∣tions. Yea he got the better of the Suit, and the Kings Grant was adjudged void. This is pressed by many to prove that King William (tho in name)
was in deed no Conqueror, but came in by Composi∣tion to keep the Laws of England. Sharborn was lately aliened (the Heirs Males being extinct) to a worthy Person Fr. Ash. Esquire who hath setled it on Emanuel College. Noted Sheriffs. An. 14. Philip Calthrope, a Facetious Gentleman, when he understood that Jo. Drakes, a Shoe-maker had bought some of the same French Tawney that himself had provided for a Gown, commanded his Taylor to cut his Gown full of Holes, which purged Drakes of his Proud Humour, that he wou'd never be of the Gentlemans Fashion again. An. 29. Edm. Windham (whose Grand∣mother was Daughter to Jo. Howard D. of Norf.) struck Mr. Clere, a Gentle∣man of his own Country in the Kings Tennis Court, For this he was arraigned in the great Hall at Greenwich, and had Judgment to lose his right∣hand. He desired that the King of Mercy would be pleased to take his left-hand, and spare his right; for therewith (said he) I may be hereafter able to do his Grace Service. The King being informed hereof, granted his full Pardon. He made his pro∣mise good (to E 6. by whom he was Knighted) en∣deavouring to suppress Kets Rebellion in this Coun∣ty, till at last it proved a Task above his Strength to perform. Th. Woodhouse, Mil. descended from Honourable Ancestors, many of whom were employed in State Affairs, viz. Rob. (Treasurer) was summoned to Parliament, by E. 3▪ Jo. was Servant and Executor to Hen. 5. Sir Will. was Vice Ad. of the English Fleet in Masleborough
Field. Philip active at the taking of Cadiz and Knighted there by the Earl of Essex. And ever since there hath been a Military inclination in this Family which hath manifested it self on several occasions. An. 18. Drugo Drury, Arm. afterwards Knighted, was joyned in Commission with Sir Amias Paulet, to keep Ma. Q. of Scots. Both were nicknamed Puritans by the ill-natur'd Roman Catholicks. An. 5. Roger Townsend, Baronet, a Re∣ligious Gentleman expending his Soul in Piety and Charity, a Lover of God, his Service ad Servants, restored Impropriations to the Churh to some Hundreds per An. He married Mary, Daughter and Coheir of Horatio Lord Vere of Tilbury, by whom he had Sir Horace, created Ba∣on at the Coronation of K. Ch. II. Norwich. NOrwich is a Pleasant and Populous City, the first with the Inhabitation of Trees, the latter with the Plantation of People. The pleasantness of the City was not a little advanced by the Dutch∣men who first garnished it with curious Flowers. As for Manufactures, Stuffs were first brought hi∣ther by the Dutch who were expelled their Coun∣try by the Cruelty of the D. of Alva. Of these
Stuffs there was one formerly called Stand-far-off, which discovered its coursness when near to the Eye, another called Perpetuano from the lasting thereof. Satinisco, Bombicino, Italiano, &c. Nor∣wich hath beaten Sudbury out of distance, in the Race of trading. Of the Buildings, the Cathedral is spacious, tho the Roof in the Cioysters be most commended. Amongst private Houses, the D. of Norfolk's Palace is the greatest I ever saw in any City out of London. Here is a covered Bowling-Alley, The Bishops Palace, formerly a fair Stru∣cture was lately unleaded, and new covered with Tyle. Whereon a Wagg, Thus Palaces are altered, we saw John Leaden. Leyden, now Wat Tyler, next Jack Straw. Physicians. Jo. Goslin, Master of Caius Colledge in Camb. Proctor of the University and twice Vice-Chancel∣lour thereof, a greet Scholar and Reg. Prof. of Phy∣sick, was strict in pressing the Statutes of the Uni∣versity; and it being then highly penal for a Scholar to wear Boots in the University, there was a Student undertook for a Wager to address himself booted to the Vice-Chancellor, craving his advice for a Numness in his Leggs, the Vice-Chancellor prescribed him a Receit and dismissed him very civilly. This Youth a cunning Gibeonite, covering at the same Instant his Leggs with his Boots, and his Boots with his Leggs; escaped the punishment that was due in that case. Dr. Goslin was a Worthy Benefactor to Kath. Hall, bestowing thereon the fair Bull-Inn of considerable value. He died 1625.
Jo. Caius, Fellow in Gonvil-Hall in Camb. travel∣led into Italy and wrote several Trea. there. After his Return he was Physician to Q. Mary and impro∣ved Gonvil-Hall into a College. He wrote an Ex∣cellent Book of the Antiquity of Cambridge and another De Canibus. His Epitaph is FUI CAI∣US. Since the Reformation. Rob. Watson was Skilled in the Laws, and Steward of the House to Arch-Bishop Cranmer. Having fre∣quently disputed with Papists, during his Impri∣sonment for Religion, he wrote, after his enlarge∣ment, an Elegant Latin Treatise, wherein he rela∣teth the Accidents of his Life. Benefactors to the Publick. Will. Baitman, bred in Cambridge, Arch-Deacon, then B. of Norwich in the Reign of E. 3. enjoyned Penance to Rob. Lord Morley for stealing of his Deer, and made him perform the same in the Ca∣thedral of Norwich, notwithstanding the Kings threatning Letters to the contrary. He erected Trinity-Hall Colledge, in Cambridge, for the Study of the Canon and Civil Laws. He removed Gonvil-Hall, to a more convenient place, building and set∣ling the Revenues thereof according to the Will of the Founder. King Ed. 3. resolving to follow his Title to the Crown of France sent this Bi∣shop to the Pope, to acquaint him with his In∣tentions; In which Embassy he died at Avignon 1354.
Since the Reformation. Th. Legg, Master of Gonvil-Hall, in Cambridge, was Doctor of Law and Arches, one of the Masters in the Chancery, twice Vice-Chancellor of the Uni∣versity. He was well skilled in Antiquity. He wrote a Tragedy of the Destruction of Jerus; which was filched from him, by a Plagiary, before it was acted. In the acting of a Tragedy, he had formerly written of R. 3. Jo. Palmer (afterward Dean of Peterborough) who personated K. Rich. therein had his head so possessed with a Prince-like Humor, that ever after he did what he then acted, in his prdigal Expences. Dr. Legg bequeathed 600 l. for the building of the East-Part of his Col∣lege. He died An. 1607. Northampton∣shire. NOrthampton-shire, a long narrow Inland County stretched from the N. E. to S. W. borde∣reth on 9 several Counties. viz. on the E. Camb. Hunt. on the W. Warwick-shire, on the N. Linc. Rutl. and Leic. on the S. Bedford, Buckingham▪ and Oxford. It is a fruitful and populous County as any in England. Here there is very little Wast
Ground; so that this Shire is an Apple without Core or Rind. All the Rivers therein, are bred there, which argues the elevation of the Ground. The Language of the Inhabitants is very proper. There is a Heath in this County, nigh to Stamford, which hath variety of very rare Plants growing upon it. The Natural Commodities besides Grass, Corn, &c. are Salt-Peter, most whereof is found in Dove-Houses, and most Dove-houses in this great Corn-County. Then Pigeons, in Hebrew Jonah which comes from a Root which signifies to spoil and destroy. They are thought to be the Causers of Dearth, and are indeed devouring Innocents. This Shire needs no Manufactures, yet the Town of Northampton may be said to stand chiefly on o∣ther Mens Leggs, where (if not the best) the most and cheapest Boots and Stockins are bought in Eng∣land. Upon Trial of the Cloth Manufacture in this County, their Cloth ran very course, tho their Wool be fine. Among Buildings, the Cathedral of St. Peter challengeth the precedency of all in England for a Majestick Western Front of Columel-work. The Cloysters of this Cathedral were lately pulled down to repair the Body thereof. As for civil Structures Holdenby-House, built by Sir Christopher Hatton, once a stately Structure, is now demolished. Next Burleigh-House nigh Stamford, built by W. Lord Cecil, is a House of great State and Magni∣ficence. Withorpe, built by Th. Cecil E. of Exeter, to retire to, (as he pleasantly said) out of the Dust, whilst his great House of Burleigh was a sweeping. Castle-Ashbey, the Noble Mansion of the E. of Northampton, was most beautiful before a casual Fire deformed part thereof. Besides these, there be many others, no County in England yielding more Noblemen, no Noblemen in England having fai∣rer
Habitations. The Wonder of this Shire is, that within the Demesnes of Baughton (the Barony of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Montague) there is a Spring which is conceived to turn Wood into Stone. As for Medicinal Waters, Wellinborough-Well was very famous in the daies of Queen Mary who lay many weeks thereat. Proverbs. I. The Mayor of Northampton opens Oysters with his Dagger. This Town being 80 miles from the Sa, Sea-Fish may be presumed stale therein. II. He that must eat a buttered Faggot, let him go to North∣ampton. Because it is the dearest Town in England for fuel. Princes. Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Richard Woodvill, by the Lady Jaquet his Wife, (formerly the Relict of Jo. D. of Bedford) was born at Grafton-Honour. She was Widow to Sir. Jo. Grey, who lost his life for the House of Lancaster; and petitioned King Edward to take off the sequestration from her Joynture. She afterwards became the Royal consort of that King, tho it was not long before the Tem∣pest of his lust drove him to another Shore, which had a greater share in his Affections. This Lady lived to see the Death of her Husband, Murder of her 2 Sons, and the rest of her Children and tho her Daugh. was afterwards married to H. 7. that King, was not over dutiful to her, nor over-loving to her Daughter. She died An. 14—She finished Queens College in Cambridge (where I had my first breeding) begun by Queen Marg. Wife to Henry 6 an im∣placable Enemy to her Husband, so that the 2 Houses of York and Lancaster had their first Amity in that Foundation.
Rich. Plantagenet, (Crook-back) Son to Rich. D. of York, was born at Fothinghay Castle. Valour and Elo∣quence met in his Person. He compassed the Crown by Cruelty, and the Killing of his Nephews, the 2 Sons of Edward 4. When King he made good Laws. He lost the Crown and his life in the Battle of Bosworth, An. 1435. having perfor∣med in the Fight, all the Offices of a Wise Ge∣neral and Valiant Souldier. He knew it was all one for him to die as to survive success. Kath. D. to Sir Th. Par, and last Wife to Henry 8. was probably born in this County See Westmerland. Saints. Werburgh, D. to Wolpher Prince of Merica, was a Nun at Ely, whence returning to Wedon (for∣merly her Father's Palace) she turn'd that place into a Monastery. She had also Juridiction over the Monastery of Trekinghan in Linc. (where she was buried) the Gates of which place are fabulous∣ly reported to have open'd of themselves, when the Men of Hamburge (which was also within her Jurisdiction) came for her Corps, to bury it ac∣cording to the direction given in her Will. 'Twas presumed that Werburgh (al. Wardburgh) would prove a Tutelary Patroness of the Town or place which possessed her body. Some have reported, that she hath driven awry all Geese from Weden, that they shall destroy no Grain thereabout. She died An. 675. her body was afterward translated to Chester, where H. Lupus built the Monastery of St. Werburghs, converted into a Cathedral by Henry 8.
Martyrs. Jo. Curd a Shoemaker, burnt in Northampton An. 1557. whose Blood was not chargeable on the Bishop, but his bloody Arch-Deacons account. Cardinal. Henry Chichley, born at Higham-Ferrers, is said to have been made Cardinal by the Title of St. Eusebius. Prelates. Rich. and Adam of Northampton were both Bishops in Ireland, the former Consecrated Bishop of Fer∣nose 1282. died 1304. The later Consecrated 1322. died 1346. having first seen his Cathedral burnt by the Rebels. W. le Zouch, Son to —Lord Zouch, was born at Haringwort, from Dean he became Arch-Bishop of York, to whose care Edward 3. going into France committed the care of the North. This Arch-Bishop (soon after,) bid Battle to David King of Scots, at Durham, on St. Luke's Eve, whereon the Scotch King found such a Fast, that he had little list to feast the day following, being routed and taken Prisoner. Hence a Poet of that Age, Est Pater invictus, sicco de Stipite dictus, Zouch in French signifying the dry stump of a stick. However his Family flourished as a Green-tree, till withered in our memory, when Edward the last Lord Zouch died without Issue male in the beg. of King Charles. This Prelate began a beautiful Chappel on the South-side of
his Cathedrial. He died and was buried before the Altar of St. Edmond. 1352. Rob. Braybrooke was made Bishop of London 1381. and afterward Chancellour of England. He died 1404. and was buried in the Chappel of St. Mary. Lionell Woodvill (or Wydevill) born at Grafton, bred in, then Chanc. of Oxford, was made B. of Salisbury 1482. His Memory is supported rather by the But∣tresses of his great Relations, than the Foundation of his own Deserts. For he was Son to Jaquet Dutchess of Bedford and Rich. Wydevill Earl of Rivers, Brother to Elizabeth Queen of England and Brother in Law to Edward 4. Heart-broken with grief with the Tragedies he beheld in his own Family, caused by the Cruelty of King Richard 3. he died about 1484. Since the Reformation. Ja. Montague, Son to Sir Rich. Knight, was born at Boughton, bred in Christ-college in Cambridge, was after Mr. of Sidney-college, which he freed from a debt of 20l. yearly payable to Trin. College. He expended 100 Marks to bring running water into the Kings-ditch in Cambridge. He was after∣wards Bishop of Bath and Wells, then of Win∣chester being highly in favour with King James whose Works he translated into Latin. He died 1618, and lyeth buried in the Church of Bath. Fr. Godwin, Son to Th. Bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at Hanningham 1561. and became D. D. in Christs-Church in Oxford, Sub-Dean of Exeter and afterwards Bishop of Landaffe An. 40 Eliz. 1601. He was a good Man, grave Divine, skil∣full Mathematician, pure Latinist and incompara∣ble
Historian, to whose painful Endeavors the whole Church Militant is much beholding. He was translated by King James to Hereford, and died in the Reign of King Charles, An. 162— Jo. Owen, born at Burton Latimers (where his Father was Minister) was bred in Jesus-College in Cambridg, where he commenced D. D. and was Chaplain to King Charles whilst he was a Prince. King Charles being troubled with 2 Competitors, advanced this modest Doctor to the Bishoprick of St. Asaph, to end the contest. He outlived his Vote in Parliament, and survived to see all Con∣tempt cast on his Order, which he bare with Mo∣deration, and died 164... Rob. Skinner, D. D. born at Pisford and bred in Oxford, became a Preacher in London and Dean of —Hence he was preferred Bishop of Brist. then of Oxford, and is still and long may he be living. Statesmen. Sir Christopher Hatton, born at Holdenby, of an ancient Family, was beloved of the Queen for his handsom Dancing, better for his Proper Per∣son, and best of all for his Abilities. The Queen at last preferred him Lord Chancellor of England. He by his Power and Prudence convinced some sullen Serjeants (who thought him not throughly learned in the Laws) of their Errours and his own Abilities. His Zeal for the Discipline of the Church of England gave the first being to a scandalous report, that he was Popishly affected. It brake his heart that the Queen rigorously de∣manded the present Payment of some Arrears, and falling into a mortal Disease, he could not be re∣covered
by the Queens broth's, which (some af∣firm) her Majesty brought to him with her own hands. He died 1591. and was buried in the Quire of St. Paules. Sir W. Fitz-Williams, born at Milton, married the Sister of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Dep. of Ireland, where himself was 5 times Dep. and when Walt. Earl of Essex was sent over Governour of Ʋl∣ster, he took his Commission from this Sir W. then Lord Dep. He was Serviceable towards the reduction of that Kingdom, in raising a Com∣position in Munster, and in setling the Possessi∣ons of the Lords and Tenants in Monohan. His Vigilancy was most conspicuous in 88. when the routed Armado in its return dared not to land in Ireland, except against their Wills, when driven by tempest, when they found the Shore worse than the Sea unto them. Some impute the Irish Re∣bellion, which afterwards brake out, to this De∣puties Severity, in imprisoning suspected Persons for concealed Spanish Goods, tho, this gave only the Irish a Mantle for their intended Wickedness. He died An. 15. . . Sir Isaack Wake, honorably descended, was bred in Oxford, where he was Orator of the Univ. He was afterwards Secretary to Sir Dudley Charleton, Secretary of State, and from his, was advanced into the Kings service and employed Ambassadour to Venice, where he neglected his own Commo∣dity to attend his Majesties Imployment; the rea∣son that he died only rich to his own Conscience. He was afterwards appointed Leiger for France, and designed Secretary of State, had not Death prevented him at Paris. He was accomplished with all Qualifications requisite for publick Em∣ployment. King Charles allowed the Expences for
his Funeral, and at his Majesties Command his Corps was brought over to England and buried in the Castle of Dover An. 16— Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Martin de Pateshull, was made Ju∣stice of the Common Pleas An. 1. H. 3.AMP. He was 4th Dean of St. Pauls. Sir Tho. Billing, dwelt at Ashwell, was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench An. 6. E 4. Whose Lands have since by the Lovils descended to the Shirlies. He married for his 2d Wife, Mary, Daughter and Heir of Robert Nosenham of Con∣ington in Hunt. the Relict of W. Cotten, (whose Issue possess her Inheritance at this day) and she lyeth entombed in Westminster. Sir W. Catesbye, (whose Family flourished at Ashby St. Leger) was advanced by W. Lord Hastings into the Notice and Favour of Richard 3. tho ill requiting it, when betraying him who caused his Preferment. He was a man well Learned in the Laws of the Land, and sure great pity it was that he had not had more Truth or less Wit. He was eminently all Officers in every Court of Judi∣cature. Witness the Libell which Collingborn made, and which cost him his Life for the same. The Rat and the Cat, and Lovel the Dog, Do Govern all England under the Hog. He died (probably) before the end of R. 3. Sir Richard Empson, (another Catesbye,) was eminent for having, odious for abusing his skill in the Law, active for his Prince, injurious to
the People. He was Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster and from a Sieve-maker's Son (at Towceter in this County where he was born) came to sift the Estates of the wealthiest Men in Eng∣land. For Henry 7. vexed that he had refused Co∣lumbus his proffer (whereby the West Indies for∣tunately discovered, fell to Ferd. King of Spain) resolved to discover Indies in England, and to this purpose made Empson Promoter General to press the Penal Statutes all over the Land. Impowred hereby, this prolling Knight did grind the faces of the Rich and Poor, bringing the grist thereof to the K. and keeping the Toll thereof to himself, whereby he advanced a vast Estate, which now with himself is reduced to nothing. He united the Houses of York and Lanc. in the Kings Coffers, taking notice of no person for his good service, but making all equally obnoxious to Forfeitures. This Empson scoffingly demanding of a Judicial Astrolo∣ger in Warw. When the Sun would change? Even then (said the Astrologer) when such a wicked Lawyer as you go to Heaven. In the beginning of H. 8. he was beheaded, 1510. Edw. Mountague, born at Brigstock, was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, An. 30. H. 8. His Motto was, Equitas Justitiae Norma. In his time, tho the Golden Showers of Abby-Lands rained amongst great Men, it was long before he would open his lap (scrupling the acception of such Gifts) and at last received but little in propor∣tion to others. An. 37. H. 7. he was made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, a descent in Honour, but ascent in profit. In drawing up the Will of E. 6. and setling the Crown on Lady Jane, for a time, he swam against the Tide and Stream of D. Dudley, till at last he was carried away with the
Stream. Outed of his Office, An. 1. Mary he found that Contentment in his Hospital-Hall in Nor∣thampton-shire which he could not find in Westm. Hall. He died An. 1556. and lyeth buried in the Church of Weekley. Sir Augustine Nicolls, born at Eckton, was free∣ly made by K. James one of the Judges of the Com. Pleas. That K. commonly called him the Judge that would give no money. He was renowned for his Patience to hear both Parties all they could say, a happy Memory and singular Sagacity to search into the material circumstances, and exemplary In∣tegrity, even to the rejection of Gratuities after Judgment given. He forbearing to Travel on the Lords Day, wrote a Reformation on some of his own Order. He loved Plain and profitable prea∣ching, being wont to say, I know not what you call Puritanical Sermons, but they come nearest to my Conscience. He died as he went the Northern Circuit, and lyeth buried in Kendall-Church in Westmorland. Sir Robert Dallington, born at Geddington, bred a Bible-Clerk in Bennet-Colledg. He was afterwards a School-Master in Norf. and (after having travelled) Secretary to Francis Earl of Rutland. His accurate Aphorisms on Tacitus, witness his Excellent Wit and Judgment. At last he was Knighted and pre∣ferred Mr. of the Charter-House. At the end of a Latin Speech (spoken by a School-Boy with which he was welcomed to that Hospital, there was a Distick to this effect Do not the least part of your trust disdain, Nor grudge of Boyes to take the Care again. He died An. 162.
Jo. Fletcher, Son of Rich. D. D. had an excellent Wit. He with Fr. Beaumont, Esq. like Castor and Pollux (most happy when in conjunction) raised the English to equal the Athenian and the Roman Theatre. Beaumont being the Ballast of Judgment, Fletcher the Sail of Phantasie, both compounding a Poet to Admiration. Meeting once in a Ta∣vern, to contrive the rude draught of a Tragedy, Fletcher undertook to kill the King therein, his words being overheard by a Listner, he was ac∣cused of High Treason, till the mistake soon appearing that the Plot was only against a Dra∣matick and Scenical King, all wound off in Mer∣riment, Fletcher surviving his Partner, wrote good Comedies himself, tho inferiour to the for∣mer; and no wonder if a single thred was not so strong as a twisted one. He died (as I am informed) of the Plague An. 1. Car I. 1625. Sir Hen. Montague, (Grandson to Sir Edward, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench) was born at Boughton. He raised himself (as was foretold in his Childhood) above the rest of his Family, by the pregnancy of his parts. He was bred in Christ's Colledge in Cambridge, then in the Middle Temple. He became Serjant at Law, was Knight∣ed by King James 1602. and was Recorder of London, made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench 1616. Lord Treasurer of England 1620. created Baron of Kimbolton and Visc. Mandevile (afterwards Earl of Manchester,) made President of the privy Councel, then Lord Privy Seal; at which time he brought the Court of Requests into such repute that what was formerly called the Almes-Basket of the Chancery, had in his time, well nigh as many Suits and Clients as the Chancery it self. His Mot∣to was Movendo non mutando me. His Meditations
on Life and death, written in time of his health, may be presumed to have left good impressions on him, preparatory for his death which hapned 164. . . Writers. Jo. of Northampton, (in lat. Jo. Avonius) a Car∣melite, an Eminent Mathematician, wrote a Book entitled The Philosophers Ring, a Perpetual Alma∣nack; a Masterpiece of that Age. He flourished. 1340. Robert Holcot, born in Holcot, and bred in Oxford, became a Dominican in Northam. A learned and prudent Man. He wrote many famous Treatises. He died of the plague 1349 at North∣am. before he had finished his Lectures on Eccle∣siastes. Note, The Plague about that time, so raged in England that our Stow, p. 245. Chro∣niclers affirm, scarce a tenth person of all sorts was left alive. Robert Dodford, born at Dodford, was a Benedic∣tine Monk in Ramsey. He wrote Postills on the Proverbs, which the envy of time hath intercept∣ed from us. He flourished about 1370. Pet. Peteshull, an Augustinian, in Oxford disli∣king his Order, procured a dispensation to relin∣quish it, and became Honorary Chaplain to Pope Ʋrbain 6. He afterwards promoted the Doctrine of Wickliffe, and in his Exposition of the Prophe∣sie of Hildegardes, so taxed the pride and lazi∣ness of all Friers, that his Book was burnt, and himself fled to escape the same Fate. He flou∣rished. 1390.
Since the Reformation. Robert Crowley, bred in Oxford, confuted Miles Hogheard, who wrote against the poor Protestants. He fled to Frankford in the Reign of Queen Mary and in the Reign of Q. Eliz. was made Vicar of St. Giles without Cripple-gate, London, where he lyes buried, having died 1588. Eusebius Paget, born at Cranford, and bred in Oxford, was commonly called the Golden Sophister. He was Minister in London, and wrote an excel∣lent book called the History of the Bible and Ca∣techism of the 40 short Questions. Ja. Preston, D. D. born in Heyford, and bred in Cambridge, was so far from Eminency (before he commenced Master of Arts) that he was but a little above Contempt. Soon after, his skill in Philosophy rendred him to the general respect of the University. He was the greatest Pupil-manager in England. The Duke used him to work the Pu∣ritan Party (then most active in Parliament) to his compliance. And tho this Dr. was most pow∣erfull with them, he was at last found useless to the intended Purpose. He was therefore cal∣led by one, the Court Comet, blazing for a time and fading soon afterwards. He was a perfect Politician, and used (Lapwing-like) to flutter most on that place which was furthest from his eggs. He had perfect command of his Passion with the Caspian Sea never ebbing nor slowing, and would not alter his composed Pace for all the whipping which Satyrical Wits bestowed on him. He never had Wife or Cure of Souls, and leaving a plentiful, no invidious estate, died 1628.
Th. Randolph, born at Hougton, was bred Fell. in Trinity College in Cambridg. The Muses may seem not only to have Smiled but to have been tickled at his Nativity, such the Festivity of his Pomes of all sorts. He died 163— Nick. Estwick, B. D. born at Harowden, and bred in Cambridg, was (40 years) Parson of War∣ton, then of Botsworth a pious and judicious Di∣vine. His Works witness his great Worth. He died 1657. Romish Exile Writers. Math. Kellison, born at Harowden, was Kings Professor and Rector of the University in Rhemes. He wrote a Book to King James, another against Sutliff, with many more, and was living 1611. Benefactors to the Publick. Hen. Chichley, born at Higham Ferrers, and bred in Oxford, was sent by Henry 4. to the Council of Pisa 1409, and by the Popes own hand was conse∣crated Bishop of St. Davids at Vienna, and thence was advanced Arch-Bishop of Canterbury by Henry 5. Which Wise King having a shrewd design a∣gainst the Abbeys, was diverted with vast sums of Mony paid by the Clergy, to maintain his Wars in France. He refused a Cardinals Cap (proffered to him in the Reign of Henry 6.) being loath (as some think) to be junior to Cardinal Beaufort of Winchester who had often disobliged him. He was cruel against the Wicklevites, but was a Zea∣lous Asserter of the English Liberties in opposition to the Popes Ʋsurped Supremacy. Great his Zeal to promote Learning, as appears by 3 Collges
erected and endowed at his expence and procure∣ment. One with an Hospital at Higham-Ferrers St. Bernards in Oxford, afterwards bettered by Sir Th. White into St. John's Colledg and All-Souls in Oxford. Having continued in his See 29 years, He died 1443. William Laxton, (of Oundle) was bred a Grocer in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor 1544. He founded and endowed a fair School and Alms∣house at Oundle in this County, well maintained at this day by the Company of Grocers. He died 1556. Since the Reformation. Nic. Latham, born at Bridgstock was Minister at Barn-Wells. He founded several small Schools with Salaries, in Country Villages, and founded a most beautifull Almshouse at Oundle. He died 1620. Edward Montague Baron of Baughton, a pious, peacable and hospitable Patriot, was a Bountiful Benefactor to Sidney-Colledg, and built and endow∣ed an Alms-house at Weekley in this County. He was Honourable at Court and beloved in the Country, tho he never affected popularity, be∣ing wont to say, Do the common sort of people 19 Courtesies together, and yet you may lose their love, if you do but go over the stile before them. He died in restraint in the Savoy on the account of his Loyalty to his Soveraign. 164... Memorable Persons. A Sexton of the Cathedral of Peterborough in∣terred 2 Queens (Kath. Dowager and Mary of
Scotland) more than 50 years interceding betwixt their 2 sepultures. He buried also 2 generations of people that lived in the place. Noted Sheriffs. An. 16. Rich. Widevil al. Woodvil, mar∣ried Jaquet Dutchess of Bedford, of most ancient extraction, malicious therefore the Cavil of Rich. Duke of York That the Family was made Noble which was not worth a Noble. Yea 'tis very probable that all the ancient Nobility of England are derived from his Daughters. 23. Hen. Green, (of another Family than those of Green Norton) built Draiton House in this Coun∣ty. He had one Daughter and Heir, Constance mar∣ried to Jo. Stafford, E. of Wilt. to whom she bare Ed∣ward who died without Issue, so that her Inheritance devolved unto the Family of the Veres. An. 1. Hen. Vere, Arm. a jolly Gen∣tleman both for Court and Camp, a great Reveller, good as well at a March as Masques being Governour of Guines in Picar∣die, was created by H. 8. Baron of Harouden, An∣cestor to Edw. Lord Vau. now living. He was a great Courtier, and appeared in costly Equipage, wearing on the Marriage day of P. Arthur, a Gown worth above 1000 l. and the day following, a Col∣lar of S S worth 800l. The solemn occasion of this Gallantry was that which hindred Empson from taking this Gentleman by the Collar and pick∣ing a Hole in his Gown, upon the breach of some rusty penal Sumptuary Statute. An. Th. Par. removed from Kendal-Castle in Westmerland into this County  upon his marrying Maud Daughter of Sir
Th. Green of Green-Norton. He was Father to Q. Kath. Par, and to W. Marquiss of Northam. 15. W. Fitz-Williams Sen. Mil. first a Merchant-Taylor and Servant to Cardinal Woolsey, was Alder∣man in London 1506. Afterwards upon his entertain∣ment of his Mr. Woolsey at Milton in Northampton∣shire, the King being displeased therewith, deman∣ded how he durst harbour so great an Enemy to the State; his Answer was, That he had done it because he had been his Master, and partly the means of his greatest Fortunes. The K. was so well pleased with his Answer that saying, himself had few such Servants, immediately Knighted him and after∣wards made him a privy Councellor. 17. W. Par, Uncle to Queen Kath. Par, was by H. 8. created Baron Par of Horton. 21. Jo. Clarke, Mil. A. 5. H. 8. at the Siege of Terrowane, took Prisoner Lewis de Orleans D. of Longevile, for which service he got the Arms of that Duke, viz. a Canton sinister Az. and thereupon a Demi-Ram mounting Ar. armed O. betwixt 2 Flower de Luces in Chief of the last, over all, a Batune dexter∣ways Ar. 24. Dav. Cecil, was Grandfather to W. Cecil, Baron of Burleigh, and Lord Treasurer of England. 25. W. Par, Mil. brother to Q. Kath. Par, was made Lord Par of Kendl and E. of Essex in the right of Anne Bourcher his Wife, King Ed. 6. crea∣ted him Marq. of Northampton, under Queen Mary he was condemned for siding with Queen Jane, but pardoned and restored by Q. Eliz. He was skilled in Musick and wanted not for Valour, tho unsuccess∣ful in his employment against Ket. He died 1571 without issue.
An. 1. Th. Tressam Mil. for his activi∣ty in bringing Q. Mary to the Crown, was by her made Prior of St. Jo. in Jeru∣salem. An. 6. Edm. Brudenell, Arm. after∣wards Knighted, was a great Antiquary, and seems to have entailed his Abilities on Th. Lord Brud. of Stoughton. 15. Th. Tressam, Arm. Knighted 18 Eliz. built the Market-House at Rothwell. For his Zeal to the Popish Religion he was confined to Wisbich Castle. 20. Th. Cecil, Mil. Son to Sir Will. Bar. of Bur∣leigh, was created E. of Exeter and married Doro∣thy Daughter to the Lord Latimer. These joyntly bestowed 108 l. per An. on Clare-hall in Cambridge. 34. Anth. Milemay, Esq. was Knighted by Q. Eliz. and sent Ambassador into France. 43. Rob. Spencer, Knight, descended from the Spen∣cers Earls of Glocester and Winchester, was An. 1. Jac. created Baron Spencer of Wormleiton in Warw. spea∣king in Parliament of the Valour of their English Ancestors in defending the Liberties of the Nation, your Ancestors (said the Earl of Arundel (were keeping of Sheep when those Liberties were defended. The other returned.—And yours were then in plotting of Treason. He was sent by K. James to Frederick Duke of Wirtenberge, to present him with the Gar∣ter. An. 2. Arth. Throgmorton, Knight, (whose Sister was married to Sir Walt. Raleigh) an ingenious Gentleman, left his Estate to his 4 Daughters married to the Lord Dacres, Lord Wotton, Sir Peter Temple of Stow Bar∣ronet, and Sir Ed. Partridge. 3. Jo. Freeman was a most bountiful Benefactor to Clare-Hall in Cambridge giving 2000l. to the
founding of Fellowships and Scholar-ships therein. He died without Issue. 12. W. Wilmer, Arm. the first Pensioner in Sidney-Colledge to which he was a Benefactor. An. 7. Jo. Hewet, Baronet, tho he had no Land in this County;  the Shrivalty was imposed upon him because he had offended a great Courtier. Northumberland. NOrthumberland hath Durham on the S. Cum∣berland on the S. W. the German Ocean on the E. and Scotland on the N. and W. parted with the River Tweed and Cheviot Hills. It is somewhat of a Pyramidal Form whose Base exten∣deth to above 40. and Shaft. ascendeth to 50 miles. The Soyl is not very fruitful but is improved more and more daily. An 4. Jac. many Gentlemen in this County challenged their hereditary right in the Bounds betwixt the two Kingdoms, which had been formerly neglected. The Buildings in this County are either Castles or Castle-like able to resist a tumultuary incursion. Proverbs. I. To carry Coals to Newcastle. That is, to bu∣sy ones self in a needless employment. II. From Berwick to Dover 300 miles over. That is from one
end of the Land to the other. III To take Hectors Cloak. That is to deceivce a friend who confideth in his faithfulness. 'Tis said that one Hector Arm∣strong of Harlaw betrayed his friend Th. Piercy, Earl of Northumberland for mony, and afterwards fell in∣to so great poverty and contempt that he durst not go abroad. IV. We will not lose a Scot That is, We will lose nothing how inconsiderable soever. The Proverb began during the Enmity betwixt the 2 Kingdoms. V. A Scotish Mist may wet an Eng∣lishman to the skin. That is, small mischiefs in the beginning, if not seasonably prevented, may prove very dangerous. VI. A Scotish-man and a Newcastle grindstone travil all the World over. Occasioned by the curiosity of the one and the goodness of the other. VII. If they come, they come not, and if they come not they come, That is, if the Borderers came, the Cattle of the Vicinage came not home from their Pasture, but were by them intercepted, &c. The 4 following Pro∣verbs are Scotish. VIII. Lang or ye cut Faulk∣land-Wood with a penknife. It is spoken of such means which are insufficient for the effecting of any end or design. IX. He is an Aberdeen's man taking his word again. Aberdeen is a Town in the County of Mar in Scotland. X. He was born in August. This is said to be meant as a Periphra∣sis of a liquorish person. A Yule Feast may be quat at Pasche. That is, Christmass-cheer may be di∣gested, and the Party hungry again at Easter. Saints. St. Ebba, Daughter to Edilfrid King of Northum. was Prioress of Coldingham in Scotland. She with others cut off their Noses, that their Beauty might be no bait to the lustfull Danes. She flourished 630.
Prelates since the Reformation. Geo. Carleton, born at Norham, bred in Oxford, was one of the 4 Divines sent by King James to the Synod of Dort. He was Bishop of Landaff, afterwards of Chichester. A man of good affecti∣ons, solid Judgment and clear Invention. He wrote (amongst others) 2 Treatises called A Thankfull Remembrance of Gods mercy and a Con∣futation of Judicial Astrology. When Young, he was grave in his manners, so when old, he was youthful in his parts even to his death, which hapned An. 1. Ch. Valentine Cary, born at Barwick, extracted from the Cary's Barons of Hunsdon, was bred in Cam∣bridg, where he was Vice-Chancellor An. 1612. He was preferred Dean of St Pauls, and at last Bishop of Exeter. A compleat Gentleman and ex∣cellent scholar. Tho some Contest hapned betwixt him and the City of Exeter, yet he was bounti∣ful above expectation in relieving the poor there∣of, when it was visited with the Sickness. He died 1626. and lyes buried in St Pauls London. Rich. Holeworth, D. D. born at Newcastle, bred in Cambridg. Rector of St Peter in the Poor in London, Arch-deacon of Huntington at last Mr. of Emanuel Colledg, incurred the Censures of Fac∣tious Innovators in London at the beginning of the Civil wars. Most candid his disposition, being wont to check himself when in Passion. He was imprisoned for a Sermon he preached in Cam∣bridg. After he had procured his Liberty, he wai∣ted on his Majesty in the Isle of Wight. He was Proffered the Bishoprick of Bristol, but refused it. Some shoot by the aim of their own fancies
who report him to have said, He would not wear a Bristol-stone. Tho he was a zealous assertor of Episcopacy, he esteemed the acceptance of that Bishopprick unsafe and unseasonable. He afterwards took the Deanry of Worcester. The Tre∣atise called the Valley of Vision is in all probabi∣lity none of his. Dying about 1650 he was bu∣ried in St. Pet. Broadstreet. Souldiers. This County breedeth most hardy Men. The Borderers have been embroyled in several Bat∣tles against the Scotch, Witness the Battel of Chevy chase, An. 29 Henry 8. about which time Henry Earl of Northumberland died peaceably at Hackney near London, tho reported to be slain in that battle. Physicians. W. Turner, born at Morpeth, bred in Cambridge, was a general Scholar and very zealous in the Protestant Religion, writing much in the defence thereof, and much molested for the same by Bishop Gardner and others. After long imprison∣ment he escaped and fled beyond the Seas. At Ferrara in Italy he commenced Dr. in Physick He wrote a great Herbal and a Book of Physick. for the English Gentry, besides several other Trea∣tises. He died in Germany, as I conjecture, in the Reign of Queen Mary. Whose Contemporary and fellow Confessor, Th. Gibson, born at Morpeth, wrote a Book of Herbs, as also a Treatise entitled The Treasons of the Prelates since the Conquest. He was alive in the last of Queen Mary.
Writers. Ralph Frechbourne, bred a Souldier, Scholar, Traveller, became at last a Frier. He attended Rich. Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans, into the Holy land; whence he brought the Carme∣lites into England, and built for them a House at Holme in Northumberland. He wrote Books of pious Exhortations and Epistles, and after he had been 14 years Provincial of his Order, died and was buried at Holme, 1274. Johannes Scotus, born at Dunston, a Franciscan Frier, got the Title of Doctor Subtilis. He main∣tained against the Thomists that the Blessed Virgin was conceived with sin. He died of a sit of an Apo∣plexy, at Colen. Benefactors to the Publick. Stephen Brown, Grocer, was born at Newcastle, afterwards Knighted and made Lord Mayor of London 1438. In which year happened a Great Famin, caused much by unseasonableness of wea∣ther, but more by some Huckstring husbandmen) who properly may be termed Knaves in Grain, Sir Stephen sent some ships to Dantz, whose sea∣sonable return with Rye, suddainly sunk grain to reasonable rates, whereby many a languishing life was preserved. He was one of the first Merchants who in want of Corn shewed the Londoners the way to the Barn-dore. I mean into Spruseland. Rob. Woodlark, Provost of King's Colledge in Cambridge in the Raign of Edward 4. bought 3 Tenements in Milne street and erected them
a small Colledge by the Name of St. Katharine's Hall. Memorable Persons. Machell Vivan, a Scoth-man (born near Ab∣berdeen) beneficed in this County within 3 miles of Alnwick. An Old Man (of 110 years of Age) was famous for a new growth of his hair, breed∣ing of three teeth in the space of 2 years, and reading of small Print without spectacles, where∣as 40 years before that time, he had used them for the biggest Print. He had 5 Children after he was 80 years of Age. Note, The Countess of Desmond (alive 1589) is said to have recovered her teeth, after she had cast them 3 severall times, and to have lived 140 years. —Anderson, Merchant in Newcastle, lost a Ring in the River, which being afterwards found in the Belly of a Fish was again restored to him. Noted Sheriffs. An. 25. Jo. Coupeland, (An. 20 E 3) took Dav. Bruce King of Scotland pri∣soner, in the Battle at Nevils-Cross, for which he was rewarded with Knighthood and 500l. per An. Note the Sheriffs of this Coun∣ty never accounted in the Exchequer untill 3. E. 6. An. 19. Fr. Russell, Knight, (Son to Fr. and Father to Edward Earl of Bed∣ford) married Julian Daughter to Sir Jo. Foster. He lost his life in a Tumult raised by the Scots (on a Truce-day) June 27, 1585.
Nottingham-shire. NOttingham-shire hath York-shire on the N. Linc. on the E. Leic. on the S. and Derby-shire on the W. The pleasantness thereof may be collected from the plenty of Noblemen, many having their Baronies, and more their Residence therein. This County affords the first and best Liquorish in England. There were 2 Ayries of Lannards lately found in Sherwood Forrest. These Hawks are the Natives of Saxony, which coming hither and breeding with Lanerets, proved as ex∣cellent in their Kind, when managed, as any which were brought out of Germany. Proverbs. I. Many talk of Robin Hood who never shot in his Bow. That is, many prate of Matters where∣in they have no skill. Robin Hood an excellent Archer and Arch-robber did chiefly reside in Sher∣wood Forrest in this County. II. To sell Robin Hoods penny-worths. That is, stoln goods under half their value. III. As wise as a man of Gotham. The usual Periphrasis of a Fool; yet Gotham (a Village in this County) breeds as wise people as any which causlessly laugh at their simplicity. IV.
The little Smith of Nottingham, who doth the work that no man can. This seems to be intended (by circumlocution) for no body, and by way of Sarcasm is applied to such who being conceited of their own skill, pretend to the atchieving of Impossibilities. Martyr. Th. Cranmer, born at Arse-lackton in this Coun∣ty, and bred in Jesus Colledg in Cambridge, became Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and at last (after some intermediate failings) valiantly suffered for the Truth at Oxford, March 22. An. 1556. After his whole body was reduced into Ashes, his heart was found intire and untouched, which is justly alleadged as an Argument of his cordial Integrity to the Truth, see Fox and my Eccl. History. Note that none suffered within this County in the Mari∣an days, which was imputed to the mild-temper of Nich. Heath, Arch-Bishop of York and Diocesan there∣of. Prelate since the Reformation. W. Chapell, born at Lexington, and bred in Chr. Colledge in Cambridge, was a Man of strict Conser∣vation, an Excellent Tutor and a most subtil Dis∣putant. He was chosen Provost of Trin. Colledge in Dublin, and afterwards B. of Cork and Rosse, frighted with the Rebellion in Ireland he came over into England, where he rather exchanged then eased his Condition, such the wofulness of our Civil Wars. He died 1649, and parted his Estate almost equally betwixt his own Kindred and distressed Ministers.
Capital Judges. Sir Jo. Markham, descended of an ancient Fami∣ly, was born at Markham. He was Knighted by E. 4. and was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the place of Sir Jo. Fortescue, of these one favoured the house of Lancaster, the other of York, both, the House of Justice betwixt party and party being Men of signal Integrity. I. Markham, at the Triall of Sir Th. Cook, (late Lord Mayor of London) for lending Money to Marg. Wife to Henry 6. directed the Jury to find it only Misprision of Treason, tho Sir Th. had been cast at Court before. The King highly displeased thereat, vowed that Sir Jo. should never sit on the Bench any more, and accordingly being outed of his Place, he lived privately but plentifully, the remainder of his Life, having fair Lands by Marg. his Wife (Daughter of Sir Sim. Leke of Co∣tham in this County) besides his own Estate. Seamen. Edw. Fenton, Brother to Sir Jeffery, was Servant to Queen Elizabeth and a Valiant Commander in Ireland, when O Neal and the Earl of Desmond troubled that Kingdom. He was Ambitious to discover the Northen unknown Passages, and after a long and dangerous Voyage, he returned to England, and being made Captain of one of her Majesties Men of War, he signalized his Valour in his Sea-Service against the Spaniards in 88. He died An. 1603.
Writers. W. Mansfield, a Dominican in Mansfield, was a great Philosopher, and defended Aquinas against H. Gan∣davensis. He flourished. 1320. William Nottingham, Provincial of the Augusti∣nian Order, wrote a Concordance on the Evange∣lists with other Books. He died 1336. Rob. Worsop, born at Worsop, was an Augustini∣an at Tickhill. He wrote amongst others a Book entitled the Entrance of the Sentences. Bale says he was a Bishop. He died 1360. Since the Reformation. Sir Jeffrey Fenton, Knight (for 20 years Privy Counseller in Ireland to Queen Elizabeth and King James) translated the History of Guicciardine into English, dedicating it to Queen Elizabeth. He died at Dublin 1680. Jo. Plough, a pious Minister, fled to Basil in the Reign of Queen Mary. He answered a Book a∣gainst the Marriage of Ministers, written by one Hoggard, a silly Hosier. He died ih the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. W. Brightman, born in Nott. bred in Cambridge, and beneficed at Haunes in Bedfordshire a, Charta∣ble Nonconformist, wrote a Commentary on the Re∣velation. He died dayly and died suddenly An. 16—. Memorable Persons. Rob. Hood, a Gentle Thief, robbed Peter to pay Paul plundring Clergymen, but relieving the
poor and distressed. His principal residence was in Shirewood Forrest in this County, tho his Bay is still remembred in York-shire. He complemented Passengers out of their Purses, tho he never asked the Keeper's leave for Killing of Deer, and dis∣posing of the Venison amongst the Vicinage. He played his pranks in the Reign of R. 1. about 1100. So much for Robin Hood. Th. Magnus, an exposed child, left by his Mo∣ther in the Parish of Newark, was found and edu∣cated by a Company of York-shire Clothiers, who gave him the name of Amang-us i. e. Amongst-us. But he growing afterwards a famous Scholar and Statesman took upon him the Name of Dr. Mag∣nus, and was famous thereby both at home and abroad. He was a great benefactor to the Town of his Nativity, and founded a far School there. He flourished (as I take it) under Henry. 8. Noted Sheriffs. An. 15 W. Hollis Knight, (called the Good Sir W. for his Hospitality and other Virtues) was Son to Sir W. Lord Mayor of London, father to Jo. Hollis Lord Houghton of Houghton, created Earl of Clare An. 22 Charles I, and Grandfather to the Right Hon∣ourable Jo. the present Earl of Clare. Rob. Pierpoint, Arm. was afterwards created Baron Pierpoint and Earl of Kingston upon Hull, An. 4 Car I. His Ancestors, coming over with the Conquerour, first fixed at Hurst Pierpoint in Sussex, and thence removed into this County. There was another Rob. who lived in great dignity under E. 3.
Oxford-shire. OXford-shire hath Bark-shire on the S. Glocester-shire on the W. Buckingham-shire on the E. Warwick-shire and Northampton-shire on the N. A plentifull County, whereof the Chief City Oxford was lately, for some years together a Court, a Garrison and an University. The Natural Com∣modities are Fallow Deer, the most ancient Park is said to have been at Woodstock in this County. Wood now in decay is relieved by Coals. For pre∣servation of Shot-over-woods it was alleadged by the University, That Oxford being one of the eyes of the Land, and Shot-over-woods the Hair of the eye lids, the loss thereof must needs prejudice the sight, with too much moisture flowing therein. As for Buildings, the Colleges in Oxford exceed the most in Christendome for the generality of their Structure, and equal any for the largeness of their Endowments. A moiety of their Founders were Prelates, who provided them the Patronages of many good Benefices. Of these Colleges Ʋniver∣sity is the Oldest, Pemb. the youngest, Christ-Church the greatest, Lincon. the least, Magdalen the neatest, Wadham the most uniform, New-College the strongest, and Jesus-College the poorest. New-College for the Southern, Exeter for Western,
Queens for Northern, Brazon-nose for North-Western men, St. John's for Londoners, Jesus for Welshmen; and at other Colleges almost indiffe∣rently for men of all Countries. Merton Famous for Schoolmen, Corpus-Christi for Linguists, Christs-Church for Poets, All-Souls for Orators, New-Col∣lege for Civilians, Brazen-nose for Disputants, Queens College for Metaphysicians, Exeter for a late Series of Regius Professors, Magdalen for an∣cient, St. Johns for modern Prelates. Corpus-Christi-College was formerly called the College of Bees, which industrious creatures were, as it seems, Aborigines from the first building of the College, and An. 1630 there was an incredible mass of Honey found over the Study of Ludovicus Vives that Mellifluous Doctor. The Library in some re∣spects equals any in Europe, and in most kinds exceeds all in England, standing as Diana amongst the Nymphs. In the infancy of Christianity, the Library of York bare away the Bell, founded by Arch-Bishop Egbert. Before the Dissolution of the Abbeys, that at Ramsey was the greatest Rabbin, abounding chiefly with Jewish Books. Guildhall Libra∣ry, founded by Richard Whittington, was deprived of 3 Cart loads of choice Manuscripts in the days of Edward 6. Since the Reformation that of Be∣net in Cambridge founded by Math. Parker, ex∣ceed any Collegiate Library in England. And of late the Library of that University, augmented with the Archi-episcopal Library of Lambeth, is grown the Second in the Land. Of Private Li∣braries that of Treas. Burleigh's was the best for the use of Statesmen, the Lord Lumlie's for an Historian, the Earl of Arundel's for a Herauld, Sir Rob. Cottens for an Antiquary, and Arch-Bishop-Usher's for a Divine, with many others as Lord
Brudnel's, Lord Hatton's &c. which were, routed in our Civil wars or transported into forreign parts. Oxford Library was founded by Humphry D. of Glocester, confounded in the Reign of Edward 6. and refounded by Sir Th. Bodley and the bounty of daily benefactors. As for the Kings Houses in this County. Wood∣stock is Justly to be preferred, where the Wood and Water-Nymphs might equally be Pleased in its Situation. Here Queen Elizabeth was Priso∣ner in the Reign of Queen Mary. Here she e∣scaped a dangerous fire. Here hearing a Milk∣maid merrily singing in the Park she wished for an exchange of her Condition with the Maid's. Here Henry 2. built a Labyrinth which is now vanished. Enston made by Th. Bushel Esq. some∣time Servant to Fr. Bacon Lord Verulam, is a Place by Nature pleasant and adorned with Art. Proverbs. I. You were born at Hogs-Norton. This is a Vil∣lage properly call Hoch-Norton, whose Inhabitants (it seems formerly) were so rustical in their be∣haviour, that clownish people are said to be born at Hogs-Norton. II. To take a Burford bait. That is, to be drunk. III. Banbury Zeal, Cheese and Cakes. Some would have Veal put for Zeal. IIII. He looks as the Devil over Lincoln. The De∣vil's picture did over-look Lincoln-College. It is ap∣pliable to envious persons. V. Lincoln-shire Te∣stons are gon to Oxford to study in Brazen-Nose. That is, Testons (now corruptly called Testers worth 6d.) were in the Reign of Henry 8. debased and so mixed with copper and brass that they
were not above 3s. 4d. the ounce, looking so red with the allay, that they blushed for shame, as conscious of their own corruption. VI. Send Verdingales to Broad Gates in Oxford. Verdingales formerly worn by women, pent-housed theirs Gowns far beyond their bodies, and were (as some say) a barricado against the assaults of Wan∣tons, but (as others affirm) a convenient cover of the fruits of wantonness, the first Inventress there∣of being known for a light hous-wife. These grew so great that their Wearers were to enter ordinary Doors side-ways, as the Scotch Pedlars do with their Packs on their backs. VII. Chronica sipenses, cum pugnent Oxonienses, Post aliquot menses volat ira per Anglinienses. Mark the Chronicles aright, When Oxford Scholars fall to fight Before many months expired England will with war be fired. By this are properly intended the Contests betwixt Scholars and Scholars, which were observed pre∣dictional, as if their Animosities were the Index of the Volume of the Land. There were shrewd Bicke∣rings betwixt the Southern and Northern Men in the University, not long before the bloody War of the Barons did begin. The like hapned twice under R. 2. before the fatal Fights betwixt Lan∣caster and York, tho there were no Broyls in Oxford before the late Civil Wars. Princes. Richard, Son to H. 2. and Queen Eleanor (was
the 6th. King since the Conquest) born in Oxford, 1157. Whilst a Prince he was undutiful to his Father, or to qualifie the Matter, over-dutiful to his Mother, whose Domestick Quarrels he always espoused. To expiate his offence, when King, he with Philip King of France undertook a Voyage to the Holy-Land, where through the Treachery of Templary Cowardise of the Greeks, diversity of the Climate and differences betwixt Christian Princes, much time was spent, a Mass of Money expended, many lives lost, some Honour atchieved but little Profit produced. Going to Palestine, he suffered Shipwrack and many Mischiefs on the coasts of Cyprus; com∣ing for England through Germany, he was tossed with a worse Land-Tempest, being (in pursuance of an old grudge betwixt them) taken Prisoner by Leo∣pold, D. of Austria; yet this Caeur de Lion, or Lion-Hearted King (for so was he commonly called) was no less Lion (tho now in a Grate) then when at Liberty, abating nothing of his high Spirit in his Behaviour. The Duke did not undervalue his Royal Prisoner, prizing his Person at 10 years pur∣chase, according to the (then) yearly Revenue of the English) Crown. This Ransom of 100000 pounds being paid, he came home; first reformed himself, and then mended many abuses in the Land. He was afterwards shot with an Arrow in France, 1199. Edmund, Youngest Son to King Edward 1. by Queen Marg. was born at Woodstock, Aug. 5. 1301. He was afterwards created E. of Kent, and was Tu∣tor to his Nephew King Edward 3. In whose Reign he was beheaded at Winchester, March 19. for that he never dissembled his Brotherly affection towards his Brother deposed, and went about when he was murdered before, (not knowing so much)
to enlarge him out of Prison, perswaded thereunto by such as covertly practised his Destruction. Edward, Eldest Son of King Edward 3. was born at Woodstock and bred under his Father in Martial Discipline. He was afterwards called the Black Prince, from his Atchievements dismal and black, as they appeared to the eyes of his Enemies whom he constantly overcame. He married Joan Coun∣tess of Salisbury and Kent, whose Garter (which now flourisheth again) hath lasted longer than all the Wardrobes of the Kings and Queens of England, since the Conquest, continued in the Knighthood of that Order. This Prince died before his Father at Cant. An. 46. Aet. An. Dom. 1376. whose Mai∣den success attended him to the Grave, as never soiled in any undertakings. He left 2 Sons Edward and Richard afterward King, both born in France. Th. of Woodstock, Youngest Son of E. 3. and Queen Philippa, was Earl of Buck. and Duke of Gloc. crea∣ted by his Nephew King Rich. who summoned him to Parliament. He married Isabel Daughter of Humphrey Bohun E. of Essex, in whose Right he be∣came Constable of England. He observed the King too nearly and checked him too sharply; whereupon he was conveyed to Calis and there Strangled. By whose Death King Richard being freed from the causless fear of an Unkle, became exposed to the cunning Plots of his Cosen German, Henry Duke of Lancaster, who at last deposed him. This Th. founded a fair Colledge at Playsie in Essex, where he was afterwards buried, his Body having been since translated to Westminster. Anne Beauchamp, born at Cavesham, was Daugh∣ter to Rich. Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and marri∣ed to Rich. Nevil, Earl of Sarisbury and Warwick, commonly called the Make-King. In his own and
her Husband's right she was possessed of 114. Man∣ners. Isa. her eldest Daughter was married to Geo. Duke of Clarence, and Anne her younger to Ed∣ward Prince of Wales, Son of H. 6. and afterwards to King Richard 3. Her Husband being killed at Barnet fight, all her Land by Act of Parliament was setled on her 2 Daughters. Being attainted on the account of her Husband, she was forced to flye to the Sanctuary at Beauly in Hant-shire, and thence to the North, where she lived privately and in a mean condition. Saints. St. Frideswide, was born in Oxford, being Daugh∣ter to Didan the Duke thereof. 'Tis said that one Algarius a young Noble man was struck blind up∣on his attempting her Chastity. She was after∣wards Abbess of a Monastery erected by her Father in the same City, which since is become part of Christs Church, where her body lyeth buried. An. 1. Eliz. the Scholars of Oxford took up the body of the Wife of Pet. Martyr, who former∣ly had been disgracefully buried in a dung-hill, and interred it in the Tomb with the dust of this Saint, with this Inscription (as Saunders affirms) Here lyes Religion with Superstition: and there was more than 800 years betwixt their several deaths. St. Frideswide dying 739 and is remembred in the Romish Calender on 19 Oct. St. Edwold, Younger brother to St Edmond King of the E. Angles, so cruelly Martyred by the Danes, and after his death, Edwold being his right Heir, declined the Crown and retired to Cornhouse-Monastery at Dorchester, where he was
interred and had in great veneration for his re∣puted Miracles after his death, which happen∣ed 871. St. Edward the Confessor was born at Islip. He was afterwards King of England, whose Reign was attended with Peace and Prosperity. Fa∣mous for the first founding of Westminster-Abbey, and for many other worthy Atchievements. He lived and dyed Single, never carnally conversing with St. Edith his Queen, which opened a Door for forreign Competitors, and occasioned the Conquest of this Nation. He died 1065. and ly∣eth buried in Westminster-Abbey. Cardinals. Robert Pullen, (or Bullen) came over from Paris in the Reign of Henry 1. when Learning ran low in Oxford.S. N. He improved his utmost power with the King and Prelates for the restoring thereof. He is said to have begun to read the Scriptures at Oxford which were grown out of fashion in England. Afterwards Pope Innocent courteously sent for him to Rome. Celestine created him Cardinal of St. Eusebius, 1144. Lucius 2. made him Chancellor of the Church of Rome. He died about 1150. Th. Joyce, or Jorce, a Dominican and D. D. in Oxford,S. N. became Provincial of his Order. Afterwardes Pope Clement 5. created him Cardinal of St. Sabine. He had 6 Brethren Dominicans, who altogether were by one uncharitably resembled to the 7. Sons of Seeva which were Exorcists; however they may be termed a Week of Brethren, whereof this Ru∣bricated Cardinal was the Dominical Letter.
There want not those who conceive great Vertue in the youngest Son of these seven, and that his touch was able to cure the Popes Evill. Th. flou∣rished 1310. and he lyes buried in his Convent in Oxford. Prelates. Herbert Losing, born in Oxford, Son of an Abbot, gave 1900l. to King William Rufus for the Bishoprick of Thetford, having also purchased his Fathers preferment. Hence the Verse Filius est Praesul, Pater Abbas, Simon uterque, both be∣ing guilty of Simony. Herbert afterwards went to Rome (no such clean washing as in the water of Tyber) and returned thence as free from fault as when first born. Thus cleansed from the Le∣prosie of Simony, he removed his Bishoprick from Thetford to Norwich, laid the first Stone and in effect finished the fair Cathedral therein, and built 5 beautifull Parish Churches. He died 1119. See Suff. Owen Oglethorp, Pres. of Magdalen Colledg.AMP. Dean of Windsor, and Bishop of Carlile (in the Reign of Queen Mary) crowned Queen Elizabeth which the rest of his Order refused to do, and by her deprived for his ensuing Stubbornness distilled in him by other Popish Bishops, who abused his good Nature. He died of an Apoplexy 1559. Since the Reformation. Jo. Ʋnderhill, born in Oxford and bred in New Colledg, was Chaplain to Queen Elizabeth, and by her made Bishop of Oxford after that See had
been Vacant 22 years. He died 1592. and lyeth buried in Christ Church. Jo. Bancroft, born at Ascot, was Mr. of Ʋni∣versity College in Oxford and setled the ancient Lands of that Foudation. Being afterward Bishop of Oxford, he renewed no Leases, but let them run out for the Benefit of his Successor. He obtained the Royalty of Shot-over for, and annexed the Vicaridge of Cudsen to his Bishoprick; where he built a fair Palace and a Chappel at the cost of 3500l. But that Palace was reduced to its first Principles, being burnt in the late Civil Wars. He died 1640. Statesmen. Sir Dudley Carleton, Knight, bred in Oxford, was Secretary to Sir Ralph Winwood Ambassador in the Low Countries when King James resigned the Cautionary Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his learning, that afterwards King Charles I. employed him for 20 years to∣gether Ambassador in Venice, Savoy and the Low-Countries; And created him Baron of Imber∣court in Surrey, then Visc. Dorchester. He mar∣ried for his 2d Wife, the Daughter of Sir Hen. Glenham, the Relict of Paul Visc. Banning. He succeeded the Lord Conway in the Office of Secreta∣ry of State. He died 163.. Souldiers. Sir Jo. Norris, a most accomplished General, had 3 Horses is one day killed under him in a Battle against the Scots, when in France he brought off a small handful of English from a great arm∣ful
of Enemies, fighting as he retreated, so that always his Rear affronted the Enemies. Having afterwards a great Command in Ireland he found it far harder to find out, than fight his Enemies. At last a great Lord of an opposite Party to Sir Jo. being made Lieuetenant of Ireland, 'tis con∣ceived his working Soul broke the cask of his body, as wanting a vent for his Grief and Anger; for going up into his Chamber, at the first hear∣ing of the News, he suddenly died 1597. His ancient Father dying soon after. Upon the News of his death, Queen Elizabeth wrote a Consola∣tory Letter to the Lady Marg. his Mother, whom her Majesty used to call Her own Crow; in which▪ was this Endearing Expression, If it be true that Society in Sorrow works diminution, We do assure you by this true Messenger of our Mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous Affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, than Gratefulness of Memory of his Service past hath wrought in us his Soveraign an apprehension of Our miss for so Wor∣thy a Servant. His Father Hen. Lord Norris was descended from the Viscount Lovels, and his Grandfather died in a manner Martyr for the Queens Mother Margaret aforesaid; his Mother was Daughter to Jo. Lord Williams of Tame, Keeper of Queen Elizabeth whilst in Restraint under her Sister, and civil to Her in those dan∣gerous days. His eldest Brother William was Mar∣shall of Barwick, and Father to Francis, afterwards Earl of Bark-shire. He had 4 Brothers more, viz. Sir Th. President of Munster, who died of a small wound which being neglected turned to a Gan∣grene. Sir Hen. who died about the same time, in the same manner, Maximilian, who was slain in the War of Britain. Then Sir Edw. who led
the Front at the taking of the Groyn, fought so valianly at the siege of Ostend, and of all the 6 only survived his Parents. Sir Fra. Knowlls, Treasurer to the Queens Hous∣hold, and Knight of the Garter, was descended from Sir Robert that Conquering Commander in France. He was an Exile in the dayes of Queen Ma∣ry. He married—Cary Sister to Henry Lord Hunsdon and Cosen German to Queen Elizabeth, having Mary Bullen for her Mother. Thus the Husband was allied to the Queen in Conscience (Fellow-sufferers for the Protestant cause) the Wife in Kindred. Their chief dwelling was Grays in this County. Their Issue was Sir Hen. whose Daughter and Heir was married to the Lord Paget. Sir W. Treasurer of the Houshold to King James, by whom he was created Baron Knowlls 1603. Visc. Wallingford 1616. and by Charles I. (An. 1 regn.) Earl of Banbury. Sir R. father to Sir Rob. of Greys now living. Sir Fr. a Member of the late long Parliament, since dead, aged 99. Sir Th. a Commander in the Low Coun∣tries. Lettice second Wife to R. Dudley Earl of Leicester, and (by a former Husband) mother to R. Devereux Earl of Essex. These 2 last mentioned Families being Contem∣poraries, and High in State and Stomack, often Justled together, and no wonder if Oxford-shire wanted room for them, when all England could not hold them together. The Norrices were Sons of Mars, and never out of military Employ∣ment. The Knowlls were Mercurial, conversing constantly at Court, and were rather Valient men, then any great Souldiers. The Norrices got more Honour abroad, the Knowlls more Profit at Home. There was once a challenge passed betwixt them
at certain exercises, to be tried between the 2 Fraternities, the Queen and their Aged Fathers being to be the Spectators and Judges, till quick∣ly it became a flat quarrel betwixt them, which lasted for many years, and the Knowlls are su∣spected to have done the Norrices bad offices, which at last did tend to their mutual hurt. Writers. Jo Hanvile, proceeded M. A. in Ox∣ford, then studied in Paris,AMP. and travelled over most parts in Christendom. He is commonly called Archithrenius, or Prince of Lamen∣tation. He wrote a Book wherein he bemoaned the Vices of his Age. He flourished under King Jo. 1200, and died as some conceive a Benedictine of St. Albans. Jo. of Oxford, surnamed by Boethius, à Vado Boum, was owned by him as the next Historian to Jeffrey Monmouth, in Age and Industry. He was a great Anti-Becketist, being Dean of old Sarum and Chap∣lin to H. 2. and was by him employed among others, to give an account to the Pope of the Kings carri∣age in the business of Becket. He was preferred An. 1175 Bishop of Norwich, where he repaired his Cathedral lately defaced with fire, and built a fair Alms-house. He built also Trinity Church in Ips∣wich. He died about 1200. Rob Bacon, D. D in Oxford became a Domini∣can Frier, was for his Sermons highly esteemed by Henry 3. He was Lepidus & Cynicus, and a most professed Enemy to Pet. Roach Bishop of Winchester. He was a great Divine. I behold him as the Senior of all the Bacons, which like Tri∣butary Streams disembogued themselves with all
the credit of their actions, into Roger Bacon, who in process of time hath monopolized the Honour of all his sirname-sakes in Oxford. This Rob. died 1248. Rob. of Oxford an Adorer of Aquinas his contem∣porary, wrote against the College of Sorbonne. He flourished under Henry 3. 1270. Jeffrey Chaucer born (probably) at Woodstock▪ was a terse and elegant Poet, the Homer of his Age, and refined the Engish Tongue. A great Mathematician, Witness his Book de Sphaerâ. He was living 1402. being Contemporary with Gower. Since the Reformation. Th. Lydgate, born at Alkerton and bred in Ox∣ford, was Eminent for his Learning and Obscure for his Living. An admirable Mathematician, wit∣ness his Learned Treatises De Naturâ Coeli, and de variis Annorum Formis, &c. He opposed the opi∣nion of Scaliger, and was by him jeered for a Pro∣phet, having somewhat traded in the Apocalyptical Divinity; yet 'tis said Lydgate had the best in the Contest. He was Rector of Alkerton. His low Condition may be imputed to these Causes. 1. The Barrenness of his speculative Studies. 2. His own Nature, being inclined to Solitude. 3. The death of P. Henry, whose Library-Keeper he was. 4. His Disaffection to Church Discipline and Cere∣monies, tho such wrong his Memory who represent him an Anabaptist. His Modesty was as great as his want, which he would not make known to any. Sir W. Boswell, and B. Williams were great Friends to him. He died about 1644▪
Sir Richard Baker, Knight, was High Sheriff of this County An. 18. Jac. 1621. his Estate being encumbered, he fled in his old Age for shelter to his studies and devotions. He wrote an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, and a Chronicle of our English Kings. He died about the begin∣ning of the Civil Wars. W. Whateley, born in (afterwards Minister of) Banbury, and bred in Cambridge, was a good Lin∣guist, Philosopher, Mathematician, and Divine. He wrote a Book entitled the Bride-bush, which is variously construed. He died 1639. Jo. Balle, born at Casfigton, bred B. D. in Ox∣ford, was Preacher at Whitmore in Stafford-shire. His Treatise of Faith cannot sufficiently be com∣mended. He was a Humble, Pious and good Natured Christian. When his friend having had a fall from a Horse, said that he never had the like deliverance, Yea (said Mr. Balle) and a hun∣dred times when you never fell. He hated all New Lights. Living comfortably he relieved others charitably, left his children competently and died piously 1640. W. Chillingworth, born in Oxford, and bred in Trinity College, was a subtil Disputant. Going beyond the Seas, he was in some sort reconciled to the Church of Rome, but returning afterwards into England, in testimony of his true Conversi∣on, he wrote a Book entitled The Religion of Pro∣testants a safe way to Salvation. He was taken Prisoner by the Parliaments Forces at Arundel-Castle and safely conducted to Chichester, where hard usage hastned his death. Dan. Featly, D. D. born in or near to Oxford, made the Speech in Corpus-Christi-College at the Funeral of Dr. Reynalds. He was good in the
Schools and in the Pulpit, and a happy disputant against Papists. In the conference with F. Fisher who was caught in a Net cast by Dr. White, Dr. Featly did help strongly to draw that Net to the shore. He was in, but (it seems) not of the late Assembley, his body being with them but his heart at Oxford. Being discovered he was imprisoned in the College at Chelsey where he died 1643. Jo. White, (originally from Hant-shire) born at Staunton-St John and bred in Oxford, was Minister at Dorchester for about 40 years, in which time he expounded the whole Scripture once over and half over again. That Town was enriched by his Wisdom; Knowledge causing Piety, Piety breed∣ing Industry, and Industry Plenty unto it. A beg∣gar then was not to be seen in the Town. He absolutely commanded his own Passions and the Purses of the Parishoners, and was free from Co∣vetousness. He had a Patriarchal influence both in Old and New-England. Yet towards the end of his days Factions grew in his stock, then disloyal persons would not pay the due respect to the Crown of his old Age. He was chosen one of the Assembly of Divines. He married the sister of Dr. Burges, by whom he left 4 Sons, and died quietly at Dorchester 163.. Benefactors to the Publick. Th. Tisdall, of Glimpton Esq. dying 1610. be∣queathed 5000l. to Geo. Abbot then Bishop of London and others to purchase Lands for the maintainance of 7 Fellows and 6 Scholars. which Money was expended for the purchase of 250 l. per An. and a new College was erected therewith by the Name of Pembroke College. Th. gave ma∣ny
other charitable Legacies, and deserved well of Abbington School, founding an Usher therein. Memorable Persons. Anne Green, a person unmarried having been ex∣ecuted at Oxford 1650. for killing her Child, re∣covered perfect health. Charitable people inter∣pret her so miraculous preservation a Compurga∣tor of her Innocence. Noted Sheriffs. An. 11. W. Taverner, Arm. in the year of his Sherivalty came to Oxford, went up into the pulpit at St. Maries with a sword by his side, and a gold chain about his neck, where he made a Sermon to the University. 18 Rob. Doyle Knight, in whose year the Black Assizes were at Oxford, wherein the Prisoners cau∣sed the death of the Judge (Chief Baron Bell) the Sheriff, some of the Lawyers, many of the Justi∣ces, and most of the Jury, besides other persons of Quality there present. It was generally im∣puted to the stench of the Prisoners cloathes and bodies. 31 W. Clarke, Arm. Son to W. Sher. 10 Jac. and grandchild to Sir Jo. of Northam. 21. Hen∣ry 8. 36. Rich. Fenys, bred in Oxford was lineally desended from Ja. Lord Say and Seal Treasurer of England in the days of Henry 6. was created An. 1 Ja. Lord Say and Seal. He died 1612. W. Fenys his eldest Son was since created Visc. Say and Seal and is still alive.
An. 3. Rich. Wenmam was by King Charles I. created, first Baron of Wen∣man of Chilmaynam in the County of Dublin, and then Visc. Wenman of Tuant in the County of Galloway, both in the Kingdom of Ire∣land. Rutland-shire. RƲtland-shire the least County in England, is both pleasant and fruitful, and in Form almost Orbicular. The name is q. Redland from the co∣lour of the Soyl. As for Buildings, Burgley on the Hill belonged formerly to the Lords Harring∣tons, but since so beautified by the D. of Buck∣ingham, that it was inferiour to few for the House, superiour to all for the Stable. It was demolished in the Civil War. Of Wonders, this is one, that this County had never an absolute or entire Abby therein, producing only Okeham and Brook, two small Appurtenances to Convents in other Counties. The cause whereof seems to have been, Ed. the Confessor's giving all Rutland to Westminster Church, which tho rescinded by William the Conqueror, yet other Convents perchance might be scrupulous to accept what once belonged to another Founda∣tion.
Proverbs. I. Rutland Raddleman, A poor sort of Trader, that sells red stones or Oker for the marking of sheep. Saints. St. Tibba (a Saxon) was in the times of Su∣perstition reputed the Patroness of Hawking, and worshipped as a second Diana; she lived a Virgin and Anchoress at Dormundcaster, and died with the reputation of holiness about 660. Benefactors to the Publick. W. Brown Esq. twice Alderman of Stamford, was descended from the ancient Family of the Browns of Toll-Thorp in this County. He built the beautiful Steeple, with a great Part of the Church in Stamford, (where he lyeth buried). He erected An. 1493. the Old Bead-house in that Town, to which he gave the Mannor of Swayfeld worth 400 l. per An. &c. Since the Reformation. Jo. Harington, Senior, son to Sir Ja. was born at Exton, the residence of that ancient Family. He divided his eminent Hospitality betwixt Rut∣land and Warwick-shire. He was a grand benefact∣or to Sidney-College, King Ja. created him Baron of Exton, & his Lady was Governess to Princess Eli∣zabeth whom this Lord afterwards attended when she went over to be married to Frederick Prince
Palatine; after which he died at Wormes in Ger∣many 1613. The Lord Jo. his Son did not sur∣vive him a year; both of them signally eminent, the one a Pattern for all good Fathers, the other for all gracious Sons. Thus the Male issue of that Honorable Family expired. Memorable Persons. —Jeffrey, born in Okeham, never arrived at a full ell in stature, tho his Father was a pro∣per man, and was presented to the Dutchess of Buckingham, as a very great Rarity, being then but a foot and a half in height, and a very well proportioned dwarf about 9 years of Age. The Dutchess raised him to a considerable degree of Eminency, when after many special marks of her Favour, she caused him to be presented in a cold baked pye to King Charles and Queen Mary at an Entertainment. Hence living at Court, he grew so high that he lookt not down upon his Father, until by a sound correction (at the Kings command) his Mind was reduced into somewhat nearer pro∣portion with his Body. He was a Captain in the Army in the late civil Wars, and afterwards went over to wait on the Queen in France. He shot one Mr. Crofts who had prvoked and account∣ed him the object rather of his contempt than An∣ger: whereupon he was imprisoned. And so I take my leave of Jeffery the least Man of the least County in England. Noted Sheriffs. An. 16. Christopher Brown Arm. came with King Henry 7. and assisted him a∣gainst King Richard 3. for which good
Service King Henry 8. by Letters Patents Grant∣ed to Francis Brown Son of this Sheriff, That he should not be impanelled on any Jury nor serve in Office of Sheriff or Escheator in any County, and also that he should be covered in the Kings presence. Tolethorpe (the chief place of residence at this day of Christopher Brown Esq. who bore the Office of Sheriff in this County 1647) was by Deed conveyed to Jo. Brown by Th. Burton Knight An. 15. Edward 3. There was Brown Lord Mayor of London 1479. the Son of Jo. Brown of Oak∣ham. Shrop-shire. SHrop-shire hath Cheshire on the North. Staf∣ford-shire on the East Worcester, Hereford and Radnor-shire. on the South. Montgomery and Denby-shire on the West. It is in length 34 and in breadth 26 miles. A large and lovely County, ge∣nerally fair and fruitful, plentifully producing all things necessary for mans sustenance, but chiefly abounding with Iron and Coale at Mendip Bedworth, &c. As for Manufactures, the County has none her Original, but is supplied with Welsh-Freeses brought to Oswastre the Staple of that commodity. For Buildings, Shrop-shire may seem on the West divided from Wales with a Wall of continued Castles. Mr. Speed who alloweth 186 Castles in England, accounteth 32 in this County, which ha∣ving
been formerly serviceable whilst Shrop-shire was the Verge of English Dominions, are now neg∣lected, this Shire being almost in the midst of England since Wales was annexed thereunto. Of the Houses of the Gentry, many are Fair and handsome, none amount to an extraordinary Emi∣nency. In this Shire there is a Spring at Pitch∣ford which hath an oyly matter upon the Water thereof, which being Bituminous is a great comfort to the Nerves. Proverbs. I. He that fetcheth a Wife from Shrewsbury, must carry her into Stafford-shire, or else must live in Cumberland. That is a Shrew must be beaten with a Staff, &c. II. The Case is altered quoth Plowden. 'Tis said that Plowden a great Lawyer of this Coun∣ty, being of the Romish Perswasion, some Setters trapanned him (pardon the Prolepsis) to hear Mass, but afterwards Plowden understanding that the Pretender to Officiate was no Priest, but a Lay-man (on design to make a Discovery) O! the Case is al∣tered quoth Plowden, No Priest no Mass. Princes. Richard Plantagenet, Second Son to King Ed. 4. and Eliz. his Queen, was born at Shrewsbury, 1472. He was created Duke of York and affianced to Anne Daughter and Heir to Jo. Mowbray D. of Norfolk, but before the Nuptials were Solemnized his cruel Uncle the Duke of Glocester married him to a Grave in the Tower of London. The obscuri∣ty of his Burial gave the advantage to the report that he lived in Perkin Warbeck, one of the Idols
which put Henry 7. to some Danger and more Trouble before he could finally suppress him. Geo. Plantag. Youngest Son to E. 4. and Eliz. his Queen, was born at Shrewsbury, and lived but a ve∣ry short time, being like Plautus his Solstitial Flow∣er Qui repentinò ortus repentinò occidit. Saints. St. Milburgh, Daughter to Meroaldus Prince of Mercia, gave the fair Mannor of Wenlock in this County, (which was assigned to her for his Porti∣on) to the Poor, and living a Virgin, she built a Monastery in the same place, answering her Name, which being interpreted is Good to Burgh or Town. She died about 664. Some 400 years after in the Reign of W. the Conqueror, her Corps (discovered by Miracles wrought thereby) is said to have been taken up sound and uncorrupted. St. Oswald King of Northumberland was slain by Penda the Pagan King of the Mercians, at a place called after his name, Oswaldstre in this County 635. He had been always Pious and exceeding charitable to the Poor. His Arm cut off, it seems, from the rest of his Body remained, said Bede, whole and incorrupted, kept in a Silver Case in St. Pet. Church at Bamborough, whilst his Corps was first buried at Peterborough, and afterwards (in the Danish Persecution) translated to Bergen in Flan∣ders, where it still remaineth. The 5th. of August in our Calender was consecrated to his Memory, save that the Thanksgiving for Gowrie's Conspira∣cy made bold to justle him out all the Reign of King James.
Confessors Th. Gataker, (a Branch of an ancient Family at Gataker-Hall, in this County, from the time of King Edward the Confessor,) was bred in the Tem∣ple, and afterwards present at the Examination of persecuted People in the Reign of Queen Mary. Their hard usage made him pity their persons, and admirable Patience to approve their Opinions. His Parents perceiving his inclination, used all possible means to divert the same by sending him beyond the Seas, and providing liberally for him; then (these proving ineffectual) by recalling his Person, and reducing his Allowance, all which would not do. He afterwards studied Divinity and became Pastor of St. Edmunds in Lumbard-street London where he died An.—leaving Th. his learned Son (of whom formerly among the Writers in London) heir to his Pains and Piety. Prelates. Rob. of Shrewsbury preferred B. of Bangor, in the Reign of K. Jo. 1197. was afterward taken Pri∣soner in his own Cathedral Church, by the King, waging War against Leoline P. of Wales, and en∣joyned to pay 300 Hawks for his Ransom, which was more considerable than a Brace of Grey-Hounds, the late Ransom of an English Noble-man (in the Reign of King Ch. I.) About that time the Men of Norway, possessed the Isle of Anglesea, could best provide him the best and the most. Besides in Pembrook-shire there were Aryes of Peregrines which bred in great plenty. This Bishop ordered by his Will that he should be buried in the middle of the Market place of Shrewsbury. This may be imputed either to his Humility, or fear of future Sacriledge, during the Wars betwixt the English and Welsh. He died 1215.
Rob. Burnel, Son to Rob. and Brother to Hugh Lord Burnel, whose prime Seat was at Acton-Burnel-Castle in this County, was by E. 1. preferred B. of Bath and Wells, and first Treasurer, then Chan∣cellor of England. He caused the Court of Chan∣cery to be kept at Bristol for the more convenient management of the Welsh affairs. Having acquired great Riches, he is supposed to have rebuilt (for his Heirs) the Castle of Acton Burnel on his own expence, as he built for his Successors, the beautiful Hall at Wells, the biggest Room of any Bishops Palace in England, pluckt down by Sir Jo. Gabos (afterwards executed for Treason) in the Reign of E. 6. after a good settlement of the English and Welsh affairs, this Bishop was employed in some business about Scotland; in the Marches whereof he died, 1292. and was buried in his own Cathe∣dral. Walter de Wenlock Abbot of Westminster was Treasurer of England to E. 1. He died at Peri∣ford in Gloc. 1307 and was buried in his Church at Westminster, where Abbas Walterus non fuit Aus∣terus is part of his Epitaph. Rob. of Shrewsbury was An. 3. E. 3. preferred Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being consecrated without the Popes privity, he paid a large sum to expiate his presumption. He bestowed on his Ca∣thedral a Chest Port-cullis-like barred with iron, able to hold out a siege in the view of such as be∣held it, which notwithstanding was forced open by some Thieves in the Raign of Queen Elizabeth. He erected and endowed a spacious Structure for the Vicars-Choral of his Cathedral, to inhabit to∣gether. Having made such a Palace for his Vicars, he was necessitated in some sort to enlarge the Bishops Seat, which he beautified and fortified Cas∣tle-wise.
He disafforrested Mendip, and died 1363 being buried in his Cathedral, where his Statute is done to the life. Rob. Mascal, born (probably) and a Carmelite in Ludlow, was bred in Oxford and became for his Piety and Learning, Confessor to King Henry 4. and Councellour to Henry 5. He was one of the 3 English Prelates which went to (and one of the 2 which returned alive from) the Council of Con∣stance. He died 1416. being buried in the Church of White-friers London, to which he had been a great Benefactor. Rich. Talbot, of honourable Parentage, was bro∣ther to Jo. first Earl of Shrewsbury. He was con∣secrated Arch-Bishop of Dublin in Irland 1417. and was Privy Councellour to Henry 5 and 6. twice Chief Justice and once Chancellour of Ireland. He founded 6 Petty Canons and 6 Choristers in his Church, and wrote a Book against Ja. Earl of Or∣mond, wherein he detected his abuses during his Lieutenancy in Ireland. He died 1449. and lyeth buried in St Patricks in Dublin. He had refu∣sed the Arch-Bishoprick of Armagh tho a higher place. Geo. Day, Provost of King's College in Cambridge, was preferred Bishop of Chichester 1543. A per∣tinacious Papist, who tho he made some kind of recantation (which is entered in the Diary of E. 6.) yet either the same was not satisfactory, or else he relapsed into his errours again, for which he was deprived, but restored again by Queen Mary. He died 1556. Whose Brother
Since the Reformation. W. Day, a Zealous Protestant (bred in Cambridge) requested of his Brother some Mony to buy books &c. therewith, and was answered with this denial, That he thought it not fit to spend the Goods of the Church on him who was an Enemy of the Church. Yet he found a Friend nearer than a Brother. He was Proctor of Cambridge 1558. and afterwards was made by Queen Elizabeth Prov. of Eaton, Dean of Windsor, and Bishop of Winchester, and having enjoyed that See scarcely a whole year, he died 1596. Statesmen. Sir Th. Bromley, born at Bromley, of a right an∣cient Family, was Solicitor Gen. to Queen Elizabeth before he was 40 and afterwards Lord Chancellour of England 1579. before he was 50 years old; of great Learning and Integrity. He died 1587. Learning in Law may seem to run in the Veins of that name, which since hath had a Baron of the Exchequer of his Alliance. Sir Clem. Edmunds, born at Shrawardine and bred in Oxford, generally skilled in all Arts and Scien∣ces, (Witness his Translation of, and Illustrations on Caesar's Commentaries) was Clerk of the Coun∣cil to King James, Knighted by him, and at last preferred Secretary of State, tho he acted not therein, being prevented by death happening 16.. He lyes buried at Preston in Northam. were he purchased a fair estate which his Grand∣child doth possess at this day.
Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Edmond Plowden Arm. born at Plowden, wrote lear∣nedly on the Common Law. He was a man of emi∣nent Integrity. He was Treasurer for the Ho∣nerable Company of the Middle Temple An. 1572. when their Magnificent Hall was built: He being a good advancer thereof. He died 1584. and lyes buried in the Quire of Temple Church in Lon∣don. Sir Jo. Walter, Son to Edm. Chief Justice of S. Wales, was born at Ludlow. An eminent Law∣yer and Judge. When a Pleader, he suffered not good men to be born down by slanderers, poor men by more Potent, Learned men by the igno∣rant. Sir Jo was passionate, Judge Walter was most Patient and grave; and mery enough for a Judge as he told Judge Denham. He was outed of his place, when Chief Baron of the Exche∣quer about the illegality of the Loan as I take it. He was a great Benefactor to Jesus College in Ox∣ford and died 1630. in the Parish of Savoy, be∣queathing 20l. to the poor thereof. Edward Litleton, born at Mounslow was Eldest Son to Sir Edward one of the Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of N. Wales. He was bred in Christ Church in Oxford, where he proceed∣ed Batchelor of Arts. He was preferred one of the Justices of N. Wales, Recorder of London and Sollicitor to King Charles I. and afterwards Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Privy Councellour, thence advanced to be Lord Keeper and Baron of Mounslow. He died in Oxford and was buried in Christs-Church, 1645.
Souldiers Sir Jo. Talbot born at Blackmore, was Lord Talbot and Strange, from his paternal Extraction, Lord Furnival and Verdon (by Marriage with Joan Daughter of Th. de Nevil) and E. of Shrewsbury in England and Weisford in Ireland, by creation of King Henry 6. This is that Talbot, so famous for his Sword, or rather whose Sword was so famous for his Arm that used it. A Sword with bad La∣tin upon it, viz. Sum Talboti pro vincere inimicos meos, but good steel within it, which constantly conquered where it came, insomuch that the bare Fame of his approach frighted the French from the Siege of Burdeaux. Being victorious for 24 years together; success failed him at last, charging the Enemy near Castilion, on unequal termes, where he was slain with a Shot July, 17. 1453. The Victori∣es of the English in France were buried with the Body of this Earl, which lyes at White-Church in this County. Whose Son Sir Jo. Talbot, (Visc. Lisle in right of his Mo∣ther) was slain with his Father, who had advised him by an escape to reserve himself for future for∣tune, but he craved to be excused, and would not on any termes be perswaded to forsake his Fa∣ther. He surpassed Emilius the Roman General (who being pressed with Hanibal's Forces, was re∣solved to die, and not come again under the Judgment of the People of Rome) in that Sir Jo. was young, unhurt and able to escape, and in no wise answe∣rable for the daies misfortune, Aemilius, old, grie∣vously wounded and accountable for the overthrow received.
Writers. Rob. of Shrewsbury, wrote the Life and Miracles of St. Winfride. He flourished 1148. Dav. of Chirbury, born in Chirbury, a Carmelite, and (according to Leland) a Famous Divine, was made B. of Drummore in Ireland. His Writings were either few or obscure. He died and was bu∣ried at Ludlow, 1420. Since the Reformation. Rob. Langeland, a Protestant in Judgment (tho he lived 150 years before the general Reformation) was born at Mortimer's Clibery, bred a Priest, and one of the first followers of Wickliffe, wanting nei∣ther Wit nor Learning, Witness his Book entituled The Vision of Pierce Plough-man, highly commended by Mr. Selden. He flourished under Edward 3. An. 1369. Th. Churchyard, born in Shrewsbury, about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, wrote a Book in Verse, of the Worthiness of Wales, taking in Shrop-shire. He died about 11 Elizabeth 1570. His Epitaph being Come Alecto lend me thy Torch, To find a Church-Yard in a Church-Porch: Poverty and Poetry his Tomb doth enclose, Wherefore good Neighbours be merry in Prose. Th. Holland, D. D. born in the Marches of Wales, bred in, and Rector of Exeter Colledge, in Cam∣bridge, was so much addicted to Study, that the Scholar in him almost devoured all other Relations,
and being well acquainted with the Fathers, succee∣ded Dr. Lawr. Humphride in the place of Regius Professor. His solemn Valediction of the Fellows (when occasion) was, I commend you to the Love of God and to the hatred of Popery and Superstition. His Extemporaries were often better than his pre∣meditations. He died 1612. and was buried in Ox∣ford. Abraham Whelock, born in White-Church Parish, Arabick Professor and Minister of St. Sepulchres in Cambridge, admirable his knowledge in the Orien∣tal Tongues; amongst the Western, he was well versed in the Saxon. Witness his Edition of Bede▪ He translated the New Testament into Persian, and printed it, hoping that it might tend to the Con∣version of that Country. He died 1654. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir Roger Achley, born at Stanwardine was Mayor of London 1511. Observing that poor People, who never have more than they need will sometimes need more than they have, pepared Leaden-Hall, (the Common-Garner and stored up much Corn therein, collecting from the present Plenty, a relief against an ensuing Famine. Since the Reformation. Sir Rowland Hill, born at Hodnet, was a Mer∣cer in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor 1549. He gave maintainance to a fair school at Dray∣ton in ths County, which he built and endowed, besides 600l. to Christs-Church Hospital &c. He forgave at his death all his Tenants in his man∣nors of Aldersey and Sponely a years Rent, and enjoyned his Heirs to make them new Leases of 21 years for 2 years Rent. He built two Brid∣ges of stone, containing 18 Arches in both, be∣sides
Cawseys &c He died 15— Sir Th. Adams Knight, born at Wem, bred a Draper in, became Lord Mayor of London 164— A man who drank of the bitter waters of Meri∣bah, without making a bad face thereat. He gave the House of his Nativity to be a Free-School, with liberal endowment. W. Adams. Esq. born at Newport, bred a Ha∣berdasher in London (where he fined for Alder∣man.) founded a School-house in Newport, with a Library and Lodgings for a Master and Usher, (the one having 60l. the other 30l. salary per An. with a Tarras on the top. 2 Almshouses near to the School with competent maintainance. On which School the following Verses were made Some Cottage-Schools are built so low, The Muses there must groveling goe; Here whilst Apollo's harp doth sound, The sisters Nine may dance around; And Architects may take from hence The Pattern of Magnificence. Long may this Worthy person live to see his In∣tentions compleated. Memorable Persons. Th. Parre, born at Alberbury, lived above 150 years, (verifying his Anagram. Th. Parre, Most rare hap.) being born in the Reign of E. 4. 1483. he was 2 months before his death brought up by Th. Earl of Arundel (a great Lover of Antiquities) to Westminster. He slept away most of his time, and is thus Charactred by an eye witness of him From head to heel his body had all over A Quick-set thick-set natral hairy cover. Change of Air and Diet (tho to the better) with the trouble of many Visitants are conceived to
have accelerated his death, which happened West∣minster November 15. 1634. and was buried in the Abbey-Church, all present at his burial doing homage to this our aged Th. de Temporibus. Noted Sheriffs. An. 9. Nich de Sandford. This anci∣ent Name is still extant in this County;  amongst those who compounded for their reputed delinquency in our late Civil Wars, Fr. Sandford Esq. paid 459. a Gentleman excellently skilled in Fortification. Jo. Cornwall Mil. descended from Rich. Earl of Cornwall and King of the Almains, was a man of prosperous Valour under Henry 5. in France. He built a Fair House at Amp-hil in Bedford-shire. He was created by King Henry 6. Baron of Fanhop and Knight of the Garter, and faithfully adhered to that King, after the Crown forsook him. Continuing till the Raign of E. 4. he was by him dispossessed of his lands in Bedford of which he said pleasantly, That not he but his fine House at Amp-hill was guilty of High Treason. An. 1. Th. Mitton, in obedience to the Kings Command, apprehended the D. of Buckingham the (grand Engineer to promote that Usurper) in that House of Humphrey Banaster, who for 1000 l. betrayed the Duke to the Sheriff. 3. Gilb. Talbot, Mil. Son to Jo. 2d. Earl of Shrews∣bury of that name, assisted Hen. of Richmond (after∣wards K. Hen. 7.) with 2000 men well appoin∣ted (most of them Tennants and Retainers to his Nephew Geo. E. of Shrewsbury at the Battle of Bosworth-Field. For his good Service K. Hen. re∣warded
him with fair Lands at Grafton, in Worc. made him Governour of Calis in France and Knight of the Garter; and from him the present E. of Shrewsbury is descended. I conceive it was his Son to whom K. Hen. 8. (fearing a surprise) wrote briefly and peremptorily, that he should instantly for∣tifie the Castle of Calis. To whom Governor Tal∣bot as briefly replied, That he could neither fortifie nor fiftifie without Money. An. 45. Roger Owen, Mil. was a Worthy Son to a Worthy Father Sir Th. Chief J. of the Com. Pleas. He was a Member of Parl. 11 Jac. when a great Man there cast a grievous and general Aspersion on an English Clergy, (using this Expression) Quo genere hominum nihil est puti∣dius. This Sir Rog. appeared a Zelot in their de∣fence, and not only removed the Bastard (calumny) from their dores, but also carried the Falshood home to the true Father, and urged it shrewdly against the Person, who in that place first revived the Aspersion. An. 14. Rowl. Cotton, Mil. was a valiant and active Gent. so strong as if he had been nothing but Bones: so nimble, as if he had been nothing but Sinews. An. 2. Rich. Newport, Mil being Faithful to the King in his lowest Condition, was rewarded with the Title of Baron of High-Arcl in this County, 1642. His Son Fr. Lord Newport adorneth his Honour with Learning and other natural Accomplishments. Note, This County was visited with the Sweating Sickness which first began and twice raged in the Town of Shrewsbury, the Cure was found to be the keeping the Patient in the same posture wherein he was seised without Food or Physick, and such who weathered out the Disease for 24 hours did certainly escape.
SOMMERSET-SHIRE. SOmmerset-shire hath the Severn Sea on the North, Glocester-shire on the North East, Wilt-shire on the East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Devon∣shire on the West; It is named from Sommerton the most ancient Town in the County. It reacheth from East to West 55, and from North to South 42 Miles. It is generally Fruitful. 'Tis said there are several single Acres in this Shire, which may serve a good round Family with Bread for a Year, as affording a Bushel of Wheat for every Week therein. There is plenty of the best Lead, (for Shot) digged out of Myn∣dyp-Hills, by the benefit whereof vast sums of Money were advanced to the Bishops of Bath and Wells, since the latter end of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth; Bishop Still having had the Harvest, Bishop Montague the Gleanings, and Bishop Lake the Stubble thereof, and yet considerable was the profit of Lead to him and his Successors. In Myndip-Hills there is also found plenty of Lapis Calaminaris, (good for clearing of the sight) which mixed with Copper, doth make Brass, and yet is not worth above six pence in the pound. It was dis∣covered about the time when Copper-Mines were re∣discovered in Cumberland. The best and biggest Cheese in England, are made at Chedder in this County. The Rich and Poor of a Parish joyn their Milk, for the making of Corporation Cheeses, of which the Proprie∣tors are Tennants in Common. Woad groweth natu∣rally in this County, especially about Glassenbury; The use thereof was either ancient, (among the Britains, for a black wash to render their Faces terrible to their
Enemies) or modern, as a ground-colour for dying. It greatly impaireth the ground it groweth on. The Gentry and Commonalty of thi County are much af∣fected with Bull-baiting, for which purpose there are very good Mastiffs, though chiefly useful for necessary defence, as being good Porters. Note, Prince Henry An. 1602. allowd a pension for the maintenance of a Mastiff which had worsted a Lyon, and gave Order, That he that had fought with the King of Beasts, should never after encounter any inferiour Creatures. When 100 Mastiffs were sent from England to the Pope, a Cardinal hearing the Letter read, mistook the Latin Molossos for so many Mules; yet since that word does almost sound Mule-asses, you may imagine the Cardi∣nal had neither good Lati nor English, in not laying his Bull equally on both the kinds of these Beasts of burden. The Manufactures here are Taunton Serges, which were much sent into Spain before the Civil War. As for Buildings, the Churches of Bath and Wells are most eminent, and constitute one See. The Church of Bath was begun by Oliver King, Bishop of this Di∣ocess in the Reign of Hen. 7. and the West end most curiously Cut, and Carved with Angels on Jacob's Lad∣der. After his decease it stood a long time neglected, whence these Verses were written on the Church-wall with a Charcoal, O Church I wail thy woful plight Whom King, nor Cardinal, Clark or Knight Have yet restored to ancient right. Alluding to the aforesaid Bishop King, and his 4 Suc∣cessors in 35 years, viz. Card. Woolsey, Card. Adrian, Bishop Clark and Bishop Knight. It felt the Hammers which knocked down the Abbeys. The Townsmen were not willing to buy the Church so cheap as 500
Marks (as it was proffered by the Commissioners) fearing to be thought to couzen the King, so that the purchase might come under the compass of concealed Lands. Hereupon the Glass, Iron, Bells and Lead, (which last amounted to 480 Tun) provided for the finishing thereof, were sold and sent beyond the Sea, and (as some say) lost by shipwrack. In the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, Collections were made all over the Land, for the repairing thereof, though they proved incon∣siderable: Only Mr. Billet, who was (I think) Ex∣ecutor to W. Cecil Lord Burleigh, disbursed good sums to that end. A Stranger wrote on this Structure, Be blith fair Kirck, when Hempe is past Thine Olive, that all winds did blast, Shall flourish green for Age to last. The parcel Popish Author (who subscribed himself Cassadore) expected the finishing of this Church at the return of their Religion, and lookt for this after the Reigns of Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary, K. Philip, and Q. Eliz. This Church was finished by James Mon∣tague, Bishop of this See, who removed the Lead from the Bowels of the Earth to the Roof of the Church, which is both spacious and specious, the most lightsome as ever I beheld. The parable of Jotham, (the name of the first Founder,) Judg. 9.8. is most curiously wrought in this Church. When Oliver the Usurper was Commander in chief in this Land, some beheld him as the Olive, (mentioned in the Parable) till he was once blasted Root and Branches. The Ca∣thedral of Wells is greater, and darker then the other, so that Bath may seem to draw Devotion with the plea∣santness, Wells to drive it with the solemnity thereof. The West Front of Wells is a Master-piece of Art made of well proportioned imagery, Vera & Spirantia Signa.
As for the Civil Habitations in this County, to pass by Dunstar Castle, (which hath a high Ascent, and a goodly Prospect by Sea and Land) Montague built by Sir Edward Philips, Master of the Rolles, is a most Magnificent Fabrick. Hinton St. George, the House of the Lord Paulet, has every Stone in the Front shaped Doule-wayes, in form of a Cart-nail, and 'tis said the owner thereof built it in a dear year, on purpose to employ the more poor people thereupon. The Wonder of this County is Wockey-hole in Men∣dip-Hills, near Wells, a Subterranean Concavity, ha∣ving spatious Vaults, stony Walls, creeping Laby∣rinths. The water which incessantly dropped down from the Vault of the Rock, was seen by some to turn to the Rock it self. And the like transmutation is thought to be the Original of many Rocks. As for Medicinal Waters, Bath is well known, the Waters whereof have much Bitumen, soveraign against Obstructions, Niter, which strengthneth the operation of the former, and Purgeth the Body of gross Hu∣mours, and Sulphur which dries, and is good for uterine effects. Amongst the various Opinions concerning the heat of these Waters; some do with great probability impute the same to the fermentation of several Mine∣rals, through which the Waters run The practice of taking the Waters inwardly (in Broths, &c.) begin∣neth to prevail. The Right Honourable James Earl of Marleborough undertook to cover the Cross-Bath at his own cost, and would others follow his Resolution, it would effectually conduce to publick benefit, and raise the credit of the place. Proverbs. I. Where should I be bore else then in Tanton deane. A Peasant's bragg; that place is indeed populous, plea∣sant,
and so fruitful with the zun and zoil alone, that it needs no manuring. II. The Beggers of Bath. Saints. St. Dunstan, born in, and Abbot of Glassenbury, was Bishop of London and Worcester, Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury, and at last, for his promoting of Monkery re∣puted a Saint: He dyed 988. His skill in Smithery was so great, that the Goldsmiths in London are Incor∣porated by the name of the Company of St. Dunstans. See my Eccl. Hist. Martyrs. Jo. Hooper, born in this County, and bred in Ox∣ford, then beyond the Seas, a great Scholar and Lin∣guist, was in the Reign of Edw. 6. Elected Bishop of Glocester, but for a time scrupled the acceptance there∣of, as refusing the Oath of Supremacy, which then en∣joyned the receivers to a Conformity to the Kings Commands, in what alterations soever he should after∣wards make in Religion, and also concluded with so help me God, and all his Angels and Saints; This was the occasion of the ensuing reforming of that Oath, whilst the King dispensed with his present taking there∣of. He also scrupled the wearing of some Episcopal Habiliments, but at last consented thereunto. He held afterwards Worcester in Commendam with Glocester, and having a double Dignity, gave treble Diligence by Preaching Gods Word, living piously, and dying pa∣tiently, being Martyred, An. 1555. The only Na∣tive in this Shire, who suffered for the Testimony of the Gospel, Bishop Burn, Bishop of Bath and Wells in the Reign of Q. Mary, having persecuted no Pro∣testants in his Diocess, to death.
Prelates. Joceline of Wells, whereof he was Bishop. He first changed the Stile of Bishop of Glaston (used by his Predecessors) into that of Bishop of Bath and Wells. The Monks of Glassenbury purchased their exemption from his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, by parting with 4 fair Mannors to the See of Wells. After his return from Exile (for his obstinacy against King John) he Beautified and Enriched the Cathedral, Erected some new Prebends, and to the use of the Chapter appropri∣ated many Churches, and gave 3 Mannors of great value to the Episcopal See. He with Hugo Bishop of London, was the joynt Founder of St. Jo. in Wells and on his own cost, built two fair Chappels, one at Wokey, the other at Wells. The Church of Wells was rather rebuilt then repaired by him. He was Bishop 37 Years, and Dyed 1242. His Effigies in Brass which was on his Tomb, is since defaced. Fulk of Samford, was Treasurer of St. Pauls, Lon∣don, and then by Papal-Bull declared Arch-Bishop of Dublin 1256. He dyed in his Mannor of Finglas 1271. and was Buried in the Church of St. Pat. whose Brother Jo. of Samford Dean of St. Pat. in Dublin, and for a time Escheator of all Ireland, was afterward chosen, and by Edw. the 1st. Confirm'd Arch-Bishop of Dub∣lin 1284. For a time he was Chief Justice of Ireland, and thence was sent (with Anth. Bishop of Durham) Ambassador to the Emperour, whence returning, he dyed in London 1294. his Body being carried over in∣to Ireland, was buried in St. Pat. Thomas Beckington, born at Beckington, bred in New-Colledge, Dr. of the Laws, and Dean of the Arches, till by King Hen. 6. he was advanced Bishop of Bath
and Wells. He gave for his Rebus (in allusion to his Name) a burning Beacon, to which he answered in his Nature, being a burning and shining light. He wrote a Book to prove the K. of England's Title to the Crown of France; He spent 6000 Marks in repairing and a∣dorning of his Palaces; He was a Loyal Subject, kind Kinsman, and a good Master, bequeathing 5 pound a piece to his Chief, and 5 Marks a piece to his meaner Servants, and 40 Shillings a piece to his Boys. He was a Benefactor to Wells Church, Winch. New, Mer∣ton, but chiefly Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, being little less than a second Founder thereof. His Will was Confirmed under the Broad Seal of England: He dy∣ed 1464. Richard Fitz-James Dr. of Law, was born at Red∣linch, of Ancient and Worshipful Extraction, and bred at Mert. Coll. in Oxford, where he built most Beautiful Lodgings, repairing also St. Ma. in Oxford. He was preferred successively Bishop of Rochester, Chichester, and London: An excellent Scholar, and Author of some Books not now Extant. He was over busie with Fire and Faggot, persecuting the poor servants of God in his Diocess. He dyed 1512, and was buried in his Cathedral, (having contributed to the adorning there∣of) in a Chappel like Tomb of Timber, since burnt down, 1561: He was Brother to Fitz-James Lord Chief Justice. Statesmen. Sir Amias Poulet, (whose Grandfather put Cardinal Woolsey, then but a School-Master, in the Stocks) was born at Hinton St. George: He was Chancellour of the Garter, Governour of Jersey and Gersney, and Privy-Councellour to Q. Elizabeth, who chiefly committed the keeping of Mary Q. of Scots to his fidelity. He
would not yield to Secretary Walsingham, who moved him to suffer one of his servants to be bribed by the Agents of the Queen of Scots, so to compass the better Intelligence: He dyed 15. and was Buried in St. Martins in the Fields, in London: His Motto was Gardez la Foy, keep your Faith, or Allegiance. Capital Judges. Jo. Fitz-James, born at Redclinch, of an Ancient Family; was by Hen. 8. made Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench: He sate one of the Assistants, when Sir Thomas More was Arraigned for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, and was shrewdly put to it to save his own Conscience, and not incurr the Kings displeasure, de∣claring himself (upon demand) in these words, My Lords all, by St. Gillian, I must needs confess, that if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful, then the Indict∣ment is not in my Conscience insufficient: He dyed An. 30. Hen. 8. and his Family doth still flourish at Lew∣son in Dorsetshire. Sir Jo. descended from his Brother Alured, has strongly encouraged my weak Endea∣vours. Jo. Portman Knight, of Worshipful Extraction at Portmans-Orchard, was An. 2. Mary, made Chief Ju∣stice of the Kings-Bench, in which Office it seems he dyed. A Baron of his Name and Lineage, flourisheth at this day with a plentiful Estate. Dav. Brook Knight, born at Glassenbury, Son to Jo. Brook Esq Serjeant at Law to Hen. 8. was an. 1. Mary made Chief Bar. of the Exchequer: He Marri∣ed Katharine Daughter of Jo. Lord Chandois, but dy∣ed without Issue. James Dier Knight, born at Roundhill, an. 1. Eliz∣abeth, was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, continuing therein 24 years. At the Tryal of
the Duke of Norfolk, an. 1572. This Judge declared that Duke could have no Councill assigned him for mat∣ter of Fact, and that the Council of Humphry Stafford, in the Reign of Hen. 7. (which was pleaded by the Duke) had been granted only as to point of Law: His Reports evidence his great Abilities: He dyed an. 25. Eliz. (though Married) without Issue. There is a house of a Baronet, descended from his Elder Brother, at great Stoughton in Hunt. Sir Jo. Popham, of most ancient descent, was born at Huntworth; when a Youth he was stout, and well skilled at Sword and Buckler, and wild enough in his Recreations. Afterwards he applyed himself to a more profitable Fencing, the Study of the Common Laws, wherein he became Eminent. He was prefer∣red the Queens Attorney, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of England: He deposed upon his Oath in open Court, at the Tryal of the Earl of Essex, an. 1600. that he had been violently detained at the Earls house, by his Military men there Assembled, which some con∣ceived tantamount to an Imprisonment. Note the ra∣rity of the Precedent. He cut asunder the Knot of Northern Robbers (and others) with the Sword of Ju∣stice. He represented effectually to King James, the inconvenience of frequent Pardons. He used exempla∣ry severity against Male-Factors, (shunning the danger∣ous Rock of Cruel Mercy) whereby the Lives of many Thousands were preserved; He dyed 16. Souldiers. Jo. Courcy, Baron of Stoke-Courcy, was the first Englishman who invaded and subdued Ʋlster in Ireland, therefore Created Earl thereof. He was afterwards surprized by Hugh Lacy, (corrival for his Title) sent over into England, and imprisoned by King John, in the
Tower of London. Sometime after he was command∣ed by the King to fight a French man, in decision of a Controversie about the Title of a French Castle, (the King of France being Present) but the Monsieur being informed that Courcy was a monstrous Eater, and con∣cluding his Courage to be proportionable to his Sto∣mach, wisely declined the Combat. The English Cham∣pion was fain to give proof of his strength another way, in the presence of the two Kings, sundring a Steel Helmet at one blow, into two pieces, and stri∣king the Sword so deep into the Block (whereon the Helmet lay) that none but himself could pull it out again, being observed to look sternly before, and in the giv∣ing of the blow, he was demanded why he looked so exceeding fierce, Had I (said he) missed my blow, I would have killed the Kings, and all in the place. This was in no wise displeasing to the Kings, (being highly in good humour) both because they were confident Courcy (now) was not so ill natur'd as his words did im∣port, and also because the words appeared to be some necessary Evaporations of that violent Ferment of his Blood, which had produced in him a propensity to give an Ʋniversal demonstration of his Strength, by making the deepest Impression on the strongest Mettal, (or otherwise,) leaving no reserve of Spirits to actuate the Organs of his Speech for any Expression of his Alle∣giance at that time; yet by that great Action he seems to have declared himself in a most eminent manner the Kings Man, and to have antedated the performance of that Homage which the Lord Courcy, Baron of Ringrom, (the second of Ireland) was of course bound to do. Hence it is that these Barons claimed a priviledge, after their first Obeisance, to be covered in the Kings Pre∣sence. His Devotion was equal to his Valour, being a great Founder, and endower of Religious houses; yet he turn'd the Church of the Holy Trinity in Down into
the Church of St. Pat. for which ('tis said) he was con∣demned never to return into Ireland, though attempt∣ing it 15 several times, but repelled with soul weather. He dyed in France about 1210. Math. Gournay, was born at Stoke under Hambden, where his Family hath flourished since the Conquest, and there built both a Castle and a Colledge. He was the Honour of his house. In the Reign of Edw. 3. he fought at the Siege of Algier and Benemazin against the Saracens, at Ingen, Poictiers, Sluce and Cressy, a∣gainst the French, and at Nazaran under the Black Prince in Spain. His Armour was beheld by Martial men with much civil veneration, with whom his faith∣ful Buckler was a Relique of esteem. He dyed in Peace, Aged 96 years, about the beginning of Rich. 2. and was buried in the Church of Stoke. Seamen. Sir Amias Preston, of an Ancient Family at Cricket, an. 88. seized on the Admiral of the Galiasses, where∣in the Governour, with most of his Men, were burnt or killed. An. 1595 he took the Isle of Puerto Santo, and the Isle of Cochi, surprized the Fort and Town of Coro, sack'd the City of St. Jago, put to ransom the Town of Cumana, and entred Jamaica, (all in the West-Indies) and returned home safely. He sent a Challenge to Sir Walter Raleigh then Privy Councellor, which was by him refused, Sir Walter having a Wife and Children, and a fair Estate, and Sir Amias being a private and single Person, though of good Quality; Be∣sides Sir Walter condemned those for ill Honours, where the Hangman gives the Garland. These two Knights were afterwards reconciled, and Sir Amias dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King James
Writers. Gildas (the Wise) was born in Bath. He was also sirnamed the Querulous, because the little we have of his Writing is only an Historical Complaint, against the sins (and sufferings) of the Age he lived in, calling the Clergy, Mountains of Malice, the Britans generally, the Ink (or stain) of the Age. Dr. Gerard Vossius does by a mistake, attribute the Comedy of Aulularia in Plautus to this Gildas. He dyed about 570. Maurice Somerset, born in Sommerset-shire, a Cister∣tian in Ford Abbey, and bred in Oxford, was Abbot of Wells, Some Books he Dedicated to Reginald Bishop of Bath, and flourished 1193. Alexander of Essebie, the Prince of English Poets in his Age, put our English Festivals into Verse, and wrote the History of the Bible, with the Lives of some Saints, in an Heroick Poem. He became Prior of Es∣seby-Abbey, and flourished under Hen. 3. 1220. Adam of Marsh born (probably) at Brent-marsh, was D. D. in Oxford; Robert Grosthead and he joyntly compared the Scripture; being afterwards Franciscan Frier in Worcester, he furnished the Library thereof with excellent Manuscripts: He flourished 1257. Hu∣go de Belsham his Corrival, got the Bishoprick of Ely from him. Since the Reformation. H. Cuffe, born at St. George Hinton, was Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford, and Secretary to Robert Earl of Essex, with whom he engaged in his Rising, an. 1600. being Arraigned at Westminster, he was cast,  being proved against him, that whilst Essex was in Consultation with his Complices, this Cuffe had,
for promoting that Plot, alleadged this Verse out of Lucan, Viribus utendum est quas fecimus, Arma ferenti Omnia dat, qui justa negat. For which he suffered.S. N He wrote an excellent Book of the difference of the Ages of Man. Jo. Harrington Knight, had a fair Estate at Kelston near Bath, was Master of St. John's Colledge, and af∣terwards one of the most ingenious Poets of the English Nation, witness his Translation of Orlando Furioso out of Italian, &c. Being at an Ordinary in Bath, (with some Gentlemen of greater Estates than himself) the Maid that waited at Table, attended him with a par∣ticular observance, and being demanded the reason, I understand, said she, you are a very witty man, and if I should displease you in any thing, I fear you would make an Epigram of me. He made an Addition to Bi∣shop Godwins Catalogue of Bishops. He left a fair Es∣tate to a Learned and Religious Son, and dyed about the middle of the Reign of K. James. His Father suf∣fered Imprisonment, and lost One Thousand Pound for carrying a Letter to the Lady (afterward Queen) Eliz. from whom his Mother was sequestred, as an Heretick, and all by Gardiner's means. Samuel Daniel, born near Taunton, was an exqui∣site Poet, and a Judicious Historian, witness his Lives of the English Kings, since the Conqueror untill Edw. 3. He was servant in Ordinary to Q. Anne, In his old Age, he rented a Farm in VVilt-shire, and dyed about the end of K. James. Humphrey Sidenham, born at Dalverton, of an An∣cient and Worshipful Family, was bred a Fellow in Wadham Colledge; So eminent a Preacher, that he was commonly called Silver-tongued Sidenham. He wrote
learned Sermons, of which that called the Athenian Babler was most remarkable. He dyed 1650. Romish Exile Writers. Jo. Gibbon, leaving the Land, was by Pope Greg. 13. made Canon, in the Church of Bonn, he was af∣terwards Rector of the Jesuits-Colledge in Triers. He wrote a Book, in which he endeavoured to prove that the Pope was not Antichrist. He dyed 1589. Rob. Person, bred in Oxford, (whence he was expel∣led for his Viciousness) went to Rome, whence he re∣turned with Campian, to preserve this Nation, 1589. Some of his own party (offended with his ill-nature) intended to resign him to the Queens Officers. He was Satyrical, and so much of a Politician, as to provide for his own saftety; who would look on, direct, give ground, abet on other Mens hands, but never plaid so as to adventure himself into England. He wrote a shrewd Book of the Succession to the English Crown, setting it forth under the Name of Dolman. He had an Authoritative influence on all the English Catholicks. He was 23 years Rector of the Colledge at Rome, where he dyed 1610. Jo. Fen, born at Montacute, and Batchelour of the Laws in Oxford, fled into Flanders, thence into Italy, whence returning, he fixed at Lovain: He wrote ma∣ny, and Translated more books, and dyed 1613. Note, there lived a rigid Non-Conformist of his Sirname a∣bout Coventry, who in his latter Will and Testament rail'd against the Hierarchy. Jo. Collington, bred in Oxford, was taken with Cam∣pian, and Condemned, but being Reprieved; after some Travel, he advanced his Religion in England for 30 years together. He was alive 161.
Benefactors to the Publick. The Lady Mohun, obtained from her Husband, Jo. Lord Mohun of Dunstor, so much ground for the Com∣mons of the Town of Dunstor, as she could in one day compass about, going on her naked Feet. She dyed (as is conjectured) in the Reign of Hen. 5. Since the Reformation. Nich. Wadham of Merrifieild, Esq having great length in his Extraction, breadth in his Estate, and depth in his Liberality, Marryed Dorothy, Daughter to the Secretary, Sister to the first Lord Peters. His Hospital house was an Inn at all times, a Court at Christ∣mas. This worthy Pair, being Issuless, Erected the Colledge of VVadham in Oxford. His Estate (after his Death) descended to Strangwayes, Windham, VVhite, &c. He was buried in the Church of Ilminster. Phil. Biss. of a worthy Family at Spargrave, Com∣menced D. D. in Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, and was Arch-Deacon of Taunton. He bequeathed his Li∣brary (consisting of so many Folio's as were valued at One Thousand Pound) to VVadham-Colledge, then new∣ly Founded. One Epitaph made on him begins, Bis fuit hic natus, &c. in allusion to his Name. He dyed about 1614. Memorable Persons. Sir Jo. Champneis, born at Chew, bred Skinner in London, (and Lord Mayor thereof, 1535.) was the first private Man, who in his house next Cloth-VVorkers-Hall, built a Turret to oversee his Neighbours in the City, which delight in his Eye was punished with blindness some years before his Death.
Tho. Coriat, born at Odcombe, and bred in Oxford. A great Grecian, carried Folly (which the Charitable call Merriment) in his Face, and had a Head in form like an inverted Sugar-loaf. He lay alwayes in his Cloaths, to save both labour and charge in shifting. Prince Henry allowed him a Pension, and kept him for his Servant; Sweet-meats and Coriat made up the last course at all Entertainments; being the Courtiers An∣vil to try their Wits upon, sometimes he returned the Hammers as hard knocks as he received. His Book called Coriat's Crudities is not altogether useless. Being hardy he undertook to travel on foot to the East-Indies, and dyed in the midst of his Journey. Noted Sheriffs. An. 14. Jo. Paulet Arm. an Accomplisht Gentleman, and bountiful House-keeper, was by King Charles I. Created Baron Pau∣let of Hinton St. George in this County, whose Right Honourable Son and Heir Jo. Lord Paulet, now suc∣ceedeth in that Barony. Modern Battles. The Skirmish at Martials-Elm, 1642. made much noise in Mens Ears, (a Musket gave a greater report then a Canon since) and is conceived to have first bro∣ken the Peace of the Nation. As for the Encounter at Lang-Port, where the Kings Forces under the Lord Goring were defeated, July 12, 1645, it was rather a Flight than a Fight; And hence forward the Sun of the Kings Cause declined, versing more and more VVest∣ward, till at last it set in Cornwal, and since (after a long and dark night) rose again by Gods goodness in the East, when our Gracious Sovereign arrived at Dover.
Note that an. 1607, there happened an Inundation, by the irruption of the Severn-Sea, which over-flowed this County, almost 20 Miles in length, and four in breadth, though by Gods special Providence, it drown∣ed no more then 80 Persons. BRISTOL. BRistol (or Bright-stow, i. e. Illustrious Dwelling) is divided by the River Avon, and pleasantly Scitu∣ated on the Rising of a Hill. The Buildings are fair and firm, the Streets cleanly kept. The City answer∣eth its Name, chiefly for having bred many Eminent Persons. It is a Liberty of it self, though it standeth both in Sommerset-shire and Glocester-shire. There are Diamonds (though somewhat dim) produced at St. Vincents Rock near to this City. Of Manufactures; Gray Sope was anciently made only in this City. As for Buildings, Ratcliff-Church is the best Parish Church in England It was first Founded by Cannings, first a Merchant, then a Priest. St. Augustines Church, is better accommodated with publick Buildings about it, for the See of the Bishop. Under St. Vincents Rock, on the VVest of the City, there is St. Vincents Well, the waters whereof run through some Mineral of Iron, and are sovereign for sores and sicknesses, being washt in, or taken inwardly. The Beer brewed thereof is wholsome against the Spleen, If it should chance that the Crudity of the Waters trouble the Stomach, there is a remedy in this City, and that is Bristol Milk, (a Prov.) or Sherry-Sack, which the Courteous Inhabitants present to all Strangers, when first visiting their City.
Martyrs. Richard Sharp, Th. Benion, and Th. Hale, were Martyred in this City in the dayes of Q. Mary, whose Blood will be visited on account of Dalbye, the Chan∣cellour of this Diocess, Jo. Holyman, then Bishop of this City, not having Persecuted any therein. Prelates. Ralph of Bristol, born there, and bred (belike) in the Covent of Glassenbury, became Treasurer of St Pat. in Dublin, then Bishop of Kildare. He wrote the Life of Lawrance Arch-Bishop of Dublin, and granted certain Indulgences to the Covent aforesaid. He dyed 1232. Since the Reformation. Tobias Matthew, D. D. bred in Oxford, became Bishop of Durham, and at last of York. He dyed 1628. See my Eccles. Hist. Seamen. Hugh Eliot, Merchant of this City, the prime Pilot of our Nation, in his Age, first (with the Assistance of Mr Thorn his Fellow Citizen) found out New-found-Land; though an. 1527. before Virginia, or any o∣ther English Plantation was conceived. And note that no City in England (London alone excepted) hath in so short a time, bred more brave and bold Seamen. As for Eliot's discovery, had it been as fortunate in pub∣lick Encouragement as private Industry, probably be∣fore this time we had enjoyed the kernel of those Coun∣tries, whose shell only we now possess.
VVriters. Th. Norton, a great Professor of Chymistry in the 7 Chap. of his Ordinal, wrote the two following Lines of himself, Thomas Norton of Briseto A perfect Master you may him trow, The first Line whereof he modestly parted into the in∣itial Syllables of several other Lines, thereby obliging his Reader to become a perfect Master in Nominal Chy∣mistry, before he can extract the Golden Name of Nor∣ton. He affirms of himself, that being scarce 28 years of Age, he learned the perfection of Chymistry in 40 dayes. The spight is, he complaineth, that a Mer∣chants Wife of Bristol, stole from him the Elixir of Life. Some suspect her to have been the Wife of VV. Cannings (of whom before) contemporary with Nor∣ton, who started up to so great and sudden Wealth. He is said to have undone himself, and those who trust∣ed him. He dyed 1477. Jo. Spine, D. D. in Oxford, living under Edw. 4. left some Books to Posterity. His sirname seems to be Latine, which Englished is Thorn, an ancient name in this City. He was Provincial (and Champion) of the Carmelites through England, Scotland and Ireland. He laboured to make all believe that Christ was a Carme∣lite, and Professor of wilfull Poverty, by which he ta∣citly condemned the pomp of the Prelates. Hereupon the Bishop of London (his Diocesan) cast him into Pri∣son, from whom he appealed to Paul II, and went to Rome, where he remained three years in close Prison, then he was enlarged by 7 Cardinals, to whom the bu∣siness was referred. Returning into London, he was nominated Bishop of St. Dav. but never sat in that See. He dyed 186.
W. Grocine, an excellent Poet, became publick Pro∣fessor of the Greek Tongue in Oxford. Erasmus owns him in his Epistles for his Patron and Master. His Mi∣striss (it seems) having in a frolick pelted him with a Snow-ball, he declared in a Poetical Rapture, that that cold Meteor, had made so great an addition to his Flame, that it could not be quenched otherwise then by a reci∣procal Affection, Sola potes nostras extinguere Julia flammas Non nive, non glacie sed potes igne pari. He dyed, an. 1520. Romish Exile Writers. Jo. Flower, Printer, skilful in Latine and Greek, and a good Poet, Orator and Divine, wrote an Abridg∣ment of Thomas his Summes, the Translation of Osorius into English. Having fled for his Religion he set up at Antwerp, where he was serviceable to the Catholick Cause. He dyed 1579. Benefactors to the Publick. Robert Thorn, a Merchant-Taylor in London, gave more then 4445 pound to pious uses, and to his Kin∣dred 5142 pound. He dyed a Batchelor 1532, and was buried in St. Christophers, London. Since the Reformation. Mary Dale (or Ramsey) Daughter of William Dale, became second Wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer, and Lord Mayor of London, 1577. She founded two Fellowships, and two Scholarships in Peter-House in Cambridge, on which she would have have setled 500
pounds per Annum, on condition that it should be called the Colledge of Peter and Mary. Dr. Soams then Master of the House, refused, affirming, that Peter, who so long lived single, was now too old to have a Feminine Part∣ner. She dyed 1596, and lyeth buried in Christs-Church, in London. Thomas White, D. D. was bred in Oxford, and a Preacher in the Reign of Q. Eliz. He had one Cure of Souls, but several dignities. False was the Aspersi∣on of his being an Usurer. Besides Benefactions to Christs-Church, and a Lecture in St. Pauls, London, he left 3000 pounds for the building of Sion-Colledge. He built there also an Almshouse for twenty poor Folk, al∣lowing them yearly 6 pounds a piece, and another at Bristol, which is better endowed. He dyed 1623. Mr. Jo. Simson, Minister of St. Olaves Hart-street, London, perfected the aforesaid Colledge of Sion, build∣ing the Gate-house, with a fair Case for the Library, and endowing it with 60 pounds per Annum. Mr. Richard Grigson, expended a great sum of Mo∣ney in new casting of the Bells of Christs-Church, in Bristol. He paid 105 pounds for his reputed delinquen∣cy in our Civil Wars.
STAFFORD-SHIRE. STafford-shire hath Cheshire on the North-West, Dar∣by-shire on the East, and North-East Warwick-shire, and Worcester-shire on the South, and Shrop-shire on the West. It lyeth from North to South in form of a Lozenge, in length 40, and in breadth 26 Miles. A most pleasant and fruitful County, wherein Beau-desert is the beautiful Barony of the Lord Paget. The best Alabaster in England is found about Castle-Hay in this County. The great Manufacture here is Nails. As for Buildings, the neat Church of Lichfield was ruined in the Civil Wars. 'Tis said of the Close of Lich∣field, that the Plague (which long had raged therein) did abate, at the first shooting of a Cannon at the siege thereof. Of Civil Buildings, Tutbury-Castle is a state∣ly Structure, affording a large and brave Prospect. It was formerly the Seat of the Lord Ferrars Earl of Derby, and was forfeited to Hen. 3. by Robert de Fer∣rars Earl of Darby (who had sided with Simon Mum∣ford against that King) because he did not advance a Fine of 5000 pounds at the time appointed. The English Clergy willing to relieve Jo. the Son of this Earl Robert, were commanded to the contrary, under the pan of the Popes Curse. Tutbury was annexed to the Dutchy of Lancaster, and some small matter was restored to John. Dudley Castle high and pleasantly seated, and in the Reign of King Edw. 6. well built, was adorned by John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, who claiming the Title thereof, had thrust out John Sutton Lord Dudley (a weak man and entangled with Debts) who therefore got the Name of Lord Quon∣dam▪ But after the Execution of that Duke, Queen
Mary restored Edward the Son of the aforesaid poor Lord. Proverbs. I. In April Doves Flood is worth a Kings good. Dove is a River parting this and Derby-shire, much batling the Meadows thereof, II. Wotton under Weaver, where God came never. Though it is probable that Wotton is a dismal place, covered with Hills from the light of the Sun, yet this Proverb, set off with such a dark ground, does the more plainly discover its own profane Complexion. Saints. There was a Grand Massacre committed by the Pa∣gans under Dioclesian, on the Christians in Britain, (and elsewhere) particularly in the place where Lich∣field now standeth, whose names and numbers are ut∣terly unknown. St. Bertelin, a Brittan of Noble Birth, lived an E∣remite in the Woods near Stafford, anciently called Bi∣thiney. Wolfadus and Ruffinus, loving in their Lives, in their Death they were not divided. They were Murdered by their Bloody Father the Pagan, King of Mercia. There is the Chappel of Burnweston built in a Woody place, whither Ruffinus had fled for a while from his Fathers fury. Cardinals. Reginald Pole, born at Stoverton-Castle, 1500, was second Son to Sir Richard, Knight of the Garter, and nearly related to King Henry 7. His Mother Marga∣ret, Countess of Salisbury, was Neice to King Edw. 4.
and Daughter to George Duke of Clarence. He was bred in Corpus-Christi Colledge in Oxford, preferred afterwards Dean of Exeter. King Henry 8. allowing him a Pension, sent him beyond the Seas. He studied at Padua, conversed much with the Patricians of Ve∣nice, and in fine became a perfect Italian and could not be prevailed upon by the King or his Friends to return to England, whereupon his Pension was withdrawn. Living afterwards in a Venetian Monastery, he attain'd great Credit for his Eloquence, Learning and good Life. It was not long before he was made Deacon Cardinal, by the Title of St. Mary in Cosmedin, by Pope Paul 3. who sent him Ambassadour to the Emperour, and the French King, to incite them to War against K. Hen. 8. Afterwards he retired to Viterbo in Italy, where his House was the Sanctuary of Lutherans, and he himself became a Racking, but no through paced Protestant: Insomuch, that being appointed one of the three Presi∣dents of the Council of Trent, he endeavoured to have Justification determined by Faith alone. During his living at Viterbo, he was taxed for begetting a Bastard, which Pasquil Published in Verses affixed to his Pillar. That Blade being made all of Tongue and Teeth, would not stick to tell where the Pope trod his Holy Sandals awry: Yet he had some Relation to the Beast in the Apocalyps, in that under the Name of Pasquil, there has been a successive Corporation of Satyrists. Af∣ter the death of Paul 3. Pole was at midnight in the Conclave chosen to succeed him, the refusal whereof under the notion of a deed of darkness, was by the Ita∣lians, lookt upon as a piece of dulness in our Cardinal. Next day expecting a re-Election, he saw Julius 3. his professed Enemy chosen in his place: Yet afterwards he became Alterius Orbis Papa, when made Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury by Queen Mary. He was a Per∣son free from Passion. His Youthful Books are full of the Flowers of Rhetorick; whilst those of his old Age
are dry and dull. He dyed few hours after Q. Mary, November 17. 1558. Prelates. Edmund Stafford, Brother to Ralph, first Earl of Stafford, and Son to Edmund Baron of Stafford, was by King Rich. 2. preferred Bishop of Exeter, and un∣der King Henry 4. was Chancellor of England. He added two Fellowships to Stapletons-Inn in Oxford, (first named by him Exeter-Colledge) and setled Lands for the maintenance, and made good Statutes for the good or∣der of the same. He dyed 1419, and was buried in his own Cathedral. W. Dudley, Son of John Baron Dudley of Dudley-Castle in this County, and bred in Ʋniver. Colledge in Oxford, became Dean of Windsor, and afterwards Bi∣shop of Durham. He dyed at London 1483, and was buried in VVestminster. Edmund Audley, Son to the Lord Audley of Heyley in this County, (whose Sirname was Touchet) was bred in Oxford, where he built the Quire of St. Maries, a∣dorning it with a Musical Organ. He was preferred Bishop of Rochester, then of Hereford, and at last of Salisbury. He dyed at Ramsbury 1624, and was bu∣ried in his own Cathedral, in a Chappel of excellent Artifice, of his own Erection▪ Lawyers. Sir Thomas Littleton Knight, was Son to Thomas VVestcote Esq and Elizabeth Littleton his Wife. He was bred in the Study of the Laws, in the Inner Tem∣ple, and became Serjeant and Steward of the Court of the Marshal-sea of the Kings Houshold, to Henry 6. By Edw. 4. (an. 6 reg.) he was made one of the Jud∣ges of the Common-Pleas, and an. 15. reg. Created Kt.
of the Bath. He deserved as well of our Common, as Justinian of the Civil Law; whose Book of Tenures is counted Oraculous in that kind, Commented upon by the Learned Sir Edward Coke. He Married Joan Daugh∣ter and Coheir of W. Boerly of Bromsecraft Castle in Salop, by whom he had three Sons, Founders of three Families still flourishing. 1. William, fixed at Frank∣ley in this County, where his Posterity is eminently ex∣tant. 2. Richard, whose Issue remain at Pillerton-Hall in Shropshire. 3. Thomas, whose Linage conti∣nues in Worcestershire, This Reverend Judge dyed an. 21. of King Edw. 4. and lyeth buried under a fair Mo∣nument in the Cathedral of VVorcester. Edmund Dudley Esq was Son to John Dudley Esq second Son to John Sutton first Baron of Dudley, though he was slandered by some as being the Son of a Car∣penter. He Married the Daughter and Heir of the Visc. Lisle. Being bred in the Study of the Laws, he was made one of Puisne Judges, and wrote an excellent book, Entitled the Tree of the Common VVealth. He was employed by K. Henry 7. to put his Penal Statutes in Execution, which he did with severity, cruelty and extortion: K. Henry 8. resigned this Dudley, and Sir Richard Empson his Partner to Justice, so that they were made a Peace-Offering to popular anger 1510, being Executed at Tower-Hill. Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, was an. 1. Mary made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, holding his place hardly a year. Souldiers. Jo. Bromley Esq branched from the Bromleys in Shrop∣shire, was born at Bromley. He recovered the English Standard, which was taken by the French at the battle near Corby in France: In reward of his Valour, King Henry 5. (whose Arms he had followed in France)
made him a Knight Batchelor, Captain of Dampfront, and great Constable of Bossevile le Ross in France, and granted by Letters Patent 40 pounds in Land a year, to him and his Heirs. Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier, ha∣ving on the same account, conferred on him a yearly Pension of 40 pound during his life. Sir John dyed a∣bout the middle of the Reign of Hen. 6. John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, Son to Ed∣ward Dudley Esq and would willingly be reputed of this County, a descendant from the Lord Dudley therein. He was a proper, wise and valiant Man, and general∣ly (till his last project) prosperous: But he was also no∣toriously wanton, intolerably ambitious, a constant dis∣sembler, prodigiously profuse, so that he had sunk his Estate, had he not met with a seasonable support of Abbey-Land. King Henry 8. first Knighted him, then Created him Visc. Lisle, Earl of Warwick, and Duke of Northumberland. Under Queen Mary, he contri∣ved the setling of the Crown on Queen Jane, his Daugh∣ter in Law, for which Treason he was Executed, an. 1. Mary, much bemoaned by Martial Men, whom he had formerly endeared in his good service in the French and Scotish Wars. He left two Sons who survived to great Honour, Ambrose Earl of Warwick Heir to all that was good, and Robert Earl of Leicester, Heir to all that was great in his Father. The Bagnols (or Bagenhalts) were formerly a Fami∣ly of such remark in this County, that before the Reign of Hen. 8. there scarce passed an ancient Evidence, which is not attested by one of that Name; And having for a time sunk into a low condition, was afterwards restored to their genuine Lustre, when Ralph and Ni∣cholas, Sons to John Bagnol of Newcastle in this County, were both Knighted for their good service, the one in Mussleborough Field, the other in Ireland. Their Sons Samuel and Henry, were for their Martial merit advanc∣ed to the same degree.
Seamen. William Minors, Son to Richard Gent. of Hallen∣bury-Hall, was born at Ʋttoxater, who afterwards com∣ing to London, became so prosperous a Mariner, that he hath safely returned eleven times from the East-In∣dies, and now peaceably enjoyeth what he painfully hath gotten, living in or near Hartford, at this present year 1660. Writers. John Stafford a Franciscan, born in Stafford, wrote a Latine History of England, about 1380. W. de Lichfield, D. D. and Rector of All-hallowes the Great in Thames-street, London, a Learned and God∣ly Man, wrote many Books, one Entituled The com∣plaint of God unto sinful men. There were found in his Study, after his death 3083 Sermons of his own Wri∣ting. He dyed an. 1447. and was buried in the Quire of his own Church. Robert Whittington, born at Lichfield, was an indif∣ferent, but conceited Grammarian. He coped with W. Lillie, (and others) in comparison of whom he was but a crackling Thorn. Since the Reformation. Henry Stafford, Baron of Stafford, was Son to Edw. Duke of Buckingham, beheaded under K. Hen. 8. The Barony descended unforfeited to this Henry, placed here not as a trans, but a Cis-Reformation-man for translating the Book of Dr. Fox, Bishop of Hereford, (a favour∣er of Luther) into English, Of the difference of the Pow∣er Ecclesiastical and Secular. He dyed 1558, some Months before the beginning of Q. Elizabeth.
Sampson Erderswik, Esq born at Sandon, of Anci∣ent and Worshipful Extraction, was a Gentleman, ac∣complished with all Noble Qualities, Affability, De∣votion and Learning. Being a great Antiquary, he be∣gan a description, Etituled a View of Stafford-shire, an. 193. which hath directed me in matters of diffi∣culty relating to  County. He repaired, and new glazed the Church of Sandon, wherein he Erected a Monument for himself, with his Statue in Stone, and lyeth now Interred, dying April 11, 1603. Of him Mr. Cambden sayes, Venerandae Antiquitatis fuit Cultor Maximus. Thomas Allen, descended from Allanus de Buckenhole Lord of Buckenhole, in the Reign of Edw. 2. was bred in Glocester-Hall in Oxford, a most excellent Mathema∣tician, where he succeeded to the skill and scandal of Frier Bacon, as accounted a Conjurer. He was much in favour with Robert Earl of Leicester. His Writings are detained in some private hands. He dyed towards the end of K. James. Edward Leigh of Rushwel-Hall, Esq (alive) wrote Critica Saca, with many other worthy Works, which will make his judicious Industry known to Posterity. Elias Ashmole, Esq (alive) born in Litchfield, a great Antiquary, Chymist, Herauld, Mathematician. John Lightfoot, D. D. (alive) hath deserved well of the Churches of England, for his exact insight in Hebrew and Rabbinical Learning. Romish Exile Writers. W. Gifford, an extract of the Family of Chillington, was a man of much motion. Being bred in Oxford he went over to Lovain, where he became B. D. whence going to Paris, he was highly prized by H. Duke of Guise, (who made him Arch-Bishop of Rhemes) and the Cardinal his Brother, who gave him a Pension of
200 Crowns a year. He became afterwards Dean of St. Pet. the Isle in Rome, then Rector of the Univer∣sity of Rhemes, and at last a Benedictine at Delaware in Lorain. He founded a Convent for English Monks at St. Mallower in France, and another at Paris, for those of the same Profession. He was alive 1611. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir Stephen Jennings Lord Mayor of London, built a fair School at Wolver-Hampton. Another being erect∣ed by Mr. Tho. Allen at Ʋtceter. Martin Noel, Esq born in Stafford, bred Scrivener in London, built, and largely endowed an Hospital in the Town of his Nativity; the first considerable Fa∣brick of that kind in this County. Memorable Persons. Tho. Tarlton. born at Condover in Shrop∣shire:REM Here he was in the Field, keeping his Fathers Swine, when a Servant of Robert Earl of Leicester, (passing this way) was so highly pleased with his odd Answers, that he brought him to Court, where he became the most famous Jester to Q. Eliz. When the Queen was out of humour, he could undum∣pish her at his pleasure. He prepared in some cases for the highest Favourits, an advantagious access to her Ma∣jesty. In a word, he told the Queen more of her Faults, then most of her Chaplains, and cured her Me∣lancholly better than all her Physicians. Much of his Merriment lay in his Looks and Actions, according to his Epitaph, Hic situs est cujus poterat vox, actio, vultus, Ex Heraclito reddere democritum.
His Jests never were prophane, scurrilous nor satyrical, as in which, plurimum Salis nihil veneni. He dyed a∣bout the end of Q. Eliz. James Sands of Horborn, lived 140, and his Wife 120 years. He outlived 5 Leases of 21 years, which were made to him after his Marriage. Walt. Parsons, first an Apprentice to a Smith, grew so tall, that a hole was made for him in the Ground to stand therein, to make him adequate with his Fellow-Workmen. He afterwards was Porter to K. James, a proper place, seeing he might serve both for Tower and Spy, to give notice (upon occasion) of the approach of the Kings Enemies. He would make nothing to take two of the tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under his Arms at once, and order them as he pleased. And his Valour was equal to his Strength. He was proportionable in all parts, and was of a good temper, disdaining to do an injury to any single person. Noted Sheriffs. Hen. 6. An. 1. Ranul. Com. Cestr. and Henry de Al∣dicheleia. This Henry was the first Lord Audley in this County, and Founder of that Noble Family, so long Famous for Martial Atchievments. K. Henry 3. confirmed to him many Lands of his own Grant, and the donation of others. Of the latter kind were these following (the most of them) great Mannors. Aldith∣lege, Coulton, Cold Norton, Betleigh, Shagbourn, Stan∣weare, Tunstal, Chaderley, Chell. Normancot, Nerle, Brudnap, Weston, Hauskley, Bagley, Morton and He∣leigh, afterwards the prime Seat of the Lord Audley, who also had great Lands in Devon-shire. Their Heir Males sailing about the Reign of K. Henry 6. Joan one of their Heirs was Married to Sir John Touchet, whose Son was Baron Audley, Ancestor to the present Lord
Audley, Earl of Castle-Haven in Ireland. Edw. 3. An. 18. John de Aston. I have not met with a more Noble Family, measuring on the Level of flat and un-advantaged Antiquity. They have ever born a good respect to the Church and Learned Men, ever since Roger de Molend Bishop of Litchfield, in the Reign of Henry 3. gave Haywood in this County, to Roger de Aston his Servant, Son to Ralph, and Father to Sir John aforenamed, from whom are descended in a Lineal Succession. Sir Thomas, Sir Roger, Sir Robert, John Aston Esq Sir John, Knight Banneret, Sir Ed∣ward, Sir Walter, Sir Edward, Sir Walter, employed by K. James Ambassadour into Spain. Hen. 6. An. 12. Thomas Stanley, his true name was Audley, for after that Adam youngest Brother to James Lord Audley, had married the Daughter and Heir of Henry de Stanley, William their Son, assumed the Sir∣name of Stanley. This Thomas seems to have been the same person whom K. Henry 6. made Lord Stanley, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Chamberlain of the Houshold; and who was Fa∣ther to Thomas, whom K. Henry 7. Created the first Earl of Derby. 34. John Delves Esq (afterwards Knighted) was the last of his Ancient Family, who were fixed in this County, in the Reign of Edward 3. Helene his sole Daughter and Heir, Married to Robert Sheffield Knight, and Recorder of London, Ancestor to the present Lord of Moulgrave Edw. 4. an. 1. Walter Wrotesley was lineally de∣scended from Sir Hugh, one of the first Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter. Hen 8. an. 28. John Dudley, was afterwards by Hen. 8. Created Duke of Northumberland. K. Charles I. W. Bowyer, lineally descended from Thomas, who in the Reign of Richard 2. Married Ka∣tharine, Daughter and Heir to Robert Knipersley. The
Bowyers of Sussex (invited thither some 200 years since by an Earl of Northumberland) are a younger of these in Stafford. Battles. At Hopton-Heath, March, 1643. a fierce Fight hap∣pened betwixt the Kings and the Parliaments Forces, on a ground full of Cony-borroughs, affording bad footing for the Horse. The Royalists may be said to have got the day, and lost the Sun which made it, I mean the tru∣ly Loyal and Valiant Spencer Earl of Northampton, leaving a grateful Memory, and a Noble and Nume∣rous Issue.
SUFFOLK. SƲffolk hath Norfolk on the North, Cambridgeshire on the West, the German Ocean on the East, and Essex on the South. It stretcheth from East to West 45 Miles, though the general breadth be but 20, sa∣ving that is somewhat towards the Sea. The Air there∣of is esteem'd the best in England, a small parcel near the Sea-side only excepted. There is very good Cheese made in this County, (whereof the finest are very thin) though yielding to the Butter made here, which excells both in Quantity and Quality. The Manufacture of Cloathing in this County hath been much greater, and Clothiers richer heretofore then in these times; Many stately Monuments having been formerly erected to their Memories, and not one in those latter Seasons. The County hath no Cathedral, though generally fair Parish Churches. It had formerly a most magnificent Abbey-Church in Bury, with three lesser Churches waiting thereon in the same Church-yard; of these, but two are extant at this day, being stately Structures. It is generally avouched by all Authors, that Mary youngest Sister to King Henry 8. Relict to Lewis 12. King of France, afterwards Married to Ch. Brandon D. of Suffolk, was buried in the Abbey-Church in Bu∣ry, 1533. Yet her Corps could not protect that Church, which was in few years after levelled to the ground. I read not that her Body was removed, nor doth any Monument remain here to her Memory. The Town of Buy is sweetly seated, and fairly built, especially since 1608. about which time it was defaced with a ca∣sual Fire. The School, a great Ornament to the Town,
was founded by K. Edw. 6. and is it self a Corporation now (as well as ever) flourishing under Mr. Stephens, the able Master thereof. Amongst the Houses of the Gentry, long Melford, late the House of the Countess of Rivers, was the first Fruits of the plundering in Eng∣land. Then Sommerley-Hall nigh Yarmouth, belonging to the Lady Wentworth, is Beautified with pleasant Walks, set with Firr-Trees, verdant all the year. As for others, there are many handsome Houses in the Town of Ipswich, which belong to Merchants. Proverbs. I. Suffolk Milk. No County in England affords bet∣ter. II. Suffolk fair Maids. III. Suffolk-stiles. This belongeth both to Suffolk and Essex, where there are troublesome Stiles to be clambred over. IV. You are in the right way to Needham; spoken of those who ha∣sten to Poverty. Needham is a Market Town in this County, stocked (as it happens) with poor people. Princes. Edmund Mortimer, Son to Roger Earl of March,AMP. was born (probably) in Clare. Af∣ter the death of Richard 2. he was the next Heir to the Crown; but was willing to yield the same to K. Henry 4. so he might receive and enjoy his pri∣vate Patrimony, kept from him by the said Henry, but he could obtain neither. Being afterwards employed by this King in a War against Owen Glendor, the Welsh Rebel, he was taken Prisoner, and neglected by the King, (who had only exposed him to danger under pretence of Honour) he made a shift to ransom himself. Yet did he but exchange a Welsh for an Irish Prison, kept 20 years in restraint in his own Castle of Trim, in the end of the Reign of Henry 4. all the Reign of
Henry 5. and the beginning of Henry 6. He dyed an. 1454. without issue, leaving Anne his Sister his Heir, and was buried in Clare. Saints. St. Edmund, K. of the E. Angles, was cruelly tor∣tured to death at Hoxton in this County, by the Pagan Danes, an. 870. His Body was placed in a goodly Shrine, richly adorned with Jewels, at Bury in this County. Of him a Popish Author; When the Christi∣ans, seeking his Corps, were lost in a Wood, did call to one another, where art? where art? where art? The Mar∣tyred head answered, here, here, here. Here is a three∣fold cord artificially twisted, the full length of which I leave to the learned Author, and will only add, that if those Christians could not hear a Treble voice, they were as deaf, as the Forger was impudent, who first hammered out such a base lye. The Glorious Memo∣ry of this Martyr-King, needs not the rotten Varnish of such Falsities. The Town of Bury bears his Name. Robert Grosthead, bred in Oxford, was eminent for Religion and Learning. He became Bishop of Lin∣coln, 1235. He wrote 300 Treatises, whereof most are extant in Manuscript in Westminster Library. He was a stout Opposer of Popish Oppression. Such his Pi∣ety, that though loaded with Curses from the Pope, he generally obtained the reputation of a Saint. He dyed 1254. Martyrs. Rowland Taylor was bred in Cambridge, became Dr. of Lawes, and Rector of Hadley in this County. He was a proper and comely person, a great Scholar, pain∣ful Preacher, charitable to the Poor, and cheerful in his Behaviour. The same Devotion had different looks
in several Martyrs, frowning in stern Hooper, weeping in meek Bradford, and smiling constantly in pleasant Taylor. Indeed some have censured his merry conceits as trespassing on the gravity of his calling, especially when just before death. But sure such Romanists who admire the temper of Sir Thomas More, jesting with the Axe of the Executioner will excuse our Taylor, for making himself merry with the Stake. But though it be ill jesting with edged Tools (whereof death is the sharpest) yet since our Saviour hath blunted it, his Ser∣vants may rather be delighted then dismayed with it. Not long after, Dr. Taylor set Arch-Bishop Cranmer (his Patron) a Copy of Patience, who indeed wrote af∣ter it, but not with so steady a hand, and so even a Character of Constancy. Taylor was Martyred at Had∣ley, Feb. 9. 1555. Rob. Samuel, Minister of Barfold in this County, was tortured in Prison by the cruelty of Hopton Bishop of Norwich, and Downing his Chancellour, who allowed him every day but three Mouthfuls of Bread, and three Spoonfuls of Water. Fain would he have drunk his own Urine, but his Thirst-parched Body afforded none. I read how he saw a Vision of one all in White, com∣forting and telling him, that after that day, he never should be hungry or thirsty, which came to pass accord∣ingly, being within few hours after Martyred at Ips∣wich, August 31. 1555. There was a Report that his Body when burnt, did shine as bright as burnished Sil∣ver. Some may possibly impute his Vision, and this Appearance, the first to his own, and the latter to the Beholders Imaginations, or both to the forgery of those who were more remote and unconcerned. If to Ima∣gination; it is a plain Concession of the matter of Fact in both, and consequently, a granting of all such things which can be reasonably proved therein. The Argu∣ment I shall use to prove that his Vision was superna∣tural, shall be drawn from the Absurdity of the contra∣ry
Opinion; For since Samuel was reduced (as afore∣said) to extream weakness, his Body being parched, his Humours fixed, and his Spirits exhausted, it is im∣possible that his languishing Phantasie should either produce or receive so bright an Idaea, without the su∣pernatural Assistance of Divine Power. As for the appearance of his Body when burnt; I will suppose, (salvo jure Omnipotentiae,) that some good Christians who beheld his last Suffering, did by an Heroick act of Faith, antedate the glorious State of a Future Re∣surrection: And as Seaware or mud is sometimes found in the Net, or on the Line, after the Fish is catch'd, so they, having stretched out the hand of Faith for ap∣prehending of a Christian verity, might together with the same, receive an erroneous imagination, upon the (then) present occasion. After all, if both instances be charged with subsequent Forgery, as to the matter of Fact, I shall not insist any longer on them, as not being so proveable by others as they are probable in them∣selves. Cardinals. Tho. Woolsey, Son to an honest Butcher, was born in Ipswich; one of so vast undertakings, that our whole Book will not afford room enough for his Character, the writing whereof I commend to some Eminent per∣son of his Foundation of Christs-Church in Oxford. He was Cardinal of St. Cecily, and dyed Heart-broken with grief at Leicester, 1530. without any Monument, of which Dr. Corbet, (one of his Colledge) thus com∣plains, If Thou art thus neglected, what shall we Hope after death that are but Shreds of Thee. He was not guilty of mischievous Pride, and was ge∣nerally
commanded for doing Justice, when Chancellor of England. Prelates. Herb. Losing, was deeply guilty of Simony in his Youth, otherwise when he was Old, being then wont to say, When Young we went astray, when Old we will amend. He dyed 1119. and was buried in the Cathe∣dral Church of Norwich. Richard Angervile, Son to Sir Richard, was born at Bury, and bred in Oxford. He was Governour to King Edw. 3. whilst Prince, and successively his Cof∣ferer, Treasurer of his Wardrobe, Dean of Wells, Bishop of Durham, Chancellour, and lastly Treasurer of England. He bestowed on the Poor every Week 8 Quarters of Wheat baked in Bread. When he re∣moved from Durham to Newcastle, (12 Miles) he used to give 8 pounds to the poor, and so proporti∣onably in other places betwixt his Palaces. He be∣queathed his stately Library to the University of Ox∣ford. He dyed 1345. Jo. Paschal, well descended, bred a Carthusian, and D. D. in Cambridge, was Bishop first of Scutary, then of Landaff under Edw. 3. He dyed 1361. Simon Sudbury, (alias Tibald) was born at Sudbury. He was made Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He began two Synods with Latine Sermons, portending ill suc∣cess to Wickliffe and his followers, but over-awed by God and John Duke of Lancaster, he could do him no harm. He was killed in the Rebellion of J. Straw and Wat Tyler, 1381. being buried in St. Gregories Church in Sudbury, Tho. Edwardston, born in Edwardston, bred in Ox∣ford, then Augustinian in Clare, attended Lionel Duke of Clarence in Italy, when he Married the Daughter of the Duke of Milan. He wrote some Learned
Works, and undertook care of some Arch-Bishoprick (probably) during the vacancy thereof. He dyed at Clare 1396. Tho. Peverel, well descended, a Carmelite, and D. D. in Oxford, was by Rich. 2. made Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, whence he was removed to Landaff in Wales, then to Worcester in England, being much esteemed for his Learning, as his Books do declare. He dyed 1417. and lyeth buried in his own Cathe∣dral. Stephen Gardiner, was born in Bury St. Edmunds, and (by some) reported to be Base-Son to Lionel Wood∣vile, Bishop of Salisbury, though this Bishop was by others, more truly conceived to be younger then he. He was a Man of admirable natural parts, and Me∣mory especially, and was bred Dr. of Laws, in Tri∣nity-Hall in Cambridge. After many great Employ∣ments, he was made Bishop of Winchester. Being Se∣cret in all his own Acts of Cruelty; he often chid Bon∣ner, calling him Ass, though not so much for killing poor people, as for not doing it more cunningly. He (chiefly) contrived the six Articles, (Gardiner's Creed) which caused the death of many, and trouble of more Protestants. He had almost cut off Queen Kath. Par, and prevented Queen Elizabeth, from being Queen, had not Divine Providence preserved them. He through∣ly complyed with Henry 8. opposed K. Edw. 6. by whom he was imprisoned and deprived, acted all under Q. Mary, by whom he was restored, and made Lord Chancellour of England. He is reported to have a∣vowed (at his death) Justification by the Merits of Christ only. He dyed at Whitehall, of the Gout, Nov. 12. 1555, and was buried in the Quire, leaving (as is said) 4000 Marks in ready Money behind him. He improved his power with Queen Mary, to restore some Noble Families formerly depressed, viz. Some descendant from the Duke of Norfolk, the Arundels of Warder-Castle, and the Hungerfords.
Since the Reformation. John Bale, born at Covie, and bred in Jesus-Colledge in Oxford, was a Carmelite in Norwich. He was con∣verted to be a Protestant, by the means of Thomas Lord Wentworth. He wrote a Book de Scriptoribus Britannicis. He was Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, an. 1552. whence on the death of Edw. 6. he fled, (some of his servants being slain before his eyes) and in his passage over the Seas, was taken Prisoner, ransom'd, and safely arrived in Switzerland. Under Q. Eliz: he was made only Prebendary of the Church of Can∣terbury, being (probably) a pson more learned then discreet, fitter to write then govern, as unable to com∣mand his own Passion, and Biliosus Balaeus passeth for his true Character. He dyed at Canterbury, 1563. and was buried in the Cathedral Church therein. John May, bred in Cambridge, was Consecrated Bi∣shop of Carlile, September 27. 1577. and dyed in April 1598. John Overal, D. D. born at Hadley, was Regius Professor in Cambridge, and Master of Kath. Hall, afterwards Dean of St. Pauls. He was by King Jam employed in the New Translation of the Bible, and made Bishop of Norwich, where he was a discreet presser of Conformity. He dyed 1618. Leonard Maw, born at Rendlesham (antiently the Residence of the Kings of the E. Angles, where K. Redwald kept at the same time a Communion Table, and Altars for Idols) was Master of Peter House, then of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and in 5 years disenga∣ged that Foundation from a great debt. He was Chap∣lain to King Charles whilst he was a Prince, and wait∣ed on him in Spain, by whom he was made Bishop of Bath and Wells. A good Scholar, grave Preacher,
mild man, and gentile in his deportment. He dyed 163. Ralph Brownrig, D. D. born in Ipswich, was the Son of a Merchant. He was Fellow of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, where he to the wonder of the hearers, performed the Joco-serious part of a Philosophy Act, be∣fore King James; no man had more ability, or less in∣clination to be Satyrical. His Wit was Page, and not Privy Councellor to his Judgment. He had a Loyal Memory, quick Fancy, solid Judgment, and fluid Ut∣terance, being not only flumen, but fulmen Eloquentiae. When Commencing B. D. he chose for his Text, Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given, not only to believe but suffer, somewhat Propetical to him, being afterwards affronted and defied by some, who almost Deified him before, in whose Eyes he seemed the blacker, for wearing white Sleeves, when 1641. made Bishop of Exeter; Dr. Young Preaching his Consecration Sermon on this Text, The Waters are risen, &c. complained of the many invasions which Popular Violence had made on the Rights and Priviledges of Church and State. This Bishop himself was soon sadly sensible of such In∣undations, and yet by the procerity of his parts and pi∣ty, he not only safely waded through them himself, but also (when Vice-Chancellour of Cambridge) by his Pru∣dence raised such Banks, that those overflowings were not so destructive, as otherwise they would have been to the University. He continued constant to the Church of England, a Champion of the needful use of the Li∣turgy, and for the priviledges of Ordination to belong to Bishops alone. Being unmoveable in his Principles of Loyalty, he told Oliver the Usurper, (demanding his Advice in a matter of great difficulty) My Lord, the best Counsel I can give you is, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, with which free Answer, O. C. was rather si∣lenced then satisfied. A little before his death he was
Minister of both Temples. He dyed December 7. 1659. Aet. 67. The deserved Opinion of his good∣ness had peaceable possession in the hearts of the Presby∣terian-Party, and at his Burial, the prime persons of all perswasions were present. Dr. Jo. Gauden wrote the Memorials of his Life, and hath since succeeded him in the Temple and Bishoprick of Exeter. Statesmen. Sir Nich. Bacon, Knight, born not far from St. Ed∣mund Bury, of a very ancient Family, and bred in Ben. Colledge in Cambridge, (in which he built a beau∣tiful Chappel) after he had studied the Common Law, was made Atturney to the Court of Wards, whence he was preferred Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, an. 1. Eliz. 1558. He Married Anne, second Daughter to Sir Anth. Cook of Giddy-Hall in Essex, Governour to King Edw. 6. Queen Elizabeth relyed upon him as her Oracle in Law, who, that he might clear the Point of her Succession, derived her Right from a Statute which allowed the same, though there was a Statute, whereby the Queen was made illegitimate, in the days of her Father remained unrepealed, the rather, be∣cause Lawyers maintain, that a Crown once worn clear∣eth all defects of the wearer thereof. He was a Man of rare Wit and deep Experience, though of a corpu∣lent Body, especially in his old Age, so that he would be not only out of breath, but also almost out of life, with going to Westminster-Hall to the Star-Chamber; According to his Motto, Mediocria Firma, he never attained, because he never affected any great Estate. He was not for invidious Structures, but delighted in Domo Domino Pari, such as was his house at Gorham∣bury in Hartford. And therefore, when Q. Elizabeth coming thither in Progress, told him, My Lord, your house is too little for you, no Madam (said he) But it is
your Highness hath made me too great for my house. He left rather a good then a great Estate to his Posterity, whose eldest Son Sir Edward was the first Baronet of England. He dyed Feb. 20. 1578. and lyeth buried in the Quire of St. Pauls. In a Word, he was a good man, a grave Statesman, a Father to his Country, and a Father to Sir Francis Bacon. Sir W. Drury, descended of a Worshipful Family long flourishing at Haulsted, answered his name (Drury in Sax. Pearle) in the pretiousness of his disposition, clear and hard, innocent and valiant. His Youth he spent in the French Wars, his middle in Scotland, and his Old Age in Ireland. He was Knight Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had possessed them∣selves of the Castle of Edenburgh, in the Minority of King James. Queen Elizabeth employed this Sir Will. with 1500 to besiege the Castle, which service he right worthily performed, reducing it within few dayes to the true Owner thereof. He was appointed Lord Pre∣sident of Munster, 1575. where he executed impartial justice in spight of the Opposers thereof; entring Ker∣ry with a competent Train, (of 140 Men) with which he forced his Return through 700 Men, belonging to the Earl of Desmond, who claimed Kerry as a Palati∣nate peculiarly belonging to himself. In the last year of his Life, he was made Lord Deputy of Ireland, dying at Waterford, 1598. Sir Robert Naunton, was descended from an ancient Family, extant at (or before) the time of the Conque∣rour, who rewarded the Chief of that Name for his Service, with a great Inheritrix given him in Marriage, whose Lands were then estimated at 700 pounds a year. For a long time they were Patrons of Alderton in this County. Sir Robert was bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and Proctor of the University, 1600. He wrote (in his Youth I conjecture) an excellent piece cal∣led Fragmenta Regalia. He was afterwards sworn
Secretary of State to King James, Jan. 8. 1617. which place he discharged with great ability and dexterity; during which, one Wiemark was called to an Account for saying, the Head of Sir Waltar Raleigh (beheaded that day) would do very well on the Shoulders of Sir Ro∣bert Naunton, and having alleadged in his own Justifi∣cation, that two heads were better than one, he was for the present dismissed. Afterwards Wiewark, being with other wealthy persons called on for a Contribution to St. Pauls, first subscribed 100 pounds at the Coun∣cil Table, but was glad to double it, after Mr. Secre∣tary had told him, two hundred were better then one: Sir Robert dyed 163.. leaving one Daughter, who first was Married to Paul Visc. Banning, and after to the Lord Herbert, eldest Son to Philip Earl of Pembroke. Capital Judges. Jo. de Metingham, Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon-Pleas, in the Reign of Edw. 3. When all the rest of the Judges (an. 18. Edw. 3.) were fined and outed for Corruption, this Jo. and Elias de Beckingham con∣tinued in their places, whose innocence was of proof against all Accusations. King Edw. 3. (an. 20. reg.) directed a Writ to him, about the stinting of the num∣ber of the Apprentices, and Atturneys at Law, to 140, (or thereabouts) according to the discretion of this Judge, and his Assistants, whereof a certain num∣ber were to be provided out of every County,—what may better avail for their Court, and the good of the peo∣ple of the Land. Sir Jo. Cavendish Knight, born at Cavendish in this County, (where his Name continued untill the Reign of King Henry 8.) was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, an. 46. Edw. 3. He dyed a violent death, an. 5. Rich. 2. on this occasion. J. Raw, a Priest, contemporary with J. Straw and Wat Tyler,
advanced Robert Westbroom a Clown, to be King of the Commons in this County, having 50000 followers. These for eight dayes together, in savage sport, caused the Heads of great persons to be cut off, and set on Poles, to kiss and whisper in one anothers ears. Chief Justice Cavendish chanced to be then in the Country, to whom they bare a double pique, for his Honesty and Learning. Besides, they had lately heard that Jo. Ca∣vendish his Kinsman, had killed their Idol Wat Tyler in Smithfield: Whereupon they drag'd the Reverend Judge, with Sir Jo. of Camb. Prior of Bury, into the Market place there, and beheaded them; whose inno∣cent blood remained not long unrevenged by Spencer, the Warlike Bishop of Norwich, by whom this Ras∣cal Rabble of Rebels was routed and ruined 1381. Sir Robert Broke, a great Lawyer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Reign of Q. Mary, wrote an excellent Abridgement of the Law. His Po∣sterity still flourish in a Worshipful Equipage at Nacton, nigh Ipswich in this County. Souldiers. Sir Th. Wentworth, of Nettlested, descended from the Wentworths in York-shire, was Created Baron Wentw. by King Henry 8. He was a Valiant Gentleman, a Cordial Protestant, and his Family a Sanctuary of such Professors. By his means Jo. Bale was converted from a Carmelite. The Memory of this Lord is much (but unjustly) blemished, because Calis was lost the last of Q. Mary, under his Government, the manner thus; The English being secure by reason of their late Con∣quest at St. Quintin, and the Duke of Guise having no∣tice thereof, sat down before the Town on New-years day. Next day he took the Forts of Rise-bank and Newnam-Bridge, which ('tis suspected) were betray∣ed. Within three dayes, the Castle of Calis, which
commanded the City, and was under the command of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, was taken, the French being first repulsed back by Sir Anth. Ager, (the only Man of note who was killed in the Fight) entred the City the next day, being Twelfth day. Then resistance being in vain, the Lord Wentworth Deputy thereof, was forced to take what terms he could get, that the Townsmen should depart (though plundered to a groat) with their Lives, and himself, with 49 more should remain Prisoners to be put to ransom. Queen Mary might thank her self for losing this Key of France, because hanging it at her side with so slender a string, there being but 500 Souldiers effectually in the Garrison. The Lord Wentworth was condemned for High-Trea∣son, during his absence, but Queen Mary, soon after dying, he was tryed and acquitted by his Peers, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, though Sir Jo. Harl∣ston Governour of Rise-bank, and Sir Ralph Chamber∣lain Governour of Calis-Castle were both condemned, but their Judgment was remitted. This Lord played in a manner Rubbers, when his Head lay at Stake, and having lost the fore, recovered the after-game. He dyed very Aged, 1590. Seamen. Th. Cavendish, of Trimley, Esq intending forreign discoveries, on his own cost Victualled and Furnished three Ships (the least of Fleets) viz. the Desire, Ad∣miral, 120 Tuns, the Content, Vice-Admiral, 40, and the Hugh-Gallant, Rere-Admiral, 40 Tuns; all three man'd with 123, and setting to Sea from Ply∣mouth, July 21. 1586. Entring the mouth of the Ma∣gellan Straits, 7 Jan. following, where they suffered great hunger; Mr. Cavendish named a Town there Port-Famine. The Spaniards intending to fortifie the Straits, and engross the passage, were smitten with such a
Mortality, that scarce 5 of 500 did survive. On Feb. 24. they entred the South Sea, and frequently landed, as they saw occasion. Many their Conflicts with the Natives, more with the Spaniards, coming off gainers in most, and savers in all encounters, that at Quinterno excepted, April 1. 1587. when they lost 12 men of aount, the cause that they afterwards sunk the Rere-Admiral, for want of Men to manage her. Of the many prizes he took, the St. Anne was the most con∣siderable, being the Spanish Admiral of the S. Sea, of 700 Tuns, and 190 Men. There were 122000 Pe∣zos (each worth 8 shillings) of Gold, with other Rich Lading, as Silks and Musk. Mr. Cavendish landed the Spaniards, and left them plentiful Provisions. Surround∣ing the East-Indies, and returning for England, the Content (whose Men were mutinous) stayed behind. Mr. Cavendish safely landing at Plymouth, Sept. 9. 1588. Amongst his Men, three most remarkable, Mr. John Way, their Preacher, Mr. Th▪ Fuller of Ipswich, their Pilote, and Mr. Fr. Pretty of Eyke, in this County, who wrote the History of their Voyage. Thus having circumnavigated the whole Earth, let his Ship be no longer termed the Desire, but the Performance. He was the third Man, and second Englishman of such uni∣versal undertakings. In his next Voyage, begun 26 August 1591. he was severed from his Company the November following, near Port-desire (by him formerly so named,) in the Megellan-Straits, and never seen or heard of afterwards. Physicians. W. Butler, born at Ipswich, was Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, where he became the Aesculapius of our Age. He was the first Englishman who quick∣ned Galenical Physick with a touch of Paracelsus; Be∣ing excellent at the instant discovery of a cadaverous
face, at the first sight of sick Prince Henry, he got him∣self out of the way; knowing himself to be Prince of Physicians, he would be observed accordingly: Com∣plements would prevail nothing with him, intreaties but little, surely threatnings would do much, and a witty jeer would do any thing. Neatness he neglected into slovenliness, and accounted cuffs to be manacles. He made his humoursomness to become him, wherein some of his Profession have rather aped then imitated him, who kept the tenour of the same surliness to all persons. He was a good Benefactor to Clare-Hall, and dyed 1621, he was buried in the Chancel of St. Maries in Cambridge, leaving nothing to his only Bro∣ther, because he had turned Papist beyond the Seas. VVriters. Humphrey Necton, a Carmelite in Norw. and the first D. D. of his Order in Cambridge, flourished under Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. and dyed, 1303. Jo. Horminger, Travelling in Italy, where he heard some Italians villifie England, as being only fruitful of a barbarous people, wrote in her defence, an Epitome of the Commodities thereof, and (after his return) Of the Profit and Pleasure of England, He flourished 1310. Th. of Ely, born in Monks-Ely, was a Carmelite, the second D. D. of his Order in Cambridge. He tra∣velled over the Seas, and kept Lectures at Bruges in Flanders till his death, about 1320. Rich. Lanham, a Carm. in Ipswich, and D. D. in Oxford, was a great Adversary to the Wicklevites. His Learning is attested by the Books he left to Poste∣rity. Some say he was beheaded by the Rebellious Crew of Wat Tyler, others, that he dyed a natural death at Bristol, 1381.
Jo. Kinyngham, a Carm. in Ipswich, then bred in Oxford, was prefect of his Order in England and Ire∣land, Confessor to Jo of Gaunt and his Lady. He was the first who encountred Wickliffe in the Schools of Oxford, and disputed with great ingenuity and mode∣sty, whereupon his good Antagonist praed heartily, that his Judgment might be convinced. He dyed 1399. and was buried at York▪ Jo. Lydgate, born at Lydgate, was a Benedictine in St. Edmund Bury; the best Author of his Age in Poe∣try and Prose. He wrote of himself as follows, I wear a habite of Perfection, Although my Life agrees not with the same, &c. He dyed about 1444. and was buried in his own Con∣vent. Jo. Barningham, born at Barningham, was a Carm. in Ipswich, and D. D. in Oxford, and in Sorbon the Cock-pit of Controversies. He had a subtile Wit, and was a great Master of Defence in Schools, both to guard and hit. He wrote 4 fair Volumes. He dyed 1448. Jo. of Bury, an Augustinian in Clare, and D. D. in Cambridge, was Prov. of his Order, through England and Ireland, and a great Opposer of Wicklevites, flou∣rishing 1460. Th. Scroope, born at Bradley, but descended from the Lord Scroope in Yorkshire, was a Benedictine, a Car∣melite in Norwich, then an Anchorite 20 years, after∣wards (by papal dispensation) Bishop of Drummore in Ireland, and at last an Anchorite again, yet using once a Week to walk on his bare Feet, and Preach the De∣calogue, in the Villages round about. About 1425. being cloathed with Sackcloth, and girt about with an Iron Chain, he cry'd out in the Streets, That new Je∣rusalem was shortly to come down, &c. Rev. 21. and
that with great Joy he saw the same in the Spirit, Th. Waldensis the great Anti-VVicklivite, offended there∣at, protested it was a great scandal to the Church. Scroop lived very nigh 100 years, being accounted a Holy man. He was buried at Leoffe, 1491. Since the Reformation. Rich. Sibs born nigh Sudbury, was Fellow in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, afterwards Preacher to the Honourable Society of Grays-Inn, whence he was chosen Master of St. Kath. Hall in Cambridge which he found in a low condition, but left replenished with Scholars, beautified, and better endowed. He was most eminent for Christian humility. Of all points of Divinity, he most pressed that of Christs Incarnation or Humility, the true Original whence he copied his own. He dyed 1631. W. Alabaster, born at Hadley, was Fellow in Trin. Colledge in Cambridge; a most rare Poet, witness his Tragedy of Roxana, so admireably Acted in that Col∣ledge, and so pathetically, that a Gentlewoman present thereat, at the hearing of the last words thereof, Se∣quar, Sequar, so hideously pronounced, fell distracted, and never after recovered her Senses. He was Chap∣lain to Robert Earl of Essex in Calis Voyage, where he staggered in his Religion, and afterwards turned Pa∣pist; though he returned both to his Religion and Country, where he was made Preb. of St. Pauls, and Rector of Tharfield in Hartford. He was an excellent Hebrician. He dyed 163.. Samuel Ward, was born at Haveril, where his Fa∣ther had been a Famous Minister, according to his E∣pitaph,
Quo si quis scivit scitius Aut si quis docuit doctius At rarus vixit sanctius Et nullus tonuit fortius. Grant some of knowledge greater store, More Learned some in teaching, Yet few in Life did Lighten more, None thundered more in Preaching. Sam. was bred in Sidn. Colledge in Cambridge, and be∣came a great Scholar, and excellent Preacher. Being Minister in Ipswich, he gained the Affections of the people, by the tender care he had of them, yet he had his Foes as well as Friends, who complained of him to the High Com. where he met with some molestation. He had three Brethren, and it was said, that these four put together would not make up the abilities of their Father; nor were they offended with this Hyperbole: One of them (lately dead) followed the Counsel of the Poet, Ridentem dicere verum, Quis vetat? having in a jesting way delivered much smart truth of the times. Sam. dyed 163.. Jo. Boise, born at Elmeseth, bred in Cambridge, was of the Quorum in Translating the Bible, and whilst Chysostome lives, Mr. Boise shall not dye, such his learned pains on him in the Edition of Sir H. Savil. He dyed about the beginning of the Civil Wars. Romish Exile Writers. Robert Southwell, wrote many Books? and was re∣puted
a dangerous Enemy to the State, for which he was Imprisoned, and Executed, March 3. 1595. Benefactors to the Publick. Elizabeth, third Daughter of Gilb. Earl of Clare, and Wife to Jo. Burgh Earl of Ʋlster in Ireland, had her greatest Honour from Clare in this County. She Founded Clare-Hall in Cambridge, an. 1343. Sir Simon Eyre, born at Brandon, first an Ʋpholster, then a Draper in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor 1445, on his own cost built Leaden-Hall, for a com∣mon Garner of Corn to the City. He left 5000 Marks to charitable uses. He dyed Sept. 18. an. 1459. and is buried in the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth in Lum∣bard-Street, London. Th. Spring, the rich Clothier, was born (I believe) at Laveham. He built the Carved Chappel of Wain∣scot, on the North side of the Chancel, as also the Chap∣pel at the South side of the Church. He dyed 1510, and lyeth buried in his own Chappel. Since the Reformation. W. Coppinger was born at Bucks-hall, in this County, where his Family flourisheth in good esteem. He was bred a Fishmonger in London, whereof he became Lord Mayor 1512. He gave the half of his (great) Estate to pious uses. I am sorry to see this Gentleman's an∣cient Arms substracted (in point of honour) by the ad∣dition of a superfluous Bordure. Sir W. Cordal Knight,S. N. had a fair Estate in Long-Melford, and was well descended. He became a Barrister, Speaker of the Parliament, and Privy Counsellour, and Master of the Rolls, to Queen Mary. He founded a fair Almshouse at Melford, and
left a large allowance to the poor, for Diet and Cloaths, He continued Master of the Rolls till the day of his death, 23 Eliz. Sir Robert Hicham Knight, and Serjeant at Law, born at or near Nacton, purchased the Mannor of Fram∣lingham from the Earl of Suffolk, and entered into the same, after great and many intervening Obstacles. He left a great part of his Estate to pious uses, and prin∣cipally to Pembrook-Hall in Cambridge. He dyed a lit∣tle before the beginning of the Civil Wars. Memorable Persons. Jo. Cavendish Esq born at Cavendish, was servant to Richard 2. when Wat Tyler played Rex in London, whom he, in assistance of Sir W. Walworth Lord Mayor of London, dispatched by giving two or three mortal wounds. The beginning of the bustle, was that Wat took it mightily in dudgeon that Sir Jo. Newton did not make a mannerly approach to him, upon which the said Lord arrested Wat, and wounded him with his Dagger. Hence the Arms of London were aug∣mented with a Dagger. King Richards discretion ap∣peared very much in appeasing the tumult, which hap∣pened 1381. Sir Th. Cook Knight, and Sir W. Capel Knight, born, the first at Lavenham, the later at Stoke-Ney∣land, were bred Drapers in London, and were Lord Mayors of the City. Sir Will. is reported, after a large entertainment for King Henry 7. to have burnt many Bonds, in which the King stood obliged to him, and at another time to have drank a dissolved Pearl (which cost him many hundreds) in an Health to the King. Sir Th. was in danger of his Life, for lending Money in the Reign of K. Edw. 4 Both dyed in Age, Honour and Riches, these transmitted to their Poste∣rity:
The Cooks flourishing at Giddy-hall, and the Ca∣pels at Hadham in Hartford. Note Elizabeth, Daugh∣ter of Sir Will. Capel, was Married to Sir W. Pawlet Marquess of VVinchester and Mildred, descended from Sir Th. Cook, to VV. Cecil Lord Burleigh, both their Husbands being Lord Treasurers of England. Sir Tho. lyeth buried in the Church of Augustine Friars in Lon∣don; Sir VV. Capel in St. Bartholomews behind the Ex∣change. Noted Sheriffs. Q. Eliz. An. 18. Jo. Higham, Arm. (the anci∣ent Sirname of the Lords Montaign in France) was de∣scended from Sir Clem. a Potent Knight. 20. Robert Jermin, a pious Man, and a great Bene∣factor to Emanuel Colledge, and a potent man, was Fa∣ther to Sir Th. (Privy Councellor and Lord Chamber∣lain to King Charles I.) Grandfather to Tho. and Hen. Esq the younger of these being Lord Chamberlain to our present Queen Mary, and sharing in her Majesties sufferings, was by King Charles II. made Baron and Earl of St. Albans. 23. Nich. Bacon, Mil. was the first Baronet in England. 36. Tho. Crofts, Arm. was Grandfather to — Crofts, who was created Baron Crofts, by K. Cha. II. Sir Simond Dewes was Grandfather to Adrian, de∣scended from the Lords of Kessel in Gelderland, who came thence in the time of their Civil Wars, in the Reign of Henry 8. He was bred in Cambridge, and became a great Antiquary. He observed that the Or∣dinances of the late long Parliament, did in Bulk and Number exceed all the Statutes made since the Con∣quest. He dyed about 1653.
SURREY. SƲrrey hath Middlesex on the North, Kent on the East, Sussex on the South, Hant and Bark-shire on the West. It is (very near) a Square of 22 Miles, the Skirts whereof are fruitful, and the inward parts barren, though generally the Air be clear, and the ways clean. Here is the most and best Fullers Earth, digged up near Rygate. It is worth four pence a Bu∣shel at the Pit, and the Transportation thereof is pro∣hibited. The County likewise affords good Trouts and VVall-nuts, and the best Box growing about Dark∣ing. In this Shire there is the best Gardening for Pro∣fit; King James about the end of his Reign, gave 2000 pounds to Sir Francis Crane, to build a House at Morelack, for setting up a Manufacture of Tapestry, and one Francis Klein a German, was the designer thereof, and united the Italian and Dutch perfections in that Mysy. This Klein afterwards setled in Lon∣don, where he had a gratuity of 100 pounds per An. until the beginning of the late Civil Wars. The chief Buildings are Richmond, built by King Henry 7. and most pleasantly seated on the Thames; Non-such built by King Henry 8. answereth its Name for compleat Architecture, though exceeded by Wimbleton in point of a neat Scituation. This was built by Sir Th. Cecil in 88. Of Medicinal Waters, those at Ebsham, (found out 1618, in a dry season, the Water being first ob∣served in a Horse or Neats-footing) run through some Veins of Alume, and are abstersive and sanative, being outwardly and inwardly taken. The wonder in this County is, that there is a River (termed Mole) at a
place called the Swallow, that sinketh into the Earth, and surgeth again, some two miles off nigh Letherhead, and 'tis said, a Goose was put in, and came out again with Life; if so, there was a wonderful preservation of the Goose! There is also a Vault nigh Rygate, ca∣pable to receive 500 Men, which was anciently the Receptacle of some great person, a proper place it seems, for the exercise of Valour, (if the old saying in arenam descendere be capable of a litteral sense) af∣fording the finest Sand, and having several Rooms therein. Proverbs. I. The Vale of Holms-dale, never won, ne never shall. Holms-dale, (partly in this County, and partly in Kent) when in the hands of the Saxon Kings was generally victorious; yet VVilliam the Conqueror having van∣quished Harold, passed through the middle of it, in his way to London. Princes. Henry, eldest Son of King Henry 8. and Queen Ka∣tharine Dowager, was born at Richmond, an. 1509. Jan. 1. and lived but about two Months. K. Hen. 8. alleadged his untimely death, with that of another Son by the same Queen, as a punishment, for begetting them on the Body of his Brothers Wife. This Prince was buried in VVestminster. Henry of Oatlands, 4th, and youngest Son of King Charles I. and Queen Mary was born at Oatlands, 1640. He was commonly called Duke of Glocester, though not solemnly Created. In the year 1654, almost as soon as his two Elder Brethren had removed themselves into Flanders, he found a strong practice in some of the
Queens Court, to seduce him to the Court of Rome, whose temptations he resisted beyond his years, and thereupon was sent by them into Flanders. He had a great Appetite to Learning, and a quick Digestion, a∣ble to take as much as his Tutors could teach him. He fluently could speak many, understood more Modern Tongues. He was able to express himself in matters of importance presently, properly, solidly, to the Ad∣miration of such who trebled his Age Judicious his Curiosity to enquire into Navigation, and other Mathe∣matical Mysteries. His Courtesie set a lustre on all, and commanded mens Affections to love him. He dy∣ed at VVhitehall, Sept. 13. 1660. and was buried in the Chappel of King Henry 7. Confessors. Eleanor Cobham, Daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough Castle in this County, was afterwards Mar∣ried to Humphrey Plantag. Duke of Glocester. She was persecuted for being a VVicklevite, and for other hai∣nous crimes, under Hen. 6. an. 14. Prelates. Nich. of Fernham, (or de Fileceta) was born at Fernham, and bred a Physician in Oxford. After he had travelled, he became Physician to King Henry 3. by whom he was made Bishop of Chester, afterwards of Durham. Having written many Books, he dyed 1257. VValt. de Merton, was thrice Chancellor under K. Hen. 3. and Bishop of Rochester. He founded Mer∣ton-Colledge in Oxford, and dyed 1277. Th. Cranley, born (probably) at Cranley, was the first Warden of New-Colledge in Oxford, thence pre∣ferred
Arch-Bishop of Dublin in Ireland, where he was made Chancellor by King Henry 4. and Chief Ju∣stice thereof by King Henry 5. He wrote a terse Po∣em to the King, of the Rebellious humour of the Irish. He was a great Scholar, Divine, and an excellent Preacher; Tho. of Marleborough thus (blasphemously) bespeaks him, Thou art fairer then the Children of Men, full of Grace are thy Lips. He dyed at Faringdon, and lyeth buried in New-Colledge Chappel. Nich. West, born at Putney, and bred in Cambridge, was in his youth a Rakel in grain, for something cros∣sing him in the Kings-Colledge, he in revenge, secret∣ly set the Masters Lodgings on fire; but naughty Boys sometimes make good Men. He reformed himself, and in process of time was transformed into a great Scho∣lar and Statesman, being preferred Bishop of Ely, and employed in many Forreign Embassies. He rebuilt the Masters Lodgings (part of which he had burnt) firm and fair from the ground. He lived in great State, and kept a bountiful house, dying 1533. Since the Reformation. Jo. Parkhurst, born at Gilford, and bred in Oxford, was Tutor, yea Mecenas to Jo. Jewel: He was Bene∣ficed at Clere in Glocester-shire. He laid himself out in the Works of Charity and Hospitality. He used to examine the pockets of such Oxford Scholars as repair∣ed to him, and alwayes recruited them with necessa∣ries. Yet after the death of King Edward 6. he had not a house to hide himself in, flying beyond the Seas (in the Reign of Queen Mary) and being robbed be∣fore his return of that little he had, by some Searchers appointed for that purpose. Being returned into Eng∣land, he was by Queen Elizabeth made Bishop of Norwich, 1560. His Epigrams declare his excellency in Poetry. He dyed 1574.
Tho. Ravis, born at Maulden, of worthy Parentage, was Dean of Christs Church in Oxford, of which Uni∣versity he was twice Vice-Chancellour. He was made Bishop of Glocester, whence he was removed to Lon∣don, where he dyed 1609. and lyeth buried in his Cathedral. Rob. Abbot, D. D. born at Guilford, principal of Bal. Colledge, and Kings Professor of Divinity in Ox∣ford, was a man whom every liberal Employment did beseem. He routed the Reasons of Bishop, the Ro∣mish Champion, that he never could rally them again. His preferment to the Bishoprick of Salisbury was late, and his continuance therein but short, being hard∣ly warm in his See, before cold in his Coffin. He was one of 5 Bishops whom Salisbury saw in 6 years; yet whilst-Bishop, he saw his Brother George at the same time Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. The delay of his Advancement is imputed to his Humility, to his Foes (who traduced him for a Puritan) and to his Friends, who were loath to adorn the Church with the spoil of the University, and marr a Professor to make a Bi∣shop. George Abbot born at Guilford, (one of that happy Ternion of Brothers, whereof two eminent Prelates, the third Lord Mayor of London) was bred in Oxford. A pious Man, and excellent Preacher, as his Lectures on Jonah do declare. He was mounted from a Lectu∣rer to a Dignitary, and was never incumbent on any Living with Cure of Souls, nor acquainted with the trou∣ble of taking Tithes; which is assigned by some as the cause of his severity to Ministers when brought before him. Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar, then Omni-prevalent with King James, he was unex∣pectedly preferred Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Two things are charged on his Memory, first, that he re∣spected his Secretary above his Chaplains, secondly,
that he connived at the spreading of Non-Conformity. He was much humbled with a casual homicide of a Keeper of the Lord Zouch's in Bramzel-Park, though he was soon after solemnly acquitted from any irregula∣rity therein. In the Reign of King Charles I. he was Sequestred, say some, on the old account of that Ho∣micide, though others say, for refusing to Licence a Sermon of Dr. Sibthorps. Probably his former ob∣noxiousness for that casualty was renewed on the occa∣sion of such refusal. He dyed 1633, having Erected a large Hospital with liberal maintenance at Guilford. Rich. Corbet, D. D. born at Ewel, became Dean of Christs Church, then Bishop of Oxford; an high Wit, and most excellent Poet, and of a courteous Car∣riage. He was afterwards advanced Bishop of Nor∣wich, where he dyed 1635. Statesmen. Tho. Cromwel, born at Putney: Of whom at large in my Church Hist. William Howard, Son to Thomas Duke of Howard, was by Queen Mary created Baron of Effingham, and made Lord Admiral of England. He was one of the first Favourers and Furtherers of the discovery of Rus∣sia. He died 154.. Whose Son Ch. Howard succeeded his Father in the Admiralty, an hearty Gentleman, and cordial to his Soveraign, of a most proper person, one reason why Q. Elizabeth reflected so much upon him. The first Evidence he gave of his Prowess was, when the Emperours Sister the Spouse of Spain, with a Fleet of 130 Sails, passed the narrow Seas, his Lordship accompanied with 10 Ships only environed their Fleet, and enforced them to stoop gallant, and strike Sail. In 88. at the first News of the Spaniards approach, he towed at a Cable with
his own hands, to draw out the Harbour bound Ships into the Sea. He was Commander of the Sea Forces, at the taking of Cadiz, and for his good Service there, he was made Earl of Nottingham. Having been a Guest at the Consecration of Matthew Parker at Lam∣beth, many years after, he confuted those Lies which the Papists tell of the Nags Head in Cheapside. He resigned his Admiralty in the Reign of King James to the Duke of Buckingham, and dyed about the end of that Kings Reign. Seamen. Sir Robert Dudley, Son to Robert Earl of Leicester, was born at Shene, became a most compleat Gentle∣man, and endeavoured in the Reign of King James, to prove his legitimacy (his Mother being Douglas She∣feld) and meeting with much opposition from the Court, in distaste left the Land, and went over into Italy, where he became a Favourite to the Duke of Florence, who used his directions in all his Buildings. Legorn was much beholding to him for its fairness and firmness, as chief Contriver of both. Upon his refusal to come home into England, all his Lands there were siezed on by the King. These his losses doubled the Dukes love to him, as being a much meriting Person, an excellent Mathematician, Physician and Navigator. In Queen Elizabeths dayes he had sail'd with three small Ships to the Isle of Trinidad, in which Voyage he sunk and took nine Spanish Ships, whereof one an Armada of 600 Tun. Ferd. 2. Emperour of Germany, confer∣red on him and his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the Sacred Empire.
Writers. Nich. Ockham, a Franciscan in Oxford, where he was the 18th. publick Lecturer of his Convent, flou∣rished 1320. W. Ockham, born in Ockham, was bred under J. Scotus, whose Principles he afterwards disproved, head∣ing the Nominals against the Reals, followers of Scotus. This Will. undertook Pope Jo. 23. and gave a Mortal wound to his Temporal Power over Princes. The Court of Lewis of Bavaria, the Emperour being then the Sanctuary of this Will; yet he was Excommunicated by the Pope, and condemned for an Heretick by the Masters of Paris, who burnt his Books, which were much esteemed by Luther; yet the Pope taking Wit in his Anger, Will. was afterwards restored to his State, and the Reputation of an acute Schoolman, his Epitaph reflects on his Spirit of Contradiction; Sed jam mortuus est ut apparet Quod si viveret, id negaret. But now he's dead as plainly doth appear, Yet would deny it, were he living here. He flourished under K. Edw. 3. and dying 1330, was buried at Monchen in Bavaria. Jo. Holbrook, a profound Philosopher and Mathema∣tician, was much esteemed of the English Nobility. He is conjectured to have flourished in the 14th. Cen∣tury. George Ripley, see York-shire.
Since the Reformation. H. Hammond, D. D. born at Chertsey, was Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, till preferred Canon of Christs Church, and Orator of the University. He may be called an Angelical Doctor, for his Countenance, Sanctity, Meekness, Charity, (this demonstrated by his keeping many a poor Royalist from famishing, be∣stowing yearly (as was believed) 200 pounds for their relief,) and his Knowledge, being general in Antiqui∣ty, Controversie, &c. His excellent Controversial Treatises, Comments, and Practical Catechism, do a∣bundantly declare the accomplishments of his Mind, and the stability of his great Soul. He dyed of the Stone, at West wood in Worcestershire. By his Will he impowred Dr. Humphrey Henchman (since Bishop of Sarum) his sole Executor, to expend, according to his discretion, in relief of poor people, not exceeding 200 pounds. Romish Exile Writers. Nich. Sanders, born at Charlewood in this County (where his Family still continueth Worshipful) was bred Batchelour of the Laws in New-Colledge. Going to Rome, he was there made D. D. and Kings Profes∣sor thereof at Lovain. He was Learned and Malici∣ous, and presumed to write Passages without Truth, because on a subject beyond Memory. His Libellous Treatise has been sufficiently answered by that Learned Baronet, Sir Roger Twisden, a great Champion in a good Cause, in the defence of which, and in the con∣founding of malicious falshoods, he was protected by the Kings ancient Prerogative, justified by the Laws of the Land, and directed by the plainest Rules of right
Reason. It is observable that Sanders, who surfeited with Falshoods, was famished for lack of food in Ire∣land, 1520. Benefactors to the Publick. Henry Smith Esq born at VVandsworth, was Alder∣man of London; He gave 6000 pounds to buy Lands for a perpetuity, for the relief and setting of the poor to work, in Croidon, Kingston, Guilford, Darking, Fernham, Rigate, 1000 pounds for each place. Be∣sides many other liberal Legacies bequeathed to pious uses. He dyed Jan. 13. 1627. 79 Aet. and lyeth buried in the Chancel of VVandsworth. Memorable Persons. Elizabeth VVeston, a Virgin of gentile Extraction, was a great Scholar, flourishing about 1600, of whom Janus Dousa, Angla vel Angelica es, vel prorsus es Angelus; immo, Si Sexus vetat hoc, Angelus est Animus. Joseph Scaliger praiseth her no less in Prose. There is an Ancient and Worshipful Family of her Name flou∣rishing at Sutton in this County. The Birth and Qua∣lity of this Virgin, had she lived in the dayes of King James, and been presented to him as another Maid was, would have left no room for that Kings inquisitiveness, in asking if she could spin, as he did in the case of the other, who could Speak and Write pure Latine, Greek and Hebrew.
Noted Sheriffs. Edw. 3. An. 1. Andrew Sackvil; The Family of the Sackvils is as ancient as any in England, taking their Name from Sackvil, a Town of their Possession in Normandy. Before this time Sir Robert Sackvil, Knight, younger Son of Herbran, was fixed in Eng∣land, and gave the Mannor of Wickham in Suffolk, to the Abbey of St. John de Bap. in Colchester, about the Reign of Will. Rufus. Sir Jo. his Son, was one of the Assistance to 25 Peers, appointed to see the Liberties of Magna Charta performed; whose Son Richard was a principal Baron, (of whose house Hubert de Avesty held some Lands) whose Granchild Sir. Jordan was ta∣ken Prisoner at the Battle of Emesham, in the Reign of Henry 3. for siding with the Barons against him, whose Son Andrew (the Kings Ward) was imprisoned in Do∣ver, an. 3. Edw. 1. and afterwards, by the Kings command Married Ermyntide, a Lady of the Houshold of Queen Eleanor, whereby he regained a great part of his Inheritance, which had been formerly forfeited; whose Son Andrew (first above mentioned) was Ance∣stor to the truly Honourable Rich. now E. of Dorset. Note Surrey and Sussex generally had distinct Sheriffs until the Reign of Edw. 2. when they were united; then again divided an. 9, Eliz. united an. 13. divided agin an. 12. K. Charles I. Rich 2. An. 19. Jo. Ashburnham, was Ancester to Sir Jo. who Married Elizabeth, Daughter of Sir Tho. Beaumont (afterwards Created Viscountess Cramond in Scotland) and had by her 2 Sons, John of the Bed Cham∣ber to K. Charles I. and II. and William Cofferer to his Majesty, who will build their Name a story higher to Posterity. And note this Family is of stupendious An∣tiquity, the chief whereof was Sheriffs of Sussex and
Surrey 1066; when VV. Duke of Normandy invaded England, to whom K. Harauld wrote to assemble Pos∣se omitatuum to make resistance against that Duke. And the eminency hath equalled the Antiquity thereof, having been Barons of England, in the Reign of King Henry 3. Hen. 6. An. 29. Jo. Lewkenor, (afterwards Knight) (with 3000 others) were slain in the Battle of Teuksbury, valiantly fighting under P. Edward, Son to K. Hen. 6. Hen. 7. An. 12. Math. Brown, Arm. was Ancestor (though not in the direct Line) to Sir Anthony Standard-bearer of England, second Husband of Lucy, fourth Daughter to Jo. Nevel Marquess Montacute, and Grand-father to Sir Anthony, (whom Q. Mary created Visc. Montacute, and whom Q. Eliz. much esteemed) di∣rect Ancestor to the right Honourable the present Visc. Montacute, who has a place, and Vote in Parliament, by an express clause in his Patent, but otherwise no par∣ticular Title of a Baron. Hen. 8. An. 10. Nich. Carew, Mil. a jolly Gen∣tleman, was made Knight of the Garter by, and Ma∣ster of the Horse to Hen. 8. He built the fair house at Beddington in this County, which by the advantage of the water is a Paradise of Pleasure. 'Tis said K. Hen. 8. being then at Bowls, gave this Knight opprobrious Language, betwixt jest and earnest, to whom the o∣ther returned a stout Answer, that was inconsistent with his Allegiance, which cost him his Life. The last of this Sirname adopted a Throgmorton, on condition to assume the Name and Arms of Carew. From him is Li∣neally descended Sir Nich. Carew Knight, who I confi∣dently hope, will continue and encrease the Honour of his ancient Family. Edw. 6. An. 1. Tho. Carden, Mil. was 5 years be∣fore Endited for Heresie, but K. Henry preserved him with some others of his Privy Chamber, being in the same circumstances.
Q. Eliz. An. 20. George Goring; whose names sake Sir George Goring, was by Charles I. created Ba∣ron of Hurst Per-point in Sussex, and afterwards Earl of Norwich. He was the only instance of a Person of Ho∣nour, who found Pardon for his Loyalty to his Sove∣reign: Afterwards going beyond the Seas, he was hap∣pily instrumental in advancing the Peace betwixt Spain and Holland, and since the Restauration of K. Charles II. he was made Captain of his Majesties Guard. Note that about 140 years ago, one Mr. Clark hear∣ing that the Market-house of Farnham in this County, (begun by him) was not generally approved of, but li∣ked by some, and disliked by others, who found fault with the Model thereof, and discouraged the Workmen, caused this Distich to be writ in that House; You who do like me, give Money to end me, You who dislike me give Money to mend me. I wish the Advice may be practised all overt his Coun∣ty.
SUSSEX. SƲssex hath Surrey on the North, Kent on the East, the Sea on the South, and Hantshire on the West. It extendeth along the Sea 60 miles in length, though not exceeding 20 in breadth. A fruitful County, though very dirty for Travellers. All the Rivers in this Coun∣ty have their Fountains and Falls therein. It is suffici∣ent Evidence of the plenty of this County, that the Toll of the Wheat, Corn and Malt, growing or made about, and sold in the City of Chichester, doth amount yearly at a half-penny a Quarter, to 60 pounds and upwards. Of Commodities, Iron is plentiful in this County. It is to be hoped that for the preservation of Woods, a way may be found out to Chark Sea-coal in such manner as to render it useful for the making of Iron. Then Talk, produced in great abundance in this County, is an excellent white Wash, and a great astrin∣gent. There is a Bird called Wheat-Ears (so named, because fattest when Wheat is ripe) which is peculiar to this County; a fine Bird, though in season only in the heat of Summer. A certain Gentleman concluded a great Lord, a man of very weak parts, because once he saw him at a Feast, feed on Chickens, when there were Wheat-Ears on the Table. This County abound∣eth with more Carpes, then any other in England, and is eminent for an Arundel Mullet, a Chichester Lobster, a Shelsey Cockle, and an Amerly Trout. The Manu∣factures are great Guns, made of the Iron in this Coun∣ty. A Monk in Mentz (some 300 years since) is ge∣nerally reputed the first Founder of them, when about the same time a Souldier found out Printing. Jo. Oaven.
was the first Englishman who in England cast Brass Ordnance, an. 1535, Peter Baud a Frenchman, an. 1. Edw. 6. was the first who in England cast Iron Ord∣nance. Tho. Johnson servant to Peter, improved his Masters Art. He dyed about 1600. There is also plenty of Glass made in this County, and the Work∣men thereof are much encreased since 1557 A certain Lord living near Cambridge, (upon his Petition) got from Queen Elizabeth, a grant of all the Plate in that University, upon condition to find Glasses for the Scho∣lars, the performance of which condition at first, and at all times after, upon the casual or wilful breaking of the Glasses, would have been the most effectual way of ruining the Lord absolutely and infallibly. The first making of Venice Glasses in England, began at the Cro∣chet Friers in London, about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by one Jacob Venaline an Italian. As for the Buildings in this County, Chichester Cathe∣dral is a fine Fabrick built (after it had been twice burnt) by Bishop Seffride 2. an. 1193. The Country Folk say, the Master Workman built Sarisbury, and his Man the Church of Chichester, but this is a mistake, since Seffride lived under King John, and Bishop Poor who founded Sarisbury, lived much later under Hen. 3. This Church was Beautified by Bishop Sherborn, in the Reign of Henry 7. Lately a great part thereof hath fal∣len to the ground. Arundel Castle is of great esteem, the rather because a Local Earldome is cemented to the Walls thereof. Some will have it named from Arun∣del, the Horse of Beavois the great Champion, though this Castle was so called long before that imaginary Horse was Foaled, (that is long before the Conquest) from the River Arund, running hard by it. Petworth, the House of the Earls of Northumberland, is most fa∣mous for a stately Stable, which affordeth standing in State for 60 Horses, with all necessary accommodations.
Proverbs. I. He is none of the Hastings; That is, he is slow and dull, the Proverb bearing only a nominal counter-relation to the Noble and ancient Family of the Hast∣ings, formerly Earls of Pembroke, and still of Hunting∣ton. There is also a Haven of that name, in this Coun∣ty, which is said to have been built in all hast by William the Conquerour. Martyrs. Grievous the persecution in this County, under Jo. Christopherson the Bishop thereof: Such his havock in burning poor Protestants in one year, that had he sat long in that See, and continued after that Rate, there needed no Iron Mills to rarifie the Woods of this County. The Papists admire him as a great Divine, which I will not oppose, but only say as the Man said of his surly Mistriss, She hath too much Divinity for me, Oh! that She had some more Humanity. Cardinals. Herbert de Bosham was a Manubus unto Tho. Becket, at whose Murder-Martyring, he was present, and had the discretion to make no resistance. He wrote the sto∣ry of his Masters death. Going over into Italy, he was by Pope Alex. 3. made Arch-Bishop of Beneven∣tum, and in Dec. 1178. created Cardinal.
Prelates. Jo. Peckham, born of obscure Parents, bred in Ox∣ford, and beyond the Seas, became Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, by the Popes favour, for which he after∣wards paid 4000 Marks. He neither feared the Layty, nor flattered the Clergy; and was a great punisher of Pluralists. He transmitted the Canons place at Lyons (which he held for life) to his Successors, who held the same in Commendam some hundred years after. He built and endowed a Colledge at Wingham, yet left a great Estate to his Kindred, whose descendants are pos∣sessed of the same at this day, in this and the next County. He dyed 1294. Robert Winchelsey, bred in Merton-Colledge in Oxford where (after having travelled) he proceeded D. D. and became Chancellour of the University; successively Can. of Pauls, Arch-Deacon of Essex, and Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury. He went to Rome, and obtained his Pall of Pope Celestine, refusing a Cardinals Cap of∣fered unto him. After his return, confiding in the Ca∣non of the Councel of Lions, which forbad the Clergy to pay Taxes to Princes, without consent of the Pope, he created much molestation to himself, King Edw. 1. using him first very harshly, till at last he overcame all with his Patience: A worthy Prelate, excellent Preach∣er. Being Learned himself, he loved and preferred Learned Men. Prodigious his Hospitality, being re∣ported, that Sundays and Fridays he fed no fewer then 4000 Men, when Corn was cheap, and 5000 when it was dear. After his death, (1313) poor men used to repair to his Tomb, and present their Petitions to him. Tho. Bradwardine, descended of an ancient Family at Braw. in Hereford, (whence they removed and set∣led
in this County, for three Generations.) was born in or near Chichester, and bred in Merton-Colledge in Oxford, where for his skill in the Mathematicks and Divinity, he was called Dr. Profundus. He was Con∣fessor to Edw. 3. To his Prayers the Conquest of France was (by some) imputed. He Preached Piety to the Army. He was Consecrated at Avignon Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, at which time he was accounted somewhat Clownish, both because he could not mode it with the Italians, but chiefly because he was advanced for his Merit, and not for his Money. In his excellent Book De Causâ Dei, he complaineth grievously of the prevalent Errours of Pelagius. He dyed 1349. Tho. Arundel, Son to Robert, and Brother to Rich∣ard Fitz-Allen, both Earls of Arundel, was Arch-Bi∣shop of York, the fourth Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, having been Bishop of Ely at 22 years of Age. He was thrice Lord Chancellour of England, viz. an. 10. and 15. Rich. 2. and 11 Hen. 4. He was by Rich. 2. banished the Land, after his Brother was beheaded; Restored by Hen. 4. to his Arch-Bishoprick. In Par∣liament he was the Churches Champion for preservati∣on of her Revenues. He was the first who persecuted the Wicklevites with Fire and Faggot. This Noble Person, who had stop'd the Mouths of many Servants of God, from Preaching his Word, was himself fa∣mished to death by a swelling in his Throat, Feb. 20. 1413. and lyeth Buried in the Cathedral of Canter∣bury. H. Burwash, of Noble Alliance, a Covetous, Am∣bitious, Rebellious and Injurious Person, was recom∣mended by Barth. de Badilismer (Bar. of Leeds in Kent) to Edw. 2. who preferred him Bishop of Lin∣coln. Having fallen into the Kings displeasure, and for∣feited his Temporalities (though afterwards restored) he was most forward to assist the Queen in the depo¦sing
of her Husband: He was twice Lord Treasurer, once Chancellour, and once Ambassadour to the Duke of Bavaria. He dyed 1340.. There's a merry Sto∣ry, that he was condemned after his death to be a Green Forrester, because in his life time he had violently en∣closed other Mens Grounds into his own Park. Since the Reformation. W. Barlow, D. D. was Canon of St. Osiths, then Prior of Bisham in Bark-shire, afterwards preferred by Hen. 8. Bishop of St. Asaph, whence he was Transla∣ted to St. Davids, thence an. 3. Edw. 6. to Bath and Wells. Having fled in the dayes of Queen Mary, he was superintendent of the English Congregation at Emb∣den. Returning afterwards into England, he was made by Queen Elizabeth Bishop of Chichester. He had a numerous and prosperous Female Issue, He dyed De∣cember 10, 1569. W. Juxton, born at Chichester, was bred at St. Johns Colledge in Oxford, where he commenced Doctor of Law, and became Pres. of the Colledge. He was ad∣mirably Master of his Pen and Passion. By K. Charles I. he was preferred Bishop first of Hereford, then of Lon∣don, and for some years Lord Treasurer of England, in the legal and prudent management of which Office, Jo. 3.12. He was well reported of all Men, and of the Truth it self. He beheld (with much Christian Patience) those of his Order lose their Votes in Parliament, much contempt poured on his Function, whilst their Enemies hence concluded, their final Extirpation would follow. This Bishop was a∣mongst others selected as Confessor to King Charles I. at his Martyrdom. He formerly had had experience (in the case of the Earl of Strafford) that this Bishops Conscience was bottom'd on Piety, the Reason that
from him he received the Sacrament, good Comfort and Counsel, just before the perpetration of that horrid Mur∣der; a Fact so foule, that it alone may confute the Er∣rour of the Pelagians, maintaining that all sin cometh by imitation, the Ʋniverse not formerly affording such a precedent, as if those Regicides had purposely designed to disprove the observation of Solomon, that there is no new thing under the Sun. King Charles II. an. 1660 preferred him Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, which place he worthily graceth at the Writing hereof. Acceptus Fruin, D. D. President of Magdalen-Col∣ledge in Oxford, was by K. Charles I. advanced Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and since by K. Charles II. made Arch-Bishop of York, and is now alive. This County hath bred 5 Arch-Bishops of Canterbury, at this instant claiming for her Natives, the two Metropo∣litans of our Nation. Statesmen. Tho. Sackvil, Son and Heir to Sir Richard (Chan∣cellour, Sub-Treasurer of the Exchequer, and Privy-Councellour to Queen Elizabeth) by Winifred his Wife, Daughter to Sir Jo. Bruges, was bred in Ox∣ford, where he became an excellent Poet, leaving both Latine and English Poems of his Composing to Posterity. Then he became Barrister, and afterwards in his Travels, was for some time Prisoner at Rome, whence returning to the possession of a fair Estate, he wasted the greatest part thereof, and afterwards being made (as is reported) to dance attendance on an Alder∣man of London, who had gained great penny-worths by his former purchases of him, he was sensible of the incivility, and resolving to be no more beholding to Wealthy Pride, he turned a thrifty improver of the Remainder of his Estate. Others affirm that Queen
Elizabeth (his Cosin Germ. once removed) diverted the torrent of his profusion by her frequent admoniti∣ons; after which she made him Baron of Buckhurst in this County, an. 1566. Sent him Ambassadour into France, 1571, into the Low Countries, 1586. made him Knight of the Garter, 1589. and Treasurer of Eng∣land, 1599. He was Chancellour of the University, where he entertained Queen Elizabeth, with a sumptu∣ous Feast. He was a person of so quick dispatch, that his Secretaries seldom pleased him. Thus having made amends to his house for his mispent time▪ both in en∣crease of Estate and Honour, being created Earl of Dorset by King James. He dyed April 19. 1608. Capital Judges. Sir Jo. Jeffrey Knight, was preferred Secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, thence advanced an. 19. Elizabeth, to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. He left one only Daughter and Heir, Married to Sir Edward Montague, (since Baron of Boughton) by whom he had but one Daughter Elizabeth, Married to Ro∣bert Berty Earl of Linsey, Mother to the truly Honour∣able Montague Earl of Linsey; and Lord great Cham∣berlain of England. This worthy Judge dyed an. 21. Elizabeth. Souldiers. The Abbot of Battle, after the French had invaded this County, during the Non-age of King Richard 2. (and the Dotage of his Council) and taken the Prior of Lewis Prisoner, Fortified Winchelsey effectually against the Enemy, who in vain had attempted to storm the place, and feared to venture a fair siege, suspecting that they should be surrounded on all sides. The Monsieurs
therefore bid adieu to England, and made for France as fast as they could, An. Dom. 13... Sir W. Pelham Knight, of an ancient and wealthy Family at Laughton, was by Queen Elizabeth made Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, betwixt the death of Sir W. Drury, and the coming in of Arthur Gray Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. In this juncture of time Des∣mond began his Rebellion 1579. inviting Sir W. Pelham to side with him, who though he could not cure the wound for want of Force, yet he kept it clean, re∣signing the same in a recovering condition to the Lord Gray his Successor. Afterwards he was Commander of the English Horse in the Low-Countries, where he surprised Brabant. Sir Anth. Shirley, second Son to Sir Thomas, set forth from Plimouth, May 21. 1596. in a Ship called the Bevis of Southampton, attended with six lesser Ves∣sels: His design for St. Thome was diverted by a Con∣tagion, occasioned by stinking Rain, which within six hours after it fell, turned to Maggots. Turning there∣fore his course to America, he took, and kept the Ci∣ty of St, Jago, two dayes and nights, with 280 Men (wherein 80 were wounded in the service) against 3000 Portugals. Hence he made for the Isle of Fuego, in the midst whereof was a Mountain Aetna-like always burning, and the Wind did drive such a shower of Ashes upon them, that one might have wrote his name with his Finger, on the upper Deck. Whence passing by the Island of Margarita, he took St. Martha, the Chief Town of Jamaica; After much distress and de∣sertion, (by the other Ships) he returned into England; Whose youngest Brother, Sir Robert Shirley, was entred by his Brother Anth. in the Persian Court. Here he performed so great ser∣vice against the Turks, that it drew the envy of the Persian Lords, and love of the Ladies, among whom
one (reputed a Kinswoman to the great Sophy) was af∣terwards Married unto him, and came over with him into England. He much affected to appear in the Per∣sian habit. At last, having (as 'tis said) given the Per∣sian Ambassadour a box on the ear, upon some contest betwixt them, they were sent both together into Persia, to impeach one another, Dr. Gough being joyned in Commission with Sir Robert, but Neptune decided the Controversie before they came thither, both of them dying on the Seas (as I have been informed) about the beginning of King Charles I whose eldest Brother, Sir Tho. Shirley, excited by the Atchievments of his two younger Brethren, undertook Sea Voyages into Forreign parts, to the great honour of his Nation, but small enriching of himself. As to the general perform∣ances of these three Brethren, when Abatement is made for Poetical Embellishments (contained in the Comedy made upon them, &c.) the Remainder will speak them Worthies in their Generations. Physicians. Nich. Hostresham, (it seems from Horsham in this County) a famous Physician,REM. wrote ma∣ny Books, amongst which, one Contra dolorem Renum, thus beginning, A Stone is sometimes bred in the Kidneys, &c. Note this was long before Hops and Beer made therewith, (accounted by some the Original of the Stone in this Land) were commonly used in England, 1516. He having flourished 1443. Writers Lawrence Somercote, was Can. of Chichester. He studied the Law,S. N. and went to Rome, where through the favour of his Brother (or Kinsman)
Robert Somercote Cardinal, he was made Subdeacon under the Pope. He wrote some Books, and flourish∣ed 1240. Jo. Driton, (alias Sicca Villa or Sackvil) bred in Fr. became the Chief Moderator of the Colledge of Paris, and together with W de Sancto Amore, vigo∣rously opposed the Hellish imposture of the Monks Eternal Gospel, though it was much countenanced by his Holiness. He flourished 1260. Jo. Winchelsey, bred in Oxford, turn'd a Franciscan in his old dayes, and when grey, became a green No∣vice of the Order at Sarisbury. He dyed before the year of his probation was ended, 1326. Since the Reformation. W. Pemble, maintained in a great proportion by Jo. Barker of Mayfield in this Shire, Esquire, was bred in (or if you will, he bred) Magdalens-Hall in Oxford, that house owing its late Lustre to his Learned Lectures. An excellent Oratour, and a better Christian. He dy∣ed in the Flower of his Age. Tho. Chune Esq living at Alfriston, set forth a Ma∣nual, Entituled, Collectiones Theologicarum Conclusionum, which positions are brief and clear; set forth 1635. Tho. May, of a worshipful but decayed Family, was bred Fellow Commoner in Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge, and afterwards lived about the Court. Being an Ele∣gant Poet, he Translated Lucan into English; some affirm that he took some disgust at Court, because his Bays were not gilded enough, nor his Verses reward∣ed by King Charles I. according to his Expectation. He afterwards wrote an History of this State in the be∣ginning of the Civil Wars. He died suddenly in the night, 1652.
Jo. Selden, born at Salvington, within the Parish of East Terring, was Son to Jo. by his Wife Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Tho. Barker of Rushington, de∣scended from a Knightly Family in Kent. He was bred in Hart-hall in Oxford, then in the Inner Temple in London; where he attained great skill in the Law, and all Antiquity. He traced all the dimensions of Arts and Languages, as appear by the many and various Works which he hath written, whereof Lay-Gentle∣men prefer his Titles of Honour, Lawyers his Mare Clausum, Antiquaries his Spicilegium ad Eadmerum, Clergy-men like best his Book de Diis Syris, and worst his History of Tithes; For which Book, having been called to an account before the High Commission, 'tis said that afterwards he was no Friend to Bishops, ne∣ver affecting the Men, nor cordially approving their Calling. But it is certain Mr. Selden did in a Letter to Arch-Bishop Laud, express his unfeigned contrition for setting forth of the said Book of Tithes. That which afterwards Entituled him to a general populari∣ty, was his pleading with Mr. Noy, for an Habeas Cor∣pus, for such Gentlemen who were imprisoned for re∣fusal of the Loan. He had very many Ancient and Modern Coyns, and dyed exceeding Wealthy. His large and excellent Library is now reposited (Bodly within a Bodly) in the matchless Library of Oxford. Romish Exil'd Writers. George Martin, born at Macfield, bred in Oxford, was Tutor to Phil. Earl of Arundel, Son to Tho. Duke of Norfolk. After he had Travelled to Rome, he became Professor of Divinity in the English Col∣ledge of Rhemes. He wrote much in defence of the Romish Faith; one of his Books being Entituled, A Detection of Corruptions in the English Bible. He dy∣ed
1582. and was buried in St. Stephens Church in Rhemes. Tho. Stapleton, born at Henfield, (of a very good Family) was observed by those of his own Perswasion, to have been born in the same Year and Month, where∣in Sir Thomas More was beheaded, as if Divine Pro∣vidence, had purposely drop'd from Heaven an Acn. in place of the Oak that was fell'd. He was bred in New-Colleage in Oxford, and became Canon of Chiche∣ster, which place he quitted, an. 1. Eliz. and having fled beyond the Seas, he became Catechist at Doway, which Office, he having discharged to his commendati∣on▪ he was preferred Kings Professor of Divinity in Lovain, and was  yars together▪ undertaker Gene∣ral against all  Dr Whitaker Professor in Cambridge,  professed, that Bellarmine was the fairer, and ap eon the shrewde Adversary. He dyed, and was buried in  in Lovain, 1598. Benefactors to the ublick sce the Reformation. Richard Sackvil, Eldest Son of Thomas Earl of Dor∣set, had his barony, if not his Birth at Buckhurst: A Learned Gentleman, to whom the Greek and La∣tine, were as familiar as his own Native Tongue. Suc∣ceeding his Father in that Earldom, he enjoyed his Dignity not a full ear. He erectd a Colledge at East Greensted in this County, for 3 po pple to serve Almighty  therein, endowing the same with 330 pounds a year out of all his Lands n England. By Margaret sole Daughter to Tho. Duke of Norfolk, he left two surviving Sons, Richard and Edward, of admirable parts, sccessively Earl after him; and dy∣ing, was buried in Withham in this County.
Memorable Persons. John, Henry and Thomas Palmer, were Sons to Ed∣ward Palmer Esquire, of Angmarine, by his Wife, Daughter to one Clement of Wales, who for his effectu∣al assisting of King Henry 7. from his Landing at Mil∣ford Haven, untill the Battle of Bosworth, was brought by him into England, and rewarded with good Lands in this and the next County. It happened that their Mother, being a full fourthnight inclusively in Labour, was on Whitsunday delivered of John her eldest Son, on the Sunday following, of Henry her second Son, and the Sunday next after, of Thomas her third Son. These three were Knighted for their Valour by King Henry 8. They have a Worshipful and numerous Posterity in Sussex and Kent, amongst whom, Sir Roger Palmer, Aged 80 years, lately deceased, and Cofferer to the late King, averred the Truth of the aforesaid Rela∣tion. Leonard Mascal, of Plumsted, was the first who brought over into England, from beyond the Seas, Carps and Pippins, about an. 5. Henry 8. 1514. W. Withers, being a Child of about 11 years of Age, an. 1581. lay in a Trance 10 dayes, without any sustenance, and at last, coming to himself, uttered to the standers by, many strange Speeches, inveighing against Pride, Covetousness, and other outragious sins. Note, that an. 1378, (in the Reign of Richard 2.) the Sussexians (of Rye and Winchelsey) embarqued for Normandy, and afterwards entered by night, into a Town called Peters Port, took all such Prisoners who were able to pay ransome, and safely returned home
with the Spoil, amongst which were some Bells, the French had formerly taken from the Towns in this County, which they lately invaded. It was a wor∣thy advice which William Earl of Arundel gave to his Son Henry Fitz-Allen, never to trust his Neighbours, the French, which I would recommend to the Inhabi∣tants of this County.
WARWICK-SHIRE. WArwick-shire hath Leicester and Northampton-shire on the East, Oxford and Glocester-shire on the South, Worcester on the West, and Stafford-shire on the North thereof. It extends 33 Miles from North to South, and 26 from East to West. This County is the Heart, but not the Core of England; The Woodland thereof may want what the Fieldon affords; As for the pleasure there∣of, an Speed of this County. Author saith, that from Edge hill one may behold it as the Garden of Eden. The Sheep here are very large, especially about Warm-Leighton. There is a plentiful growth of Ashes in the Woodland of this County, and much Coal digged up at Bedworth. As for Buildings, Coventry sheweth two fair Churches, yet such their vicinity that the Arch-Angel eclipseth the Trinity. Then St. Maries in War∣wick, a beautiful Structure, owes its life to the Monu∣ments of the dead therein, most being Earls of War∣wick. So numerous is the Church with its Appendan∣ces, that the Minister can accommodate one Clergy∣man of all dignities and degrees, to repose them in se∣veral Chappels and Vestries by themselves. Kenel∣worth had the strength of a Castle, and beauty of a Princes Court; a vast, and withal a comely Structure, the Porch being proportionable to the rest of the Fa∣brick It was demolished sinc the end of the Wars. The Castle of Warwick overlooketh the Town, being pleasantly Scituated on a rising Hill, affording a very fine Prospect, mostly of the Lands of the present Owner Robert Lord Brk▪ The Cross of Coventry (all
for Ornament, nothing for Superstition) was begun 1541, an. 33. and finished 1544, 36 Henry 8. at the sole cost of Sir William Hollis Lord Mayor of London, great Grand-father to the Right Honourable the Earl of Clare. The wonders of this County are, that at Lemington, within two Miles of Warwick, there issue out (within a stride) of the Womb of the Earth, two Springs, the one salt, and the other fresh. On Fri∣day, April 17, 1607. there happened in Coventry such an inundation, (no considerable Rain preceding) that continued for the space of three hours, wherein it over∣flowed more then 250 dwelling houses, to the great dammage of the Inhabitants; vanishing away as quick∣ly as it did rise; and note, the City has no River near it, save a small Brook, over which generally one may make a Bridge with a stride. As for Medicinal Wa∣ters, there is at Newenham a Spring, the water where∣of drunk with Salt loosneth, with Sugar bindeth the Body. It is sovereign against Ulcers and Imposthumes, and the Stone, though Mr. Speed affirms that it turned Wood into Stoe. Proverbs. I. He is the black Bear of Arden. By this is meant Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, a grim person, and surly of Resolution, who in spite of all opposition, cau∣sed the death of Pierce Gaveston, that Minion of Ed∣ward 2. at a Hill within two Miles of Warwick. Ar∣den is a Forrest, anciently occupying all the Wood-land part of this County. 'Tis applyed to such who (with∣out any other Authority then that of their Countenance or Disposition) strike terrour into others. II. As bold as Beauchamp. Though there was a series of succes∣sive undauntedness in the Noble Family of the Earls of Warwick, yet I conceive that Thomas first of that name
gave the chief occasion to this Proverb; He being ar∣rived with King Edward 3. at Hogges in Normandy, 1346. was the first man who landed, and being follow∣ed by one Esquire, and six Archers, is reported to have fought against a 100 Armed men, and in hostile manner to have overthrown every one who withstood him: having at one shock slain 60 Normans, and re∣moved all resistance, so that the Kings whole Army landed in safety. The Heirs Male of this name, are long since extinct, though some deriving themselves from the Heirs general, are extant at this day. III. The Bear wants a Tail, and cannot be a Lion. This abated the jealousie the Dutch had of Robert Earl of Leicester (descended from the ancient Earls of War∣wick) Governour of the Low-Countries, being sus∣pected to hatch a design of making himself Sovereign Commander over the Low-Countries, whilst he diffu∣sed his own Coat of the green Lion, with two Tails, and sign'd all instruments with the Crest of the Bear and Ragged Staff. Then it was that this Proverb was written under his Crest, set up in publick places, Ʋrsa caret caudâ, non queat esse Leo. The Bear he never can prevail, To Lion it, for lack of Tail. It is applyed to such who aspire to what is above their power to atchieve. IV. He is true Coventry-blew. It seems the best Blews are dyed in Coventry. It is ap∣plyed to such an one who is a faithful Friend. Princes. Anne Nevil, Daughter and coheir to Richard Ne∣vil Earl of Warwick, was (probably) born in War∣wick
Castle; She was Married to Edward Prince of Wales, (sole Son to Henry 6.) afterwards murdered by Richard Duke of Glocester, who took to Wife the same Anne. She died for grief, 1464, though others suspect a Grain was given her, for the greater dispatch to another World. Edward Plantag. Son to George Duke of Clarence, was the last Male Heir of the Royal Family. His Mother was Isabella, eldest Daughter to Richard Ne∣vil, Earl of Warwick, and he was born in Warwick-Castle. Being kept close Prisoner by Edward 4. Rich∣ard 3. and Henry 7. he was rendred weak in his In∣tellectuals. Upon the proposal of Marriage for Prince Arthur, with Katharine Daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, this Edward was taken out of the way, to the end all Titles might be cleared. The Lady Ka∣tharine Dowager was wont to acknowledge the death of her two Sons, an ill success of her match, as Hea∣vens judgment on her Family, for the murdering of this Earl, which happened 1499. Saints. St. Wolstan, born in Long Jetington, was Bishop of VVorcester; a man of great Candour, and an opposer of the French fickleness, and the Italian pride, for which he was hated by VVilliam the Conqueror, and Lanfrak Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and by them com∣manded to resign his Episcopalibus; Upon this the Ho∣nest Bishop repaired to the Monument of Edward the Confessor, and there offered up his Episcopal Habili∣ments. These (said he) from you I received, and to you I resign them. This his plain dealing not only re∣covered his Bishoprick, but also purchased to him the reputation of a Saint. He was active in promoting VVilliam Rufus to the Kingdom, in prejudice of his eldest Brother Robert.
Martyrs. Laurence Saunders, a Priest, was Martyred in Co∣ventry, February 8. 1555. Robert Glove, born at Mancetor, Gentleman, was Martyred in Coventry, September 20. 1555 Cornel Bongey, born at Coventry, a Capper, was Martyred at Coventry▪ September 20 1555. Jo. Carles, born at Coventry, a Weaver, was Mar∣tyred at the Kings Bench, London. Julius Palmer, born at Coventry, and bred in Mag∣dalens-Colledge in Oxford, was burnt in Newbury. Confessors. John Glover, Brother to the aforementioned Robert, escaped miraculously, whilst his Brother, without the intention of his enemies, fell into their hands. Cardinals. VVilliam Macklesfield, born ('tis said) in Coventry, was made B. D. in Paris, Dr. at Oxford, and became General of the Dominican Order. He was by Pope Benedict 11. created Cardinal with the Title of St. Sabine, but dyed in London before his Cap was brought him; yet this chief part of a Cardinal (I mean the Cap) was with great solemnity set on his Tomb. Peter Petow, of an ancient Family, flourishing for a long time at Chesterton, was a Franciscan, afterwards Cardinal, being created by Pope Paul 3. 1557. who also made him Legat a Latere, and Bishop of Salis∣bury. Queen Mary in favour to Cardinal Pole, prohi∣bited this Legats entrance into her Court. He dyed in France 1558.
Prelates. John Stratford, Son of Robert and Isabel, was born at Stratford, and preferred by the Pope Bishop of VVinchester, whereupon falling into the displeasure of Richard 2. for a time, he took it in so ill part, that he forsook that King whilst in his extremity. This cost him the displeasure of Queen Mother, and Edward 3. till at last converted by his Constancy, they turned their frowns into smiles upon him. When Arch Bishop of Canterbury, he furnished the King with great sums at his first setting forth for France, but when the King afterwards sent for another supply, instead of Coyn, the Bishop sent him Counsel, whereat the King return∣ing into England, was so highly offended, that the Bi∣shop was fain to pass his publick Purgation in Parlia∣ment, by which he was restored to the Reputation of his innocence. He built, and bountifully endowed a beautiful Colledge in Stratford. He dyed 1348, ha∣ving been a Man of great Charity, Meekness and Mo∣deration; Whose Kinsman Ralph Stratford, was born in Stratford, where he built a Chappel to the Honour of St. Thomas. He was first Canon of St. Pauls, and afterwards Bishop of London, 1539, about which time, there being a most grievous Pestilence in London, this Bishop bought a piece of ground nigh Smithfield for the burial of the dead, and named the same No-mans-land. He dyed 1355, whose Brother, Robert Stratford, was in the Reign of Edward 3. made Bishop of Chichester, being then Chancellour of Oxford, and of all England. He compremised a bloody contest and difference, that arose about that time betwixt the South and North parts of that Uni∣versity. He with his Brother Arch-Bishop, being ac∣cused
for favouring the French, were afterwards freed from that false aspersion. He dyed at Allingbourn, 1362. John Vesty, alias Harman, Dr. of Law, was born at Sutton Colefield, bred in Oxford, was a vivacious per∣son. He was appointed to celebrate Divine Service at Sutton aforesaid, an. 20. Henry 6. was Vicar of St. Michaels Church in Coventry, 23 Henry 7. Dean of the Royal Chappel, Tutor to the Lady Mary, and President of VVales, under Henry 8. and being ad∣vanced to be Bishop of Exeter, an. 11. of that King; which Bishoprick he so destroyed, that Bishop Hall his Successor complaineth, that the following Bishops were Barons, but Bare-ones indeed. Some affirm the word Veize (that is in the VVest, to drive away with a Wit∣ness) had its original from his profligating of the Lands of his Bishoprick. He robbed his own Cathedral to pay a Parish Church, (Sutton in this County) whereon he bestowed many Benefactions, and built 51 houses. He intended also (but in vain) to fix the Cloth Manu∣facture of Devonshire, in the aforesaid Town. He quitted his Bishoprick, (not worth the keeping) in the Reign of Edward 6. He dyed being 103 years old, in the Reign of Queen Mary, and was buried in Sutton, with his Statue Mitred and Vestred. Since the Reformation. Jo. Bird, born in Coventry, and bred a Carmelite at Oxford, was the Provincial of his Order. For his smart Sermon against the Primacy of the Pope, preach∣ed before Henry 8. he was preferred Bishop of Ban∣gor in VVales, then of Chester in England. Pitz saith he returned to the Vomit of Popery, which I cannot be∣lieve, though he might be guilty of a passive compli∣ance, as appears by his telling Mr. Haukes Protestant,
(about the time of his Examination) I would not wish you to go to far. He dyed 1556. Statesmen. Sir Nich. Throckmorton, Knight, fourth Son of Sir George of Coughton, was bred beyond the Seas. Un∣der Queen Mary, he was Arraigned for Treason (complyance with VVyat) and hardly escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him her Lieger in France and Scot∣land. He was of the opposite party to Burleigh Lord Treasurer. He was Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and chief Butler of England, which offices yielded him no considerable profit. He dyed at Supper, with eat∣ing of Salades, not without suspicion of poyson, the rather, because happening in the House of no mean Artist in that Faculty, Robert Earl of Leicester. He dyed 1570, and lyeth buried in St. Katharine Cree-Church in London. Edward Conway Knight, was Son to Sir Jo. Knight, Lord and Owner of Ragleigh in this County, who was made by Robert Earl of Leicester (Governour of the English Auxiliaries in the Ʋnited Provinces) Gover∣nour of Ostend, being a man of great skill in Military affairs. His Son succeeding to his Fathers Wisdom and Valour, was by King James made Principal Secretary of State, and by him created Lord Conway of Ragleigh in this County, and afterwards by King Charles I. Visc. Killultagh in the County of Autrim; Lastly, an. 30. Car. I. Visc. Conway of Conway in Carnarvan shire. He dyed 1630. Jo. Digby, Baron of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was employed by King James in several Embassies to Forreign Princes. But his managing the Matchless Match with Spain, was his Master-piece. After the great Contest betwixt him and the Duke of Bucking∣ham,
he fell into the Kings displeasure, during which he was very popular with most of the Nation. And the King was afterwards graciously pleased to reflect upon him, at the beginning of the Long Parliament, as one best able to give him the safest Counsel in those dangerous times; but how he incensed the Parliament so far as to be excepted Pardon, I know not. After the surrender of Exeter, he went over into France, where he met with that due respect in Forreign, which he missed in his Native Country. He was a Cordial Champion of the Church of England. He dyed in France, 1650. Writers Walter of Coventry, (where he was a Benedictine) was a Man (as ale affirms) worthy of immortal Me∣mory, and excelled in two Essential Qualities of an Hi∣storian, Faith and Method, being only guilty of cours∣ness of Style. From the beginning of the Britons, he wrote a Chron. to his own time. He flourished 1217. Vincent of Coventry, born in Warwick, was a Fran∣ciscan in Cambridge. He was the first of his Order, who applyed himself to Academical Studies, and be∣came publick Professor in Cambridge. He set a Copy to the Carmelites, left some Books to Posterity, and dyed 1250. Jo. of Killingworth, was bred in Oxford, an excel∣lent Philosopher, Astronomer and Physician. He was Father and Founder to all the Astronomers in that Age, being a Star of the first Magnitude amongst those of that Faculty He flourished 1360. W. of Coventry, (where he was a Carmelite) being lame in his Hip, was called Claudus Conversus, Conver∣sus being properly one who is condemned (or turned) to servile work in the Monastery. He preferred Cha∣rity
to pilgrimages, and wrote several Books, flourish∣ing 1360. Jo. Rouse▪ born at Warwick, and descended from the Rouses of  great  of Learning in Oxford, whence , a most delicious place, within a mile of War∣wick; he wrote the Antiquities of Warwick, a Chroni∣cle of the English Kings, and a History of the two Universities. He was as good at his Pensil as Pen, be∣ing an excellent Limner. He dyed 1491. Since the Reformation. W. Perkins, born at Marston, bred Fellow of Christs-Colledge, became Preacher of St. Andrew in Cambridge. (See of him in my Holy State) He dyed 1602. Tho. Drax, D. D. born at Stonely, and bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, was a pious Man, and an excellent Preacher. He Translated all the Works of Mr. Perkins into Latine. He was beneficed nigh Harwich in Essex, and dyed 1616. The Family of the Drax flourished a long time at Wood-hall in York-shire, and after various Changes, hath recovered and encreased its former lustre in Sir James Drax, who hath merited much of the English Nation, in bringing the Sugars, and other Commodities of the Barbadoes to their perfection. William Shakespeare, born at Stratford, was in some sort a Compound of three eminent Poets, viz. Mar∣tial, Ovid, and Plautus the Comedian; The two first were Charactered in a Verse made by Queen Eliza∣beth, coming into a Grammar School; Persius a Crab∣staff, Bawdy Martial, Ovid a fine VVag. Though the Genius of this our Poet was jocular, he could be so∣lemn and serious, when occasion required, as appears by his Tragedies, so that He aclitus himself might af∣ford
to smile at his Comedies, and Democritus scarce forbear to sigh at his Tragedies. His Learning being very little, Nature seems to have practised her best Rules in his production. Many were the witty Com∣bates betwixt him and Benjamin Johnson, who (like a Spanish Gallion) was built far higher in Learning; solid, but slow in his performances; whilst Shakespeare (like an English Man of War, less in bulk, but lighter in Sailing) could turn with all Tides, tack about, and take advantage of all Winds, by the quickness of his wit and invention. He dyed 16.. and was buried at Stratford. Michael Drayton, born at Athelston, was a pious Poet, a Temperate man, and a good natured Compa∣nion. He changed his Laurel for a Crown of Glory, 1631. and was buried in Westminster-Abbey. Sir Fulke Grevil Knight, Son to Sir Fulke Senior of Becham Court, was bred in Cambridge. He came to Court back'd with a fair Estate, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. He was a good Scholar, and a great Friend to Learned Men, Bishop Overal chiefly owed his pre∣ferment to him, and Mr. Cambden tasted largely of his Liberality. His Studies were most in Poetry and History, as his works do witness. King James crea∣ted him Baron Brook of Beauchamp-Court, as descend∣ed from the sole Daughter and Heir of Edward VVil∣loughby the last Lord Brook. He was murdered 16.. by a discontented servant, who conceiving himself not soon or well enough rewarded, first wounded his Ma∣ster mortally, and afterwards dispatched himself. He lyeth buried in Warwick Church, under a fair Monu∣ment, whereon he is styled Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Councellour to King James, and Friend to Sir Philip Sidney, dying unmarried, his Barony descended on his Kinsman, Robert Grevil Lord Brook, Father to the Right Honourable Robert Lord Brook.
Nich. Byfield, bred in Queens Colledge in Oxford, entring into the Ministery, was invited into Ireland; But being wind-bound at Chester, and having preached there, with great approbation, he was chosen Minister in the City, being afterwards informed that his going over to Ireland, would have been labour in vain. He maintained the strict observation of the Lords day a∣gainst Mr. Breerwood. He was afterwards Minister of Isleworth in Middlesex, where he Preached for 15 years together, twice every Lords day, and expound∣ed Scripture every Wednesday and Fryday. He dyed of the Stone (in his Bladder) which being taken out after his death, was weighed and measured, being 33 ounces and more, in length 13 inches and above, in measure about the breadth, almost 13 inches; and a∣bout the edge 15 and ½. Being of solid substance, (to look upon) like Flint. He was buried at Isle∣worth. Philemon Holland, bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, a Doctor in Physick, and fixed himself in Co∣ventry. He was the Translator General of his Age, of whom one saith, Holland with his Translations doth so fill us, He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus. Many of his Books he wrote with one Pen, whereon he himself versifies. With one sole Pen I writ this Book, made of a Grey Goose Quill, A Pen it was when I it took, and a Pen I leave it still. He Translated Cambden's Britannia, with many excel∣lent Additions, and was himself Translated to a better Life 16...
Francis Holyoake, born at Whitacre, was Minister of Southampton. He set forth Rider's Dictionary, and dyed 16... James Cranford, born at Coventry, and bred in Ox∣ford, was beneficed in Northampton-shire, afterwards Minister of St. Christophers in London; A learned and pious man, and a painful Preacher, of much Humili∣ty, Moderation and Charity. Having sadly sympathi∣zed with the Sufferings of Church and State, he dyed 1657. Romish Exile Writers. William Bishop, Son (probably) to John a Protestant and Patron of Brails in this County, went first to Rhemes, then to Rome, whence being sent back into England, he was siezed on, and committed by Secretary Walsing∣ham to the Marshalsey. After 3 years, beng banish∣ed the Land, he became a Doctor of Sorbon. Afterwards he returned into England, and for nine years laboured in the Popish Harvest; And after another visit to his Ho∣liness, he returned to his Station, till he was imprison∣ed at London. At last being enlarged, he went to Paris. The Papists cry him up for a Glorious Confes∣sor of the Popish Faith, who (if any goodness in him) should also be a thankful Confessor of the Protestant Cha∣rity, permitting him twice to depart Prison. Benefactors to the Publick. Hugh Clapton, born at Stratford, and bred a Mercer in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor 1491. built at Stratford a stately and long Stone Bridge, of many Arches, over the von, many other Charities he be∣stowed, and deceased 1496.
Since the Reformation. —Hales Esquire, sounded and endowed a fair Grammar School in Coventry, the Priory of which he had purchased from King Henry 8. Jo. Lord Harrington, born at Combe-Abbey, was no less Pious then Noble. He began the Fashion of a diary, wherein he registred his daily failings. Being a wise Accomptant, he used that method of Christian Arithmetick, in numbering his dayes with such exact∣ness, that it seems he had but one day to account for▪ and repent of, before his death. He was a most boun∣tiful Benefactor to Sidney-Colledge. He dyed in his prime, and unmarried, being the last Male of that Honourable Family, as one complains by way of Ana∣gram; Johannes Dominus Harringtonius, insignis erat (Ah!) Ʋnus Honor Domi. He left his two Sisters his Heirs, Lucy, Married to Edward Earl of Bedford, and Anne, who by Sir Robert Chichester, had a Daugh∣ter Anne, married to Thomas Earl of Elgin, and Mo∣ther to Robert Lord Bruce, who is at this day Heir apparent to no small part of the Lands, but actually possessed of a large share of the Vertues of his great Uncle. Memorable Persons. Thomas Ʋnderhill Esquire, was born at Neaher-Eatendon, lived with his Wife 65 years, (having by her 13 Sons, and 7 Daughters) in Worshipful Equi∣page, which was rendred illustrious by their Exem∣plary Hospitality. She dyed in July, and he in Octo∣ber following, 1603.
Noted Sheriffs. Q. Eliz. An. 27. An. Shugburg Arm. The Sir∣name of the Family is right ancient in the place of their Name and Habitation, giving for their Arms, the Stones Astroites (in Herauldry reduced to Mullets, which they most resemble, found within their Mannor. K. James. An. 2. Richard Verney, Mil. hunted the Powder-Traytors (taking desperate courses after the discovery of their Plot) out of this, into the next Shire of Worcester. 16. Francis Leigh, Mil. was Created Baron of Dunsmore, and afterwards Earl of Chichester by King Charles I. His eldest Daughter and Heir was Married to Thomas Earl of Southampton, his younger to George Villiers, Visc. Grandison. K. Charles I. An. 12. Thomas Leigh, Mil. was Created by Charles I. Baron of Stoneleigh in this Coun∣ty, and he is happy in his Son Sir Thomas Leigh, who undoubtedly will dignifie the Honour which de∣scendeth unto him. The Battle on October 3. 1642. Dr. Heyl. Hist. of King Charles. The Fight at Edge-Hill was very terrible, no fewer then Five Thousand Men slain upon the place; the Prologue to a greater Slaughter, if the dark night had not put an end to that dispute. The Victory went on the Kings side, who though he lost his General, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of the dead Bo∣dies, and not so only, but he made his way open unto London, and in his way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of Essex, who with his flying Army made all the hast he could towards the
City, (that he might be there before the King) to secure the Parliament. The King afterwards entred triumphant∣ly into Oxford, with no fewer then 120 Colours taken in the Fight. Yet here many of the Loyal Gentry of Lincoln-shire, fell with the Earl of Linsey their Coun∣try-man, and had not some miscarriage happened here, the Royalists had totally in all probability routed their Enemies.
WESTMORLAND. WEstmorland hath Cumberland on the West and North, Lancashire on the South, Durham and York-shire on the East thereof. I is in length from North to South 30 Miles, and in breadth 24. The County is neither stored with Arable Grounds, nor Pa∣sturage, the principal profit that the people of this County raise unto themselves is by Cloathing. Speed mentions but one Religious House in this County, though it has several Kirks. As for Manufactures, Ken∣dal Cottons are famous all over England. Note, the Clothiers of Kendal, were the first Founders of Stur∣bridge Fair. Proverbs. I. Let Uter-Pendragon do what he can, the River Eden will run as it ran. Tradition reporteth, that Ʋter-Pendragon designing to Fortifie the Castle of Pen∣dragon in this County, invited (in vain) the River Eden to forsake her old Channel. The Proverb is ap∣plyable to such who offer a Rape to Nature, by endea∣vouring to abrogate any of her Established Lawes, to divert her course, or invert her method. Princes. Katharine, Daughter of Sir Thomas Par, was born at Kendal-Castle, which descended to her Father from the Brusses and Rsses of Werk. She was first Married to John Nevil, Lord Latimer, and afterward to King
Henry 8. She was a great Favourer of the Gospel, and would earnestly argue for it. Once politick Gar∣diner had almost got her into his Clutches, had not Divine Providence delivered her. Yet a Jesuit (who was neither Confessor nor Privy-Councellour to the King) tells us, that the King intended, if longer sur∣viving, to behead her for an Heretick▪ She was after∣wards Married to Sir Thomas Seymour Baron of Sude∣ley, and Lord Admiral, and dyed in Child-bed of a Daughter 1548. Cardinals. Cristopher Bambridge, born near Appleby, was bred Doctor of Law in Queens Colledge in Oxford. He was afterwards Dean of York, Bishop of Durham, and at last Arch-Bishop of York. Being employed an Am∣bassadour to Rome, he was an active instrument to pro∣cure King Henry 8. to take part with the Pope a∣gainst Lewis King of France, for which good service he was created Cardinal of St. Praxis. A little after falling out with his Steward Rivaldus de Medena, an Italian, and caeing him for his faults, the Italian (in short) poysone him, July 14. 1511. He was buried in the Hospital of the English at Rome. Prelates. Thomas Vipont, descended of those ancient Barons who were Hereditary Lords of this County, was by the Canons of Carlile elected their Bishop, though King Henry 3. with great importunity (why not Authori∣ty?) commended John Prior of Newbury to them. He enjoyed his place but one year, and dyed 1256. John de Kirby, born at Kirkby Lansdale (or Stephens) was first Canon, afterwards Bishop of Carlile, 1332.
He, with the Assistance of Thomas Lucy and Robert Ogle, (persons of prime power in those parts) fight∣ing in an advantagious place, utterly routed and ruined the Scots, who invaded England, with an Army of 30000 Men, under the Conduct of William Douglas, and had taken, and burnt Carlile. He dyed 1353. Thomas de Appleby was legally chosen Bishop of Car∣lile, yet he durst not own the choice, till he had ob∣tained his Confirmation from the Court of Rome. He was consecrated 1363, and deceased 1395. Robert de Appleby went over into Ireland, and there became Prior of St. Peter near Trimme, hence he was by the Pope preferred Bishop of Ossory in that Kingdom. He dyed 1404. W. of Strickland, descended of a right Worshipful Family, was elected Bishop of Carlile, yet Robert Read was by King Richard 2. and the Pope preferred to the place, which affront Strickland bore with much moderation. He was afterwards (during a vacancy) chosen again, and Consecrated Bishop of Carlile 1400. For the Town of Perith in Cumberland, he cut a pas∣sage from the Town into the River Petteril, for the conveyance of Boatage into the Irish Sea. He dyed 1419. Nich. Close, born at Bibreke, was one of the six O∣riginal Fellows, whom King Henry 6. placed in his new Colledge (Kings Colledge) in Cambridge, having committed the building of that house to his fidelity. He was first Bishop of Carlile, then of Lichfield, where he dyed within a year after his Consecration, viz. an. 1453. Since the Reformation. Hugh Coren, was made by Queen Mary, Arch-Bi∣shop of Dublin in Ireland, his Predecessor having been
deprived for being married. 'Tis very observable, that no person in that Kingdom suffered death for their Religion in Queen Maries dayes. Indeed an. 3. Mary a Pursevant was sent with a Commission into Ireland, to impower some eminent persons, to proceed with Fire and Faggot against poor Protestants; On he went to Chester, where his Hoste, (a Protestant) having an ink∣ling of the matter, stole the Commission, putting the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some weeks af∣ter, he appeared before the Lords of the Privy Coun∣cil at Dublin, (of whom Bishop Coren a Principal) produced a Card for his Commission, and was impri∣soned for the affront. After his enlargement, he was very willing to make a reparation, by getting the Com∣mission renewed in England, but was prevented by the Queens death. Bishop Coren conformed with the first, to the Reformation of Queen Elizabeth, being ever sound in his heart. He was for some time Chief Ju∣stice, and Chancellour of Ireland, till he quitted all his Dignities in Exchange for the Bishoprick of Oxford, which being attended with more quiet, was more wel∣come to him in his old Age. He dyed 1567. Barnaby Potter, was born within the Barony of Ken∣dal, 1578. and bred in Queens Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became Provost. He was Chaplain in Or∣dinary to Prince Charles, being accounted at Court, the Penitential Preacher, and by King Charles I. was preferred Bishop of Carlile. He was commonly cal∣led the Puritanical Bishop, and they said of him in the time of King James, that Organs would blow him out of the Church, which I do not believe, the rather, because he loved Vocal Musick, and could bear his own part therein. He was a constant Preacher, and per∣former of Family duties, of a weak Constitution, Me∣lancholly, lean, and a hard Student. He dyed in Ho∣nour, being the last Bishop that dyed a Member of Parliament, 1642.
Statesmen. Sir Edward Bellingham Knight, of an Ancient and Warlike Family, was Servant of the Privy Chamber to King Edward 6. who sent him over Deputy of Ire∣land. He first extended the English pale, proceeding against the Irishry in a Martial course, by breaking the Moors and Connors, two Rebellious Sexts; He built the Forts of Leix and Offaly, to secure his new Ac∣quisition, and had setled the English Plantations there∣in, had he not been suddenly revoked before two years were expired. His Souldiers never knew whither they went, till they were come whither they should go; Thus he surprized the rude Earl of Desmond, brought him to Dublin, reformed him in Civility, sometimes making him to kneel an hour together, before he knew his Duty, till he became a new man in his behaviour. This Earl all his Life after, highly honoured him, and at every Meal, would pray to God for good Sir Ed∣ward Bellingham. When the Deputy returned into England, he cleared himself of many faults laid to his charge, recovering the King's favour, and had been sent over Deputy again, save that he excused himself by indisposition of Body, and dyed not long after. Writers. Richard Kendal, an excellent Grammarian and Schoolmaster, extracted a Quintessence from a vast num∣ber of Latine Grammars, and boasted (like a conceit∣ed Pedant) that Latine only to be elegant, which was made according to his Rules. He flourished under Henry 6.
Since the Reformation. Bernard Son of Edward Gilpin, Esquire, was born at Kentmire, 1517. and bred in Queens Colledge in Oxford. He disputed against Mr. Hooper, (who was afterwards Martyred) when indeed he did follow his Argument with his Affections. He afterwards became a zealous Protestant. He was Rector of Houghton in the North, and boarded in his house 24 Scholars, the greater number poor mens Sons, upon whom he be∣stowed Meat, Drink, Cloth and Education. He kept a Table for his Parishioners, every Sunday from Mi∣chaelmas to Easter. He commended a Marryed life in Clergy-men, himself living and dying a Batchelour. He bestowed 500 pounds, in the building and endow∣ing of his School. He was accounted a Saint, in the Judgments of his very Enemies, if he had any such. Being full of Faith and good works, he was put in his Grave, as a heap of Wheat in due time, swept into the Garner; dying March 4. 1583. Aet. 66. Richard Mulcaster, of ancient Extraction, was born in this County (or Cumberland) and bred in Kings Colledge in Cambridge,AMP. afterwards in Oxford. He was chosen the first Master of Merchant Taylors School in London, where his Scholars profited so well, that the Merchant Tay∣lors intended to fix him, as his Desk, to their School, till death should remove him. This he perceived, and therefore gave for his Motto, Fidelis servus perpetuus Asinus, but after 25 years, he was made Master of Pauls School; Such his Discipline, that the Indulgence of Parents rather encreased then mitigated his severity on their offending Children. He was Plagosus Orbili∣us, and (which quallified the matter) unpartial. A∣mongst the many excellent Scholars which he bred, Bi∣shop
Andrews was most remarkable. At last, quit∣ting the place, he became Parson of Stanford Rivers, and dyed about the middle of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. Christopher Potter, D. D. Kinsman to Bishop Potter was bred in, and Provost of Queens Colledge in Oxford. He was Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles I. and Dean of Worcester; one of a sweet nature, comely Presence, courteous Carriage, devout Life, and deep Learning. He wrote an excellent Book, Entituled Charity mistaken, answered by a Jesuit, against whom, Mr. Chillingworth took up the Cudgels. He dyed in the beginning of the Civil War. Benefactors to the Publick. Robert Langton and Miles Spencer, Doctors of Law, joyntly built a fair School at Appleby; Robert was bred in, and a Benefactor to Queens Colledge in Oxford, owing the Glasing of many Windows therein, to his Beneficence, on which Windows he caused his Sirname to be made in this manner, viz. Long (or Lang) ton. Anne Clyfford, sole Daughter and Heir to George Earl of Northumberland, Wife to Richard Earl of Dor∣set, then to Philip Earl of Pembrock and Montgomery, had her greatest Estate in the North, She built and endowed a most beautiful Hospital at Appleby in this County, and is still living.
Memorable Persons. Richard Gilpin, who was enfeoffed in the Lordship of Kent-mire-hall, by the Baron of Kendal, for his singular deserts; killed the wild Bore, that raging in the Mountains adjoyning, much endammaged the Coun∣try people, whence it is that the Gilpins give the Bore in their Arms. Note that in the Reign of King Edward 1. the He∣reditary Sherivalty of this County was conferred on the Lord Clifford, who married Sibel, eldest Daugh∣ter to Robert de Vipont. Henry Lord Clifford was by Henry 8. an. 1525. Created Earl of Cumberland, and when Henry the 5th. Earl of that Family, dyed lately without issue male, the Honour of the Hereditary She∣rivalty reverted unto Anne, the third Daughter of George Clifford, the third Earl of Cumberland, the Relict of Richard Earl of Dorset, (and since of Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery) by whom she had two Daughters, the elder Married to the Earl of Tha∣net, and the younger Married to James Earl of North∣ampton.
WILT-SHIRE. WIlt-shire hath Glocester-shire on the North, Bark-shire and Hamp-shire on the East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Somerset-shire on the West. From North to South it extendeth 39 Miles, being in bredth 29. and in circumference 139-miles. A pleasant Coun∣ty, and of great variety. It is plentiful in all English Commodities, especially in Wool, the Manufacture of Clothing being vigorously pursued, and very good Whites made here. The best Tobacco-Pipes (portable Chimneys) are made at Amesbury in this County. As for Buildings, the Cathedral of Salisbury (dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) is paramount in this kind, where∣in the Doors and Chappels equal the Months, the Windows the Days, the Pillars of Marble the Hours of the year; so that all Europe affords not such an Alma∣nack of Architecture. A Country-man viewing this Church said, I once admired that there could be a Church that should have so many Pillars, as there be hours in the year, and now I admire more, that there should be so ma∣ny hours in the year, as I see Pillars in this Church. The Cross Isle is most beautiful, the Spire Steeple is of great height, and greater Workmanship. I have been informed that some Forreign Artists, beholding this building, brake forth into tears, which some imputed to their admiration, others to their envy. Of Monu∣ments therein, that of Edward Earl of Hartford is most Magnificent, that of Helen Suavenburgh a Swede, (the Relict of William Marquess of Northampton) is most commended for its Artificial plainness. In the Nave of the Church, there is a Monument of a little Boy
in Episcopal Habiliments, it having been fashionable in that Church (in the depth of Popery) that the Cho∣risters chose a Boy of their Society, to be a Bishop a∣mong them, from St. Nicholas, till St. Innocents day at night, who did accordingly officiate in all things, saying of Mass only excepted. Of Civil Buildings in this County, Long-leat, the house of Sir James Thynne was the biggest, and Wilton is the stateliest, and the pleasantest for Gardens, Fountains, &c. As for Sa∣lisbury, the Citizens thereof have derived the River into every Street therein, so that the City is (like Ve∣nice) a heap of Islets thrown together, according to the Epitaph of Mr. Francis Hide, a Native of this City, who dyed Secretary unto the English Leiger in Venice. Born in the English Venice, thou didst dye, Dear Friend in the Italian Salisbury. The Wonders of this County are Stone-henge, a Ro∣man work, consisting of four Equilateral Triangles, inscribed within a Circle, a double Portico, and Archi∣traves set without Morter. 'Tis conceived, it was a Temple dedicated to Heaven, being of a Circular form, built on a Plain, and being without a Roof. The next is Knot Grass, growing 9 Miles from Salisbury, which is ordinarily 15 foot in length, and sometimes 24, and being built many stories high, from knot to knot; it lyeth matted on the ground, whence it is cut for Provender, the knots whereof will fat Swine. The Grass is conceived peculiar to this place. Proverbs. I. It is done according to the use of Sarum. This Proverb began on this occasion; Osmund Bishop of Sa∣rum,
about 1090 made an Ordinal or Office, which was generally received all over England, all speaking the same words in their Liturgy. It is now applyed to those persons which do, and actions which are for∣mally and solemnly done, in so regular a way, by Authentick precedents, and patterns of unquestionable Authority, that no just exception can be taken thereat. Princes. Margaret Plantagenet, Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, and Elizabeth Nevil, eldest Daughter and co-heir of Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick, was born August 14. 1473, at Farrley-Castle in this County. She was Countess of Salisbury, Heir to the Dutchess of Burgundy, and Niece to King Edward 4. and Richard 3. and Mother to Cardinal Pole. By Sir Richard a Knight of Wales, and Cosin German to King Henry 7. she had (amongst others) Henry Lord Mon∣tague, her eldest Son, when he was accused for Trea∣son, she was charged to be privy thereunto, in the Reign of King Henry 8. On the Scaffold as she stood, she would not gratifie the Executioner with a prostrate posture of her Body. The Executioner at last dragg'd her by the Hair, (gray with Age) and may be truly said to have took off her Head, (an. 23. Henry 8.) see∣ing she would neither give it him, nor forgive him the doing thereof. Jane Seymore, Daughter to Sir Jo. Knight, (honour∣ably descended from the Lords Beauchamps) was born (probably) at Wulfal, and after was Married to King Henry 8. It is said, that at her first coming to Court, Queen Anne Bollen snatched at a Jewel Pendant about this Jane's Neck, and hurt her own hand, with the vi∣olence she used, but it grieved her Heart more, when she perceived it the King's Picture, who from this day
forward, dated her own declining, and the others as∣cending into her Husbands affection. This Queen dy∣ed some days after the Birth of Prince Edward her Son, on whom this Epitaph, Phaenix Jana jacet, nato Phaenice, dolendum Saecula Phaenices nulla tulisse duas. Soon as her Phenix Bud was blown Root-Phenix Jane did wither, Sad, that no Age a brace had shown Of Phenixes together. She dyed in her Husbands favour, and was buried in the Quire of Windsor Chappel, the King continuing in real mourning for her, even all the Festival of Christ∣mass. Saints. Adelme, Son to Kenred, Nephew to Ina, King of the West Saxons, (after Forreign breeding) was Ab∣bot of Malmesbury 30 years. He was the first English∣man who ever wrote in Latine, the first that brought Poetry into England, and the first Bishop of Sherburn. He wrote a Book for the reducing the Britons to ob∣serve Easter, according to the Church of Rome. The Monks (those Babylonish Masons) have built such lying Wonders on his Memory, and have vomited out such lies (to his dishonour) that the loudness thereof has reached to Heaven; affirming that this Adelme, by his Prayers, stretched out a Beam of his Church (cut too short by the Carpenter) to the full proportion, and that he, at another time hung his Vestment on the Beams of the Sun, which miraculously supported the same. Coming to Rome to be Consecrated Bishop of
Sherburn, he reproved Pope Sergius his Fatherhood, for being a Father indeed to a Bastard, then newly born. And returning home, lived in great esteem, till the day of his death, which happened 709. His Corps was inshrined at Malmesbury, and had in great Vene∣ration. Edith, natural Daughter of King Edgar, by the Lady Wolfhild, was a devout Abbess of Wilton. Be∣ing reproved by Bishop Ethelwold for her curious At∣tire, she told him, that God regarded the Heart more then the Garment, and that sins might be covered as well under Rags as Robes. 'Tis said, that after the slaugh∣ter of her Brother Edward, holy Dunstan had a design to make her Queen of England, so to defeat Ethelred the lawful Heir, had she not declined the proffer. She dyed 984, and is buried in the Church of Dioness at Wilton, of her own building. She was commonly cal∣led St▪ Edith the younger, to distinguish her from her Aunt, of whom before. Martyrs. About 1503. there was a persecution of Protestants (in deed) in this County, under Edmund Audley Bi∣shop of Salisbury; One Richard Smart being burnt at Salisbury, for reading a Book called Wickliff's Wicket, to one Thomas Stillman, afterwards burnt in Smithfield. But under cruel Bishop Capon, Wilt-shire affordeth these Marian Martyrs, Jo. Spicer Free-Mason, William Co∣berly Taylor in Kevel, burnt in Salisbury 1556. John Maundrel Husbandman. Confessors. John Hunt and Richard White, Husbandmen at Marleborough, were persecuted in Salisbury 1558, and
being condemned to dye, were little less then mira∣culously preserved, as will appear hereafter. Alice Coberly, Wife to William Coberly forenamed, failed in her Constancy. The Jaylors Wife of Salis∣bury, heating a Key fire hot, and laying it in the Grass, spake to this Allice, to bring it unto her, in doing whereof she pitiously burnt her hand, and cryed out. O (said the other) if thou canst not abide the burning of a Key, how wilt thou endure thy whole Body to be burnt at the Stake; whereat the said Alice revoked her opinion. Cardinals. Walter Winterburn, born at Sarisbury, and bred a Dominican Frier, was an excellent Scholar, and a skilful Casuist, a quality which recommended him to be Confessor to King Edward 1. Pope Benedict 11. made him (being 79 years of Age) Cardinal of St. Savin, upon the news of the death of Maklesfield at London, who dyed before the Cap was sent him; and this Walter's Cap (being not enjoyed one year) was never a whit the worse for wearing; for ha∣ving made a journey to Rome, to procure it, in his re∣turn home, he left it, and the World, and was buri∣ed at Genoa, but his Corps (afterwards brought over) was interred in London, 1305. Robert Halam is reported to have been born of the Royal Blood of England.S. N. He was bred in, and Chancellour of Oxford, 1403. and was Arch-Deacon of Canterbury, then Bishop of Salisbury, at last made Cardinal, June 6. 1411. He was one of them who represented the English Clergy, both in the Council of Pisa and Constance, in which last Service he dyed 1417. in Gotleby Castle.
Prelates. Johannes Sarisburiesis, a Restorer of Learning, in most kinds, whereof himself was most eminent. He was Companion to Thomas Becket, in his Exile, but not in his disloyalty, for which he sharply reproved him. He was highly in favour with Pope Eugen 3. and Adrian 4. and yet no Author in that Age hath so pungent passages against the Pride and Covetousness of the Court of Rome. For in his Polycrat. he sayes, Scribes and Pharisees sit in the Church of Rome— His Legates do so swagge, as if Satan were gone forth from the Face of the Lord, to scourge the Church. They eat the sins of the people, with them they are clothed, and many ways riot therein — Who dissent from their Doctrine, are condemned for Hereticks or Schismaticks, &c. He was generally esteemed a pious man, and was by King Henry 2. made Bishop of Chartres in France, where he dyed 1182. Richard Poor, Dean of Sarisbury, was first Bishop of Chester,S. N. then of Sarisbury. He re∣moved his Cathedral (most inconveniently seated for want of water, &c.) to a place called Merry field, since Sarisbury, where he laid the Foundation of that stately Structure, which he lived not to finish. He was afterwards removed to Durham. Pious was his life, and peaceable his end, April 2. an. 1237. His Corps was buried at Tarrent in Dorset-shire, in a Nun∣nery of his own founding, and some of his Name, (and probably of his Alliance) are still extant in this County. William Edendon, born at Edendon, and bred in Ox∣ford, was by Edward 3. made Bishop of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer of England. He then first caused roats, and half Groats to be made, with some abate∣ment
of the weight. He was afterwards made Lord Chancellour, and erected a stately Convent for Bon∣homes at Edendon in this County, valued at the dissolu∣tion at 521 l. 12. s. 5 d. ½. per Annum. Some con∣demn him for robbing St. Peter (to whom with Swithin, Winchester Church was dedicated) to pay all Saints, to whom Edendon Convent was consecrated, suffering his Episcopal Palaces to decay, whilst he raised up his new Foundation. Whereupon▪ after his death, his Executors were sued for Dilapidations by his Succes∣sor William Wickham, (an excellent Architect) who recovered of them 1662 l. 10 s. besides his Executors were forced to make good the standing stock of the Bishoprick, which in his time was impaired, viz. Oxen 1556, Weathers 4717, Ewes 3521, Lambs 3521, Swine 127. He dyed 1366, and lyeth buried under a fair Monument of Alabaster, near to the Quire. Richard Mayo, born nigh Hungerford, of good Pa∣rentage, (whose Sirname is since extinguished) was bred in, and President of Magdalens-Colledge in Ox∣ford. He was sent by King Henry 7. into Spain, an. 1501, to bring over the Lady Katharine to be Married to Prince Arthur. After his return, he was rewarded with the Bishoprick of Hereford. He dyed 1516, and was buried under a Magnificent Monument in his Church. Since the Reformation. John Thornborough, B. D. born in Salisbury, and bred in Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, was a man of goodly Presence; By Queen Elizabeth he was made Dean of York, and Bishop of Lymrick in Ireland, where he had a wonderful deliverance; For an upper Floor in an old Castle, wherein he, his Wife and Chil∣dren lay, did fall down in the dead hour of the night,
into his Room, and rested on some Chests, (after it had crushed Cupboards and Tables, &c.) without hurting any living Creature. An. 1. Jac. he was Con∣secrated Bishop of Bristol, holding his other places in Commendam with it, and from thence was Transla∣ted to Worcester. Being a great Chymist he presented King James with an Extraction, which was reputed a preserver of Health, and prolonger of Life, though as for the Bishop himself, I conceive that his merry heart was his best Elixir: Dying exceeding Aged An. Dom. 164.. John Buckbridge, born at Dracot, was bred in Ox∣ford, where he became D. D. and President of St. Johns-Colledge. He was afterwards Minister of St. Giles Cripplegate, and on the 9th. of June 1611, he was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester. He wrote a Learned Book against John Fisher, De Potestate Papae in Temporalibus. He was afterwards preferred Bishop of Ely. He dyed 163. and was buried in the Church of Bromly in Kent. Statesmen. Edward and Thomas Seimor, Sons of Sir John Kt. of Wolful, are here joyn'd, because they were (only) then invincible, whilst they were united in Affection. First, Edward Seimor Duke of Sommerset, Lord Pro∣tector, and Treasurer of England, being the eldest Brother, succeeded to a fair Inheritance. He was a valiant Souldier for Land-service, fortunate, and ge∣nerally beloved by Martial men; a man of great Can∣dour and Affability. He Married Anne, Daughter of Sir Edward Stanhop Knight, a Lady of an high Mind, and undaunted Spirit. His younger Brother Thomas Seimor, made Baron of Sudley, by the favours of his Nephew King Edward 6. obtained a great Estate;
Being well experienced in Sea Affairs, he was made Lord Admiral of England. He was reserved, and more cunning in his Carriage. He Married Queen Katharine Par, the Widow of King Henry 8. Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives, the Dut∣chess refusing to bear the Queens Train, and in effect justed with her for precedence, so that, what betwixt the Train of the Queen, and long Gown of the Dut∣chess, they raised so much dust at the Court, as at last put out the eyes of both thir Husbands, and occasi∣oned their Execution; The Lord Thomas an. 154. the Lord Edward, an. 154.. These two Bullworks of the Kings safety being demolished, D. Dudley had the advantage, the more easily to practice the destructi∣on of King Edward 6. as is vehemently suspected. Sir Oliver St. John Knight, Lord Grandison, &c. was born of an Ancient and Honourable Family, whose prime Seat was at Lediard Tragoze in this County. Being bred in the Wars from his Youth, he was by King James appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and vigorously pursued the Principles of his Predecessors, for the civilizing thereof, and first advanced it to con∣siderable profit to his Master; and Ireland, which was the Land of Ire or Broyles for 400 years, did now be∣come the Land of Concord. Being recalled into Eng∣land, he lived for many years in great repute, and dy∣ing without issue, left his Honour to his Sisters Son, by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main of his Estate to his Brothers Son▪ Sir Jo. St. John Knight and Barro∣net. Sir James Ley, Knight and Baronet, (a younger Son of Henry Esquire, of great Ancestry, who serv∣ed King Henry 8. at the Seige of Bollen) was born at Taant, and bred in Brazen-Nose-College, and having studied the Laws, was by King James made Lord Chief Justice in Ireland, and practised the Charge the King
gave him at his departure, not to build his Estate on the Ruins of a miserable Nation, making a good progress in civilizing that people, by the unpartial execution of Justice. After he was recalled, King James made him Atturney of the Court of Wards, Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, an. 18. Reg. Lord Treasurer of England; an. 22. Baron Ley of Ley in Devonshire the same year. King Charles I created him Earl of Marleburg in this County an. 1. Reg. and Lord President of the Coun∣cil, in which place he dyed 1629. He was a person of great Gravity, Ability and Integrity, and as the Caspian Sea, is observed neither to ebb nor flow, so his Mind did not rise nor fall, but continued the same con∣stancy in all conditions. Sir Francis Cottington Knight, was born near Meer, and bred when a Youth under Sir — Stafford. He lived so long in Spain, till he made the garb and gra∣vity of that Nation become him. He raised himself by his natural strength, without any artificial advan∣tage, having his Parts above his Learning, his Expe∣rience above his Parts, his Industry above his Expe∣rience, and (some will say) his success above all, so that at the last, he became Chancellour of the Exche∣quer, Baron Hanworth in Middlesex, and Lord Trea∣surer of England, gaining also a very great Estate; but what he got in few years, he lost in fewer dayes, since the Civil Wars, when the Parliament made him one of the examples of their severity, excluding him pardon, but permitting his departure beyond the Seas, where he dyed about the year 1650. Capital Judges. Sir Nicholas Hide Knight, was born at Warder in this County, where his Father, in right of his Wife, had a long Lease of that Castle, from the Family of the
Arundels. His Father, I say, (descended from an An∣cient Family in Cheshire) a fortunate Gentleman in all his Children, (and more in his Grandchildren) his younger Children, (among whom Sir Nicholas) in Wealth and Honour exceeding the Heir of the Family. Having studied the Laws, he was sworn Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, February the 9th, 1626. discharging his Office with great integrity, and dyed 1631. Souldiers. Henry D'anvers, second Son to Sir John, and Dame Elizabeth, Daughter and Co-heir to Nevil Lord Lati∣mer, was born at Dantsey, 1573. being bred under the Prince of Orange, he was made a Captain in the Wars of France, and there Knighted for his good ser∣vice, under Henry 4. the then French King. He was Lieutenant of the Horse, and Serjeant Major of the Army in Ireland, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of Mountjoy, in the Reign of Queen E∣lizabeth; by King James he was made Baron of Dant∣sey, and Peer of this Realm, as also Lord President of Munster, and Governour of Guernsey. By King Charles I. he was created Earl of Danby, Privy-Councellour, and Knight of the Garter. He dyed 1643. without Issue, leaving his Estate to his Nephew, Henry D'anvers. Writers. Oliver of Malmesbury, a Benedictine, being much addicted to Mathematicks, and to judicial Astrology, upon the appearing of a Comet, foretold the destru∣ction of the Inhabitants of this Land, which fell out ac∣cordingly at the Norman Conquest. 'Tis said, he es∣sayed the famous experiment of flying, and taking his
rise from a Tower in Malmesbury, made his way in the Air for one Furlong, then fell down, and brake both his Thighs. Having written some Books of Astrology, he dyed 1060, five years before the Norman Inva∣sion. W. (Summerset) of Malmesbury, where he was Can∣ter and Library Keeper, wrote a History of the Saxon Kings and Bishops, until his own time. He dyed 1142. and was buried in Malmesbury. Robert Canutus, born at Cricklade, (or Greeklade, where anciently Greek was professed) became Chief of the Canons of St. Fridswith in Oxford. Having made a Garland of the Flowers of Pliny's Natural History, he Dedicated the Book to King Henry 2. He wrote also Comments on the greater part of the Old and New Testament, and flourished 1170. Richard of the Devises (antiently divided between the King and Bishop of Salisbury) was a famous Bene∣dictine in Winchester. He wrote a History of the Reign of Richard 1. under whom he flourished; and an Epi∣tome of the British affairs. He dyed about 1200. Godwin of Salisbury, Chanter of that Church, wrote a Book of Meditations, flourishing about 1256. Jo. of Wilton Senior, an Augustine Friar, studied in Paris; A subtle disputant, wrote many Sermons on several occasions, flourishing under Edward 2. 1310. Jo. of Wilton Junior, a Benedictine Monk in West∣minster, was an Elegant Latinist. He wrote Metrical Meditations, in imitation of St. Bernard, and a Book Entituled the Dial of Wisdom. He flourished under King Edward 3. Jo. Chylmark born at Chylmark and bred in Oxford, was a great Philosopher and Mathematician, being the Archimedes of his Age. He wrote many Mathemati∣cal Tractates, and flourished under King Richard 2. 1390.
Thomas Wilton, D. D, was first Chancellor, then Dean of St. Pauls in London. He sided with the Bi∣shops, whom the Poor Friars taxed for their pomp, for he knew well enough that the Accusers opened the Coffers of all the Treasure in the Land, by Feminine Confessions, and abusing the Key of Absolution. He wrote a smart Book on this subject, Whether Friars, in Health and Begging, be in the State of Perfection? Since the Reformation. William Horeman, bred in Kings-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, became Vice-Provost of Eaton; The most ge∣neral Scholar of his Age. Having written of Orthogra∣phy, the Quantities of Syllables, a Chronicle, a Comment on Gabriel Biel, On the divorce of King Henry 8. A Comment on Cato, Varro, &c. He dyed 1535. and ly∣eth buried in the Chappel. Masters of Musick. William Lawes, bred in Salisbury, was of the Pri∣vate Musick to King Charles I. He made several sorts of Musick for Voices and Instruments. He disclaimed the covert and priviledge of the Office of Commissary, and valiantly venturing his person, was casually shot at the Siege of Chester. The King commonly called him the Father of Musick. He, and his Brother, were the Authors of the Composures of the Psalms. He dyed 164.. Benefactors to the Publick. Thomas Stumps of Malmesbury, an Eminent Clothier, entertained (as is said) King Henry 8. and his Court-train, coming unexpected with the plentiful Provision,
which was prepared for his Workmen, who were for∣ced to fast in the mean time. He preserved Malmes∣bury Minster, at the time of the general dissolution, buying the same with a great sum of Money, for the Townsmen, by whom it was converted into a Parish Church. He bought the Demesnes of Malmesbury Abbey, for 1500 l. 2 s. ½. may there be many bran∣ches of such Stumps! Memorable Persons. — Sutton of Salisbury, a great Clothier in the time of King Henry 1. is by a mistake, spposed to have bequeathed 100 l. to the Weavers of Salisbury, which was not built till long after that King's time. Michael, Under-Sheriff to Sir Anthony Hungerford, 1558. in the last of Queen Mary, was a right Godly Man. When the Writ, de Haereticis Comburendis, for the Execution of R. White and Jo. Hunt, was brought to him, instead of burning them, he burnt the Writ; and before the same could be renewed, Dr. Geffrey (the bloody Chancellour of Salisbury who procured it) and Queen Mary, were both dead. Sir James — Vicar Choral of the Church of Salisbury, in the time of King Edward 6. was wholly addicted to the Study of Chymistry, and pretended he had all his Skill by Inspiration. He dyed about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. Noted Sheriffs. Edward 3. An. 35. Henry Sturmy, Lord of Woolf∣hall in this County, Bailiff and Guardian of the For∣rest of Savernake, by right of Inheritance, as all his Ancestors were, from the time of King Henry 2. Their Hunters Horn is kept by the Seymours, Dukes
of Sommerset, as a Monument of their descent from such noble Ancestors. King Henry 6. An. 23. Jo. Basket Esquire, had a dispensation from Pope Eugenius the 4th, to choose a Confessor in the Parish of Salisbury, who was impowr∣ed to commute his vowes of Pilgrimage to St. Peter, Paul and James, (if he had made any such) into other works of Piety. Q. Elizabeth. An. 11. Thomas Thin Mil. for his sudden Wealth, was Summoned before the Councel, some suggesting he had met with Tresor trove, or used some indirect means. He shewed, that he had got the same by Marriage, Industry, and Frugality, for the rest, (said he) you have a good Mistriss, Our Gracious Queen, and I had a good Master, the Duke of Som∣merset. Cambden saith that this Thomas was descend∣ed from the Ancient Family of the Bottevils. 41. Walter Vaughan had for his Arms, S. a Chev. betwixt three Childrens Heads, cooped at the Shoulders, Ar. their Peruques, O. inwraped about their Necks with as many Snakes proper; — One of the Family is re∣ported to have been born with a Snake about his Neck. His Lands descended to Sir George, a worthy Gentle∣man, and after his issueless decease, to a Brother of his who was born blind, bred in Oxford, and became Pre∣bendary of Sarum. K. Charles I. An. 1. Francis Seymour, Mil. Grand∣child to Edward Earl of Hartford, and Brother to Wil∣liam Duke of Sommerset, was by King Charles I. Crea∣ted Baron of Troubridge in this County, since for his Loyalty made Privy Councellour to King Charles II. and Chancellour of the Dutchy of Lancaster.
Battles. Lansdoune Fight, was fought in the Confines of this County and Sommerset, July 13. 1643. and it seemed not so much an entire Battle, as a heap of Skirmishes hudled together. It may be said, Victus & Victor uterque fuit, The Parliaments Forces beat the Roya∣lists back five times, with much disorder; Sir Bevil Greenvil being slain in the Head of his Pikes, (Major Lowre in the Head of his party of Horse) yet the Kings Forces alleadge demonstration of Conquest, that Prince Maurice, and Sir Ralph Hopton remained in the Heads of their Troops all Night, and next Morning found themselves possessed of the Field, and of the dead, as also of Three Hundred Armes, and Nine Barrels of Powder, the Enemy had left behind them. Round way Fight. Five dayes after, Prince Mau∣rice, with the Earl of Carnarvan returning, and the Lord Wilmot coming from Oxford, with a gallant sup∣ply of select Horse, charged the Parliaments Forces, under the Conduct of Sir William Waller; With him were the Horse of Sir Arthur Haslerigg, so well Arm∣ed, that each Souldier seemed an impregnable Fortifi∣cation. But these were so smartly charged by the Prince, that they fairly forsook the Field, leaving the Foot (which in English Battles bear the heat of the day) to shift for themselves. In the mean time Sir Ralph Hopton hurt lately, (with the blowing up of Powder) lay sick and sore in the Town of Devizes. His men wanted Match, whom Sir Ralph directed to beat and boyl their Bed-cords, and marching forth, they effectu∣ally contributed to the total routing and ruining of the Parliaments Foot which remained.
Note, King Edgar freed this Land from Wolves. May the Flocks of this County be also freed from two legg'd Wolves, Spanish Ewes, (whereof one being for∣merly brought over into England, brought with it the first general contagion of Sheep) and) Hunger-Rot, the effect of an over dry Summer.
WORCESTER-SHIRE. WOrcester-shire hath Stafford-shire on the North, Warwick-shire on the West, Glocester-shire on the South, Hereford and Shrop-shire on the West; Being of a Triangular form, it stretcheth from North to South 22 Miles, from South to North-West 28, and thence to her North-East point 28 Miles. The natu∣ral Commodities are Lampreys, in the River Severn; then Perry, a Wine made of Pears. There is also fine Salt made in this County, which is reputed the se∣cond Salt Cellar in England. There are found here many Salt Fountains, but stopped up again for the pre∣servation of Woods. As for the Buildings in this County, the Cathedral of Worcester was much defaced in the Civil Wars. The Market Towns are general∣ly handsomely built, and no Shire in England can shew a brace of them, so neat and near together, as Beaud∣ly and Kidderminster in this County, being scarcely two Miles asunder. Saints. St. Richard, born at Wich, (alias Droitwich) bred in Oxford, and beyond the Seas, became Chancellour of Oxford, then of Canterbury, till at last he was cho∣sen Bishop of Chichester. He was a great Becketist, a stout Opposer of Regal Power over Spiritual Persons, on which and other accounts, he wrote a Book to Pope Innocent the 4th. against King Henry 3. Wherefore, after his death he was Canonized by Pope Ʋrban the 4th. As for their Report, that the Wiches or Salt
Pits in this County were miraculously procured by the Prayers of this Holy Man, their unsavoury lie hath not a grain of probability to season it, it appearing by an∣tient Authors, that Salt-water flowed there, time out of Mind, before sweet Milk was given by Mother or Nurse, to this St. Richard. Cardinals. Jo. Cumin, bred a Monk at Eversham in this County, was by the Kings procurement, chosen Arch-Bishop of Dublin, and afterwards by Pope Lucius created Cardi∣nal of St. Vellit in Italy. Hugh of Evesham, so applyed himself to the Study of Physick, that he became the Phenix in that Facul∣ty, great was his skill in the Mathematicks and Astro∣logy. Having satisfied Pope Martin the 4th. in some matters of great difficulty, he was by his Holiness made Cardinal of St. Laurence, 1280. Seven years after he was poysoned, though Cicaonius, to palliate the bu∣siness, said he dyed of the Plague. Prelates. Wulstan of Brandsford, was Prior of Worcester, and built a most beautiful Hall in his Convent. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Worcester, 1338. He was Verus Pontifex in the Grammatical Notation thereof, building a fair Bridge at Brandsford, over the River Teme. He dyed 1349. Jo. Lowe, an Augustine Friar in Wich, was present∣ed to St Asaph, and afterwards made Bishop of Ro∣chester. He preserved many Manuscripts, and bestow∣ed them on the Magnificent Library, which he fur∣nished at St. Augustines in London; which Library va∣nished away, at the dissolution, with the fine Steeple
of that Church; one person, who shall be Nameless, imbezelling both Books and Buildings to his private profit. Edmund Bonner, alias Savage, was Son of Jo. Sa∣vage Priest, Son to Sir Jo. Knight of the Garter, and Privy Councellour to King Henry 7. His Mother, Con∣cubine to this Priest, was sent out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and lay down her Burden at Elmley in this County, where this bouncing Babe Bonner was born. Being Dr. of Laws, he was employed by King Henry 8. in several Embassies beyond the Seas, at which time he was Bonner, was not Bonner, being as yet meek, and a great Cromwelite; Not long after he was Conse∣crated Bishop of London. Under King Edward 6. being deputed to Preach publickly concerning the Re∣formation, his frigid and faint Expressions concerning the same, occasioned his deprivation and Imprisonment. Then it was, when one jearingly saluted him, Good morrow Bishop Quondam, that Bonner as tartly return∣ed, Good morrow Knave semper. Being restored under Queen Mary, he caused the death of twice as many Martyrs, as all the Bishops in England besides; justly occasioning these Verses made upon him. No Body speaking to Bonner. All call thee Cruel, and the Spunge of Blood, But Bonner, I say, thou art mild and good. Under Queen Elizabeth he was deprived, and secured in his Castle, I mean the Marshalsea in Southwark, for as that Prison kept him from doing hurt to others, it kept others from doing hurt to him, being so Univer∣sally odious, he had been stoned in the Streets, if at Liberty. The Oath being tendred to him by Horn, then Bishop of Winchester, he pleaded for himself, that Horn was no lawful Bishop, which occasioned the
ensuing Parliament to confirm him, and the rest of his Order, to all purposes and intents. After ten years Im∣prisonment, he dyed 1569. and was buried in the Church-yard of St. George in Southwark; But enough of this Herostratus, who burnt so many living Temples of the Holy Ghost; yet let me add one thing, that be∣ing a very Corpulent Man, (a Constitution that argues rather a Plethorie, then a Cacochymie, or ill humour) he seems by his cruelty to have done violence to his own disposition, seeing the temper of the Mind com∣monly followes that of the Body; But Quid non Religio potuit suadere Malorum? Since the Reformation. Jo. Watson, born at Bengeworth, was Prebendary, then Dean, and afterwards Bishop of Winchester. 'Tis said he (being 60 years of Age) proffered the Earl of Leicester 200 l. to be excused from the Bishoprick, which the Queen understanding, Nay then (said she) Watson shall have it, he being more worthy thereof, who will give 200 l. to decline, then he who will give 2000 l. to attain it. There were three Watsons Bi∣shops in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Thomas of Lincoln, our Jo. of Winchester, and Anthony of Chi∣chester. He dyed 15.. and was buried in the Church of St. Mary Overies. Statesmen. Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, born at Croone, was eldest Son to Sir Thomas Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. He was bred in, and Treasurer of the Inner Temple, 1618. Being first Attorney Ge∣neral
to King James, he was afterwards made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, November, an. 1. Car. I. by whom he was created (an. 4. Reg.) Baron Coven∣try, of Alesborough in this County. He enjoyed the dignity of Lord Keeper fifteen years, if it was not more proper to say, that dignity enjoyed him. This latter Age affording none better qualified for the place, The Patent whereby he was created Baron, makes mention of his most worthy Services to King James and King Charles I. his Prudence, Courage, Dexteri∣ty, Integrity and Industry manifested towards the King and his Crown. He dyed January, 1639. before the Civil Wars. Never Lord Keeper made fewer Or∣ders, which were afterwards reversed; His being firm∣ly grounded on the consent of the Parties. Writers on the Law. Sir Thomas Littleton Knight, born in Frankley, was Son of Thomas Wescot Esquire, and Elizabeth Littleton his Wife, and two great Kings had a great Sympathy to him, who had an Antipathy each to other, Henry 6. whose Serjeant he was, and rode Judge of the Nor∣thern Circuit, and Edward 4. who made him a Judge, and in his Reign he rode the Northampton Circuit. His Book of Tenures witnesseth his deep skill in the Laws, and retains at this day, an Authentical Reputation; In∣somuch, that when in the Reign of King James it came in question, upon a Demurrer in Law, whether a Re∣lease to one Trespasser, should be available or no to his Com∣panion, Sir Henry Hubbard, and Judges, Warberton, Winch and Nicols, his Companions gave judgment ac∣cording to the opinion of our Littleton, and openly said, That they would not have his Case disputed or que∣stioned. He left three Families, signally flourishing in this and the Neighbouring Counties of Stafford and
Salop. This Judge, and the Judicious Lord Coke, who Commented on his Tenures, were the two great Lumi∣naries of the Law of England. He dyed an. 21. Ed∣ward 4. and lyeth buried in the Cathedral of Worcester. See more of him in Stafford-shire. Souldiers. Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, born at the Mannor house of Salwape, Jan. 28. 1381. was a per∣son so redoubted for Martial Atchievments, that Her∣cules his Labours found in him a real performance. 1. Being hardly 22 years old, an. 5. Henry 4. at the Queens Coronation he Justed and Challenged all Com∣ers. 2. He bid Battle to Own Glendour the Welsh Rebel, put him to flight, and took his Banner with his own hands. 3. He vanquished the two Piercies at Shrewsbury. 4. Being challenged (in his Pilgrimage to the Holy-Land,) at Verona, by Sir Pandulph Ma∣lacet, an Italian, to fight with him at three Weapons, viz. with Axe, Sword and Dagger, he had slain his Adversary at the second Weapon, had not some sea∣sonably interceded. 5. Fighting at Justs in France with Sir Collard Fines, at every stroke, he bare him backward to his Horse, and when the French suspected that he was tyed to his Saddle, to conute their Jea∣lousies, our Earl ighted, and presently remounted▪ 6. He was eminently active in the Kings Victorious Battles in France, and might truly say, Quorum pars ego magna sui. 7. By King Henry 5. he was sent to the Council of Constance, with a Retinue of 800 Horse. 8. Here he killed a Dutch Duke (who challenged him) in the presence of the Emperour. 9. The Empress affected with his Valour, took the Badge from one of the Earls Men (being a plain Bear of Silver) and wore it on her Shoulder. But the next day our Earl pre∣sented
her with a Bear (which was his Crest) made of Pearls and Precious Stones. 10. Being sent by King Henry 5. with 1000 Men in Arms, to fetch Queen Katharine, sole Daughter to the King of France, he fought with the Earls of Vendosme and Limosin, killed one of them with his own hand, routed the Forces of 5000 Men, and brought the Lady, whom he saw safe∣ly Married to the King. 11. He was by the said Kings Will, appointed Governour of his Son in his Minority, and made Lieutenant of all France. 12. During his Life, our success in France was progressive, and re∣trograde after his death. Sigismund the Emperor, coming into England, told King Henry 5. that no Chri∣stian King had such another Knight, for Wisdom, Nur∣ture and Manhood, and by Imperial Authority (with the Kings consent) caused him to be named, The Fa∣ther of Courtesie. Being tossed with a great Tempest in his last Voyage to Normandy, and despairing of Life, he caused himself, his Lady and infant Son, to be bound to the main Mast, on this design, that being known by his Armour, and Coat of Arms upon him, he might have a Christian Burial; Yet he dyed afterwards in his Bed at Roan, April 30. 149. and lyeth buried in a Chappel of the Collegiate Church of Warwick, having a most stately Tomb. His Deeds of Charity were little inferiour to the Atchievments of his Valour. Physicians and Chymists. Sir Edward Kelley, alias Talbot, born at Worcester, was reported to have joyntly found with Dr. Dee, a great quantity of Elixir, in the Ruins of Glassenbury Abbey That Doctor having Calculated Sir Edward's Nativity, might possibly by some Mystical Equations, find out the place of that Elixir. They afterwards fixed at Trebona in Bohemia, where Sir Edward (be∣ing
a skilful as well as fortunate Chymist) is said to have transmuted a Brass warming Pan (by warming it by the fire, and putting the Elixir thereon) into pure Silver, a piece whereof was sent to Queen Elizabeth. Manuscr. Libr. Cott. These two, (Sir Edward and Dr. Dee) kept constant Intelligence with a Spirit, giving them advice how to proceed in their mystical discoveries, and enjoyning them, by way of preparatory qualification for the same, they should en∣joy their Wives in common; Though bogling hereat at first, they resolved to submit thereunto, because the Law-giver might dispense with his Laws, in matters of so high Nature. Upon this ('tis thought) Dee left his Com∣panion, to rant it in Germany, who trusting too much to his Treasure, spent extravagantly 4000 pounds on Rings, which he gave away at the Marriage of one of his Maid-servants. Being highly conceited of his Skill, he gives Advice to all Lovers of Chymistry, in these words. To you, I say, how Learned soever you be, Go burn your Books, and come and learn of me. According to the malignant position of Aquarius (which hath influence on the Legs) observed in the Scheme of his Nativity; Being imprisoned by Radulphus the Em∣perour, and endeavouring to escape out of an high Window, by a pair of Sheets tyed together, he fell, and brake his Leg, whereof he dyed 1595. From this Compound Chymist, if you separate his Sublimate and Precipitate, that is his Pride and Prodigality, there will remain an experienced Philosopher, worthy re∣commendation to Posterity.
Writers. Florence of Worcester, being learned and industrious, wrote Chronicum Chronicorum, from the Creation, till his death, happening 1119. Jo. Wallis or Welsh, a Franciscan in VVorcester, was bred in Oxford, then in Paris, where he was common∣ly called the Tree of Life; though the Tree of Know∣ledge of good and evil had been more proper, he ha∣ving written 20 Volumes of curious speculations. He dyed, and was buried in Paris, 1216. Elias de Evesham a Benedictine, born of good Pa∣rentage, flourished about 1270. VV. de Packington, a Layman, was Secre∣tary and Treasurer to Edward the black Prince.AMP. Having lived long in France, and acquired an eactness in the Language; he wrote in French the Story of five English Kings, John, Henry 3. Edward 1.2. and 3. and a Book of the Atchievments of the Black Prince. He flourished 1380. Since the Reformation. Sir Edwin Sandys, Son to Edw. D. D. and Bishop of VVorcester, was bred in Cambridge, and attain∣ed to be a most accomplished person, right handed to any great Employment, and constant in all Parlia∣ments, as the Speaker himself, being beheld by all as an excellent Patriot. He was Treasurer to the Under∣takers for the VVestern Plantations▪ the Bermudaes ow∣ing their happiness to his care, and Sandys Tribe is no contemptible proportion therein. He had a Command∣ing Pen; Witness his Book of the Religion of the VVestern World. I have been informed that he be∣queathed a considerable Sum to the building of a Col∣ledge
in Cambridge, but Debts not coming in accord∣ing to expectation, his good intention failed in the per∣formance thereof. He dyed 1631. Romish Exile Writers. Riehard Smith, D. D. was bred in Oxford, where he was the Kings Professor, till King Edward 6. sent for Pet. Martyr to supply that place; (betwixt whom and Smith, there was great contest.) But in the Reign of Queen Mary, Peter Martyr was glad to fly from that University, and make room for the old pretender. Thus we see, that in such Controversies as were be∣twixt them, it mattered little who were the disputants, whilst the prevalent power was the Moderator. Dr. Smith flying again into the Low Countries, became Dean of St. Peter in Doway, and the first Professor in the University founded therein. He dyed 1563. Jo. Marshal, born at Dalisford, was bred at New-Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Batchelour of Laws, and was second Master of VVinchester School. Flying, an. 1. Elizabeth, he became Canon of Lisle in Flanders. He wrote a Book against Jo. Calfield, an English Protestant. At his death, he bequeathed a Ring with a rich Stone, to adorn a piece of the Cross in his Cathedral, and dyed 1597. Robert Bristow, fled from Oxford to Lovain, whence he repaired to the English Colledge at Doway, where he was the first Priest, being the Right hand of Car∣dinal Allen, who made him Prefect of that Colledge. Going to Rhemes he wrote a book (say the Papists) Against foolish Fulk, who indeed was a Grave and God∣ly Divine. He returned for his Health into his Native Country, where having the good hap to miss that which cureth all diseases, he dyed in his bed at London, 1582.
Henry Holland, Fellow of St. Johns Colledge in Ox∣ford, fled over to Doway, where he took the degree of Batchelour of Divinity, and Order of Priesthood. Hence removing to Rhemes, he assisted (as my Pitz de Scrip. Ang. p. 804. Author saith) Traductioni Bib∣liorum, in the (traduceing) Translating of the Bible, He was living 1611. Masters of Musick. VValter of Evesham, a Benedictine Monk, and emi∣nent Musitian, wrote a Learned Book in that Faculty. He flourished under King Henry 3. 1240. Benefactors to the Publick. Richard Dugard, B. D. born at Grafton Fliford, was Fellow of Sidney-Colledge; An excellent Grecian, and general Scholar; old when young, such his gravity in Behaviour, and young when old, such the quickness of his Endowments. He bestowed on the Colledge 120 pounds for some perpetual use, for the Master and Fellowes, and 10 pounds for Books for the Library. At last he was Rector of Fullebey in Lincoln-shire, where by his Piety and Diligence he procured his own security. He dyed 1653. and lyes buried in his Chan∣cel. Memorable Persons. Jo. Feckenham, born of poor Parents in Feckenham-Forrest, being a Benedictine at Evesham, received at the time of the dissolution, an Annual Pension of about 20 pounds, which maintained him in Oxford, where he attained to Eminency in Learning. He was impri∣soned in the Reign of Edward 6. made Abbot of VVestminster by Queen Mary, with whom he was very
gracious, laying out all his Interest with her, to pro∣cure pardon of the faults, or mitigation of the punish∣ments, for poor Protestants. By Queen Elizabeth he was highly honoured, and proffered (as is currantly traditioned) the See of Canterbury, which he refused, and was kept in easie restraint. By his bounty he gain∣ed the good will of all persons. He dyed very Aged in VVisbich Castle, about 1585. Henry Bright, born in VVorcester, where he was for 40 years, School Master, excellently skilled in, and Communicative of the Latine, Greek and Hebrew Languages; and Canon of the Cathedral Church of VVorcester. He dyed 1626, being buried in the Ca∣thedral, I behold him placed by Divine Providence in this City, in the Marches, that he might equally Com∣municate the lustre of Grammar Learning to Youth, both of England and VVales. Noted Sheriffs. Henry 7. An. 3. Jo. Savage, Mil. was made Kt. of the Garter, and Privy Councellour to King Henry 7. And he, or his Son, removed into Cheshire, and Mar∣ried the Heir General of the ancient Family of the Bostocks, and was Ancestor to the present Earl of Rivers. Henry 8. An. 8. VV. Compton, Mil. was highly favoured by the King, in whose Court no Layman, (Charles Brandon excepted) was equal to him. His Son Peter Married into the Right Honourable Family of Shrewsbury, and his Grandson Sir Henry Compton, was one of the three H. C. (Henry Cary, Henry Comp∣ton, and Henry Cheney) who were made Barons by Queen Elizabeth, and Ancestor to James Earl of Nor∣thampton.
Q, Eliz. An. 19. Jo. Russel, Ar. afterwards Knight∣ed, had a great quarrel with Sir Henry Berkley, so that great blood-shed was like to have ensued, at the Sessions of Worcester; but Dr. Whitgift, Bishop of Worcester, wisely prevented the same, requiring both parties, with their Friends, to come well guarded to his Palace, where disarming them, he put a Conclusion to that Affray, having used perswasions and threatnings to good effect. 36. Jo. Packington, Mil. being a , but no assi∣duous Courtier, drew the Curtain between himself, and the light of the Queens favour, and then death overwhelmed the remnant, and utterly deprived him of recovery. And they say of him, that had he brought less to the Court then he did, he might have carried away more then he brought, for he had a time of it, but was no good husband of opportunity. King ames. An. 12. Richard Walsh, Ar. after∣wards Knighted, followed the Powder-Traytors (fer∣reted out of Warwick-shire by Sir Richard Verney,) out of the bounds of this County, till they took covert in the house of Stephen Littleton, at Hallbach in Staf∣ford-shire, and not standing on the Punctilio of exceed∣ing his Commission, in a case wherein the Peace of the Kingdom was so highly concerned, prosecuted his Ad∣vantage, and beset the house round about, till both the Rights were killed in the place, Catesby and Piercy slain with one Bullet, Rookwood and Winter wounded, and all the rest apprehended. The Battles. Worcester Fight, September the 3d. 1651. His Majesty on the 1st. of August foregoing, began his March from Edenburgh into England, not meeting
with any considerable opposition (those at Warrington being put to flight by his presence) until he came to Worcester. His Army consisted of 12000 effectual fight∣ing Men, (whereof 2000 English, the rest Scotch Men) but neither excellently Armed, nor plentifully stored with Ammunition; whilst the Parliaments Forces, un∣der Cromwel, more then doubled that number, want∣ing nothing but a Good Cause, that an Army could wish or desire. The Royalists chief Strength consisted in two passes they possessed over the River of Severn, which prove not advantagious according to expectati∣on; for the Enemy found the River fordable elsewhere, and the Bridge and Pass at Ʋptern, though valiantly de∣fended by Major General Massey (who received a shot in his hand) was forced by Lambert, pouring in une∣qual Numbers on the King's Forces; Besides Cromwel finished a Bridge of Boards and Planks, over the main River, with more Celerity and less Resistance then could have been expected, in a matter of such importance. Then began the Battle, wherein his Majesty, to re∣member His Subjects good, forgot His own safety, and gave an incomparable Example of Valour to the rest, by Charging in his own Person. This was followed by few, to the same degree of Courage or Danger, but imitated in the greatest measure, by the Highlanders fighting with the Butt-ends of their Muskets, when their Ammunition was spent. But new Supplies constantly charging them, and the main Body of the Scotch Horse not coming up in due time, from the City, to his Ma∣jesties Relief his Army was forced to retreat in at Sud∣bury-Gate, in much disorder. If there were (which some more then whisper) false and foul play in some persons of Principal Trust; as they have had a great space seasonably, God grant them his Grace sincerely to Repent, for their treacherous retarding the Happi∣ness, prolonging and encreasing the Troubles of the
Best of Monarchs, and Three Great Nations. Sure it is, here were slain the Flower of the Scotish Loyal Gentry, with the most Illustrious William (formerly Earl of Lannerick) Duke of Hamilton. As for Com∣mon Souldiers, some few who escaped had a longer Life, to have a sadder Death, wandring in the Coun∣try, till other Mens Charity▪ and their own Strength, began to fail them. Since, how God hath conducted his Royal Majesty through Labyrinths of many difficulties, to the Peace∣able Possession of his Throne, is notoriously known to the Wonder of the World.
YORK-SHIRE. YOrk-shire hath the Bishoprick of Durham, and Westmorland on the North, Lancashire, and a snip of Cheshire on the West, Darby, Nottingham and Lin∣coln-shire on the South, and the German Ocean on the East thereof. It is a Square of 90 Miles each side, of equal dimensions, with the Dukedom of Wirtenberg in Germany. If the Goodness of this County (which is not inferiour to others) be drawn into the greatness thereof, the product will be a denomination of the best Shire in England; Besides, in respect of the goodness nd plenty of some Commodities, it might be termed the Garden of England, save that it is too far from the Mansion-house, I mean the City of London. Dr. Ton∣stal Bishop of Durham, shewed King Henry 8. (in his Progress to York) a Valley near Doncaster, the richest as he affirmed, that ever he observed in all his Travails through Europe, for within 10 Miles of Haselwood, the Seat of the Vavasors, there were 165 Mannor-houses, 275 several Woods, some of them containing 500 Acres, 3 Parks and Chases of Deer, 120 Rivers and Brooks, whereof 5 be Navigable, 76 Water-Mills, 25 Coal Mines, 3 Forges for making of Iron. The natural Commodities of this County are Geat, found in the Clefts of the Rocks towards the Sea side; being naturally of a reddish and rusty colour, it grows black with polishing. It may pass for the Embleme of our Memories, attracting trifles, and letting pass mat∣ters of more moment. Alume, first found nigh Ges∣burgh, some 60 years since, by Sir Thomas Chaloner, Tutor to Prince Henry; The Mine thereof being af∣terwards
managed by three prime Workmen, brought (not to say stoln) over in Hogsheads, from Rochel in France, was adjudged a Mine Royal, who paid year∣ly to the King, 12500 pounds, to the Earl of Moul∣grave, 1640 pounds, to Sir William Penniman, 600 pounds, and though he had in pay at one time, no few∣er then 800 Men, he complained not of his Bargain; Selling the Alume (whereof he had the sole Sale) at 26 pounds the Tun. This the late Long Parliament Voted a Monopoly, and restored the benefit thereof to the former Proprietaries, who now pursue the work at five several places, viz. Sands-end and Ash-holme, belonging to the Earl of Moulgrave, Slapy-wath, Sir William (formerly Penniman's) Darcey's, Dunsley, Mr. Thomas Fairfax's, Whitlay, Sir Hugh Chomley's. The Commodity is now fallen 13 pounds the Tun▪ Lime is made near Pontfract, no less (as I am credibly informed) then 20000 pounds worth yearly. This County doth breed the best Race of English Horses, which (generally) are not so slight as the Barbe, nor so slovenly as the Flemish, nor so Airy as the Spanish-Gennets, (especially if as reported, they be conceived of the Wind) nor so Earthly as those in the Low-Coun∣tries, and Germany; But being of a middle Stature and Strength, are both seemly and serviceable. Well may Philip be so common a Name among the Gentry of this Country, who are generally so delighted in Horsemanship. The Manufacture of Cloathing is vigo∣rously followed in this County. As for edged and point∣ed Tools, Sheffeild is the Staple Town for Knives, and many and good Pins are made in this County. But come we now to the Medicinal Waters; about a Mile and a half from Knares-borough, Westward, there is a Spring of Vitrioline tast and odour; discovered by one Slingsby, about 1620, and is conceived to run parallel with the Spaw Waters in Germany. Not far of is a
Sulphur-Well, the stench whereof is great, but the ver∣tues greater. In the same Parish there is the Petrifying Well, because it converteth spungy substances into a stone, or crusteth them over round about. St. Mungus his Well is famous for the Sovereign Vertue of the Waters thereof, and for four Springs near in Scituation, and distant in Operation. It has its Name from St. Mungo, a Scotch Saint; See Dr. Dean's Spadsacrena Anglica. As for Buildings, the Church of Beverly is a fine Fabrick, of which more when I shall have occa∣sion to speak of the Collegiate Church of Rippon. Then Wresel-Castle is seated in the Confluence of Derwent and Owse, built of square Stone, with four fair Tow∣ers at each corner, with a Gatehouse, wherein are Chambers five stories high, and Gardens without the Walls; It had a Study made with great Art, in an ight square Tower, called Paradise, all which beauti∣ful Building (belonging to the Earl of Northumberland) is much impaired, if not wholly defaced by time. Proverbs. I. From Hell, Hull and Halifax, — deliver us. This is part of the Beggars or Vagrants Letany; Hull is terrible to them, as a Town of good Government. Halifax is formidable to them for the Law thereof, whereby Thieves taken in the very act of stealing Cloath, are instantly beheaded with an Engine, with∣out any further Legal Proceedings. II. A Scarborough Warning, that is none at all, but a sudden surprize, when a mischief is felt, before it be suspected. It took its Original from Thomas Stafford, who in the Reign of Queen Mary, 1557. with a small Compa∣ny, siezed on Scarborough Castle, before the Towns∣men had the least notice of his approach. However, by the industry of the Earl of Westmorland, Sir Thomas
Stafford was within 6 dayes taken, brought to London, and beheaded. Others affirm this Proverb to be of more ancient Original, fetching it from the custom of Scarborough Castle, in former times, in shooting of Ships which strook not sail, warning and damnifying them both together. III. As true Steel as Rippon Rowels. The best Spurs of England are made at Rip∣pon, the Rowels whereof may be enforced to strike through a shilling, and will break sooner then bow. It is applyed to Men of Metal, faithful in their Em∣ployments. IV. An York-shire Wee Bit. That is an overplus, not accounted in the reckoning, which sometimes proveth as much as all the rest. V. Merry Wakefield. This Town is seated in a fruitful Soyl, and cheap Country, where there is good Chear, and good Company, and therefore, why should not the Town be merry?— Princes. Henry, youngest Son to William Duke of Norman∣dy, but eldest to King William the Conquerour, was born at Selby, 1070. (where his Father Founded an Abbey) and afterwards gained the Crown from D. Ro∣berts his eldest Brother. He was bred in Cambridge and Paris, where he so profited, that he attained the Sirname of Beau-Clerke He Reigned 35 years, and upwards, remitted the Norman Rigour, and restored to his English, Subjects, a great part of the English Laws and Liberties. His Princely Vertues were at∣tended with some Amorous Extravagancies, as appears by his numerous Natural Issue, no fewer then 14, all by him publickly owned; the Males highly advanced, the Females richly Married. His Sobriety otherwise was admirable, whose Temperance was of proof a∣gainst any Meat objected to his Appetite, Lampreys
only excepted, on a Surfeit whereof he dyed, 1135. He had only two Legitimate Children, William, dying before, and Maude surviving him, both born in Nor∣mandy. Thomas, fifth Son of King Edward 1. and the first that he had by Margaret his second Wife, was born at, and Sirnamed from Brotherton, a Village in this County, June the 1st. 1300. He was created Earl of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England. He left no Male Issue; but from his Females, the Mowbrays, Dukes of Norfolk, and from them the Earls of Arun∣del, and the Lords Berkley are descended. Richard Plantag. Duke of York, commonly called Richard of Connisborough, from the Castle in this Shire of his Nativity, was Grandchild to King Edward 3. He Married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir to Edward Mortimer, the true Inheritrix of the Crown; But tam∣pering too soon, and too openly to derive the Crown, in his Wives Right, to himself, by practising the death of the present King, he was taken and behead∣ed for Treason, in the Reign of King Henry 5. Edward, sole Son to King Richard 3, and Anne his Queen, was born in the Castle of Midleham, in this County, and was by his Father created Prince of Wales▪ A Prince, who himself was a Child of as much Hopes, as his Father a Man of Hatred. But he consumed a∣way on a sudden, dying within a Month of his Mother. A Judgment on his Father, a Mercy to the Prince, that he might not behold the miserable end of him who begot him; and a Mercy to all England, for had he survived to a Mans Estate, he might possibly have pro∣ved a Wall of Partition, to hinder the Happy Ʋnion of the two Houses of York and Lancaster.
Saints. St. Hilda, Daughter to Prince Hererick, Nephew to Edwin King of Northumberland, lived in a Convent at Strenshalt in this County, and was the Oracle of her Age, being a kind of Moderatrix in a Sax. Synode, held about the Celebration of Easter. The most Learn∣ed English Female before the Conquest, the She-Ga∣maliel, at whose Feet many Learned Men had their Education. This our English Chron. 34.12. Huldah ended her holy life with a hap∣py death, 680. St. Benedict Biscop, fixed himself in the Dominions of Oswy, King of Northumberland, and built two Mo∣nasteries, the one at the influx of the River Were, the other at that of the River Tine, into the Sea; and stockt them in his life time with 600 Benedictine Monks. He made five Voyages to Rome, and always returned full fraught with Reliques, Pictures and Ceremonies. He left Religion in England, braver, but not better then he found it, the Gawdiness prejudicing the Gravity thereof. His Monastery being but the Romish Tran∣script, became the English Original, to which all Mo∣nasteries in the Land were suddenly conformed. Being struck with the dead Palsie, his Soul retired into the Ʋpper Rooms of his Clay Cottage; much employed in Meditation, until the day of his death, which happen∣ed 703. St. John of Beverly, born at Harpham, was 33 years and upwards, Arch-Bishop of York, being bred under Hilda aforesaid, and after under Theodorus the Greci∣an, and Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; Venerable Bede (his Scholar) wrote his Life, and supposed Miracles: Being Aged, he resigned his Arch-Bishoprick, and re∣tired to Beverly, where he had Founded a Colledge,
for which he procured the Freedstool (a Sanctuary) from King Athelstan. He dyed May 7. 722. and was bu∣ried in the Porch of his Collegiate Church. A Sy∣node held at London, 1416. assigned the day of his death, an Anniversary Solemnity to his Memory. Thomas Plantag. was Earl of Darby, Lancaster, Leicester, a popular person, and a great enemy to the two Spencers, Minions to King Edward 2. who being hated as Devils, for their Pride, no wonder if this Thomas was honoured as a Saint or Martyr, by the common sort. Indeed he must be a good Chymist, who can extract Saint out of Malefactor; and our Chro∣nicles generally behold him put to death for Treason against King Edward 2. But let him pass for a Provin∣cial, though no National or Loyal Saint, seeing he did not Travel far enough for Romish, and too far for Eng∣lish Canonization. His (beheaded) Martyrdom hap∣pened at Pontfret, 1322. Note, Lord Herb. in the Life of King Henry 8. speaking of Reliques, (The Bell of St. Guthlack, and the Felt of St. Thomas of Lan∣caster, both Remedies for the Head-ach.) must mean this St. Thomas, seeing there is no other English of the Name, found in any English Martyrology. Richard Role, (alias Hampole, from the place of his Holy Life, Death and Burial) was a Hermite of strict Life. He wrote many Books of Piety, which I pre∣fer before his Prophetical Predictions, as but a degree above Almanack Prognostications. He threatned the sins of the Nation with future Judgments, and his Predictions, if hitting were heeded, if missing not mark∣ed. Having spoken much against the Covetousness of the Clergy of that Age, he dyed 1349. Jo. Birlington, born in Birlington, and bred in Ox∣ford, became Canon in the Convent of Birlington, where he grew Eminent for exemplary Holiness. He refu∣sed at first the Office of Prior, counting himself unwor∣thy
thy thereof, but upon the second proffer accepted of it. 'Tis said Martha and Mary were compounded in him, being as pious, so provident to husband the Revenues of his house to the best advantage; A She-Ancorist accosting him thus, Jesus is my Love, and you so honour him in your heart, that no earthly thing can di∣stract you; He replyed, I came hither to hear from you some saving and savoury discourse, but seeing you begin with such idle talk, farewel. He dyed 1379. being reputed, though (I think) not Canonized a Saint, whose Friend, W. Slightholme, asked of his friend Jo. aforesaid, what might be the reason the Devil appeared so seldom in their dayes, &c. To whom Jo. replyed, We are grown so remiss in Godliness, that the Devil needs not put himself to such pains, seeing less and lighter Temp∣tations will do the deed. William is reported to have been one of singular Piety, and to have wrought many Miracles at his Tomb, after his death, which happen∣ed 1380. A certain Maid, resisting the sollicitations of a Bravo, was by him Murdered, her Head being set up on a Yew-Tree, at Horton, called now Halifax. The silly peo∣ple conceited that the Veins, which in form of little threds, spread themselves betwixt the Bark and the Body of the said Tree, were the very Hairs of the Virgins Head, to whom they flocked in Pilgrimage. Note the prevalency of Opinion, Her reputation for be∣ing a Saint is transmitted to Posterity, though her name be lost. Martyrs. The County, and generally the Province of York, escaped from Popish Persecution, which under Gods goodness, may be imputed to the tempers of their
four succeeding Arch-Bishops, Thomas Woolsey, who was more Proud then Cruel; Edward Lee, who perse∣cuted to Imprisonment, none to Death; (save two) Robert Holgate, who was a parcel-Protestant; Nicho∣las Heath, a meek and moderate Man. And as there were no Martyrs, so were there no Confessors, which are Martyrs in the bud. Cardinals. Jo. Fisher, born in Beverly, and bred in Michael House in Cambridge, whereof he was first Chancellour, became Bishop of Rochester. He was accessary to the dissembling of Elizabeth Barton, the Holy Maid of Kent. He opposed King Henry's Divorce, and Title of Supream Head of the Church; procured a Cardinals Cap from the Pope, and forfeited his own Head to the King, being beheaded 1535. Having been tryed by an ordinary Jury, and not by his Peers. Prelates. Eustathius de Fauconbridge, was chosen Bishop of London, an. 6. Henry 3. 1222. He was Chief Ju∣stice, then Chancellour of the Exchequer, and after∣terwards Treasurer of England, and twice Ambassa∣dour to the King of France. He dyed October 31. 1228. and was buried in the Presbytery. W. de Melton, Prov. of Beverly, and Canon, then Arch-Bishop of York. Being Consecrated at Avignon, and returning into England, he expended 700 Marks in the finishing of his Cathedral. His Life was free from scandal, signal for his Chastity, Charity, Fasting and Praying. He bought 3 Mannors from the Arch-Bishop of Roan, with the Popes Confirmation, and set∣led them on his Brothers Son. He compassed about
the Old Baily in York, with a great Wall. He dyed 1340. and was buried in his own Church. Henry Wakefield, preferred Bishop of Worcester by King Edward 3. 1375. was for one year Lord Trea∣surer of England, dying March 11. 1394. he was bu∣ried in his own Church, which before his death he had enlarged. R. Scroope, Son to the Lord Scroope, and brother to William Earl of Wilt-shire, was D. D. in Cambridge, a man of great Learning and unblameable life. He was preferred Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, then Arch-Bishop of York. Being netled with the News of his Brothers beheading, he joyned with the Earl of Northumberland and others, against King Henry 4. The Earl of Westmorland complyed with him in ap∣pearance, till he had trepanned him. It doth not ap∣pear that he desired to be tryed by his Peers; if he was dealt with therein but odly; the Executioner ser∣ved him as odly, in having 5 stroaks at his Neck, be∣fore he could sunder it from his Body, an. 1405. Stephen Patrington, born in Patrington, was a Car∣melite, D. D. in Oxford, and Provincial of his Order in England, and afterwards Chaplain and Confessor to King Henry 5. by whom he was deputed a Commissi∣oner to proceed against the Wicklevites, and during that service, he was made Bishop of St. Davids: Hence he was sent over to the Council of Constance; returning into England, he was advanced Bishop of Chichester, but dying before his Translation was finish∣ed, was buried in White Friers in Fleet-street. VVilliam Peircy, Son to Henry Earl of Northum∣berland, and Eleanor his Wife, (whose principal Seat was Topliff in this County) was D. D. in and Chan∣cellour of Cambridge, and made Bishop of Carlile, 1452. He dyed 1462.
Cuthbert Tonstal, born at Hatchforth in Richmond-shire in this County, of a Worshipful Family at Ton∣stal Thurland, was bred in Cambridge, to which he was in Books a great Benefactor. He was afterwards Bishop of London, and at last of Durham; a great Linguist, Mathematician and Divine, and a fast Friend to Erasmus. In the Reign of King Henry 8. he pub∣lickly confuted the Papal Supremacy in a learned Ser∣mon, 1539. but returned to his errour, in the Reign of Edward 6. continuing therein an. 1. Elizabeth, for which he was deprived of his Bishoprick. He shew∣ed Mercy, when in Power; and found it in his Ad∣versity. He dyed a Prisoner at Lambeth, 1560. Ralph Baines, Fellow of St. Johns Colledge in Cam∣bridge, was an excellent Linguist. Going over into France, he became Hebrew Professor at Paris. He wrote a Comment on the Proverbs, in three Volumes, and Dedicated it to Fr. 1st. King of France. Return∣ing into England, he was by Queen Mary made Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, in which Diocess he caused great Persecution. He was deprived of his Bishoprick, an. 1. Elizabeth, and dying, he was buried in St. Dun∣stans, 1560. Since the Reformation. Thomas Bentham, Fellow of Magdalens-Colledge in Oxford, renounced Popery, an. 1. Mary. He assist∣ed Henry Bull, one of the same Colledge, to wrest out of the hands of the Choristers, the Censer, when a∣bout to offer their Superstitious Incense. Flying into Germany he lived at Basil, Preacher to the English Exiles. Towards the end of Queen Mary, he was se∣cretly sent over, to be Superintendent of the London Conventicle, (the only true Church in the time of Per∣secution) where with all his caution he hardly escaped.
An. 2. Elizabeth, he was Consecrated Bishop of Co∣ventry and Lichfield. He dyed February the 21st. 1578. Edmund Guest, born at Afferton, was D. D. in Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. He was Almoner to Queen Elizabeth, by whom he was preferred Bishop of Rochester, then of Salisbury. Having written many Books, he dyed 1578. Miles Coverdale, bred in Cambridge, became an Au∣gustine Frier, but afterwards quitting that Profession, he went into Germany; he laboured greatly in Tran∣slating of the Bible, and writing other Books. He was made D. D. at Tubing, and returning into Eng∣land, was made Bishop of Exeter by King Edward 6. An. 1. Mary he was imposed, though saved from Martyrdom, by the Mediation of Fred. King of Den∣mark. Being enlarged he went over into Germany, whence in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth he returned to England, but not to Exeter. He was one of those who solemnly Consecrated Matthew Parker Arch-Bi∣shop of Canterbury, at Lambeth. He dyed 1588. and lyes buried in St. Bartholomews, behind the Ex∣change. Adam Loftus, bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where he Commenced D. D. was Chaplain to Robert Earl of Sussex, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and was first made Arch-Bishop of Armagh, an. 1562. and after∣wards Arch-Bishop of Dublin, 1567 At last being made Chancellour of Ireand he discharged that place with singular Ability and ntegrity, until the day of his death. He was a principal Procurer of, and a profita∣ble Agent in the Foundation of the University of Dub∣lin, being the first Honorary Master thereof, whilst he was Arch-Bishop, if not Chancellour of Ireland. He dyed April 5. 1605. and was buried in the Church of St. Pat. having been Arch-Bishop almost 43 years.
George Mountaine, bred in Queens-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, was Chaplain to the Earl of Essex, whom he attended in his Voyage to Cales, being indeed a man of great Valour. He was afterwards made Dean of West∣minster, then successively Bishop of Lincoln and Lon∣don; whilst residing in the latter, he would often plea∣santly say, that of him the Proverb would be verified, Lincoln was, and London is, and York shall be; which came to pass accordingly, when he was removed to the Arch-Bishoprick of York. He was a good Bene∣factor to Queens-Colledge, whereon he bestowed a fair piece of Plate, (called Poculum Charitatis, with this Inscription, incipio) and Founded two Scholarships therein. Capital Judges. Sir William Gascoine, born at Ganthorp, studied in the Inner Temple, and being Knighted an. 1. Henry 4. he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in which Office he demeaned himself with great integri∣ty. It happened that a Servant of Prince Henry (af∣terwards King Henry 5.) was Arraigned before this Judge for Felony, whom the Prince, then present, en∣deavoured to take away, coming up in fury, striking the Judge; But he sitting without moving, committed the Prince Prisoner to the Kings-Bench, there to re∣main until the Pleasure of the King his Father were further known; who when he heard thereof, gave God thanks, who at the same instant had given him a Judge who could minister, and a Son who could obey Justice. He dyed an. 14. Henry 4. Guido de Fairfax Knight, (whose Name hath con∣tinued at Walton in this County, more then 450 years) was bred in the Study of the Law, and became Ser∣jeant thereof. He favoured the House of York, in
those civil distempers; yet was he by King Henry 7. advanced Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench. Roger Cholmley Knight, natural Son to — Lieute∣nant of the Tower, under King Henry 7. was an. 37. Henry 8. made Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and an. 6. Edward 6. Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench. An. 1. Mary he with Sir Edward Montague, Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, was committed to the Tower, for drawing up the Will of King Ed∣ward 6. wherein his Sisters were disinherited; where∣upon Sir Roger was deprived of his Judges place, though his Activity had amounted no higher then to a Subscription of the said Will. He built a free School of Brick at Highgate, about 1564. Sir Christopher Wray Knight, was born in the Parish of Bedal, the motive which made his Daughter Fran∣ces, Countess of Warwick, scatter her Benefactions the thicker in that place. His Ancestor came out of Corn∣wal, where his Name is right ancient. Being bred in the Law, he was an. 16. Elizabeth, made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench. He was moved by no Fear, but that of the Judge of the World. He was pro tempore Lord Privy Seal, and sate Chief in the Court, when Secretary Davison was Sentenced in the Star-Chamber, concurring with the rest of the Commissi∣oners to lay a fine on him. His Benefaction to Magda∣lens-Colledge in Cambridge, was both bountiful and sea∣sonable. We know who saith, The righteous man leav∣eth an Inheritance to his Childrens Children, and the well thriving of his third Generation may be an evi∣dence of his well gotten Goods. This worthy Judge dy∣ed May the 8th. an. 34. Elizabeth.
Statesmen. Sir Jo. Puckering Knight, born at Flamborough-head, being a second Son, applyed himself to the Study of the Common Law, and became the Queens Serjeant, Speaker in the House of Commons, and at last Lord Chan∣cellour of England. In the House of Lords he made a Speech against those that were called Puritans, where∣in he charges them with the open profession of disloy∣al and seditious Principles, and affirms, that they by this Separation of themselves from the Ʋnity of their Fellow Subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Ma∣jesty of their Prince, do both joyn and concurr with the Jesuites, in opening the door, and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatned against the Realm. He dyed 1596. He is Charactred by Mr. Cambden, (in Elizabeth) Vir integer. His Estate is since descend∣ed (his Male Issue failing) on Sir Henry Newton, who assumed the Sirname of Pckering, and I can never be sufficiently thankful to him, and his Relations Sir George Calvert Knight, was born at Kiplin, and bred first in Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, then beyond the Seas. He was Secretary to Robert Cecil Earl of Sarisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterward he was made Clerk of the Councel, and at last Princi∣pal Secretary of State to King James, an. 1619. Con∣ceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental in his preferment, he presented him with a Jewel of great value, which the Duke returned again, not owning any activity in his advancement, whom King James, ex me∣ro motu, reflecting on his Ability, designed for the place, which he resigned 1624. confessing to the King he was become a Roman Catholick, so that he must either be wanting to his Trust, or violate his Conscience. King James continued him his Privy Councellour all his Reign,
and created him Lord Baltemore of Balt. in Ireland. When Secretary, he had a Grant from King James, to him and his Heirs of a County Palatine (of Avalon) in the New-found-Land. He built a fair House in Ferry Land in America, and spent 25000 pounds in advancing the Plantation thereof, consulting therein the enlargement of Christianity, and the Kings Dominions. After the death of King James, he went twice in person to New-found-Land Here, with two Ships manned at his own charge, he chased away Monsieur D' Arade (sent by the King of France to annoy the English Fishermen) re∣lieved the English, and took 60 of the French Prison∣ers. King Charles I. gave a Patent to him and his Heirs, of Mary-Land, (on the North of Virginia) with Roy∣al Franchises. He dyed in London, April 15. 1632. and lyeth buried in St. Dunstans in the West, leaving his Son the Right Honourable Cecil Calvert, now Lord Baltemore, Heir to his Honour, Estate and Noble Dis∣position. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, Son to William Wentworth of Went. Woodhouse in this County, was born in London; which see. Seamen. Armigel Waad, born of an ancient Family in York∣shire, was Clerk of the Counsel to Henry 8. and Ed∣ward 6. A man of great accomplishments, employed in several Embassies, and the first Englishman who dis∣covered America. He had by two Wives 20 Chil∣dren, whereof Sir William Waad was the eldest, a ve∣ry able Gentleman, and Clerk of the Councel to Queen Elizabeth. This Armigel dyed June the 20th. 1568. and was buried at Hampstead in Middlesex. Martin Forbisher Knight, born nigh Doncaster, was the first Englishman who first discovered the North way
to China and Cathay, whence he brought great store of black soft Stone, supposing it to be Silver Ore, but it proved useless. He was Valiant and Violent. He was Knighted for his signal service in 88. Having (with 10 Ships) defended Brest-Haven in Britain, against a far greater power of the Spaniards, he was shot in the side. His wound not being mortal in it self was ren∣dred such by the unskilfulness of the Chirurgeon, who having taken out the Bullet, left the bombast behind, wherewith the sore festered, and the worthy Knight dyed 1594. George Clifford, Lord Clifford Vescye, &c. Earl of Cumberland, was Son to Henry, second Earl of that Fa∣mily, by his second Lady; A person wholly Compo∣sed of true Honour and Valour. In order to the cut∣ing off the Spanish Sinews of War, their Money from the West-Indies, this Earl set forth a small Fleet at his own cost, and Adventured his own person therein, be∣ing the best born Englishman that ever adventured him∣self in that kind. His Fleet may be said to be bound for no other Harbour but the Port of Honour, though touching at the Port of Profit in his passage thereunto; I say touching, whose design was not to enrich himself, but impoverish the Enemy. He left Impressions of his Valour and Mercy in all places where he came. Queen Elizabeth an. 1592. honoured him with the Dignity of the Garter. When King James came first out of Scotland to York he attended him with such an Equi∣page, that he seemed rather a King, then Earl of Cum∣berland. Here happened a Contest between the Earl, and the Lord President in the North, about carrying the Sword before the King in York; which Office was finally adjudged to the Earl, as belonging to him, and whilst Clifford's Tower is standing in York, that Fami∣ly will never be forgotten. His Anagram was as re∣ally as literally true▪ Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlan∣dius.
Doridis regno clarus cum vi fulgebis. He dyed 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady Anne, Married to the Earl of Dorset. Physicians. Sir George Ripley, born at Ripley, was Canon of Bridlington in this County. He went over into Italy, and there studied 20 years together in pursuance of the Philosophers Stone, and found it an. 1470. as some collect from his words, Cant. 3.4. Inveni quem diligit Anima mea. An English Gen∣tleman of good credit, reported that he saw a Record in the Isle of Malta, which declares, that Sir George Ripley gave yearly to those Knights of Rhodes, 100000 pounds towards maintaining of the War against the Turks. This vast Donation might easily induce one to think that he was Eques Auratus, though indeed ne∣ver more then Sir Priest, and Canon of Bridlington. Returning home he became a Carmelite-Anchorite at Boston in Lincoln shire, where he wrote 25 Books, his Compound Alchymy carrying away the credit of all the rest; It makes mention of the 12 Gates leading to the making of the Philosophers Stone, viz. Calcination, Solution, Separation, Conjunction, Putrefaction, Conge∣lation, Cibation, Sublimation, Fermentation, Exaltation, Multiplication, Projection. But all this was but a Pro∣ject with a Termination; for, because things did not answer his expectation, I understood by my Author's Information, that Sir George made afterwards a solemn Recantation. He dyed about 1492. Thomas Johnson born near Hull, was an Apothecary in London; the best Herbalist in his Age. He made Additions to Gerard, He was of great Modesty, as being both more Learned and Valiant then he pretend∣ed to be. After he was made Honorary Doctor in
Oxford, he performed a dangerous piece of service at Basing-house, at the Siege of which he afterwards lost his Life, on the Loyal side, in the late Wars, 1644. Writers. Alphred of Beverly, bred in Cambridge, and Trea∣surer of the Convent at Beverly, wrote a Chronicle from Brutus to the time of his own death, which hap∣pened 1136. W. of Rievaulx, a Monk of Rushford, wrote an Hi∣story of his own Age, and dyed 1146. St. Ealread, the Pious and Learned Abbot of Ri∣vaulx, was intimate with Dav. King of Scotland, and many persons of prime Quality. He had an active Soul, which he employed for the benefit of the pub∣lick. He is generally accounted the English St. Ber∣nard, and wrote de Virginitate Mariae, de Abusionibus Claustri. He refused several Bishopricks, &c. prof∣fered to him, and dyed 1166. Whose Deacon Walter Daniel, trod in his Masters foot-steps, and wrote on the same subject, De Virginitate Mariae. He flourished under King Henry 2. and was buried in his own Abbey. Robert the Scribe, Prefect of the Canons Regulars at Bridlington, was extolled by Erasmus for his fair and fast Writing. Having left many Books to Poste∣rity, he dyed about 1180. and was buried in his Con∣vent. Peter of Rippon, Canon of that Colledge, wrote a Book of the Life and Miracles of St. Wilfred the Foun∣der thereof. There was a narrow place in his Church, through which chaste persons might easily pass, whilst the incontinent did stick therein. Many suspected per∣sons did prick their credit, who could not thred his
Needle. I confess there might be some such narrow place, the occasion as well as Touch-stone of incontinen∣cy, over which this Inscription had been proper, Aut inveniam aut faciam Libidinosas. The Steeple of this Church was blown down, the fall whereof beat down the Chancel. Peter flourished 1190. under King Richard 1. W. of Newborough, born at Bridlington, was Canon Regular of Newborough. A fierce little Man. He charged Jeffrey of Monmouth with Forgery, and de∣nies that there ever was such a Man as King A thur, &c. 'Tis said, he was out of humour, because Dav. Prince of Wales denied him the See of St Asaph; So it seems, for William himself can tell an incredible sto∣ry, and therefore its likely, he would not have charg∣ed a Falshood upon another for the sake of Truth only. He affirmeth, That in the place of the slaughter of the English, nigh Battaile in Sussex, if peradventure it be wet with any small showre, presently the Ground thereabouts sweateth forth very Blood, though it be the quality of the Soyl (naturally reddish) and nothing else. He flourished under King John 1200. Roger Hoveden, of an Illustrious Family, bred in the Study of the Civil and Canon Laws, became a most accomplished Courtier under King Henry 2. He is the chief (if not sole) Lay-Historian of his Age, writing a Chronicle, beginning where Bede ended, con∣tinuing the same until the fourth of King John, by which Chronicle King Edward 1. did partly clear his Title to the Crown of Scotland. He flourished 1204. Jo. of Halifax, commonly called De Sacro Bosco, was bred in Oxford, then in Paris; the prime Mathe∣matician of his Age. All Students of Astronomy enter into that Art, through the door of his book De Sphae∣râ. He dyed an. 1256.
Robert the Searcher, a Dominican, great Mathema∣tician and Philosopher, is reported to have lighted his Candle at the Devils Torch, to seek after such secrets as he did desire; Witness his Book of Ceremonial Ma∣gick. He flourished under King Edward 2. 1326. Thomas Castleford, was a Benedictine in Pontfract, whereof he wrote an History, from a Ask a Saxon, the first Proprietor, to the Lacies, from whom that Lordship descended to the Earls of Lancaster. He flourished about 1326. Jo. Gower, born at Stitenham, of a Knightly Fami∣ly; was first a Student in the Law, then a Poet, and was the first Refiner of the English Tongue; But it seems he was made a Judge in his old Age. He may be called the English Homer, having grown stark blind with Age. He wrote (amongst other Books) Specu∣lum Meditantis in French, Confessio Amantis in English, Vox Clamantis, in Latine. He dyed 1402. Jo. Marre, born at Marre, bred in Oxford, a Car∣melite of great Learning, was praised by Trithemius and others, chiefly for his writing against J. Wickliffe. He dyed 1407. and was buried in Doncaster. Thomas Gascoigne, younger Brother to Sir William, Lord Chief Justice, was born at Huntfleet, and bred D. D. in Bal. Colledge in Oxford. He was Commissi∣oner of that University, 1434. He was a great fol∣lower of St. Hierom, whose Life he wrote. He Com∣posed a Theological Dictionary, much esteemed by Divines in that Age. He was 57 years old, an. 1460. Jo. Harding, Esquire, of ancient Parentage, was bred a Souldier, doing good service at Roxborough-Ca∣stle against the Scots, and following the Standard of King Edward, adhered to him in his deepest distress. He adventured into Scotland, not without the manifest hazard of his Life, where he so cunningly demeaned
himself, that he found there, and fetched thence out of their Records, many Original Letters, which he present∣ed to Edward 4. Out of these he Collected an History of the several Solemn Submissions publickly made, and Oaths of Fealty, publickly taken, from the time of King Athelstan, by the Kings of Scotland, to the Kings of England for the Crown of Scotland, though the Scots affirm that such Homage was only taken for Cum∣berland, and some parcels held of England, on the South of Tweed. He wrote also a Chronicle of the English Kings, from Brutus to King Edward 4. He was living 1461. Henry Parker, a Carmelite at Doncaster, and D. D. in Cambridge, Preached a Sermon in London, in which he endeavoured to prove, that Christs Poverty was the Pattern of Humane Perfection, and drove the Nail so far, that he was imprisoned by the Bishop of London for the same, and since his Holiness took the Bishops part, Parker thought to recant at Pauls Cross, where he had Preached before. And from this time we may date the decay of the credit of the Carmelites in Eng∣land, moulting their Feathers afterwards, till King Henry 8. cut off their Wings and Bodies Politick. This Parker flourished under Edward 4. 1470. Since the Reformation. Sir Francis Bigot Knight, wrote a Book against the Clergy, Of Impropriations. He was slain 1537. a∣mong the Northern Rebels, who detained Loyal Per∣sons in their Camp, until the blind Sword, having A∣ciem but not Ocuium, killed Friend and Foe in fury, without distinction. Wilfrid Holme, of gentile Parentage, lived in these parts, when the two Northern Rebellions happened, and when the Popish-party gave it out, that the Refor∣mation
would ruine Church and State. Wilfrid stated the Controversie truly, clearly and wittily, confuting the Priests false Reports, and the Peoples causless Jea∣lousies. He dyed 1536. Thomas Roberson, D. D. in Oxford, was a Gram∣marian for Greek and Latine, and an excellent Teach∣er of Youth. He wrote Notes upon Lilly's Gram∣mar. Robert, under whose name Quae Genus is writ∣ten may be the same with this Thomas. He flourished 1544. William Hugh, bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in Ox∣ford, wrote a Book, Entituled, The troubled Mans Me∣dicine, (dedicated to Queen Katharine Par.) for the satisfaction of those who were troubled about the final State of their Children dying unbaptized. He dyed of the breaking of a Vein, 1549. Roger Ascham, born at Kirby-Weik, and bred in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, was Orator and Greek Pro∣fessor of the University, and an. 1. Mary, wrote Let∣ters to 47 several Princes, the meanest whereof was a Cardinal. Travelling into Germany he was familiar with Jo. Sturmius; After his return, he was a Teacher to the Lady Elizabeth, to whom (after she was Queen) he became Secretary for her Latine Letters. He was an honest man, a good Archer, and much delighted with Cock-fighting. His Latine Style was facile and fluent, witness his Letters. His  is a Book good for young men, his School-Master for old, and his Epistles for all Men. He dyed 1568. December 30. and was buried in St. Sepulchres in London. Sir Henry Savil Knight, born at Bradley, and bred in Oxford, became Warden of Merton-Colledge, and Prov. of Eaton. He set forth an excellent Edition of Hierom, with Annotations, Copies of which were stoln (before the Printing thereof) by Popish Emissaries, and sent to France, and Printed there, with a Latine Transla∣tion.
His only Daughter was Married to Sir William Sidley of Kent, Barronet. He dyed at Eaton, 1549. and was interred there. He was an excellent Mathe∣matician, witness his Learned Lectures on Euclide. He founded Mathematick Professors in Oxford, whereof one was Mr. Briggs, who had mightily pleased Sir Henry, with a certain curious demonstration in that Science. Thomas Taylor, born at Richmond, bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge; entred into the Ministery at 27 years of Age, continuing in the same at Reading and London 35 years. A pious and charitable man, and a painful Pastor. A little before his death (1632.) he avowed, that we serve such a Master, who covereth many imperfections, and giveth much wages for a little work. Nathaniel Shute, born at Gigleswick, and bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, was an excellent Scholar and solide Preacher, (at St. Mildred Poultrey, in Lon∣don) though nothing of his is extant in Print, save a Sermon, called Corona Charitatis. He was an uncom∣fortable Preacher in one sense, in that he left no hope of imitation for such as should succeed him. He dyed 1638. Josiah Shute, Brother to Nathaniel aforesaid, was bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and was after∣wards Minister of St. Mary Woolnoth in London; One of the most considerable Labourers in Gods Vineyard, that ever was beheld in Lombard street. He was good at both Positive and Controversial Divinity, and had a strain of Native Eloquence. Highly esteemed of his Parish, till the beginning of our late Civil Wars, when some began to neglect him; distasting wholsome Meat, because their Mouths were out of taste. He dyed 1640. and was buried in his own Church. One hour before his death, he cheerfully entertained some of the
Parishioners who came to visit him, with this expressi∣on, I have taught you, my dear Flock, for above 30 years how to live, and now I will shew you in a very short time how to dye. Note, there were three other Bro∣thers of this Josiah, who were Ministers, viz. Robert in Lyn, Thomas in Chester, and Timothy in Exeter. George Sandys, youngest Son of Sir Edwin Arch-Bishop of York, was born at Bishops-Thorp. A most accomplished Gentleman. He travel'd to, and wrote a description of the Holy Land. He most elegantly Translated Ovid's Metamorphosis into English Verse, and Composed some spriteful and Masculine Poems of his own. He dyed about 1642. Jo. Saltmarsh, of an ancient, but decayed Family, was bred (chiefly at the Charge of Sir Thomas Me∣tham his Kinsman) in Magdalens Colledge in Cambridge. He was a Poet and good Preacher. Be it charitably imputed to his Conscience, that of a zealous observer, he became a violent oppresser of Bishops and Ceremo∣nies. He wrote against my Sermon of Reformation, taking me for many points of Popery therein. I de∣fended my self in a Book called Truth maintained, to which he answered not, being informed I was dead at Exeter. He dyed (1650) in or about Windsor, (as he was riding to and fro in the Parliaments Army) of a burning Feaver, venting on his death strange and exta∣tical expressions, Jer. Whitacre, born at Wakefield, was bred Master of Arts in Sidney-Colledge. He became School-master of Okeham, then Minister of Stretton in Rut∣land. Being a Member in the late Assembly, he be∣haved himself with much Moderation. At last he was Preacher at St. Magdalens Bermondsey, being a solid Divine, and a man made up of piety, pity and patience. He was visited with many, and most acute diseases, the Gout, Stone, and Ulcer in his Bladder, and ano∣ther
in his Kidneys. His Liberality knew no bottom, but an empty Purse, so bountiful he was to all in want: He dyed 1654. and was buried in his own Parish. All I shall add is this distick, Whites ambo, Whitehead, Whitgift, Whitakerus uterque, Vulnera Romano quanta dedere Papae? Romish Exile Writers. Jo. Young, was Fellow of St. Johns-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, at first a parcel-Protestant, Translating into English, the Book of Arch-Bishop Cranmer of the Sa∣crament, he became a zealous Papist, and great Anta∣gonist of Mart. Bucer, and an able disputant. He was Vice-Chancellour of Cambridge, 1554 Master of Pemb. Hall, Professor of Divinity, and Rector of Land∣beach nigh Cambridge, but lost all his preferment an. 1. Elizabeth, being deprived and imprisoned. He dyed 1579. Jo. Mush, bred in the English-Colledge at Doway, and in Rome, whence returning into England, he fished for Proselytes for 20 years together, being for some considerable time imprisoned, at last he procured his Enlargement. In his time happened the Schisme be∣twixt the Jesuits and Priests, which threatned Ruine to the Church of Rome. Mush went to Rome about it, and was very instrumental in Composing of those dif∣ferences. Returning into England he was assistant to the English Arch-Priest. He wrote (among other books) Vitam & Martyrium D. Margaret Clithoreae, Whe∣ther D. be for Domina or Diva, Lady or Saint, I know not; I take her for some Gentlewoman in the North, who for some practices in maintenance of her
Religion, became obnoxious to the severity of the English Law. He lived 1612. Benefactors to the Publick. Thomas Scot, born at Rotheram, (which he assumed for his Name) was Fellow of Kings-Colledge, after∣wards Master of Pemb. Hall, in Cambridge, and Chan∣cellour of the University. He built on his proper cost (saving something helped by the Scholars) the fair Gate of the School, with fair Walks on each side, and a Library on the East thereof. This Thomas having felt the sharp tusks of the Boar (when imprisoned by King Richard 3. for resigning the Great Seal of Eng∣land to Queen Elizabeth, the Relict of King Edward 4.) he advanced that Kings Crest (being the Boar) on the aforesaid Gate, meerly to ingratiate himself. He was successively Provost of Beverly, Bishop of Rochester, Lincoln, and lastly Arch Bishop of York; Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Chancellour of England. Ma∣ny were his Benefactions to the Publick, of which none more remarkable then his founding 5 Fellowships in Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford. He dyed at Cawood of the Plague, 1500. Jo. Alcocke, born at Beverly, (where he built a Chappel, and Founded a Chantry for his Parents) was D. D. in Cambridge, and became Bishop of Ely, and was preferred Lord Chancellour of England by King Henry 7. He turned the old Nunnery of St. Radegund, (Founded by Malcolm King of Scotland) into a New Colledge, called Jesus in Cambridge. He was a Learn∣ed and Pious Man, deceasing 1500.
Since the Reformation. Mr. — Harrison of Leeds, built a new Church in that Town, the old one being too small for the nu∣merous Parishoners. Memorable Persons. Paulinus de Leeds, was so far from buying a Bishoprick, that when a Bishoprick bought him, he refused to accept it. King Henry offering him the Bishoprick of Car∣lile, with an Addition of 300 Marks to the yearly Re∣venue, which he refused. He flourished 1186. W. de la Pole, born at Ravensford, for Wealth and Skill in Merchandize, inferiour to none in England, re∣sided at Kingston upon Hull. He lent King Edward 3. many thousands of pounds, in recompence whereof the King made him Valect (i. e. Gent.) of the Bed-Cham∣ber, and Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, &c. giving him the Precedency and Honour of a Knight Banneret, though he was not made in the Field with the usual Ceremony. He dyed about 1350. Noted Sheriffs. Edward 2. An. 9. Simon Ward; the Male line of his ancient Family expired in Sir Christopher Ward, Standard bearer to King Henry 8. at Bolleign. He lived at Grindal, leaving three Daughters Married to the Families of Strickland, Musgrave and Osborn. Edward 3. An. 17. Thomas de Rokeby, was twice (1351, and 1355) Lord Justice of Ireland. He in part extirpated the damnable Custom of Coigne and Li∣very in that Kingdom, whereby the Commander in Chief extorted from the people Horse-meat, Mans
meat, and Money at pleasure, without any satisfaction for the same. This Custom was begun in the time of King Edward 2. by Maurice Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Desmond; In reference to which this Rokeby used to say, that he would eat in Wooden dishes, but would pay for his Meat Gold and Silver. Henry 4. An. 8. Thomas Rokeby Junior, Mil. over∣came and took (by the sole assistance of this Shire) Pri∣soners, Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Barldolfe, who began War against the King. Henry 5. An. 8. Halvatheus Maulever, Mil. had his Sirname (in Latine Malus Leporarius) from his un∣skilfulness in hunting of the Hare. Henry 6. An. 11. Henry Bromfleet, Mil. was sent the year following, with other Ambassadours, to the Council of Basil, and returning was created Lord Vescy, in the right of his Mother; And though in his Patent, that Title was entailed on his Heir-Males only, yet Margaret his sole Daughter and Heir Married to Jo. Lord Clifford, (Father to Henry, first Earl of Northum∣berland of that Sirname) derived the Barony into that Family, which at this day they enjoy. 22. Edmund Talbot Mil. (though not related to the house of Shrewsbury) was of a Family of ancient extra∣ction, ever since King Henry 2. He was Father to Sir Thomas, one very zealous for the House of York, and a servant to King Richard 3. who bestowed an Annui∣ty of 40 pounds per Annum on him. A Branch of these Talbots are removed into Lancashire, and from those in York-shire, Col. Thomas Talbot is descended. Edward 4. Henry Vavasor Mil. It is observed of this Family, that they never Married an Heir, or bu∣ried their Wives. The place of their habitation is cal∣led Hasel-Wod; out of which Mannor the stones were taken that built St. Maries Abbey in York.
Henry 8. An. 2. Radulphus Eure, alias Evers, Mil. was created Baron and Lord Warden of the Marches towards Scotland, where he gave signal demonstrations of his Fidelity and Valour, in resisting and opposing the Scots. From him the present Lord Evers is de∣scended. 5. William Piercy, Mil. was (probably of the Fa∣mily of the Piercy's-Hays) whose ancient possession was Riton, hard by the River Rhidals. 23. Nicholas Fairfax Mil. (the Sirname signifying Fair Hair) had for his Motto Fare, Fac, Say, Doe. His Namesake Sir Nicholas of Bullingbrook, was Knight of the Rhodes, (in the Reign of King Edward 4.) be∣ing Charactred, Cavaliero molto spiritoso e Prudente. Q. Mary. An. 3. Christopher Metcalfe, Mil. at∣tended on the Judges of York, with 300 Horsemen, all of his own Name and Kindred, well mounted, and suitably attired. This Family was accounted the most numerous of any in England, an. 1607. He stocked the River Yower (nigh his house) with Crevishes. Q. Eliz. An. 4. George Bowes, Mil. had a great Estate in this County, and greater in Durham. He was besieged by the Northern Rebels, an. 1569. in Ber∣nards-Castle, which he delivered, upon condition they might depart with their Armour. After the suppressi∣on of the Rebels, their Execution was committed to his care, wherein he was severe unto Cruelty, many well meaning people having been (in their simplicity) drawn in, under a pretence of doing the Queen ser∣vice. These Sir George hung up by Scores, (by the Office of his Marshalship) and had hung more, if Mr. Bernard Gilpin had not interceeded for their Lives. 23. Robert Stapleton, Mil. descended from Sir Miles, one of the first Founders of the Garter, and Sheriff 29. Edward 3. met the Judges, with 140 Men in suit∣able Liveries, and was a very comely and eloquent
Man, equally charming both the senses of Discipline, the Eyes and the Ears. He married one of the Co-heirs of Sir Henry Sherington, by whom he had a numerous Posterity. 42. Francis Clifford, Ar. succeeded his Brother George, in the Earldom of Cumberland, a worthy Gen∣tleman, made up of all honourable Accomplishments. He was Father to Henry the 5th, and last Earl of that Family, whose sole Daughter and Heir was married to the Right Honorable the then Lord Dungarvon, since Earl of Cork. 45. Henry Bellasis, Mil. was by King Charles I. created Baron Fauconbridge of Yarum, as since his Grandchild by his eldest Son is made Visc. Faucon∣bridge. Jo. Bellasis Esquire, who in the Garrison of Newark, and elsewhere, hath given ample testimony of his Valour, and all noble Qualities, is since advanc∣ed to the dignity of a Baron. K. James. An. 9. Henry Slingsby, Mil. of an an∣cient Family, whose Armes are, Quarterly the first and the fourth G. a Chev. between two Leopards Heads, and a Hutchet or Bugle Arg. the second and the third Arg. a Griffin Surgeant S. supprest by a Fess. G. 11. George Savil, Mil. and Bar. was of a Nume∣rous, Wealthy, and Ancient Family, of which Sir Jo. Savil was lately created Baron Savil of Pomfraict, and his Son since Earl of Sussex. K. Charles. Sir Marmaduke Langdale was Sheriff, 1641. who might have said, as to the Kings side, of Northern Actions, Pas ego magna fui. But as for his raising of the Siege of Pomfraict, (felt before seen by the Enemy) it will appear Romance-like to Posterity, with whom it will find Plus Famae quam Fidei. King Charles II. created him a Baron, the Temple of Honour being of due open to him, who had passed through the Temple of Vertue.
The Battles. That at Marston-Moor, July 2. 1644▪ was our English Pharsalian Fight, to the Loyal Cavaliers. Prince Rupert having raised the Siege at York, drew out his Men into the Moor, with intention to fight the Ene∣my, though his Souldiers were weary, and the ex∣pected Recruits were not come; and besides if the Parliaments Army had been then let alone, such were their Animosities, that they had fallen foul among them∣selves, had not the Prince, preparing to fight them, cemented their differences to agree against a General Enemy. But the Prince was not informed of such dif∣ferences. But being pressed by the Kings Command to fight the Enemy speedily, and having received In∣telligence that the Enemy had the day before, sent a∣way 7000 Men, (who yet returned before the Fight) he proceeded so far, that it was too late to draw off, the Parliaments Forces necessitating them to fight, and about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Battle began. Some causlesly complain on the Marquess of New-castle, that he drew not his Men soon enough (according to his Orders) out of York, to the Prince's succour. Such consider not that Souldiers newly re∣lieved from a 9 weeks Siege, will a little indulge them∣selves. The Lord General Goring so valiantly charg∣ed the left Wing of the Enemy, that they fairly for∣sook the Field. General Leslie with his Scotish Army, ran away more than a York-shire Mile, and a Wee-Bet. Fame with her Trumpet sounded their Flight as far as Oxford, the Royalists rejoycing with Bonefires for the Victory; But within few dayes, their Bayes, by a mournful Metamorphosis, were turned into Willow; For Cromwel with his Cuirassires, did the work of that day. Some suspected Collonel Hurry (lately converted to the
Kings side) for foul play herein; for he divided the Kings old Horse into small Bodies, alledging this way the best way to break the Scotish Lanciers. But those Horse alwayes used to charge together, were much dis∣composed with this new Mode. Besides a right Valiant Lord, severed with a Ditch from the Enemy, did not attend, till the Foe forced their way unto him. The Van of the Kings Foot being led up by the truly Ho∣nourable Collonel John Russel, impressed with unequal numbers, and distanced from seasonable succour, be∣came a Prey to their Enemy. The Marquess of New∣castles white Coats (who were said to bring their Wind∣ing sheet about them into the Field) after thrice firing, fell to it with the But-ends of their Muskets, and were invincible, till mowed down by Cromwel's Cuirassiers, they were almost all slain. Great was the Execution of that day, Cromwel commanding his Men to give no Quarter. Various the numbering of the slain of both sides; yet I meet with none, mounting them above 6. or sinking them beneath 3000. I remember no Per∣son of Honour slain on the Kings side, save the hopeful Lord Cary, eldest Son to the Earl of Monmouth; But on the Parliaments side, the Lord Didup (a lately crea∣ted Baron) was slain, on the same token, that when King Charles said, that he hardly remembred that he had such a Lord in Scotland, one returned, that the Lord had wholly forgotten, that he had such a King in Eng∣land. Soon after more then 60 Royalists, of prime Quality, removed themselves beyond the Seas; so that hence forward, the King's Affairs in the North were in a languishing Condition.
YORK. YORK is an ancient City, built on both sides of the River Ouse, joyned with a Bridge of one Arch the largest in England. Here the Roman Emperours had their Residence, Severus, and Valer. Constantius their death. What it sacketh of London in bigness and beauty of Buildings, it hath in cheapness and plenty of Provisions. Of Manufactures, it challengeth none peculiar to it self. They send course Cloath to Ham∣borough, and have Iron, Flax, &c. in return. But the Trade which is indeed but driven at York▪ runneth of it self at Hull, which of a Fishers Town is become a City's Fellow, within 300 years, being the Key of the North. As for the Buildings of York, the Cathe∣dral was built by Jo. Romaine, William Melton, and Jo. Thoresbury, successive Arch-Bishops thereof, the Family of the Piercy's contributing Timber, of the Va∣vasors, Stone thereunto. It is famous all the World over for the largeness and workmanship thereof. Ap∣pending to it, is the Chapter-house, such a Master-piece of Art, that this Golden Verse is Engraved thereon, Ʋt Rosa Flos Florum, sic est Domus ista Domorum. Proverbs. I. Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be. True it is, that Lincoln is the greatest City in the Kingdom of Mercia, that London is, we know, and if York shall be, God knows. It was indeed in a fair way of
preferment, when England and Scotland were first United into Great Britain; But as for those who hope it shall be the English Metropolis, they must wait, until the River of Thames run under the great Arch of Ouse-Bridge. However, York shall be, that is, shall be York still, as it was before. Saints. Flaccus Albinus, (alias Alcuinus) born (probably) in York, (where he was advanced) was bred under Ven. Bede, and became a man of prodigious Learn∣ing. He was Master to Charles I. Emperour, who owed unto him the best part of his Title, the Great, being made Great in Arts and Learning by his Instru∣ctions. He founded the University in Paris, so that the Learning of the French was a Taper lighted at Our Torch. His Name puts me in mind of their malitious and silly Anagram upon Calvin, viz. Calvinus Lucia∣nus, who was an Atheist, though there were many wor∣thy persons of the same Name. The same Anagram is found in Alcuinus. He was first made Abbot of St. Augustines in Canterbury, and afterwards of St. Martins in the City of Tours in France, and dying 780 he was buried in a Convent appendant to his Monaste∣ry. Many of the Modern Saints in the Church of Rome, must modestly confess, that on a due and true estimate, Our Alcuinus was worth many scores of them, so great his Learning, and Holy his Conversation. Sewal, bred in Oxford, was Scholar to St. Edmund, who was wont to say to him, Sewald, Sewald, thou wilt have many Afflictions, and dye a Martyr. Nor did he miss much of his Mark therein, though he met with Peace and Plenty at first, when Arch-Bishop of York; But afterwards opposing the Pope, who intruded one Jordan an Italian to be Dean of York, he was for his
contempt, Excommunicated. Note, that at the same time, there were 300 Benefices possessed by Italians, who did not only teach in the Church, but mis-teach by their lascivious and debauched Conversations. Let us now return to Sewald, who never returned in the Popes favour, but dyed of grief, in the state of Excommuni∣cation, 1258. Yet was he reputed a Saint in Vulgar Estimation. Martyrs. Valentine Freese, and his Wife, both born in this City, gave their Lives therein, at one Stake, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, an. 1531. probably by or∣der from Edward Lee, the cruel Arch-Bishop. Confessors. Edward Freese, Brother to Valentine aforesaid, was Apprentice to a Painter, afterwards a Novice-Monk, and leaving his Convent, came to Colchester in Essex, where discovering his Heretical Inclinations, by Paint∣ing Sentences of Scriptures in the Borders of Cloaths, he was called to an account by Jo. Stoaksley Bishop of London. Mr. Fox saith, he was fed with Manchet, made of saw-dust, and kept so long in Prison, mani∣cled, till the Flesh had overgrown his Irons, and he not able to Kemb his own head, became so distracted, that being brought before the Bishop, he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good Man. We must not forget how the Wife of this Edward, being big with Child, and pressing in to see her Husband, the Porter at Fulham gave her such a kick on the Belly, that the Child was destroyed with that stroak immediately, and she dyed afterwards of the same.
Prelates. Jo. Roman, (whose Father was born at Rome) was (probably) born in York, seeing he was very indul∣gent to that City: For generally Outlandish Mules, though lying down in English Pasture, used to leave no hairs behind them. But this Jo. being advanced Arch-Bishop began to build the Church, and finished the North part of the Cross-Isle therein. Pol. Virg. prais∣eth him for a man of great Learning and Sincerity. He fell into the disfavour of King Edward 1. for Excom∣municating Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, and it cost him 4000 Marks to regain his Prince's good Will. He dyed 1295. and was buried in his own Church. Robert Walbey, an Augustinian Friar in York, went over into France, where he was chosen Professor of Divinity in the City of Tholouse. He was Chaplain to the Black Prince, and after his death, to his Father, King Edward 3. Now as his Master enjoyed three Crowns, so under him, his Chaplain did successively par∣take of three Mitres, being first a Bishop in Gascoigne, then Arch-Bishop of Dublin in Ireland, and afterwards Bishop of Chichester in England. At last he was Con∣secrated Arch-Bishop of York. He dyed 1397. Since the Reformation. Thomas Morton, born 1564. was Son to a famous Mercer (reputed the first in York) and allied to Cardi∣nal Morton, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He was bred in York School (with that Arch-Traytor Guy Faux) and afterwards in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, and (for his Merit) chosen Fellow thereof, before 8 Com∣petitors. Commencing D. D. he made his Position on
his second Question, contrary to the expectation of Dr. Playfere, replying upon him with some passion, Com∣môsti mihi Stomachum, to whom Morton returned, Gra∣tutor tibi Reverende Professor de bono tuo Stomacho, cana∣bis apud me hâc nocte. He was successively preferred Dean of Glocester, Winchester, Bishop of Chester, Co∣ventry and Lichfield, and Durham. The Foundation which he laid, of Forreign Correspondency with emi∣nent persons, of different perswasions, when he attend∣ed as Chaplain to the Lord Evers, (sent by King James Ambassador to the King of Denmark, &c.) he built upon unto the day of his death. In the late Long Par∣liament, the displeasure of the House of Commons fell heavy upon him, partly, for subscribing the Bishops Protestation for their Votes in Parliament; partly, for refusing to resign the Seal of his Bishoprick, and Bap∣tizing a Daughter of John Earl of Rutland, with the Sign of the Cross; two faults, which compounded to∣gether, in the judgment of honest and wise men, a∣mounted to an High Innocence. Yet the Parliament al∣lowed him 800 pounds a year, (a proportion above his Brethren) for his Maintenance. But the Trumpet of their Charity gave an uncertain sound, not assigning by whom, or whence this Sum should be paid. In∣deed the severe Votes of Parliament ever took full ef∣fect, according to his observation who did Anagram it, VOTED, OƲTED. But their Merciful Votes found not so free performance; however this good Bi∣shop got 1000 pounds out of Goldsmiths Hall, which afforded him support in his Old Age. He wrote a∣gainst Faction, in defence of three Innocent Ceremonies, and against Superstition, in his Treatise called The Grand Impostor. He solemnly proffered unto me, to maintain me to live with him, which courteous prof∣fer, as I could not conveniently accept, I did thankful∣ly refuse. Many of the Nobility deservedly honour∣ed
him, but none more then John Earl of Rutland, to whose Kinsman Roger Earl of Rut. he had formerly been Chaplain. Sir George Savil civilly paid him his pur∣chased Annuity of 200 pounds. He dyed at Easton Manduit, in Northampton-shire, the House of Sir Henry Yelverton, 1659. Aet. 95. Statesmen. Sir Robert Car, Son to Thomas Laird of Funihurst in the South of Scotland, (who being active for Mary Queen of Scots, was thereupon forced to fly to York) was born in this City, and therefore he afterwards re∣fused to be Naturalized by Act of Parliament, as need∣less to him, being born in the English Dominions. 'Tis reported, that his first making at Court, was by breaking of his Leg at Tilting in London, whereby he came first into the cognizance of King James, who re∣flected on him, whose Father had been a kind of Con∣fessor, for the Cause of the Queen his Mother. Be∣sides the young Gentleman had a handsome Person, and a conveniency of desert. Honours were crowded upon him, made Baron, Viscount, Earl of Sommerset, Knight of the Garter, Warden of the Cinque Ports, &c. He was a good natur'd Man, doing himself more hurt then any Man else. For abating one foul Fact, with the Consequences thereof notoriously known and he will appear deserving no foul Character to Po∣sterity; but for the same, he was banished the Court, lived and dyed very privately, about 1638. Writers Jo. Walbye, an Augustinian (Provincial of his Or∣der) and D. D. in Oxford, was a complaisant person,
being Ingenious, Industrious, Learned, Eloquent, Pi∣ous and Prudent. Though sharp at first against the Wicklevites, he soon abated his own edge; and though present at a Council held at Stanford, by the King, against them, was not well pleased with all things trans∣acted therein. He dyed in York 1393. Jo. Erghom, an Augustinian, went to Oxford, and became an admirable Preacher. He renewed the cu∣stom of Expounding Scripture in a Typical way, which crowded his Church with Auditors, being more pleas∣ed then edified therewith. He wrote many Books, and Dedicated them to the Earl of Hereford, (the same with Edward Duke of Buckingham) and flourished under King Henry 7. 1490. Since the Reformation. Richard Stock, bred in St. Johns-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, was Minister of All-hallowes Breadstreet in London, by the space of 32 years, till the day of his death; where (if in Health) he omitted not to Preach twice every Lords day, with the approbation of all that were Judicious and Religious. Dr. Davenant was his constant Auditor, whilst lying at London. He prevailed with some Companies, to put off their wont∣ed Festivals from Mondays to Tuesdays, that the Lords day might not be abused, by the preparation for such Entertainments. Though he Preached often in Neigh∣bouring Churches, he never neglected his own, being wont to protest, That it was more comfortable to him to win one of his own Parish, then twenty others. Preach∣ing at St. Pauls Cross, when young, it was ill taken that he reproved the inequality of Rates in the City,
(burdening the Poor to ease the Rich) and he was called a Green-Head for his Pains. But being put up in his latter dayes, to Preach on the Lord Mayors E∣lection, and falling on the same Subject, he told them, That a Gray-Head spake now what a Green-Head said before. He dyed April 20. 1626.
THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES. Nec Perfecte nec Perfunctorie. THIS Principality hath the Severn-Sea on the South, Irish Ocean on the West and North, England on the East, divided by a Ditch, drawn from the Mouth of Dee to the Mouth of Wie. From East to West it is 100, and from North to South 120 Miles. The foresaid Ditch is called Claudh-Offa, because made by King Offa, who Enacted, that what Welsh-man soever was found on the East side of this Ditch, should forfeit his Right Hand, a Law long since Cancelled. And the Loyal and Valiant Welsh have for many Ages past enjoyed the same Priviledges with o∣ther Subjects of the King of England. It was divided into three parts by Roderick the Great, about the year 877. and allotted to his three Sons.
1. North-Wales 2. Powis 3. South-Wales Whose Princes chiefly resided at 1. Aberfrow. 2. Mathraval. 3. Dynefar. This Division proved the Confusion of Wales, whose Princes were always at War, not only against the Eng∣lish, but mutually with themselves, to enlarge and de∣fend their Dominions. Of these Three, North-Wales was the Chief, being left to Mervin eldest Son to Ro∣derick aforesaid; the Princes whereof (by way of E∣minency, were stiled the Princes of Wales, and some∣times Kings of Aberfrow) paid to the King of London, yearly 63 pounds, by way of Tribute, the same sum being like wise paid to the said King, by the Princes of Powis and South-Wales. However South-Wales (called by the Natives Deheubarth, i. e. the Right-side, be∣cause nearer the Sun) was of the three, the largest, richest, and most fruitful; But this Country being con∣stantly infested with the Invasions of the English and Flemings, had North-Wales preferred before it, as more entire, and better secured from such Annoyances. Hence it is that the Welsh-Tongue retaineth the purity thereof only in North-Wales. The Soil mostly rising up into Hills and Mountains, is of a lean and hungry Nature; yet is the ill quality recompenced by the good quanti∣ty thereof; Whence it was that a Worshipful Knight in Wales, who had a fair Estate therein, said to an Eng∣lish Gentleman, (who bragged that he had in England so much Ground, worth 40 Shillings an Acre,) You have 10 yards of Velvet, and I have 200 of Frize, I will not exchange with you. However there are in Wales most pleasant Meadows along the sides of Rivers; and as the sweetest Flesh is said to be nearest the Bones, so most delicious Vallies are interposed betwixt these Mountains. The Inhabitants are Healthful, Strong,
Swift and Witty, which is imputed to the clear and wholsome Air of the Mountains, the cleanly and mode∣rate Diet of the people, and the hardness whereunto they are inured from their infancy. Of Natural Commodities, there is Silver, whereof Cardigan-shire yields Royal Mines; in these Mountains, viz. Comsomelock, Tallabant, Gadarren, Bromfloid, Geginnon, and Cummerrum. The Romans began to Mine here, (as appears by their Coynes found therein) working in Trenches, (about 24 Fathom deep) and found plenty of Lead. The Danes and Saxons wrought 100 Fathom deep, and found great plenty of the same, till their Works were drown'd with water. Customer Smith, about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, dis∣covered Silver in Comsomelock: After his death the de∣sign was prosecuted, and more perfected by Sir Hugh Middleton Knight, Coyning the Silver to his great Charge, (as his Predecessor had done) at the Tower; After whose death, Sir Francis Godolphin of Cornwal Knight, and Thomas Bushel Esquire, undertook the Work. King Charles I. granted to them power of Coinage at Aberrusky, in that County. Thomas Bushel (Sir Francis dying, and Comsomelock being deserted) adventured on the other five Mountains, and at last these Mines yielded 100 pounds a Week, (besides Lead amounting to half as much) Coyned at Aberrusky aforesaid. The Pence, Groats, Shillings, Half-Crowns, &c. of this Silver, had the Ostrich Feathers (the Arms of Wales) stamped on them. The Civil Wars dis∣composed all the Work. I will add no more, but on∣ly make mention of that ingenious invention, where∣by the Miners are supplyed with fresh Air: This is done by two Mens blowing wind with a pair of Bel∣lows, on the outside of Adit, into a Pipe of Lead, dai∣ly lengthned as the Mine is made longer, whereby the Candle in the Mine is daily kept burning, and the dig∣gers
recruited constantly with a sufficiency of breath. There is Lead found in many places of Wales, but in Carnarvan-shire the best. Plenty of Goats are bred here, especially in Montgomery-shire. As for Manu∣factures, the British generally bearing themselves high, on the account of their gentile extraction, are better pleased in the employment of their Valour then La∣bour, and therefore there are only those few that follow, Frieze, of which Henry Prince of Wales, having a Suit, and being checkt by a bold Courtier for wear∣ing the same many Weeks together, Would (said he) that the Cloth of my Country would last alwayes. Then Cheese, very tender and palatable, the Pedigree where∣of was by one, merrily derived, thus, Adam's nawn Cusson was her by her Birth, Ap Curds, ap Milk, ap Cow, ap Grass, ap Earth. Lastly, Metheglen, derived by the Welsh from their nown Countryman, Matthew Glin, the first Inventor, though others will have this word of Greek extraction, from  contracted . It is a Compound of Water, Honey, &c. being most wholsome for Mans Body. Pollio Romulus being 100 years of Age, told Caesar, that he had preserved his Vigour of Mind and Body, Intus Mulso, foris Oleo, by taking Methe∣glen inward, and Oyl outward; It is the same in kind with, but much stronger then Mede. Queen Eliza∣beth, who by the Tudors was of Welsh descent, much loved this her Native Liquor. As for the Buildings, generally they are like those of the old Britains, neither big nor beautiful; the Ita∣lian humour of building having not affected (not to say infected) the British Nation. Hoelldha Prince of Wales, about the year 800. built a House for his own Resi∣dence of White-hurdles or Watling, therefore called
Ty Gwin, White-House, or White-Hall, if you please. However there are brave Buildings in VVales, though not Welsh Buildings, which the English Erected therein, as Bridles to the Country. Proverbs. I. His VVelsh Blood is up; and 'tis no wonder that a very ancient Shentleman should digest his losses with great difficulty. II. As long as a VVelsh Pedigree; nay and as high too, seeing commonly a VVelsh Gentle∣man can presently climb up into a Princely Extraction. III. Give your Horse a VVelsh-Bait; That is a stop on the top of the Mountains, where the poor Palfrey is forced to make a shift with Chameleon's Commons, the clear Air. This Principality was Modelled into Shires in the Reign of King Henry 8. The General Catalogue that follows, is of those who were VVelsh, though extant before such Division into Shires. Princes. They are very Ancient and Numerous, yet Camb∣den observes, they never had any Coin of their own. Confessors. Walter Brute, born in VVales, a Sinner, Layman, Husbandman, and a Christian, (they are his own words in a certain Protestation which he made) was bred in Oxford. Being accused to the Bishop of Hereford, he (by a solemn Subscription) submitted himself prin∣cipally to the Evangely of Jesus Christ, to the determina∣tion and general Councils of Holy Kirk, to — Austin, Ambrose, Jerome and Gregory; and to his Bishop, as a
Subject ought to his Bishop. It seems this Brute was one of the first who was vext for Wickliffisme. Nicholas Hereford, (probably) of British extraction, D. D. in Oxford,AMP. and a secular Priest, opposed Transubstantiation; maintain∣ed that Clergy-men ought to be subject to their respec∣tive Princes, that Monks and Friers ought to live by their own Labour; That all ought to rule themselves by the Word of God. He (with Philip Repington) was made to recant his Opinions at St. Pauls Cross in London, 1382. After which Repington proving a Per∣secutor of his party, was made Bishop of Lincoln, and afterwards made a Cardinal. Hereford being not so forward, was imprisoned (with John Purvey his Part∣ner) by Arch-Bishop Arundel. Reginald Peacock, D. D. in Kings-Colledge in Oxford, was Bishop first of St. Asaph, then of Chichester. For 20 years together he favoured the Opinions of Wickliffe, and wrote much in defence thereof, until in a Synode held at Lambeth by Thomas Boucher, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, 1457. he was made to recant at Pauls Cross, (his Books being burnt before his eyes) confuted with seven solid Arguments, thus reckoned up, Authoritate, Vi, Arte, Fraude, Metu, Terrore & Tyrannide. Some believe, that he recanted his recantation, others that he was privily made away in Prison. Cardinals. Sertor of Wales, (by some named Fontanerius Va∣lassus) was General of the Franciscans 1339. then Bi∣shop of Massile, and afterwards Arch-Bishop of Ra∣venna. He was made Cardinal by Pope Innocent 6. but dyed before he received his Cap. Among many Books, he wrote a Comment on St. Austin, De Civit. Dei. He dyed at Padua in Italy, and was therein bu∣ried
in the Church of Saint Anthony. Prelates. Marbod Evanx went over into France, when the Danes were harassing this Land. There he became Bi∣shop of Renes. He wrote the Book called Carmina Sententiosa, flourishing 1050. Walter de Constantiis, Arch-Deacon of Oxford, was preferred Bishop of Lincoln, then Arch-Bishop of Ro∣han, by King Richard 1. whom he attended into the Holy-Land, by Sea and Land; Insomuch, that some will have him Sirnamed from his constancy to his Ma∣ster in all conditions. He effectually suppressed the Ty∣ranny of William Longchamp, Bishop of Ely. He af∣terwards interred King Richard at Font-Everard, and invested King John with the Principality of Normandy, and dyed about 1206. Caducanus Bishop of Bangor, left his Bishoprick, and became a Cistertian Monk in Monasterio Durensi, and being no less happy then industrious in his endeavours, wrote a Book of Sermons, and another called Specu∣lum Christianorum. He dyed under the Reign of King Henry 3. 1225. Since the Reformation. Hugh Johnes, Batchelour of the Laws in Oxford, was made Bishop of Landaffe, May 5. 1566. The first Welsh-man, who for the last 300 years was Bishop thereof. He dyed and was buried at Matherne, No∣vember 5. 1574 Dr. — Philips, bred in Oxford, was preferred Bishop of Man. He Translated the Bible into the Manks-Tongue, by the assistance of some of the Islan∣ders, and namely, Sir Hugh Cavol, Minister of the Gos∣pel,
and lately Vicar of Kirk-Michael; though that work was never put to the Press; the Ministers there being forced to read the Scriptures to the people, out of the English, in the Manks-Tongue. Physicians. Robert Recorde, well descended, was bred in Oxford, where he proceeded Dr. of Physick. He wrote five famous Treatises, viz. of Arithmetic, Astrology, Ge∣ometry, Physick and Metals; and was well skilled in Anatomy, Cosmography and Musick. He wrote also of Auricular Confession, and De Negotio Eucharistiae, with which subjects no Roman Catholick is to meddle. He flourished under King Edward 6. about 1550. Thomas Phacer, was bred (I believe) first in Oxford, then in London, a general Scholar, and well versed in the Common Law, wherein he wrote a Book, De Na∣turâ Brevium. He afterwards proceeded Dr. of Phy∣sick He Translated out of the French many useful Books, 1. Of the Pestilence. 2. Of the Grief of Chil∣dren. 3. Of the Nature of Simples. 4. The Regiment of Natural Life. He likewise Translated Virgil's E∣neads. He dyed and was buried in London, 1550. Albane Hill, Dr. of Physick, wrote much on Ga∣len, and was famous at home and abroad, flourishing (as I conjecture) about 1550. Writers. Petrok, bred in Ireland, fixed himself in Cornwal, after his return, the place of his abode being called Petrok Stow, corruptly Pad-Stow, where many eminent Scholars were brought up under him. He delighted in, and wrote a Book of Solitary Life. He was re∣puted a Saint, and there is a Church at Exeter, dedi∣cated to his Memory.
Gildas the fourth, studied in Ireland. He wrote of the Wonders, and first Inhabitants of Britain, King Arthur, &c. of Perceval and Lancelot. He flourish∣ed 860. Blegabride, Langauride, a great Scholar, and Dr. of both Laws, was Arch-Deacon of the Church of Landaffe. He to the Honour of his Country, and use of Posterity, Translated the Laws of Howel, the most modest King of Wales, and flourished 914. Salephilax the Barde, set forth a Genealogy of the Britains, and flourished 920. Gwalterus Calenius, Arch-Deacon of Oxford, highly prized for his great Learning, went over into Britain in France, and thence retrieved an ancient Manuscript of the British Princes, from Brutus to Cadwalader, and Communicated the same to Jeffrey of Monmouth, to be Translated by him, into Latine. He continued the same Chronicle for 400 years together, till his own time. He flourished 1120. under King Henry 1. Gualo Britannus, was from his youth a Servant to the Muses, and a lover of Poetry. His Pen fell foul on the Monks, writing invectives against their wanton∣ness, impostures, and covetousness, with such caution, that he incurred no danger thereby. He flourished 1170. under King Henry 2. William Breton, a great Scholar, and deep Divine, was (as some affirm) a Franciscan at Grimsby in Lin∣coln-shire. He wrote (besides many other Books) an Exposition of all the hard words in the Bible, and such the reputation thereof, that in the Controversie be∣twixt Standish Bishop of St. Asaph, and Erasmus, the former appeals to Breton's Book, about the interpreta∣tion of a place in Scripture. He dyed at Grimsby, an. 1356. Ʋtred Bolton, travelled to Durham in troublesome times, and there became a Benedictine. The prompt∣ness
and pleasantness of his parts, commended all things that he did or said. Coming to Oxford in the heat of the difference betwixt Wickliffe, and his Adversaries, he agreed in some things with him; Whereupon one Jordan a Dominican falling foul upon him, he expressed himself more openly for Wickliffe, especially in that his smart Book, Pro veris Monachis; With which Jor∣dan was so incensed, that he used his utmost endea∣vour to get Bolton Excommunicated, who flourished under King Richard 2. 1330. Jo. Gwent, a Franciscan in Oxford, became Provin∣cial of his Order throughout all Britain. He wrote a Learned Comment on Lombard's Common places, and was a man of admirable prudence. He dyed at He∣reford, 1348. Jo. Ede, a Learned and Religious Man, wrote se∣veral Comments on Aristotle, Peter Lombard, and the Revelation. He was chief of the Franciscans Convent in Hereford, where he was buried, in the Reign of King Henry 4. 1408. David Boys (in Latine Boethius) studied in Oxford. He procured the Writings of Jo. Barningham, and bestowed them on the Library in Cambridge. He was befriended by Eleanor Cobham, Dutchess of Glocester, whence we collect him at least a parcel-Wickliffite. He wrote (amongst many others) a Book of double Im∣mortality, and another about the madness of the Haga∣rens. He was Prefect of the Carmelities in Glocester, where he dyed 1450. Since the Reformation. Sir Jo. Rhese, alias Ap Ryse, Knight, Noble by his Lineage, but more by his Learning, was well versed in the British Antiquities, and was a zealous Assertor of the credit of Welsh-Authors, against Pol. Virgil. He
wrote a Treatise of the Eucharist, and was a favour∣er of the Reformation, flourishing under King Edward. 6. 1550. Jo. Griffin, first a Cistertian in Hales-Abbey in Glo∣cester, became a Preacher after the dissolution of his Convent, Preaching many Sermons in English, and wri∣ting them in Latine. He flourished under Edward 6. an. 1550. Hugh Broughton, of gentile, but poor Parents, was sent by Mr. Gilpin to Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, of which he became Fellow. He was famous for his skill in the Hebrew, a great Ornament to that University. He was somewhat hot and peremptory in his Opinions. He wrote many Books, whereof one called the Consent of Times, carrieth the general commendation. 'Tis reported, that he procured Mr. Gilpin his Maecenas, to be molested by Dr. Barnes Bishop of Durham, in expectation of his Parsonage, as some shrewdly suspect. At last being fixed in London, he taught many Citizens, and their Apprentices the Hebrew Tongue. His Ser∣mons were rather curious then edifying, which was the cause that he had numerous Auditors. He dyed about 1600. Hugh Holland, Fellow of Trinity-Colledge in Cam∣bridge, was an excellent Latine Poet; Being disaffect∣ed to the Protestant Religion, he Travelled into Italy, where he let fly freely against the credit of Queen E∣lizabeth. Whence he went to Rome, and in his re∣turn, he touched at Constantinople, where Sir Tho∣mas Glover, Ambassadour for King James, called him to an account for his Scandalum Reginae, and imprison∣ed him for some time. Being enlarged he returned into England, where missing of preferment, he grumb∣led out the rest of his Life in visible discontentment. He made Verses in description of the chief Cities in
Europe, wrote the Chronicle of Queen Elizabeths Reign and a Book of the Life of Mr. Cambden, which were never Printed. He had a competent Estate in good Candle-rents in London, and dyed about the beginning of the Reign of King Charles I. ANGLESEY. ANglesey, (in Latine Mona,) that is, the English Island is surrounded on all sides with the Irish Sea, save on the South; where a small Fret (called Menai) sundreth it from the Welsh Continent, having 20 Miles in the length, and 17 in the breadth thereof. It is seemingly barren, and really fruitful, affording plenty of good Wheat, and Mill-stones to grind it. There are several Trees digged up here, out of marish places, which are firm and fit for Timber. They are black within as Ebony, and are used by Carvers for in∣laying Cupboards, &c. Yea Hasle-nuts are found un∣der ground, with sound Kernels in them. Proverbs. I. Mon Mam Cymbry, that is, Anglesey is the Mother of Wales, because when other Countries fail, she plen∣tifully feedeth them with Provision, and is said to af∣ford Corn enough to sustain all Wales. Nor is she less happy in Cattle then Corn. II. Crogging Crogging. The Original of this by word was in dayes of King Henry 2. who had many men slain by the Welsh at
Croggen-Castle. The English afterwards used it as a Provocative, when they had the Welsh at an advantage. It is now without cause, uttered in disgrace of the Welsh▪ though originally it was expressive of their Honour. Prelates. Guido de Mona, (that is of Anglesey) was Bishop of St. Davids, and Lord Treasurer of England under King Henry 4. though the Parliament moved, that no Welshman should be a State Officer in England. He dyed 1407. Arthur Bulkley, Bishop of Bangor, though bred Dr. of the Laws, never read, or forgot the Chapter de Sa∣crilegio, for he spoyled the Bishoprick, and sold the five Bells, being so over-officious, that he would go down to the Sea to see them Shipped. He was sudden∣ly deprived of his sight, and dyed 1555. William Glyn, D. D. bred in, and Master of Queens-Colledge in Oxford, was an. 2. Mary, preferred Bishop of Bangor. An excellent Scholar; being constant to his own, and not cruel to opposite judgments; he cau∣sed no persecution in his Diocess. He dyed an. 1. E∣lizabeth; whose Brother Jeffrey, Dr. of Laws, built and endowed a Free School at Bangor. Since the Reformation. Rouland Merrick, Dr. of Laws, was born at Bodin∣gan, bred at Oxford, where he became Principal of New-Inn-hall, and afterwards a Dignitary in the Church of St. Davids. He procured the imprisonment of Ro∣bert Ferrar his Diocesan, in the dayes of King Ed∣ward 6. who was afterwards Martyred in the Reign of Queen Mary. Mr. Merrick was Consecrated Bishop of Bangor, an. 2. Elizabeth, 1559. He was Father
to Sir Gilly Merrick Knight, who lost his life for en∣gaging with the Earl of Essex, 1600. Lancelot Bulkley, was born of a then Right Wor∣shipful (since Honourable) Family, one of whose fair Habitations is near Beumaris. He was bred in Brazen-Nose-Colledge in Oxford, and afterwards became first Arch-Deacon, and then Arch-Bishop of Dublin, Octo∣ber 3. 1619. Soon after, he was made by King James one of his Privy Counsel in Ireland. He dyed about 16. Seamen. Madoc, Son to Owen Gwineth, ap Griffith, ap Co∣nan, and Brother to Dav. Prince of North-Wales, was born probably at Aberfraw, then the principal Palace of their Royal residence. He (1170.) made a Voyage Westward, and probably those names of Cape de Breton Norvinberg, and Pengwin in part of the Northern A∣merica, were Reliques of his discovery.
BRECKNOCK-SHIRE. BRecknock-shire hath Radnor-shire on the North, Car∣digan and Carmarthen-shire on the West, Glamor∣gan-shire on the South, Hereford and Monmouth-shire on the East. In length 28, and in breadth 20 miles. The fruitfulness of the Vallies in this Shire maketh a∣mends for the barrenness of the Mountains. Brecknock the chief Town hereof, doth at this present time af∣ford the Title of an Earl to James Duke of Ormond, the first that ever received that Dignity. About 400 years since, a Daughter of Gilb. and Maud Becket, (and Sister to Thomas Becket) was by King Henry 2. bestowed in Marriage on one Butler an English Gentle∣man. Him King Henry sent over into Ireland, and (endeavouring to expiate Beckets blood) rewarded him with large Lands, so that his Posterity were created Earls of Ormond. In this County there is plenty of Otters in Brecknock Meer, the Wool whereof is much used in making of Beavers. As for Wonders, 'tis reported by Speed, that Cloaks, Hats and Staves, cast down from the top of an Hill, (called Mouchy Denny or Cadier Arthur) and the North-East Rocks, would never fall, but were with the air and wind still returned back, and blown up again, nor would any thing descend, save a Stone or some metallin sub∣stance. When the Meer Lynsavathan (within two Miles of Brecknock) hath her frozen Ice first broken, it yields a thundering noyse; and there is a Tradition, that where that Meer spreadeth its waters, stood a fair City, till swallowed up by an Earthquake, which
is not improbable, first, because all the Highways of this County do lead thither, secondly, Ptolemy doth place in this Tract the City Loventrium, which Mr. Cambden could not recover, and therefore likely to be drown'd in this Pool; the rather because Levenny is the name of the River running by it. Saints. St. Canoch, Cadock, Sons, and Keyne Daughter to Braghan King, builder and namer of Brecknock (who had 24 Daughters, all Saints, though only St. Keyne survived) flourished about 492. of whom St. Cadock is reported a Martyr; and all had in high Veneration a∣mongst the people of South-Wales. St. Clintanke was King of Brecknock. It happened that a Noble Virgin gave it out, That she would never Marry any man except the said King, who was so zea∣lous a Christian. A Pagan Souldier, purposely to de∣feat her desire, killed this King, who left behind him the reputation of a Saint. Prelates. Giles de Bruse, born at Brecknock, was Son to Wil∣liam de Bruse, Baron of Brecknock, a prime Peer in his time. This Giles became Bishop of Hereford, and in the Civil Wars, sided with the Nobility against King John, on which account he was banished, but at length returned, and recovered the Kings favour. His Paternal Honour and Inheritance was devolved upon him, and from him, after his death, transmitted to his Brother Reginald, who Married the Daughter of Leo∣line Prince of Wales. His Effigies on his Tomb in Hereford Church, holdeth a Steeple in his hand; whence it is concluded that he built the Belfree of that Cathedral. He dyed 1215.
Since the Reformation. Thomas Howel, born at Nangamarch, bred Fellow of Jesus-Colledge in Oxford, became a most meek man, and excellent Preacher. His Sermons, like the waters of Siloah, did run softly, gliding on with a smooth stream. King Charles I. made him Bishop of Bristol. He dyed 1646. leaving many Orphan Children behind him. I have been told, that the Honourable City of Bristol hath taken care for their comfortable Educa∣tion. Statesmen. Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, set up King Richard on the Throne, endeavouring afterwards in vain to depose him; the King compassing him into his clutches, through the treachery of Humphrey Banister, the Dukes own Servant, the Sheriff siezing him in Shrop-shire, where he was digging of a Ditch in a dis∣guise. He was beheaded at Sarisbury, without any Legal Tryal, 1484. Memorable Persons. Nesta, Daughter to Gruffin Prince of Wales, and Wife to Bernard of Newmarch, a Noble Norman, and Lord by Conquest of this County, was an Harlot to a young Gentleman. Mahel her Son having got this Stallion into his hands, used him very hardly, where∣with Nesta being madded, came into open Court, and on her Oath before King Henry 2. publickly protest∣ed, that Mahel was none of Newmarch his Son, but be∣gotten on her in Adultery. This if true, spake her dis∣honesty, if false, her perjury; true or false, her Peer∣less
impudency. Hereby she disinherited Mahel, and setled a vast Territory on Sybil her sole Daughter, Married afterwards to Milo Earl of Hereford. Note, that when Mr. Speed, in pursuance of his De∣scription of England, passed this County, 8 persons who had been Bayliffs of Brecknock gave him courte∣ous entertainment.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE. CArdigan-shire is washed on the West with the Irish Sea, and parted from Merioneth-shire by the Ri∣ver Dovi, from Brecknock-shire by Tovy, and on the South, from Carmarthen and Pembroke-shire by Tyvy. Being in form like a Horn, wider towards the North; and has a Cornu-copia, universal plenty. This County though remotest to England, was soonest reduced to the English Dominion, as being nearer to the Sea, which afforded a more convenient passage to the English, who were potent in Shipping, and invaded this Coun∣ty in the Reign of VVilliam Rufus; and Henry 1. be∣stowed the same entirely upon VVilliam de Clare. In former times, plenty of Bevers did breed in the River Tyvy in this County. Proverbs. I. Talaeth, Talaeth, that is Fine, Fine: When Ro∣derick divided Wales betwixt his three Sons, he or∣dered that each of them should wear upon his Bonnet or Helmet, a Coronet of Gold, set with pretious Stones, called in British Talaeth, and they from thence, Ytri trwysc Talaethioc, that is, three Crowned Princes. Now it is applyed to the uppermost part of the head attire of Children, yea the English men have that which they call the Crown of a Cap. II. B Arthur and ; That is, Arthur was not but whilst he was; 'Tis Ho∣nourable for old Men, if they can truly say, we have been brave Fellows. III. Ne Thorres Arthur Nawdd gwraig; that is, King Arthur did never violate the re∣fuge
of a woman; For that King was the Mirrour of Manhood. By the Woman's Refuge, many understand her Tongue, and no valiant Man will revenge her words with his blows. IV. Calen y Sais wrah Gimro; That is, the Heart of an Englishman towards a Welshman. This was invented whilst England and Wales were at deadly Feude, and is applyed to such who are possessed with prejudice, or only carry an outward complyance with Cordial Affection. V. Ni Cheitw Cymbro oni Gollo; That is, the Welshman keeps nothing until he hath lost it: When the British recovered their lost Castles from the English, they doubled their diligence and va∣lour, keeping them more tenaciously then before. VI. A fo Pen, bid Bont; That is, He that will be a Head, let him be a Bridge. This is of a fictitious Original. Benigridan a Welsh General is said to have carried his Army (one by one we must imagine) on his back, over a River in Ireland, where there was neither Bridge nor Ferry. These Proverbs are generally used in VVales. Note that in this Principality of VVales, there was an ancient Play, wherein the stronger put the weaker into a sack, whence the English By-word, He is able to put him up in a Bag. VII. Na difanco y Beriglawr; That is, Vilifie not thy Parish Priest. This may be lookt up∣on as a true penitential Proverb, since the Citizens of Llan-Badern-Vaure (that Lland-Badern the great) cru∣elly slew their Bishop, which City and Bishoprick af∣terwards dwindled into nothing.
CARMARTHEN-SHIRE. CArmarthen-shire hath Pembroke-shire on the West, the Severn Sea on the South, Cardigan-shire on the North, Brecknock and Glamorgan-shire on the East. This County being not so Mountainous as others in Wales, affords plenty of Grain, Grass, Wood and Fish. Here there is a place called Golden Grove, belonging to the Right Honourable Richard Vaughan, Baron of E∣melor in England, and Earl of Carbery in Ireland, who plentifully relieved many eminent Divines, during the late Sequestration. 'Tis said that in this Maritime-shire, there is a Fountain which ebbs and flows confor∣mable to the Sea. There are likewise here strange Subterranean Vaults, conceived the Castles of routed people in the Civil Wars. Martyrs. Robert Ferrar, an English man, a prime Martyr of this County, was a Man not unlearned, but somewhat indiscreet, or rather uncomplying; so that he may be said with St. Lawrence to be broyled on both sides, be∣ing persecuted both by Protestants and Papists. He was preferred Bishop of St. Davids, by the Duke of Sommerset, then Lord Protector, who was put to death not long after. Some conceived that the Patrons fall was the Chaplains greatest guilt, and encouraged his Enemies against him. Of these, two were afterwards Bishops in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, viz. Thomas Young Arch-Bishop of York, and Rowland Merrick Bi∣shop of Banger.
Souldiers. Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight, little less then a Prince in his Country, was called by the Author of Praelia Anglorum, the Flower of the Britains. He repaired to King Henry 7. (lately landed at Milford Haven with contemptible Forces) with a considerable accession of choice Souldiers, marching with them to Bosworth-Field, where he right valiantly behaved himself. He was in reward of his good service made Knight of the Garter. He rebuilt Emeline in this County, and called it New-Castle, being one of his Principal Seats, and one of the latest Castles in Wales. In the 4th. year of King Henry 8. he conducted 500 Horse at the Siege of The∣rouene. VValt. de Devereux, Son of — Devereux, and Cicely his VVife (sole Sister to Thomas Bourchier last Earl of Essex,) was born in the Town of Carmarthen, and by Queen Elizabeth Created Earl of Essex, in Right of his Mother. Being a Martial Man he Arti∣cled with Queen Elizabeth, to maintain such a propor∣tion of Souldiers at his own cost, and to have the fair Territory of — Clandebuy in the Province of Ʋlster (in Ireland) for the Conquering thereof. To maintain his Army, he sold his fair inheritance in Essex. Over he goes into Ireland, with a noble Company of Kin∣dred and Friends, supernumerary Volunteers, above the proportion of Souldiers agreed upon. Sir W. Fitz-Williams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, suspecting to be Eclipsed by this great Earl, sollicits the Queen to main∣tain him in full power of his place. Hereupon it was Ordered, that the Earl should have his Commission from this Lord Deputy, which with much importunity and long attendance, he hardly obtained, and that with no higher Title then Governour of Ʋlster. After many
impressions (not over successfully) made in Ʋlster, he was by the Lord Deputy remanded into the South of Ireland, where he spent much time to little purpose. From Munster he was sent back into Ʋlster, where he was forbidden to follow his blow, and use a Victory he had gotten: Yea on a sudden stript out of his Com∣mission, and reduced to be Governour of 300 Men. He embraced all these Changes with prodigious con∣stancy Pay-days in Ireland came very thick, Moneys out of England very slow, his Noble Associates began to withdraw, common Men to mutiny, so that the Earl himself was at the last recalled home. Not long after he was again sent over, with the Title of Earl Marshal of Ireland, where he fell into a strange looseness (not without suspicion of Poyson) and dyed 1576. Aet. 36. His Soul he piously resigned to God, his Lands (much impaired) descended to his Son Robert. His Body be∣ing brought over was buried in Carmarthen. His Wi∣dow Lady was soon remarried to Robert Earl of Lei∣cester. His Father and Grandfather dyed about the same time of their Age, (viz. the 36th. year) to which his Son Robert never attained. Writers. Ambrose Merlin, born at Carmarthen, is reported to have had an Incubus to his Father, pretending to a pe∣digree older then Adam, even from the Serpent him∣self. VVe will allow the Serpent to be Father to his own Child, I mean this monstrous Lie about Merlin's Birth. Many are his pretended Prophesies, whereof the British have a very high esteem, though their own Proverb says, Namyn Dduw nid oes dewin, that be∣sides God there is no Diviner. Indeed Merlin's Pro∣phesies did much mischief, when his Interpreters put Owen Glendower on his Rebellion against King Henry 4.
perswading him the time was come, wherein he should recover the Welsh Principality, which occasioned the making of cruel Laws against the British Nation. Some maintain Merlin to have been a great Chymist, and that his Prophesies are to be expounded naturally, not Historically. One of his Prophesies cited by Hist. of Irel. Giraldus Cambrensis, hit the mark indeed; Being this, The sixth shall over∣turn the Walls of Ireland, and reduce their Countries into a Kingdom. Accomplished under King James the sixth, when their Fastnesses (Irish Walls) were dismantled, and Courts of Justice set up in all the Land.
CARNARVON-SHIRE. CArnarvon-shire hath the Irish Sea on the West, An∣glesey (divided by Menaifret) on the North, Denby-shire on the East, and Merioneth-shire on the South. All the Markets are Sea Towns, being five in number. The Natives hereof submitted at last to the English, who were never more put to it then in the In∣vasion thereof, which for natural strength exceeds any part of the Principality. It is sufficiently plentiful, and Snow-down-hills therein are fruitful of Wood, Cat∣tle, Fowl, besides Fish in the Pools which are interpo∣sed; Where there was (as Giraldus Cambrensis af∣firms) a Floating Island, and a strange kind of Fishes found with one eye. Proverbs. I. Craig Eriry or Snow-don will yield sufficient Pa∣sture for all the Cattle of Wales put together. This is hyperbolical, importing the extraordinary fruitfulness of the place. II. Dinge ar Gluid a boddi ar Gonway. That is, to scape Clude, and be drown'd in Conay. Parallel to the Latine, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim. Princes. Edward the fourth, (but first surviving) Son of King Edward 1. and Queen Eleanor, was born at Carnar∣vn, April 25. 1284. No Prince ever ascended the English Throne with greater, or used it with less advan∣tage
to himself. The VVelsh generally accepted him for their Prince, as being Crowned Prince of VVales (before he was born) in their Country, the King his Father, having caused a Crown to be set on Queen Eleanor's Belly, when she was big with this Prince. As this gave the Britas a full interest in, so it begat in them a particular veneration for the succeeding English Monarchs. This Edward (succeeding to a VVise and Victorious Father) did strange himself from his Sub∣jects, and in effect subjected himself to Pierce Gaveston, his French Minion, and after his Execution, to the two Spencers, Englishmen, yet equally odious for their insolence. Hence it was that he first lost the love of his Subjects, then of his Queen, (the vacuity of whose Bed was quickly filled up) then his Crown, then his Life, being Murdered at Berkley Castle, September 22. 1327. Saints. The Corps of 20000 Saints are said to be interred in a small Island called Berdsey, lying within a Mile of the South promontory of this County. It is (I confess) more facile to find Graves therein for so many Saints, then Saints for so many Graves. Statesmen. Jo. VVilliams, born in Aber-Conwy, bred Fellow of St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, and Proctor of that University, was preferred Dean of VVestminster, Bi∣shop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and at last Arch-Bishop of York. He dyed March 25. 1649. See my Eccl. Hist.
Prelates since the Reformaion. Richard Vaughan, born at Nuffrin, or else at Etrin, was bred in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, became successively Bishop of Bangor, Chester and London, a very Corpulent Man, but Spiritually minded, an ex∣cellent Preacher, and pious Liver. A pleasant man in discourse, especially at his Table; using frequently this expression, At Meals be glad, for sin be sad, and indeed he was a Mortified man. Nothing could tempt him to betray the Rights of the Church to Sacrilegious hands, not sparing sharply to reprove some of his own Order on that account. He dyed March 30. 1607. I will add, (according to an Epigram which was made upon; and directed to him) — Facienda docuit, do∣cenda fecit. Having been none of those unhappy men, Qui sciunt & non docent, or Qui docent & non vivunt. Henry Roulands, bred in Oxford, was Consecrated Bishop of Bangor, November 12. 1598. He bought 4 new Bells for the Tower of St. Asaph, whereof the biggest cost 100 pounds. He also gave to Jesus-Colledge in Oxford, means for the maintenance of two Fellows, He dyed 1615. Note Speed's Maps of this County (as also of Denby and Flint-shire) are not divided with points into seve∣ral Hundreds, seeing the Author could not procure the same out of the Sheriffs Books, fearing lest the Riches of their Shire should be further fought into, by revealing such particulars.
DENBIGH-SHIRE. DEnbigh-shire hath Flint-shire, Cheshire and Shrop-shire on the East, Montgomery and Merioneth-shire on the South, Carnarvon-shire on the West, being from East to West 31. and from North to South 20 Miles. The East part of this County is fruitful, but in the West, the Husbandman may be said to fetch his Bread out of the fire, fertilizing their ground with the Ashes of burnt Turfs. There is plenty of Rye (or Amelcorn) in this County. Of Buildings, the Church of Wrexham is a fair and spatious Structure, having a stately Tower without, and Organs within it. Note that Organs were brought into general use in Churches about the year 828. and much improved by Bernard a Venetian, and an incomparable Musician. But to pro∣ceed, Holt Castle was possessed by William Lord Stan∣ley, whose ready Money and Plate therein (besides Jewels and Rich Houshold-stuff) amounted to 4000 Marks, got by the plunder of Bosworth field. Upon the Owners Attainder, it was Confiscated into the Cof∣fers of King Henry 7. Prelates. Leoline ap Llewelin ap Ywyr (or Leoline de Bront∣field) was born in the Marches. Under King Edward 1. he was Consecrated Bishop of St. Asaph, 1293. and afterwards appropriated some Churches to his Chapter. He reduced a portion of Tithes in the Parish of Cor∣wen, (appropriating to the Church) to its former Estate. He askd leave of King Edward 1. to make his Will,
whereby he bequeathed much of his Plate, rich Vests and Books to the Canons of that Church, and his Chap∣lains, dying 1313. Since the Reformation. Godfrey Goodman, born of Wealthy Parentage, bred under his Uncle (of whom hereafter) in Westminster-School, then in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, where he Commenced D. D. was successively preferred Pre∣bend. of Windsor, Dean of Rochester, and Bishop of Glocester. He lived since, but was no friend to the Re∣formation, constantly complaining of the first Refor∣mers, amongst whom he noted Ridley, as a very Odd Man; One being then present, My Lord, (says he) He was an Odde Man indeed, for all the Popish Party in England, could not match him with his equal in Learn∣ing and Religion. He is the only instance (amongst 200 Bishops since Queen Elizabeth) who was Popishly af∣fected. He was a harmless man, hurtful to none but himself, pitiful to the Poor, hospitable to his Neighbours, against the ruining of any of an opposite Judgment, and gave the most he left to pious uses. He was no con∣temptible Historian. He was made Bishop 1624. and dyed about 1655. in Westminster. Writers since the Reformation. William Salesbury, born in this County, (where his Family flourisheth at this day) composed an English and Wesh Dictionary, Printed 1547. He dyed 1560. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. Sir Thomas, Son of Sir Richard Exmew, was born at Rithin, and bred in London a Goldsmith, and was
Lord Mayor thereof 1517. Besides Benefactions in his own Country, and to St. Mary Magdalens in Milk∣street, London, (where he lyes buried)▪ he made the VVater-Conduit by London VVall, at Moor-Gate. Gabriel Goodman, Son of Edward Goodman Esq was born at Rithin, afterwards D. D. in St. Johns-Colledge in Cambridge, and Dean of VVestminster, (for forty years). The Bible was Translated into VVelsh on his cost. He founded a School-house in Rythin, with a competent Salary, and erected an Almshouse therein for 12 poor people. He repaired the House for the Minster (there called the VVarden) of Rythin, furnish∣ing it with Plate, &c. which were to descend to his Successors. He purchased a fair House thereunto, at Cheswick in Middlesex, where with his own hands he set a fair row of Elmes, for a Retiring place to the Ma∣sters and Scholars at VVestminster. He was made one of the Executors of the Will of our English Nestor, the Lord Treasurer Cecil, for the disposing of great sums to charitable uses. He dyed 101. and is buried in the Collegiate Church of VVestminster, whereof he so well deserved, as of all England, Mr. Cambden performing his perambulation about it on his Expences. Sir Hugh Middleton, Son of Sir Richard Middleton, was born at Denbigh, and bred in London. This is that worthy Knight, who fetcht into London, VVater on his own cost, more then 24 Miles, encountring all the way with an Army of Oppositions, grapling with Hills, strugling with Rocks, fighting with Forests, till in defiance of difficulties, he had brought his Project to Perfection. A potent person, and an idle Spectator struck in, and by his greatness possessed a Moiety of the profit, whilst the Honour thereof will remain Eter∣nally fixed to the Memory of Sir Hugh Middleton. Note, Robert Earl of Leicester by his bounty, ad∣vanced the Building of a new Church in Denbigh.
FLINT-SHIRE. FLint-shire (named from Flint, formerly an eminent place therein) hath the Sea on the North, Shrop-shire on the South, Cheshire on the East, and Denbigh-shire on the West. The smallest Shire in VVales. Flint the Shire-Town is no Market Town, no nor St. Asaph, (a City and Bishops See) till made so very late; But it is near to Chester, the Market General of these parts, and besides, every Village hath a Market in it self, as affording all necessary Commodities. This County was Parcel of the County Palatine, paying 2000 Marks (called a Mize) at the Change of every Earl of Chester, until the year 1568. For then upon the occasion of one Thomas Radford, committed to Prison by the Cham∣berlain of Chester, this County disjoyned it self from the Earldom of Chester, and united it self to the Prin∣cipality, though I cannot see how the one or the other could be done, without an Act of Parliament. Proverbs. I. Mwy nag un bw a yro Ynghaer; That is, More then on Yugh-Bow in Chester. Cheshire men have been very famous for Archery. It is applyed to such who take other folks Goods for their own, being mistaken with the similitude and resemblance. Princes. Elizabeth, the 7th. Daughter of King Edward 1. and Queen Lleanor, was born at Ruthland Castle, where
antiently a Parliament was kept an. Edward 1. This Princess, at 14 years of Age, was Married to John, first of that Name, Earl of Holland, Zealand, &c. and (after his death) to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Here∣ford and Essex; High Constable of England, by whom he had a numerous Issue. She dyed 1316. and was buried in the Abby-Church of Saffron-Walden in Essex. Saints. Congellus or Comgallus is challenged by the Welsh for their Country-Man, as being first Abbot of Banchr in this County, though Arch-Bishop Ʋsher makes him the first Abbot of Bangor in the North of Ireland. He was one of a pious Life, who wrote Learned Epistles, and dyed an. 600. Aet. 85. St. Beno. Instructor to St. Wenefride, was it seems a good Chirurgeon to a Miracle, who when VVene∣fride was beheaded by the Lustful Caradocus, set her Head on again, she living 15 years after! Asaph, born of Right Honourable Parentage, was bred at Llan-Elvy, under Mungo the Scotch Bishop of that place, who had a Convent of 663 Monks (almost the number of the Beast) whereof 300 being more— unlearned then the rest, were employed in Husbandry. Amongst the rest (who attended Divine Service) St. Asaph was eminently conspicuous for Piety and Learn∣ing, insomuch that Mungo, (in Latine Quentigermu) being called into his Country, resigned both his Con∣vent and Cathedral to him. Here he demeaned him∣self with such Sanctity, that Llan-Elvy was after his death, called from him St. Asaph. He was an assi∣duous Preacher, having this Speech in his Mouth, Such who are against the Preaching of Gods word, envy Mans Salvation. He is thought by some to have dyed about 569. After which, his See was Vacant above 500
years, until Jeffrey of Monmouth was placed there. Prelates since the Reformation. Richard Parry, D. D. born at Ruthin, was bred in Christs-Church in Oxford, whence he was preferred Dean of Bangor, and at last Bishop of St. Asaph, con∣secrated December 30. 1604. Bishop Godwin being near to him in time, and in his studies, desireth to be his equal in other Episcopal Qualities. Bishop Parry dyed 16.. Souldiers. Owen Glendower, born in his ancient Patrimony of Glendower-Wye, was bred in London, a Student of the Common Law, till he became a Courtier and Servant to King Richard 2. After whose death, being in the wrong side of preferment, he retired into Wales, where there arose a difference between him and the Lord Gre of Ruthen, about a Common, which Owen by force recovered from Gre, whom he killed. Many spur'd his posting Ambition, by telling him he was the true Heir to all North-Wales, and now or never the time to regain it; whereupon he brake into open Rebellion. Being angry with the King, his Revenge fell upon God; burning down the fair Cathedrals of Bangor, and St Asaph. Doing mischiefs to others, he did no good to himself. King Henry 4. found it more easie to depose King Richard then subdue this Owen, who had taken Roger Earl of March, and next Heir to the Crown, Prisoner. Writers. Elvodugus Probus, was Vir sui Nominis; he lived at
Bangor Monachorum, in that Age the Cambridge and Oxford of all Britain. He wrote many Books, (and particularly a Chronicle of his Nation) which the Envy of Time hath denied to Posterity. Amongst many eminent Men whom he had for his Scholars, there was the Learned Nennius, commonly called Nennius El∣vodugi. This Elvoduge flourished 950. Since the Reformation. Meredith Hanmer, D D. was born in this County, where a good Family of his Name flourish at Han∣meer, at this day. He was Treasurer of Trin-Colledge in Dublin. He Translated the Eccles. Histories of Euseb. Socrates, Evagrius, &c. into English, wrote an Ephemeris of the Irish Saints, and a Chronicle of that Country. He dyed at Dublin of the Plague, 1604. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. Richard Clough, born at Denbigh, was a Chorister in Chester, whence he removed to London, where he became an Apprentice to, and afterwards Partner with Sir Thomas Gresham. Having lived some time at An∣twerp, he Travelled to Jerusalem, where he was made Knight of the Sepulchre. Some affirm that some Thou∣sands of pounds were disbursed by him, for the build∣ing of the Royal Exchange, and that it was agreed be∣twixt him and Sir Thomas Gresham, that the Survivour of them should be Heir to the other, on which ac∣count they say, that the Knight carried away the main of the Estate. He gave the impropriation of Killken in Flint-shire, worth 100 pounds per annum to the free School in Denbigh, besides his Benefaction to the new Church there. He dyed 15▪.
Memorable Persons. Thomas ap William ap Thomas ap Richard ap Howel, ap Evan Vaughan, &c. Esq was born of an ancient worshipful Parentage at Moston. This Gentleman be∣ing called at the Pannel of a Jury by the aforesaid Names, was advised by the Judge, in the Reign of King Henry 8. to contract his Name, who thereupon denominated himself Moston. A leading case to the Gentry in Wales, who (leaving their Pedigrees at home) carry one Sirname only abroad with them. Note, Superstitious Pilgrimages do still continue of fond people in this County, to the VVell of St. VVini∣frede, though their Proverb tells them, Goreu Pererin∣dod Cyrchu offeren Sull; That is, It is the best Pilgri∣mage to frequent the Divine duties of the Sabbath. GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. GLamorgan-shire hath the Severn-Sea on the South, Carmarthen on the West, Brecknock on the North, Monmouth shire on the East. The North of this Coun∣ty is full of Mountains, the South is a very fruitful Val∣ley, and the Garden of Wales. At St. Donat's (an ancient House of the Right Worshipful Family of the Stradlings) groweth a good fruit, and as soon ripe as any in England. Giraldus Cambrensis reports, that in the Island Barrey, there is a Chink in a Rock, to which if you lay your ear, you will hear a noise like that of
Smiths at work, one while blowing the bellows, ano∣ther while striking of the hammer, &c. There is al∣so at Newton, on the Bank of Ogmore, a Well, the wa∣ter whereof is so low at the flowing of the Sea in Sum∣mer, you can scarcely get up a dishful of the same; whereas at the ebb thereof you may easily recover a pailful. Mr. Cambden who saw it, addeth, that it is the same in Winter. Civilians. Sir Edward Carne, descended from a good Family, flourishing at Wenny, was bred (I believe) in Oxford, Dr. of the Civil Law, and was Knighted by Ch. 5. Em∣peror. He was dispatched to Rome by King Henry 8. for his Excusator to his Holiness, (upon intelligence of his intention shortly to cite that King to appear in Rome) to remonstrate, that his Grace was not bound by Law so to appear. This he effectually performed, plead∣ing, that the Emperor was so powerful at Rome, that he could not expect Justice; declaring that unless they desisted, he must appeal thence to some able Men in some indifferent Universities; and if this were refused, he protested a Nullity in all that they did. A behavi∣our which spake him of no less Valour then Ability. Queen Mary highly prized him, and no whit the less for his cordial appearing for King Henry, in the matter of her Mothers divorce, imputing it to the discharge of his Calling, in him who otherwise was a thorough pa∣ced Romanist, and whom she employed Ambassadour to the Pope. After her death, he still resided at Rome, and by Command from Queen Elizabeth, repaired to Pope Paul the 4th, to give him an account, that his Mistriss was called to the Crown of England; To whom the Pope returned, That England was a Fee of the Church of Rome, and that she could not succeed, as
being illegitimate. This Pope would have no Prince as his equal, but all subject under his Foot Besides, he commanded Sir Edward to lay down his Office of Am∣bassadour, and under pain of the greater Excommuni∣cation, and confiscation of his Goods, not to go out of the City, but to take upon him the Regiment of the English Hospital therein, So that I see not how Queen Elizabeth can be taxed by the Papists for a Schismatick, being thrust from the Church of Rome, by the Pope himself, so barbarously treating her Ambassador, whilst as yet she had made no alteration in Religion; though I confess some conceive that the crafty old Knight was well contented with his restraint, wherein he dyed, 1561. MERIONETH-SHIRE. MErioneth-shire hath the Sea on the West, Cardigan-shire on the South, and Carnarvan and Denbigh-shire on the North. It is extream Mountainous, yea so high the Hills therein, that it is reported, that men may discourse one with another on the tops thereof, and yet hardly meet (beneath in the Valley) in a dayes time, On these Mountains great numbers of Sheep are fed. Mr. Cambden takes special notice of the beau∣ty and comliness of the Inhabitants of this Shire. There is a place at this day called Le Herbert upon this Ac∣count. During the differences betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster, Dav ap Jenkin, ap Enion, a stout Gentleman on the Lancastrian side, resolutely defend∣ed
the Castle Arleck against King Edward 4. until Sir William Herbert, (afterwards Earl of Pembroke) so fu∣riously stormed it, that immediately it was surrendred. There is a Lake in this County called Lhin-Tegid (in English Pimble-mear) through which the River running, preserveth his Stream by himself) discernable by the discolouration thereof) with the Fishes peculiar there∣unto. This same Mear swelleth not with the many waters that fall therein, whilst a blast of Wind will quickly make it mount above the bounds thereof. Do∣gelthy a Market Town in this County, has Wells three Miles high, viz. the Mountains that surround it, hath a Steeple that groweth therein, the Bell on a Yeugh-Tree, and more Alehouses, then Houses, Barns, &c. being used for their Tipling Conventicles, I mean good-fellow∣ship. Saints. AMP. St. Thelian, bred under Dubritius Bishop of Landaff, was much envied for his Holiness by one of the Commanders of the Picts, who harassed his Country; That Bravo sent 2 lewd Strumpets, suppo∣sing by their tempting tricks to entice this Holy Man. These Women counterfieting madness (whereby they might take the more liberty to themselves of filthy dis∣course) returned distracted indeed, not having under∣standing enough to relate the cause of their sad misfor∣tunes, which wrought so much on the Souldier, that he received the Faith, was Baptized, and ever after had a great veneration for this our Saint, who afterwards ac∣companied Sir Dav. Bishop of Menevia to Jerusalem, and returning into his own Country, by his fervent Prayers freed the same from the Plague, wherewith it was then much infested. He dyed February 9. about 563.
Note, that this County (abounding with Sheep) was not a little beholding to Ludwal their Prince, who (King Edgar imposing on him a yearly Tribute, the presenting him with 300 Wolves) did free this County from Wolves. MONTGOMERY-SHIRE. MOntgomery-shire hath Cardigan and Radnor-shire on the South, Shrop-shire on the East, Denbigh-shire on the North, and Merioneth-shire on the West. in this County are many high Hills, and many delight∣ful fruitful Vallies. Montgomery is the chief Town of the County; of which there never was any Earl, un∣til the Reign of King James, who created Philip Her∣bert, second Son to Henry Earl of Pembrook, Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery. There are excellent Horses bred in this County. Proverbs. I. Y Tair Chiwiorydd; In English the 3 Sisters, whereby are meant the 3 Rivers, of Wye, Severn and Rhiddial, arising all 3 in this County. The Tradition is, that these 3 Sisters were to run a race, which should be first Married to the Ocean; Severn and Wye having a great Journey to go, chose their way through soft Meadows, and kept on a Travellers pace, whilst Rhiddial (presuming on her short Journey) staid before she went out, and then to recover her lost time, runs
furiously in a distracted manner, with her mad stream, over all opposition. It is applyable to children of the same Parents, but of different dispositions, and courses of lives, so that their Cradles were not so near, but their Coffins are as far asunder. II. Pywys Paradwys Cymry, That is, Powis is the Paradise of Wales. This Proverb referreth to Teliessen the Author thereof, at what time Powis contained all that pleasant Land lying betwixt Wye and Severn. III. Gwan di Bawlyn Ha∣fren, Hafren fydd hifel cynt; That is, fix thy Pale (with intent to fence out his water) in Severn, Severn will be as before, applyable to such who undertake pro∣jects above their power to perform. Writers. George Herbert, born at Montgomery-Castle, was bred Fellow in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge, and Ora∣tor of the University, where he made a Speech of the return of Prince Charles out of Spain. Waving world∣ly preferment, he served at Gods Altar. So pious his Life, that as he was a Copy of Primitive, he might be a Pattern of Sanctity to Posterity. He never men∣tioned the Name of Jesus, but with this Addition, my Master, next God, the Word, he loved the Word of God, being heard often to protest, That he would not part with one leaf thereof for the whole World. By his good Example, he gained many to the Church. He was Preacher at Bemmerton nigh Salisbury, (where he built a fair House for his Successor) and Prebendary at Leighton, (founded in the Cathedral of Lincoln) where he built a fair Church, with the assistance of some Friends free Offerings. When a Friend of his went about to comfort him with the remembrance thereof, as a good work, he returned, it is a good work, if sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. He dyed 163.. Whose Brother,
Edward Herbert, Son to Sir Richard Herbert Esq and Susan Newport his Wife, was born at Montgomery-Castle, Knighted by King James, who sent him over Ambassadour to France. Afterwards King Charles I. created him Baron of Castle-Island in Ireland, and some years after, Baron Cherbury in this County. He was a most excellent Artist, and rare Linguist, studied both in Books and Men. He wrote a Treatise of the Truth in French, extant at this day, with great Honour in the Pope's Vatican. He Married the Daughter, and sole Heir of Sir William Herbert, of St. Julians, in Monmouth-shire, with whom he had a large inheritance both in England and Ireland. He dyed in August, 1648. and was buried in St. Giles in ths Fields, London. A fair Monument (of his own invention) was begun, and almost finished in the Church of Montgomery. Memorable Persons. Hawis Gadarn, a Lady of remark, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap Gruffyth, Prince of Powis Wen∣winwin, was justly Sirnamed Gadarn, i. e. Hardy. Her 4 Uncles Lhewelyn, Jo. Griffith, Vaughan and Da∣vid, detained her inheritance from her. Give (said they) a Girl a little Gold, and Marry her, God and Nature made Land for men to manage. Hereupon Hawis complained to King Edward 2. who commiserating her condition, consigned his Servant John Charleton (born at Apple in Shropshire) a Vigorus Knight, to Marry her, creating him in her Right, Baron of Powis. Being as∣sisted with the Kings Forces, he took three of her Un∣cles Prisoners, (about 1320) brought the fourth to a Composition; and finally recovered all his Wives E∣state, procuring also the Lands of her Uncles, in de∣fault of their Issue Male to be setled on her. Julines Herring, was born at Flambere-Mayre, 1582.
His Ancestors (for the space of almost 200 years) had been in their course chief Officers of Coventry. Julines was bred in Sidney-Colledge in Cambridge, and became Preacher at Calk in Derby-shire, Shrewsbury, and Rendbury in Cheshire, being one of a Pious Life, but disaffected to Church Discipline, he was prohibited his Preaching here, and called over to Amsterdam, where he continued Preacher to the English Congre∣gation, some years well respected, and dyed 1644.
MONMOUTH-SHIRE. MOnmouth-shire may be called an English-Welsh County; For whereas formerly all Welsh Coun∣ties sent but one Knight to Parliament, this had the priviledge of two, and it is not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction, but to the Governance of the itinerant Judges, who ride Oxford Circuit. As for Manufactures, the best Caps were formerly made at Monmouth, where the Cappers Chappel doth still remain. The Statute of the 13th. of Queen Elizabeth, c. 19. (Enacting that Caps should be worn by all persons) was repealed an. 39. Eliz. Princes. Henry of Monmouth, Son to King Henry 4. (by Mary one of the Daughters and Heirs of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford) and whom he succeeded on the Throne, (being the fifth of that Name) and began his Reign March 20. an. 1413. Being extravagant in his Youth, he had been by the King his Father, expel∣led his Council, (substituting his younger Brother, the Duke of Clarence President in his stead) for the same. No sooner was his Father dead, but he reclaimed him∣self, and became a Glory to his Country, and a constant Terror to his Enemies; yea, and banished all his idle Companions from Court, allowing them a competency for their subsistence. When the Lord Chief Justice (who had secured him when Prince, for striking him for the Commitment of some of his lewd Companions) he not only forgave him, but rewarded his Justice. In
his Reign a Supplication was preferred, that the Tem∣poral Lands given to pious uses, but abusively spent, might be siezed on by the King. This was wisely a∣warded by Chichley Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, by putting the King on the design of recovering France. Yea, this King by his Valour, reduced Charles 6. King of France to such a condition, that he resigned his King∣dom into his hand, and our King Henry 5. was ac∣cordingly Crowned in Paris King of France. There the French found him as good (or rather worse) as his Promise, which he made to the Dolphin, (who sent him a Barrel of Paris Tennis-Balls) sending such Eng∣lish-Balls, that they proved fatal to them. He dyed at Boys St. Vincent, ult. Aug. 1422. and was brought over with great Solemnity, and interred in Westminster-Abbey. Saints. St. Amphibalus, a Citizen of Carlion. See the Saints in Hereford. St. Aaron, a wealthy Citizen of Carlion, was Mar∣tyred under Dioclesian the Emperour, 30. Note, that the three first British Martyrs, viz. Alban, Am∣phibalus and Aaron have, the first a Latine, the second a Greek, and the third an Hebrew Name. St. Julius of Carlion, suffered with Aaron aforesaid. Note, that Carlion (now a small Town) was once a great City, reaching a Mile in length, and compre∣hending St. Julian's, a House of late Sir William Her∣bert's, now a Mile distant from the Town. Cardinals. Geffery of Monmouth, is avouched by some to have been made Cardinal, but it is improbable, that so much
honour should be done unto him whilst living, who was so solemnly disgraced after his death; his Books being then publickly prohibited by the Court of Rome. See Writers in this Shire. John of Monmouth, D. D. and Canon of Lincoln, was chosen Bishop of Landaff, 1296. after that See had been 7 years vacant. He was a Learned and Pious Divine. Besides other Benefactions to his See, he pro∣cured the Rectory of Newland, in the Forrest of Dean, to be appropriated thereto; But Bishop Kitchin after∣wards impoverished the same, more then all his Prede∣cessors had endowed it in 400 years. This John dyed April 8. 1322. and was buried in St Maries Chappel. Walter Cantilupe, Son to William the elder, Lord Cuntilupe, (whose prime residence was at Abergavennie in this County) was made (by Henry 3.) Bishop of Worcester. He would not yield to the Popes Legate, who complained of many Clergy-men keeping their Livings against the Canons, intending to make room for the Popes Favourites, or force such irregular incum∣bents to a Composition. He was one of a keen nature, whose two-edged spirit did cut on both sides, against the King and Pope. Against the former, he sided with the Barons, to whom he promised Heaven for the re∣ward of their Rebellion against their Prince, though it cost him an Excommunication from the Pope, who was the more forward in denouncing that fatal Sen∣tence against him, because he had told Rusland his Le∣gate, coming hither 1255. that he would preferr him to be hang'd on the Gallows, rather then ever consent to such expilation of the Church, as aforesaid. Lying on his deathbed, he was touched with true remorse for his disloyalty, and obtained Absolution. He dyed February, 1267. whom I behold as Uncle to Thomas, the Sainted Bishop of Hereford.
Souldiers. Richard de Clare, alias Strongbow, born (probably) at Stringule Castle, was Earl of Stringule and Pembrook. A person of effectual performance. It happened that Mac Murugh, an. 1167. being expelled his Territo∣ries, for several Tyrannies, by the Lords of Meath and Conaight, repaired to King Henry 2. and invited him to Ireland. That Politick King sent over this R. Strongbow (with 1200 Men) who possessed himself of the Ports of Leinster and Mounster, with large Lands thereunto belonging; insomuch that the King growing jealous of his greatness remanded him home, and com∣manded him to surrender his Acquest into his hands, which done, he received them by regrant from the King, save that Henry reserved the City of Dublin for him∣self. This Strongbow is commonly called Domitor Hi∣berniae, the Tamer of Ireland. Yet some of the great Lords there did still retain the Power and Title of King; Witness the Preface in the Commission, where∣by King Henry 2. made William Fitz-Adelme his Lieu∣tenant of Ireland, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus, &c. Salutem. This Earl dyed at Dublin, 1177. Sir Roger Williams, born of an ancient Family at Penross, was first a Souldier of Fortune under the Duke of Alva, and afterwards served Queen Elizabeth. A man extreamly forward to Fight. When a Spanish Captain challenged Sir John Norris to fight a single Com∣bat (which was beneath him to accept, being a Gene∣ral) this Roger undertook the Don. And after they had fought some time (both Armies beholding them) without any hurt, they pledged each other a deep draught of Wine, and so friendly departed. Another time at mid-night, he assaulted the Camp of the Prince of Parma, nigh Venloe, slew some of the Enemies, and
pierced to the Tent of the General. He bravely de∣fended Sluse, whilst any hope of help. William Herbert, Earl of Pembrook, with Sir Richard his Brother, were both valiant Men, and as fast Friends to King Edward 4. as professed Foes to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick. Leading the Army of the Welsh, in the Battle of Banbury, with their Poll-Axes, they twice made way through the Battle of the Northern men (which sided with King Henry 6.) without any Mortal Wound. There passeth a Tradition in the No∣ble Family of the Herberts of Chierbury, that this Sir Richard their Ancestor, slew that day 140 Men with his own hands, in passing and repassing through the Army. Guns not being then in fashion, the Poll-Axe was the next Mortal Weapon, especially in such a dead Hand as this Knight had. He is reported also to be of a Giants Stature, the Peg being extant in Mont∣gomery Castle, whereon he used to hang his Hat at din∣ner, which no Man of an ordinary height can reach with his hand at this day. However, both these brave Brethren, circumvented with the subtilty of their Foes (Odds at any time may be bet on the side of Treachery, against Valour) were brought to Banbury, beheaded and buried, the Earl at Tinterne, and Sir Richard at Abergaveny in this County. Writers. Jeffrey of Monmouth, (alias ap Arthur) Translated and Compiled the various British Authors into one Vo∣lume. He hath many things from the British Bards, which though improbable, are not therefore ipso facto untrue; yet Humanum est errare; and Tradition ha∣ving run a great way from its clear Original, may swell into a rapide Stream, violently forcing Rubbish into its own Channel, which shall render the waters thereof
impenetrable by the Eye, and ungrateful to the Palate His Book is prohibited by his Holiness, whilst the lying Legend is permitted to be read without controul. If Jeffrey be guilty of mistakes, they are such as make not for the Popes advantage. He was Bishop of St. Asaph, and flourished 1152. Thomas of Monmouth, wrote an History of St. Wil∣liam, the Child that was Crucified by the Jews in Nor∣wich, in hatred of our Saviour. He flourished 1160 under King Henry 2. Benefactors to the Publick. AMP. Henry Plantagenet, first Duke of Lancaster, was born in Monmouth Castle, the chief Seat of his Ba∣rony. He is commonly Sirnamed the Wryneck, and by others more rightfully the good Duke of Lancaster. He was Head of the Guild of Corpus-Christi in Cam∣bridge, and the first Founder of a Colledge, so called in that University. Indeed the Land was little he confer∣red thereon, but great the Countenance of so eminent a person, in procuring and setling their Mortmain. He dyed 1361. and was buried in the Collegiate Church at Leicester, which he Founded. Blanche his only Daugh∣ter, which had Issue, was Married to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. Since the Reformation. W. Johnes, born in Monmouth, was forced thence for not being able to pay 3 s. and 4 d. Flying to Lon∣don, he became first a Porter, and then a Factor, and going over into Hamborough made such a Vent for Welsh Cottons, that what he found Drugs at home, he left Dainties beyond Sea. He Founded a fair School in Monmouth, allowing 50 pounds yearly for the Master,
with 100 pounds Salary to a Lecturer, besides a State∣ly Almshouse for 20 poor Folk, each of them having 2 Rooms and a Garden, with half a Crown a Week; All which Benefactions he submitted to the oversight of the Honourable Company of Haberdashers in London, who at this day right worthily discharge their trust here∣in. He dyed 16—. Memorable Persons. William Evans, was two yards and an half in height, being Porter to King Charles I. He was somewhat lame, knocking his Knees together, and going out squal∣ling with his Feet; yet made he a shift to Dance in an Antimask at Court, where he drew little Jeffrey the Dwarf out of his Pocket. He dyed 163—. Note, this was made a Shire, an. 27. Henry 8. but not solemnly setled till 5 years after. An. 1607. the Moor in this County sustained by the breaking in of the Severn Sea.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE. PEmbroke-shire is surrounded on all sides with the Sea, save on the North-East, where it boundeth on Car∣digan, and the East, where it butteth on Carmarthen-shire. 'Tis very plentiful of all things necessary for Man's livelyhood, and the East part thereof is the plea∣santest place in all Wales. It affordeth plenty of Fish, especially about Tenby-y-Piscoid, having its name from the abundance thereof. A part of this County is peo∣pled by Flemings, placed there by King Henry 1. to defend the Land given them against the Welsh, and their Country is called Little England beyond Wales. In this County there is a Breed of very good Faulcons, called Peregrines. King Henry 2. passing hence into Ireland, cast off a Norway Goshawk at one of these: but the Goshawk taken at the source by the Faulcon, soon fell down at the Kings Foot, which performance in this ramage, made him yearly send hither for Eyesses. Of Buildings, the Cathedral of St. David is most eminent, begun by Bishop Peter in the Reign of King John. The Roof thereof is higher then any in England. It acknowledged subjection neither to Rome nor Canterbury, till the Reign of King Henry 1. Princes. Henry Tuthar, Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Margaret his Lady, was born at Pembroke, in the Reign of King Henry 6. When a young man, he lived
in Exile in France, where he contracted a permanent habit of Frugality. Having vanquished King Richard 3. in Bosworth-field, and Married Elizabeth, eldest Daugh∣ter to King Edward 4. He Reigned King of England by the name of Henry 7. He is generally conceived a most politick Prince; yet many think his judgment failed him, when refusing the proffer of Columbus, for discovering of America; but such his wariness, he would not tamper with costly Contingencies. He was the first King▪ who secretly sought to abate the formidable greatness (the Parent of many former Eng∣lish Rebellions) in the English Peerage. Hereby he taught the Commons to claim Jurisdiction by the name of Priviledge, and made them able in time to contest with Sovereignty. He survived his Queen, by whom he had the best Title to the Crown, about five years. His greatest fault was, grinding his Sub∣jects with grievous exactions. He was most Magni∣ficent in those Structures he left to Posterity; amongst which, his Devotion to God, is seen in two Chappels, the one at Cambridge, the other at Westminster; His Charity to the poor in the Hospital of the Savoy, his Magnificence to himself in his own Monument of guilded Copper, and his vanity to the World, in building a Ship called the Great Harry, of equal cost say some, with his Chappel, which soon after sunk into the Sea. He much employed Bishops in his ser∣vice, finding them honest and able. He deceased at Richmond, April 22. 1509. and was buried in his Magnificent Chappel at Westminster, having prohibi∣ted by his Will, the Interment of any person or persons whatsoever therein, save those of the Royal Blood.
Saints. Justinian, a Noble Briton, with his own inheri∣tance, built a Monastery in the Island of Ramsey in this County, where many Monks lived happily under his Jurisdiction, until three of them murdered him in ha∣tred of his Sanctity, about 486. His Body was brought to Menevia, and there interred by St. Da∣vid, and since much famed for (supposed) Miracles. Writers. Giraldus Cambrensis, whose Sirname was Barry, (and some say Fitz-Girald) was born at Tenby, being Son to William Barry an Englishman by his Wife An∣gareth, Daughter of Nesta, Daughter of Rhese, Prince of South-Wales. He was Nephew to David, the se∣cond Bishop of St. David, by whom he was made Arch-Deacon of Brecknock. He was wont to com∣plain, that the English did not love him, because his Mother was a Welsh-woman, and the Welsh did hate him, because his Father was an Englishman, though by his excellent Writings, he deserved of England well, of Wales better, and of Ireland best of all, making a Topographical description of all three: But acting in the last as a Secretary under King John, with great indu∣stry and expence. Having Travelled to Jerusalem, he wrote De Mirabilibus Terrae Sanctae. Having had ill success at Court, he attained to no considerable Dig∣nity. For a long time no preferment was proffered him, above a beggarly Bishoprick in Ireland: At last, the See of St. David was the highest place he attained. Giraldus himself tells us the true reason thereof, that he was ever beheld oculo novercali, because being a Welshman by the surer side, and then such the antipa∣thy
of the English, that they thought no good could come out of Wales. Being now Bishop of St. Davids he went to Rome and there stickled for an exemption of that See from Canterbury, whereby he highly of∣fended Hubert the Archbishop thereof. Whereupon, being rather overborn with bribes then overcome in Cause returned re infecta, died and was buried in his own Cathedral about 1215.
RADNOR-SHIRE. RAdnor-shire, (in British Sire Maiseveth) in form three square, is bounded on the North-West with Hereford-shire, and on the South (separated by the River Wye) with Brecknock-shire, and on the North with Montgomery-shire. Nature may seem to have chequered this County, the East and South parts there∣of being fruitful, whilst the North and West thereof (being Mountainous) can hardly be bettered by Hus∣bandry; Yet it is indifferently stored with Woods, and conveniently watered with Rivers and Meers. Mr. Cambden telleth us, that there is a place therein termed Melienith, (from the yellowish Mountains thereof) which stretcheth from Offa Dike unto the River Wye, which cutteth overthwart the West corner of this Shire, where meeting with some stones which impede its motion on a sudden, for want of ground to glide on, hath a vio∣lent downfal, which place is termed Raihader Gowy, that is the Fall of Wye. Hereupon he supposeth it not improbable, that the Englishmen forged that word for the name of this Shire, terming it Radnor-shire. Prelates. Elias and Guilielmus de Radnor, were both born in Old Radnor, both Bishops of Landaff, and both emi∣nent, being eminent for nothing, the former dying May 6. 1240. the latter, June 30. 1256. Note, when Owen Glyndower-dwy (inveigled by some skilled in Merlin's Prophesies, that the time was come wherein the Britains, through his assistance, should re∣cover
their ancient Lberty) raised a Rebellion, ma∣king War against the Earl of March, Heir apparent to the Crown of England, and Principality of Wales. King Henry 4. (enraged at his proceedings) Enacted these rigorous Lawes ensuing: First, That no Welsh∣man should purchase Lands, nor be chosen into any Of∣fice in City or Town, &c. or bear Armour within any City; Besides, if a Welshman should sue an Englishman, it was ordained, that he should be tryed and judged by Englishmen. That all English Burgesses who Married Welshwomen, should forfeit their Liberties. No Con∣gregation or Council was to be permitted to the Welsh but in presence of the Officers of the Seigniory. That no Victuals should be brought into Wales, unless by the License of the King and Council. That no Welsh∣man should have any Castle. &c. That no Welsh∣man should be capable of any Office of State, or in any Court of Judicature, and that no Englishman Marry∣ing a Welsh woman should enjoy any Office in Wales. FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. A French and English Dictionary, composed by Mr. Randolph Cotgrave, Folio. Bakers Chronicles, folio. Heylins Cosmography, fol. History of Josephus, fol. Herberts Harry the 8th fol. Mounsieur De Grey, Expert Horseman, with large Additions Quarto. Cockers Arithmetick Vulgar, and now in the Press, his Deci∣mal Arethmetick with a Treatise of Algebra, made easie for all young Learners, Collected from his own Paper by John Hawkins teacher of the said Arts, at St. Georges Southwark. Mariners Magazeen in Folio. Royal and Practical Chymistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John Hartman, faithfully rendred into English, Folio price 10. s. Gods Revenge against Murther, by John Reynolds, containing thir∣ty Tragical Stories, digested into six Book newly reprinted, Folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacon's Natural History, Folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels containing a description of the Turkish Empire, of Egypt, and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and Islands adjoyning, Folio, price 8 s. Markham's Master-piece. David's Repentance, by Sam. Smith. David's Blessed-man. Lilligrows Travels. Dialogue between Life and Death. Seamans Calendar. Seamans Practice. Marriners Calendar. Seamans Companion. Norwoods Triangles, his Epitome. Seamans Glass. Geometrical Seaman. Gellibrands Epitome. Marriners Compass rectified. Pilots Sea-Mirror. Practical Navigation. Boat-Swains Art.
Dr. Newtons Cosmography, a Treatise of Geometry and Astrono∣my and Surveying, with an exact Description of the Globes. The famous History of the Destruction of Troy, in three Books in Quarro, price 3 s, Valentine and Orson, price 18 d. Chymical Essays by John Beguminus, price 1 s. 8 d. Monasticon Fevershamiense, Or a Description of the Abby of Faver∣sham Octavo, price bound 18 d. The Path way to Health, price bound 18 d. The Compleat Academy, or Nursery of Complements Bound one shilling. The Book of Knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The Book of Palmistry in Octavo, bound 18 d. The Pilgrims Por, or the weary mans rest in the Grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The famous History of the five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of Jehosaphat, Son of Avenerio, Emperor of Corma, and his wonderful conversion to he Christian Faith. The great Assize, by Sam. Smith. The Bear-baiting of Women. The History of Fryer Baon and Fryar Bungy. New conceited Letters. The Jovial Garland, containing all the newest Songs that are now used. Newton's Art of Logick. Newton's Art of Rhetorick. The famous History, of Don Bellianis of Greece, in three parts being now compleat The famous History of Montelion, Knight of the Oracle. Ovid de Tristibus in English. Bishop Hall's Soliloquies in twelves. The Poems of Ben Johnson Junior. Books Printed, for John Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate-Hill. Folio. RUshworth Collections. Straffords Tryall. Cawleyes Lawes against Popish Recusants▪ Modern Reports. Guillims display of Heraldry. Daltons Country Justice. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy.
Wanleys wonders of the little World, or a general History of man. Pharmacopeia Londinensis. Crooks Reports. Cooks Reports. Quarto▪ History of the 7 Champions. History of Parismus. Mandeviles Travels. Assize of Bread. Littletons Dictionary. Markhams Master-piece. Octavo. Dr. Bright of prayer. — of Judgement. History of the 7 wise Masters. Salmons London dispensatory. —his Doron medicum. Religio medici. Lethgows Travels. Lucians Dialogues, Greek and Latin. Poseing of the parts, Gesta Romanorum. Aristotles problems. Gouges words to Saints and Sinners. Tryall of the Regicides. Twelves. Farnabys Rhetorick. Fetyplaces Holy Exercise. Brights Essays on Morality. Mothers blessing. A Help to disourse. Erasmus de Copia verborum. Poor Mans Rest. Doctrine of the Bible. Butlers Rhetorick. With many others, where any Chapman may be furnished with what Boks he hath occasion for.
Books Printed for William Thackery at the An∣gel in Ducklane. COuntry Mans Jewel or Mascal of Cattel in 8to. Fermers Divine Message in 8to. The Epitome of Josephus or the Wars of the Jews in lage 8to. The Disease of London or a description of the Scurvy, by Doctor Harvy 8to. The Compleat Courtier or Cupid's Academy in 12es. Christian Devotion in 12es. Cosmo Meros or the Worldly portion, by Dr. Bushy. The Book of Knowledge of things unkown 8to. Epitome of the Turkish History, 8to. Poto of the Covenant in 8to. Epitome of the Ecclesiastical History 8to. Josselyns Voyage to New England 8to. History of Montelion Knight of the Oracle, in 4to. History of Parismus. History Gentle Craft. 4to.
A TABLE of the most remarkable persons and things contained in this work. THE end and matter of the Work Page 1, 2 Legenda non semper Credenda Page 3 Canonization costly ibid. And best after mature deliberation Page 4 The Office of the Ancient Cardinals of St. Pauls ibid. The Constitution of Pope Paul II. concerning the Cardinals Hat Page 5 Cardinal Norfolk, a rare, if not single President ibid. The Clergy of Brittain, the Glory of the World Page 6 The Antiquity of the Office of Lord Chancellour of England Page 7 The value of that great Office Page 8 The Etymology and office of Lord High Admiral of England Page 9 King Henry VIII. first assumed the Title of King of Ireland ibid. Sir Ed. Montague's choice Page 10 The first Circumnavigators of the World ibid. King Henry VIII. his great skill in Musick Page 12 The Heads of Charity, Visito, Poto, Cibo, &c. Page 13 A perswasive to Charity ibid. The dates and degrees of the English Reformation Page 14 Younger Sons are raised by their Virtue to the dignity of Lord Mayors of London Page 15 The first division of England into Shires Page 16 The Office of Sheriff ibid. Causes of the alteration of Sirnames Page 19 Bark-shire had no Earl till an. 1607. Page 20 Popish Cavil, some for Martin some for Luther Page 21 Instances of fortunate and eminent Sons of Clergy-men Page 22 Of the English Gentry, by Nation and Profession Page 25, 26, &c. Of the Queens Majesty Page 28 Of the Kings Majesty Page 29 BARK-SHIRE. Commodities, Oaks, Bark, Trouts Page 31 The Beggars reason for going naked, viz. all my Body is Face Page 32 Exposition of the Proverb, When our Lady falls into our Lord's lap, let England beware of a sad mishap Page 33
An observable Proverb relating to Ireland Page 37 The Lives of four Children of King Edward I. Page 37, 38 The life of King Edward III. King Henry VI. Page 38, 39 The life of St. Edmund Page 40 The early dawning of the Gospel in Barkshire Page 41 King Henry VIII. his pity towards 3 Martyrs Page 42 Humanum est errare, Answer to a great Cavil Page 43 Arch-Bishop Laud refused to be made Cardinal ibid. The life of Bishop Godwin Page 44 The life of Arch-Bishop Laud Page 45 The life of Sir John Mason, who saw 5 Princes ibid. Of Sir Hen. Umpton Ambassadour. His publick Challenge Page 46, 47. The life of King Alfrede Page 50 Of Jo. Kendrick, who gave above 20000 l. to the poor Page 51 Of Tho. Cole the rich Clothier of Reading ibid. The life of Sir Jo Howard Page 54 The lives of Sir Rob. Harcourt and Will. Essex Page 55 The lives of Sir Humphrey Foster, Sir Francis Inglefield, Sir John Williams, and Henry Lord Norrice Page 56 The life of Richard Lord Lovelace Page 57 The Qualifications &c. of Baronets ibid. Of the Battle of Newbury Page 58 BEDFORD-SHIRE. Proverbs Page 60 The life of Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Darby Page 61 King Henry III. his smart reply to Sylvester of Carlile Page 62 The life of Henry Grey Earl of Kent Page 64 The life of John Mordant first Baron of Turvey Page 65 The life of Sir Francis Russel, afterwards Earl of Bedford Page 68 BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE. Proverbs Page 69 The life of St. Edburg ibid. A great Fiction about Sir Rumbald, as I am a Christian Page 70 The life of Sir George Crook, Lord Chief Justice of England Page 74 The lives of Sir William Windsor and Arthur Gray Bar. of Wilton ibid. Of the Noble and Antient name of the Cheneys Page 82
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE▪ Proverbs Page 83 The life of Thomas Westfield Bishop of Bristol Page 87 The life of Jo. Tiptoft Earl of Worcester ibid. The life of Matthew Paris Page 89 Will. Collet was Caterer to Selden, &c. Page 95 The life of Sir Edward North Baron of Catlidge The life of Sir Jo. Huddlestone CHESHIRE. The Antiquity of that County Palatine Page 98 The Life of W. Booth Bishop of York, and Lawrence and John his Brothers Page 100, 101 The life of Bishop Chaderon Page 102 The life of Bishop James ibid. The life of Sir Tho. Egerton Lord Chancellour of England Page 103 The life of the Lord Chief Justice Crew Page 104 The life of Sir Hugh Calveley Page 105 The life of Sir Robert Knowles ibid. The life of John Speed, first Taylor then Historian Page 108 The life of Sir Jo. Brereton Page 110 The life of Sir Hugh Cholmley The Battle of Rowton-Heath Page 112 CHESTER. The life of Bishop Dounham Page 114 The lives of David and Sir Henry Middleton Page 115 The life of Tho. Offley Page 117 Who three dishes had of daily Roast Page 117 An Egg, an Apple, and the third a toast Page 117 CORNWAL. Commodities, Diamonds, Ambergrease, Pilchards, Tin Page 120 The wonders ibid. The life of Will. de Greenvil Lord Chancellour of England Page 122 The life of Jo. Arundel Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield Page 123 The life of W. Noy ibid. The life of King Arthur ibid. The Enterprize of Jo. Arundel of Trerice Page 124
Richard D. of Cornwal, was High Sheriff of the County for term of his Life Page 128 The Battles of Liskerd and Stratton Page 130 CUMBERLAND. Commodities, Pearls, black Lead, Copper Page 132 The life of Arch-Bishop Grindal Page 135 The life of Sir Richard Hutton the honest Judge Page 136 The life of Sir Jo. Banks ibid. The life of Richard Crakenthorpe, D. D. Page 136 The life of Maud Daughter to the Lord Lucy Page 139 Richard D. of Glocester, Sheriff of this County Page 140 DERBY-SHIRE. Commodities. The best Lead Page 141 The punishment of stealing Oare twice ibid. The life of Cardinal Curson Page 142 The life of Phil. de Repingdon alias Rampington Page 143 The life of Bishop Cook ibid. The life of Sir Jo. Cook Secretary of State Page 144 The life of Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert ibid. The life of Sir Hugh Willoughby Page 145 The life of Thomas Linacer Page 146 The life of Elizabeth Hardwick Countess of Shrewsbury Page 147 DEVON-SHIRE. The high Character of the Gentry given by Q. Eliz. Page 148 The wonders of the Pit and Hanging-Stone Page 149 The life of Cardinal Courtney Page 151 Bishop Foliot's encounter with the Devil ibid. The Character of Bishop Jew Page 153 The life of D. Prideaux Bishop of Worcester Page 153, 154 The life of Sir Arthur Chichester Page 154 The life of Lord Chief Justice Herle Page 155 The life of Sir Jo. Cary ibid. The life of the unfortunate Judge Hankford ibid. The life of Sir Jo. Fortescue Page 156 The life of Sir Lewis Pollard, and Sir Jo. Doderidge ibid. The life of Sir Richard Greenvil Page 157 The life of James Lord Audley ibid. The life of the ambitious Tho. Stuckley, Titular Earl of Wexford Page 158 The life of the most Noble General Monk, Duke of Albermarl Page 159
The life of W. Wilford Page 160 The life of Sir Humphrey Gilbert Page 161 The life of Sir Walter Rawleigh, who would demonstrate the errours of his Traducers, a posteriori ibid, The life of the famous Hooker Page 163 The life of the Lord Pomery Page 164 Nich. and Andr. Tremane, twins alike in all lineaments, &c. Page 165 The Stratagem of Sir Richard Edgecomb Page 166 EXETER. The Fatal Castle of Rugemont Page 167 The life of Princess Henrietta, Dutchess of Orleans Page 168 The Character of the famous Iscanus Bishop of Exeter ibid. DORSET-SHIRE. Commodities, Salt, Tobacco-pipe Clay, wild madder Page 171 The Life of St. Edward Son to King Edgar ibid. The life of Arch-Bishop Morton Page 173 The life of Arch-Bishop Stafford ibid. The life of Bishop Turbevil ibid. The life of the valiant Sir Richard Bingham Page 175 The Original of White-Hart-Silver Page 177 The descent of the Newburgs ibid. DURHAM. The life of Cicely Nevil Daughter to the E. of Westmerland Page 178 The life of Venerable Bede Page 179 The life of John Wickliffe Page 180 The lives of the Nevils ibid. The life of Bishop Horn and Bishop Cosen ibid. The life of Anthony Lord Gray, and Rector of Burbach Page 183 ESSEX. Where Vulgar wits are said to multiply exceedingly Page 184 The Commodities Page 185 The life of Henry Fitz-Roy, Son to Henry VIII. Page 186 The life of St. Helen ibid. The Miracle of St. Osith Page 187 The life of Arch-Bishop Bourcher Page 188 The life of the facetious Dr. Jegon Page 189 The life of the Lord Chancellour Audley Page 190 The life of Sir Anthony Cook, famous for his learned Daughters ibid. The life of Tho. Howard, Earl of Suffolk Page 191 With his Magnificent Entertainment of King James Page 192 The life of Tho. Ratcliffe Earl of Suffolk Page 193
The life of Sir Francis Vere Page 194 The life of Tho. Waldensis Page 195 The Character of Francis Quarles ibid. The life of Joseph Mede Page 196 The life of Sir Walter Mildmey Page 197 The supposed occasion of the Barons War ibid. The Siege of Colchester Page 200 GLOCESTER-SHIRE. King James his Observation of fruitful Pastures Page 202 Commodities; Tobacco, Steel, Syder ibid. The Legend of St. Kenelme Page 204 Bihop Ruhal's fatal mistake Page 205 The li of Bishop Fox ibid. Local Treason▪ or a Treasonable Castle Page 206 Neal's invention of Ngs Head Page 208 A treatise found in the belly of a Cod ibid. The life of Sir Thomas Overbury ibid. The fatal effects of Fear Page 212 HANT-SHIRE. Commodities Honey, &c. Page 213 Th life of King Henry I Page 214 The life of P. Arthur, Brother to King Henry VIII. ibid. The life of St Edburg Page 215 The death of Katharine Gouches ibid. The  Sir Richard Rich Page 218 The life of W. Pawlet, Marqess of Winchester ibid. King James his Character of Sir Thomas Lakes ibid. Whiehead's blunt Rpartee to Q. Elizabeth Page 221 The ase of a Teble Character, viz. Pits the Drone Page 222 A Plough drawn by dogs Page 223 HERTFORD-SHIRE Is the Garden of England The life of Edmund Earl of Richmond Page 370 The life of Pope Nicholas ibid. King Henry VIII his prediction concerning Sir Ed. Waterhouse Page 371 The life of Sir Henry Cary Page 372 The life of Alexander Nquam Page 373 The Character of Thomas Cartwright Page 375 The life of the Loyal Lord Capel ibid. Thomas Conisby's Resolution Page 377 HEREFORD-SHIRE. Of a good Al Page 377 The wonder of Bon-Well ibid. Appearance of two Parelion's ibid. Thomas Cantilupe the last Canonized Englishman Page 378
The Life of Card. de Easton. The severe punishment of several Cardi∣nals Page 379 The fatal Riddle concerning King Edward ibid. The Life of the Earl of Essex Page 380 The Spend-thrifts Requiem Page 382 Woodstock Labyrinth Page 383 A Religious President for Persuming ibid. The life of Sir James Crofts Page 384 HUNTINGTON-SHIRE. Protestant Nunnery Page 386 The life of St. Eled Page 387 The life of Bishop White Page 388 A through-paced Poet Page 389 The life of Sir Robert Cotton, the great Antiquary ibid. The life of Stephen Marshal, B. D. Page 391 Cromwel's Ʋncle Page 392 KENT. Of the Royal Navy and Navigation Page Proverbs Page 3 The life of King Henry VIII Page 39 The life of Q. Mary ibid▪ The life of Q. Elizabeth Page 399 King James in his Prayer resolved to have respect to the Virgin Mary Page 400 The lives of Princess Sophia, and Prince Charles ibid. The life of St. Elphage The fatal death of Judge Hales Page 402 The life of Cardinal Kemp ibid. The life of Sir Edward Poynings Page 405 The life of Sir Anth. St. Leger Page 406 The life of Sir Henry Sidney ibid. The life of Sir Philip Sidney Page 407 The life of Sir Francis Walsingham ibid. The life of Sir Henry Finch Page 409 W. Adams the first effectual discoverer of Japan ibid. The life of Dr. Harvey Page 411 The Life of the Loyal Sir Thomas Wiat Page 412 Charnock's Miscarriage Page 413 The life of Dr. Bois Page 414 Sir John Philpot's Fleet Page 415 A strange account of a Woman in dispair Page 417 Sir Tho. Cheney Privy Councellour to four Soveraign Princes Page 419 CANTERBURY. The Life of Arch-Bishop Langton Page 421 A vindication of Musick in Churches Page 422 The life of Simon Langton ibid.
LANCASHIRE The Inhabitants generally devout Page 424 Fishing with Spades ibid. The life and death of John Rogers Page 425 The life and death of John Bradford ibid. The life of Cardinal Alan Page 426 The life of Bishop Barnes Page 428 The life of Arch-Bishop Bancroft Page 429 The 6 Properties of a good Scholar Page 432 The rance of George Walker an infant Page 433 Mr. Chetham's Benefactions Page 434 The Battle of Preston Page 435 LEICESTER-SHIRE. Where the inhabitants of a certain Village have a ratling kind of speech Page 437 The life of Jane, Katharine and Mary Grey ibid. The life and death of Latimer Page 439 The life of Bishop Langton Page 440 The life of Roger de Martival ibid. The life of Dr. Hall Page 441 The life of the Duke of Buckingham ibid. The life of Judge Belknap Page 442 The life of the Lord Chief Justice Cateline Page 443 The life of W. Burton Page 445 The life of Richard Vines ibid. The life of John Cleaveland Page 446 Sir John Poultney's Benefactions ibid. The Pectoral Bird of Thomas Burdet, and the occasion of his death Page 448 LINCOLN-SHIRE. Foolish Fowls have fine flesh Page 450 The life of King Henry IV. Page 453 The Lives of Gilb. de Sempringham, and Cardinal Somercote Page 454 A Remark on the imprisonment of Pope Urb. 8 Page 455 The life and cruel death of W. Ascough, D. L. Page 456 The life of Bishop Fox ibid. Arch-Bishop Whitgifts Anagram Page 457 The life of Edward Fines Earl of Lincoln Page 458 The life of Thomas Lord Bury ibid. The life of the Lord Treasurer Cecil Page 459 The life of Judge Skipwith Page 460 The life of the Lord Chief Justice Husee ibid. The life of J. Anderson ibid. The life of Peregrine Berty Lord Willoughby Page 461 The Tree of Food, Raiment and Harbour Page 463 The life of Sir W. Mounson ibid.
The Benefactions of R. Sutton Esq Page 467 The Blacksmiths Book of Herauldry Page 468 MIDDLESEX. Commodities and Manufactures Page 470 Proverbs Page 471 The life of King Edward VI. ibid. A csom of the Jewes Page 472 The benefactions of Alice Wilkes Page 475 The benefactions of Sir Julius Caesar ibid. Branford Fight Page 477 LONDON. The Millers Riddle applyed to the Thames Page 479 The Fire that happened on the Bridg ibid. Proverb Page 481 The Life and death of W. Sautre Page 486 The life of Arch-Bishop Heath Page 487 The life of Bishop Cotton Page 488 The life of Dr. Davenant, Bishop of Sarum Page 489 The life of Bishop Wren The life of Sir Thomas More Page 490 Sir W. Paget, Chancellour to 4 successive Princes Page 491 The life of the Earl of Strafford ibid. A politick Cordial Page 493 The life of Sir Thomas Roper Page 494 The life of Edmund Spencer Page 497 Campian's Life Page 499 An Innocent She-Pope Page 500 The Founder of Dulwich Colledge Page 501 WESTMINSTER. Eastminster what? Page 503 The Life of King Edward I. &c. Page 505 The Birth and Character of the King's Majesty, Charles II. Page 506 The Birth and Character of His Royal Highness James Duke of York. Page 507 The life of Mary Princess of Orange ibid. The life of Princess Elizabeth Page 508 The life of Princess Anne Page 509 The life of Princess Katharine ibid. The life of Prince Charles ibid. The life of Bishop Warner Page 510 The life of Sir Francis Bacon ibid. The life of Benjamin Johnson Page 512 NORFOLK. Mr. Aylmer took Sanctuary in a Wine-Butt Page 516 The life of Sir Edward Coke Page 518
The life of Sir Clement Paston Page 522 Dr. Thorp's Life Page 524 The life of John Skelton ibid. D. Perne a notorious Trimmer, mortally wounded with a Jest Page 527 The benefactions of Henry Howard Earl of Northampton Page 528 The punishment of striking within the Verge Page 529 NORWICH. Dr. Goslin's Life Page 531 NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE. The chief Town stands on other Mens Legs Page 534 The County abounds with Nobility ibid. The life of Queen Elizabeth, Wife to Edward II. Page 355 The life of King Richard Crookback Page 536 The life of St. Werburgh ibid. The life of W. le Zouch Page 537 The life of Francis Godwin, Bishop of Hereford Page 539 The life of Sir Christopher Hatton ibid. The life of Sir W. Fitz-Williams Page 540 The life of Sir Isaac Wake ibid. The life of Sir W. Catesbye Page 541 The life of Sir Richard Empson ibid. The life of Lord Chief Justice Montague Page 542 The life of Sir Augustine Nicols Page 543 The life of Sir Robert Dallington ibid. The life of John Fletcher Page 549 The life of Sir Henry Montague ibid. The life of Dr. Preston Page 546 The benefactions of Henry Chichley Page 547 The life of Ed. Montague Baron of Baughton Page 548 An instance of Gratitude Page 550 NORTHUMBERLAND. Charity reversed, instanced in St. Ebba: Many are chast that they may preserve their Noses. She parted with her Nose that she might pre∣serve her Chastity One breeds Teeth at 110 years of Age Page 557 NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. Where is the best Liquorish Page 558 The life and death of Arch-Bishop Cranmer Page 559 The life of Sir John Markham Page 560 The life of Robin Hood Page 561 OXFORD-SHIRE. A description of the Ʋniversity Page 573 The life of King Richard, Caeur de Lion Page 576 The life of Prince Edmund Page 577 The life of Edward the Black Prince Page 578
The life of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Glocester Page 578 The life of Anne Beauchamp Countess of Sarisbury ibid. The life of St. Frideswide Page 579 The life of St. Edwold ibid. The life of St. Edw. the Confessor Page 550 The life of Cardinal Pullen ibid. The life of Cardinal Joyce ibid. The life of Bishop Bancroft Page 582 The life of Sir Dudley Carleton ibid. The life of Sir John Norris ibid. The life of Sir Francis Knowls Page 584 The life of Thomas Lydgate Page 586 Anne Green hang'd, and recovered Page 579 RUTLAND-SHIRE. A large description of a small Gentleman Page 582 SHROP-SHIRE. The life of Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York Page 584 The life of St. Oswald Page 585 The life of Thomas Gataker Page 586 The life of Robert of Shrewsbury, Bishop of Bangor ibid. The life of Robert Burnel Chancellour of England Page 587 The life of Robert of Shrewsbury, Bishop of Bath and Wells ibid. The life of Arch-Bishop Talbot Page 588 The life of Lord Chancellour Bromley Page 589 The life of Sir John Walter Page 590 The life of Edward Littleton Lord Keeper ibid. The life of the Martial Talbot Page 591 The life of Old Parr Page 594 The life of Sir Roger Owen Page 596 SOMMERSET-SHIRE. Lapis Calaminaris found here Page 797 The best Mastiffs bred here Page 740 The Parable of Jotham misapplyed Page 741 The properties of the waters of Bath Page 742 St. Dunstan's Life Page 743 The life of Bishop Hooper ibid. The life of Joceline Bishop of Wells Page 744 The life of Thomas Beckington, Bishop of Bath and Wells ibid. The life of Sir Amias Poulet Page 745 The decision of Lord Chief Justice Fitz-James Page 746 Tho life of Sir John Popham Page 747 The life of the valiant Courcy Earl of Ulster ibid. Sir Amias Preston's Challenge to Sir Walter Rawleigh Page 749 Ferguson Senior, or Henry Cuffee Page 750 The life of Sir John Harrington Page 751
Silver-tongued Sidenham Page 751 The Life of Robert Person Page 752 Coriat's Picture Page 754 The Skirmish at Martials Elm ibid. BRISTOL. Bristol Milk a Remedy against Crudities Page 754 Hugh Eliot first discovered the New found Land Page 756 The life of Thomas Norton the Chymist. Page 757 The life of W. Grocine Page 758 Dr. White Founder of Sion-Colledge Page 759 STAFFORD-SHIRE. Wherein is found good Alabaster Page 760 The Life of Cardinal Pole Page 761 The life of Sir Thomas Littleton Judge Page 763 The life of Dudley Sir Richard Empson's Partner Page 764 The life of Sir John Bromley ibid. The life of John Dudley Duke of Northumberland Page 765 The Bagnols ibid. SUFFOLK. The life of Edmund Mortimer Page 773 The life of St. Edmund King of the East-Angles Page 774 The life and death of Dr. Taylor ibid. The strange circumstances of the death of Robert Samuel Page 775 Cardinal Woolsey Founder of Christ-Colledge in Oxford Page 776 The life of Bishop Gardiner Page 778 The life of Bishop Brownrig Page 780 The life of Sir Nicholas Bacon Page 781 The life of Sir William Drury Lord Deputy of Ireland Page 782 The life of Sir Robert Naunton Secretary of State Page 783 The life and violent death of the Lord Chief Justice Cavendish ibid. The life of Sir Thomas Wentworth Page 784 Dr. Butler's Life Page 786 Scroop the Anchorite's life Page 788 The Tragedy of Roxana Page 789 Foundress of Clare-Hall in Cambridge Page 791 The occasion of the addition of the Dagger to the Arms of London Page 792 A Cordial testimony of Loyalty, or a costly Pearl diffused in a Royal Health Page 792 SURREY. Wherein the best Fullers Earth Page 794 Richmond and Non-such built by King Henry VII. and VIII. ibid Vertue of Epsom Waters ibid, The life of Prince Henry, Son to King Charles I. Page 795 The life of Arch-Bishop Cranley Page 796 The life of Bishop Parkhurst Page 797
The lives of Arch-Bishop and Bishop Abbot's Page 798 The life of Charles Howard Earl of Nottingham Page 799 The life of Sir Robert Dudley Page 800 The life of William Ockham Page 801 The life of Dr. Hammond Page 802 The life of Dr. Sanders ibid. Elizabeth Weston a great Scholar Page 803 Of the Family of the Sackvills Page 805 The Family of the Ashburnhams ibid. The life of Sir Nicholas Carew Page 804 The life of George Goring Earl of Norwich Page 806 SUSSEX. Plentiful in Iron, Talk Page 807 The Manufactures are great Guns ibid. Arundel-Castle, a Local Earldom Page 808 The life of Arch-Bishop Winchelsey Page 810 The life of Thomas Bradwardine Page 811 The life of the Lord Treasurer Burwash ibid. The lives of Dr. Barlow, Bishop of St. Davids, and Dr. Juxton Bishop of Hereford Page 812 The life of the Lord Treasurer Sackvil Page 813 The life of Judge Jeffrey Page 814 The life of Sir William Pelham Page 815 The life of Sir Anthony Shirley, &c. ibid. The life of Mr. Selden Page 818 The life of Dr. Stapleton Page 819 VVARWICK-SHIRE. A sudden inundation in Coventry Page 823 The life of Anne Nevil, Married to Edward Prince of Wales Page 825 The life of Edward Plantagenet Son to George Duke of Clarence ibid. The life of St. VVolstan ibid. The life of Cardinal Macklesfield Page 826 The life of Bishop Stratford Page 827 The supposed Original of the word Veize Page 828 The life of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Page 829 The life of Sir Edward Conway ibid. The life of John Digby Earl of Bristol ibid. The life of William Shakespear Page 831 The life of Sir Fulk Grevil Page 832 The life of John Lord Harrington Page 835 Edge-Hill Fight Page 836 WESTMORLAND. The life of Queen Katharine Parr Page 838 The life of Cardinal Bambridge Page 839 A pleasant Adventure of the Knave of Club Page 841
The life of Bishop Potter Page 841 The life of Sir Edward Bellingham Page 842 Foundress of Appleby Hospital ibid. The Office of Sheriff made Hereditary Page 845 WILT-SHIRE. The life of Margaret Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury Page 848 The life of Jane Seymore ibid. The life of St. Adelme Page 849 The life of St. Edith Page 850 The life of Cardinal VVinterburn Page 851 The life of Johannis Sarisburiensis Page 852 The life of the Lord Chancellour Edendon ibid. The life of Bishop Thornborough Page 853 The life of Edward Seymor Duke of Sommerset Page 854 The life of Sir Ol. St, John Lord Grandison Page 855 The life of Sir Francis Cottington Page 856 The life of Sir Nicholas Hide ibid. Lansdown and Round-way Fights Page 862 VVORCESTER-SHIRE. The life of St. Richard Page 864 The life of Bishop Bonner Page 866 The life of Sir Thomas Coventry Lord Keeper Page 867 The life of Judge Littleton Page 868 The life of Richard Beauchamp Earl of VVarwick Page 869 The life of Sir Edward Kelly, Chymist Page 870 The life of Sir Edwin Sandys Page 872 VVorcester-Fight YORK-SHIRE. The life of King Henry I. The life of Richard Plantagenet Duke of York Page 883 The life of St. Hilda or the English Huldah Page 884 The life of St. John of Beverly The life of St. Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Darby Page 885 The life of Cardinal Fisher Page 887 The life of Bishop Melton ibid. The life of Dr. Scroop Page 888 The life of Dr. Coverdale Page 890 The life of Arch-Bishop Loftus ibid. Prince Henry committed by Sir W. Gascoine Page 891 The life of the Lord Chief Justice VVray Page 892 The life of Lord Chancellour Puckering Page 893 The life of Sir George Calvert ibid. The life of the Lord Clifford Page 895 The life of Sir George Ripley Page 896 The life of Dr. VVhitacre Page 903
The Battle of Marston-Moor Page 910 YORK The life of Edward Freese The life of Bishop Morton Page 915 The life of Sir Robert Car Page 917 VVALES. The Division thereof Page 921 Cardigan yields Royal Mines Page 922 Matthew Glin the supposed Author of Metheglin Page 923 The life of Cardinal Sertor The life of Mr. Broughton Page 930 The life of Hugh Holland ibid. ANGLESEY The Mother of VVales Page 931 BRECNOCK-SHIRE. The wonder of Mouchy Denny Page 934 The life of Giles de Bruse Page 935 The life of Thomas Howel Bishop of Bristol Page 936 The life of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham ibid. The Protestation of Nesta ibid. CARDIGAN-SHIRE First reduced to the English Dominion Page 938 CARMARTHEN-SHIRE. The Life of Bishop Ferrar Page 940 The life of Sir Rice ap Thomas Page 941 The life of VValter Devereux Earl of Essex ibid. The life of Merline CARNARVON-SHIRE. The life of King Edward IV. Page 944 The life of Bishop Vaughan Page 946 DENBIGH-SHIRE. The life of Leoline Bishop of St. Asaph Page 948 The life of Bishop Goodman The life of Sir Hugh Middleton Page 949 FLINT-SHIRE. The smallest Shire in Wales Page 950 The life of Elizabeth, Countess of Holland ibid. The life of St. Asaph Page 951 The life of Owen Glendower Page 952 Pilgrimages to St. Winifred's Well Page 954 GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. The life of Sir Edward Carne Page 955 MERIONETH-SHIRE. Wherein are comely Inhabitants Page 956 The life of St. Thelian Page 957
A Tribute of 300 Wolves Page 958 MONTGOMERY-SHIRE. Where excellent Horses are bred ibid. The Life of George Herbert Page 959 The life of Edward Herbert Baron Cherbury Page 960 Hawis Gadarn a Lady of Remark ibid, MONMOUTH-SHIRE Not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction Page 962 The life of King Henry V. ibid. The life of Cantilupe Bishop of Worcester Page 964 The life of Richard Strongbow Page 965 The life of Sir Roger Williams ibid. The life of William Herbert Earl of Pembroke Page 966 The life of Jeffrey of Monmouth ibid. The life of Henry Plantagenet first Duke of Lancaster Page 967 The life of W. Johnes ibid. W. Evans put little Jeffrey in his Pocket Page 988 PEMBROKE-SHIRE. Peopled by Flemings Page 969 The Life of Henry Tuthar ibid. The life of St. Justinian Page 971 The life of Giraldus Cambrensis ibid. RADNOR-SHIRE. The rigorous Laws of King Henry IV. Enacted for the effectual sup∣pression of Insurrections in Wales Page 974
