S234 R222125 99833353 37829
Sad and Dreadful NEWS from Dukes-place near Aldgate: Or, A TRUE Account of a Barborous and Vnnatural SELF-MURTHER Committed by DORCAS PINKNEY, A Single WOMAN, About the Age of Forty Years, on the 8th. of July, 1686. upon her own Person. With the material Circumstances that attended it. MAny and Strange are the Delusions and Evil Suggestions of the Prince of Darkness, that Implacable Enemy of Man∣kind, to undermine and overthrow the Felicity of Mor∣tals, as in sundry Cases and Matters has been Evident, but espe∣cially in what follows. Dorcas Pinkney, a single Woman, of about 40 years of Age, by Profession a Child's Coat-maker, and working to divers Emi∣nent Shops in and about London, was, some time past, observed by divers Persons to be much dejected with Melancholly, but espe∣cially by the Family where she had lodged for many years; who narrowly observing her, and finding by her Discourse, Looks, and Gesture, that she was much disturbed in Mind, used no small Endeavour to reconcile her to her self, and in seeking to learn the Cause from whence the Defect proceeded; But her Answers to such demands and questions as were made, were dark and dubi∣ous; insomuch that a fear of what has since too sadly happened,
possessing them, they took what care they with modesty and con∣venience could, to prevent the worst, though their Diligence pro∣ved Ineffectual: For she (on the 8th. Instant) going to her Cham∣ber in the Evening (as was supposed) to Read, or Meditate, thereby to compose her mind; and the People of the House con∣jecturing (by the stillness they soon after observed that she took her repose) did not in the least doubt, or suspect the sad Con∣sequence at that time; but the next morning, not finding her Chamber door open as usual, some of them hearkened, but heard no Voice, nor any manner of noise; which creating a Jealousie that something extraordinary had happened, calling up others, they knocked, desiring to know how she did, requiring her to open the Door, &c. but receiving no Answer, the suspicion of the unhappy Accident increasing, after often saying, they would break open the Door, to induce her to open it, if alive; they, with the help of some Neighbours, did open it; and entring the Room, found her sitting on the Bed, leaning against the Curtain, on the lower part of which she likewise sate as asleep: Where∣upon some were of the opinion, as being deceived by that Posture, not to wake her; but upon nearer view, perceiving a String of Tape or Filletting about her Neck, and observing her Face black, they upon feeling, found her Cold and Stiff; and further, that the String had been fastened to a Hook of the Bed-post, or Teaster; but with strugling, or the like, as is supposed, had been broken, though not as it appears, timely enough to save her Life: Yet whether or no she had made more than one Attempt or Essay of that kind, is uncertain: Yet certain it is, that the String appeared to have been broken and tied again, but how she came by it (all Mischievous Things of that, or any other kind, being as carefully as possible laid out of her way) is as yet altogether unknown. The dead Body thus found, the Coroner was the next day acquainted with the unhappy Accident: And Summoning a Jury, they after a strict Enquiry into the Circumstances that attended the Death and manner of finding the Party, as far as could be given by the People of the House, and others, found it Felo de se, or Self-Murther; but that she was Distracted. And though she had of∣ten suggested a fear of Wanting e'r she died, which was thought to discompose her Mind; yet, upon Search, they found Money and other Things in her Chamber, which shew'd she was not in so great Necessity as she imagin'd. Finis. July 10. 1686. This may be Printed, R. P. LONDON, Printed for J. L. 1686.
