S3893 16267958 105194
Sir Thomas Fairfax his Summons sent into OXFORD, And the Governours Answer, with the names of those Sir Thomas Glenham desires passes for to treat about what he shall send. Also Sir Thomas Fairfax his Summons sent into Wallingford, Bostoll, and Rudcot. And the Copie of the Articles for the surrender of Dudley Castle to Sir William Brereton, with all Ordnance, Armes and Ammunition, bag and baggage. These being examined by the originall Copies, are commanded to be printed, and are published according to Order of Parliament. LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Purslow, May 14. 1646.
The Copie of the Summons, sent in∣to Oxford, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646, by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof, to his Excellency for the PARLIAMENT. SIR, I Doe by these, summon you to deliver up the Citie of Oxford into my hands, for the use of the Parliament, I very much desire the preservation of that place (so famous for learning) from ruine, which inevitably is like to fall upon it, except you concurre: You may have honourable termes for your selfe, and all within the Garrison, if you seasonbly accept thereof. I desire your Answer this day, and remaine Your Servant T. Fairfax. May 11, 1646. For the Governour of Oxford.
The Copy of Sir Thomas Glenhams Answer, to the Summons sent into Oxford, by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with a motion for a safe con∣duct for Commissioners to treat, sent out the same day. SIR, I Have received your Letter, summoning me to sur∣render the Citie, which was given me in trust for His Majesties use; but in respect there are many persons of Eminencie, I must desire you to receive for Answer a Request, that you will be pleased to send a safe conduct for Sir Iohn Mounson, & Master Philip War∣wick, to repaire unto you at such a time and place as you shall appoynt, by whom you shall understand what for the present is desired, I remaine Your humble servant Tho. Glenham. May 11, 1646. For Sir Thomas Fairfax
The Copy of the Sumons sent into Bostol house, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646, by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his Excel∣lencie, for the Parliament. SIR, I Doe by these, summon you to deliver up the Gar∣rison of Bostol house into my hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honourable termes for your selfe, and all within your Garrison, if you seaso∣nally accept thereof. I desire your Answer this day. May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax. For the Governour of Bostol house. The Copie of the Summons sent into Radcot house, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646, by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his Excellencie, for the Parliament. SIR, I Do by these, summon you to deliver up Ratcut house into my hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honourable terms for your self, and all with∣in your Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire your Answer this day. May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax. For the Governour of Ratcot house.
The Copie of the Summons, sent in to the Ca∣stle of Wallingford, on Monday the 11 of May, 1646. by Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the surrender thereof to his Excelencie, for the Parliament. SIR, I Doe by these, summon you to deliver up the Castle of Wallingford into my hands, for the use of the Parliament; you may have honourable termes for your selfe, and all within your Garrison, if you sea∣sonably accept thereof, I desire your answer this day. May the 11, 1646. T. Fairfax. For the Governour of Wallingford Castle.
Articles agreed upon the 10. day of May, 1646. Betweene Lieutenant Colonel Beamount, Major Christopher Henningham, and Major Iohn Gifford, deputed on the behalfe of Colonell Leveson, Governour of the Castle of Dudley, and Colonell Skipkins, Lieutenant Colonell Hunt, and Captaine Stone, Commissioners appoynted by Sir William Brereton, Com∣mander in chiefe of the Forces imployed for the redusing of the said Castle, touching the Surrender thereof. 1. THat all Gentlemen with their Servants, and all Officers in Commission, shall march away with their Horses and Armes, so that they exceed not the number of 30. And all common Souldiers that will march to any of the Kings Garrisons unbe∣sieged without their Armes, and all such as will live at their owne houses to have protections, submitting themseleves to all Ordinances of Parliament, and all Gentlemen Souldiers and others, to carry with them their owne proper goods and no more. 2. That they shall have two Moneths time, to con∣sider whether they will live at home, or depart the Kingdome without molestation or arrest for any Hostel, Act, or Debt, so farre as is in our power, and to have passes to that purpose; Provided, in the meane time they doe nothing prejudiciall to the Parliament. 3. That at the end of two Moneths, all that will live at their houses shall injoy their goods and estates without plunder or molestation, submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament, & such as will goe beyond seas, to have passes accordingly, and convenient time allowed them to travell to any port Towne to take shipping with passes accordingly.
4. That no oath shall be imposed on any Officer or Souldiers that shall choose to goe to the said Gar∣risons, during the time of their march. 5. That a sufficient convoy be appoynted to such as will march away, and Carriages provided for their goods, and not to be forced to march above 10. miles a day, and to have free quarter in their march, and care taken that no abuse be offered to their persons, or any of their proper goods diminished. 6. That all the Prisoners in this Countie belonging to this Garrison shall be released, and likewise all Country-men & Souldiers in the Castle set at liberty, 7. That the Governour shall on Wednesday next, by 12 of the clock, deliver up the said Castle, with all the Ordnance, Armes, and Ammunition, Victuals, Provisions, Goods, Bedding, and all other accom∣modation, necessary and belonging to the said Castle, (except what is allowed by the fore said Articles) and all those safe and unspoyled unto the said Sir William Brereton, or whom he shall appoynt for service of the Parliament. 8. That (the Prrliament giving order) the Works, Wals, and Townes of the said Castle, shall be sleigh∣ted and made nncapable of a Garrison. 9. That all Goods in the Castle that lawfully can be claimed and owned by any of the Country, shall be restored. 10. That all wounded Souldiers shall have liberty to remaine in the Towne, till they are cured, and then have passes according to the Articles. Commissioners for the King. Iohn Beamont. Christopher Heveningham. Iohn Gifford. Commissioners for the Parliament. Robert Stepkin Robert Hunt. Henry Stone. FINIS.
