S4257 11884380 50349
An exact RELATION Of that famous and notable VICTORIE Obtained at Milford-Haven against the Earle of Carbery his Forces; by the Admirall and Vice-Admirall of the Irish Seas. The manner of the Fight, the taking of the Town of Tinby, two Ships and foure Castles, with their Ordnance. Also a List of the Names of the Commanders taken, with six or seven hundred common Souldiers now prisoners: With their severall Letters and Summons sent to the abovesaid Towne and Castles, and their Answers. Written by Captaine WILLIAM SMITH Vice-Admirall and Commander of his Majesties Ship the Swallow imployed in that Service: And by him presented to the right Honourable ROBERT Earle of Warwick, Lord high Admirall of ENGLAND. Printed according to Order. London printed by Moses Bell, 25. Iuly 1644.
Right Honourable, and my very good Lord: IN the proceed of the Flect on our Irish Voyage, you may be pleased to take notice, that on the 18. Ja∣nuary 1643. we set saile in Pli∣mouth Sound, and after much fowle weather and contrary winds beating about the Lands end, it pleased God to bring part of the Fleet safe to Anchor in Milford-Haven on the 23. of the same, viz. the Leopard Regent, the Swallow, the Leopard Merchant, Provi∣dence Merchant, and Crescent Frigot, and within three dayes after the Prosperous and the two Lerpoole Vessels came to Milford. But through the neglect of Captaine Plunket and Captaine Williams, the said Vessels were ne∣cessitated to continue for the space of seven weeks at Milford, it being their charge to have conveyed them to their desired Port. And at our arrivall we found at Anchor in the Haven the Globe of Bristoll, and a small ship which arrived at Milford eight dayes be∣fore we came in, and had brought from Bristoll Ammunition to fortifie the Harbour, as great Guns, Powder, Bullet, and other Provisions, and had landed them at Prickspill, which lyeth on the North side of the Harbour, where the enemy had made a Fort and fortified it; into which Pill the Globe and the other Ship having made us from the mouth of the Harbour let slip and run. And my Admirall in pursuit came before the Pill, where were ex∣changed divers Shots, but no hurt done on either side: The Ad∣mirall perceiving no considerable service or execution could be performed on the Fort or Ships, they being drawne about a neck of Land behinde the Fort, he came to Anchor before it within
shot, and the Swallow a head of him, and the rest of the Fleet a head of the Swallow inclining to the Southside. Some three dayes after in the night the enemy drew a Gun out of the Fort to the Westward of the Pill, and at breake of the day began a morning salute to the Swallow, who to gratifie their courtesie answered them; and after many shot their Gun split, and so they withdrew it away. At that time it proved very stormy weather, in so much that our Ships hauled home their Anchors, wherefore upon the first opportunity the Leopard and Swallow were inforced to weigh and come to Anchor on the South-side before Angle, a Birth where usually the Kings Ships ride when they come into that Harbour. But shortly after the Admirall sent the Prospe∣rous and the Leopard Merchant, to ride before the Pill, to hinder (if it were possible) the strengthning of their Worke, which dayly the enemy assaid to doe: From the Ships were divers shots made daily at their Works, as also from the Fort at the Ships, but no considerable dammage received, only the Leopard Merchant received a shot in her quarter, which dropt into the Masters bed. And to annoy the Fort the more, the Admirall (with the joynt consent of the Commanders) built a Fort on the South side over against the Pill, and placed therein a Demy-Cannon, wherewith we played into their Works, which was a great incouragement unto many in the County to adhere unto the well-affected party (who at that time were very weake.) Thus having presented to your Lordship with our proceedings at Sea, in and about the Harbour, you may be pleased to take a view of the correspondence we held ashore, both with the ill and well affected. After our happy arivall, I call it happy, in respect of the great deliverance it pleased the most mighty Preserver of all things to afford to the distressed Inhabitants of Pembrooke, and the well-affected Gentlemen of that County. The next morning af∣ter we came to Anchor in the Haven, Colonell Langborne and the Major of Pembrooke came aboard the Leopard, and informed my Admirall with the feeble condition the well-affected party was in, as also of the strength, power, and insolency of the adverse party: For after the enemy had fortified the North side of the Harbour, and intending to fortifie the South side within a day or two, had not our arrivall frustrated that designe. The Enemy presuming on their strength, cast off their sheeps cloathing, in which they had so long deluded the people, and demonstrated
themselves to be like unto the rest of their Consederates (Raven∣ing Wolves:) The Earle of Carbery having voted that after the Harbour was fortified, hee would plunder the Towne of Pem∣brooke, and the Houses of the Gentlemen who had adhered to that party, and that their persons should be put to death by cruell tor∣tures; the Maior of Pembrooke; they said, should be put into a bar∣rell of nailes and brought to Prickspili, and from the top of a hill should be rolled downe into the Sea. This report so terrified the Gentlemen, that they fled from their houses and hid themselves in obscure places (in disguise) and sent their wives and children to Tinbie, where his Lordship then lay, humbly to supplicate his Lordship to grant them protections that their Houses might not be plundered nor their persons abused by the rude Souldiers, among whom there was a reverent aged Gentlewoman, the wife of one Master Griffith White, who had in her house eight sonnes and eight daughters who were Virgins, and foure small grand Children in all number 20. with divers servants both Male and Female: This Gentlewoman pressing his Lordship to commise∣rate her sad estate in case her house should be plundered, desired his protection, assuring his Lordship that whensoever he would be pleased to give her husband leave to wait on him, she did not doubt but that her husband would give his Lordship ample satis∣faction in all his lawfull demands. His Lordship replied, Hee would finde a time to speake with her husband, but as for a Pro∣tection he would grant her none. The Gentlewoman, with teares in her eyes, desired his Lordship to look on her children, who in point of honour hee stood ingaged to protect, as also the chastity of Matrons and Virgins, the which (without his Lord∣ships protection) she said must undoubtedly be violated, and her family perish. To which his Lordship answered with divers re∣proaches and some Jeasts among, That it were better her children and Family should perish, then that the King should want means to perfect his designe. To which she said, The King could not want, if His Majestie would be graciously pleased to be content with what God and the Laws of the Land have provided. At which his Lordship flung out of the roome, leaving the Gentle∣woman with teares in her eyes, and so she departed to her house full of griefe and pensive thoughts. A passage from his Lordship of so barbarous a deportment, that I beleeve History can scarce parallel to have proceeded from any Heathen: And if these be the
loyall Subjects who fight for the Gospell, the Kings Honour, and the Subjects Liberty, I leave it to every mans judgement to de∣termine. The lamentable condition of the well-affected, being by the Admirall and Commanders disputed; It was demanded of Colo∣nell Langborne and the Major, what force the well-affected party was able to rayse, to oppose his Lordship: It was by them reply∣ed, that they could not rayse above 40 Horse, and about 60 Foot; Then it was demanded, in case there should be 200 Sea-men landed well armed, whether they would joyne with them in endeavou∣ring to drive his Lordship out of the County, for unlesse they would be active, they must resolve to prepaire to goe away with the Fleet, in regard a consumption of Victualls would force us to depart that harhour; The Colonell and Major, with the well-affected Gentry, like gallant men, who had rather dye then out∣live the honour of their Country, or to see the ruine thereof, by a Jesuiticall & Popish Faction, resolved to put themselves under the providence of the Almightie, and with the helpe of our Sea-men to affront the Enemy, the which was without delay put in execu∣tion: And on the 13 of February we fell on a Garrison of the Ene∣mies, in a strong hold called (Stackpoole) the Mannor house of one Master Roger Lot, one which with our great Guns, having made a breach after 8 houres assault, we tooke with the losse of two men, and many wounded on both sides; shortly after they fell on a∣nother Garrison of the Enemies, called (Troyffloine) lying within a mile of Tinbye, out of which Towne his Lorship issued with about 100 Horse and Foot, intending to have relieved Troyffloine, and faced our Forces, on whom we let flye a peece of Ordnance, whereat his Lordship wheeled about with all his Forces, and ran into the Towne; Our Forces persecuting there assault upon the Garrison, tooke it, and therein 40 Horse, and 150 Armes, with the losse of two men on our side, and six on the Enemies. God gi∣ving our small Forces this good successe, they retired to Pembrooke to refresh their men, and to inable themselves for a more potent designe on the Enemy, intending to oppose their whole bodie which consisted 1200 men, foot and horse, which lay in and about Haverford-West, then his Lordships Rendezvouze; but his Lord∣ship hearing of this designe, having fortyfied Haverford-West, and placed most of his strength there; his Lordship like a valiant Commander with 20. Horse, some foot, and 4. feild peecs (ranne
away) telling the rest of the Commanders that he road unto the adjacent County to raise more forces, and that he would suddenly returne. Now when our men were refreshed and 6. field pieecs mounted on Carriages, with Wagons to convey there Amuniti∣on and Victualls, they resolved to fall on the fort at the Pill, and on the 22. of Feb. Colonell Langborne and the Major of Pembrooke sent aboard the Admirall, to desire that our boates might be sent to the passage to convey over on the enemies side there Artillery, Wagons, and Provisions, the which was done on Fryday the 23. And about three of the clocke in the morning they were all lan∣ded, consisting of about 300. Horse and Foot, with sixe field Pieces of Ordnance, who proceeding on their march, their Horse in the front, advanced before the Pill; about twelve a clocke at noone our Ships also were at Anchor before the Fort, the Leo∣pard Regent and the Swallow road to the Westward, and the Pro∣sperous and the Leopard Merchant road to the Eastward, plying our Ordinance into the Fort, and when our land forces had drawne up their Artillery, they played into the Fort from a hill which lay to the Eastward of it, and were answered againe; The Horse and Foot did skirmish from their Ambuscodoes, but on this day no man was either slaine or hurt on either side, night comming on, caused a Cessation: Our land Forces quartering about their Artillery, lay in the field before the Fort, it being a bitter cold night. The next morning being Saturday, the 24. by breake of the day, from our Ships and land Forces, we began to plye our Ordnance, from the Swallow was a shot made into the Fort which tooke off the head of one man, and the posteriours of another, of which he dyed the next day; our Horse and Foot behaved them∣selves valiantly that day, and beat the Enemy from their Ambus∣cadoes, and with the Enemy entred their Fort; and then the Ene∣my cryed quarter, the which our Commanders in Immitation of their Heavenly Father, who is the God of mercy, granted farre above their deserts and spared their lives, who had formerly voted that if they should prove Conquerours, they would kill the Dogs, and ravish the Bitches, and drowne the Whelpes; most inhu∣maine language! did it not proceed from those that adheare to the Beast? And therefore proper for them to speake diabolicall and beastiall language. In the Fort were taken. Armes 160. peecs of Ordnance 18. Souldiers 240. Commanders 26. their names and qualities are expressed in the Schedule annexed. In the Pill were
taken two Ships, viz. The Globe of Bristoll, in her 12 peeces of Ord∣nance, and by a shot from the Globe, was one of the Swallow men slaine on the shoare by his owne folly, the (other Ship called the Providence, had belonging to her 10 great Guns, but the enemy had carried them to Haverford-West; In the taking of this Fort, the protecting power of the Almightie, I hope by us shall never be for∣gotten, for it was his owne arme that got the Victory, to whom be ascribed, all honour and glory for ever and ever; for in taking thereof, there was not one man slaine either by Sword or small shot. When the Enemy was routed, some of their Souldiers sed to Haverford-West, and informed the Commanders there, of the losse of the Fort, and that all their Commanders and Souldiers therein were taken Prisoners: At which newes, it is reported Sir Henry Vaughan, with the rest of the Commanders, began to rage and sweare, (like mad-men) and as a Beare robbed of her whelpes, ran up and downe the streets, (crying) beat up our Drums, gather our Horse and Foot together, for we will out this night and be revenged of the Round-headed Parliament Dogs; and having with this bravado drawne their Forces into a bodie, being about 450. Sir Iohn Stepney the Governour of that Towne, like a prudent Overseer went into the Churchyard to see if he could discerne our Forces to approach towards Haverford-West; about halfe a mile from the Towne he discovered a heard of young black Bul∣locks comming towards him; those horned beasts so amuzed the Knight, that being afraid of his owne shadow, his Worship ran to the head of their Forees, and swore (Gods wounds) the Round-headed Dogs were comming; at which report they marched out of the Towne, and calling to minde the valiant example of their Lieutenent-Generall Carbery, they wheeled about and ranne away: The Boyes of the Towne perceiving them to run, fell on their Rear, and tooke from them 60. Muskets. This disorder in the Rear made those in the Front beleeve that the Round-heads were at their heels indeed, the feare thereof metamorphosed all her couzen Taffies into Mercuries, and with winged speed every man fled for his life, some threw away their Armes, and those that had the charge of the Powder flung it into the River; and in this manner was the Towne of Haverford-West surrendered, verifying that saying of the Kingly Prophet David, The wicked flyeth when no man pursueth them: when the enemy fled, they left behinde them in Haverford-West 100. red Coats which were never
worne, a quantity of Victuals, & 10. peeces of Ordnance, all which argued, they wanting nothing but a good Cause to maintaine. Now our Forces being againe refreshed, having a Demy-can∣non and a Demy-culverine mounted on field Carriages and being supplyed from our Ships, with Powder and all other Ammuniti∣on, they marched towards Tinbye the sixth of March, on the same day the Swallow and Crescent Frygot, with the Prosperous Merchant, set sayle from Milford, and came to anchor before Tinbye, where I summoned the Governour and Major, to surrender the Towne for the service of King and Parliament, but receiving a negative answer, I desired the Governour and Major, to send out of the Towne all the women and children, for unlesse they would com∣ply, I must in discharge of my dutie use my utmost endeavours to force them thereunto: The same night our land Forces came within two mile of the Towne, from whence Colonell Langhorne sent aboard the Swallow, and desired me to summon the Towne, the which I had done before his Letter came, and returned the Colonell their answer, and receiving no satisfaction from the Go∣vernour or Major, the next morning about eight of the clocke we began to play into the Town with our Ordnance from our ships, & about one a clocke in the afternoone our land Forces came before the Towne, and having placed the; r Demy-cannon within a quar∣ter of a mile of the Towne they fell to battery, and so we continu∣ed three dayes; the small shot on both sides performed well, the Towne was maintained with brave resolution, and more bravely assaulted by our Sea-men and Land-men, presenting their naked bodies even in the face of danger; Commissary Gwine Governour of that Towne, shewed himselfe to be a man of undaunted spirit, issuing out of the Towne bringing up his small shot to make good their Ambuscadoes, and his valour exposed that Towne to una∣voydable misery, in voting he would neither give nor take quarter; but I may say of his valour as S. Paul said in another case, to cer∣tain Christians in his time; Shall I praise him for this, no, I praise him not; for all our actions that tend not to the glory of God, lead us to our destructions; to which indeed this resolution of his had almost brought him, for leading on his men to face our small shot, who plyed their Musquets so fast, that his men forsooke him, and him∣selfe received a shot under his right pap, which inforced him to retreat alone in a orderly pace; he was no sooner entred the
Towne, but the Master Gunner thereof was also slaine, in which we must not omit to manifest Gods providence towards us; for our small shot having forced the Enemy out of their Ambuscadees, pursued them also to the Towne-gate, their Gunner having loa∣den a peece of Ordnance with case shot, and watching for such an opportunitie, having travysed the Gun, said to those that stood by. You shall see me make a slaughter of these Round-beads: At which words, a small shot from our Forts hit him in the head, after which he he never spake more; whose fall so daunted the Enemy, Commanders, & Souldiers, that forthwith they cried out for quar∣ter: The first that forced their entry into the Town was C. Peter Whittie, with his company of Sea-men and sub-ordinate Officers, Lieutenant Greene and Ensigne Dodson, with Lieutenant Colte, who led on the Swallow men, and immediately after them Colonell Langhorne with his Troopes of Horse. This Towne of Tinbie was held by the judgement of the most Judicious almost impregna∣ble, it being not to be entred but by single foyle, wherein were ta∣ken betweene three or 400 Prisoners, as many Armes, 7 peeces of Ordnance, all which were taken on Saturday the 9 of March, and on Sunday the 10. Carew-Castle was surrendered, in which was consummated the totall subduing of that Malignant & insulting Partie. In the County of Pembrooke, wherein the Lord of Hosts gave his servants the Victory over his and their Enemies, which gives us just cause to put our confidence in him, and in that com∣fortable Ejaculation expressed by holy David, to cry and say, by this we know, That thou Lord favourest us, in that thou hast not suffered our Enemies to triumph over us. The true Relation of him, who is a most humble and faithfull Servant in this great Worke, according to the trust reposed by your Lordship.
A List of the names of the worthy valiant Commanders now in action in the County of Pembrooke, in the service of the King and Parliament, which opposed the Earle of Carbery. ROwland Langhorne Colo∣nell, and Commander in chiefe. Simon Thelwell Colonell, and Voluntier. Thomas Langhorne Serjeant Ma∣jor. Captaine Rice Powell. Captaine Walter Cuney. Captaine Iohn Poyer. Captaine Peter Whitty. Lieutenant Owgin. Lieutenant Richard Ienes. Coronet Powell. A List of the names of the Malignant Commanders taken prisoners at the Pill, with their inferiour Officers in the County of Pembrooke, by those gallant Commanders above specified, viz. IOhn Barlow Esquire, Master of the Ordnance, and Captain of a troop of Horse. Captaine Edmond Bradshaw. Captaine Iohn Bradshaw. Captaine Iohn Butler. Captaine Arnold Butler. Captaine William Mary-Church. Captaine Iohn Price. Captaine Francis Edmonds. From the Earle of Carbery we took in this action foure Castles, 53. peece of Ordnance, about six or seven hundred souldiers, as ma∣ny Arms, and the whole County of Pembrooke totally subdued, and unanimously have taken the Covenant, and there is great hopes that Carmarthen and Cardiganshire will comply with us. Commanders run away from Haverford-West. SIr Henry Vaughan Major-Generall of the Army. Sir Iohn Stepney Knight and Baronet, Governour of Haverford-West. Sir Francis Floyde Knight, Captaine of a troop of Horse. Iames Martin Captaine of a troop of Horse. Captaine Iohn Edwards.
Commanders taken at Tinby, with their inferiour Officers. IOhn Gwyn Governour of Tinby, and Commisary of the Army. David Gwyn Colonell. Thomas Butler Lieutenant Colonel, and high Sheriffe for the Coun∣ty of Pembrooke. Captaine George Lewis. Captaine Thomas Methell. A Letter sent in generall to the Gentlemen of the County of Pembrooke, at the request of the well-affected. Gentlemen, AS in duty bound, I have alwayes in all fidelity highly honou∣red my King, and ever beene a lover of my Country, and as I stand ingaged. God hath called me to be a servant to both; and in discharge of the trust imposed, I am come hither to desire your compliance in the protection of the Gospell in its inherent puri∣ty, as also the Kings honour, with the Subjects liberty, a worke that every good Christian and loyall Subject ought to be active in, with tender of both his life and fortunes, in which you have the obligation of our Saviour to save you harmlesse, who saith, If any man shall hazard his life or fortunes, or what is most, deare unto him for my sake, shall undoubtedly preserve them: And for your Coun∣ter security, you have three Kingdoms in the body of the Parlia∣ment ingaged. Now why stand you gazing like the timorous Is∣raelites on the host of the Philistims? Did not a little youth, David by name, being inspired with the Spirit of God slay their Champion, and overthrew that idolatrous Host? And shall a Jesuiticall and Popish Army, with a malignant party at odious in the sight of God as those cursed Philistims, make you dismaied? No, be comforted, God and the State hath presented unto you a more probable meanes of deliverance in sending this Fleet to your preservation, consisting of twelve warlike Ships, with store of Ammunition and Land Forces, the major part whereof is not yet come in, occasioned by foule weather at Sea; but upon the
first opportunity of winde and weather undoubtedly will arrive; and by Gods assistance I am confident. That if the Gentlemen of this County will joyne with me in my endeavours, I make no doubt but we shall drive that Malignant rout (who endeavour to inslave this Nation under the yoke of the Antichristian beast) not onely out of this County, but consequently out of the Dominion of Wales: wherefore I shall desire the Gentlemen to give me their speedy resolutions; and if any of them shall not comply, let such looke for no favour from me, if it shall please God to send us the victory, but what Gods enemies and destroyers of the Coun∣try deserve. And let not any mans heart be afraid, for God hath promised to be with his in his protecting power, even to the end of the world, to whose protection I commit you all: And expe∣cting your Answer, I remaine and rest Ever ready to ingage my life with you in this great worke, Not answered. A Copy of the Declaration of the Honourable Houses of Parliament now sitting at Westminster, bearing date the first of February comming to my hand, I caused divers Copies there∣of to be taken, and with the Letter following I sent one to Pem∣brooke, another to Haverford-West, and one to Tinbie. Gentlemen, THat you may see with what sincerity of heart we desire you may be reduced to a right understanding of the unhappy condi∣tion you are now in; we shal not neglect neither our Pen nor Sword, the one to discover unto you the strong delusions of that Anti∣christian beast, with whom it is foretold in holy Writ, That the Princes of the earth shall ioyne in confederacy, as also they with him undoubtedly must perish, and many millions of poore soules so misled. Oh be wise, and timely prevent such certaine ruine by uniting your selves with the true Professors of the Gospell, by whom God hath said, he would pull that beast from his Throne, and they shall reward him sevenfold for all the evill he hath done unto the Saints. Now if you shall joyne with us in this great worke, then
shall our Swords be active in your preservation; and for your more ample satisfaction we shall present you with a most perspi∣cuous Perspective, wherein you may perceive the perfect way both to your Terrestriall and Celestiall felicity, being a Copy of the last Declaration of the Honourable Houses of Parliament; tho which if you please to peruse with a discerning judgement, you may see with what zeale and care those Worthies of our Land have endeavoured to remove from your eyes those Antichristian mists, through which (as with an Ignis fatuus) you have beene so long misguided. And because we know that the Patient thirsts after the Cure, we refer you to the application of the meanes pre∣sented in that Declaration; the which if they may give you that satisfaction as may make you truly happy in joyning with us, our endeavours are fully satisfied, and you shall ever finde us yours, Richard Swanley. William Smith. The Summons to the Towne of TINBIE. Gentlemen, IN a former Letter unto you, wherein was presented the late Declaration of the Honourable Assembly of Parliament; Wee the Commanders of His Majesties Ships, desired your Resolutions, whether you would comply in the contents thereof, and joyne with us in the preservation of the Gospell, the Kings Honour, and the Kingdomes Safetie, to expell the Forces brought into the County by the Earle of Carbery, but receiving no answer, Wee are now come before your Towne, to let you know, that unlesse you forthwith yeeld obedience thereunto, Wee shall use our best indeavours to force it. In which, if it shall please God to deliver you into our hands, you must expect no other fa∣vour then what is due to Traytors, both to God and their Coun∣try; wherefore I advise you seriously to consider, and wisely to provide for your present and future safety, and let us receive your speedie Answer, that by your timely adhearing to us, you
may prevent the demolishing of your Towne, by the battering it about your eares with our Ordnance, and hoping you will pre∣serve it as also the effusion of much blood by your sweet comply∣ance, Wee remaine and rest As you may give us cause, your faith∣full Friends to protect you. Post-script. We further declare, That if the Commanders and Souldiers shall joyne with you in the surrendring of your Towne that they shall have quarter for their lives and to go whether they please, or continue and be received into the service of King and Par∣liament. Their ANSWER. Gentlemen, YOurs we formerly received, with a Declaration their inclosed, which was required from us before we could peruse the contents therof, which was the cause of our not returning any Answer therun∣to, yours of this present we have received: Wherein you desire us to complye with you for the preservation of the Gospell, and His Ma∣jesties Honour, which is the worke we have vowed to maintaine with our lives and fortunes; and so doing, we hold our selves true Sub∣jects, to God, our King, and Country. And whereas you threaten the demolishing of our Towne, which is not ours to dispose of, but His Majesties, all which we pray you to take into your serious considera∣tions, as also the cry of the effusion of much innocent blood; for Ane¦sweare from the Commanders and Souldiers, we referre you to th- Letter you shall receive from the Governour of the Towne and Fort. Thus with our best respects, we take leave, and rest Tinbie 6th March, 1643./44. Your ever loving Friends if you please, Richard Wyett Major. David Hamond. Richard Prichard. John Rogers. Francis Longe.
The Summons of the Castle of Tinbie. Gentlemen, THese are to require you, that upon sight hereof, you imme∣diately yeeld up the Fort to the use of the King and Parlia∣ment; and so doing you shall be received into the protecti∣on of that Assembly and injoy the benefit of Loyall Subjects. But in case you shall continue in your Rebellion you must expect to be proceeded against as Traytors to your King and Country, and e∣nemies to God and the Protestant Religion; For if you shall make one shot at the King and Parliaments Ships, not one of you shall escape for his life if it shall please God to give us the Victory. Consider of it, and let me receive your Resolutions, in which if you please you shall find me Your faithfull Friend to preserve, Their ANSWER. Gentlemen, THis Towne we hold as loyall Subjects to the Kings Majesties use, for defence thereof we have his Majesties gracious Com∣mission, which we will endeavour to maintaine with the hazard of our lives and fortunes against all opposers, by what colour or pre∣tence soever. This is the resolution of John Gwynn. David Gwynn. Thomas Botler. FINIS.
