W2229 R27587 9959986 44418
CHARACTERS OF A SINCERE HEART, And the COMFORTS thereof. Collected out of the. WORD OF GOD, By HEN-WILKINSON, D. D. Late Principal of Magdalen Hall in the University of OXFORD. 1 Sam. 16. 7. Man looketh on the outward appearance, but Lord looketh on the heart. Psal. 51. 6. Behold thou desirest truth in the inward parts and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdome. OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD, Printer e University, for RIC. DAVIS, Anno Domini, 1674.
To the much Honoured and vir∣tuous Lady HESTER HONYWOOD of Marks-Hall in the County of of Essex: Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord. Honoured Madame, DEDICATIONS of Books to Persons of great rank and Quality, are of great antiquity, for St. Luke Dedicates Luke 1. 3. Act. 1. 1. two Treatises To the most excellent Theophilus. And now a daies it's usual to dedicate Books to such Per∣sonages, who are (probably) ready to approve them by their Patronage and practice.
As to my own concernment, I the ra∣ther prefix your name to this little Treatise, not only to acknowledge with all thankfulness, the many great Favours, which I have received from you, but especiall I am en∣couraged to present those things to your view whereof you have had so large experience as you can give Testimony to the truth of them, both as to your judgement and affections. I therefore am your remembrancer of those things, whereof (as I doubt not) you have experimental know∣ledge, and my design is to comfort you with those comforts, wherewith I my self have been comforted: It's the charge which the Angel gives unto the Church of Thyatira—But that which you have already, hold Rev. 2. 25. fast: And the Apostle's charge is su∣table unto that,—Let us hold fast Heb. 10. 23. the profession of our faith without wavering, (for he is faithful that
promised.) Likewise for self exa∣mination, and tryal of our eviden∣ces for heaven, we are frequently commanded,—More particularly St. Paul chargeth the Corinthians, and us as well as them.—Examine your 2 Cor. 13. 5. selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you? except ye be Reprobates. So likewise the Church (after she had un∣dergone great afflictions and suffer∣ings) makes this serious deliberate resolution—Let us search and try Lam. 3. 40. our waies, and turn again to the Lord. You being (Madam) an old Di∣sciple, and an experienced Christian, cannot but know, that it's a duty of great concernment, and in an especial manner incumbent upon all faithful Ministers to endeavour in their Preaching to distinguish the pretious from the vile: for so saith the Lord to the Prophet Jeremiah. If thou Ier. 15. 19.
take forth the pretiou from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee but return thou not to them. Our blessed Lord and Saviour, the best Example and the exactest Pat∣tern for our imitation▪ in that in∣comparable Sermon which he Preach∣ed in the Mount, makes mention of se∣ven Beatitudes, each of them being a rare discriminatig character, whereby good and bad, blessed and cursed, are distinguished one from a∣nother: For if the poor in spirit be blessed, then the rich & proud in spi∣rit are cursed; & if the pure in heart be blessed, then the impue in heart must be cursed, &c. Because of Contra∣rieties there are contrary consequen∣ces. And Christ himself is the best Interpreter of himself, for when he pronounced blessings upon such as Luke 6. 20. 21. 22. were poor, and hungred, and wept, v. 24, 25, 26. he pronounced woes against such as
were rich and full, and of whom all men speak well. Likewise our Saviour shewes the absolute and indispensible necessity of Regeneration and being born from above, as may appear by Christs an∣swer to Nichodemus.—Jesus answer∣ed, and said unto him, Verily, verily Ioh. 3. 3. I say unto thee, except a man be born again he cannot see the king∣dome of God. And Regeneration is a Characteristick note of distincti∣on between the old and new birth. Farther, Christ puts a vast differ∣ence between a good and a bad tree: For (saith he) A good tree cannot Matt. 7. 18, 19, 20. bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not good fruit is hewen down, and cast into the fier, wherefore by their fruits you shall know them: And Christ makes Love one to another, a mark Ioh. 13. 35. af his Disciples.
And after Christs Example, his Apostles lay down marks and signes to distinguish the good from the bad. For instance, How frequently, doth St. John press the grace of love, and lays it down as an infallible sign of one that is translated from death to life—We know that we have passed 1 Ioh. 3. 14. from death to life, because we love the Brethren: He that loveth not his Brother abideth in death. Saint Peter expresly manifests what we should avoid—Wherefore laying 1 Pt. 2. 1, 2, 3. aside all malice and guile, and hy∣pocusies, and envies, and all evil speakings, &c and he injoynes what we should reduce unto practice, As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. And it follows by way of Character, representing such who are new born babes in these words. If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord 2 Cor. 5. 17. is gracious. Saint Paul gives an e∣vident
sign of such who are in Christ by the new Creature wrought in them. Thefore if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature: old things are past away, behold all things are be∣come new. And, to mention only one more scripture to this purpose, The Apostle discovers a great difference between the old man and the new, and Eph. 4. 21. 22, 23, 24. thus Presseth our duty upon us: If so be that ye have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, That ye put of concerning the former con∣versation, the old man which is cor∣rupt according to the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your minde: and that ye put on the new man, which after God is crea∣ted in righteousness, and true holi∣ness. Now having such abundant war∣rant from the example of Christ and his Apostles, I question not in the
least, but that in the exercise of our Ministry we obliged according to the Rule of the word of Gods to lay down Characters of a Regenerate e∣state, and to distinguish sincere and real Professors, from such who are only Nominal and Hypocritical. Many there are who name the name of Christ, but depart not from ini∣quity: But it's the express command of the word: And let every one that nameth the name of Christ de∣part from iniquity. Many there are that content themselves, with the An∣gel of the Church of Sardis, to have only a bare name to live; But he is reproved by Christ, Rev. 3 1, 2. And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write, these things saith he . 3. 1. 2. that hath the seaven spirits of God, and the seaven Stars, I know thy works, that thou hast a name, that livest and art dead. Be watchful and
strengthen the things that are ready to dye:  I have not found thy works perfect before God. Many there are who rest satisfied with a bare form, and deny the power of god∣liness: But the Apostles command is—Having a form of godliness, 2 Tim. 3. 5. but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. The Sincerity of the Heart is that which God requires. Behold thou desireth truth in the inward parts: Psal. 51. 6. Josh. 34. 14. Ioh. 4. 24. God must be feared and served in sincerity and in truth: God is a spirit, and his worship must be a spi∣ritual worship: So saith our Savi∣our, God is a spirit and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in truth. The fruits of the spirit are recknd up by the A∣postle to be in all goodness, righte∣ousness and truth. Goodness may Eph. 5. 9. be reckoned to the duties of the first
Table, and righteousness to the duties of the second Table, but Truth (i e.) Sincerity, refers to both Tables res∣pectively. Sincerity is the ground of rejoycing, For (saith the Apostle) Our rejoycing is this, the Testimo∣ny Cor. 1. 12. of our Conscience, that in sim∣plicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation, and more abundantly to you ward. And the same Apo∣stle prayes for the Philippians, That Phil. 1. 10. ye may approve things that are ex∣cellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ. And although he is sensible of his own, and of his Brethrens in∣sufficiency for the great work of the Ministry, as may appear by that Question which he propounds: And who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. Yet he makes this profession of his
own, and his brethrens sincerity. For (saith he) we are not as many v. 17. which corrupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God in the fight of God, speak we in Christ. To draw to a close of this Epistle: It is the sincerity of the Heart, which both to Ministers and people is a great ground of consolation. The grand design which I only drive at in this small Treatise, is to stir up my self and others, that every one in good earnest may Chatechise his own heart, and propound this great need∣ful Question. Is my heart sincere with God? For answer to this question, I have by way of Chara∣cter, according to the Rule of the word of God, endeavoured to declare in several particulars, wherein the sincerity of the heart consists. This Treatise I preached as to
the substantials thereof, (which sinc I have unlarged) in the publick Con∣greation at Cosfield in Essex. T you (much Honoured Madam) I of∣fer his Mite, or Testimony of my graceful acknowledgment of these many signal favours, which both my self and my nearest Relations have recieved from you, both in our sick∣ness, and health, God hath made you a worthy instrument to do good to many, and I hope you will fare the better for their prayers. That Bread which you have cast upon the wa∣ters, you shall find after many daies. May the Lord lengthen out your daies, for the glory of God, and for your own good, and the good of ma∣ny others: And may you be one of those of whom the Psalmist makes mention; Those that be planted in Psal. 92. 13. the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of God; They shall
still bring forth fruit in old age; They shall be fat and flourishing. I commend your self, and all your Relations, to the Gracious Provi∣dence of God, beseeching him to guide you by his counsell till he bring you to glory. I remain Sible Henningham in Essex, Jan. 1. 1674. Madame Your Servant for Christ sake, HEN. WILKINSON.
CHARACTERS OF A SINCERE HEART. CHAP. I. Of Spiritual Poverty. THE first Character of a Sincere Charact. 1. Spiritual Poverty. Heart, is, Spiritual Poverty: And Spiritual Poverty consists in emptying of the Heart to the utmost, of all and every thing, what∣ever is Self; as self-love, self-righteous∣ness, self-opinion, self-sufficiency, self∣reasonings and disputings with flesh and blood, and self-confidence, and self∣conceit, and all manner of self-ends, self∣aims, and self-designs, So that when a Christian is wholly emptied of him∣self, and he hath learned that great and excellent Gospel-Lesson of Self-denyal, and he comprehends himself, as he is in
himself only, nothing, and less then no▪ thing, and is vile in his own eyes, and h magnifies the riches of Gods mercy, and ascribes all honour and glory to God such a one is Sincere, & upright hearted towards God. Jacob whom the Holy Ghost stiles a plain man, (i. e.) as Taatum dicit suisse simplicem;  quidem pro integro & sincero at plurimū accipitur, Calv. Jacob viz. integer, sim∣plex: Graeci  alienus ab omni fraude dolo, & callidatate, Mercer. in Lo. some Gen. 25. 27. interpret, a sincere and single hearted man, was a man of an humble spirit, wit∣ness his confession, I am not worthy o the least of all thy mercies, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy servant, Gen. 32. 10. David was poo in spirit, & endowed with that excellen grace of Humilitie: For he was so vil in his own eyes, as he accounted himsel a worm and no man, Psal. 22. 6. and when the Lord sent Nathan the Prophet to tell what great things God had, and would do, for him, as to take him from 2 Sam. 7. 8. and that he had cut off all his the Sheep Coat to be ruler over Israel, enemies, and made him a great name, ver. 9. and that he would fix the chil∣dren of Israel, that they may dwell in  place of their own, and ve no more, and that the Lord would make David an house; how David received these messa∣ges from the Prophet, is apparent by the humility and thankfulness, whereof he gave a large testimony, 2 Sam. 7. 18.
19. Then went King David in, and sate before the Lord, and he said, who am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? And this was yet a small thing in thy sight O Lord God; but thou hast spoken also of thy ser∣vants house, for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man, O Lord God? Agur was a wise man, and the more wise, because the more humble, and the more esteem'd of by God, by how much the more vile he was in his own opinion. His Qui si vilis est Deo charus est. Born. Prov. 30. 2. acknowledging himself to be more brutish then any man, and not to have the under∣standing of a man, plainly declares the lowliness and poverty of his spirit. S. Paul, who was the chiefest of the Apo∣stles, and more eminent in gifts, and graces, then any of them, yet he had so cheap and mean thoughts, and valuation of himself, as to confess that he was chief 1 Tim. 1. 15. of sinners. Every humble spirited person, who trades most at home, and negotiates a∣bout his own soul, in heart-searching, and self-examination, thinks far worse of himself, and is more abject in his own eies, then in the eies of the worst of his enemies. Wherefore he is sensible of his forlorn and miserable estate: He knows
himself to be poor, and indigent, and therefore he goes to Christ to inrich him. He apprehends himself blind, and igno∣rant, or knowing nothing as he ought to know, and therefore he begs eye-salve and a spirit of illumination from Jesus Christ. He is sensible of his nakedness, and therefore he goes to Christ for cloa∣thing, knowing that the immaculate robes of Christs righteousnes can alone cloath and cover his nakedness. For this is that soul-saving Counsel, which Christ gives to the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans,—I counsel thee to buy of me Gold tryed in the fire, that thou may'st Rev. 3. 18. Suadendi no impe∣randi verbo utitur Do∣minus, quo illorum re∣tundat insa∣ni em qui ni∣si violenter trahantur non arbi∣trantur se a Domino ad∣monitos, tractos vel vocalos. Bulling. 1 Pet. 1. 7. be rich, nd white rayment, that thou may'st be cloathed, that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint thine eies with eie-salve that thou may'st see. By Gold we are to understand true grace, especi∣ally true faith, which is much more preti∣ous then Gold, and this faith is not an or∣dinary faith, but 'tis a tryed faith, for its said tryed in the fire, (i. e.) such a faith that is genuine, and of the right stamp, that can endure the tryal of the sword, and the tryal of afflictions though they be fiery. Further, by white rayment we are to understand, the unspotted and in∣nocent robes of Christs righteousness. And by eye-salve, we are to understand
the illumination of the spirit, even that wisdom that cometh from above. All these we are counselled to buy of Jesus Christ: * yet here is no gap opened to let in Popish merit: Christus est  ille qui merces salutis caelitus venales nobis promittit, et offert in Evangelio, no pretio, vel meritis paran∣das, sed precibus & fide gratis Deo accipiendas. Hoc monopolium est Christi, extra quod nulla est salus, Pareus. Here is not the least allowance given to that rotten Doctrine of Merits: For all graces which we have, and all gifts which we have, are gratuitously given us by God, and to him alone we must ascribe the praise and glo∣ry of all. Whoever then hath received this great and excellent grace of Spiri∣tual Poverty, the free gift of God (which is by our Saviour mentioned the first, and leads the van to the rest of all the Beati∣tudes) he is obliged more and more daily to search his heart thoroughly, and so to find out, and be sensible of, his own lost, forlorn, and utterly undone condi∣tion as in himself, and so likewise to ap∣prehend his absolute necessity of make∣ing sure of his interest in Christ; who was for this very purpose sent into the world, to seek and to save that which was lost: For Mat. 18. 11. he professeth, Matth 15. 24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Is∣rael. He then, who is so poor in spirit, and vile, and despicable, and altogether less then nothing in his own eies, O!
what hast doth he make unto Christ. As poor men flock apace to the Lord Al∣moner, to receive Alms, so all spiritual∣ly poor Christians make hast unto Christ, who only can enrich them with never fading iches. They therefore apply themselves unto Christ, and apply his merits unto themselves. They are tho∣roughly apprehensive of their absolute necessity of getting a saving interest in Christ, and that without him, they are utterly undone, wherefore with all expe∣dition they run to Christ, and hey lay hold on him by faith (for he is their life) and they will not let go their hold. Further, whosoever tis endowed with this rare and pretious grace of Spiritual Poverty, he, I say, exerciseth himself in a frequent and serious medi∣tation of the promises of the Gospel, and he applies them particularly for his own singular consolation. He likewise me∣ditates of, and with all thankfulness ac∣cepts of, the invitations of the Gospel, and he makes particular application of them unto his own sonl. He is one of those who labors and is heavy laden, and there∣fore he goes to Christ for rest: For so runs the Invitation, and promise, both made by Christ, Mat. 11. 29. Come unto
me all ye that labor, and are hea∣vy , Aimo delas∣sati dicuntar qui sub pec∣catorum gravi sensu animo faitscut. Beza. Refocillatio, quam pro∣mittit in gratuit â peccato∣rum remisione seta est quae nos tranquillat, Calvin. laden, and I will give you rest. But some are conscious to themselves of so much unwor∣thinese, as they are afraid to come, least if they do come, they be utterly rejected: But O! Christian, labour to be sen∣sible of thy unworthiness, and mourn for the same, and then, notwithstanding thy unworthiness, be not discouraged; O! do not slacken thy pace, but make hast to go to Jesus Christ, for he hath made a gracious promise,—And him that com∣eth Ioh. 6. 36. to me I will no wise cast out, Joh 6. 37. Although you are poor and indigent, blind, miserable and naked, and can claim no merit from any thing, no not the best things, which you can do, yet you must not exclude your selves, and so refuse that great salvation offered to you in the Gospel. The expostulation is pathetical, Heb. 23. How shall we e∣scape, if we neglect so great salvation? If you are thirsty, and vehemently desire Tam pau∣peres quam divites fos graciae De recipit, ac largiter po∣lat, Musc. in Loc. Christ, you have many special invitati∣ons: One is saiah 55. 1. Ha every one that thirsteth, come unto the witers, and let not want and penury set a barr against your coming, for it followeth, And he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat,
yea come buy Wine, and Milk without mo∣ney, and without price. Another Invi∣tation is made by Christ amongst a great confluence of people.—In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood, and cryed saying, if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. Joh. 7. 37. A Third Invitation is Rev. 22. 17. And the Spirit, and the Bride say, come, and let him, that is athirst come, and whoso∣ever will let him take of the water of life. Now least any may affix a false gloss, and a corrupt sense upon those Invitations, as if they laid down a ground for Liberum facio cuilibet veniendi: neminem ex—cludo, prorsus omnes veni∣re subeo. Omnes venite & accipite aquas. Domino t gloria. Bulling. Free-will: I answer, That all those Invitations abundantly manifest the Free grace of God and ascribe nothing to mans Free will (which if we trust to it, will prove an Aegyptian reed to deceive us.) We read Ezrah. 1. 5. Then rose the cheif of the Fathers of Judah, and Benjamin, and the Priests and the Levites, with all them, whose spirit God had raised to go up, to build the house of the Lord in Jerusalem. Before we can come to Christ and ac∣cept of the Gospel Invitation, God rais∣eth up our hearts: For saith our Savi∣our. Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me except the Father, which hath sent m draw him. But when he draws us w
can run (as the spouse professeth) Can. 1. 4. Draw me, we will run after the. Be∣fore we can run the waies of Gods Com∣mandments, he inlargeth our hearts. So saith the Psalmist. Psal. 119. 32. I will run the way of thy Commandments: When thou shalt enlarge my heart. Sect. 4. He that is poor in spirit is weak, sick, and in a distressed condition, as to his own apprehension, and there∣fore of necessity (all delaies being laid aside) he must repair to Christ, and beg strength, health, Comforts, even all from him, as the only skilfull Physitian who alone can Work an effectual cure. And Christ is the only Physitian, and his blood is the only Medicine; and both the Physitian, and his Medicine are of infinite dignity, price, value. For no Physitian, nor no Medicine can work that cure, which Christ works, Psal. 103. 3. For he pardoneth all iniquities, and healeth all diseases. Christ prepares and prescribes the Medicine: our Duty is to apply it to our wounds: For the most Soveraign Medicine cures not in preparation, but in Application. Where∣fore we must imitate the Apostle, by making a particular Application of of Christ and all his merits unto our
own souls. For (saith he) Gal. 2. 20. I am crucisied with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, and the life with I now live in the Flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gve himself for me. After Tho∣mas had a demonstrative Conviction of Christ's personal appearance after his re∣surrection, he made use of a Pronoun Possessive to his comfort, saying, Joh. 20. 28. My Lord, and my God. Whoever he be, that is so poor in spirit as to be nothing and less then nothing in his own accompt and value Christ above all, and (as the Apostle phraseth . Est Christus (sese scili∣cet uniens reatis eos{que} regenerans) omnia, scili∣cet ad salutem necessa∣ria: Omnibus, ni mirum fidelibus sanctificatis & Christo copulatis, Est illis omnia meritoriè. Daven. in Loc. . Macar. Hom. 16. it) Col. 3. 11. All in All, he (questionless) is in the state of blessedness; for (saith our Savi∣our, Matth. 5. 3.) Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdome of heaven. Observe how low the Foundation is laid, even in Poverty of spirit: But Christ setts a high Roof and glorious superstructure up∣on so low a Foundation, even the Kingdome of heaven.
CHAP. II. Concerning the highest priceing and valueing of Jesus Christ. A Second Character of a sincere Heart Chara∣cter 2. The highest priseing and valu∣ing of Jesus Christ. is to set the highest Price, Value and Estimation upon Jesus Christ.  This is an infallible Sign of a true Beleiver, whose heart is upright with God, to Price, Value, Esteem, and Preferr Christ in our judgments, and affections before all the Riches of the World in their greatest Estate, and confluence. This the Apostle sets down as an infallible Sign of a true Believer, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Ʋn∣to you therefore which believe he is preli∣ous . O! how high an Estimation did the Love-sick Spouse discover concerning Jesus Christ: For (said she) Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is white and ruddy, the cheif∣est Jesus Christus to∣tus suavis est, totus sa∣lubris est, totus de∣lect iblis, totus deni∣que secuadn̄ sponsae Vo∣cem desi∣derabilis. Beza. among ten thousand. Christ is white by his innocency, purity, and immacu∣late righteousness, but he is ruddy by reason of his bloody sufferings, and the effusion of his pretious blood. To which the Prophet Isaiah alludes in a lofty piece of Retorick Esa. 63. 1, 2, 3. Who is this that cometh from Edom? with died Garments from Bozrah? This is
to be understood of Christ, as may ap∣pear Loquitur Ecclesia & Christum ip∣sum allo∣quitur. Quare ves∣tes tuae ru∣bidae sunt? Piscator, in Loc. more evidently by what followes, viz: This that is glorious in his apparell, travelling in the greatness of his strength, I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in apparrell and thy garments like him, that treadeth the wine fat? This scripture represents the meritorious sufferings of Christ, in pouring out his most pretious blood out of his veins. His body was pierced with a Spear, and forthwith came thereout Joh. 19. 34. Rev. 19 13 Amictus cruentus in∣dicat victo∣rem redu∣cem ab hosti∣um strage Parae. Tinct∣um non pio∣rum sangui∣ne, ut Ro∣ma sed im∣piorum Grot. blood and water. St. John in the Reve∣lation gives us a farther Evidence—And he was cloathed with a vesture dipt in blood and his name is called the word of God. Oh! what an inestimable value should we have of Christ, who bought us, and paid for the purchase the greatest price that ever was paid, even the price of his innocent, meritorious, and most preti∣ous blood. The Apostle observes the Doctrine, and injoyns us to make parti∣cular application thereof—For (saith Haec cor∣rectio est∣quod ad∣monet cor∣pus non mi∣nus quam a∣nimam sub∣jectum esse Deo. Calv. Ezek. 34. 29. Hag. 2. 7. he) 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. Christ is called by the Prophet Ezekiel a Plant of renown. Christ is called by the Pro∣phet Haggai The Desire of all Nations, and by Malachy The Angel of the Cove∣nant,
and by Zachary the Branch of Mal. 3. 1. Zech. 3. 8. Dan. 9. 26. Righteousness, and by Daniel The Messi∣ah. Add farther, by way of Singularity and excellency and incomparable Bene∣fit, Christ is call'd our Advocate and 1 Joh. 2. 1. Propitiation, our Redeemer and only Me∣diator. Job. 19. 25. Christ hath trodd the wine press alone. 1 Tim. 2. 5. There is Isa. 63. 3. none other given under heaven, whereby we must be saved, but by the name of Jesus. Act. 4. 11. 12. Christ therefore as he is of infinite value and dignity in himself, so we ought to have the highest estima∣tion of him, and to preferr him both in judgment and affections, before all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. Christ is compared to a Foun∣tain, which is beyond compare with any Zech. 13. 1. other, for it is a Fountain opened to the House of David and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness. Christ is likewise compared to a Stone, and to such a one as excelleth others in admirable Properties. Isai. 28. 16. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tryed Stone, a pretious corner Stone, a sure Foundation: He that believeth, shall not make hast. Farther Christ is compared to the Pearle of great Price. Matth. 13. 45. 46. Again the Kingdome of heaven
is like unto a Merchant man seeking good∣ly Matt. 13. 45, 46. Pearls, who when he had found one Pear of great price, he went, and sold all that h had and bought it. Whatever we estee highly of, must go for Christ, the Pearl o Price: If we possess Christ in our hearts b faith, we are enriched with that possessi∣on, which is infinitely more worth the all the possessions of the Vniverse. Muc value is set upon the Eastern, and West∣ern treasures of the Indies, and grea pains is taken to get them: Impiger ex∣tremos currit Mercator ad Indos. Ye they are not worth the nameing, in com∣parison of the Riches of Christ. Th knowledg of Christ is the most inriching knowledge, for Col 2. 3. In him are hi O Thesau∣ris omnibus opulentior notitia Chri∣sti. all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge Whosoever hath a saving Interest i Christ, is richer then the greatest Empe∣rour, who is ignorant of him. And hereunto, Where there i such a high valuation of Christ in th Judgment, there will of necessity follow ardency & strength of affection toward 2 Cor. 5. 14. , constringit, cohibet (i. e.) totos possi∣det ac regit, ut ejus af∣flatu quasi correpti a∣gamus om∣nia. Beza. Jesus Christ. The apprehension of th exceeding great love of Christ to u should constrain us to love him with a re∣ciprocal love. Love is the Loadstone o love, and love will never be paid, nor b contented and satisfied, but with its own
coyn; I mean love, answering love. And the greatest love which we can express to Jesus Christ, is only the reflection of those Beams, which he first darted upon us. Whatever love we manifest towards God is only the Return of that love, which he first shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Rom. 5. 5. 1 Joh. 4. 19. We (saith the Apostle) love him, because he first loved us. Where Christ is highly prised, that soul is inflam'd with ardent love to him. Neither is this an ordina∣ry and common, but an extraordinary, and special love. This love is in the highest degree above the apprehension of Philosophers. They tell us, That there is Calor ad octo, and this is in gradu intenso, & non in gradu remisso. Somthing that expression represents, but we'l set forth the vehemency of Love in the Scripture Phrase: Love, Psal. 120. 4. is hotter then the coals of Juniper; and to such an extensive heat, so that Cant. 8. 7. many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. But as for all those who love not the Lord Jesus, they are cursed in this world, and in the world to come: For (saith the Apostle 1 Cor. Read Pynk in Loc. 16. 22, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama Maranatha. An Anathama alone is a dreadful Curse,
but that's not all, there is a Maranath Maran-Domiaus, Athan-ve∣nit Marana∣tha extrema & ultima species ex∣communica∣tionis quae Ebraeis Sa∣matha di∣citur. Drus. added to the Anathema; and this Ma∣ranatha is reserved until the second com∣ing of Christ to judgment, and oh! how dreadful must their condition be at that great and terrible day, who love not the Lord Jesus Christ! Against them Christ will pronounce that dreadful sentence of condemnation, Depart from me ye curs∣ed into everlasting fire, prepared for the De∣vil and his Angels. CHAP III. A heart in love with holiness, evi∣denced in a holy life and conver∣sation, is a Character of a sincere Heart. A Third Character of Sincerity, is a Character Third. A heart in love with holiness.  Heart in love with holiness:  For when the Heart is emptied of all self∣love, and self-confidence, and made throughly sensible of its own vileness▪ and wretchedness, then Christ is highly valued and entirely loved, and cordially embraced and delighted in. Every true
Believer loves holiness for it self, be∣cause it is the image of God. And (as Bucer us'd to say) where there is Aliquid Christi (i. e.) any impression of the image of Christ, there we ought to place our love. Wherefore the Apostle gives a strict Eph. 4. 23. 24. . Command—Be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And that ye put on the new man, which after the image of God is cre∣ated in righteousness and true holiness. Where this image of God is, (which con∣sists in righteousness and true holiness) Sanctitas veritatis est vera sincera minime fu∣cata Drus. Tali inno∣centia & sanctitate qu sint in esse non in videri Grot. it is stampt upon the heart, and is visible in the life, and there is such a transcen∣dent beauty, purity, and excellency, and amiableness in all the waies of holiness, as the least glimpse of them are abundant∣ly sufficient to delight, rejoyce and ravish the soul of every true believer. What plato said of Moral vertue, much more may be said of Theological vertue (i. e.) Si Virtus & humanis ocutis possit ceri admi∣rabile (sui) desiderium excitaret-Plato. Soul-saving grace, and holiness, that if it could be discerned by Corporal eyes, it would raise the heart to a wonderfull de∣sire thereof. Oh! how did David love the Law of God! He profest that Gods Law was his Delight, and that Psal. 119. 77. he loved the commandments above Gold, yea above fine gold. Psal. 119. 127. Thy Testimonies (saith he) I have taken Psal. 119. 111. n Heritage for ever, for they are the
rejoycing of my heart. O! What sweet ness did David suck out of the Judg∣ments of the Lord! for (saith he) Th Psal. 19. 9. 10. Judgments of the Lord are true, and righ∣teous altogether: More to be desired ar they then Gold yea then much fine Gold sweeter also then honey, and the hone comb. There is a great reward in th very work of holiness: For it follows i the next words—Moreover by them, i thy Servant warned: and in keeping o them, there is Utilitas non mediocris, sedingens sequitur, etiamsi illi respectum retributio∣nis alicujus non habeant sed simplici ac sincer cor∣de in viâ mandatorum Dei currant, unum hoc spectantes, ut Domino Deo suo gratificentur Musc. great reward Now to love God for himselfe and the Law of God for it felf and holiness for holiness sake because it is the image of God and resembles him, this is a good sign indeed that the heart is sin∣cere with God. But to profess religion for selfe and sinister ends, hope∣ing to make a good Market to them∣selves by ingratiating themselves with some Professors for advantage sake, this is a very bad Sign, and comes farr short of a heart right with God. Qui De∣um ideo co∣lit ut aliud magis quam ipsum asse∣quatur, non Deum colit sed illud colit quod concupiseit. August. So the Siche∣mites Embraced circumcision upon a Politick design, to compass to themselves all the Estate of the Israelites Gen. 34. 25. Si vere hoc dicunt, tyranide baud dubie, & per vim cum illis a∣gere specie foederis sta∣tuerūt, quod vellent vi eorum bonae accipere. Ita cum dolose cum illis a∣gerent juste sunt puitī alioqui prae∣ter stuprum illataus. Merc. Shall not their Cattle, and their substance, and every beast of theirs be ours, only le us consent unto them, and they will dwell
with us. But that Politick, and self∣ended proposall did not prosper with the Sichemites, for we read immediatly after of their utter destruction: No more will any men thrive in the close of all, who seek their own ends and design onely self-Interests. The People followed Christ for the loaves, and many like the Persians worship the rising Sun, and seek only their own private ends, and some have two faces under one hood, and some imitate Water men rowing upon the Thames, who look one way and row another. The Apostles Censure is veri∣fied of multitudes—For all seek their Phil. 221. own, not the things which are Jesus Christs: But such mens hearts are not upright with God. Ad hereunto, wherever true holiness is seated in the heart, it becomes exceed∣ing fruitfull in the life, and appears so by those good fruits visible in a holy con∣versation. Not bare leaves, and for∣mal professions will serve the turn, but there are required good actions. Christ must not only be in the tongue, to speak good of his name (which is our duty;) but he must be formed in us, and our hearts must be ravished with love to him, and Love must constrain us to yeeld ready &
cheerfull obedience to him. Not only a form but the power of godliness must exert and evidence it self in a Sanctified conversation. The Apostle cautions us against such, who content themselves with a bare outside-form of godlyness, 2. Tim. 3. 5. and deny the power thereof—Having a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof: from such turn away. There must not be only , a formall pro∣fession: But there must be   a transforming, Rom 12. 2. We must be transsormed by the renewing of our minds. Questionless, where the heart is sincere towards God, there profession and practice concur in a sweet harmo∣ny, and where the profession is in since∣ty, a holy life gives abundant Testi∣mony thereunto: For we must a∣dorn the Doctrine of God (as the Apostle Tit. 2. 10. speaks) and then we adorn the Doctrine of God when we evidence the sincerity of our profession by the holiness of our lives and conversations: For wherever holiness is in sincerity, and in truth, it is very diffusive, and discovers it selfe in its vast extent, and latitude. It consists not only in verbal professions, but in re∣al actions, nor is confined to one or to two acts, nor to a few particulars, but it is in the Habit, and extends it selfe to all
manner of Conversation (as the Apostle 1 Per. 1. 15.  Heb. 12. 14,  Per sequu∣tione pre∣mite, Sum∣me studio enitimiai. exhorts) But as he that hath called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Con∣versation. We must with all diligence pursue holyness (for so the Original im∣ports) It is used of Hunters and Hounds, who follow the game, and take great pains in the pursuit thereof. Peace and Holyness are conjoyn'd by the Apostle—Follow peace with all men and holyness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Holy persons, and they only shall be made partakers of the blessed Vision: And they are thus distinguished from hypocrites by our Saviour—Blessed are Matth. 5. 8. the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They are said to be pure in opposition to Deum jam videt lumine glo∣riae, quae es summa ho∣minis Bea∣titudo. Spanhem. all manner of impurity, and profaneness, and pure in heart in opposition to all manner of hypocrisie. Whoever then hath hope to be made like unto God in happiness, in the highest Heaven, must be first made like unto God in holiness here on Earth. For holyness and hap∣piness differr not substantially, but gra∣dually: For Holiness is happiness in∣choate in this World, and happiness is holiness perfected and consummated in the World to come. Let us take a narrow View View of the Words of the Apostle—Be∣hold now are we the Sons of God, and it 1 Joh. 3. 2.
doth not yet appear, what we shall be; But Non sanc∣titate tan∣tum, sed ae∣ternitate & beatitudine, ac sic multo magis filii ejas quam nunc. Grot. we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Now for the right Interpretation of those words, we must interpose this Caution by way of Distinction—There is sicut similitudinis to be understood, non sicut proportionis. In variety of places in Holy Scripture, we are com∣manded Lev. 11. 44. Lev. 19. 2. Lev. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 16. to be holy, as God is holy; yet we must know and acknowledge, that it's altogether impossible for us poor finite Creatures to attain to that equality of holiness, which is in God: However it is our obliged duty to endeavour accor∣ding to our utmost ability, after a simili∣tude and conformity to God. Similitudes are in the Predicament of Quality, and according to Quality, we are said to be like, or unlike. But similitudes are not in the Predicament of Quantity: for it's altogether impossible for any Crea∣ture to be equal and hold any propor∣tions of holiness, with the Infinite, and Everlasting Creator. But what's the Grand Duty incumbent on all those, who hope to be partakers of the blessed Vision. The Apostle makes mention—1 Ioh. 3. 3. And every one that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure: Both outward and inward purity; holi∣ness
of Heart, as well as Holiness of life are essentially requisite to a good Christi∣an. Both Hands and Hearts (as St. James commands) must be cleansed, and I am. 4. 8. purifyed—Ʋclean persons can have no commerce with God: If you would have a holy life you must get a clean heart v D. Manton in Lo. 2 Cor. 7. 1. . In divino. Cultu nihi mutilū sed omnia abso∣luta esse de∣cet. Calv. Cleanse your hands ye Sin∣ners, and purify your hearts, ye double minded. Not only outward impurity of the Body, but inward impurity of the Heart, not only practical uncleanness, but speculative uncleanness should be utterly abhorred, and abandoned alto∣gether: For so runs the Charge of the Apostle—Having therefore these promi∣ses, (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. This then is an undoubted Conclu∣sion consonant to the Rule of the word. That where holiness is cordially em∣braced, loved, desired, and delighted in, and rightly priced in the Judgment, and preferrd as the true Wisdome, before Rubies and all manner of pretious Stones, and where holiness is practiced in the life and Conversation, questionless that heart is upright and sincere towards God, notwithstanding many personal Infirmities (which we grieve for and dis∣like of) while we are in this Vale of misery.
CHAP. IIII. Of ingenuous Sorrow for Sin. A Fourth Character of Sincerity is In∣genous Charact. 4. Ingenous sorrow for our Sias. sorrow for all Sin. This E∣pithete Ingenuous, I therefore name, be∣cause I would lay down hereby a discri∣minating note between that sorrow; which is for the Sin, and that which is onely for the punishment. That sorrow I call ingenuous which is for the Sin, more then for the Punish∣ment, and this is a Filial kind of sorrow, That I call servile and disingenous, which is more for the Punishment, then for the Sin. A Child of God under∣stands the nature of Sin, as to it's filthi∣ness, guiltiness and punishment, which is the consequent thereof, and therefore he laies Sin to heart, and is grieved and vexed at the very heart, because God is thereby dishonoured and his holy Law is broken. A Godly mourner mourns for Sin as it is Sin, because of its filthiness, and defilement, and because
it displeaseth the only Holy Lord God, and is odious and abominable in his sight. The Eye of every upright man affects his Heart, and melts him into Tears of Godly sorrow, and works an inward compunction, and a heart break∣ing sorrow. And this is that sorrow, which is of the right stamp, a genuine and ingenuous kind of sorrow. And where ever this ingenuous sorrow is, it may be fully evidenced by seven Apo∣stolical characters mentioned by the A∣postle: For, Behold (saith the Apostle) 2 Cor. 7. 11. this self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you? yea, what clearing of your selves? yea, what indignation? yea, what fear? yea, what vehement desire? yea, what zeal? yea, what revenge? There is a very great difference be∣tween the mournings of Cain, Pharaoh, Ahab, and Judas, (who only mourned and roared for the smart of punishment) and the mournings of David, Paul, Peter, and Mary Magdalen, who mourned for their sins; and therefore grieved, be∣cause they displeased so good and gra∣cious a Lord God. For instance, Pha∣raoh often cried out, that the plagues inflicted on him and on his people might be taken away; but what plagues did
he mean? I answer; he meant only the plagues of Frogs, Locusts, Caterpillars, &c. Pharaoh had a plague incumbent on him worse than all those, and that was the plague of a hard heart; of this plague he makes not any mention at all. A hard heart was his great sin, and it was inflicted upon him as a very great judgment: But David cries out against Psal. 51. 4. himself for his sins, and makes a parti∣cular acknowledgment: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. And he prayes, Hide thy face Verse 9. from my sins, and blot out all my trans∣gressions. Ahab was a meer stranger to the Grace of Humility, and unacquainted with it altogether; yet it's said of him, that he humbled himself: and for his out∣ward humiliation the judgment threat∣ned was adjourned. Seest thou how Ahab 1 Kings 21. 29. humbleth himself before me? Because he humbleth himself before me, I Poenitentia ductus sed quae non permansit. Ali∣quid tamen de commeri∣tâ poenâ ob hoc detractum est. Grot. Exemplum bonitatis Dei: quatenus Achab quantumvis hypo∣criticè poeitentiam agen∣ti poenas meritas differt. Hinc colligi pot est Deum, multo magis beneficum fore erga cos qui veram & seriam poenitentiam egerint. Piscat. will not bring the evil in his dayes; but in his sons dayes will I bring the evil upon his house. Yet of Ahab it may be more properly said, that he was rather humbled than humble; for the fear and horror ap∣prehended of those dreadful judgments which were to be
poured down against himself, and Je∣zebel his Wife, and his Posterity, ex∣torted from him an outward humilia∣tion, which consisted in putting on Sack∣cloth, in fasting and going softly, and looking with a sorrowful and dejected countenance, yet all this while he had not one dram of true godly sorrow, and of true humility. How sad must be the condition of many loose Professors now a-dayes, who come short of such as A∣hab was? and how dreadful must their condition be who come short of those who come short of Heaven? But St. Paul was a man of another spirit, he was not only humbled, but humble, and had the gift and grace of true humility; and he was a true Penitent, a sincere Con∣vert, and a godly Mourner for sin; and he was so low and debased in his own eyes, as to account himself the chief of 1 Tim. 1. 15. sinners. We read of Ahab's forwardness in offering himself a Voluntier and Slave to sin, so that this foul Brand of Infamy is stampt upon him. But there was none 1 Kings 21. 25. like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his Wife stirred up. Ahab was active, and put himself forward to work all manner of mischief; he pre∣cipitated himself, without fear or wit,
into any desperate Adventure. He stuck at nothing, but ran on in a wild and mad career, following all sorts of wic∣kedness with a full bent, propension and vergency of his soul, and with delight and complacency, driving a Trade for Sin, and for the Devil. We read of such who were almost starved for hunger, that they flew upon the spoil. And like∣wise 1 Sam. 14. 32. the Apostle stigmatizeth the vilest of sinners after this manner; Who being past feeling, have given themselves over Eph. 4. 19. unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Of this brand was Ahab. But on the contrary, St. Paul discovers a better spirit, as appears by his prote∣station; I delight in the Law of God after Rom. 7. 22. the inward man. He was passive, and with great grief and remorse of heart Tom. 7. 14. complains, that he was sold under sin. He discover'd great renitency, reluctan∣cy and antipathies against every sin; For (saith he) that which I do, I allow not; for what I would do, that do I not; but Rom. 7. 15. what I hate, that do I. O how did this holy Apostle fight and struggle, and ex∣ercise continual Combats and Conflicts, fighting against Sin and Satan! And thereupon he breaks forth into a dole∣ful complaint; But I see another Law in Verse 23. my members, warring against the Law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members. And it's observable, that all this while, and amidst all those sad complaints, Paul was a regenerate man; and a pregnant demonstration we have of our assertion, because he delighted in the Law of God, For (saith he) I delight in the Law of God Verse 22. Totus homo mento & ratione re∣gitur: ab ca itaque Apostolo ho∣mo totus appellatur, Bucer. after the inward man. And to delight in the Law of God in the inward man, can∣not be appropriated to any, but to such only who are in the state of Regenera∣cy. And that the words of the Apostle are not by a figure, called , it's evident that he speaks in his own, and not in another person, because he saith, I my self. And that the Apostle Rom. 7. 25. gives no allowance to himself . Idem ego vel ipse ego, quod à Pau∣lo emphaticè dictum est ad designandum seipsum ne quis eum sub alienâ personâ hactenus fuisse lo∣cutum suspicaretur. Estius in Loc. Accipiamus hoc in suâ ipsius personâ pro∣tulisse Apostolum. Zege∣rus. Hac exceptione fa∣tetur se it a esse Deo ad∣dictum, ut reptans in ter∣ra mutis sordibus inqui∣netur. Calr. in any sin is clear, because he professeth, For the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do. And the Apostle was appre∣hensive of his own impotency and insufficiency, to extricate himself out of those straits and difficulties wherein he was in∣volved, and therefore he cries out for a deliverer, as appears in that pathetical exclamation: O wretch∣ed man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the Body of Sin? By the Body o Sin, he understands all sorts of Sin, both Original and Actual, both the Roor and Fruit; the corrupt Fountain, and the corrupt Streams. And none but God ca deliver and set him free from them. H alone can deliver him, who delivers u from the wrath to come, 1 Thes. 1. 10. Moreover, we are farther to consider that there is a vast and a wide difference between the howling of Dogs, and the crying of Children; and there is as muc difference between the roaring of Gal∣ly slaves, and the crying of godly Mourners. Wicked men, Slaves, an such as feel the present smart of the lash, cry out bitterly by reason of the great pain which they feel, and thos smarting blows which they groan under. Poe lit eat te quod tot & tantis flagitiis in∣volutus in luto faecis & miseriae diutius ja∣cuisti, poe∣nitetiam agens cor∣pus tuum conteras & furibunde carnis a∣sello iacen∣tivorum se∣mina subtra∣hens, &c. Bern. p. 331. But as for all those who are true and unfeigned Mourners in Zion, they are deeply affected with godly sorrow fo sin; and therefore they grieve and mourn, because they have been so hard∣hearted as to kick a tender Father upon his Bowels; and have been so unthank∣ful, as to sin against riches of mercy and loving kindness: Hence comes thei Heart-piercing, Heart-breaking, and Soul-melting Sorrows, because they have been such undutiful Children, as to re
bel against a gracious and merciful God, the Father of all mercies, and the God of all consolations. No massie great Mountain, no not the burthen of Aetna (as the Proverb is) no weight imagina∣ble, or expressible, can be so heavy, as is the burthen of sin to a Child of God. And no manner of sorrow can be so bit∣ter to a godly man, as is the sense of Sin, and sorrow for it. Nothing in the World can be so grievous, vexing, tor∣turing, and every way afflictive to a good Christian, as Sin is: for Sin to him is like a Dagger sticking in his Heart, and continually tormenting and putting him to pain. Hereupon we read of David watering his Couch with his Tears; For Psal. 6. 6, 7. (saith he) I am weary with my groaning; I make my Bed to swim, I water my Couch with my Tears: Mine eye is consumed be∣cause of grief. Further he expresseth an addition to his mourning, because his Psal. 42. 3. tears was his meat day and night. To eat the bread of affliction, and to drink the water of affliction is a sad calamity, but to feed on tears must needs be much sadder; but this is not all, for the Psalmist confesseth further; There is no Psal. 38. 3. soundness in my flesh, because of thine an∣ger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. Diseases, aches, pains,
and broken bones are very grievous Omnium est utilissimum dolorem corporis ex morbo vel ulcere loco peccati ha∣bere, & peceati eti∣am vocabu∣lo appella∣re: ita vel hoc pa∣cto ad de∣testationem peccatorum, & horro∣rem indu∣ceremur. Musc. in Loc. but sin is, or should be, more grievou to us than all. David was of a sanguin complexion (and such naturally are more chearful.) David was a great and potent King, and an excellent Musician yet the sense of his sins caused great sorrows to him, and made him go mourning all the day long. If then the thorow sense of sin, and the guilt there∣of be set home upon the Conscience, there will be weeping and mourning: The eye will affect the heart, and cause inward compunction, and godly sor∣row. Thus we read of Ephraim smiting upon his thigh. Of Ephraim's Conversion and Repentance (which is the Fruit of Conversion) the Prophet Jeremy makes mention: I have surely heard Ephraim Jer. 31. 18, 19. bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast cha∣stised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thing. I was ashamed, yea even confounded; because I did bear the reproach of my youth. We shall likewise find the Prophet Ezekiel zek. 21. 6. sighing to the breaking of his loyns. And Job 42. 6. Job abhorring himself, and repenting in
dust and ashes. Many mourn for worldly losses, and shed many a tear for any loss which befals them in their temporal estate; but few there are which mourn for sin, which produceth the greatest loss, even the loss of God's favor. Many have cause to repent for their worldly mournings, and to mourn for their mournings. See the vast difference be∣tween worldly and godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7. 10. For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death. If we could mourn for sin much more, and for the world less, we should lead more comfortable lives for the future, than ever we have formerly done. CHAP. V. Of Sorrowing and Mourning for others Sins. A Fifth Character of a sincere Heart Charact. 5. Mourning for others Sins. 1. is Sorrowing and Mourning for others Sins. A true godly Mourner, (whose heart is upright with God) doth not confine and terminate his sorrow within the narrow compass of his own rest, and not let it extend any further,
but he laies to heart, and unfeignedly mourns for the sins of others. Though (as it's commonly said) Charity begins at home, yet it must not end there; there must be a plus ultrà for our Cha∣rity; it must be diffusive, and extended to others. And this is a great sign of love, when we are assected with, and af∣fected for the sins o others, as well as for our own. Every good man is not only grieved for his own sins, but for the sins of others. Of this excellent temper was David, the man after God's own heart; who from his heart pro∣fessed, Rivers of tears run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, Psal. 119. 136. But many there are whose moti∣ons Qui spiritu Dei agun∣tur hi sen∣tiunt tales dolorum stimulos, ut Loth cum videret scelerū om∣nium collu∣viem reg∣nare Sodo∣mae, &c. Mollcrus. are excentrick to that good man; for they are so far strangers to mourn∣ing for other mens sins, as they make their sins a matter of sport, mirth and mockery: However, they would be loath to be branded for fools, yet they cannot escape Solomon's censure, Prov. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at sin. When men make sin a matter of pleasure and jest∣ing, and make that a matter of laughter, which should be a cause of mourning, they shew themselves to be notorious fools. Many there are who deservedly may be rank'd amongst the chiefest and
worst sort of fools, who when they see men drunk, or hear them swear or curse, or talk lasciviously, and belch out such words as (even the Heathen could say) corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33. then . Menan∣der. those men are transported with laughter and merriment, and they talk with de∣light and complacency, pleasing them∣selves with the remembrance of others sins. These have Solomon's brand for fools; and their folly will appear to their shame, when they shall mourn for their laughter, and weep for their wicked pleasure and jollities. When some wrote Books in a jesting and deriding manner, concerning several faults of great men, after Mr. Greenham, a Re∣verend and Learned Divine, had read those Books, he was much offended at them, saying, That sins ought to be made V. Green∣hams works. odious, and not onely made ridiculous. Whatever sins we either discern in our selves, or in any other, we ought to mourn for them, and not to make a sport of them. A good Christian, who is acquainted with the pangs of the New Birth, and is sensible of that great fil∣thiness and abomination that is in every sin, and that every sin grieveth and vex∣eth God, and is odious and abominable in his sight, such a man (I say) where∣ever
he finds sin, he hates it, and mourns for it; and therefore he is not an idle Spectator, or over-curious Inquisitor, but a real Mourner for other mens sins. And whilst he mourns for others sins, he reflects upon himself as a person made of the same mould, and one of the same passions, and having the same corrupt nature. That excellent Father St. Ber∣nard makes mention of an old man, who when he had heard that one of his Bre∣thren had committed a scandalous sin, he wept bitterly, saying, He sin'd to day, Vid. Bern. in Fest. St. Martini. I may sin to morrow. We are all by nature children of wrath, as others, Ephes. 2. 3. Nature makes no difference between us and the vilest of men: Who art thou then that boastest of a good nature, and a sweet disposition? though these things are very commendable amongst men, and much to be desired, yet there's much more required; for the best na∣ture, without sanctifying grace, is no better than poyson in a golden Cup. Hath then God endowed thee with a greater measure of grace than thy Bro∣ther? remember that it is thy duty to acknowledg with all thankfulness, that what grace thou hast, is the free gift of God. And what hast thou which thou hast not received? now if thou didst receive
it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not 1 Cor. 4. 7. received it? Not the goodness of thy nature, but the free grace of God makes thee to differ from thy Brother. O there∣fore with all thankfulness acknowledg God's restraining grace, and sanctifying grace, whereby thou kept from run∣ning with others into the same excess of riot. All sorts of grace come from God; as antecedent, concomitant, and subse∣quent; and a Christian hath need of them all, that so he may begin any good work, proceed, and persevere therein. If the Lord should leave thee to thy self, and let thee be fill'd with thy own ways, and give thee up to thy own hearts lusts, thou wilt quickly destroy thy self, by breaking out into such horrid sins, as the vilest of men give themselves to commit with delight and complacency. It was a good Prayer in an ancient Le∣tany, Lord, deliver me from my self. That rare Father St. Bernard prayed, Lord, deliver me from the evil man, (i. e.) my Eipe me a malo homi∣ne, a me i∣so. Bern. de iter. Dom. self. Thus he counted himself the evil man, and thus he discovered singular humility. Let's not neglect our duty, in being both affected with, and afflicted for the sins of others, as remembring, that we are men of like passions; and we are
dust and ashes, frail creatures, our Fa∣thers being Amorites, and our Mothers Hittites; notwithstanding we are pre∣serv'd from the commission of many sins which others ordinarily commit, we have great cause of thankfulness, but not the least cause of being proud. If through riches of mercy we have hopes of a saving interest in Christ, (we not knowing the secret Decree of God) for ought we know others may be fellow members of Christ's Body, and fellow Citizens of the new Jerusalem; we ought therefore to sympathize with them, and be alike affected with variety of Dis∣pensations towards them, as the Apostle commands, Rom. 12. 15 Rejoyce with them that do rejoyce, weep with them that weep. For any one to say as Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? What am I con∣cern'd in anothers matters? let every one look to himself: such speeches as elare scriptum est a Platone on a nobis solum nati sumus, sed ortus nostri partem pa∣tria, partem pareates vedicant, partem a∣mici. Cic. off. lib. 1. these are so far below a Christian spirit, as they come short of a moral Heathen: For one of the best of Heathen Orators cites Plato, (and commends his saying) We are not only born for our selves, but our Country, our Parents; our Friends challenge a part of us. And Sympathies and Antipathies are critical Dispensa∣tions, and discriminate Friends from
Enemies. If then our Brethren be in adversity, then we should mourn with them; if they be in prosperity, we should rejoyce with them. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 3. 11. that God hath made eve∣ry thing beautiful in his time, also he hath set the world in their heart. And that shews the beauty of Providence; for God hath abundantly discovered his beautiful ordering of all the affairs of the World, representing his infinite Wisdom and gracious Providence. Now seasons of Providence are to be ob∣served, and we ought to act according∣ly; as the same Wise man exhorts, Ec∣cles. 7. 14. In the day of prosperity be joy∣ful, but in the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find no∣thing after him. And as we ought to take notice of Providences in general, so we should take notice of the parti∣cular conditions of others, as consider∣ing that all things come by a Provi∣dence, either permitting or approving. No sin is approved of, but altogether abhorred by Almighty God; yet God permits that which he approves not of. For the greatest of sins which the Jews committed, in embrewing their hands in the blood of Christ, came to pass by
Divine permissive Providence; (as St. Peter spake Acts 2. 23.) Him being de∣livered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wcked hands have crucified and slain. That which was an Act of the highest Malice in the Jews, was an Act of great Providence in God. Wherefore though we cannot (though if we could we ought) prevent and hin∣der the commission of sins in others, yet (be they never so bad) we ought hearti∣ly to mourn for them. So did Lot mourn for the abomination of the So∣domites; though they were ripe for ven∣geance, by reason of their exceeding great wickedness, (as if they had attain∣ed unto the highest degree of sinning) yet Lot grieved and mourned for them, who no way grieved nor mourned for themselves. Of Lot's mourning for those wicked Sodomites, St. Peter sets an espe∣cial remark, 2 Pet. 2. 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversa∣tion of the wicked. The word imports more then an ordinary sorrow and vexa∣tion , Significas opprimi, fa∣tigari, gra∣ter assli∣gi. Gerh. in Loc. for their wickedness, for it signifies to be oppressed, wearied, and grievously afflicted. And it's further added; For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 8. And here is another word expressing a greater grief or vexa∣tion; the word is . The word implies a sifting and searching; so in Ari∣stophanes, & others note upon the word: So that many have been question'd by such searching and torturing to force confession. 2. The word signifieth to Vid. Rev. 14. 10. . vex, rack and torment; and it expres∣seth the torments of Hell. Lot was as it were upon the rack, and for the time imagin'd himself to be so tormented in his Soul, as if he was in Hell, by seeing and hearing those abominations of the Sodomites. And as Lot, so the Prophet Jeremy was a true Mourner for the sins of others; he wept abundantly for the dreadful judgments inflicted on the Is∣raelites: his Rhetorick is rais'd to a high pitch. My bowels, my bowels; I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace; because thou hast heard, O my Soul, the sound of the Trumpet, the alarm of War, Jer. 4. 19. And he strains himself to a higher piece of Rhetorick, Jer. 9. 1. O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. But he not only weeps for
the judgments, but in an especial man∣ner for their sins, Jer. 13. 17. But if ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in se∣cret places for your pride. By what hath been mention'd, let's utterly detest the careless, heedless temper of Cain, Gallio, &c. and let us look upon our selves concerned, not only to mourn for, and bewail our own sins, but mourn for, and bewail the sins of others also. CHAP. VI. Shewing, that all sincere-hearted Christians labour to approve their Hearts towards God. THE sixth Character of a sincere∣hearted Charact. 6. A sincere heart ap∣proves it self. . Christian, is to approve himself to God, and to put himself in the integrity of his heart upon the test, trial and examination of God himself, who only knows the heart, and alone can search it thorowly. Thus David durst not stand upon his own searching, but casts himself altogether upon God's search and trial: Judg me, (saith he) O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity;
I have trusted also in the Lord, therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart, Psal. 26. 1, 2. Likewise in another Psalm David puts himself upon a farther test and trial, Psalm 139. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Job makes his appeals and applications unto God alone. Behold, (saith he) my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high, Job 16. 19. Hence he discover'd a resolution truly heroical. I will not remove my integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, Job 2. 5, 6. Variety of the foulest slanders are cast upon the people of God, (as Histories mention) even such lies and calumnies were in∣vented, as bad as the Father of lies could invent. Nero, when Rome was burnt, imputed the burning of it to the Christians; and the Romish Gun-pow∣der Traytors (had their Treason took effect) were resolved to have laid the whole Treason upon such whom they maliciously stigmatized with the nick∣name of Puritans. It's an old Policy (though there is not one dram of ho∣nesty
in it) of Machiavel; To accuse Auducter criminare aliquid hae∣rebit. boldly, and cast dirt enough, hoping that some may stick on. Yet notwith∣standing, all those whose hearts are sin∣cere and upright towards God, do raise to themselves a ground of strong con∣solation, from the testimony of a good conscience; that notwithstanding hu∣mane infirmities, the whole frame, ver∣gency, and resolution of their hearts is, to walk in the fear of God all the day long. The Apostle speaks in his own name, and in the names of all upright∣hearted Christians, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our con∣science, that in simplicity, and godly sin∣cerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversa∣tion in the World, and more abundantly to you-wards. Wherefore then we must make it our grand study and business to approve our hearts to God, and alwaies to walk as in the presence of God, as having the fear of God before our eyes; if so, amidst troubles, trials, and suffer∣ings, we may take abundant comfort in the integrity of our hearts and con∣sciences. It must be daily bewail'd (what we cannot deny) that we are subject to many infirmities, and shall never be
quite exempted from them whilst we are in this World, yet if we groan under the burthen of them, and mourn for them, and pray and strive against them; there may be sincerity in the heart, notwith∣standing human infirmities incident to our lives. We read in that Parable, Matth. 25. 5. that all the Virgins slept, even the five wise Virgins as well as the five foolish Virgins: While the Bride∣groom tarried, they all slumbred and slept. That sleeping implies infirmity. Both wise and foolish went forth to meet the Bridegroom, verse 1. Both of them took their Lamps, verse 3. But the wise took oyl in their Vessels, with their Lamps; i. e. they had grace in their hearts. Both wise and foolish had the Lamps of an in∣lightned judgment, and of an Per oleum unde lampa∣des aluntur ne exting uā∣tur poterit exponi cor∣dis justitia, sinceritas & vigilantia, quae est in ve∣râ solida, & perseve∣ranti fide Christi, & cha∣ritate non ficta. Nam sine tali corde, quid aliud est quicquid foris ostenditur, quam lampas quaedam adsque oleo. Musc. in Loc. outward profession; but the wise had made provision for supplies, and augmentation of all the graces of the spirit of God. Those five wise Vir∣gins, notwithstanding they slept as well as the foolish, yet they were admitted to the Marriage, when the foolish lost the season, and a door of hope was for ever shut against them. For we read Matth. 25. 10. And while they went to
buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready went in with him to the Mar∣riage, and the door was shut. The Spouse likewise had her infirmities, and she was sensible of them, so she professeth, Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. She confest (as some have observ'd) That security had opprest her in a great Vid. English Annotat. measure; but yet the inward bent and motion of her heart was active and vigilant. Let us, Oh! let us se∣cure this Fort-Royal of a good con∣science; this is a better defence than a wall of Brass. Bulwarks and Forts have Hic murus abeneus esto Nil conscire sibi nullâ pallescere ulpâ. been took by stratagems, or by storm∣ing; great Castles built upon Rocks may be undermind, and the strongest Military Garrison may be forced to yield, lest they be starved: but a good Conscience cannot be starv'd, for it's a continual feast. Ahashuerosh made a magnificent Feast unto the common People seven daies, but unto his Princes and Nobles, an hundred and fourscore daies, Esther 1. 4, 5. But he that daily keeps a good Conscience, he keeps a Feast every day. And notwithstanding many assaults and batteries, a good Conscience will be a shield of defence, and as a Bulwark impregnable, to se∣cure us from the malice and mischief
of unreasonable and malicious Adver∣saries. However men may be inraged against us, and accuse us falsly, and con∣demn us unjustly, yet if a good Con∣science acquit us, we have more to make for us, than all accusations and condemnations of the worst of Enemies can make against us. Wherefore we should make it our continual endeavor to walk with that wisdom and circum∣spection, as we may put to silence un∣godly men, who watch for our haltings, and would gladly make us an offender for a word. And a good Conscience, and a good Conversation, will make our Enemies to be ashamed. Having a Christiant testatum mundo fa∣cerent, se procul ab omni impie∣tate, verae{que} pietatis corruptela ab esse, quo nomine im∣peritis su∣specti e∣rant. Calv. good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that fasly accuse your good conver∣sation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Here is the great labour, and the great work, so to endeavor to order our hearts and our lives, that we may amidst all our trou∣bles and calamities, either imminent or incumbent on us, appeal to God, the searcher of all hearts, whose curious eyes are more then ten thousand times ten thousand, even infinitely more bright than the Sun in his brightness; before whom all things are transparent; to whom day and night are all one; the
darkest night hideth not from God: For (saith the Apostle, Heb. 4. 13.) neither . Tradunt Gramma∣tici  dici quae a collo suspensa excorian∣tur, & per dorsi spi∣nam, tan∣dem resupi∣nata fia∣duntur ut tota soris & intus oculis pate∣ant. Beza. is there any creature that is not manifest in his sighi; but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. If then the Question (which is a very material one) be askt, What is that which will carry us through the greatest sufferings? I answer, that a God reconciled in Jesus Christ, a Conscience pacified, and a Righteous Cause, i. e. when we suffer for Righteousness sake, will make us Conquerors, and more than Conquerors, as the Rom. 8. 37. , supervinci∣mus, quoni∣am in eruce etiam gloriamur, nedum ut, animam despondeamus. Cypr-Epist. 26. word very emphatically imports, mentioned by the Apostle, Rom. 8. 37.  super∣vincimus. Nay, in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved us.
CHAP. VII. Where the Heart is sincere, there will be a pressing forward towards Perfection. I Proceed to a seventh Character of a Charact. 7. A pressing forward towards Perfection. sincere Heart; and this both an A∣postolical Character, and an Apostolical Practice; viz. A pressing forward to∣wards Perfection. St. Paul propounds his own Example as a Pattern for our imitation, and what he had experi∣mented, and known to be good expe∣rimentally, he communicates to us, and exhorts to reduce into practice. Not as (saith he) though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but I follow after, that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before; I press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: Let us therefore, as many as be perfect be thus minded, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15. This
progressive motion David laies dowor is a sign of such who are blessed, Psal. 84. 6, 7. Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well, the rain also filleth the pool: They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appeareth be∣fore God. Their indeavors are indefa∣tigable, and their motions are continued and progressive in the service of God. Hence judicious Calvin observes upon the place; That the faithful recollect Ae si dice∣runt fideles collectis subiade vi∣ribus ascen∣dere ad moatem Zi∣on nec las∣situdiae ul∣lâ tardari, donec con∣spicia at Dei faciem. Calv in Psal. 84. vers. 7. their strength, and ascend unto the mount of Zion, and are not hindred by any weariness till they behold the face of God. Our grand indeavor should be to get grace, and truth of grace; and to be diligent in searching whether we have got special and more than common grace; and whether we mistake not parts for graces. We must still be sitting, examining, and trying whether our grace be true and genuine, sincere and saving grace: And our in∣deavor must be continued to get growth in grace, and more accessions thereunto. If we would be preserved from apostacy and back-sliding, we must grow in grace; for growth in grace is a special preservative to keep us from falling from our stedfastness. For so saith the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore, be∣loved,
seeing ye know these things before, beware, lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. A sovereign remedy to pre∣vent the danger of Apostacy, is pre∣scribed in the following words, vers. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledg of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. A growing Believer is a new born Chri∣stian. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Likewise augmentation of every particular grace is required: We must labour for true grace as to the quality of it; and as to the quantity of it we must still be adding thereunto. So saith the same Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue Est insignis hic locus, si quis alius verae Chri∣stianae vitae summam, descriptis illius ve∣ris tum crusis tum effectis spe∣ctandam praebens. Beza. knowledg, and to knowledg temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kind∣ness, and to brotherly kindness charity: For if those things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be bar∣ren nor unfruitful in the the knowledg of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have need of every grace; and the more we have of any grace in sincerity and in truth, the more we shall value it, and the more we shall beg supplies of God, and increase from him. The Apostles pray'd, Lord,
increase our Faith. If we have any grace already really wrought in us, we shall be sensible what need we have of, and shall pray for, a continual augmenta∣tion. To instance in particulars: Have we faith? let's fift narrowly, and examine thorowly, whether our faith be a saving faith; whether it be a justifying faith, Rom. 5. 1. such as works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and purifies the heart, Acts 15. 9. (for this only is of the right stamp:) or whe∣ther our faith be only historical, dog∣matical, and only temporary. If we search exactly, upon mature and deli∣berate reflections upon our selves, we shall find some failings and deficiencies in our faith: For though (questionless) the Thessalonians had true faith, yet they had something lacking in their faith. And yet they were such for whom the A∣postle gave thanks to God in an espe∣cial  (i. e.) om∣nibus ∣ris fidem vestram aa huc imper∣fectam ab∣solvamus. Beze in Loc. manner, 1 Thes. 3. 9, 10. For (saith he) what thanks can we render again to God for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God night and and day, praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and perfect that which is lacking in your faith? And as we should labour for more faith, so should we labour for more love, more meek∣ness,
more humility, and more self-de∣nial. If then through the pride of our own hearts we should flatter our selves as if we had grace enough already, it's evident that we never had any grace at all in sincerity and in truth; for where∣ever true grace is planted in the heart, it fructifies in the life and conversation. Grace is no withered dead plant, but a living and growing plant; where the seed of grace is sound in the heart, it takes root downward, and brings forth fruit upward throughout the practice of our whole lives. He then who la∣bours Qui desinit prosicere, incipit de∣ficere. Bern. not to grow better, begins to grow worse, as a Father saith. Though covetousness, and a greedy carking care after the World are unlawful, yet here is a lawful covetousness; for to desire more grace is a holy covetousness. To be rapax & tenax, i. e. to get get and grasp all that one get, and not to be willing to part with any thing, are characters of covetous Earth-worms; but to be eager  Stadium exigit & majorem quandam in compa∣radis soi∣ritualibus cupiditale. Theoph. and greedy after increase of every grace, and when we have got grace, to be care∣ful to the utmost to keep it, this is the only lawful kind of covetousness, re∣commended by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 13. Covet earnestly the best gifts. And grace is the best gift, Christ himself only ex∣cepted:
Gifts of Tongues, and gifts of Wisdom and Understanding, &c. are highly to be valued, but this gift of Grace is of far greater value. Grace is Quid constitutivum; i. e. that which constitutes a true Christian. Though Tongues, and Arts and Sciences are pre∣cious in their kind, yet many bad men may have them, and many good men may want them; but Grace is of ab∣solute necessity, for without it we can∣not come to Heaven; and without holi∣ness we shall never see the Lord. Where∣fore let us cry out for Grace, as Solomon makes mention of the Horsleeches two Daughters, Give, give, Prov. 30. 15. Wherefore we should not rest satisfied & contented with these measures of Grace whereunto we have at present attained, but we should make it our great busi∣ness, study, and indeavor to grow from one degree of grace unto another: We must no only follow holiness, Heb. 12. 14. but perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. We must strive after per∣fection of grace; though we are incom∣passed with many imperfections in this World, yet we must not allow our selves in them, but mourn for them; and still go on in adding grace to grace here, till at length grace be swallowed up in
glory; and we then shall attain to the end of our hope, the salvation of our immortal Souls. CHAP. VIII. Shewing, that where the Heart is sincere, there is a strict Watch set upon the Heart and Life, to keep us from bosome Sins. THe eighth Character of sincerity is a Charact. 8. A strict Watch a∣gainst bo∣some Sts. strict Watch set upon the Heart and Life, against all and every bosome and beloved Sin: Be thy sins as dear and as near as a right hand, or a right eye, they must be cut off, and pluckt out; for so saith our Saviour, Observems in hac Chri∣sti admonitione quo serio qno fervore quamque ve∣hementi cautione opus sit regnum Dei quaereibus ut offendiculorum occa∣siones undicunqe irruen∣tes amputent. Musch. in Loc. Matth. 5. 29, 30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one
of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell. But these words may not be understood literally, of mutilating and of dismem∣bring of our selves, but we are to under∣stand them as spoken by way of caution, and of strict command, not only to avoid all sins, but all manner of appearance of evil; and likewise all sorts of occasions and temptations to sin. The Psalmist gives a clear note of distinction between him whose heart is upright, and him whose heart is not upright towards God, Psal. 18. 23. I was (saith he) upright be∣fore Neque quis∣quam ia pie∣tatis siudio perget, nisi qui sedulo se custodi∣et ab iai∣qitatc sua. Caiv. in Loc. Ab iniqui∣tate meâ, i. c. ad quam naturā meâ proius sum, h. e. ne quid pravi ad∣milterem aut nescc∣lus admit∣terem quas antea ad∣misissem. Vatabl. him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. It's plain and evident from that Scripture, that every bosome sin, which David calls mine iniquity, ought in an especial manner to be watched against, and prevented; and if we be overtaken with it, we should loathe and leave it. That sin is a bosome sin which is peccatum in deliciis, a darling sin, like a Delilah in the bosome; an Agag, a ruling sin; a Gibeonite, a pretending sin: any sin that pleads with an Exceptive, as Naaman did, 2 Kings 5. 18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant, that when my Master goeth into the house of Rim∣mon to worship there, and he leaneth on my hand, and I bow down my self in the
house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy Servant in this thing. All these, and such like Apologies and pleadings, pre∣tences and excuses for sin, must be ut∣terly abhor'd and abandon'd altogether. Suppose thy sins may be lesfer compara∣tively than some others, yet no sin can be so little, but it's greatly hated and abhor'd by Almighty God, and deserves his wrath to be poured down upon the Sinner unto all eternity. As for instance, suppose thou accustomest thy self to petty and lesser Oaths, frothy and vain discourse, jesting lyes, &c. yet all these have filth and guilt in them, and are odi∣ous and abominable in the fight of God, and therefore we ought to detest and utterly forsake them. One of the an∣cient Fathers, of the highest rank, de∣clares his judgment, That none ought Augusti to tell (though but one) a lye, al∣though the telling of that one lye might save the whole World. The Reason of that Assertion is grounded upon that Proposition of eternal Truth, We may not do evil that good may come thereof. Ancient sins, which are of long standing and custom, such as are sins of pleasure and profit, such as suit most with the genius, complexion, and con∣stitution of particular men, and conduce
most to the satisfaction of carnal lusts, and to the pleasing of flesh and blood, and corrupt nature, are so far from be∣ing extenuated, as notwithstanding Cu∣stom and Antiquity, they carry a greater Aggravation with them. Thieves, Mur∣therers, and such notorious criminal persons, cannot expect to fare a whit the better, but the worse altogether, for pleading a custom and habit in their wickedness: Wherefore then let us in good earnest loat he and detest all sins, and after loathing and detesting, leave and forsake all manner of sins; and break off both acts and habits of sinning by unfeigned repentance, and conver∣sion to God. And let us fulfil that Pro∣phesie by our daily practice, Isai. 30. 22. Ye shall defile also the covering of thy gra∣ven Images of Silver, and ornament of thy molten Images of Gold. Thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous Cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence. Let none presume to plead for any sin, as Lot pleaded for Zoar; Is it not a little one? and my Soul shall live. A little leak in a Ship, if it be neglected and not stopt up presently, may sink the Ship, and so all in the Ship may be suddenly drowned. A little Thief put into a Window may open the Door, and let in a multitude of
such desperate Cut-throats, as may quick∣ly destroy a whole Family. A little Pen∣knife, a little Aul or Bodkin, may kill a man as soon as either Sword, Spear, or Gun. Sisera the General of Jabin's For∣ces, ran away on his feet, and so escaped the edge of the Sword in the open field, but by Jael he was kill'd in the Tent: for we read, Judges 4. 21. That Jael, Heber's Wife, took a Nail of the Tent, and took an Hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the Nail into his Temples, and fastned it into the ground, (for he was fast asleep and weary) so he died. In our most composed and deliberate thoughts, let us consider that there is no sin so little, but (without the interposing of the merits of Christ) will damn us both Body and Soul into the nethermost Hell. There is no little God, no little Price paid to make an Attonement for Sin; and no little Hell, the place of Torments. Oh then! as thou consultest the good of thy precious Soul, lay aside altogether all manner of Apologies, pre∣tences, pleadings, and expostulations, and all manner of hopes of obtaining any Dispensations for any one Sin, which may be comparatively lesser than some others: As for that sin which in thy ac∣count
is not to be regarded, as if it were either a little one, or none at all, (with∣out repentance and pardon, purchased through the Bloud of Christ) thy Soul and Body may be cast into that Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone to all eternity. One of the chiefest rank of the Roman Historians relates what Hanno said of Hannibal, That such a Parvus hic igis iace∣dium geis exuscitet. Iav. little Spark might cause a great Flame. The Embers of an evil Thought may set the whole man in combustion: sin∣ful thoughts which are in embrione, and not yet come to maturity, yet being not crush'd not disallowed, may in a short tract of time bring forth evil words, and afterwards full-born actions of all sorts of abominations. As soon as Goliah, that insolent proud-daring Champion, was brain'd, and his Head with his own Sword sever'd from his shoulders, then forthwith the whole Army of the Phi∣listins was routed, and utterly over∣thrown. If then all Champion-reign∣ing Sins (such I call so which are darling bosome Sins) be conquered and destroy∣ed, then all other sins which are of more than ordinary incursion, will the soon∣er be vanquished and subdued. We read that when the King of Syria went to joyn battle against Ahab King of Is∣rael,
2 Kings 22. 31. that he gave strict command to his thirty and two Captains, that had rule over his Chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. Now if the Question be made, Why was the battle principally design'd against the King of Israel? The Answer is at hand, Because the King of Israel was the worst Enemy, and most hating, and most hated. Al∣though in our spiritual warfare we must valiantly encounter and fight against every sin, yet in an especial manner we must with renewed strength fight against all bosome sins; because the more they are delighted in, and hugg'd in the bo∣some, they prove more mischievous; as Vipers and Serpents, who being once received into the bosome, suddenly de∣stroy those who give them entertain∣ment. Questionless every sin is of a poisonous and destructive nature; yet a beloved sin carries with it more aggra∣vating circumstances, and so proves more mischievous and destructive; as may be abundantly evidenced by the sad consequences thereof, as daily ex∣perience witnesseth abundantly. For a further illustration of the Asser∣tion, by a plain and obvious similitude: Would any man, though of an ordinary
capacity, habour Vipers, Adders, Scor∣pions, Toads, and such like noxious and hurtful creatures in his house? would any entertain such kind of dangerous creatures in his bed, and lay them in his bosome, and so venture to sleep with them? None can easily imagine that any there are who are so far sequestred from common sense and reason, as to venture to give a bosome reception to such kind of creatures which are offensive and de∣structive unto mankind. The chiefest of the Heathen Orators tells us, That Principio generi ani∣mantium omni est a naturâ tri∣butum, utse, vitam corpusque tueatur, de∣elinetqe ea, quae o∣citura vi∣deantur. Ci. off. Ib. 1. naturally all creatures must defend their life and body, and avoid all those things which are hurtful. Where∣fore let's consider seriously, and after mature deliberation we shall confess, that any beloved Sin is worse than any Viper, Scorpion, Adder, or Toad in the bosome; and whilst thou embracest and pleasest thy self in any beloved Sin, thou takest a ready course to destroy both thy Body and Soul. Wherefore, Oh Christian! if thou hast any love, any regard or commiseration of thy immor∣tal and heavenly-born being Soul, give not thy self the least allowance or dis∣pensation in any beloved Sin: for if thou pleadest for thy Sins, thou art the greatest Enemy to thy own Soul. Let
not any voluptuous man plead for his pleasures and sensual delights; let not any unchaste man plead for his Strum∣pet, or for any wanton lascivious car∣riage; let not any vain frothy Jester and Scoffer plead for any wittily contriv'd lye, collusion, or any abusive carriage; let not any Tradesman excuse his lying, and overreaching in his Trade, and vending of sophisticated wares, and re∣fuse commodities; let him not flatter himself with vain pretences, as if his ly∣ing, equivocating, and jugling, would much conduce to his profit; let him not pretend that he cannot keep open shop, and maintain his family; and if he should once leave his lying, and swearing, and couzening, his family would be utterly undone. All such kind of pleadings are odious and abominable in the sight of God. Neither Antiquity nor Custom, nor pleasure nor profit will excuse thee in the least, nor relieve thee before the impartial Tribunal of Jesus Christ: When thou shalt appear before the Judgment-seat of Christ, then all sinful pleadings, and all vain Apologies, will be so far from extenuating or lessening thy sin at that great day, as that they will aggravae them both as to the silth and guilt of them. And then Christ
will pronounce against thee that dread∣ful sentence of condemnation. We read Matth. 25. that sins of omissions could not in the least excuse them: And some in an especial manner have bewail'd their sins of omission; how then shall the Bishop Ush∣er late Pri∣mate of Ire∣land. commissions of scandalous sins excuse thee at that great day of account; and amongst other sins, such as are beloved, bosome and customary sins, most pleas∣ing to flesh and blood; these will ag∣gravate both thy sins and thy punish∣ments at the day of Judgment.
CHAP. IX. A desire and universal endeavour against all and every Sin, is a Character of a sincere Heart, and it's accompanied with the Practice of all Duties. THe ninth Character of sincerity con∣sists Charact. 9. A desire and endea∣vour against all Sins, and for the practice of all Duties. in a desire universally extensive, and an equal endeavour against all man∣ner and all sorts of Sins, and a desire and endeavor as extensive to yield obe∣dience unto all Command, and to pra∣ctice all Duties. The desire and endeavour must be The desire and endea∣vour must be exten∣sive against all sins. extensive against all manner of all sins. There must be a desire and endeavour to refrain from every evil way; and not only from one sin, but from all sins of all sorts, and all manner of sizes; though as considered comparatively they may not be pleaded for at all, (though less than others) but they must be utterly abandoned and forsaken, as well as others of a greater filth and guilt. Thus the Psalmist professeth, Psal. 119. 101. I
have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I may keep thy word. By feet we are to understand, the whole course of our lives and conversations in a com∣prehensive sense, taking in the whole duty of man. And that we may keep the Word of God, and keep close to his Sta∣tutes, we must wage war against every sin, and Significat se bellum indixisse omnibus vi∣tiis, ut se Deo in ob∣sequium de∣deret. Calv. refrain our feet from every evil way. There must then of necessity be an universal loathing, and an universal leaving of every sin; for in every sin, even in such as some call a peccadillo, there is poison and venome, for which there is no other Antidote but the Bloud of Jesus Christ. There is no sin which is in its own nature venial, unless the Bloud of Christ make it so. Where∣fore that commonly received distinction amongst Papists, of venial and mortal sins, is to be discarded altogether, as a rotten distinction: The Papists may ra∣ther, according to their own practice, call sins venal, because they set sins to sale and grant Indulgences for money; and so hope to make a good Market of Peoples bad lives, thereby intending to inrich the Popes Coffers, and the Priests Purses. But they in the mean time pre∣sumptuously derogate from the Merits of Jesus Christ, by presumptuously ar∣rogating
to themselves a power of for∣giving of sins, upon the payment of moneys for Indulgences. Against them may be justly retorted the same censure which the Apostle pronounced against Simon Magus, Acts 8. 20. for offering of money: Thy money perish with thee, be∣cause thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. As for Popish Pardons and Indulgences, both Givers and Takers are abominable, be∣cause they undervalue the pardoning Mercy of God in Jesus Christ. It's an undoubted sign of all those who love God, to hate evil. So saith the Psalmist, Psal. 97. 10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil. And this hatred must be an uni∣versal hatred of all manner of sins, with∣out exception; and it must be a perfect and irreconcileable hatred. Deadly fewds (such as Chronicles mention) be∣tween Family and Family, were barba∣rous and abominable, and tended to the utter subversion of many Families: But here, a deadly fewd is lawful; i. e. to perpetuate our hatred and enmity a∣gainst all manner of sins and corrupti∣ons. David declares his utter hatred and indignation against all the Enemies of God, Psal. 139. 23, 24. I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee. And am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. David hated their sins rather than their persons; though he loved their persons, yet as they were God's enemies, for their no∣torious rebellions against God, he hated them with a perfect hatred. It's an universal charge enjoyn'd by the Apo∣stle, Rom. 10. 9. to all without exception, Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. Not only one Cocka∣trice, but all the breed of Cockatrices are of a poisonous and destructive na∣ture, and mischievous to mankind, and therefore not only such as come to ma∣turity, but those also which are in the Egg ought to be destroyed. So every sin is of a poisonous and mischievous na∣ture, and therefore ought to be stifled in the fir conception, and be prevented from proceeding to any ripeness. For any Woman to stifle and destroy the fruit of her womb (though the con∣ception be very early) is abominable murther in the sight of God; and if such courses be practised, they tend to the rooting out a succession of all man∣kind: But as for all manner of sins and wickedness, though newly committed, and gone no further then a thought, yet
that very evil thought should be checkt and disallowed. The School men have coyn'd quaint notions, and amongst them are mention'd motus primo primi; let them not mince nor extenuate sins by such Cob-web distinctions; for those beginnings, (to speak more plainly) which by them are call'd primo primi, are sinful; those first risings and mo∣tions, as sinful, are to be destroyed, mourned for, and never suffered to pro∣ceed to any further maturity. 2. As there must be a refraining and 2. An en∣deavour to practise all Gods com∣mands. abstaining from all manner of sins, so there must be an endeavour to obey all Commands, and practise all Duties. Hereupon the Psalmist professeth, Psal. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. It is an infallible and undoubted sign of a gracious heart, neither to divide in duties nor in commands; neither to make exceptions and distinctions, as if one grace was to be got, and not ano∣ther. Neither may we plead a dispen∣sation from any duty, whether it be commanded in the first or second Table. For instance, whoever he be that pre∣tends a strict observation of the Sabbath day (I mean only the Lords day Sab∣bath) and pretends a hatred of swearing
and lying, and of all manner of Idolatry, and yet this man is dishonest and un∣just in his dealings, he is without doubt an errand Hypocrite; and likewise who∣ever he be that pretends to deal justly and uprightly between man and man, and to pay every one his own, (which is both necessary and commendable) and yet this man makes no conscience at all of observing the Lords day, nor of keep∣ing his Word or Oath, nor of using the Name of God with reverence, such a man is but a meer formalist, and a stran∣ger to the power of godliness: For the same God who commands one duty commands another, and laies an equal obligation to yield ready and chearful obedience unto both Tables. For the whole Law of God is copulative, and Lex Dei est uta tota co∣pulativa. Illyric. one Commandment is joyn'd to ano∣ther as a link of the same golden Chain. Hence it appears in Deuteronomy, Deut. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. that there is a conca∣tenation and connexion between all the Commandments of God. Neither shalt thou commit adultery, neither shalt thou steal, neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour, neither shalt thou desire thy neighbours wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbours house, his field, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant,
his ox or his ass, or any thing that is thy neighbours. From which Scriptures we conclude, That there ought to be an equal regard unto one Commandment Qjcquid  cum si, equali∣er sit. as well as another; for there is one only holy Lord God, who commands one Commandment in the Decalogue as well as an other. This was the very trade, or grand employment which St. Paul did drive, Acts 24. 16. To keep a conscience void of offence, towards God and towards man. The Apostle did not shift and put off this grand negotiation from himself, as if he were unconcern'd, and therefore left it to others; but it's said, herein do . I exercise my self. Neither did the A∣postle sit fast and loose, and (as we say) exercise himself by fits and starts only, but he made it his business, exercise and imployment; for it's said, alwaies. Nei∣ther . will any sort of conscience, at a ven∣ture, serve the turn; because there are many bad consciences: but the Apostle only values and exerciseth a conscience . void of offence. And such a conscience, in its extent and latitude, is a , or an infallible note of the sincerity of that heart, which in the Apostles lan∣guage, keeps a conscience void of offence, toward God and toward men. Farther the said Apostle makes mention of three
significant Adverbs, which comprehend the whole duty of man; viz. soberly, . righteously, and godly. As to all com∣mands, and to all sorts of duties com∣manded in the Word of God, we must make it our business to manifest our thorow and impartial obedience, not picking and chusing, as if when we had perform'd an easier duty, then we might obtain a dispensation for a greater com∣mandment. But all such manner of halving and dividing is odious and abo∣minable in the sight of Almighty God; for every divided heart is faulty, as the Prophet saith, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, therefore they shall be found faulty. Wherefore Universality of the subject, the whole man, which in a com∣prehensive acceptation takes in all the members of the Body, and faculties of the Soul, Universality of the object, the whole Law, and Universality of time and place, are essentially requisite to the compleating of the obedience of every sincere hearted Christian. This Cha∣racter searcheth very near the heart; and he who hath it, without all question is a sincere hearted man. By this Cha∣racter let us in an especial manner try our selves; even by the universality of our hatred of all manner of sins, and by
the universality of our obedience unto all God's commands; and by the uni∣versality of our endeavours to grow in every grace. Universality is both a di∣visive and constitutive difference, for it distinguisheth a half nominal and formal outside Christian, from a sincere Chri∣stian; and it constitutes a Child of God. CHAP. X. Where the Heart is upright with God, it is without guile and hy∣pocrisie. THe tenth Character of sincerity, is Charact. 10. A spirit without guile. Sect. 1. a spirit without guile and hypocri∣sie. Nathanael had this testimony from Christ, John 1. 47. Behold an Israelite in∣deed, in whom is no guile. And to have a spirit without guile, is that grand distinguishing Character which the Psalmist appropriates to a blessed man, Psal. 32. 1, 2. Elessea is he whose trans∣gression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the mn unto whom the Lord im∣puteth not iniquity,  in whose spirit there is no guile. Who are they who are
thus blessed? Such whose sins are for∣given, and not imputed to them. And who are they whose sins are forgiven, and not imputed to them? Such in whose spirit there is no guile. Only those who are pure in heart shall see God. Purity of heart is one of those transcen∣dent Beatitudes mention'd in our Sa∣viours Sermon upon the Mount, Matth. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They are said to be pure, in opposition to profaneness; and pure in heart, in opposition to hypocrisie. They only shall be partakers of the bles∣sed Vision, whose hearts are pure, (i. e.) sincere with God. True Believers, whose hearts are upright, and their lives holy, they shall see some manifestations of God by his Word, and by his Provi∣dences; and they shall see the footsteps and out-goings of God in the Sanctuary. But what they see here, is but little in comparison of what they shall see and enjoy in glory. For (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12.) we see through a glass, dark∣ly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. Every upright person is compounded of three signisicat words, which com∣prehend the whole duty of integrity:
And they are simplicity, singleness, and sincerity. The first word is simplicity; and this 1. Simpli∣city. is opposite to a double heart, and to such a heart as is usually call'd, a heart and a heart. This simplicity of the heart was a ground of the Apostles rejoycing, and of all true Believers: For saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoycing is . this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, &c. And it's the high com∣mendation ascrib'd to the Children of Zebulun, 1 Chron. 12. 33. that they were not of a double heart. St. James stamps a brand of infamy upon a double minded man, in that he is unstable in all his waies, . James 1. 8. He is unsixt, unplaced, and so unsettled, as you know not what to judg of him, nor (as we use to say) where to find him: A man may as soon hold the wind in his hand, as hold fast an unstable man. A second word is singleness: Now 2. Single∣ness. singleness and uprightness differ only in the sound of the name pronounced; they agree in the same sense altogether, as being of a synonimous signification. Of this singleness of heart we have a clear evidence of the Primitive Con∣verts, Acts 2. 46. They continued daily . with one accord in the Temple, and break∣ing
bread from house to house, and eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God. It's the observation of judicious Mr. Calvin upon the place, Quia in laudando Deo non potest esse cordis sim∣plicitas nisi constet in omnibus vi∣tae partibus, ideo certum est ejus fieri mentionem hoc sensu quod fideles eain ubique colueriat. Calv. in Loc. That simplicity of heart, and praising of God, are joyn'd together: And the rea∣son he gives is this; Because in prais∣ing of God, there cannot be simplicity of heart, unless it consist in all the parts of our lives, &c. This single and undivided heart is highly esteem'd of in the sight of God: Wherefore we are commanded to turn unto the Lord with all our hearts, Joel 2. 12. And the Psalmist professeth, Psal. 119. 10. With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy commandments. An entire, single, one heart, are all one in sense; and such a one only obtains acceptance in the sight of God, the searcher of all hearts. A third word is godly sincerity; so I 3. Since∣rity. 2 Cor. 1. 12. .  site cerâ. call it, because it's so call'd by the A∣postle; godly sincerity, or the sincerity of God. Hereby is necessarily to be in∣fer'd, that we must not only be sincere in all that we do towards men, but in all that we do towards God. Simplicity and godly sincerity are joyn'd together by the Apostle, and they cannot be parted asunder. The Apostle likewise
prays for the Philippians, Phil. 1. 10. That ye may approve things that are excel∣lent, that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ. In this place here are two significant words to be ex∣plained; one is, sincere:  in the Original, and according to the received Etymology, derived from , sol, and , judico: And this is as (most say) an allusion to the practise of Eagles, who turn the faces of their young ones to look upwards towards the Sun, and if they cannot behold the Sun, they throw them down as spurious, and not of the breed of Eagles. Thus far this allusion may be improved, That all our thoughts, words and actions, should be so genuine, and so rightly ordered, as they may be∣hold the Sun of Righteousness, and be approved of by Almighty God. Ano∣ther word to be opened in that Text, is . Qui inoffenso cursu per∣git. Qui non possit offendi qui nusquam offendat. inoffensive; in the Original it's : (i. e.) We should so look to our steps as that we may not stumble; and we should walk so prudently, as we may neither give nor take offence. This in∣offensive walking the Apostle injoyns in the extent and latitude of it, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. The same Apostle gives in special charge
to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6. 1. We then as workers together with him, beseech you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. And how must they evidence their not receiving the grace of God in vain? He adds verse 3. Giving no offence in any thing, that the Gospel be not blamed. All Ministers, in an equal manner, ought to keep up the honour of their Ministry, by a faithful and diligent discharge of their duty, and by the holiness of their lives and conversations. Many foul∣mouth'd rash Censurers are so ignorant, as not to distinguish between the Mini∣sters and Ministry, and therefore blame the whole Ministry for the default of some particular Ministers: Wherefore Ministers and People, especially such as are Professors of Religion, must labour to walk so unblamably, as they may (what in them lies) preserve the Repu∣tation and Honour of the Gospel-Mini∣stry. Inoffensive and circumspect walk∣ing, is the wisest walking. See (saith the Apostle, Ephes. 5. 15.) how circum∣spectly . you walk. Not only the matter, but the manner is required; and this precise walking is the wisest walking. Not as fools, but as wise. They who walk in dissolute courses, and live without God in the World, they are the fools,
and so will be found to be another day: And an especial effect of circumspect wise walking consists in redeeming of time. Redeeming the time, because the daies are evil, Ephes. 5. 10. He then whose heart is without guile, evidenceth it so to be in the integrity of his life and conversation; as a good tree is known by the good fruits which it bears. And this upright walking is the only sure and safe walking; but the contrary thereof is alwaies accompanied with variety of dangers and mischiefs: As Solomon saith, Prov. 10. 9. He that walketh uprightly, walketh surely; but he that perverteth his waies shall be known.
CHAP. XI. Of Mortification of the Deeds of the Body. THe eleventh Character of a sincere Charact. 11. Mortifia∣tion of the Deeds of the Body. Sect. 1. Heart, is Mortification of the Deeds of the Body; i. e. all manner of Lusts, and the evil fruits of corrupt nature. Carnal lusts, and all the works of the flesh must be mortified. And that we may the better know what they are, the Apostle gives us a large Catalogue of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; adultery, fornication, un∣cleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witch∣craft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, mur∣thers, drunkenness, and such like. Our duty is to confer the strength of our best endeavours, to set upon the practice of mortification of all those fore-mention∣ed, and not of those only, but of all other sins: For not only one particular member, not only one particular act, not only one particular affection or fa∣culty must be mortified, but the habit,
nature, and constitution, even the whole body of sin must be mortified. Every sin must have a mortifying blow, and not only be left half dead, but dead alto∣gether. I have heard an observation made of two eminently Learned and Dr. Job. Reynolds, and Dr. Guil. is bi∣taker. Valiant Champions of the Truth, that one of them fought so long with his Ad∣versary, that he conquer'd and slew him in his Disputations; the other did not only slay his Adversary, but buried him. Thus must we deal with every sin; our endeavour must be to destroy all our sins utterly, to kill and bury them, that so they may never rise against us in this World to our shame, nor in the World to come to our condemnation. Where∣ever we find the cursed fruits of sin, we must utterly destroy them; neither must sin only be destroyed in the fruits, but in the roots also: both root and branch must be pluckt up. When the plague of Leprosie was spread in any house, God gave a special command, That the Priest should break down the house, and the Levit. 14. 45. stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the morter of the house. Sin is a spiritual infectious Leprosie; and wherever it is, it ought to be rooted out. The mor∣ter of a Leprous house may not be made use of for daubing of any house; no
more may any sin be mingled in the worship of God. We read of the bar∣barous cruelty of Pilate, Luke 13. 1. who mingled the bloud of the Galileans with their sacrifices. But it's most just for God to reject all our services, and de∣stroy us, when we mingle our sins, vain fancies, and sinful inventions, with the purity of his worship. Nadab and Abihu are standing examples and warning∣pieces against offering strange fire unto the Lord. And that is strange fire which is after our will-worship, and devised by our own brains, and not according to divine Institution. We have the History upon record, Lev. 10. 1. And Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. We may not offer to God the lame and the blind. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy per∣son, Mal. 1. 8. saith the Lord of hosts? As for all those who put such a high affront and indignity upon God, as to offer the re∣fuse
and worst of their services, (as if they thought any good enough for him.) they incur that dreadful curse, Mal. 1. 14. But cursed be the deceiver, who hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful amongst the Heathen. If then we would offer any acceptable sacrifice unto God, we must mortifie our sins and corruptions, and offer unto God the best of our services: the male in the flock, and the best male. Although the Lord commanded the sacrifice of Bullocks and Rams, &c. yet he rejected the sacrifices of the Jews, and had no respect to their persons, nor to their sacrifices. Thus the Lord expostu∣lates the case with them, Isai. 1. 12, 13. When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts? And the Lord forbids them to bring such kind of sacrifices, verse 13. Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me. Quest. But might not they truly have replied, that incense, oblations, sacrifices, &c. were all of Divine institution? God commanded them all, why then should not they yield obedience to the com∣mand accordingly?
Answ. I answer, They were com∣manded to offer sacrifice; but they of∣fered sacrifice in a wrong manner: For in every service which we perform to God, we should do it in a right manner, and for a right end; not only the action it self, but the manner of performing it must be regarded. The Jews rested only in the Ceremonial service, and in the multitude of external sacrifices, ha∣ving no regard at all to their own hearts and lives: these they should have of∣fered up to God pure and holy; but their hearts were exceeding foul, and their hands were full of bloud; there∣fore God rejected both their persons and their sacrifices. For thus saith the Lord, verse 15. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of bloud. First then before we can offer any acceptable sa∣crifice unto God, we must set upon the practice of mortification and slaughter of all our sins. Wherefore the special charge of the Apostle is, Col. 3. 5. Mor∣tisie therefore your members which are upon the earth: fornication, uncleanness, in or∣dinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry. Not a lust may be spared: All carnal lusts may
be compared to those brats of Babylon, which are appointed for utter destru∣ction. To this purpose we may apply that of the Psalmist, Psal. 137. 8, 9. O daughter of Babylon, who art to be de∣stroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast rewarded us. Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. Quest. Some make it a Question, (though good Christians make no Que∣stion of it at all) Whether self-murther be lawful? Answ. For Answer: It's murther in the highest degree, and an apparent breach of the sixth Commandment, Thou shalt do no murther. As no murther should be committed against another, much less against a mans self: But for every one of us to slay our sins, and de∣stroy our corruptions, is no self-mur∣ther; for then a Christian lives best of all, when he hath slain his sins and cor∣ruptions. We must make it our daily prayer, that God would destroy our sins, and save our Souls. Every sin we must account a Benhadad, design'd for destru∣ction. Therefore Benhadad being ap∣pointed by God for utter destruction, Ahab by sparing him brought inevitable ruine upon himself and his people. For
thus saith the man of God to Ahab, by the word of the Lord, 1 Kings 20. 42. Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. If then we give quarter to any one sin, and hug it in our bosomes, we take a speedy course to destroy our own Souls; for by shewing foolish pity to spare any one sin, we prove cruel to our precious Souls; we our selves being the greatest enemies to our selves. Farther, we must take special cogni∣zance of such sins as either are secret, unknown to any man, or else such as come not within the verge of the punish∣ment of the Law of man; as wanton and amorous glances, vain frothy dis∣course, and covetousness, on which God sets a peculiar brand of infamy, Col. 3. 5. and calls it Idolatry. Now Idolatry is a sin of a high aggravation, for it in∣deavors to rob God of his honour, and to ascribe that honour and glory to Mammon, and worldly rich men, which is only due to the eternal Creator, God blessed for ever. Likewise we must ob∣serve what a wide difference the Apostle makes between carnal living, and the practice of mortification; the difference
is as great, as between life and death, and so are the different effects and issues of both. For saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. 13. Ifye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. We read of that glorious Victory which the Lord wrought for Israel against Amalek, an inveterate enemy; after this Victory was obtained, we read that Moses built an Altar, and called the name of it Jehovah Nissi; for he said, because the Lord hath sworn, that he will have war with Amalek from generation to generation, Exod. 17. 15, 16. Quest. The Question may be askt, Why was war to be made and continued from generation to generation against Ama∣lek? Answ. The Answer is obvious; they were cruel and bloudy Enemies, desti∣tute of all manner of mercy, and bowels of compassion, and therefore God char∣geth Moses to make a Record of this signal Deliverance. And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a memorial in a Book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; for I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven. Quest. But it will be further askt, Wherein consisted the particular sin of Awalek?
Answ. For Answer, Moses gives a full relation, Deut. 25. 17, 18, 19. Remem∣ber what Amalek did unto thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint; and he feared not God. There∣fore it shall be when the Lord thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven; thou shalt not forget it. As war by Gods appoint∣ment should be waged against Amalek, so it's the appointment of God that we should continue fighting and warring a∣gainst our sins and corruptions. In this case onely it's lawful to perpetuate a deadly fewd, and remain alwaies im∣placable and irreconcileable against all our sins; we must not make the least peace, nor admit of any parly for peace for any sin, though it be of long stand∣ing, custom and antiquity, and pleasing to flesh and bloud. To what hath been mentioned, I will add for further explication two signifi∣cant words; viz.  and , of which the Apostle makes an empha∣tical mention, 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subje∣ction;
lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a cast-away. The first word is , rendred, I keep under my body: but there lies in the word a greater emphasis; for the word signifies to beat the body black and blue; and further yet in the pro∣priety of the word, it signifies  est par sa∣ciet quae o∣culis est sub∣jecta, con∣tuendo sub∣octum, seu dejectū pre∣mo. Beza. to beat under the eye, and to leave a mark there of redness and blueness. The other word is , and this properly sig∣nifies, to bring into subjection: it's a Me∣taphor took from Oxen, whom we bring under the yoke; or from any such Crea∣tures whom we enslave or captivate, and bring them into subjection, for our use and service. We should then indeavor so to bring down our bodies, and sub∣due them, as to make them serviceable to our souls, and subject and obedient to the yoke of Christ; if so, we have well learn'd the Doctrine of Mortifica∣tion. A learned moral Heathen will condemn many dissolute livers, who call themselves Christians, and yet live without God in the world: I am (saith Seneca) greater, and born to greater things, than to be a slave to my body. Every Drunkard is a slave to his Cups, and every Whoremonger a slave to his Harlot, and every covetous Worldling
is a slave to his Mammon: But our de∣sign must not be to enslave our Souls to our Bodies; but the design which we drive, must be to make our Bodies ser∣viceable to our Souls. It was an excel∣lent saying of Ephrem Syrus, who flourisht in the third Century after Christ; He that feasts his Body, and starves his Soul, is like him that feasts his Slave, and starves his Wife.
CHAP. XII. Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit is a Character of a sincere Heart. THe twelfth and last Character of sin∣cerity Charact. 12. Vivification of the fruits of the Spi∣rit. Sect. 1. (which I shall only mention) is, The Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit. After mortification of the deeds of the Body, there must necessarily fol∣low, the Vivification of the Fruits of the Spirit; for where Christ dwells in a Soul by faith, and by the influence of his grace, the Body is dead, (as the Apostle saith, Rom. 8. 10.) because of sin; but the spirit is life, because of righteousness. A Learned and Judicious Writer thus interprets that Scripture; Quam vis peccatum morfi nos adjudicet quatenus in nobis remanet primae na∣turae vitiosibus spiritum tamea Dei esse victore noc obstare quod tantum pri∣mitiis donati sumus quia vel una ejus sciatilla viae semen est. Calv. in Loc. Although (saith he) sin con∣demns us to death, so far as the remainders of cor∣rupt nature, and the vitiosity thereof remains in us, yet the Spirit is Conquerour: wherefore notwithstanding out primi∣tive corruption, one spark of the Spirit
of God is a seed of life to us, though in this world we receive only the first∣fruits thereof. All those who by na∣ture are dead in trespasses and sins, can never be brought from death to life, and from the state of nature into the state of grace, any other way but by the quickning virtue of Jesus Christ. For saith the Apostle, You hath he quickned, who were dead in your trespasses and sins. Such as are now (through grace) in a state of regeneracy, were in their na∣tural condition in a state of unregene∣racy; and such who are now quickned, were formerly in a dead condition: As it's said of the converted Prodigal in the Parable, Luke 15. 32. He was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found. The Apostle discovers the great diffe∣rence between the state of regeneracy and unregeneracy, (and the difference is great, as great as the difference be∣tween life and death.) Let's diligently review the words of the Apostle, Where∣in Ephes. 2. 2, 3. in time past ye walked according to the course of this World, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of diso∣bedience: Among whom also we had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires (or wills) of
the flesh, and of the mind, and were by na∣ture . the children of wrath, even as others. And what is the sole moving cause of all? it followeth vers. 4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love where∣with he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickned us together with . Sect. 2. Christ; by grace ye are saved. Quest. But the Question may be askt, How may such who are regenerated and quickned by Christ, be distinguished from such who are unregenerate, and yet dead in their trespasses and sins? Answ. I Answer, as a tree may be known by its fruits which it bears; i. e. a good tree, by good fruits; and a bad tree, by bad fruits; so may regenerate be distinguished from unregenerate: un∣regenerate bring forth the fruits of the flesh, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, &c. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. before mentioned; but regenerate persons bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. St. Paul gives us a double Catalogue; one is short, but very comprehensive, Ephes. 5. 9. The fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and truth. The other is a large Cata∣logue, Gal. 5. 22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, tem∣perance, against such there is no Law. If
then the fruits of the Spirit exert and manifest themselves in the holiness of our lives and conversations, it's an in∣fallible sign of our vivification by the Spirit of Jesus Christ. By those twelve forementioned Cha∣racters of a sincere Heart, we may and must put our selves upon a strict search and enquiry, whether our hearts be sin∣cere and upright towards God? We must then with all diligence and impartiality make a strict search into our hearts; we must ask, What have I done? Jer. 8. 6. we must commune with our own hearts, Psal. 4. 4. and (as the Church resolves, Lam. 3. 40.) Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. And I am per∣swaded, that if we have one of those Characters forementioned in sincerity and in truth, we have the rest; for they are all Links of one and the same golden Chain, and there's such a concatenation between them, as one cannot be sepa∣rated from another.
CHAP. XIII. Containing the Comforts pertaining to sincere Christians in their Lives in this World. HAving laid down those twelve fore∣mentioned Characters and Signs of Sincerity, I thence infer this Conclusion, That it's the grand Duty incumbent up∣on us all, and every one in particular, to propound the Question (as in the pre∣sence of God) to his own Soul, Am I a sincere-hearted Christian, yea or no? Let us with deliberate thoughts consider of those twelve above-named Signs and Marks of Sincerity, and examine our selves by them accordingly: herein con∣sists the grand Labour and Work, to busie our selves with all frequent and serious self-reflections, and heart-exa∣minations; and let us as one man, eve∣ry one particularly, propound the Que∣stion (as in the presence of God) to his own Soul, saving, Is my heart sincere and upright towards God? There are many needless Questions propounded,
which gender strife, and it were better that they had been buried in silence al∣together; but here is the Question wor∣thy of our studying and stating, viz. Whether our hearts stand sincere to∣wards God? As for all those whose hearts are without guile, as Nathanael's was, John 1. 47. who have truth in the inward parts, (as God requires, Psal. 37. 6.) who are men after God's own heart, (as David was) whose hearts are perfect with God, as Hezekiah, Asa, and Jeho∣saphat were, these notwithstanding in∣firmities incident to human nature, shall find the comfort and benefit of their up∣rightness and sincerity in their lives, and in their deaths, and after death to all eternity. Sincere-hearted Christians receive Sincere per∣sons receive comfort in their lives. comfort in their lives: Although God's dear Children meet with variety of sore and grievous afflictions in this present World, and encounter with many ten∣tations, and great troubles and vexati∣ons, insomuch as they are the very Butt and Mark against which their implacable Enemies shoot their keenest and sharpest Arrows, poisoned and destructive: yet notwithstanding all their sufferings, a good od, a good Cause, and a good Conscience, will carry them chearfully
through all their troubles, and abun∣dantly quiet and support their spirits. And the least glimpse of God's recon∣ciled countenance in Christ, will infi∣nitely compensate for all the frowns and fury of implacable Adversaries; inward comforts will make amends for out∣ward troubles. A good Conscience, like Ahimaaz, will bring good tidings; or like a Halcyon, (as is said) appears in a storm, as an emblem of a calm ap∣proaching. Or a good Conscience may resemble Noah's Dove, which brought an Olive-leaf in her mouth, in token that the waters were abated. As Aaron's Rod swallowed up all the Rods of the Magicians; so a pacified Conscience, by the consolations of God's spirit, will swallow up all manner of troubles and vexations whatsoever. A sincere heart, and the answer of a good conscience, and the apprehension of God's recon∣ciled countenance in the face of Christ, will compose and quiet our spirits, and becalm and make them sedate, and set∣tle all manner of fluctuating and tumul∣tuating thoughts. To this purpose I'le cite an excellent passage of St. Augustine. Tumultu∣osis varie∣tatibus di∣laniantur cogitationes meae, intimae viscera a∣nimae, meae donet in te coajinam purgatus & liuidus ge amoris tui. Aug. conf. l. c. 29. My thoughts (saith he) are torn in pieces with variety of tumults, even my inward bowels are torn in pieces,
until I make haste to be purged, and and melted with the fire of thy love. One only word spoken by Christ, sud∣denly becalm'd a rough and tempestu∣ous Sea; for when the Disciples were afraid, Matth. 8. 26. Christ arose, and re∣buked the Winds and the Sea, and there was a great calm. And amidst variety of storms and tempests, even such winds which blow fiercer than that called Eu∣roclydon, Acts 27. 17. Christ can make all still: and so can he amidst the greatest inward and sharpest storms of Christians (when they are at their wits end, and know not what to do) Christ (I say) can speak a word of peace unto their Souls, saying, Son, or Daughter, be of good com∣fort, all thy sins are forgiven thee. Upon the hearing of such a gracious word, there will follow a marvelous tranqui∣lity and serenity upon the spirit. It cannot be denied (though it ought to be bewailed) but the best of Saints here on earth have their spots and fail∣ings; for they are encompassed in this World with a body of sin and corru∣ption, yet they are sensible of, and mourn for their spots and failings, (for they are their sorrow, and their heavy burthen.) They do not willingly allow themselves in any sin, nor willingly de∣part
from any command. Sin in a Child of God is a torment to him, like a bro∣ken leg, or a broken tooth; it's matter of dolour and anguish to him. Sin in a Child of God, is like Garbidge thrown into a running stream, it is still running and purging away of all manner of filth and impurity. But sin in an unregene∣rate man is like Garbidge thrown into a standing pond, there it abides, and sends forth a loathsome and stinking sa∣vour. However, all those whose hearts are upright with God, make it their continual employment to search their hearts, and to wash and cleanse them: hereupon after searching of their hearts, they learn to know them better; and they know more evil by themselves than all the World can tell them of; hence follows heart-compunction, sighing and mourning. And being thus apprehen∣sive of their own impotency and unwor∣thiness, and forlorn condition, they make haste to Christ, and implore his gracious assistance; and beseech him to cleanse them, and make them white in his Bloud. Wherefore as often as that inveterate enemy Satan, and all mali∣cious and ungodly men, the Devils in∣struments, prefer large Bills of Accusa∣tions and false Indictments against the
Saints, they make their appeal to the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, who alwaies judgeth righteously. The Apostle makes an expostulation, and gives an answer thereunto every way sa∣tisfactory, Rom. 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifieth. The most bitter Ac∣cusations, and most violent Persecutions of them all are altogether insignificant, and of no effect, force or vertue, against any of those whom God justifies: for Gods justification and discharge will fully acquit and exonerate us, and save us harmless and indemnified against all the demands, charges, suggestions, and libels made against us by the worst of Enemies. For it follows in the next words; Who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us. The frequent and serious meditation of these things, abundantly support and comfort the godly in their Pilgrimage on Earth. Albeit the best of Gods chil∣dren meet with conflicts and antipathies, and are excercised in combats against the Flesh, the Devil, and the World, those spiritual Enemies of their Salvation, yet through the strength of Christ they shall
return with Trophies of Victory; and by experience they shall find the flesh to be weaker and weaker, and the spi∣rit stronger: as it was said of the houses of David and Saul, this grew weaker and weaker, and the other grew stronger and stronger. But whilst we are in this World we must never cast down our weapons, but still continue fighting against sin; we must not expect to rest from our la∣bours till we are dead. Let's then with all diligence and fidelity manage our spi∣ritual warfare, and in all things labour to approve our hearts sincere to God, and we shall at length conclude with the Apostle, Rom. 8, 37. Nay, in all these . things we are more then conquerors, through him that loved us.
CHAP. XIV. Containing the Comforts which sin∣cere-hearted Persons enjoy in their Deaths. HAving represented in the former Chapter the great comforts which such whose hearts are sincere with God receive in their lives, in the second place I come to discover the comforts of them in their deaths: Although by no means may we make a judgment of the course of the life, by reason of some distempers and passions which oftentimes proceed from strength of Diseases; yet usually we read of the deliberate, composed and serious professions of many good Chri∣stians, which they have made on the bed of languishing. Solomon saith, Prov. 14. 32. The righteous hath hope in his death. And hope grounded on Divine promises affords us superabundant consolation. When the Prophet Isaiah was sent to He∣zekiah, to give him warning of his death, which was suddenly approaching, then Hezekiah recollects his serious thoughts,
and reflects upon his upright walking with God in his whole life and conver∣sation; the remembrance whereof ad∣ministred ground of singular consolation unto his Soul. The History is on record in holy Scripture; 2 Kings 20. 1, 2, 3. In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death: and the Prophet Isaiah the son of Amos came to him, and said unto him, Set thine house in order, for thou shalt die and not live. Then he turned his face unto the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight. Likewise St. Paul, ap∣prehending the time of his dissolution to draw near, thus raiseth to himself a ground of strong consolation, 2 Tim. 4. 7, 8. For (saith he) I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them that love his ap∣pearing. We commonly say, That the house of Death is the house of Truth; and where the senses are exercised, and the memory and judgment are not ex∣tinct,
there will be plain dealing, and there will be made plain discoveries. As for such (for them only I now mention) whose hearts are upright with God, the remembrance of the sincerity of their hearts, next to the consolations of Gods spirit, will revive their spirits on their beds of languishing. Let us consider before hand, that we shall all die; for Death is the common lot and portion of all mankind, Heb. 9. 27. it is Gods appointment: Would we not then be glad when we are cast upon our Death-beds, to have something at that time o comfort us? when we are leav∣ing of these houses of Clay, and unclo∣thing of our selves of our mortal Bodies, what is that which will be a ground of comfort to bear up our spirits? Will thousands of Gold and Silver purchase the Favour of God? can the greatest Mannors, Lordships, and Revenues of the World? Can an Imperial Diadem bib Death to stay a longer time? Can all the Grandees and Potenates of this World, should they all unite as one man, avail any thing to make our peace with God? No, questionless: For no great Personages, nor great Riches, can either der themselves or us from the stroke of Death, nor pacifie their own
nor our Consciences, nor make any peace and reconciliation either for themselves or for us at that day. Some in this World being arrested for Debt, have made the Serjeant drunk, and so have made an escape out of his hands. But it is altogether impossible to deal so with the grim Serjeant Death; none can escape Deaths dart, wherever they run Death will strike them to the heart. Now then, when all the Gold and Silver which the Universe can afford, when all the interest of Friends, though great and potent, cannot administer any comfort, peace and satisfaction to us when we lie upon our Death-beds, then Oh then! is that necessary instant, when the light of Gods gracious countenance, shining upon us in the face of Christ, can only revive our spirits, and give us real and durable joy, peace and comfort; when all creature comforts are Physicians of Job 13. 4. no value, empty Cyphers, insufficient and unable to give us any satisfacti∣on. This then is that good which the Psalmist had experienced, and prayed for it above all besides, Psal. 4. 6, 7, 8. There be many that say, Who will shew us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more then in the
time that their corn and wine increased. I Aspice nos sereao vul∣tu, ostende te nobis fa∣vere, recipe no in gra∣tiam, conso∣lare to, lae∣tifica no. tuâ praes∣tiâ: id non famus soliciti quid fiat in hoc mundo, car impit per veniat ad summas ope, & ec∣clesia mise∣re prima∣tur. Mol∣lerus. will both lay me down in peace and sleep; for thou Lord only makest me dwell in safety. Hence it evidently appears, that the only saving good consists in the light of Gods gracious countenance. For this we must be earnest and indefatigable solicitors at the Throne of Grace: How∣ever the men of the World may frown on us, and the Riches of the World may forsake us, yet if God smile on us, and be reconciled to us in Christ, he will never leave us nor forsake us, no not when we are gray-headed, and upon our beds of languishing; and when our natural strength fails, and our diseases do much afflict us, and the pains thereof make us roar, the reflection of our well∣spent time in giving up our strength to the service of God, and of improving of our health to glorifie God, will be even our Death-beds singular ground of con∣solation, even the reviving of the me∣mory of such time, strength, and health so imployed in the service of God. When the faithfulest of our Friends, and such as are most willing to do us good, are not able to help us at all; when learned Physicians have given us over, as alto∣gether desperate and incurable; and when the pains and pangs of a long,
wasting, lingring and tormenting disease, even a complication of diseases are inex∣pressible, and our throats rattle, and the abundance of Phlegm is ready to suffo∣cate us, and our eye-strings are ready to break, and our eyes are dim and gastly, and every breath we take (though with much difficulty) is like to be our last breathing. Oh! then is the time that the testimony of a good conscience, that (as the Apostle professeth, 2 Cor. 1. 12.) in sim∣plicity, and in godly sincerity, we had our conversation in this world, will a∣bundantly comfort us; and the appre∣hension of the love of God in Christ will revive our fainting spirits, and give strength in our weakness, and raise up our spirits, and make us couragious, that we shall not be afraid of Death, the King of terrors; which though it be terrible in it self, and (as the Philosopher saith) . the most terrible of all terrible things; yet through the mediation of Jesus Christ, Death is a conquer'd Enemy; Christ hath conquer'd Death, and took away its sting. That which makes Death so terrible, is the sting of sin; but when the sting is took away, Death can no more hurt us than a Snake that hath lost its sting, or an Adder that hath its teeth knockt out. The Apostle cries out,
1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? The sting of Death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. What is Death to a Child of God, reconciled to him by the  hrist? It's no more (as a ding Saint exprest) then a Child of God can embrace with both his arms: And he closing his arms together died immediately. To a Child of God Death is the greatest preferment; by Death he is translated from a vale of tears and misery, to everlasting happiness. It's like  Gaol-delivery, which delivers the Soul from the Bodies imprisonment, and sets it at liberty to enjoy the happiness amongst Saints in glory. VVhat's then the grand duty incumbent on us all? It is thus: If we would desire to die happily, we must live holily; if we would die the death of thghteous, we must labour to live the life of the righteous: we should so live every day, as we desire to be sound at the last day. And if we de∣sire comfort in our death, we must make daily preparation, by approving our hearts to God in a holy and circumspect life and conversation. It is a very great mercy and condescension in God, to ac∣cept
Evangelical instead of Legal per∣fection; and to accept of a willing mind instead of real performances. For we read, Heb. 11. 17. that by faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac. And likewise the Apostle saith, If there be a willing mind it is accepted, according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. When then we come to die, to consider that our hearts are sin∣cere with God, and that our peace is made with him by the redemption and intercession of Christ, and that all our sins are washt away, and we are made white in the Bloud of the Lamb, these Meditations will comfort us in Life and in Death. Let's add hereunto for incouragement and comfort to the living, the dying Speeches of many eminent Saints, who upon their Death-beds breath'd forth snch savoury Speeches, which ought to be had in everlasting remembrance. I shall gather sparingly from so great a heap, and only select some choice In∣stances, which deserve a special remark to be set upon them. Old Simeon's Song was sweet before his Funeral, saying, Luke 2. 29, 30. Lord, now lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy Word; for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation,
Stephen, the Protomartyr, breath'd forth this dying Prayer, Acts 7. 59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Ignatius, who liv'd in the sirst Cen∣tury, . Vid. Ignat. epist. ad Rom. who was (as the Ecclesiastical Wri∣ters say) twelve years of age when Christ was crucified, and afterward St. John's Auditor, used frequently to say, My Love is crucified. And when he was brought to Martyrdom, and the wild Beasts were let loose to tear him in pieces, he coura∣giously said, I am the Wheat or Grain to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that I may be pure Bread for my Ma∣sters tooth: Let fire, rack, pullies, yea and all the torments of Hell come on me, so I may win Christ. Polycarpus, when the Proconsul urged him to deny Christ, answered, I have served Christ Eighty six years, and he hath not done me hurt, and shall I now deny him? When they would have tied him to the Stake to be burned, he desired to stand untied, saying, Let me alone, I pray you; for he that gave me strength to come to this fire, will also give me patience to abide in the same, without your tying. Cyprian, that eminent Martyr for the truth, after his condemnation, said, Blessed be God for this Gaol-delivery.
Ambrose, on his Death bed, said to his Friends about him, I have not so lived, that I am ashamed to live any longer; nor fear I death, because I have a good Lord. Some young men seeing the excellent death of St. Ambrose, and hearing what rare speeches he ut∣tered, one of those young men turned to his fellow, and said, Oh! that I might live with you, and die with him. John Lambert, a Martyr in Queen Ma∣ry's daies, said amidst the flame, None but Christ, none but Christ. Mr. Bradford, at the Stake in Smith∣field, embraced the Reeds and Fagots which were suddenly to be set on fire to burn him, and said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leadeth unto Life, and few there be that find it. And he encouraged his fellow-Martyr, saying, Be of good comfort, Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord this night: If there be any way to Heaven on horse-back, or in fiery Chariots, this is it. Martin Luther, that great scourge of the Pope, and Champion sor the Prote∣stant Religion, on his Death-bed said, Thee, O Christ, have I taught, thee have I trusted, thee have I loved; into thy hands I commend my spirit.
Bucer, an eminent Reformer, said ne his death, No man by talk shall with draw my mind from Christ crucified from Heaven, and my speedy Depa∣ture, on which my Soul is fixed. Whe one advised him to arm himself again Saans temptations, he answered, Sa∣tan hath nothing to do with me; Go forbid but that now my Soul shoul be sure of sweet consolation. John Ardley, a Martyr in Queen Mary' dais, said, If every hair of my hea were a man, it should suffer death i the faith I now stand in. To the sam purpose William Sparrow spake, and Ag∣nes Stanley. Alice Driver, when the Chain was a∣bout her Neck, Here is (saith she)  goodly Neckerchief, blessed be Go for it. John Noyes, a Martyr, kissing the Stake sain, Blessed be God that ever I wa born for this day. And he added far∣ther to his fellow Martyrs a word of sin∣gular consolation, saying, We shal not lose our lives in this fire, bu change them for a better; and fo Coals have Parls. &c. What need I produce any more In∣stances? with what joy have many sin∣cere hearted Christians lookt death in
the face, so that they had rather die than live? Melancthon rejoyced when he was to die, saying; That he should be with Christ, and enjoy fellowship with him and the Church triumphant; and then be freed from all those hot disputes and contentions of Divines, which were very great in those days. Grynaeus, a great Scholar, when he came to die, said; O happy day, when I may depart out of this troublesome and sin∣ful world, and to go to those blessed Souls before departed. He writing to his friend Chytraeus, said; If we never see one ano∣ther again in this world, yet we shall meet in that place where Luther and Zuinglius agree very well together. Mr. Bolton on his dying bd said; I am now drawing on apace to my dissolution: Hold out faith and patience, your work will quickly be attained. That great Magazine of Learning Mr. John Selden, when he came to die, said; That he accounted all his Learning nothing at all in comparison of Christ. Mr. Giles Workman, a worthy Mini∣ster of the Gospel in Glocester shire, a little before his death said; That he had a little sincerity of heart, and that was a comfort to him.
Mr. John Ferriby, a Minister of the Gospel in Essex, when he was dying said; That he left his Wife and Children with God, and his gracious promises. Mr. Gifford, a Minister in Northam∣pton-shire, said to his Children upon his Death-bed; That if they feared God, (to which he earnestly exhorted them) they should not want; but if they did not fear God, he wisht that they might want till they did fear him. Mr. Samuel Hieron, a rare Minister, (whose excellent writings praise him in the gate) on his Death-bed said; That the same God who took care for the Ravens and Sparrows, would likewise take care for the young Hierons. And so it came to pass, for God stirred up the hearts of some charitably affe∣cted persons, who carefully educated his Children; and so those young Hierons were well provided for. I shall conclude this head with the words of the Psalmist; Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psal. 116. 15. Surely he shall not be moved for ever; the righteous shall be in ever∣lasting remembrance, Psal. 112. 6. And I will only add words of Solomon, Prov. 10. 9. The memory of the just is blessed.
CHAP. XV. Containing the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven; or the inex∣pressible Consolations which the Godly, even all sincere-hearted Persons, enjoy in Heaven to all Eternity. IN the third and last place, let's con∣sider, 3. The com∣forts of the godly afte death. Sect. 1. or rather admire at the hap∣piness, even the perfection of all com∣forts and happiness, which the Saints shall enjoy after death in the highest Heavens to all eternity. As for all those who lived in hypocrisie and dissimula∣tion, and lived without repentance, and so died; and as for all such who lived without God in the world, having no fear of God before their eyes, but have committed sin with greediness, and have run into all excess of riot, and so die in their unbelief and impenitency, these are the Goats which shall stand on Christs left hand; and against them he will pro∣nounce that dreadful sentence of con∣demnation, Matth 25. 41. Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, pre∣pared for the Devil and his Angels. But all upright and sincere-hearted Christians, who are only Christs sheep, they shall stand at Christs right hand; and he will pronounce to them that comfortable soul∣ravishing sentence of absolution; Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foun∣dation of the world, verse 34. However such who are Gods Jewels, and precious in sight, are vilisied and trampled on by the wicked of the world, as if they were no better than the filth of 1 Cor. 4. 13. . the world, and the off-scouring of all things yet at the general resurrection, both of just and unjust, there will be a resurre∣ction of the names and of the causes of the righteous, however in this world they have been traduced and scorned. Then the meanest of glorified Saints (whom this world thought they could not think bad enough) shall have the preheminence and superiority above all the ungodly, though they have been never so great in this present world; for (so saith the Psalmist, Psal. 49. 14.) the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. From this Scripture it plainly appears, that at the general re∣surrection the godly shall be known to
the whole world to have dominion and Quamvis c demer∣sis sit i teebris mund is, exritur subito n∣va manè quod faci∣em verae & aeetaae ve obis restituet. Calv. in Loc. preheminence above all the ungody men of this world. And that all such who truly fear God, though in this world they were in a poor and abject condi∣tion, yet at that great day they shall be in a better condition, every way rich and honourable, and infinitely happier than any ungodly, great, and rich men can be in this present world. Farther, the godly in glory shall par∣take of nothing else but joy and happi∣ness, and the perfection of both; but damned wretches shall be for ever de∣bar'd from all manner of joy, and par∣take of nothing else but hopeless sor∣row, and endless misery. At the ge∣neral Judgment, when all without ex∣ception shall appear before the Judgment∣seat 2 Cor. 5. 10. of Christ, then there shall appear a great and wide difference between god and bad, chaff and wheat, sheep and goats: that day will make a great and clear distinction. Then all the Enemies of Christ and of his Church, who re∣joyced in persecuting Christ here on Earth in his Members, would be glad to creep into holes (if possible) that they might hide themselves from the wrath of the Lamb. Then they will wish that the mountains might fall upon them,
and that Rocks and Hills, Dens or Caves might shelter and cover them from the face of the Lamb incensed against them. The those bloudy Persecutors of Christ shall see him whom they have pierced, zech. 1. 10. Judas, who betrayed Christ with a hypocritical kiss; Pilate, who (not∣withstanding the reluctancy of his own conscience) condemned Christ to please the people, and released Barabb as, an in∣famous Thief and Murtherer; the Sol∣diers, who crucified him; and after they had first been his Executioners, were his Executors to take his Garments: All these, and all other Enemies of Jesus Christ, shall see him at that great Day to their terror and condemnation. Those giddy-pated people, who a little before cried to Christ Hosanna, and afterwards cried, Crucifie him, Crucifie him, shall ap∣pear before Christs Judgment-seat, and then receive their sentence. Those cur∣sed Jews, who wisht that the bloud of Christ might be upon them, and their Chil∣dren (except such only who are washt in Christ's bloud) shall to their dread, and horror be condemn'd for embrewing their hands in the innocent bloud of Christ. At the day of Judgment all fals Judg∣ments, and unrighteous sentences past
on earth shall be reverst. Pontius Pilate who past an unjust judgment against Christ, shall have a just judgment past upon him. Luther used to say, that At the day of Judgment, John Huss and Jerome Luth. Loc. Com. of Prague shall appear to be good men, when the Pope and his Cardinalls shall ap∣pear to be vile, and wicked wretches. St Bernard us'd to say. That the Day will Veniet Ve∣niet Dies quando ma∣le judicata rejudicabit Deu. Bern. come, it will certainly come, when God will judg over again all false judgment. But as for all those whose hearts were up∣right with God, whilst they liv'd in this world, these after death are translated into an estate of glory and happiness, and in the highest heavens receive consolati∣ons beyond all expression, and a weight of glory beyond the capacity of any mor∣tal man, which Christ gives to all his Children, who in their Pilgrimage on earth, endeavoured with their whole heart, and strength, to serve the Lord in sincerity, and in truth. All those who were on earth Sincere-hearted, and real Saints, shall be acknowledged to be such by Christ himself at the Day of Judg∣ment. No sin, no failing, nor imperfecti∣on shall at all be layd to their Charge in that day; for all failings and sins, and all manner of imperfections shall be washt away in the bloud of Jesus Christ. What
ever good things the Saints have done on earth, shall be all remembred, and not any one thing forgotten at the day of judgment. But whatever was bad and sinfull that they committed on earth, shall not be layd to their Charge, but shall be blotted out of the Book of Gods Remembrance, and God will cast them into the depth of the sea. O: What a joyfull day, and full of Comfort will the day of judgment be to all the Children of God! Then they shall lift up their heads with Comfort and behold him who is their Judg, as their Redeemer, Advocate, Intercessor, and Flder Brother, and he will pronounce for them a sen∣tence of Absolution. At that day, all glorified Saints shall have their bodily eyes irradiated with the splendor of glo∣ry▪ and they shall be inabled to behold the Beatificall Vision, and this is he Happiness of all Happiness, and this only is their portion, and appropriated to them alone who are pure in heart. Thy are blessed (as our Saviour pro∣nounceth them) Who are pure in heart, for they shall see God. Then the Saints in glory shall sit in Judgment as Assessors with Christ, and shall approve of the righteous sentence of Christ in Con∣demning their unrighteous Judges.
Then they shall see the Omniporent E∣ternal Jehovah, the Beeing of all Beeings the first person in Trinity uncreated, un∣begotten, and unproceeding: Then they shall see Christ the Mediator of th New Covenant, their only Saviour and Redeemer uncreated, but begotten, and not proceeding, who is the second Per∣son in Trinity: Then they shall see the holy Ghost the third Person in Trinity neither created, nor begotten, but pro∣ceeding from both. The Glorifyd Saints (what they believed when they were militant on earth) shall in heaven understand the great Mystery of the Tri∣nity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. One glorified Saint shall know more, then all the Learned men in the world. I'le conclude with this Doxology. Now to the holy and blessed Trinity, and one God in Ʋnity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honour and Glory, Praise and Thanksgiving, Dominion and Obedience, henceforth and unto all E∣ternity, Amen,
THE Contents of this Treatise. CHAP. I. OF spiritual poverty p. 1. Sect. I. Spiritual poverty consists in empty∣ing of the heart of what is self ibid. Sect II. Every humble spirited man is low, vile and abject in his own eyes p. 3. Sect. III. One who is spiritually poor, medi∣tates frequently and seriously upon the promises, and makes particular applica∣tion of them p. 6. Sect. IV. One that is poor in spirit is weak, fik, and in a distressed condition as to his own apprehension, and makes haste unto Christ for help p. 9. CHAP. II. Concerning the highest prizing and valuing
of Jesus Christ p. 11. Sect. I. It's an infallible sign of a true Be∣liever to value and prefer Christ before all the riches of the world p. 11. Sect. II. Of ardney and strength of affe∣ction to Jesus Christ p. 14. CHAP. III. Of a heart in love with holiness, evidenced in  holy life and conversation p. 16. Sect. I. Every true Believer loves holiness for it self, because it is the image of God ibid. Sect. II. Where holiness is in the heart, it is fruitful in the life p. 19. CHAP. IV. Of ingenuous sorrow for sin p. 24. Sect. I. Ingenuous sorrow is more for the sin than the punishment ibid. Sect. II. There is a great difference between the mournings of Cain, Ahab. Judas, &c. and the mournings of. David, Paul, Peter, &c. p. 25. Sect. III. There's a great difference between the mourning of slaves and mourning of children p. 30.
CHAP. V. Of sorrowing and mourning for others sins p. 33. Sect. I. A godly mourner mourns for others sins ibid. Sect. II. We must be affected with, and af∣flicted for the sins of others, remembring that we are men of like passions p. 37. CHAP. VI. Of approving our hearts unto God p. 42. Sect. I. A sincere-herted Christian labours to aprove his heart to God, and put him∣self upon God's trial ibid. Sect. II. Though we are subject to many in∣firmities, we must groan under the bur∣then of them p. 44. CHAP. VII. Of pressing forward towards perfection p. 49. Sect. I. It's an Apostolical character, and Apostolical practice, to press forward to∣wards perfection ibid. Sect. II. Instances in particulars whether we press forward towards perfection p. 52.
CHAP. VIII. Of a strict watch set upon the heart against bosome sins p. 55. Sect. I. A sincere heart endeavors to keep it self from every beloved sin ibid. Sect. II. No sin so little but deserves dam∣nation p. 59. Sect. III. An illustration by similitudes p. 61. CHAP. IX. An endeavor against every sin, and for the practice of every duty p. 65. Sect. I. The desire and endeavor must be against every sin ibid. Sect. II. The endeavor must be to obey all commands, and practice all duties p. 69. CHAP. X. Of a heart without guile p. 73. Sect. I. The heart must be without guile ibid. Sect. II. Every person that is upright is compounded of three words, viz. simpli∣city, singleness, and sincerity p. 74.
CHAP. XI. Of mortification of the deeds of the body p. 80. Sect. I. The deeds of the body, i. e. all lusts ought to be mortified ibid. Sect. II. Questions propounded and answer∣ed p. 83. CHAP. XII. Vivisication of the fruits of the Spirit p. 91. Sect. I. Beside mortification of the deeds of the body, there must be a vivification of the fruits of the Spirit ibid. Sect. II. How this is to be discerned p. 93. CHAP. XIII. Containing the comforts of sincere Chri∣stians p. 95. Sect I. Sincere Christians have comforts in their lives ibid. Sect. II. Sincere Christians are sensible of their sins, and mourn for them p. 98. CHAP. XIV. Sincere-hearted Christians have comforts in their deaths p. 102. Sect. I. The comfortable deaths of such as
are sincere p. 102 Sect. II. We ought to prepare for deat p. 10 Sect. III. The ying speeches of Saints p. 109 CHAP. XII. Containing the happiness of the Saints i Heaven p. 115 Sect. I. The Saints in Heaven receive per fection of happiness ibid Sect. II. At the day of Judgment all fal judgments shall be reverst p. 118 FINIS.
