W2716 12929980 95631
Dr WILLIAMS's LAST SERMON AT Mr. BOYLE's Lecture, 1695.
ADVERTISEMENT. HAVING now finished the Course of Sermons for the Year 1695. Those of the Present Year belonging to the same Argu∣ment, will (God willing) be speedily Publish∣ed in their Order, viz. Concerning the Rule of Scripture, and The Way of Interpretation.
The Perfection of the Evangelical Revelation. A SERMON Preached at St. Martins in the Fields, Nov. 4. 1695. BEING THE Eighth and Last of the LECTURE For that YEAR, Founded by the Honourable ROBERT BOYLE, Esquire. By JOHN WILLIAMS, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. LONDON: Prined for Ri. Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill, Ser.r & Junr: At the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard; and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey. M DC XC VI
HEB. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times, and in divers manners spake in time past unto the Fa∣thers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, &c. IN which words (as I have shew∣ed) there is. 1. A Description of Revelati∣on, 'tis God's speaking. 2. The Certainty of such a Revelation, God spake, 'tis taken for granted. 3. The Order observed in it, it was at sun∣dry times. 4. The Perfection and Completion of all; God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. Under the Third, (1.) I Have considered the several ways by which God did reveal himself, as Inspiration, &c.
(2.) Have shewed the difference between Divine Inspirations, and Diabolical Illusions, and Natural Impressions. (3.) I am now to consider the several periods before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, and the gradual progress of Reve∣lation from first to last, from the lower to the higher degree, and the perpetual respect one had to the other. (4.) I am to consider, why God did thus gra∣dually and at sundry times proceed in revealing his Will to Mankind; and why he did not at the first communicate his Will to them as fully and perfectly, as he did in the last daies by his Son. And then I am to conclude with the last Ge∣neral, viz. 4. General; Where I am to shew the Perfe∣ction of the Gospel Revelation, and that there is not to be any other Revelation till the end of the World. I have here a large Field before me; and many difficult Points to treat of; but because this is the Concluding Lecture of the Year, I shall sum it up, and pass through the Particulars with as much brevity as the time will allow; and with as much attention as I can; though
I must fall short of what the Subject and Nature of the things to be spoken of doth deserve, and might otherwise, be treated of. (3.) I am now come to the Third Branch, and to consider the several Periods, viz. the Pa∣triarchal before the Law, the Mosaical under the Law, and the Evangelical under the Gospel. The Patriarchal State, is that which extended from Adam to the Deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, and the giving the Law at Mount Sinai, which included in it the space of Two thousand five hundred Years, and upward. The Mosaical or Legal State, was that which extended from the delivery of the Law at Sinai, to the preaching of John the Baptist, with whom ended the time past, and the last daies began; which included in it the space of One thousand four hundred Years, and upward. The Evangelical State, is that which began with John the Baptist, and is to continue to the Worlds end. In the consideration of these three States, we may observe, That there is a great difference be∣tween them, and a gradual ascent from the less perfect to the greater; so that the Mosaical is su∣perior to the Patriarchal, and the Evangelical to the Mosaical.
When I speak of the Patriarchal, I intend to give it all the advantage, by looking upon it as a State of Revelation, and not a bare State of Nature; for I have before proved, that there was a Revelation from the beginning, and de∣rived down by a constant Pedigree and Succes∣sion, more or less. But what it was, we must in great part rather conjecture, than can certainly know; especially as to the Antediluvian State. For the Flood having swept away the whole Stock of the ungodly Cainites, it was the design of Providence that their Memorial should perish with them: And so the Divine Penman contract∣ed that State, and gives us only a Breviat of what passed before the Flood. We have there the History of the Creation, Fall, and Recovery of Man; and may observe how seasonably Almighty God interposed for his Comfort and Relief, by the promise of the Seed of the Woman. We may observe further, how for the maintaining of his Authority, and the manifestation of his Justice and Holiness, and to imprint on the minds of Men a dread of offending for the future, and to keep up an expectation of the Son of God's appearing and becoming a Sacrifice in our Nature, God esta∣blished from the very first a course of Sacrifices;
by the means of which Atonement Sinners might have a right Notion of Almighty God: when his Justice and Mercy were thus inter∣mingled; that they might not be encouraged to presume on one hand, nor be thrown into despair on the other. We may observe farther, how God provided for the preservation of Religion, and especially Revelation, by the Longaevity of the Patriarchs, and a Race of Holy Men, who were Prophets and Testifiers of his Will; of whom there was a constant Succession; that by a long Conversa∣tion between Father and Son, Progenitors and Successors, what was wanting in Records and Memorials, might be supplied. We may observe farther, how ineffectual this course proved in the Issue, how degenerate Man∣kind grew, so inflexible and incorrigible, that to purge out this pest of Impiety that had infected the whole Race, God took up a resolution of discharging the World of that impious Stock, and to raise up a new Seed from the Righteous Noah; and that issued in the Flood. This is the short History of the first Sixteen hundred fifty six years of the World, the Ante∣diluvian State.
The Revelation, so far as it is handed down to us in Moses, was then obscure; But a Reve∣lation they had, and Prophets, and those of the higher Form: Insomuch, that some of the Jews hold, that Enoch, in particular, was endued with a higher degree of Prophecy than Moses and Elias. But whatever it was, the sum amounted to this, That God was reconciled to man after his Apostacy; that he had established an Atone∣ment; and that in process of time the Son of God should in our Nature actually appear, and become a Saviour to us, and be a Propitiation for our Sins. But there is a farther branch of this Patriarchal State, which is the Post-Diluvian, after the Deluge. Here we are in part in the dark as before; for there were no less than Three hundred sixty seven years, at the least, past (for so long it was from the Flood to Abraham's departure out of Haran) of which the Inspired Historian gives little account. All that we have, is the pro∣geny of the Sons of Noah, and their dispersion, and the division of Tongues upon the foolish attempt at Babel.
The reason of this seems to be much the same as before the Flood; and that was the general depravation of Mankind, of which the said at∣tempt at Babel was an Instance; and the Call of Abraham out of the Land of the Chaldees an Evidence. For the reason of that Call of his, was the Idolatry then growing upon the World; the in∣fection of which, it seems, the Family of Sem had not altogether escaped: For this the Ance∣stors of Abraham are charged with, Josh. 24.2, 14. And then it was in him that pure Religion be∣gan to lift up its head again; and for that reason that he might become an eminent Instrument for preserving and promoting it, God revealed himself to that Holy Patriarch. And this is the Third Branch of the Patri∣archal Period, which I may call the Abraamical State. The first Revelation of this was (as afore∣said) to Adam, which was, that it should be the Seed of the woman, (whom the Serpent had seduced, and thought to have brought his ends about by). The next opening of this great secret of Divine Wisdom was, that this Seed, or Messias, should descend from the Stock of Abraham, viz. In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed, Gen. 12.3.
which the Apostle applies to Christ, Gal. 3.16. and to which Abraham had a respect in the Birth of Isaac, when he gave him that Name, which signifies laughter, or rejoycing, Gen. 21.3. Thus our Saviour interprets it in that allusion, Your father Abraham rejoyced to see my day, and was glad, John 8.56. This was the reason why Moses did so care∣fully draw down the Pedigree of Sem, which terminated in Abraham; passing slightly by the History of his Progenitors, and taking up that of this Patriarch, in whom the Holy Seed did more illustriously appear: And why also he so punctually set down the time when this promise to Abraham was first made,Gen. 18.18. 22.18. and which as the principal of all, God did several times repeat to him,Gen. 26.4. 28.14. and also to Isaac and Jacob, at the first time he is said to have appeared to them. So that though they had a standing Oracle,Gen. 25.22, 23. and had other Revelations, yet this of the holy Seed was the chief Revelation, and which was upon all solemn occasions renewed. But though Revelation did eminently con∣duce to the good of the world, where it was promulged and received, and afforded a much brighter and more certain light than Nature and Reason of it self did; yet even here Reve∣lation
made, as it were, a pause, and the Pa∣triarchal State gave way to another which we call, 2. The Mosaical, which had a manifold ad∣vantage of the other. As (1.) That Religion here was National, and the People were entire and embodied into one Society; whereas it was otherwise among the Patriarchs, as in the case of Terah in Mesopotamia; Melchisedec, and even Abraham, in Canaan; and Job in Arabia; where Religion and the Church was rather Domestical than National. (2.) The State of the Jews was a Theocracy, and the whole of it, whether as to matters Civil or Divine, was established by God's peculiar appointment, and under whose immediate Re∣giment they were; having his Minister Moses their Mediator, Gal. 3.19. and God making them his peculiar and propriety, Deut. 4.33. 14.2. (3.) It was a typical State, under which one of greater excellency, and thereafter in process of time to succeed, was adumbrated, I mean, the Evangelical: So that their Rites, and parti∣cularly their Sacrifices under that Dispensation, had a peculiar respect to the great Sacrifice, the lamb said to be slain (in God's Decree, and in
the vertue of it) from the foundation of the world: And which those Rites and Sacrifices were in∣tended for the farther ratification, and for the preservation of in their minds. (4.) I may add, there was an improvement made upon this Legal and Typical State, by the Prophetical; which was enobled by the many illustrious Prophecies, more especially concern∣ing the Messiah, as to the time of his Appear∣ance, his Birth, and the Place of it, his Family, Sufferings, Miracles, Resurrection, Ascension, in abundance of circumstances relating thereun∣to. And when in the declension of the Jewish State, Prophecy might be expected should decay with it, it on the contrary increas'd, till on the sudden it wholly ceas'd, when the Revelation of that kind, and for that season, was sufficient: For what could have been more punctual than what was already Revealed? (5.) After this there was a long interval of above Four hundred years, and a cessation of that Prophecy and extraordinary Revelation which had continued in that Church for the space of above a Thousand years, from the time of Moses to that of Zechary and Malachi; at the close of which it had been foretold, that by the coming of the Messiah, Prophecy and Revela∣tion
should revive, and a more plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit should then be, than had been ever before. Now what should be the reason of this, but that there might be raised in that People the more earnest desire after the approaching of that happy Age; and that they might thereby be convinced that their own In∣stitution was not to continue for ever, and that there was a more perfect Dispensation which they were to expect, and which was to rise, as it were, out of the ashes of the other. And that is 3. The Evangelical State, which is the close and completion of all; in which the Rites of the Law were completed, the Types answered by the Anti-Types, and the Prophecies were ful∣filled and interpreted by the Event. So that the New Testament is the evidence and proof of the Old; the one declaring what is to come, and the other shewing that it is come; both bearing an exact correspondence to each other. I proceed to the Fourth Branch of the Third General; where 4. I am to consider why God did thus gra∣dually and at sundry times proceed in Revealing his Will to Mankind, and why he did not at the first communicate his Will to them as fully
and perfectly, as he did in the last days by his Son? So that there are Two Questions to be resol∣ved. Q. 1. Why God did not communicate his Will at first? Q. 2. Why in these last days? A. (1.) As to the former; it may as well be asked, Why God did ever promise? And why he did not actually give at the same time when he promised? It may again be as well asked, Why there was such a thing as Prophecy, and that the things Pro∣phecied of were not at the same instant accom∣plished, as they were predicted? And if that be the question; it may again as well be asked, Why there is such a thing as Suc∣cession? Why there are Causes and Effects? And why all things are not Existent at once? And why all Acts are not done together? For Promi∣ses and Prophecies imply Succession; and to re∣quire there should be no Promises and no Pro∣phecies, is, in effect, to require there should be no Succession. (2.) A Promise on God's part, implies the certainty of the thing in its season, as well as a Prophecy. A Prophecy is certain because of
God's infinite Power, Wisdom, and Know∣ledge, to foresee what will be the effect of such Causes, what the events of such Actions, or how he will order and accomplish them: And a Promise implies besides that, his Faithfulness, and that he will infallibly see to the accomplish∣ment of it. And so whatever is Promised or Prophecied of by Almighty God, is as certain in its Causes, and shall be in the Event, as if it was now in being or now done, or that we had it in actual possession. (3.) It is as much, if not more, for the Ho∣nour of Almighty God, that there should be a Succession of Beings, Actions, and Events, as if they were all Existent at once; and conse∣quently as much to order such Beings, Actions, and Events in Succession, as it is if they were present. (4.) As there are in Nature a First and a Se∣cond, and so on in progression; and all things appearing in their proper time, order, and course, till by degrees 'tis raised to its highest Perfection: So it is as accountable for God to make known his Will to Mankind, to begin and carry it on, from a lesser to a higher degree, as he sees fit; and upon a strict examination has as much Beauty and Order in it. And to have all
Revelation at once, would appear as irregular as for all Mankind to have lived and died all at once. (5.) Especially is this, where such Revelati∣ons are suited to the state of the World, and that the Dispensation of one Age would not suit the Temper and Circumstances of another; of which we have an instance in the Jews, who were of that Temper, that a burdensome and Ritual Religion was more fit for them than another more Refined and Spiritual, and whose External and Gorgeous Form was accommodated accordingly to it, as under age, Gal. 4.1. And therefore it is wisely observed by Theodoret,Heret. Fab. l. 5. c. 11.; That God suited his Instructions to every Age of the World. And we have good reason to believe this to be so, because there was such a gradual pro∣gress in Divine Revelation, as has been already shewn. (6.) This is still the more accountable, if we consider that the Obligation of Mankind arises from the Notification of the Divine Will; and that according as the Revelation of it is, so is the Obligation. And therefore those that have no Revelation, are not upon the same strict terms with those that have; nor are those that
live under the lower Dispensation, upon the same terms with those that have the higher: So the Apostle St. Peter,Acts 10.34. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons; but every one that feareth God, and worketh righteousness is accepted of him. But this in part belongs to the next Question. Q. 2. From hence we may be able in part to resolve the other branch of the Question, viz. Why God did not at the first send his Son to de∣liver his Will to the world, as he did in the last days? Celsus, a great Adversary to the Christian Reli∣gion, from the consideration of Christ's coming so late into the world for the Redemption of Mankind, compares God to Jupiter in the Co∣medy, ,Origen. contr. Cels. 1.6. as waking out of a long sleep. But this may as well be objected against any special act of Divine Providence; and were there no other answer to be given, this were suf∣ficient. But as there were many Prophecies concerning this state of things to be accom∣plished by the coming of Messiah, so we shall find sufficient reason for the Justification of Divine Providence in laying this Scene so remote from the first Ages of the world.
For 1. By this means we see what a wonderful Concatenation there is in the Divine Operations, and how in an orderly course all Events succeed according to his determinate Will, and what he has foretold. For there is a History, as it were, of our Saviour before his Appearance; and by the Description and Characters given of him in Scripture for Four thousand years together, we may be able to prove, that he is the Messiah. 2. It doth not seem that the world was pre∣pared for it before. For if Christ had been Born and Died as soon as Adam had Sinned, there would not have been among Mankind the sense of their Condition, and of the need they stood in of a Redeemer, and of the Goodness of God in pro∣viding one for them; nor of the Necessity of the Divine Power to rescue them, if they had not had a long experience of the ineffectualness of any other course or means for it. 3. We are to consider, that the benefit of Christ's Death, looked backward as well as forward, and took place from the first publication of the Promise. For (1.) Immediately after the Fall, God did pro∣mise, That the seed of the woman should bruise
the Serpent's head; and this being a Promise made to Adam, he himself must consequently have the benefit of it: For what advantage or comfort could it have been to him, that Four thousand years after there should be a Descendent from him that should become a Saviour to them that were at that time in being, and that should then and afterward believe on him? (2.) We are to consider, that this Promise gave Adam as much a title to the benefit of such an atonement, and was to him as stable a ground of comfort, as if it had at the same time been actually executed; or as it could be to any that lived in or after the time that this atonement was offered, and the promise in all respects punctually made good. Hence we read in St. Paul, of the grace that was in Christ Jesus before the world began, , of ancient times, 2 Tim. 1.9. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour; and that not in decree only, but in fact; so the same Apo∣stle uses the phrase, the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lye, promised, ,Tit. 1.2, 3. be∣fore the world began; it's a promise made in time, and which he there distinguishes from the mani∣festation of it. So the Gospel was preached before to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. and who in the Faith of it, re∣joyced
and was glad, John 8.56. This is implied Heb. 9.25, 26. Then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world; which implies that all sin, since the foundation of the world, was forgiven with respect to that Atonement. So that when there was a promise of such a means for our Reconciliation to God, and in the vertue of which the Penitent might plead for pardon, it was equally as advantageous to them that believed in him that was to come, from the first publication of that Promise, as if they had then had a plenary possession: So that Christ might be well said to be the lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. 4. I may say, in all appearance there was not a more proper time for the coming of our Saviour into the world, and for all the Events depending upon it, than that in which he ap∣peared. And that if we consider, (1.) The general expectation of it, in con∣formity to ancient Prophecies. This was noto∣rious among the Jews: So Luke 19.11. They thought the kingdom of God should immediately appear; that is, the Kingdom of the Messiah. So we find Simeon and Anna, and others, waited for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25, 38.
of which number was Joseph of Arimathea, Mark 15.43. Nay, this or something like it, was got among the Gentiles: So Tacitus,Hist. l. 5. c. 2. §. 8. the Roman Histo∣rian, Many were perswaded, that it was contained in the ancient Writings of the Priests, that at that time it should come to pass, That the East should prevail, and that They should proceed from Judaea who should be Lords of all; which was a Prophecy of Vespatian and Titus. Suetonius another Historian, saith, That it was an old and constant Opinion that had prevailed all over the East: This the Event, said he, shewed to be meant of the Roman Emperor; but the Jews ap∣plying it to themselves, Rebelled. This is agreeable to what is said by Josephus,Joseph. de Bell. 7. . the Jewish Historian, who saith, That which stirred up the Jews, and brought final Ruin upon them, was the opinion they had from , some doubtful Prophecy in the Sacred Writings, that at that very time there should arise from that Countrey one of themselves that should Govern the whole World. (2.) It was a proper time, because as the world had all along the experience of the inabi∣lity of all human means for reforming the Man∣ners and Tempers of Men, so in that age more
especially, when the Wisdom of the world was in its height both among Jews and Gentiles. When among the Jews they were at that time as averse to Idolatry, as ever their Ancestors had been inclined to it, and were in all the punctilio's of the Law as exact and scrupulous, as they were skilled in the Letter of it; and yet our Saviour found matter enough to condemn and chastise them for, and their practice was a fit Comment on that of the Apostle, Rom. 8.3. What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh. So St. Hierom Comments upon it, Now the time was fulfilled, when through evil custom no man could keep the Law. And if we turn our selves to the Heathens, Learning is acknowledged to have flourished in the time of Augustus beyond any Age; and yet that Age seemed to equal it self in Vice, not only as the Apostle describes it, Rom. 1.29. but as it is confirmed by their own Historians: So St. Augustin describes it,De civ. dei l. 2. c. 19. I am not the first that report it, but their own Authors; behold, before the coming of Christ, and after the destruction of Carthage, the manners of their Ancestors were neglected, not as before by little and little, but like a torrent by a strange precipi∣tation; so much was the truth corrupted by luxury and avarice.
Now when the world was thus corrupted un∣der the best human means, What could be a fitter season for our Saviour's Appearance? And therefore the Fathers, as Origen and Tertullian, triumph'd over the Philosophers, and despis'd their artificial methods of Vertue, as too weak for so great and noble an undertaking. 3. It was a fit season, as way was made for the propagation of the Gospel by the dispersion of the Jews, and the success of the Grecian and Ro∣man Arms. (1.) By the dispersion of the Jews, &c. For as their Law did serve to introduce the Gospel, to which it had a Relation, and of which it was a proof; so by their dispersion upon the Captivity (whence many of them never re∣turned) and by other subsequent means, many of the prejudices which other Nations had against the Jewish Religion and Nation, were taken off. And this was much furthered by the Transla∣tion of the Old Testament into Greek (which was then the General Language). From whence I am apt to think, that the Opinion mentioned by the abovesaid Roman Historians, did arise. It was, saith Tacitus,Antiquis Sacerdo∣tum li∣teris. in the ancient Writings of the Priests: And indeed their ex Judaea prosecti qui re∣rum
potirentur, out of Judaea should proceed those that should Rule the world, seems to be but the Latin of the Greek in Mic. 5.2. , Out of thee shall come a Governor, as it is in Matth. 2.6: or in the Septuagint, , that there should be a Ruler. And Tacitus's way of expressing it,Vt inva∣lesecret Oriens. that the East should prevail, is a manifest allusion to the same Translation, which renders the word, Netzar, the Branch (the Name ascribed to our Saviour in the Prophets) by , the East; so Jer. 23.5. Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch,V. Isai. 11.1. or the East; and a King, that King, shall reign and prosper,Jer 33.15, 16. and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.Zech. 6.12. Now this Version having been in whole or in part,Luke 1.78. undertaken for the use, and at the request of Ptolomy Philadelphus King of Egypt, about Three hundred years before our Saviour, was in many hands; and so such a material part as those Prophecies could not be overlook'd. And in∣deed with these Prophecies there may be a good account given of those fore-cited places in the Ro∣man Historians, but otherwise they are unintelli∣gible, as appears by their application of them to Vespatian and his Son Titus, for want of understand∣ing the true intent of them, and the respect they had to the Messiah.
(2.) Another means was the success of the Grecian and Roman Arms; the former of which by Alexander, and the latter by Pompey, Julius Caesar, and Augustus, had opened a way into most of the remote parts of the then known world; and by which means, and the civilizing the most bar∣barous People, there was a freer commerce and access. It must be confessed, That the Power of God can conquer all difficulties; and which we have an exemplification of in the Gospel, where the Barbarians and Scythians felt the wonderful power and prevalency of it, as well as the softer and bet∣ter disposed Greeks and Romans:. Contr. Cels. l. 2. p. 68. The Word preached with Power overcame all human Nature, saith Origen. But God doth in the most extraordinary cases, use sometimes ordinary means; and especially was this observable, that at that very time of our Saviour's Birth, the Gates of the Temple of Janus at Rome were shut, which were only in the time of an universal Peace; and which had hap∣pened but twice from the foundation of that City, till the Reign of Augustus (though twice before this in his Reign, as I remember). And this was a very fit season for the Prince of peace to appear in, and what in this sence did ve∣rify the Angels Anthem at his Birth, Luke 2.14. On
earth peace, good will amongst, as well as towards men. And so I am brought to the Evangelical State; where I am, 4th General, To shew the Perfection of the Gospel Revelation, and that there is not to be any other Revelation to the end of the world; so it is here, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son; which implies, 1. The close and conclusion of all, it is in the last days. 2. The Perfection of the Gospel Revelation, it is by his Son. 1. The close of all, it is in the last days. To which all former Ages had a relation, and in which, being the last, they were to be con∣summated. Here, setting aside all subdivisions of time; we may consider the world, as to Revelation, un∣der a twofold Period, viz. the Former and, the Latter days. And so▪Isai. 2.2. the Prophets speak of the last days, as different from what both were before,Mic. 4.1. or what were in their own time. Now in these last days, there is a certain part of time circumscribed, which in reason is to have such characters belonging to it as it may be known
by them when it was to commence, without which the Epocha was not to be determined. So that the first thing to be considered is, When these last days began, and what are the Characters by which that time is to be known? And they are such as these. (1.) The appearance of a Person, that from his spirit and temper, the Scripture calls Elijah, Mal. 3.2. and 4.5. who was to be the Forerunner of the Messiah, and to prepare the way for his reception. (2.) The Restauration of the Spirit of Prophe∣cy, which ceased among the Jews from the time of Zechary and Malachi, (as has been before ob∣served) and was to be restored in the last days. Joel 2.28. Acts 2.16. (3.) Many Impostors which were to appear; and who did not appear till about the time of the last days, according to our computation of them; so 1 John 2.18. It is the last time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many An∣tichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time. V. Matth. 24.5, 24. (4.) The last days were, when the Messiah him∣self did appear, called the fulness of time, Gal. 4.4. and so it is express in the Text, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. To which we may add the Conversion of the Gentiles, Isa. 2.2. and 63.1, &c.
From whence it is evident, that there is suffi∣cient ground for these two Periods, viz. the Former and the Latter days; and that the Latter began with our Saviour, and continue to the end of the world, whensoever that shall happen: And therefore as it is called the fulness of time, because it is the completion and consummation of all; so it is called the close of the Ages,. Heb. 9.26. (we translate it the end of the world) or the last days, because there were none to come after the expiration of this; and comprehends in it (as aforesaid) all the space of time from Christ's first, to his second Ap∣pearance. Heb. 9.26. Acts 1.11. And so there can be no other time, and so no other Revelation; for as long as the last days hold, so long the present Revelation is to conti∣nue; and then there can no more be any other Re∣velation, than there can be last days beyond the last. And this will be confirmed by the next Branch. 2. The Perfection of the Gospel Revelation, included in that phrase, God in these last days hath spoken to us by his Son. 'Tis but reasonable to suppose, that since there has been a gradual Progression in Revelation from time to time, and from a lower to a higher degree (as has been already proved) that the honour of all in the close should be reserved for the Son of
God; to whom the Prophets were Harbingers, and the Angels themselves Ministers. This is the foundation of the Apostle's Argument, and the drift of his Discourse, in this Chapter, be∣ginning with the Text, God who at sundry times—hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things—being made so much better than the Angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they: for unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, &c.? Now as the Son is the last that appears, so be∣yond his there cannot be supposed to be any other Revelation, but that the Revelation must be like to himself, Perfect and Compleat; and so there can be no other Gospel; and whosoever pretends to another, falls under the Anathema of the Apostle, Gal. 1.8, 9. If any preach any other gospel than ye have received, let him be accursed. For here it is; 1. That we find the great Prophecies ful∣filled in the Messiah; whose Characters, though many, all center in our Saviour, as to Person, Time, Place, Qualifications, and Event. 2. In Him are all the Types fulfilled, and all the good things accomplished, which the Rites of the Law were the shadow of, Heb. 10.1. 3. By Him is the most Perfect Revelation of the Will of God made known to the world, of all that God has promis'd and we may expect.
4. By Him have we the most Perfect Rule, the High∣est Motives, most Noble Principles, and Glorious Re∣wards, and all things that conduce to the Perfection and Happiness of Mankind. So that to any one that reads and compares those seve∣ral Dispensations before spoken of together, as he must acknowledge there is this Gradation, so that the Christian Institution is for the Matter and the Evidence of it supe∣rior to all; and it will be as evident, that it can be ex∣ceeded by none. For it is as perfect as can or need to be; for we cannot ascend higher in our Notions and Conceptions of things than we are there taught. We cannot exceed its Rules in our Practice, nor be defective in any necessary part of our Duty, if we advise with and observe it. Nor can we desire more excellent Encouragements and Rewards than are therein proposed, such as are Eternal. So that though the Law of Nature, or of Moses made nothing perfect, yet the bringing in of a better hope by the Gospel did. Heb. 7.19. And now we have nothing farther to expect, no more another Revelation than another Messiah; no more than another God to reward us, and another Heaven to re∣ward us with. And with this I am to conclude, having passed, by God's Assistance, through the several Heads I at first proposed in the beginning of this Lecture. The Argu∣ment is the most Noble Subject in Religion; what has been wanting in the Management of it, is to be ascribed to the Weakness and Imperfection of the Instrument: But if there has been any thing offer'd, which may tend to the farther Proof and Confirmation, the Illustration and Improvement of it; it is to be ascribed to God, who is the giver of every good gift. From him must we wait for the Blessing and Success, and To Him be all Honour and Glory, &c. Finis.
