W2912 17882652 106708
ANDRONICUS COMNENIUS: A Tragedy. By JOHN WILSON. Juvenal, Sat. 13. — Fatebere tandem, Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam, quenquam esse Deorum. — At last you'll find, That Heav'n is neither deaf, nor blind. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre between the Middle-Temple Gate and Temple-Bar in Fleetstreet. 1664.
To my Friend A. B. IF ever you gave your self the diver∣tisement of reading the Preface to my Comedy of the Cheats, you may remember, I did as good as pro∣est against Apologies; and yet, the case happens to be such at present, that I find my self (how unwil∣ling soever) engag'd to tread that path yet once agen: To tell you how long since this Tragedy was first written, or why it has not been since acted, were but (in effect) to suspect your memory; 'Tis enough to me that you know both, and I doubt not, will be ready to do me right as you see occasion:— I pass it, and according to our wonted freedom shall only speak a few words to the thing—A Story of the Eastern Empire, between the years 1179. and 1183; and such perhaps, as might not be thought altogether unparalel to what our selves
have seen, were not the one, but too fresh in our memories, and the other, too far remov'd from our knowlodge — And now me thinks I hear you charging me with a Non bene conveniunt, The Story of 3 or 4 years, cramp'd into fewer hours! And why not? — My design was a History, and if I have kept the Connection, I may reason∣bly presume I have observ'd enough— Nay fur∣ther, if I have dealt with it, as Procrustes with his guests, lop'd some, or stretch'd others, be plea∣sed to consider, 'twas for the same reason, that I might the better fit unto my own moddel: — To be short, if I have once agen made my thoughts legible, and my self the subject of every mans opi∣nion, how weak soever, be pleased, to such cavils as you may chance to meet with, to op∣pose this — That notwithstanding I may have written some few Plays, yet the Stage is the last thing I shall pretend to; And therefore, though possibly I could wish, Ut placerent quas fecis∣sem fabulas, yet I was never so much in love with a full cry, as to believe, that all open'd alike, or that the approbation of one wise man, was not more worth, than the noise of a multitude: —
Let me not seem immodest if I close all with that of Plautus Virtute ambire oportet, non favitoribus; Sat habet favitorum semper qui recte facit. Farewel Your &c. J. Wilson. Jan. 15th. 1663.
THE PERSONS. Alexius Comnenius A Youth, (the Son and Successor of Manuel Comnenius) Emperor of Constantinople Anna His Wife, (a Daughter of France) after∣wards married by Andronicus. Maria Caesarissa Half sister to Alexius, And Wife to Caesar, an Italian Lord (only mentioned, but appears not.) Sebastus The Husband of Xene, the Widdow of Ma∣nuel; who by debauching the Emperor's Youth, had got the management of Affairs. Andronicus Comnenius A Prince of the bloud; banisht by Manuel; but being call'd home to counterpoise Se∣bastus, usurps upon Alexius; murders him, and marries Anna. Manuel His Son. Conto Admiral of the Gallies. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An¦dronicus. Constantinus Lords of the best extraction. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An¦dronicus. Ducas Lords of the best extraction. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An¦dronicus. Lapardas Lords of the best extraction. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An¦dronicus. Stephanus Captain of the Guard to A∣lxius: And afterwards to Andronicus. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An¦dronicus. Basilius President of the City. Both Confidents to Andronicus. All of them, together wth Maria & Ba∣silius a Bishop often men∣tioned, but appears not, of the Con∣spiracy to bring in An∣dronicus. Mamalus Secretary of State during the time of Ma∣nuel; laid by by Sebastus. Philo Andronicus's Zany. Isaacius Angelus A Gentleman of the bloud, a far off, but living obscurely in a Monastery, not taken notice of by Andronicus; but (the rest of the bloud being destroy'd) he is in a Tumult set up against Andronicus, and carries th Empire. Citizens. Guards. Servants. Fiddlers. The Scene, CONSTANTINOPLE.
ANDRONICVS COMNENIVS A Tragedy. ACT. I. SCE. I. Enter Lapardas. Ducas. Du. 'TIs strange! and were't not for that rea∣dy faith I owe your Lordship, I had sooner ta∣ken Another Article to my Creed: — A Woman! And yet so large a soul — your Lordship's merry. La. Troth no, she fixt me Ducas — when I saw How she first took the question; stated it; Ran the whole matter; and where danger offer'd, Past it with such a careless scorn — Believe me It made me wonder into what narrow crany My soul had crept; — Du. You've such a knack at speeching; You either find'um good, or make 'um so; Rack me no longer (dearest Sir) let's have it: La. And willingly — we met — you know the place; Nor was th' appearance small; And as in Councils, There never was a fool (at least, that would Be thought so) Ev'ry man let fly his bolt; One offer'd this; Another, that; The point, Was common danger; All agreed the thing, But few, the way of helping it; that plague, And mischief of great actions (Let's do better)
Had so unhing'd their souls; until Maria Sum'd up their little all — Told 'um, th'ad lost The question; and 'twas not their wel-being, But being, was the point; not what Greece should be, But whose it was — and when they threw in doubts; That thou hadst seen her how she blew 'um off; Snufft at their scruples — and is this (quoth she) The Lion in the way? Can danger baulk Men once resolv'd? — Be that Bugbear mine; I dare encounter it, and act, what e're You all dare think. — Du. 'Twas a brave Virago; A wonder of her Sex! A Phoenix sure! La. I: you'd have sworn it, had you heard, that world, Of which, this is but an imperfect Globe; A wrong side of the hangings. — Du. But my Lord, How was it relish'd? Did not their seats grow warm? La. No — But they all lookt wistly one on t'other, As who would say, 'twas true enough, but yet Some passages might have been well forborn: Du. What was the issue? — La. Why, — they all shook hands, And by a general vote, center'd in this; That men, and monies must be rais'd, to break The present faction; and themselves would do't: Next, that Andronicus be invited home To head the forces; which, Maria pray'd Might be her part o'th' work; which once agreed, Sooner than thought they fell into their gears, Each man subscrib'd his task, gave order streight For her instructions, and have since dispatcht her: Du. But no account as yet?— La. Not possible: 'Tis scarce 2 months since she departed hence, And we forbad all Packets; But, this night She is expected: — Good my Lord be there; Your Proxy'll serve no longer; I have told 'um
Your Gout is over. — Du. I shall my Lord: my fate Runs hand in hand with yours:Enter Mamalus. But see! who's coming yonder? I'm mistaken Or 'tis Mamalus — He was an honest Courtier, And our true friend — why should not he make one? La. He is best able; All the affairs of Greece Have past his hand, and with no ill success: Du. Let's try — my Honour for his secresie. La. With all my heart: — see — he comes up to you. Du. Mamalus! save you;— 'Tis an age, or better, Since we last met.— Ma. The loss (my Lords) was mine: La. But whence our friend? turn'd Courtier agen? How goes all there? Ma. Troth I've scarce seen the place, Since my great Lord, and master, Manuel dy'd; I can nor fawn, nor truckle. La. Pettish I warrant! — I'm asham'd, Mamalus, Is it a Courtiers part to shew his teeth, Before he bite? to breath a pityful revenge, E're he have power to act — No, — great mens injuries, Are best remedy'd, by not understanding 'um, Or seeming t'ave forgot 'um, whereas otherwise, Y'are sure to be prevented with a greater; Have a good heart: — I not forbid thee strike, But do it sure. — Ma. Your Lordship's wide o'th' mark; Yet since you name the Court, when were you there? Du. Troth we come there, and that is all: we're grown, Barely spectators; idle lookers on: Sometimes perhaps, out of a Complement, To countenance a buisness, or concur; We're call'd to Council too: La. And what of that? Matters of consequence, we must not know, Nor is it out of love to us, but fear,
Of what may follow, that we've kept our heads. Ma. And can you blame me then, that have no stake, If I sit out, when you that have the greatest, Have such ill carding?— Du. Break his neck that packt 'um; Come, — joyn with us — Shuffle, and cut agen: Ma. I am no Conjurer; your Lordship must Speak plainer, e're I understand you right. La. Give us thy hand, and word for secresie. Ma. You have 'um both. — La. Then to be short, w'are lost; And so's the Empire —Now to recover it, Most of the Lords, and Officers of state, Are joyn'd, Nor want we Men, or Arms, or Money: Andronicus the head, at least we hope so. Ma. But why my Lords such hast? Must a man Lop A limb cause out of joynt? knock out his brains, To cure the Head-ach? — what's to be done but once Should be considered twice:— Mutations Are ever dangerous, even where the thing Might have been good, and profitable at first; It being impossible to provide against Those inconveniences, we can't foresee. La. But there's no other way — Has not Sebastus Turn'd us quite Topsy Turvy? — Disoblig'd; The Nobles trampl'd under foot the Commons? Ma. 'Tis granted: — But, why this last remedy? Bear it a little; — Time, many work it off: Come, come; Close with him: Blow the bladder stiff, And it must crack: — By pulling others down, He has o're built himself. — Du. We've often thought so, But find it otherwise. — Ma. Admitting yet, You must be changing; how are you secure He that comes next, shall not be worse? — who (Pray) Shall keep the Keepers? — Du. We have order'd that.
Ma. But why Andronicus of all the world? Du. Why? He's a Soldier; and a Prince o' th' blood; And valiant enough; — Ma. So much the worse: What were a vertue in another, in him, May prove a crime: — He is too near the Crown Already; and this gives him th' occasion, Of grasping that, he has so long design'd: I dare not — Nay, I must not joyn — The wolf, Shall never have my voice to make him Shepheard; But yet, to shew your Lordships I'll be secret, I'll trust you with as much. — You may remember; My Master banisht him; but why, I'll tell you. He is a Prince of the most daring soul Er'e dropt from Heaven; industrious, vigilant, Kind, affable, magnificent:— Yet all this good, Nay, all his lusts and passions Are slaves to his Ambition: Take him there, Nothing can hold him; Lawes, Religion, All Sacred, or civil, are no more then — This. Du. But we'll provide for that: We'll tye him up Fast under hand, and seal, well-backt with Oaths. Ma. Tye him with Oaths! — Hah! — You may soo∣ner hold An angry Lyon, with a clew of thread, Gyants, with rotten towe. — Th' old Emperor found it; When having forgiv'n him so oft, he still Broke out a new; — Swore, and forswore again: Until necessity made him resolve, To kill, or banish him: which last took place; Pray Heaven 't 'as alterd him; — Howe're, let me Remain your Lordships servant: — Both. Friend you mean; — farewel:Exit Mamalus. La. Tis time that we went too: Du. I wait your motion. Exeunt.
ACT. I .SCE. II. Enter Sebastus. Constantinus. COnst. Now good my Lord —'Has been an antient servant Unto our Family —'Tis the least I can: Pray let him have it. — Seb. How was your Lordship saying? I did not mind you well —my head's so full:scratches Con. O'th' simples Aside come I beg but seldom; shall I send him to kiss your hands? Seb. Matters of State Beat all things out;— Con. No — 'tis your oval Crown Aside Lets nothing in. — Seb. But good my Lord, what is't? It must be somewhat more than in my power, When you're deny'd. — Con. Troth 'tis a very nothing. Seb. Why then — you have it — is your Lordship pleas'd. Con. Hah! — yours is pleasant; — 'tis a little odd thing. The Major-domo to his Majesty's Bears. Seb. Certain my Lord it is too mean a place, And he might find much better — what is't worth? Con. not much above 2 hundred crowns a year, Besides the blessing that attends an Office. Seb. Stay! Major-Domo — Let me see — I doubt Somewhat was done in't lately scratches Oh! I have't. Alas my Lord 'tis gon; — dispos'd in troth: Now I'm so sorry: Con. But to whom? — or how? Seb. Why — I'm mistaken, or the Emperor gave it To scratches an old servant of his Fathers: —
Con. Strange! Eagles do seldom stoop so low: — Seb. Then 'twas My wife; — and like enough it might be so. But there are other things as good, or better, And might be found if men were diligent. Trust me I am so vext, — I'll tell my Wife What a displeasure she hath done your Lordship. Exit. Con. Your Lordship's. — Gon! dispos'd! — my life this fellow Would sell his soul, were any man so mad To bid him money for't — Was this a thing To be believ'd? — the Devil of such a servant, Or Office, I yet ever heard, or dreamt; But now I see, 'tis good to try ones friends, E're a man needs 'em; — And the same have I The nature of this beast — Now is he gone To hunt a chapman; — but the scent (beloved) Will be cold, e're you light on one — Dull Greece! Where is thy soul? What magick? or what fate Has dampt thy spirits? canst thou live, yet be Bull'd by this Urchin? Canst thou breath, yet suffer Such a slave ride thee? such a Tinsel bauble! No — know fond man, though Greece be fast asleep. Her Genius wakes, nor shall thy formal nothing, Brave it much longer; — dirt thou art, and dirt Shall be thy last, and sudden too; — 'tis done, The better half, what is once well begun. Exit. ACT. I. SCE. III. Enter Philo solus with a Letter in his hand. PH. Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah! To see this world! Luck's all: 'Tis better to be fortunate,
Than be a rich Man's Son: — Hear are boys scrambling; One gets an Apple, t'other a broken pate. There's good Luck, and bad Luck: Yonder a knot of Rogues rebel — the poor ones Hang for Example; And the great ones are Scratches Ev'n what they please — Good luck, and bad luck too. 'Tis now two years since first my Master sent me To manage his design within this City; And what have I done there? — Only deserv'd For to hanged — Many an honester man Then both, has marcht that way: — But the luck's all: See! Shews his letter I've receiv'd intelligence from him That what we have been hammering so long Is just dropt into's mouth: 'Tis offer'd him: Here is a kennel of such pretious Curs, They cannot rule, themselves; and now they Court The Devil, to part stakes: I hope he will Remember 'um in time: — Troth they deserve it. Well: I must to 'um: But to bring me there, Find out Maria — Now the wit of Woman! — I see they may be trusted with more secrets Besides their husband's: Though in troth I judge, Twas the best place to lodge one safe; wise men Ne're looke for't there:— Enter Manuel in a disguise. —But what have we got here? A peice of Poetry in Prose! Hah! Hah! A small Philosopher, but that he wears A brawling—I'ron: He walks as if he were Measuring feet with the Antipodes, Or treading out the Saxon Ordeal; Sure it would speak —I'll step aside, and see. Man. Vain state of wretched man, that only knows What yet he found too soon, his misery: Where is that happiness Phisolophers So much contend for? I have often met The name, but ne're the thing: sure 'tis their Stone, In other words; or having trod that path
So long, I must have reach'd my journeys end; One would have thought, my birth (to say no more) Had been enough t'ave given me title to't: But now, I am convinc'd, 'tis but a dream, An aery fancy; Or if yet there be More in't, 'tis negative; and to be happy, Is only not to be miserable. But what do I thus fondly to complain In such a common case? Trace far and near And all alike; no satisfaction. Now I see Nature took a fall when young, She has so limpt e're since: What's all this world, But several Purlieues of wild Beasts, that walk On their hin' legs; wherein, not alwaies strength, But such as have the cleanliest conveyance, Drive the dull-staring-heard before 'um? What's all that noise, and cry of publick good, But a conspiracy of the richer sort, To grind the poor, and fence themselves with Laws, To keep that safely, they've unjustly got? What makes a Traitor, but a ruin'd cause? Or Hereticks, but being less in number? Nay, what are even our greater ties become, But Bawds to interest; and specious names, To cover great mens wrongs? — who then would live That had but soul enough to die? or be A Pris'ner, when the keys of his own Prison, Hang by his side, and may discharge himselfe? And so will I (draws) 'tis worthy of my blood, Here sets the hilt to ground take your vertue back a∣gain who gave it, And by your leave. — Philo comes from be∣hind the hangings, and trips his Sword away. Ph. And mine too if you please. Man. Still more misfortune! What art thou? 'Twas rude To take that from me, which thou darest not give: Man. riseth and runs upon t' others point.
Ph. Stand off — nay since you must pursue your folly, Hold — there's your sword agen — draw They fight, and close; in the close. Ph. knows him, throws away his sword, and kneels. My honour'd Lord! Now shall I bless, or curse my hand? Man. Be gon, And tempt thy fate no longer. — Ph. My best Lord, Yet hear me speak. — Man. Rise and be sudden then. Ph. I shall (riseth) and since this combat of your passions May've checkt each other; give your reason time To breath a while: consider what you're doing: It is an injury to your self, and nature: Nature preserves it self, and taught not this; Nor promis'd any by Privation, Bliss. Man. Injurious to my self? it cannot be: I'm willing; injury supposes force: Nor yet 'gainst nature: for then surely they Whom no Religion aw'd (as having't not) Had never us'd, at least affected it; Then take your Argument, or tell me why Nature yet left it in our power to dye? Ph. She could not help it; to have made a man, And yet deny'd him liberty of will, Had been t'ave given him wings, and clipt 'um too. Yet take't with its restriction, she ne're meant Because you might, you should destroy your self; If all should do the same, where were the world? Man. What's that to me? would the whole world lay here; claps his hand upon his heart. And I'd soon 'solve the question. — Ph. Yet shew me Some late example of this kind; this humor Has worm'd it self quite out of date. — Man. Disuse, is a poor Argument — Let Children fear
To sit alone, because their candle's out, It is enough to me, there is yet left This remedy, and triumph over Fortune: Be gon. — Ph. I must not; 'tis now worth your self To dare to live; who ever sunk his ship Because he fear'd a storm might do it for him? Or kill'd himself to save his enemy pains? Life is a warfare, and who quits the field Without a lawful Pass-port, runs away. Man. And so do thou; and quickly; — or by this Man. Shakes his sword at him. I shall too soon confute your Argument. Ph. What will your noble Father say? — Man. Ha! — Father! There's magick in the word; 't'as chill'd my blood Into a Palsy — Hence — I dare not trust My resolution, nor thy tattle, longer; Ph. How will he bear 't I say, when he shall hear His son thus sacrific'd to his Return? Man. Return! — there's witchcraft in thy breath — Begon; And stagger me no longer with false hopes; Ph. Credit me once, — By all that's Great, or Good: He's now in Greece, nay, near this City too. Man. Shall I believe thee? — no — it must not be; Somewhat within me whispers, 'tis not so. Yet say he were. — He has believ'd me lost These many years; and why should I now add New sorrows to my self, or him; to see him And yet want power to help him? — Ph. Fear not that, You have; I'll chalk you out the way: And if You see him not e're many hours shall pass, As glorious as the Sun broke through a cloud; Then let that mischief you design'd your self, Fall headlong upon me. Man. Well — for a while·
I'll give thee hearing; — Sheaths his Sword. Take up that — and help me To put it on again — so — so — 'Tis well. Ph. takes up his grey peruwick, and helps him on  ai. Exeunt. ACT. I. SCE. IV. Enter Constantinus, Stephanus, Basilius. BAs. 'Twas a good humour. — Const. Good! I'll undertake You shall not think that thing, he shall not swallow. Bas. 'Tis such a starcht intelligible Ass! Ste. And may become a Fair a twelve month hence; Const. A dainty fine new-nothing! — an odd Scheme. Of knave, and fool: where yet, the fool's Ascendent, And Lords the Horoscope; too much the fool, to conceal handsomely the knave; and yet Not knave enough, to act the cunning fool: I shall forbear a farther Lecture on him, I'm sure he'll stink, e're I get half way through him. Ste. I would he knew how well his friends thought of him:To them Conto, Lapardas, Ducas. Bas. See! here are more of 'um — Const. My Lords, all health:— They salute each other. What say you? Shall we fall to our business? Cont. When you please. They take their seats. Const. You know my Lords what we resolv'd on last; Have you received any account as yet? Is our Maria safe, or the work done? Cont. She is returned this night, and sent me word She would be here: But what is done I know not. Ste. 'Tis a brave Lady: Troth I half despair'd T' have heard of her so soon: —
Cont. Pray Heaven it ben't Too soon to all our Costs? Your Lorships knows, he is ambitious. — Const. And who is not pray? It is the spur of every generous soul; And were not you the same, what make you here? Du. But 't had been prudence t'ave secur'd our selves: Const. I hope there's no such need — Here comes a Lady Enter Maria led by Philo. Will quickly end the difference — Let's go meet her; They all rise and go to meet her. Exit Philo. Madam — you're well return'd — and yet, not I, But Greece, must speak it; Omnes. Royal Maria welcome. They all kiss her hand. Mar. My Lords and Gentlemen I thank you: And am sufficienrly repay'd my pains In your acceptance; please you keep your seats, And I'll acquaint you what I've done. Const. Blest Madam; Our life, and death, hang on your lips; — And yet, Me thinks that face speaks a good Augury, Mar. Then know my Lords — I have dispatcht your message, and here bring you All you could ask, or think — the Sea prov'd calm, The willing winds smil'd on the enterprise, And left me not till I had reach'd Onaeum; Where I soon found Andronicus (his fame Needed no guides) But, in that blest retirement, That all those things which we call happiness, Might have took copy from't, but still come short. Not to amuse you longer, I presented Your Letters, and he read 'um o're; but when He saw the business; troth he wept, and wisht It had been in his power to have comply'd; But he was old, and had given o're the world To younger men, And his ambition now, Was for a better: yet he sight, and wept, And wept, and sight; and sight, and wept again: And thus he kept me many daies, yet stil
I prest him forward, told him, Greece was sunk, Unless he buoy'd it up; That the Court had More factions, then Lords; the Commons prest; The Empire shatter'd; nothing could restore't, But his last hand: beseecht him to forget His banishment, and him that laid it on: At length he paws'd, and pawsing, askt me how It could be done; he was but one, and Arms, Not lazie wishes, must accomplish it: 'On which I shew'd him all the whole design, The persons names, what force we had already; And what expected to be hir'd from thence; Well, to be short, I did at last prevail, And with his help, procur'd 5000 Foot, Yet left him not, till I had seen all shipt, And safe amidst our fleet, where he now rides, Before the City, and resolves to land, This very night, and sack her round e're morn: 'Tis more than time my Lords that you were gon; There's one came with me has your Orders ready: Conto. But what conditions has he sign'd. — Mar. Much more she throws them a blank. Than you desir'd — he bid you write your own, And he hath sworn religiously to observe 'um. Cont. What's here! a blank? 'Tis what I thought; h'as To nothing, and nothing he'll perform: would I (sworn were fairly rid on't. — La. So would I. — Du. And I: Lap. We're fool'd so prettily; Cont. Or we may in time. Cont. Lap. Ducas, rise, walk, and whisper. Bas. Did ever men confound a business so? My soul! we're lost — we shall be all discover'd: Ste. I know not what their fear may do: 'twere best To knock 'um i'th head, and give it out The Soldiers did it; if our business thrive, We're well enough; if not, we save our selves, The dead can tell no tales. —
Bas. 'Twer not amiss: What saies my Lord?— Const. Lets hear 'um once agen; And royal Madam see what you can do. Mar. Well my good Lords; What would you now be at? Are you resolv'd as yet? — Cont. Why — we'll consider't; They offer to go out, Maria stops 'um. And send you back our answer. — Mar. How's this? consider? —Is't your fear, or Fate? Blisters of Greatness, Whom the stupid Age Dull as your selves, —calls Lords? What prompts you this Irresolution? You all confess, The Empire flames, and your selves must burn with it; And yet (forsooth) you first strein curtesie Who shall begin, or which the way to quench it: Nor is that block sooner remov'd, but that You stumble on another, and then too When one would think you had been all resolv'd; You must be now secure! Call you this Lording? I shame to hear't; And, but my sex forbids, I should suspect your Mothers.— Was't for this My glorious Father made all Asia bow, Confess his Empire, And had nature pleas'd, Shak't all the world — At least, brought to'ther Eagle Back to her nest again? Was it for this? For this, I say, your famous Ansires spred Their flying Banners, far as earth had shore, Only to leave the empty fame to you; Away—Agree: Occasion calls you forth, Shew whose you are, and justifie your Mothers: Const. 'Tis a brave mettled Amazon.— Conto: Lap: Du∣cas walk up & down biting their lips. Ste. Y' faith She nettles 'um:— Mar. For shame my Lords, resolve Time runs away; 'Tis execution Makes counsels walk invisible, And like arrows, Out run the eye, and hit the mark e're seen. What is't you fear? If't be Andronicus,
You have his Honour, and his Oath engag'd: Or if Sebastus? fancy not to meet, Augustus's Arts, not yet Tiberius's cunning; No, no; he's nothing but a thick scul'd Stallion, A very sot; And such a sniveling coward; 'Tis favour to call him so: Then courage Lords; Challenge your birth-right; be no more tame fools, Dull heavy beasts, so jaded from your spirits, That Honour cannot spur you up; Come; Come; Mind what you should:— 'Tis now too late t'advise, For Greece, at present, wants more hands, than eyes. Conto. Why, I still meant it: La. We'd as good be lost In going through, as lose our heads for nothing. Du. Nay i'll do what you will: what you resolve To do, do quickly.— Mar. Now you speak like men.— Come my Lords — All's well agen — And for any thing that remains, we shall better order it within. Exeunt. ACT. I. SCE. V. Enter Andronicus solus. THus far 'tis well, and I return'd again, To thank thee Greece; nor have thy wrongs been sown On barren ground, but such as shall repay The principal, with its forbearance too: I am a Prince; who dares deny't; He breathes His last, that answers no: He damns his soul In that one negative: There's but a step 'Twixt me, and the imperial Crown: — Nor shou'd That coward wear't, that dares not venture for't: Was this the reason, my blind Mistris, that You strook at me? That thus you deal with all, Fortune (like butchers) makes the fairest fall: But stay—I'me still upon my feet, and will
Keep up my chin in spight of her; if she Will not assist, the world shall know I can Do it without her help; nor shall she share, A doit i'th' praise, when I arriv'd at top, Thus— grasp my wish; — Yet say I were as flat As she could lay me; at the lowest Ebb; I would not yet give out; 'twere poor to fear, Who is past hope, he should be past dispair: I'll run the hazard then, and if I fall, What in me lies, I'll pluck all after me; Nor leave behind me such a one that shall So much as mutter't — No — my very name Shall fright the world — And make future times Fondly attempt my History, but not reach it. Who follow, tead where men have trod before; Who is example, must be some thing more. Exit. ACT. II. SCE. I. Alarums as at the Sack of a Town: Shouts within—Enter Sebastus as in a fright. SEb. Undon, undon: — That ever Man should be Lost e're he dream't it — Whither shall I run To hide my self? Shout.— Hark —They've won the City. Enter Alexius and Anna. Alex. What sudden noyse is this?— Seb. I'cannot tell. Anna Who should tell then?— Seb, They say Andronicus Has landed 30000 Horse and Foot. And is now storming of the City. Anna One would have thought you should have lookt to this: Seb. Who would imagin Banishment a place To raise an Army? Or suspect the Fleet? Alex. No doubt but he's well backt by some at home:
Anna. Too true I fear me: Seb. Wil't please your Majesty to get away, E're't be too late? — Alez. No — I have done no wrong, Unless to wear a Crown may be call'd such. Seb. You will do well enough, who ever suffer. To Anna Pray think on me: Anna Yes — I'll remember you, And if my word will do't — Seb. Do't without doubt. Anna I'll have thee hang'd: — Thou coward — Take thy Sword, And if thou canst not find a man, that loves thee So well, as to dye by thy side; yet go, And thrust thy self amid's thy thickest foes; It may deceive the world; thy life's not worth His pains, that takes it from thee. — Alarum — Shouts. Seb. Hark! again! The Palace is beset—I've but one shift, And if that fail me then good night to all. Enter Andronicus as giving order to some within And. See that the Soldiers make no outrages Upon the Palace; there are Frankes enough Within the City, and good pillage too: Set your guards round; besure no great ones scape; And if you take Sebastus, bore his eyes out; But see — The Emperor — I must to him —Heaven Goes up to him, and kneels and kisseth his feet Preserve your Majesty, and confound your foes. Alex. Cousin you're well return'd; and might have been As welcome with fewer followers: however; rise: Give me thy hand, and unto Heaven thy knee. And Next that, unto my Prince: and do not think He riseth Deard Soveraign, that I intend you hurt Although I knockt thus rudly; all my aim Was to remove your wardship, and I've don't. And now you're free: free, as the air you breath:
Make the experiment; and if you doubt my faith, Bid me return to banishment — I'm gon: An. I know not why, But I don't like his looks. Aside. Alex. Cousin I thank you; and believe you too: The Helm requires your help:— I cannot trust it Into a better hand — But pray forget, Those injuries, my Father put upon you: I am no otherwise entitled to 'um, Than as I am his Son. — And. Had they been more, I could have past 'um all, yet never cancel'd That double tye of loyalty, and blood: 'Twas not his fault, but my unlucky fate, To have my love misconstru'd; Not the burthen That greiv'd me, but the hand; not banishment, But that 'twas caus'd by him — However let Revenge sleep with his ashes; I will pay All mine in service to your Majesty; And to that end have I embark'd at present: Alex. Pray let me see you often:— Farewel: Exeunt Alex. Anna An. All happiness attend your Majesties. Yes — you shall see me; I, and feel me too E're you're much elder — Th'ast a double crime, First that th'art Emperor; next, that Manuel gat thee; Curst Manuel! would thou liv'dst; I'de make the feel The weight of my Revenge; I scorn to raze Thy monument, or to ungrave thy dust; I rather wish the rest of all my foes Entomb'd as fairly — But thy Son, thy Wife, Thy friends, or whatsoever may prop either, I will destroy — And make this Boy to know, They're Children, trust a reconciled foe. Enter Philo. How now! what news? have you dispos'd the Army Into good quarters? Are the Lords well pleas'd? Phil. Yes, as success can make 'um; and the People Call you the publick Father — Scarce a house Without its bon-fire:—
An. Then the ground-work's laid: But prithee tell me (for I must acknowledge Thy management) how gat you this odd rabble? Their tempers are more different than their faces: 'Twould puzle the Devil to suit 'um into pairs. Phil. Oh Sir! I've t'ane more shapes than Proteus knew: Been every thing, to every man; divided, And subdivided 'um again: most men Have their blind sides; But these, are blind on both. An. But how didst pick 'um out?— Phil. He that will make Ought of the husband must begin with th'wife: I've dealt 'twixt bark and tree, Turn'd Confessor, And now and then held forth; Talkt of ingoings, And of outgoings, So thin and body less, That I was forc'd t'assign six or seven marks, To know it by, Twelve consequent effects, Nineteen perswasions; Besides, waies to get it, Innumerable. — An. You are merry Philo! I fain would give my self the loose — Proceed. Phil. And since your highness gives me leave, I shall Set out my Cattle. — I've one (but he's a scabbed sheep) a Taylor; And he's been studying these twenty years A Querpo cut of Government: I told him Twas special good, and must be well receiv'd: Another, A Philosoper by fire, And he has broke his brains to find the powder, To clense Houses-of-office without stinking; And him, I have possest 'tis the first step To the Philosophers stone; too great a thing For any private man; however he Should (as the first Inventor) have the Patent; T'other a one-ey'd Cobler; Him I humour'd As a fit instrument to stitch a hole Ith Common Wealth; when in a trice he threw His wax to th' Devil, and his Awl to's Dam:
T'other a Meal-man; And he was for sifting The flower of pure doctrine, from the bran Of superstition; which his neighbour Baker, Like't well, and cry'd, he'd leave the Leaven out: There's scarce a trade of which I have not one; And to keep all together, I've a smal Levite; He does so tew the Pope; That man of sin, The Whore of Babylon; and when he takes a run 'Gainst sence, and Antichrist, the Clock can't stop him. An. 'Tis such a rope of sand! Howe're they have Done their work well enough. — Phil. And are apt matter Ready dispos'd for what you'd have 'um next. And. But what was he that skuttled by my side As I came in: He went as if his head Would run away with's shoulders? — Phil. Can you blame A Bowl to wabble that hath lost its bias? He's been an old State-martyr. — And. I remember him; He was a Scribler in the old Emperor's daies. Phil. And has done special service for your Highness; Not that he loves you more than him, but hates Whatever's uppermost. — And. Then 'twere best hang him, To please the people. — Phil. You may do what you will, 'Tis but a halter lost. — And. But what was he (Don't you remember him) that led the Van, And storm'd the Cittadell? I saw it all: Thrice he came on, and thrice beat back again; But (as a happy Omen to my cause) Brought off th' Emperial Eagle in his hand; Rally'd his men upon the spot again, Mounted the walls afresh, and leapt among 'um: And as you've seen a flock of sheep, when one Breaks through the hedge, the rest streight follow him:
So here; his Soldiers, as asham'd to see One single man give battel to the Empire, Leapt after him, and (while you'd say, what's this?) Carry'd the place — Canst tell me what he was? Phil. Yes, he's a Gentleman of noble blood; And if your Highness please to ratifie What I have done, the Regiment is his. And. With all my heart, and thank him too—Where is he? Phil. Here in the Palace Sir. — And. Go fetch him to me. Phil. I shall: — Exit Philo. And. This single soul is worth two Empires: Just such another had my Manuel been, But that he fell too soon: — For all the rest, How I could hate 'um? — What's the best of men? That he must be beholding to such slaves: But, it must be— I have a greater work For 'um to do; over their shoulders, I Must climb th' Emperial Throne; No matter how: He that attempts a wickedness, must lay Thorough a greater wickedness his way: Sin, sin must hide; Thus Architects do roul Stone, upon stone, and so cement the whole: I have my Agents, that shall buz the people, How fit it is Alexius youth should have One that may help, and share in Government; And whom more fit than I, whom every mouth Terms the preserver of their liberty: Nor shall they want rewards — Tush, 'tis but lent; I can as easie pluck it back, as squeeze A sponge that's full: One need not far to find A staff to beat a dog; nor circumstance, To make him guilty, that's before foredoom'd; Thus when they've done I'll throw the rod i'th' fire; And break the ladder when't 'as rais'd me higher; Enter Philo conducting Manuel. Now thou hast brought me something — How he looks!
As he would shake the world — you're welcome Sir: I have sent for you, first to acknowledge, next, To thank your valour: — Man. 'Twas my duty Sir. And Call't what you will, I do assure you thus hugs him. I cherish it — And now, to let you know How I can value vertue where I find it; I ratifie whatever Philo promis'd: I've a strange curdling in my blood; what ails me?aside Man. I thank your Highness. — Phil. So do I; you never Could have bestow'd it better. — Philo plucks off Manuels disguise And. Hah! what's this? Some Devil has assum'd my Manuel's shape, To vex my soul — But I shall conjure him, draws And blow this thickned cloud to Air agen. Man. kneels Man. Your blessing Royal Sir — forbear a while: I am your Son, your Manuel; not slain As was supposed. — And. Stand up and let me feel thee:And. feels him 'Tis flesh, and warm — And now, I own thee too: Welcome my Manuel to thy Father, welcome: Let me embrace my Son — Me thinks I'm young, And have snatcht forty years from time; my blood Beats high, and strong again — But prithee tell me; Twenty at least have sworn they saw thee fall, But (like thy self) opprest, not overcome. Man. How 'twas I fell I know not, but next day A Country man searching to find his Son Among the dead, found me (almost one wound) But yet not breathless, and in charity Convey'd me to his house, and us'd me so, As he had known whom 'twas he entertain'd; And that I am (next Heaven) I ow't to him. And. Philo, take care 2000 Crowns be sent him; And my faith too, to his next wish: He was an honest man; Phil. It shall be done my Lord. —
And. Come Manuel; I'me but too happy now: — Some little mischief To turn this Tide; Lest swelling up, it tear Its banks, & drown, what it but thought to chear. Exeunt. ACT. II. SCE. II. Enter Mamalus Solus. MAm. Unhappie Greece; or more unhappie me, That live to see this day; How is thy sword Turn'd on thy self? and thine old foe invited Unto the Funeral of thy liberty? Pray Heaven my Augury prove false; but yet Me thinks I see a cloud hang o're thy head, And I'm afraid, will break too soon — That State Is past its Zenith, that ne're learns to do, But by undoing; and that ne're sees order, But where disorder shews it; some curst star Has fir'd the people, and our seditious Peers, Bring fuel to't; if one should ask 'um now What they would have? not one of um can tell; But praise those times of old, they only hear'd of; And damn the present; though they neither know, What's the disease, nor yet the remedy; And now, Andronicus is the great Idoll, The Father of his Country, and what not? A man may safer speak 'gainst Heaven, than him; Him, whom last year they curst, and ten to one Will do't agen before the next be past: Nor will he lose his time, he knows they're clay, And may be moulded to what shape he pleases: The people is a skittish beast, and must Be smooth'd, and stroak'd, till he get into th' saddle: He's at it now; but if he once get there, (Which Heaven forbid) they'l find both switch and spur:
His age, has more of fire, than Phaethon's youth; He knows no mean; but as his soul is large, So is his courage; Think, and act, to him Are the same things, only remov'd in time; He's not like others; He was born to rule Within an empty sphear, for such he'll make it; And Christen that solitude, with the name of Peace; Enter Conto leading Maria: Constantinus, Ducas, Lapardus. Other, they're like t'ave none; — But see! my friends That brought him in; 'My life they rue it first. Omnes. Mamalus! — well met; Mam. Your Lordships; servant. They salute. Mar. And now my Lords will you believe me next? Is not Andronicus the same I promist? Const. Yes troth he is; And praise can add as little Unto him, as detraction take from him. Conto But yet it does no hurt to talk a little; One may observe, more than another does: It did me good to see how he receiv'd us; Mannag'd the storm, and when that brush was over, How he embrac't us with the same even temper, As though he had not been concern'd at all: Certain he must be wise; — Map. His long experience Must doe't, if yet, it had not found him so. Du. And for his Valor, ask the meanest Soldier, And he will swear, it was his great example Put courage in 'um all; and like the soul, Did actuate the whole, and every part. Conto Most strangely liberal — Has giv'n the Fleet Ten thousand Crowns, besides what other presents Has made to th' Officers — What pitty 'tis The Empire lost so brave a man so long; Or since it has him now, age creeps upon him. Mar The greater is his glory: Had he been young, It had not been so much; though yet he has Out stript what ever I or heard, or read:
I'll vie his Autumn, with the pride of springs. Const. But hark you Gentlemen; you do'nt consider How much work's yet to do —The Councel waits us: Will't please your Highness walk? — Mar. Lead on my Lord; Exeunt Const. Conto. Maria. The Duke, and I will follow. Manent Lepardas du. Mamalus. Lap. Now my good friend That are so costive of your faith!—How think you? Is not Andronicus a Gallant person? Mam. You know I told it you, and only doubted How long 'twas possible to keep him so; Then are you safe, and only then, when 'tis not Within his power, to hurt you if he would: I hope you've ty'd him up by hand and seal, Though you have done no more; — Lap. It needed not; We have his Honor, and his Oath engag'd: Mam. To what? — Du. Wee'll tell you that, another time; Mam. How willingly these Lords would cheat them∣selves!Aside Lap. Me thought you said he was ambitious, But I'll be sworn he is the humblest man, I ever met with. — Mam. And that may be pride For ought we know — Who was the prouder pray Diogenes, that spurn'd at every thing, Or Alexander, that sate out at nothing? 'Tis dangerous; There is a rule in Ethicks, That pride, which riseth from humility, Is hardest cur'd; because the vice is grounded Upon the vertue, and the sin, built on That, that should be the cure. — Lap. What should one talk To make an infidel a Proselite: Farewel. — Du. — Farewel. — Mam. My noble Lords your servant. Exeunt: by several waies
ACT. II. SCE. III. Enter Andronicus, and Philo. ANd. But did they relish it? — Phil. 'Twas not dislikt, Nor much approv'd: But yet they drank your health, And swore you were the best, and bravest Prince That Greece e're bred; — I only threw it out As 'twere by chance, then catcht it back again To make 'um follow it; — What in the Lump Would fright, by piece-meal giv'n, goes easy down. And. It was discreetly mannag'd; you must ply 'um, For fear it cool. — Phil. I warrant you 'tis don: The women are all agogge; they would fain see Another shew; Besides, I've promist'um, One's husband shall be this, and t'others that: Let it ferment a while, 'twill do it self. And. I like it well, leave me; and tell Basilius And Stephanus, that I expect 'um hear; Exit Philo An. What's the best workman without tools? I think I am fitted pretty well; The Fleet mine own, In spight of Conto; and the fool dreams it not: The City sure upon Basilius's score; The guards on Stephanus account; The Army, Upon my own: He that can lose this game, (By my consent) should never play another: And why should I suspect my fortune then? Who courts her, loses her; she is a whore, And must be ruffled; so will I; she never Coy'd it to him, that boldly offer'd at her: I'll forward then; But as men get up stairs; Step, after Step; 'tis somewhat long, but sure; He that will get thorough a croud, he must
First wedge an elbow, then a shoulder in, And press on still, till the whole body follow; I must court every thing, submit to all; Tye up my self; yet what of that? A Lion, Is still a Lion, though his claws be par'd? They'll grow again; he that doth otherwise, Falls foul of that odd solecism of power, Enter to him Bas. & Steph. To will the end, yet not the means endure. Wellcome my friends, for that, & nothing else Must be the name hereafter: 'Tis we three Must make a new Triumvirate, and share Greece, and her glory; and throw in the world, As over weight; — What is't you may not have As cheap, as aske? But give your selves the trouble To wish, and 'tis your own — Is it estate? The Empire, and her wealth, lye at your feet; Is it command? the Provinces are yours: Is it revenge? mark out your head, and have it; Would you a beauty? 'twill be offer'd you; Wives, by their Husband; Daughters, by their Mothers: And to compleat all this, would you have honour? I am your servant; only mind your selves; What say' my noble friends?— Ste. 'Tis seal'd, and done: Nor shall the fate, or fortune of the Empire Stave it off longer. — Bas. I have giv'n my hand; Nor would I pluck it back, to save my head; Nay, though the Universe depended on't: And. Spoke like your selves my friends hugs 'um Thus men resolve: Nothing remains, but that we deal like friends; That's free, and plainly. — Have you discours'd the thing Unto your Cousin Basilius? what saies he? Bas. Yes;—and 'twill do: — But heere's a Gentleman Will scarce believ't. — And. And why my Stephanus? Ste. Pox othese holy cheats — He hum'd, and haw'd; Told me a sleeveless story; could not tell
What God might suffer; and I know not what, Of dispensations, and providence; Pleaded his holy function; but at last, Promis'd neutrality, and secrecy: And. Oh! then he's sure enough. — Bas. My life for yours, Do you but make it Law, he'll make it Gospel: Ste. Nay, there's no doubt, he can: — Bas. Trust me for him, The thing is now a brewing; But great designs, Are like great wheels, if once they move too fast, 'Tis odds, they fire themselves; — Besides, the people, Must not be rid too hard; They travel best When they play with the bit i' their mouths; if once they get it Between their teeth, 'Twill try your horsemanship: A man must deal with them, as we break horses, Shew 'um the saddle first, then let 'um smel't; Lay it i'th' manger, set it on their backs; Your foot i'th' stirrop; let 'um feell your weight, Once, and agen; and as you find 'um coming, Fall gently into th' saddle; off again; And use 'um thus but half a dozen times, They'll take the rest themselves. — And. He's in the right; And I had former thoughts, whether were best For my design, the People, or the Nobles; But have resolv'd upon the first: They're won With half the do, and easier kept; engage 'um Though never so implicitly, they drive Furiously on; They're like a Conjurers Devil, Find 'um but work enough, you need not fear 'um, Without it, 'ware your self; — Our first work then Is to divide 'um, and to keep 'um so, Till we be safe our selves; We must have parties, And Antiparties; Factions, and Antifactions; Untill they break to nothing; then you'll have 'um Be glad of any thing: dis-tune a Viol, And you may set it to what Tone you please.
Ste. But is't not requisite your Highness were Of every of 'um? at least underhand; One would not think what an endearment 'tis When they believe that he that has the power, Is theirs, and singly theirs; it girds 'um to you: And. What saies Basilius? — Bas. Extreamly good, Nay, necessary; if the people are mad, He's madder far, that will not be mad with 'um; What should a sober man in drunken company But have his brains knockt out? — Ste. Besides, by this You'll raise a dust before the grand design; 'Tis hard to see the bayt in troubled waters: And. Now you're my friends I'm sure; I see you love me, You've advis'd so true and honestly:hugs 'um Bas. On my Lord, and trust me for, the City: Ste. And for the Guards, my self — I'm sure I can Form 'um to any thing; nor are they mine, But to your Highness service. — And. My best friends; Agen. Let's heep this knot inviolable; And however Our present actions may seem flat, and dull, They'll credit us when they are seen at full. ACT. II. SCE. IV. Enter Philo and 4 Cittizens drunk. PHil. Troth we were merry — Is not this better then Small Beer and Homilies? 1. Cit. Yes — but methinks I cannot find my feet. — 2. Cit. Nor I my head, But by the noise in't — Now were I a Schollar Would I confute Philosophy and prove
The world went round. — 3. Cit. Faith neighbour at this time I could say somewhat to that point. — 4. Cit. If so, It had been roasted to a coal e're now. Phil. Or raw, or roasted, what is that to us? 1. Cit. I, let it round until the spit do crack: Give me more drink knocks Sirrah, boy, rogue, more drink; Enter drawer. Draw. Anon, Anon Sir: Speak in the Mitre Christopher—What lack you Gent? 2. Cit. Some drink you rogue—some drink—And d'you here me? The best i'the Cellar —We trouble you but seldom. Draw. Please you to walk up Gentlemen? 3. Cit. No we'll take it here. Draw. I wait upon you presently Gentlemen. 4. Cit. I've drunk enough, but I'll be rul'd: whoop Am∣brose. What all-a-mort. — Claps him on the shoulder. 2. Cit. I am not satisfy'd, But as a man would say — how do you? — and so forth. Phil. Why what's the matter man? Art thou that Greek That knockst men under board by scoars, and cry'st Have y'any more that must be drunkify'd — Enter Drawer and fils. Sit out your hand, or hang you — here's this to you. 4. Cit. I know what troubles him; The Court is broke, And most of 'um lye leiger in his book: Phil. 'Tis not all lost; 'twill serve at last for wast paper; If that be all, give him his drink — filt up. 2. Cit. What was't — Phil. Andronicus his health — 2. Cit. Away with't. Leaves some. Phil. I must not bate you that— 4. Cit. Come drink it off He's a brave person — 2. Git. He's a man indeed, He paid me honestly — Then down it goes, If it were a mile to bottom — Here's to thee Greg:
3. Citt. With all my heart — He! kept a Princely house: (One might have been drunk in his Cellar with a good conscience — it cost a man nothing.) 1. Citt. The most affable man I never met; you could not speak to him But he'd be bare as soon as you. — 4. Citt. He ow'd me Some moneys at his banishment — I was paid And without sending for't: not many Courtiers Have such good memories. — 3. Citt. A few such men Would make Tradesman live. — Bless him say I. Phil. So; it begins to work:Aside Enter two others drunk and singing: Ta! La! La! La! La! La! Plague o'these fools To them, a Fidler They'l put it off agen. — Aside Fid. Please you have any musick gentlement?—A dainty fine, merry, new song — there is none but I and my boy— Sirrah come forth! Where are you? — I have not lost you in the crowd? have I?— Enter a tall well set fellow Phil. A pretty Child—chopper. 1, 2, 3, Citt. I, I, Strike up; strike up They play 4, 5, 6. Citt. Scrape rogues, scrape.— 3. Citt. But shan't we have a song too? Omnes I, I, I, I, I. Fid. A merry drinking song and't like your worships? Omnes I, I, I. That. That — he sings — Fill—Fill up & Fill: fill up the bowl; And about let it trowl; 'Tis a magical spell against sorrow, It makes a man sing, Hey! derry, derry, ding, And ne're busie his brains with too morrow. 'Tis the Beggar's ease, And his charm against the fleas; It recover's the man that did dwindle:
It makes a stiff Gyant Both active and pliant; And a cripple turn round like a spindle. It cares not a straw, For the Justice, or his law; It fears neither spies, nor reporters: It makes all the house Lye as snug as a mouse; And a petticoate sleep without Porters. 1. Citt. How now Brother — whence came you?— 6. Citt. Even from where it was —or as a man may say, The more the merryer—we have been drinking The best man's health in Europe. — 3. Citt. Then here's to you The second best. — 6. Citt. Who's that? 3. Citt. Andronicus. 6. Citt. Twas his I meant. — 5. Citt. We cannot hav't too oft. 6. Citt. Come then, away with't. — They drink round Phil. Now's my only time. Aside What say you Gentlemen? you all confess He is a Noble Person. — Omnes As ever liv'd. 1. Citt. Wise. 3. Citt. Bounteous. 4. Citt. Valiant. 2. Citt. Every thing 5. Citt. And deserves every thing 6. Citt. And would he had every thing. Phil. Why so; I see You're understanding men; and may be trusted: Look over this. — He gives them u long roll. 4. Citt. Here are a thousand hands. — Phil. Yes, ten at least: I'me sure't'as cost my Lord and me 5 daies Aside.
To scrible their ugly Fists: 2. Cit. Let's see what is't? 1. Cit. Reads The humble Petition and Address of the Citizens and Inhabitants of Constantinople — Shew∣eth, &c. Hang't —Give me a pen— I had rather set my hand to't unsight and unseen, than to trouble my head to read it over — Subscribes. 4. Cit. Sure there can be no hurt in't; there are so many hands to't: Ph. You may be sure of that— 3. Cit. What is it then? Phil. Why — you congratulate his safe return, And pray him he would assist the Emperor; Alas good Prince, he'll have a heavy trouble of't. 5. Cit. Assist: hum! That is as much as to say, Assist — or so — 6. Cit. — I, neighbour I, 'tis plain. 5. Cit. Not so plain as you make it neither — Give me the pen — I cannot write; but I can make a G for John. 3. Cit. And I a K for Christopher: 6. Cit. I cannot read, but I can write — when I have written it, any one may read it.— They all subscribe 9 others pass the Stage 2. Cit. Hoop holyday! What's Hell broke loose? What are you? Tay. Tailors, so please you Sir. 2. Cit. Oh—Tailors — One man set his mark for you all: Phil. They look like honest men — Come Gentlemen; Subscribe, subscribe — They all subscribe. Enter a seventh Citizen. 7. Cit. How now my Masters? Sheering of Hogs? All cry, and no wooll? What's the matter? 2. Cit. Subscribe, subscribe, Phil. Nothing but set your hand to Petition: 7. Cit. For ought I know, it may be Treason twenty years hence — Not I beloved. 3. Cit. Not you, why not you? will you be wiser than the best o'th' Parish? 4. Cit. And City too — will you?
2. Cit. Shew him the President's hand there; 7. Citt. Oh ho — I'm satisfy'd; Phil. Come, come, subscribe:He subscribes. 2. Cit. But hark you, how shall we get this presented? Phil. The President's an honest Gentleman, And loves the City — I hope he will do't: 2. Cit. Away — Away — Let's to him, Omnes I, I, I. Fid. Please your Worships to remember the Musick: 5. Cit. Musick you rogue! I'd have made better upon a Gridiron. 1. Cit. Or I with a Key and Tongs. 2. Cit. Hang 'um, hang 'um, we have done with 'um: Phil. There Sirrah:Gives him money. Fid. I thank your Worship: 3. Cit. Hold, hold, let him do somewhat for his mo∣ney before he goes — Has he subscrib'd? 4, 5, 6. Cit. No, no, no — he has not yet; but he shall Fid. What your Worships please — Subscribes Is there any more? 4, 5, 6. Cit. No, no, no, enough, enough, good Mr. Scra∣per. Exeunt reeling. ACT. III. SCE. I. Enter Andronicus Solus. IT hits — And now my work's as good as done; But I must cast more blinds, for fear it be Too soon discover'd — One would not think how't takes, That I have added fifty Fryers, to pray For the curst soul of Manuel — See his revenge (Good Prince) the people cry — 'Twas necessary: Nothing establish'd Caesar's statues more, Than re-erecting those of conquer'd Pompey: I must yet farther, be their Advocate For liberty against restrictive Laws,
And make what ever's their concernment, mine; Thus shall I steal the power, and the dull beast Not dream it lost, until it feel where 'tis; Then 'twill be time, and not till then, to hew Th' Imperial Cedar, and stop the peoples mouths With a few sticks, and chips, 'twill warm their hands, When t'other is forgot: the dog that fought To save his Masters wallet, when he could not Defend it longer, eat for company; And so will they; If not, necessity That has no law her self, shall coin one for it; All things are lawful to their end; That war Is just, that's necessary; and those Arms religious, Where a man cannot well be safe without 'um; Then shall I triumph, when I make the Empire Shrink at my weight, and truckle under me; Trample the world, and frighten fate, to feel A threed so stuborn as to twist her Wheel:Enter Steph. How fares my lov'd Stephanus? Ste. As ever, Your Highness's Vassal. — And. Fy my friend, we're one; How does our friend Basilius?— Ste. He's well; And better imploy'd: — And. As how? — Ste. He's with his Cousin; A cunning Sophister that alwaies follow'd The rising Sun — He now begins to find It may be lawful; Give him but your hand He shall be Patriarch, my life, he brings A Text to make it out. — And. So, ply him there; And put it to him what he thinks, if an oath Of being true and faithful to Alexius, Were set on foot —'twould be a handsome cloak: Ste. But do more hurt than good; for if you add, His Successors, as I believe you mean,
We shall be ripe too soon, and easie smoakt: And. Why? I shall be his Successor, and then The oath will reach to me.— Ste. That will be nothing, Nor stand you much in stead; suppose you were Now Emperor, and 'twere now put about; You'd find few boggle at it, but such, as could Do you no hurt —These Oaths are dangerous things, They conceal enemies, and make no friends; One will be true enough without it, t'other Will not regard it; he that's forc'd to take An oath, streight makes a second, not to keep it: You're only sure of him, whom by believing To be what you would have him, you make so: And. But yet the greater number will swallow it; Oaths are the same to them, as rattles to children, It makes the cheat pass easie — slide as 'twere. Ste. Howe're, 'tis ticklish; some Cur or other May find it out, and bark; and all the rest Open for company; then we shall have Nothing but jealousies, distrusts, and fears, News upon news, Petition on Petition, Laws, Liberties, Religion, all at stake, And will be lost, unless these Geese (forsooth) Cackle and save the Capitol. — And. Honest StephanusHugs him. Ste. Your actions will be Table-talk; disputed In Barbers shops, and Bake-houses; each slip Be made a fault, and every fault a crime; Then shall your oath be brought upon the rack, Whether 'twere lawfully imposed; or you, Capable of receiving it; or if so, How far it binds; No faith with Tyrants, says one, With Robbers, another cries; and then how easie 'Twill be to make you one, or both, especially, When they that give the sentence, make the case, I leave it to your Highness. — And. My best friend; Hugs him again.
But somewhat must be done to blind the people: Ste. Keep 'um but moving, they will ne're mind you; Do you but shake the Tree, they'll pick the Fruit, And busie enough; but lest (when all is gone) They should look up to see who 'twas that did it; You must provide your mask; and of this kind, None better than Religion — your Highness Knows how to wear it to the best advantage; 'Tis a rare servant, but a scurvy Master: And. Then you think best to let alone the Oath, At least not press it. — Ste. Yes by any means: You'll find an hundred safer waies. And. We'll talk the rest within: these giddy fools Are hunting out Basilius, and may chance To light on me too soon:— Ste. I wait your Highness. Exeunt. ACT. III. SCE. II. Enter Philo and Citizens. PHil. How say you my Masters, who shall make the Speech? So many of us, and not one gifted brother? 2. Cit. Time was I could have done my part: The Prince (And no disparagement) might have heard it too. Phil. And ne're the wiser — Aside. 3. Cit. Troth my Pump is dry: Phil. This is your drinking — I have often told you; 1. Cit. Have but a little patience, yonder's one Will end the controversie; do but observe How hard he wrings, and squeezes; somewhat's coming: Phil. What? he with that Parenthesis about his mouth? By no means Gentlemen, 'tis ominous: What ever comes between't, may be left out. 4. Cit. I'm satisfy'd —'Tis but a good Speech lost: Good Master Philo be that Office yours.
Omnes A Philo, A Philo, Philo, Philo. Phil. I, now the matter's mended. Omnes Give't him—Give't him. They give him the petition Phil. Well — if I must — what remedy? Omnes He comes:Enter Basilius. Phil. Save you most worthy Sir — I am commanded By the Inhabitants, and Citizens Of this great City, to present you this, And beg your favour and assistance in't. delivers the Roll Basilius reads to himself. 1. Cit. Hang the rogue how he trowls it out; 2. Cit. His tongue runs on wheels. Bas. In troth my Masters 'tis a noble thing; And well advis'd: Nay and becoming men That love their Country: But I'm half afraid He'll not accept it; He's so humble minded You'll hardly draw him to't: Howe're I'll try: Omnes We thank your Honour. 1. Cit. I hope you will prevail. 2. Cit. I should be sorry else. 5. Cit. So should I that er'e I set my hand to't. Enter Andronicus. Phil. Stand off—He comes himself: Long live your Highness. Omnes Long live the Founder of our Liberty: And. I thank you Gentlemen, But may I serve you? Omnes Long live the publick Father; Live Andronicus. Bas. My Lord, these Gentlemen (both in their own And friends behalf) have made me promise 'um That I'd present you this delivers the Roll Nor must your Highness Make me denyal; Their request is short: That you'd be pleas'd to ease Alexius's years, By bearing half the burden of the Crown: Nor do I think you will disdain a part, Though you deserve the whole — And thus of old The Roman Senate to Marcellus joyn'd,
Delaying Fabius; Age, and Youth together: A wholesome mixture, where the one brought eyes, The other hands; This, action, He, advice: Thus must the body of the Gretian state, Be wisely temper'd, lest we rue't too late; And. What kind of voyce is this I hear? my friends Either forget, or know not what they ask; Joynt Emperor! — were there no Treason in't, I must not hearken to't; who would be clog'd With gieves, though made of gold; for such are Crowns, Or stoop to take one up, that knew the weight of't: Crowns are thick set with cares; for every gem, An hundred doubts, and troubles; nor are their ermin More spotted than their fate; whil'st privacy Lyes low ('tis true) but yet that low, is safe: Thunder plows up the Hills, when Valleys scape; And rives tall Cedars, when the Shrubs go free; Sleep dwells in Cottages, not thrones; content, In humble cells; whilst greatness is at odds With every thing; nay, and its self to boot: Let others grasp at all, and by great pains, Aspire to greater: Let 'um vex the world, They but disquiet themselves; he only lives, That's beneath envy, and above contempt: Be it enough that I have serv'd my Country Thus long; That I have freed her from the Yoke, Broke all her fetters:— You have had my youth; Let me enjoy my age: 'Twere too severe To have had one, and yet deny me to'ther. Phil. That was well hinted Master. Excellent fox!Aside Omnes Andronicus, Andronicus, Long live Andronicus. 5. Cit. We've brought our selves into a dainty nooze. 1. Cit. Good Sir perswade him. Bas. I must not leave your Highness so: Whom can Greece think more worthy than your self? Where should she pay most, but where most is owing? Let me prevail, my Lord, this day shall be Writ in a scarlet Text, since hence we date
The happiness, and new birth day of the state. And. 'Tis strange my friends that you should preess me thus, And put my modesty to a blush — Can Greece so full So far forget her self? Can Greece Of able Statesmen) Greece o'reshoot her self? Who hath bewitcht thee? with what spectacles Didst thou look on my merit? that th'ast made So fair a letter in so small a print? Andronicus deserve a Crown! Alas! Greece is mistook — I have one foot i'th' Grave, And can you think it sightly to behold The other in a Throne — No — Graves, and Thrones, Hold least proportion; — You say you love me; Shew't now — and dazle not those eyes agen Which I thought shut to vanity — I am Content, and what can Providence add more? Not that I tell you this as I were lazy, Or sullen, or refus'd to serve my Country; Far be it from me; No; we were not born, To live like Hedgehogs, rowl'd in our own down, And turn out bristles to all the world besides: Yet must we dye t' our selves, and so let me, Whose age may challenge a writ of ease; and crave Leave of the world to let me mind my Grave. Omnes. Andronicus, Andronicus, Long live Andronicus. Ph. Tis all in vain to press him now — we'll find Some other time when he shall not deny us. Exeunt with a shout. Ma∣net And. And. What is this giddy multitude? This beast Of many heads? This thing Vox populi? It can do all; As much, or more than Fate, Raise, and pull down; make, and annihilate; Yet see! How easie 'tis to cast a gloss Before those vulgar eyes, those leaden souls Begotten in a dream; — Ex traduce: How natural is it for sire to climb? And could they think a man; nay more, a Prince; Born near a Crown, of such a frozen spirit
That Empire could not thaw? Come, come, I must Play my Cards handsomely; and though I yield (As who would not) make 'um believe it is Through importunity, not my desire; I'll slip the Vizard first, then let it hang, Till it fall off, of't self —Thus while they wooe, I'll have my ends, and they beholding too. Exit. ACT. III. SCE. III. Enter Conto, Lapardas, Ducas. COnt. Observ'd you not the tumult? I've scarce heard A fuller cry, I wonder what it means? La. Where has your Lordship been? nothing (but Treason) Is more familiar —'Tis a Petition To have Andronicus joint Emperor; Du. And backt (they say) with 20 thousand hands; Besides some great ones — But to give him's due, He has refus'd it; if he ha'n't, I'll swear, Mamalus was a witch — Cont. Why, what of him? Lap. His name slipt from me unawares; — Good faith, He guess'd at this unluckily, long since; But make no words of't; it may do him wrong. Cont. 'Tis spoken to a stone; yet troth I'm glad He has deny'd it; say he should be honest? Du. I cannot see his drifts; would he have took it, He might have had it now, e're it took air; And we in no condition to prevent it. La. What say you if we went and waited on him? Took notice of the thing, and thankt his vertue? Cont. I like it well.— Du. Then let us not delay it. As they are going out they are met, and stopt by Maria, Constantinus, Mamalus.
Mar. My Lords! well met; but whither — You are posting Who shall be first to kiss the rising Sun? L. No, no, there's nothing in't; Besides, you (Madam) Know we've his Honour, and his Oath engag'd. Mar. Oh! w'hear you have—And yet I'll scarce believe (Though I have reason to suspect) he'll break 'um. Du. There is hope yet: he has refus'd the offer: Mam. To make them hotter on't; (good Gentleman) He's modest, and may chance to want entreaty. Const. Perhaps the cry was faint, & weak, there wanted More Curs to yelp, and Hounds to mouth it out: It was some time before he join'd with us, But yet at last you saw — Mam. I fear me, more Than you'll be fairly rid on — Enemies Are ten times easier kept out, than thrown out: Mar. But had this rabble no head? He is too cunning To trust a giddy multitude — Const. They say It was the City President — Cont. Most likely; He's one that would be great at any rate; Const. I, here's the hand, but where's the spring that moves it? Mam. The cobweb doth not cover the Spider so, But I can see him work: This must be old Basilius, I trace him by his Cousin; They two, are hand and glove — only, one acts, What t'other's asham'd to own — That holy men Must (like the holy Language) be thus read backward. Mar. But what would make him do't? I'm sure my Fa∣ther Prefer'd him well — Mam. But can he make him Patriarch? You'll say he's dead, and cann't; then blame him not To strike up interest with him that may; T'other's forgot — Besides, ambitious men When they stand still, fancy they're going back; Thus much, he has already, only tells him How much more's wanting; and what was a sum
In the desire, enjoy'd, is but a cypher. Mar. Prithee Mamalus — Do not draw the Devil More ugly than he is — Mam. Nor you good Madam Believe him fairer — Don't we know the Tree By 'ts Fruit? And judge of men, by Actions? Not fair pretences — You forget our Proverb, Remember to distrust — This easy faith Has done more mischief, than it e're did good. La. Had we believ'd your words, this had ne're been; Mam. As how my leaky Lord?— These bor'd barrels: Aside. La. Nay be not angry man; We are all friends; And may be free —We'll live and die together. Mar. No heats among our selves good Gentlemen: Andronicus from behind the hangings. And. Yonder they are y'faith — I'll stumble on 'um; Now for a neat disguise, and all's my own; A shout within Mar. Hark! hark! What's this?— Mam. Ev'n the old rout agen; This will be somewhat at last, or I'm mistaken. Enter And. as angry, and speaking to some within. And. Plague of these fools, and those that set 'um on; What do they trouble me? Tell 'um I cannot, Or if I could, I would not; Have they none To bait but me?— Mar. Save your good Majesty. And. My friends, and all!—Is this the thanks you give me? This the reward I have? Who but a madman Would serve his Country? Who would warm a snake That knew its nature? For such 'tis to me; Was't your design when first you call'd me home To make me miserable, that made you happie? Who courted you? Did I? No, Heaven knows 'Twas otherwise: If not; you Madam can Be my Compurgatrix: Nor think it strange I talk this rate; your ugly jealousie (As closely as you carry't) is cause enough:
Nay I am right; I found it in your looks Before this Lady spake it — Is't my crime The people's mad? or must my innocence Suffer, because they know not what they would? You'll say perhaps I have been offer'd Empire, But have I took it? That I might have been, And am not; judge your selves, whether it speaks My vertue more, or your ingratitude: Would he that told the peoples heat, had told you My frosty answer; That had done me right; But now I see, good deeds are writ in Ice, And the least groundless jealousie in Steel: Let me remember once (but to forget it Ever hereafter) I have serv'd you truly, Done my self injury to be kind to you, And wrought my own disquiet, to lighten yours: You know necessity first made me arm; And (by what ever's good) there's nothing less Shall make me keep it up; Then doubt not him Whom you have try'd —Could you believe I would? Certain you could not:— La. My Lord I'm satisfi'd, and thank your Highness, You took the pains to do't. — Conto. The same am I: Omnes. And all of us. — Mam. skews his lip. And. Then pray continue so, Until you find me otherwise. — Omnes. We shall. Your Highness's — Exeunt. And. Madam, I'll wait on you; But I must chide you first, you've been unkind; Good faith you have—Distrust a friend! Nay one, You knew so long, and might so well command; I ha'n't deserv'd it: — Mar. Good my Lord forgive me, I lov'd my brother well; and was afraid, What such a tumult might.— And. Hang'um —D'you think
I'd ruine, what you (the glory of your Sex) Took so much pains to save — Mar. Nay, good my Lord. And. I'm yet too low — Th'ast a brave noble soul, And such as might redeem a perisht world, But that 'tis done already.— Mar. Nay — now — my Lord! And. I've done — But shall I never see the noble Caesar Your Husband, here —I'm sure the Empire wants him: Mar. I would you could; but I'm afraid you wo'nt, His Ague hath so shaken him in pieces: And. I'm sorry for't—(he nere was well together)Aside He has my prayers, and wishes. — Mar. Thank your Lordship. Exeunt. ACT. III. SCE. IV. Enter Mannuel, Philo. MAn. But tell me Philo, prithee tell me how Thou cam'st in this great credit with my Father? Phil. Oh Sir! I've been his servant many years; He bred me from a boy, to what you see; Trust and employment can do mighty things: Man. How gat'st th'in to that trust? — Phil. As other men; By seeming fool, yet such a one, as might be Fit matter for the Knave; by bearing injuries, And thanking 'um; at least dissembling, Till I had power to act a safe revenge. Man. Suppose that never came. — Phil. Then I forgave 'um. Man. I see th'ast study'd the point; Prithee teach me Some of those little Arts. — Phil. Call you 'um little? As little as they are, they govern the world.
Man. 'Tis well 'tis ignorant how little governs it; But on — Phil. Since 'tis your pleasure, I shall — Who would Grow to an Oak, he must be first a Twig; Supple, and pliant; bow with every wind; He's long a growing up, but sure to stand, When t'other shews his roots — He must speak well Of all in place; No matter what they are, It is enough, they're there: Nature ne're made so great a Beast, but somewhat Might be said for it —Is the subject dirty? Wrap't in clean linnen — For example now: Is he a down-right fool? — Call him good natur'd: A Babler, sociable: A Railer, witty: If scoffing, pleasant: if malicious, subtile: If vitious, affable: if fool-hardy, daring: If given to Ribaldry, A merry Gentleman: All noise, a learned man: if he saies nothing, He thinks the more, and has a working brain: If impudent, A handsome confidence: They're very near ally'd, and only differ I'the success: Is he thick skull'd and stupid? A modest man, and has an excellent wit, But an odd art of keeping 't to himself: What though the Shop be thin? The Warehouse has't: Has he the Statesmans tread? A wise man no doubt: If we perceive a River run dark, and slow, We streight pronounce it deep, and ne're examine Whether the mud at bottom be the cause: Is he all Apophthegm? A shrew'd man; What matter though he want a trifling circumstance Of Sence and Pertinence; What's that to us? What hurt's in all this? do not we call Our pretty Ladies, civil, obliging women? And shall we be less modest to their husbands? Man. How have I liv'd i'th' dark? I alwaies call'd A spade, a spade; But now I see, my Knave,'s Your thriving man. —
Phil▪ Believe 'um what you please, But treat 'um like honest men —T'others so broad; And what's your Lordship better when yo've don't? They know't as well as you. — Man. Th'art a rare fellow; Thou that hast this, hast more. — Phil. Why troth — not much; He must swear every thing; and if need be, Forswear't agen; but still beware, it be Done with a tenderness: He must own nothing▪ Laid by; nor boggle at any thing, cry'd up; And for his conscience, he must split the hair, Twixt techy, and prostitute; The one Flyes in his face, the other makes him cheap; Lasty; for his Religion (since 'tis necessary He have a shew at least) chuse't, as men, bells, By the sound; or we, our Magistrates, by th' poll. Man. But does the world do this? Phil. How think you Sir? Do they eat, drink, or sleep? — Man. Where ev'r I come I find it damn'd: — Phil. And reason good — The people May chance to smoak it else — Who first discover'd it, Put teeth in the Sheeps mouths; you cannot fleece 'um Now, but they'll bite; — no — he must still decry it; But to believe himself, not worth his while: Man. And dost not thou? what pitty 'tis these parts Should be thus lost in low, ignoble Arts? Such little nothings—Leave 'um—I'll preferr thee. Phil. Defend me from a lecture. Aside—'Tis no more Than what my betters have done, and thriv'd by too. Man. Yet let me beg thee leave it; what is got By such base means, is but an empty blaze, Crackles a while in talk, but quickly gon: Tis not too late for to be vertuous yet; What's done already, may have rather been The vice of thy imployment, than thy nature. What saist thou man? —
Phil. I was ne're obstinate. Man. Let me instruct thee then—And yet heav'n knows How much I want my self, yet I may serve To light a candle to thee, Could'st thou but see What wertue were, thou would'st prevent my wish; 'Tis a continual Spring, and Harvest both, Bears fruits, and blossoms, sows and reaps at once, So quick is the return, and certain too: And as in equal temperatures, the Pulse Beat true, & even; so here, she's still the same, Not swoln with good things, nor cast down with bad; Free, without cheapness; compos'd without formality; Calm without dulness; active without weariness; And in the want of every thing, is all: How say'st thou Philo? Wilt thou have her, man? Phil. No ready money Sir? — Half one, half t'other Were somewhat like — I hearken to your Lordship. Man. Whose are the quiet sleeps, but the vertuous? Who valiant, but they? (not brutish valour, But) such as dare die in cold blood: Who honourable but they? Honour without vertue, Is what the people pleases, not our own: Who are religious but they? Without it, Religion's but a soul without a body, A painted butterfly, a specious nothing; Whilst join'd they make a perfect harmony: This is a vertuous man; Fear, neither drives him, Nor favour draws aside; He values not The curled wrinkles of a Tyrants brow; He's still serene; and tires, as well the wit, As power of torture, and enjoys 'um too: Such is his mans-estate; And when old age Has seiz'd the out-works, he's secure within; And is so far from wishing youth agen, He's only sorry that e're he was young: Come — I must make thee vertuous — Follow me:Exit. Phil. I cannot tell — As he is going out Ph. speaks aside But I half doubt my self: One such a Lecture more — And good night Master —
Farewel good honest Philo — How it sounds!He startles Had I puling gizard now, 'Twere done: But—soft, and fair goes far. — Exit. ACT. III. SCE. V. Enter And. Steph. Bas. — (shouts within.) ANd. What would you have me do? — Ste. Troth, play no longer; (Pardon the language) They are all agog, And may do mischief. — Bas. If you slip this minute, You may wait long enough, e're you get another; If once they settle, all our labour's lost; They'll understand themselves — Besides, you're gon Too far, to go no farther: — And. You mistake me; I am resolv'd upon it — What before Lookt like ambition, Is but safety now; I only stopt a while, as doubting, whether 'Twere fit t'accept it yet — Ste. What said the Lords? And. Most satisfy'd; only Mamalus's face Spake more, than his tongue durst. — Bas. Puh, he's but one, And may be made; at least, be taken off, By (the old way) preferment, or his head: Ste. But there are others, and not least concern'd, The sober party, that have stakes to lose; (The age is too refin'd for men to walk Invisible) They ha'n't been dealt with yet. Ste. 'Tis one o'th' greatest follies in the world, For to believe the world wiser than 'tis; Call me a Junto — They shall do it for you; You'll ne're want men, until you want Preferment.
And. That were to let 'um see, I needed 'um; Put a sword in their hands, and make my self Less than I am; them, more than they should. Bas. How will y'avoid it? There is no other way To fix, and settle; then you'll plead consent; Nor will it be difficult to bring'um to't: The people are like sheep, 'tis better driving A flock, than one. — And. But say they should prove sullen? Unravle my Title?— Ste. You must venture that; 'Tis easie turning 'um to grass agen; By all means let'um meet, though they do nothing, But set the rates of Tripes, and Pudding-pies. And. Well, be it so; And now my friend, you may Rally your rabble-Regiment agen: Tell 'um — I accept it. Exit Basilius. Ste. I'll secure your Highness, They shall not squabble for want of work; my self Has cut out more than they'll make up in hast; Nor shall their speed be more than we think good; Whilst, though wisemen propose, fools must debate it: Shout within. And. Now how I love my Genius hugs him Let's keep here, All will be well enough; And though I cannot Make the deaf Adder hear, I'll be sure this, To charm him so, he shall not dare to hiss. Exeunt. Shouts within proclaiming Andronicus. ACT. IV. SCE. I. Enter Alexius, Andronicus. ALex. No longer Cousin now, but dearest brother, You're welcome to a burthen, and I'm glad I've got so good a Partner in the Throne:
And. Great Sir, I thank you, and (have been so us'd To down-right honesty) I believe you too: It is enough to me, that I'm your servant, The partner of your cares, and not your Throne; Yet who'd be great, when at the best, 'tis but A better sort of slavery, a handsome Gaol, And (what the worst of Gaols is free from) envy'd? Could you believe that in this little time I should be struck at? and through your sides too? What is my fault? if to have done 'um good Be such, 'tis mine, if to have broke my rest, That they might sleep secure, be crime, I'm guilty; Alex. Alas I'm sorry for't; and cannot yet Conjecture what you mean. — And. Please you read this· And. gives him a paper Alex. How's this? Belgrade betray'd unto the King of Hungary! And. It should have been; And had not I stalkt with'um, It had been now too late to ask whose work 'twas. Alex. What are the persons? They must be considerable. And. And so they are; Alex. But have you taken any? And. Yes — divers— And on one a Counsel of war Has pass'd, and sentenc'd — Please you sign the warrant; Alex. Gi'me't, and lest relation may sway me, I'll ne're enquire the name signs it Yet let me see't; How now! what's this — My Mother Empress! — hold: Make me a Nero! take away her life That gave me mine! — And. Have but a little patience, And if I do n't convince you, o'my honour I'll give't you back agen — Consider it; A Frontier, a whole Province in effect; A little Kingdom; all the fate of Greece, Attends its Fortune— Alex. But we have it still. And. What matter is't— Then you believe no Treason, Unless the Prince be kill'd: Alex. But 'tis my Mother:
And. Justice respects no persons, Crowns, no kindred; And Fathers of their Country, know no Mothers: Alex. As if one could not be a Prince, unless He put off man— Come — You are too severe; She is my Mother — Let a Cloyster serve: And. Severe — Know I'um joynt Emperor, and can Do it my self; but that I would not rob you The glory of the action; This will break The neck of Treason, when the age shall see Such signal Justice done upon a Mother. Alex. That shall not I.— And. Then let the Empire sink, I'll never mind it more, nor break my sleep To force an happiness on one that slights it: Here — take your Paper — But lest it be said You did once well, and streight repented it, I thus dispose it — Tears a wrong paper, and burns it. Alex. 'Tis all one — I thank you. Exit And. 'Tis done; and your game's next: See! Here's the warrant Twas a wrong paper burnt: — What excellent mortar Blood makes! Rome batten'd in't, and from the ruines Of Alba, and the slaughtered world, grew up To what she was; and so must I the same? 'Tis not enough that I'm got up my self But I must beat down others; level all That stand before, or near me; I'm not safe While young Alexius lives, or (which is worse) Has a friend left him; He has many, and great ones, And might be worth my fear, could they but fix, Or know their strength; But there are only two Considerable, that's Constantinus, and Mamalus; Honest, and able both — For all the rest Would all my friends were what they think themselves, My enemies, what they are; yet as they are, They made me what I am; and may again Crush me to nothing, if I don't prevent 'um, By giving the first blow, and putting't home:
Thus, thus it must; nor can I sleep secure, Till they have slept their last, and fall together Wrapt in one common fate; none ever rackt A grave to find the man he fear'd, or hated; The rest will follow; 'Tis but using well The present time, and working on emergencys; Things counsel men, and not men counsel things. Enter Manuel. How now my Manuel — Thus you see my pains To make you happy.— Man. Would your self were such. And. Small time will do't— Rome was not built at once. Man. And better she'd continu'd Cottage still, Than built on rapine, or enlarg'd with blood; The tears of Orphans, and the curse of Widdows, Rot not i'th' Ayre. And. Away you fool — The Fox Fares best, when he is curst; 'Tis a sure sign, H'as done his work; — But to be serious — Tell me Whither a man may not preserve himself? Or whither all things that are tending to't, May not be lawfull, at least excuseable? Man. Thereafter as they are — Though this I'll grant you Peace without safety, is a bare cessation, No laying down of Arms.— And. Th'ast hit the nail: Come, you must help me; — See this executed. Gives Man. the warrant; Man. startles. What makes you startle? Let me have it done; Man. Don! — Were I satisfi'd o'th' crime, which yet The people say, was rather packt, than pro'vd; There's no such dearth of hangmen, that your Son Need take the office.— And. Stranger to my blood And never true begot: Have I for this run through so many hazards? Ventured so farr, to make a villain great That never had a soul above a dunghill?
See it be done — and quickly — Or — Man. I cannot; And which is more I shall not—Disobedience Is vertue here: — If you suspect my courage, Try't yet again; — Shew me your Enemy, And were he guarded with ten thousand Devils, I'll through, and through, but I will reach his head, Or lose my own — But this — Is such a thing Honor, and conscience, Justice, all forbid it. And. What are those private toyes to me? Kings may Do what they list. — Man. But can they do't by Law? And. But law! you block head; Doth not Justice sit At Jupiters elbow? What cannot power do, And justifi't when don? He that can nothing But what is lawful, raigns by curtesie: Besides, what use of Laws? Good Kings may live Without 'um, bad ones will not much regard 'um; Had Alexander squar'd his actions By common Justice, he had never wept The want of worlds; or had Rome giv'n back To every one their own —How had she sate (Like Aesop's Jay) stript of her pilfer'd plumes, And fairly martch't to her first Huts agen: Weigh Crowns by th' ballance and you'll make fine work: Preach laws to sword-men! — Out—This squemish slave Exit Manuel; — At another door enter Stephanus. Will be my ruin, and his own in mine. Welcome my better self! — you must see this And. gives Stephanus the warrant for Execution. Dispatch't, and quickly; If the people grumble Produce your warrant; tel'um how hard I stood To have preserv'd her, but I could not doe't. How sayes my Stephanus? — Enter Philo. Ste. I say—'tis don. And. 'Twas my good Angel's voice; good luck attend it. Now honest Philo! How goes your work on?Exit Steph. Philo. As well as heart can wish; The Stag is lodg'd; And my Hounds ready: —
And. But dost know 'um well? Have they been enter'd, flusht in blood before? I hate the fearful hands.— Phil. Ne're doubt 'um Sir, There's not a man among 'um but has been Kickt out of all the Sanctuaries in Europe: Who ever speaks of young Alexius next, Shall only say, — He was: And. 'Twas bravely said: Come — We have more to do. Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCE. II. Enter Cont. Lap. Du. Const. Mam. COnt. We have done well my Lords, we've made a rod To whip our selves — Right Aesop's frogs y'faith, We must be changing — Nay 'tis well enough. La. For why my Lord — I'm sure my thoughts were clear, As spotless christal? could I conceive one drop Of blood within me trayterous, it should out, Though 'twere that next my heart: Du. The same were mine: I only meant to use him as a purge To carry ill humors, not our spirits off: Const. A fit comparison — We're purg'd indeed; The remedy proves worse than the disease: Mam. I, you o'reshot the mark —E're he came in He was your Creature, but your Master now: Const. Where is this perjur'd Villain?—Sure he believes The bottomless bag — That Lovers, and Traitors Oaths Are lodg'd together shouts The Devil's in this Rout, More shouting yet. — La. And more is like to be; 'Tis thought when fuel fails, they'll pluck down houses To keep the bon-fires up — Did not your Lordship
See the installment? — Const. No, but I have heard 'Twas very splendid. — Cont. Yes, as Art could make it: Mam. So't should; The trappings of the Presidents horse, Is more than half i'th' Government o'th' City: Const. But have you seen no publick Acts of late? The vizard is half off— The names transpos'd Andronicus first, and then Alexius: Mam. And reason good; should not the figure stand Before the cypher? — Caesar, and Bibulus; One does all, t'other drinks all. La. Could he yet stop, There might be hopes. — Mam. Small hopes — Ambition Is ne're so high but she still thinks to mount: That station which lately seem'd the top, Is but a step to her now, and what before Was even beyond her wish, being once in power, Seems low, and cheap— If I mistake it not, The Emperor yet lives; and though he is But the bare shadow of a swelling name, Can you believe Andronicus will brook An equal in authority? — Is Andronicus No better known? — Well my good Lords what say you? Please you to give me leave and I'll propose, A short expedient. — Omnes· With all our hearts. Mam. And you engage however you dislike it Not to discourse't abroad? — Omnes. Upon our Honours. — Mam. Then thus — He's yet unsetled; Heavy bodies Once mov'd, retain a trembling e're they fix: So here — The Empire's in a strange confusion, And 'tis his interest to keep it so; Now what I offer, is this; That every one Pick out his Faction, and oblige it to him; Get but so far into 'um, as to please um,
You have 'm sure enough; the power to raise 'um, Follows of course; Then shall we fall upon him E're he have time to think; And break his neck, By the same hand that set it. — Const. I like it well, But cannot judge it safe to trust a tumult, Unless we had a body to make a stand? Mam. Nor will we want it; we'll but use the people As a forelorn: And for the rest, what think you Of Stephanus? I'll pawn my head I make him. Const. Impossible—He was the chiefest person Set t'other up.— Mam. But what has he done for him? He's but the same he was; and, which makes for us, Has equals, if not superiors in savour; I know his spirit can never brook it long; Do you but give the world, I'll run the hazard: Const. How say ye my Lords? Omnes. Worthy Mamalus, You have our hearts, and thanks, and wishes to't: Enter Maria as in hast. Const. See! here's more news, I do not like the hast. Mar. Help, help my Lords the Emperor and's Mother, Omnes. What of them? — Mar. Oh! dead, dead, dead — murder'd: That ever earth should bear so curst a Traytor, Such a false, treacherous, perfidious slave; And which is worse than all; The people cry, A judgment on him for his Mothers death? Const. How! What's all this? good Madam divide your grief, And let us bear a part. — Mar. I know not what 'tis. Reports are various — But they say, he sign'd A warrant for his Mothers execution, For a suppos'd betraying of Belgrade; And since has broke his neck by a fall from's horse, As he was hunting — There are others agen Say he was bow-string'd — Oh this cursed string,
That murders more, than e're the bow kill'd fairly: That I could see him yet; — Then thus I throw off woman; and bury my tears In my revenge — Come Lords — Let't ne're be said There's nothing left us of our former greatness But fame, and ruine —Let it ne're be spoke Greece is grown barbarous, and the merry Greek Has drown'd the valiant. — Const. Most excellent Madam! Mar. Come, let's forgive (our selves I mean) that crime Of ignorance, and well-meaning; We that were The stairs that helpt him up, our backs, the steps By which he climb'd, How are we trampled on? Come, come my Lords — 'Tis time we look about us, And ward the threatning blow — Let's but agree And our work's done; The Tortoise is secure Within her shell, if any part lye out, It dangers all the rest:—What says Mamalus? Mam. What? But that he ows Himself, and his, unto your Highness courage; We had half drove the nail e're you came in, But now 'tis rivited: There remains nothing, But that we thank your Highness, and keep to it: Const. Well mov'd —Let's on: — Mar. Do — And you'll find the Lion Is not so terrible as the Painter makes him: La. Du. Agree'd, agree'd — Let's on — Mar. Bravely resolv'd; Stars have their strongest influence in conjunction: A clap or two of thunder Const. Hark! — Hark! — The voice of Heaven — 'Tas an∣swer'd us, And seal'd the enterprise — And when I fail it, Let Heaven strike me, as I this earth. — Enter Philo with a guard. Ph. Stand — Treason — Seize 'um. Mar. Seize me! for what? Phil. Oh! your Highness? The Emperor will discharge you presently.
Const. Unhand me villlain — Take that — Constantinus knocks one of the guard down; after a short skuffle all seiz'd. Phil. So — So—Away with 'um. Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCE. III. Enter Andronicus solus. NOw I can say I live, and not till now: I've elbow room enough, And space to breath; I can look round me too; There's not a tree That stopt my prospect, but I've levell'd it, At least am fairly onward; Not a mote Hung in my light, but I have swept it down: Now could the subtilest, overgrown Devil (Whom age had render'd all experiment) Done it more cleverly? — These foolish Lords (Like Aesop's trees) have lent the Ax an helve To hew themselves in pieces; And the people, Kindled a fire, that shall burn 'um up. And let it burn—This is my time to fix, And arm my self against the worst; — Th' ascent To thrones, is slippery, the top shaking; The fall a Precipice: Men go not down By the same stairs they climb'd — Yet what of that? This must defend me hands his sword Caesar often sheath'd it, But never laid it by — Enter Anna. But see! — the Empress! 'Twere a good humour now for me that kill'd The Husband, to make love unto the Widdow; For once, I'll venture: he kneels Hail renowned Empress: Anna. What would this plague, and mischief of our House? What means he? —
And. Duty, Royal Madam, and leave To drop a tear into this Ocean— Rises Alas good Emperor! — Who can be happy, When careless Fate shall spin a thread so fine, Only to snap't in two agen? — Blest youth! Had Vertue, Innocence, and all those Graces That build a Prince, and make him more belov'd, Than fear'd, don any thing — Th'adst been here still: Or could that early Majesty, or Courage Beyond thy years, prevail'd — Th'adst not dy'd yet; But see our misery — That nothing can Be happy long, but Heav'n must envy it: He was two good to live. — Anna. Would thou'dst been so, I had not lost him then: — Damn'd, cursed man! How durst thou vent these lyes, when thou art he That didst contrive his murder, and his blood, Yet wreaks upon thee.— And. Wrong not my innocence: By all the vertues of your sex, 'tis false: Anna. Thou ly'st. — And. I do not, 'twas a fall from's horse: By this it was Kisses her handShe spits at him Anna P'th — I touch the hand That is besprinkled with my Husbands blood! The day shall sooner set i'th' East; The West Shall be Sun-rising; e're I admit the hand That took away my Husband, Kindred, Empire, Nay, all — But (what's more dear than all) thy hate; Which, to my sorrow, is the common case, Of all with me; but shall continue fresh And green, when thy ill gotten Bays shall wither, And thy perfidious Conquests be forgot. And. Call not my Duty Conquest: If you knew With how much trembling I return'd again, You would have pitty'd me, at least have judg'd More favorably — I must change my Key. Aside But yet admit it conquest — He that did
That, can do more — If still eternal hate Lodgeth in mortal breasts, nor will it be Reclaim'd, though overcome, — Let Conquerors Keep what's their own, the conquered obey. Anna. 'Twas thy Ambition first began it all: And. Say 'twere — 'Tis not the justice of the Cause, But how it ends, is lookt upon — Success Was alwaies Sainted — Anna. Yes, i'th' Devils Kalendar. And. Come, come, forget. And since I've sheath'd my Sword, Lay by your rancor — Anna. Would my eies were Basilisks, That I might look thee dead — And. They've don't already; And no less power than that, that gave the wound, Can make the Cure — Anna. Then die perfidious Traytor. And. Yet e're I do't — Let me like dying men Make my Confession — 'Twas I commanded Your Husbands death, nor can I quit my self Of any thing that you have charg'd me with: Excuse't I must, and shall; or bring you in As accessary — Anna. Me! What means he, trow? And. I love you, Royal Madam! and with that zeal, That to express it —were to imagine 'Tere comprehensible — And make it nothing. Were there ten thousand mischiefs more; each mischief Clog'd with another million, I would through; Value no hazard, laugh at bloud and ruine, Till I had plac'd me on that even ground, Might challenge your love — Now Madam you have the Cause, Be merciful to me, or just to your self: Anna. What call you justice then? — And. Either absolve me, or condemn your self: Anna. Was I the cause? And. Your beauty was. Anna. Would it had been blasted
Beyond the power of Art. — And. Be not so cruel, Consider who 'tis loves you; and what he did Was for that love: The Emperor is dead; And 'tis as easie to call back the day That's past, as him; A living mouse is better Than a dead Lion, I am Emperor still: Anna. But how? or by what means? — And. What matter's that? It is enough I am; — Here — Take that Love Which all the world would court— Nor think me old Although 't'as snow'd upon my head — Your beauty, Can raise new spirits, and my power shall fix 'um: Anna. Let me alone I hate thee. — And. But I love you: Accept it yet, and keep that power and greatness You ever had — Nay I will double it: I'll make your self (and only you) the channel To pass my favours through: The Empire shall Be blest, or blasted by your influence; And the less world, shall set its looks by yours. Anna. Would it had ne're seen thine. — And. Some Angel help me:draws his Sword Here gives it her And I tell thee once again, I kill'd Alexius: And to enjoy thee too; Revenge his death at least — And since I cannot Live with thy love, let me die thy Martyr: Anna. I take thee at thy word — Repent — And die. She offers. And. Repent! — The phrase of ignorance — That were To doubt the Action, in its Cause, your beauty: 'Twas I, — Why doubt you? strike — strange! that you'll neither Revenge, nor yet forgive. — Anna. A way dissembler. She throws the Sword at him Thou art not ripe for vengeance—Nor shall My hand anticipate thy fate — No — Live; To let thee see how much I hate thee — Live; Only to fall more infamous: — Exit Anna.
And. What's here? Love tricks? —'My life she comes at t'other pluck: ACT. IV. SCE. IV. Enter Stephanus solus. STe. And must I still live this unmanly life? Still brook a Rival? No — In Princes favours There is no middle 'twixt the top, and bottom; Their minds are large, but various, and cloy'd Sooner than others, easily o'relooking, Their first election — Sure the Emperor loves me; I never wrong'd him in my thought — He does; I'll ne're dispute it further — But what is't Unless I could engross him — There's Basilius Keeps even pace in's favour, and may in time Get the start o'me, if I don't prevent him: No more —He falls—'Tis here, as 'tis in prospects, When others come on, we think our selves go back. Enter Philo as going hastily over the Stage. Whither so hasty man? Phil. I cannot stay, as he goes out he drops a Letter. I'll wait upon you presently again. Ste. takes it up. Ste. How now! more work! it is the Emperors hand; To Tripsicus!'s heart— A promooting Rogue! And can you stoop so low — Then I see any thing Will serve your turn— This Letter may beget Right understanding 'twixt us — Well — I'll read it. He reads, Pray mind what I hinted you last — Affairs run high at present, but I shall wether'um, (Ste. Good! Good! Good!) —9, 41, and 85 meet at night — 200 will tell you where it is — Things are not yet ripe enough to own you publickly —
(Ste. Better, and better) — You know your work — either bring the Account your self or send it by 90. — I had rather the latter. Your beloved friend A. A. — That's Andronicus — I'm sure the hand Is all his own — Super-excellent! Y'faith! y'faith! and does the wind blow there! Philo returns in hast. Phil. Dropt I no Letter Sir? Ste. You best know that Your self: What letter? or to whom directed? Sure Philo you're in love, you're grown forgetful: You know you stopt not here — Come, tell me true; 'Twas from your Mis' — And you're afraid another May take the Scent — Peuh! he'll but squeeze thy Orange, And thou maist have't agen:— Phil. In troth I'm serious, And if it be n't within, am lost forever. Exit Philo Ste. My pocket, thad'st hit right — Now for a trick To kill two birds with one stone — Make me A property! An idle stale! — I have't, To see how luckily things hit — Andronicus Finding the City troublesome, as resenting Alexius murder, makes it his endeavour To fetch off Constantinus to his party; Perhaps to destroy me too — Not unlikely: But I shall miss my aim, or I cross-bite him: 'Tis thus — I smoak'd the business, and judging it a fit opportunity to ruine Basilius; went privately to Con∣stantinus, and struck up a friendship with him, and as a first Act of it, bad him have a care of Basilius, whose civil usage had no other respect, than to betray him to the loss of his head, which (to my knowledge as I told him) An∣dronicus had plotted, and would inevitably take effect, unless he could turn the mischief upon t'other, by ma∣king his escape — Whereupon (by my advice) he has po∣sest Basilius of a seeming repentance, for his former ob∣stinacy, and that he is both able, and willing to recover it,
by the discovery of a new plot; —The thing takes — An∣dronicus has sent for him (I wonder he is not come yet) But if he does not give them the go-by, I'll lose my head — If he does — The work is done — Basilius destroy'd — and consequently Andronicus disarm'd of the City, by the falling of the power into my hands. Now how I hug my self, Who cannot make his Port with a fore-wind, Must use a side-wind — Craft, where strength doth fail, And piece the Lion with the Fox's tail. Exit. ACT. IV. SCE. V. Enter Andronicus solus. ANd. And am I Emperor? And do my foes Still live? — Or must I that have dar'd so far Faulter at last, for fear the multitude May be displeas'd?— Can wounded greatness sleep, Or joy it self, when it beholds a Sword Hang o're its head? — No — Let me be safe Though the world tumble, — Slow, and fearful Counsels, Which narrow hearted fools call caution, Enter Philo Ne're made Rome what she was; — Who waits within? What? Has Maria's Doctor done his work? Ph. As pat as wish —She's dead —And so's her Husband: And. Here — see these Warrants executed; — For Con∣stantinus let him alone till you hear further from me: Ph. 'Tis done:— And. I like a man goes merrily on; Are they not right? — Philo peruses them Ph. Yes, yes, — But if they were not I'd make 'um serve aside send me good luck — I've dabled So long in blood, that ten to one he serves me As our Musitians, when the Musick's done, Hang up the Instrument — But I am in,
And must wade through, or sink:Exit Philo. And. So much for them — Now for an After-game: But that, lies nearer home — Here are a brace Of Rogues, my Lords in mischief, That's Basilius, And Stephanus, whom I kept hitherto For a reserve, and thought t'ave sacrific'd 'um Unto a popular fury — But they're grown Too cunning, and have stol'n the people from me: Had they no other crime, this were enough; Who puts off's Hat unto the people, forfeits His head to's Prince — Nor will't be difficult To compass theirs — They're jealous one of t'other; I must foment it, and by setting poison To work 'gainst poison, rid my self of both: I've instruments enough to fill their room Less cunning, and more tractable: — My friends Enter Bas. Ste. Most welcome! — What's the news? Bas. Little but that The City's husht again: And. I thank your care: What would the Buzards have? Bas. They know not what: One's for a single person — Another for two; A third for neither — A fourth for liberty; Oh! what a gallant thing this Sparta vas! But what that was, the Devil a bit they know: 'Tis hardly credible — There's not a Tap-house, But's a new Polity — A small free State; And there they sit in judgment, and give sentence, E're they agree the Case: — And. What would y'advise me? Ste. Let 'um alone — When the dull beast is weary 'Twill fall asleep — If not — 'Grant 'um some toy You meant t'ave don your self — 'Tis the same thing As you had given 'um all; They'll be as little Contented if you had; — They are not capable Of having all or nothing granted 'um: They neither brook a down-right slavery,
Nor may be trusted with full liberty; And for the rest — carry and even hand, You need not fear 'um: Wind your stings too high, They crack, and let 'um down too low, they jarr: And. My worthy friends — But is't not possible To find the hands that sets the wheel a going? I'm sure the multitude are sotts, and carry Their brains in other mens heads: — Ste. I've heard of some; But pittiful fellows: — And. As though a Rogue Might not bring in the Plague! — Have they no money? Ste. I hope in a short time to give you a Catalogue. And. Tis but ill playing with these tools; — I thank you: And now i'll tell you news — could you believe That Constantinu should have tackt about? Ste. Nor shall I easily; — the sky may fall, But yet I wish, my head n'er ake till 't do. And. O — you are too severe; — what says Basilius? Bas. Troth I believe he will — and had you heard Half our discourse, you must have judg'd the same: I never met with larger promises. And. I bad you bring him to me — have you don't? Bas. I have — And left him with a Guard without And. Go fetch! him in:— Exit Basilius. Ste. And he shall fool you both; All this aside. Things jump as right as wish — And his escape Must hit — Pray Heaven he don't mistake the door. Bas. returns with Constan. and a Guard — Ste. ponits to the door. And. How now my Lord — Basilius has told me You'd somewhat to offer me — Const. I heard you were Willing to speak with me. — And. How! — What's all this?Constantinus makes his escape by a door; & claps it after him.—Ste. and Bas. pursue: — Excursions of Guards — after some time they force the door. Bas. Why he told me. — Const. Nay if you can't agree I had as good be gon. —
Ste. Hold — stop the Traytor. And. Where leads this door? 1. Gua. Unto the water Sir. And. Nay then he's gon: — Order a Galley streight To give him chase — Disperse—stop ev'ry passage, A 1000 Crowns to him that brings his head: There must be more in this, then barely chance: 'Twas a bold Rogue that did it. — Ste. returns in a fury with his sword drawn Enter Guard. Ste. Nothing but Locks And Bolts? — Sir you're betrai'd.— And. Did you recover him? 2. Gua. No he got boat e're we could reach the stairs. And. But whither went he? 2 Gua. 'Twas so thick a fogg And the boat so well man'd, we quickly lost her. And. Death! and the Furys! — Am I then betrai'd? And my self made the Instrument? — Where's Basilius? 2 Gua. We left him fitting out a Gally. And. Hence. — Ste. Let me beseech your Majesty — Be n't troubled; Now you shall see I love you— If it be A thing of chance, you'll hear no further of't; If otherwise — and he designs a rising; The City is the Scene — I'll get before him And raise the Guards —And if your Majesty Thought it convenient, could seise the heads Of the left mutiny — But then — Basilius. — And. And what of him? — Ste. May chance to take it ill; There's some of 'um are his relations: And. But are you sure to seize 'um. Ste. Do I live? And. And you dare act as high, as I dare trust you? Ste. Dare Sir! — How think you? — Dare I eat or drink For fear of choaking?— And. I am satisfi'd: Seize him and all; — 'Tis not our antient friend, But our new enemy: —
Ste. It may be dangerous; He is so popular. And. Then knock out's brains; Such as would own his cause when living, will Shift for themselves when once they see him dead. Ste. Please you to leav't to me?—'Tis time 'twere don. And. Do what thou will't; Exit Ste. — And good luck follow thee: Tell me of middle ways! An even hand! Who ever got a Crown by evil Arts, And manag'd it by good? — That waking men Should dream themselves away! — Empire's preserv'd By the same way 'twas got; — I stand too near A precipice to think of stopping now: No, I must on; — What i've all ready don, Is but the Antimask to what I'll do; When safety comes in Question, there's no difference Twixt just, or unjust; pittiful, or cruel; I'll break what-will not bow; possess their hearts, Or force 'um open: — They that will not love, Shall, at least, fear my power — 'Tis decree'd And this great beast, must either bow, or bleed. Exit. ACT. V. SCE. I. Enter Stephanus Constantinus. STe. Thus far, my Lord, you're safe;—but one pluck more, And you may write secure: — Const. Nay, that I am, Is yours; — and singly yours: — but passing what I cannot name too oft; — let us consider What must be done: —'twere better dye at once, Than be thus saw'd in pieces; —Our wounds are So far from being heal'd, they're hardly clos'd; Nay (like sick men) we've rather lighted on
A new Physitian, than a remedy. Ste. Tis but too true, my Lord; — But tis too late To spend our selves in womanish complaints; Tis more than time 'twere don. — Const. But who shall do't? You know our friends are gon; or what's as bad (By having lost their eyes) unserviceable. Ste. 'Tis our advantage: — What we want in numbers, Will be suppli'd in secrecy; Great designs (Like wounds) if they take air corrupt; — Besides, These frequent slaughters make our game; They have Lost their authority, and rendred him As cheap, as funerals, a Physitian. And what is greater than all these— the City Has ne're a head. Const. No? —where's Basilius? Ste. He's gon the way of those that oblige Tyrants Beyond requital; — He's strangled: And now's our time to strike; — Your Lordship has Good interest among the Citizens; And they're just ripe for mischief — I have Agents Now raising 'um to your hand, and shall be ready To back you with the Guards; make but a stand, And all's our own; — Isacius Angelus Is of the blood, and we'll proclaim him Emperor. Const. But he's giv'n up to privacy; — Andronicus Well knew't, that sufferd him to live so long. Ste. I thought as much my self; ere I went to him; But now, he is so sensible of 's danger, He catches at any thing —This is our nick; For (I'm to tell you news) the Empress Has, (notwithstanding all her brave resolves,) Giv'n up t' Andronicus — Poor Lady! It will concern us to be quick —This action, Will rivet all, unless we crush him now; Now — while 'tis hott, — Come my Lord — Exeunt.
ACT V. SCE. II. Enter Andronicus Solus. ANd. Mischief of greatness! That has all to fear, Yet knows not whom to trust; What disperate Rocks Must it run foul of! when to trust all, or none Is equally an error, and both fatal: How am I fool'd! — And by some bosome slave; But let it pass —'Tis time must work it out: I have enough at present to footh the people; Some crafty Devil has buz'd them in the head With prophecies (the fond belief of fools, But now and then the talk of wiser men) Nothing but murmurs, news, seditious libels, (The common weapons of unmanly spirits) It must not be dally'd with; — These hollow blasts, Bode no fair weather; These imperfect motions, Shew somewhat's out of frame. Enter Stephanus. Ste. Safety to Caesar; The Omen, to his enemies;— And. What is't Can need that preface? —Speak — Ste. A fearful comet Sweeps the air; — And. Heav'n, has don us right at last, And grac'd or triumphs with its bonfires too; If otherwise; and there be danger in't, 'T 'as told its errand, and betray'd its end: These toys, astonish more, than signify. Ste. Nor is this all; — Men talk, as if an earthquake Had over thrown some houses. — And. 'T'as yet left The Pallace standing; — Have you more? — Ste. The Statue
Of your St. Paul, drops tears. — And. Meere change of weather; Unless perhaps the general acclamations May 've pierc'd its marble with a feeling sense Of what we are — Tears are th' effect of joy, As well as mourning; — But I thought my Stephanus, Had had more wit, then to regard these fooleries; They're natural; and ignorance of cause, Must make 'um miracles; — He that regards The crowing of a Hen; A Fox with young, Hare, Cat or Weesel, crossing his way; A Snake Dropt from the Tile; A black Dog at his dore, A left hand Mag-pie, or a right hand Thunder; Must never sleep — The very Peasant, now, Can half look through 'um — And shall Empire fear 'um! Ste. Now how it joyes my Soul to see your Majesty Thus your self still; And to confirm you so; Let me once say, be safe; — I've charm'd the City Into obedience; nor is there left A head, or hand, that dare appear against you: But though the flame be quencht, there may perhaps Some brands lye smoaking; — To prevent the worst, 'Twere fit the Guards kept there; —Besides, 'tis good To shew the Dog his whip. — And. My other self; He embraces him: Keep up thy wonted courage, and make the Empire Confess, thou sav'dst it: — If you can look so low, You'll find a nest of Slaves, that (like ill spirits) Foretell the storm, themselves intend to move; Let not a Mothers Son escape; These Villains Are grown State-Mountebanks; Nothing can pass, But they must raise some Observation, Or use upon't — And the dull Beast conceives, According to the colour of those rods, They cast before 'um — Stephanus conceives me. Ste. I do—And shall not sleep 'till I have giv'n you Some fair account. Exit Stephanus. And. Farewel my worthy friend:
So — He stands single now — He'll fall the easier: He's grown too stubborn for me; I dare n't displease him For fear he take a pett, and set up another, Perhaps himself; — But I shall check him there; He's only safe, that has nought left to fear. Exit. ACT. V. SCE. III. Enter a Rabble of Citizens. 1. Cit. Come neighbour, come—It is not to be endur'd. 2. Cit. No Troth is it not —'Twould make a Man a whore, to consider it seriously. 7. Cit. I tould you this before — You might have har∣ken'd to a fool. 3. Cit. I neighbour, would you had: 5. Cit. Hang would — Lets be doing: 6. Cit. I but what neighbour? What? 4. Cit. Any thing — Any thing — I am for any thing: Omnes. Liberty— Liberty—Liberty— A Hollow. 1. Cit. Why should this Andronicus Lord it over us any longer? 2. Cit. He is a very Tyrant, that's certain. 5. Cit. Troth all I got by his Government, is, that where I had a little money before, now I have none at all. 6. Cit. Nor I neither— The Devil might have danc'd in my pockit this twelve-month, and not broke his shins a∣gainst one single cross: — Call you me this assisting? 5. Cit. It seems Neighbour it is not altogether so plain as you made it: 1. Cit. What say you Gentlemen: — There's Isacius Angelus — And as I have heard say, has as good a Title to the Crown as another Man. 2. Cit. Constantinus appointed us to have met him her — 'O my word they say he is a pretty Gentelman; 4. Cit. I wonder they should stay so long. 6. Cit. Tell me of none of your pretty Gentelmen;— I¦m for Liberty.
Omnes. Liberty — Liberty — Liberty:A Hollow 1. Cit. But hark you neighbours — We must have some Government. 2. Cit. Time enough to think of that hereafter; — Let's destroy this first. 3. Cit. What think you of Aristotocracy? 4. Cit. No, no, no—Oligasky for my money. 5. Cit. By your favour neighbour, I should think De∣mococracy. 6. Cit. And with your favour too; why not Anarchy? 2. Cit. Any thing, any thing, but what we are: Omnes. Liberty — Liberty — Liberty — A Hollow Enter Philo Ph. Save you Gent.— What's the business? —'Tis not Midsomer Moon I hope? 3. Cit. Suppose it be — What then? Ph. Nothing good Gent. — But if it be, I hope it will not last all the year. 2. Cit. Then we shall have another in's room — But what's that to you? Ph. Pray Gent. — you need not be so stout— I could tell you news deserv'd a better face. Omnes. What's that? what's that? Ph. The Emperor has thought upon a device, that no Freeman of Constantinople, shall ever want money, unless it be his own fault; 5. Cit. That would do well. 6. Cit. Yes o'my conscience neighbour would it: Omnes. But how? But how? Ph. Do but acquiesce a while, and you'll quickly see; — whereas if you disturb him in't, you spoil all; and perhaps may repent it when 'tis too late: 2. Cit. Acquiesce — That's the word — Huh! 5. Cit. I neighbour I: Acquiesce: 3. Cit. Troth he speaks reason: 4. Cit. Marry does he: 5. Cit. Our City Orator's but an Ass to him: Ph. What say you then Gentlemen? 2. Cit. For my part (now) I'll live and die with him.
3. Cit. And so will I — We may do worse: Ph. Yes— I dare trust 'um for the first aside But what's the matter? — Has so good an Emperor but two friends among you all? — Throw up your caps, and away with't: Omnes. One and all — One and all — Long live An∣dronicus. Ph. He is beholding to you — And I'll let him know as much: — Farewel good Gent. —'Twas a fare scape. aside Exit Philo. Omnes. Farewel, Farewel—Long live Andronicus.Hallow. 1. Cit. Come neighbours, come: — We had as good be quiet —There will be faults while there are men. 3. Cit. I, I, — Let's home — Let's home: — 'Tis good sleeping in a whole skin: As they are going off, Enter Isa. Const. Const. Now Gent. I see you're men of your words: 'Tis but an easie risk, and all's our own. Can you remember your old Emperor, Or his late murder'd Son; and not acknowledge The Heir — Th'undoubted Heir? — 1. Cit. I neighbour I: — 'Twas this we came about. 2. Cit. Where's that Rogue Philo? knock out's brains. Omnes. I, I, I, Where is he? — Where is he? 3. Cit. We cannot for shame now, but proclaim him Emperor. 6. Cit. Oh by any means: Omnes. Long live Isacius Emperor of Greece! Isa: It was so far (my friends and Country men) From my desires, t'ave liv'd to see this day, 'Twas never in my thoughts — My privacy Was all the Empire I or wisht, or dream't: But since your joint unanimous consent Has firm'd that Title, which my birthright gave me; I cannot but I must acknowledge it: 3. Cit. What's that he says — Long live Isacius? Omnes. Long live the Emperor? 4. Cit. Peace, hear him speak. Isa. 'Tis not my business here to rip old sores, Or to keep ope those wounds; which let alone,
Would close themselves: — Yet since the readi'st way To what we should be, is to know what we are; Let me once ask you — What d'you call this place? Greece, or her ruines? — You had once an Emperor, A good one too, I mean Alexius: I will not say who murder'd him — He had A sister — I do not say she was poison'd: You had good Laws: — Andronicus made more, I would he had kept either: — I forbear Conto, Mamalus, Caesar, Basilius, Lapardas, Ducas, and a 1000 more, Some murder'd, others, their eies bor'd out — My way Is not to speak against such as are absent: Omnes. Yes —Yes —Yes — Pray on: —Long live Isacius! 6. Cit. Peace, hear him speak: Isa. Which of you all durst shake his head, and not Believe it loose, and might fall off? — What though You scapt when others fell, you were but kept To close his stomack, and be last eat up. Yet let me give Andronicus his due; He brought the City once again within Her Walls, whose Suburbs (like the Spleen) had swoll'n To the consumption of the rest o' th' body; I would he'd left Inhabitants enough, To people that little remain'd — He built a Chappel, I would the Devil had not set up the Cross; An Aquaduct, I would the kennels had run No other colour: — One or two good Actions To blanch and varnish o're a deal of ill, Is but the Musick to a Tragedy: But I forget my self: — I never lov'd To rake in Dunghils — I only wish their Author Had his desert —Not that I bid you lay Violent hands upon him —Justice will do Enough, but give her leave — And so I shall not Detain you longer; Only let me beg you If you meet Manuel, to preserve him safe, His only crime is, that Andronicus gat him:
7. Cit. I, Here's one spoke like an Emperor. Omnes. Long Live Isacius. 3. Cit. Come we lose time—Andronicus my chance to give us the slip. 5. Cit. But if we take him, we'll give it him. Omnes. Follow—Follow—Follow—Whoop!Exeunt. ACT. V. SCE. IV. Enter Andronicus. Stephanus. ANd. But did he land again? — Ste. I'm certain of't: I mist him narrowly — Perhaps he may Have taken Sanctuary. And. What? — Harbour Traitors? Demand him streight;— If they refuse a search Force all the doors: Shout within-What means that hollow? Some Devil's aboard — Prithee go see what 'tis:Exit Ste. Norhing but mischief still? No day shine clear Without a cloud? — Ill, follows ill (like waves) One is no sooner past, but to'ther roules: Within there!Enter Philo. Call me a Lutenist, and let him sing The song my Musick sang me last—Make hast:Exit Ph. My head's disquieted; — An old Wizard Saw Swims in my brains: — 'Twas told me once, I should Live to be Emperor, and that I. S. Should be my Successor— No Delphian Devil Was ever more obscure: — I. S. — Isaurus: But I've an eye on him; — Whoer' he be The Devil was right, if not, 'twas our mistake: But say — I. S. — Whom Heaven intends to ruin It first infatuates — There's Isacius, Whom hitherto I've rather scorn'd, than fear'd, Appears like something now:— He must not live:
In vain we fell a Tree, if yet we leave Quick roots behind: — But what's the matter? What makes the day post backward to the East? Whence this unwonted night? These stars at Noon? Out with that dunghill stuff: See how it waves, And darts at me — But I'll fetch it down. Where be the Sons of Titan? Let 'um come; I'll be their Captain: With this Arm, I'll pluck Rocks from their standing; Trees, with roots and all; Whole Mountains with their Centaurs, and erect A scaling Ladder made of heaped Hils Whose top shall touch the clouds — The world shall see Ossa, once more on Pelion; A third, Shall be Olympus, whose advanced chin, Shall knock the Heav'ns, if not, I'll throw it in: He staggers, and falls into a chair. Enter a Lute: — A Song. Some have call'd life a Stage-play that includes, Nothing but Scenes, and Interludes; Others, a month of April, where two hours Scarce pass without as many shours; Others agen, a miscelane of years, Or Chequer-work of hopes, and fears: But I'm confirm'd they were ordain'd by Fate, As Hieroglyphicks of a Princes State: One while his Genius is so kind, He'd swear He's in an Empyrean sphear; So curst agen by fits, The frozen Zone Is habitabler ten to one: Strange kind of life! to have ones hopes be brought To somewhat, and streight dasht to nought; When rais'd upon the Pinnacle, 'Tis all To think, not whither, but from whence we fall. Since then our dappled Fate is such, who can Call himself blest, and yet be man: Ev'n Crowns their Crosses have; Nor Caesar shall Write happy, till his Funeral: More are our clouds, than Suns; Our care, and pain Weigh down our bliss — Who's happy then? He, and He only, whom the womb doth smother, And sends him packing from one Grave, to t'other.
Ha! — what was that? — Me thought I heard a voice, And musick — How 't'as fixt me? — Plato sure Was in the right; Our souls are Harmony: I am my self again — What should I fear? Who flies to shun his Fate, runs headlong on't: Heaven helps the valiant, and ne're descended, To save that Coward, durst not save himself: Since then the Empire knows not when 'tis well, I'll make it sensible what power can do; I'm but Defendant, they provoke me to't: Nor can the world my blackest action blame; Necessity, has neither sin, nor shame; Mischief is never safe, but Heap, on heap, One must back t'other — They that stumble leap. Exit. ACT. V. SCE. V. Enter Citizens and Rabble. OMnes. Hollow. 1. Cit. Where is this Traitor that murder'd the Em∣peror? 2. Cit. Would I could light on him—I'd have a leg, or an arm of him— He hang'd my Brother. 3. Cit. If every one he has wrong'd have but a little, I am sure a joint will not fall to your share. 4. Cit. Come — Come— There will be enough for us all — Would we had him, though I were bound to give you mine: 5. Cit. What had we best do neighbours? 3. Cit. Smoak the Fox out of his hole: 2. Set fire on the Palace: 4. Cit. By no means Gent. —'Twill destroy a deal of good pillage — That has done no hurt: 6. Cit. No—No—No—Destroy all: — You'll ne're be rid of the Wolves, till you cut down the woods. 1. Cit. We had better sell 'um, and share the money:
6. Cit. 'Twill be too long a doing, & others may get in: Enter Philo· 1. Cit. See Neighbours! see! Who comes here? 2. Cit. Even the very Rogue that first betraid us. 3. Cit. Down with him: 4. Cit. Stand: 5. Cit. Knock him down first. Ph. Good Gentelmen — But hear me — 3. Cit. No — No—No — Hear him? — That were a trick indeed:They Knock him down. 2. Cit. So farewell him — I have a boy at home will cry for him I'm sure of't. 5. Cit. Upon my conscience Neighbour, but my Wife will do the same. 6. Cit. Hang him — Hang him — We lose time:— Lets about our work. — Hollow.Exeunt. ACT V. SCE. VI. Enter Andronicus with his Sword drawn and a Servant. ANd. Ha! Philo dead! These Devils are every where Thou shalt not fall alone — What was you saying? Ser. Another Rout has seiz'd St. Sophy's Temple. And. Who heads 'um? — Ser. Constantinus; Who has taken Isacius Angelus, and proclam'd him Emperor: And to them Stephanus, with all his Guards, Is since revolted. And. Then, Farewel my hopes; But I am still Andronicus: — Leave me: Exit servant. And is your Anger such, ye Powers? And can What's least above stoop to contest with Man? Did ye of brittle clay his Fabrick rear
Only to dash't in pieces? ad ye him bear His Maker's Image in his brow, to shew Ye reign'd above, he, a small Jove below? Only to shew him happiness; And yet, Streight snatch it from him, or umble him, from it; Had I submitted to a general fate, It had been nothing — Had I seen my State, And Empire sunk before me, I had gon Contentedly — But to fall alone, Thus tamely lost —What boot's it to complain? Give me one Battel — Heav'n! — Be Heav'n again; One Battel — And let me perish. — Enter 3 or 4 of the rabble. 1. Cit. Here he is: — Follow — Follow —Follow — And. Villians. 2. Cit. Stand. He kills 2 or 3 — The nest run — And. Lye thou By another door Enter Servant. Ser. I'm sorry I came so late: — Please you great Sir Retire a while, until the storm be past: Your name's too great in Arms to have it call'd A cowardly flight: — Then fall not out of season; Reserve your self for better times — I have A Gally waits your Majesty: And. Now Heav'n reward thy honesty — Lead on: — I know the worst; Foolish despair, is but occasion lost. Exeunt. ACT V. SCE. VII. Enter Constantinus. Isacius and Citizens. COn. Not find him yet! —I warrant you we have him: Stop all the passages, and desire Stephanus To draw down with his Guards. — 6. Cit. All but that last, Is done already: — I'll about it straight. Exit. Const. How! — Philo slain!—He never did his Master A truer service.
7. Cit. And my good neighbours, Ambrose and Grego∣ry; — Alack, Alas! —Nothing certain in this life — To day a Man, tomorrow a Cuckold, the next day dead: 3. Cit. Come — Come —Let's carry them off —But for that Rogue — Let him ev'n lie —He was a pestilent vil∣lain: 4. Cit. Are you sure he is dead?—Does not the Rogue counterfeit? 5. Cit. 'Twill do no hurt to see; 3. Cit. For the more certainty — stabs him again 'Tis good to be sure. 5. Cit. Well done neighbour —You're in my mind; — I scarcely believe a man dead, as long as his head's upon his shoulders. Exeunt. ACT. V. SCE. VIII. Enter Manuel solus. MAn. 'T would be some comfort yet I could but hear My Father 'scap'd their hands — I'm half afraid He scorn'd to step aside; — Ha! — What's here? Alas poor Philo! —Dead! —Now I perceive Thou hadst some honesty, thou lov'dst thy Master; 'Twas more than I expected — What's this world, And all its greatness? —It has rais'd up some, But ruin'd more; And even those whom't has Most rais'd, 't'as ruin'd most; —What's all this toil, And blind pursuit? But like our childrens following A Butterfly; sometimes they cannot reach it, Sometimes, o'rerun it; sometimes, think they hav't; But it slips through their fingers; And at last, When after all their offers, turns, and falls, They've taken it, What is't? (Alas poor fools!) Nothing but painted wings: — 'Tis not my late Experience taught me this, I ever found it: Who could imagine to have seen my Father,
So late the peoples darling; now, their hate? But yesterday, an Empire at his beck; Now, scarce a hole to put his head: — 'Twas Heav'n, And I submit: — But yet, it lessens not Their crime, that were the cause: —There's Stephanus, False Stephanus, a Traitor to both Masters; Were he my Enemy, 't had n't troubled me; Enter Nay — I'd forgiv'n him—But my friend:—'Tis hard:Steph. See! —Here he comes; —Now Heaven forgive me: I had a Father, till his treacherous Faith Bereav'd me of him; — Father—Me thinks the word, Prompts me to something: — Ste. My good Lord! —Be safe; Safe, as your Vertue merits: — Man. What hast thou To do with, vertue? — I ne're suspected her, Until I found her in thy mouth: — There — He strikes off Steph.'s hat. Ste. Ha! —Has your folly made you desperate? Now would thy Father, and his daring soul, Perch'd on thy point: — They draw. Man. The justice of my cause May be enough to do thy work; — My Sword In a childs hand, inform'd by that, with ease Would reach thy treacherous heart: — Words trifle time, Defend your self: — They fight, and after some small time enter Constantinus. Const. Hold—Stephanus— Hold —Nay good my Lord Let me entreat you: — Stephanus falls. Ste. How am I lost in sight of land? and all My tow'ring hopes sunk with me — Heav'n is just; I would — But cannot: — Dies. Man. So may all treachery succeed — And if T'ave been my own Justicier be a Crime; Forgive me — I had no other way — His Treason, Had lost its name, and in the worlds Ethicks, Had past for Vertue else; — Const. Alas my Lord;
'Twas an unfortunate action — But since 'Tis done — Preserve your self —Pray, good my Lord, Withdraw a while; nor let your vertue fall A prey, unto the rabble; — Man. I alwaies scorn'd 'um, And shall not now, by shewing of my back, Make 'um believe, I fear 'um: — Const. VVhat's your courage Against their numbers? —Good my Lord withdraw; Venture not Gold, to Dirt —Pray give me leave, calls a servant. Come hither — Attend my Lord, and see him safe VVithin my doors —I'll wait on you presently:Enter Serv. My Lord — Andronicus — another. Const. VVell — What of him? Serv. Had put to Sea, and was now well nigh reach'd The other shoar — VVhen of a sudden, The winds, And seas as conscious whom they wasted o're, Checkt his full speed, and beat him back again; Yet he put out a second, and third time; But all in vain — The face of Heav'n was sully'd, The winds broke loose, and club'd into a storm; Till the poor Gally (having lost her Rudder, Her Oars unserviceable, and her Masts, Spent by the board) came rowling on the back Of an impetuous wave, and drove on shore; VVhere he soon met a storm indeed —The people Having by this time utterly defac'd VVhatever bore his name, or memory; Fell foul of him —Or rather He, of them; Had you but seen the hubbub!—One twicks his beard; Another, beats out an Eie; A third, a Tooth; A forth cuts off a Hand; —No cruelty He e'r commanded, but was there agen Epitomis'd on himself; And when at last, Their tyr'd invention could inflict no longer; Laden with dirt, and obloquies, and crown'd With Garlick, they set him on a scabbed Camel, And in that odd procession, led him to
The common Gallows, where they hang up that little, They'd left of him; — So fell Andronicus. Const. May the same Fate ever attend Rebellion, And usurpation; — And let the world, Hence learn, on what a ticklish point they stand, Whose unjust actions; and borrow'd greatness, (How speciously soever colour'd o're) Have no foundation, but what's built upon The peoples favour; — The uncertain people, Constant to nothing, but inconstancie; Prove to affect, but without judgement still; Hot headed—Envious— Suspicious, Yet credulous; — Frame whimsies to themselves, And after fear 'um; — Now set up one, then t'other; But deal with all, as Children with their Dirt-pies, First raise, then pash 'um out:Enter Isacius. Isa. My Lord, you hear the news of Andronicus? Const. Yes; — And may Treason never prosper better; Isa. But I admire we hear nothing of Manuel. Const. He's safe; — And now, an object of your mercy. Isa. For why my Lord? Is vertue grown a Crime: Const. Behold He shewes him Steph. I'll let you know the rest within; But must assure your Majesty at present, 'Twas fairly don. — Isa. Shall my first letters then Be writ in blood! — Howe're — I pardon him. It is enough to me, he durst be vertuous, When Caesar (and that Caesar, his Father too) Was otherwise: — Bid him from me be safe. Const. I thank your Majesty:— Isa. But now my Lord, I must desire you look into the City; The people (like the Sea) keep rouling still, Although the winds that rais'd 'um first be laid: If they continue longer, there'll be nothing Left 'um to spoil; and then perhaps they may Consider, and repent. —
Const. I'll streight about it: They have been up too long: — 'Twere to be wisht This Beast the people, either never knew Their strength, or alwaies knew, to use it right. Isa. You may go farther, and as you see cause Proclaim a general pardon; The more I spare, The more are left me to adorn my Trophy: Promise 'um better daies, and let 'um know That though we're not in Plato's Common wealth, To have what e'r's amiss at once remedy'd; Yet the first stone is laid; And I dispair not, A hopeful superstructure — Rest, and time, Will make our troubled waters clear again; For what remains, a gentle hand will do't: Harsh, cruel Empires (like acute diseases) Are rather sharp, than lasting;— That must dure, Where subjects, not their Prince, but for him, fear. Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.
