W3307 12590308 63883
The CASE OF DIVORCE AND RE-MARRIAGE thereupon Discussed. By a Reverend Prelate of the Church of England and a private Gentleman. Occasioned by the late Act of Parliament for the Divorce of the Lord ROSSE. I know that Messias cometh which is called Christ, when he is come he will tell us all things,Joh. 4. 25. LONDON, Printed for Nevill Simmons at the Prince's Armes in St. Pauls Church-yard. 1673.
READER, THese Papers were drawn up when the Business of the Lord Rosse was de∣bated in Parliament, and had their rise
from That trans∣action. The first part of them was Written by a pri∣vate hand, and was occasioned by a Dis∣course with a learn∣ed Bishop now with God upon that Sub∣ject, and being pre∣sented to him, he re∣turned the follow∣ing Animadversi∣ons
upon it, to which the Answer Here set down was Then given by the same hand. The whole is now made publick for thy in∣formation and satis∣faction about this matter.
Touching Divorce and Re∣marriage thereupon. AN incapacity for the ends of marriage, pre∣vious to it, makes a Nul∣lity of the marriage upon a subsequent discovery of it. This needs no determinati∣on by any positive Law; For the Law of Nature, and the reason of the thing it self gives an universal de∣termination
of it every where. By the Law of Moses, un∣chastity before Marriage or contraction (if concealed) and all unchastity after Con∣traction or Marriage, was to be punished with death, and no mention made in the Law of any such thing as Divorce in that Case. Moses in the 24th of Deu∣teronomy, gave This allow∣ance for Divorce, vers. 1, 2. When a man hath taken a Wife, and Marryed her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, be∣cause he hath found some uncleanness in her: Then let him write her a Bill of
Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house; And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another mans wife; which was but an allowance in some Cases, and in those too did rather liberare à Poena than a Vitio. We need not inquire farther why this was done: our Saviour has given us a perfect account of it; such a permission was granted to them, be∣cause of the hardness of their hearts, and the unru∣ly stubborn behaviour of the Jews towards their Wives in that particular. Moses, who we are to con∣sider
as a Legislator to a State, as well as a Church, suffered it to be, as the most tolerable remedy that That people were capable of, and in favour chiefly of the Wo∣men. This permission of Mo∣ses came in the practice of it to be so far extended amongst them, that whoe∣ver desired to put away his Wife, was allowed to do it without giving any rea∣son at all, besides his own pleasure why he did it. This we may see in Mr. Selden's Vxor Haebra∣ica; and Grotius tells us, Quod Consuetudo legis in∣terpres Nullam à marito
causam dirempti Matrimonii exegerit; and adds, Alio∣qui enim nou potuisset Jo∣sephus Maria clam dimit∣tere: Potuit igitur Mari∣tus dicere quod Romae dixit Paulus Emilius, sibi optimè notum quà calceus urgeret. This custome was in it self greatly inconvenient, and as one sayes of it, For a man, Nulla aut levissima de causa uxorem dimittere, ut Jam de primaeva dei insti∣tutione nihil dicam, vel sola charitatis lex prohibebat, sive uxorem respicias, quae veluti supplex ad Mariti Tutelam confugit, sive com∣munes etiam liberos. Hea∣then Nations rarely pra∣ctised
any such thing, the Romans in particular, of whom an antient Author sayes, Romani, cum nulla lex repudium vetaret, annos tamen quingentos & viginti sine exemplo repudii gerunt: Nec quisquam fermè scripto∣rum, est qui non gravitèr reprehendat Marcum Tulli∣um Ciceronem, quod levi∣bus de causis Terentiam di∣miserit. Our Saviour in the Go∣spel, before the Pharisees asked him any Question about this matter, (which they did, and their Questi∣on and his answer is set down in the 19th. of Mat∣thew, and the 10th. of Mark)
determines it in the 5th. of Matthew in his Sermon up∣on the Mount, there being indeed nothing wherein That people needed more Re∣formation than in That particular; His words are verse the 31; It hath been said, whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give her a Writing of Divorce∣ment; And verse the 32. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication, caus∣eth her to commit Adultery and whosoever shall marry her that is Divorced, com∣mitteth Adultery. By this it is plain, that whatsoever
toleration they had from Moses about putting away their Wives, and whatso∣ever farther liberty they took to themselves in That matter, it is totally repeal∣ed and condemned, and no cause of divorce and put∣ting away allowed to be good, but in case of Fornica∣tion and Unchastity. There ariseth this diffi∣culty from the considerati∣on of our Saviour's words; whether he he did thereby intend to institute a new Law in the Case; or, whe∣ther he only spake Inter∣pretatively with reference to the Law of God Then in being. Those who are
inclined to think he did institute a New Law, urge it from hence, That our Saviour speaks of Fornica∣tion and Unchastity as a ground, and the only ground of Divorce, which by the Law had another punish∣ment appointed for it, and such a one as made Di∣vorce impossible and im∣practicable, for they were to be put to death that were so found guilty, and of That Law, our Saviour takes no notice; say they, the punishment the Law appointed to be inflicted for Fornication and Adultery, and the direction our Savi∣our gives about it cannot
consist together, the one di∣rects Divorce, the other appoints death. I suppose our Saviour in what he Here determines about this matter (as in many other of his determinations about other things) speaks so, as that he gives a full satisfa∣ction to men according to the present state of things then in being; and also esta∣blisheth a Divine Law up∣on such grounds that shall last for ever in the Church. For the first, That he spake with reference to the Law Then in being, and to settle the Consciences of men, who desired to per∣form
their duty as things Then stood, I gather from hence. First, because he spake to such who were then all of them under an obligation to the whole Mosaical Law, for so were the Jews, and Christ's own Disciples to whom he Preached. Secondly, He plainly seems all along that Cha∣pter to comment upon the Law of Moses and Evange∣lize it, and to give the true and genuine meaning of it, against the corrupt and per∣verse interpretations of the Scribes and Pharisees; And when he sayes, But I say unto you, he does not so much
oppose himself and what he said Then, to Moses and what Moses had said Before, as to what the Scribes and Pharisees had falsly said in Moses name, and so rather vindicates the true sense and intention of the Law under his own name. And though his determinations in some things exceed the Law, yet in all things they contain the true sence and end of the Law. Thirdly, When the Scribes and Pharisees asked our Sa∣viour in the 19th. of Mat∣thew about this matter what lawfully might be done in it, our Saviour answers them with the very same
determination, and therefore 'tis plain he spake with re∣ference to what was at that time to be accounted Le∣gal, according to the Laws and institutions of God Then in force; and there is no∣thing in what our Saviour sayes, that does any way contradict the Law of God in being, but gives a satis∣faction to mens Consciences how they were to behave themselves under it. We must note this, that our Saviour is singly upon the point of Divorce and putting away, he meddles not at all with the Law about Adultery, but leaves it to its due execution; His
saying, That crime was the only lawful cause of Di∣vorce did not prejudge it from any greater punishment due to it, he only determines about the matter of Putting away and Divorce, and he determines thus in oppo∣sition to the Jewish practice, and the first permission of Moses to them, that there is no cause at all upon which a Wife may be put away, but where the marriage-bond is dissolved, which is only in the case of Fornica∣tion and Adultery, where the Woman was Then le∣gally dead, and ought to be put to death, if prosecuted and the fact proved, and
that all putting away the Wife upon any other ground is unalawful and sinful. Now this determination of our Saviour about Divorce might be a satisfaction to men in Conscience, and a ground for them to put away their Wives for For∣nication and Adultery, though the Law of God against Fornication and A∣dultery to punish it with death was unrepealed, and they under the obligation of it, and that in three Cases. First, The Law did not oblige the Husband to go to the Judge, and prosecute his Wife for Adultery;
Nor does our Saviour im∣pose farther in that case then the Law did upon him, and therefore such who were Lenes mariti, as Joseph was, and had no mind to prose∣cute their Wives to extre∣mity, were by this deliver∣ed from a necessity, either to live with an Adulteress, or else to prosecute her to death, and are set free in Conscience to give her Li∣bellum repudii, and part from her. Secondly, Supposing a man could not have Justice done upon an Adulterous Wife, when he did his best in prosecution of her, (and this was like enough to be
the condition of many a man in that corrupt state of things amongst the Jews at that time, and was actually so, the execution of That Law having been for a long time forborn, and well may we hink it should be so, for all Capital punishment was at hat time taken from the Jews, and not in their pow∣er, so the Sanhedrim confess, John 18. 31. 'Tis not law∣ful for us to put any man o death,) in that case our Saviour gives free liberty for he Husband to divorce him∣elf from her, and make use of hat freedom the Jews took f putting away.
Thirdly, Supposing a man were inwardly satisfied o his Wives unchastity, and certainly knew within him∣self, she were guilty of Adul∣tery, yet had not such proof as would make it out in a Judicial way to gain Exe∣cution of the Law agains her in putting her to death in such a case, (which we may easily suppose might often fall out) our Saviour sets the mans Conscience fre to put her away, and Di∣vorce himself from her; In all these cases our Saviour allowing Divorce in case o unchastity was of great u Then to settle the Consci∣ences of men, who were ob∣liged
to the Law, and no infringement at all of the Law it self: He gives a rule to limit that exorbitant li∣berty men took to them∣selves of putting their Wives away, and tells them in what case only it may be done, which was in case of For∣nication, and that might ve∣ry well happen to be the Case, though the Law for punishing it with death were still in force, and so our Sa∣viour speaks of it as Then accidentally Divorce and putting but no way layes any A upon the punishment the Law inflicted upon it. The truth is, our Saviour
promulged such a general Law in the case, as gave a sufficient determination as things Then stood, and might satisfie mens Consci∣ences what Then to do in the point of Divorce, and was to be also a Rule to the Church about that matter to all future Ages. That our Saviour intended it so, is very evident from those general grounds upon which it is established, and all the circumstances that attend it▪ Nor is there one word in that whole Chapter but is of that nature, 'tis Evange∣lical as well as Legal, and looks forward to the Gospel-Church to come, as well
as it contains a direction to the present Church of the Jews; Whereever through∣out that Chapter our Savi∣our speaks of any Law in force amongst the Jews, even of the Judicial Laws, he induceth by his determi∣nations about them that Equity that was moral and perpetual in them, and to last for ever in the Church. It seems also necessary there should be some direction left by our Saviour in this point, or else the Church under the Gopel would have been wholly without any Rule about it, and there could never have been upon any terms whatever any such
thing as Divorce practised in the Gospel-world, for what Moses permitted about it was accidental and tem∣porary and peculiar to the Jews, and our Saviour shews us the rise of it, and the rea∣son of it, and forbids all far∣ther practice of it; The Law against Adultery and uncleanness determined those crimes another way, and be∣sides That Law of punishing Adultery with death was purely Judicial, as much as punishing a diobedient child with death was so, and wholly relating to the Jewish Oeco∣nomy; 'Tis true, the offences in these cases were moral and natural evills, and do
still so continue, but That manner of punishing them Then, was Judicial and temporary. We see at This day 'tis not a general esta∣blished Law, no not in the most Christian Nations to punish Adultery with death, and therefore our Saviour, who was guided by infinite wisdom in all he did, spake so as might give satisfacti∣on to every Conscience un∣der the Law at That time, upon what terms only to make use of the liberty of Divorce and putting away, Then so frequently and com∣monly practised, and also gave a perpetual Rule to the Church, that the bond of
marriage should be preser∣ved Sacred, and upon no ac∣count but that of Fornicati∣on dissolved, and in That case whatever the Laws of particular States might be about it, yet the obligation of marriage ceased, and the Consciences of men were for ever set free. This Doctrine of our Sa∣viour about Divorce esta∣blished in the 5th. of Mat∣thew, is again repeated by him in the 19th. of Mat∣thew in answer to the Pha∣risees, who there questioned with him about the same matter; He there tells them, there is no cause lawful for a man to put away his Wife,
but only Fornication, and that he admits to be a law∣ful cause, and the only law∣ful cause. In the 10th. of Mark our Savious discourse is set down without the ex∣ception of Fornication, and runs general, that whoever puts his Wife away, and marries another, commits Adultery, and so in the 16th. of Luke our Saviour sayes, without any of the circumstances in his other discourses of it, in the gene∣ral, and without the exce∣ption of Fornication, That whosoever shall put away his Wife and marry another commits Adultery. It must be noted, that what Mark
sets down, in the 10th. of Mark, is the very same story recorded by Matthew chapter the 19th, and both the Evangelists give an ac∣count of the same discourse between our Saviour and the Pharisees at one and the same time; That is so clear, that 'tis not to be denyed, and therefore whatever is set down by Matthew must be admitted to belong to the story, and be implyed in it, though omitted and not expressed by Mark, and so whatever is in Mark, that Matthew hath omitted, must be likewise supposed to be∣long to the story, or else we must imagine the Evan∣gelists
not to be both in the right in their relation of the same story, which cannot but be, and therefore Matthew expressing that our Saviour added That exception, (ex∣cept in the cause of Forni∣cation) 'tis to be supposed and implyed in the relation Mark makes of the story, though he express it not, neither in what he said to the Disciples nor to the Jews themselves, for the answer is There general to both; Calvin in his Har∣mony upon the Evangelists sayes upon this place, that 'tis the same story related in both places, and there is no other difference, sayes he,
but that one sets down the matter of our Saviours dis∣course more fully than the other, it being, sayes he, most usual for one Evange∣list to omit some passages and circumstances in the same story mentioned by ano∣ther. Saint Luke in his relation of what our Saviour said about this matter, omits all the circumstances of his dis∣course, and only mentions in short this general expression of our Saviour, That who∣soever should put away his wife and marry another, committed Adultery, which is evidently spoken of those unlawful Divorces daily
practised amongst the Jews, and directed against Them. Some conceive that our Saviours determinations in this point were intended with a distinction; that is, that when he spake in general against putting away without any exception, he spake re∣latively to his Disciples, and to the Gospel-Church to come; but when he spake of it with the exception of Fornication annexed to it, he intended That only with relation to the Jews, and so the exception Now con∣cerns not us, but was only meant to Them, and termi∣nated There.
Very many things strong∣ly oppose this apprehension; First, in the 5th. of Mat∣thew, where our Saviour gives the first, and most so∣lemn determination about this point, 'tis plain he spake to his Disciples, as well as the multitude of the Jews; For the Chapter begins, And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a moun∣tain; and when he was set, his Disciples came unto him; And he opened his mouth and taught them saying, &c. And he often in that Sermon directed his discourse parti∣cularly to his Disciples, for so he did in the 14th. verse, where he tells them, ye are
the salt of the World; A City set on an hill cannot be hid; which must be spoken to them: Nor was there any reason why our Saviour should Preach one Doctrine in this matter to his Disci∣ples, and another to the Jews; For the Disciples were equally obliged Then to the Law, and concerned in all that the Jews were, and therefore the same Do∣ctrine must needs be common to them both. Secondly, We find not the least ground from any thing our Saviour said any where to make any distin∣ction in this matter, to be∣lieve the Rule was given ge∣neral
to one sort of men, and with an exception to another, but we find the Rule often generally laid down by our Saviour with this general exception an∣nexed to it, and in that case where our Saviour once gives a general rule, with a general exception annexed to it, wheresoever our Saviour after repeats the same Rule, we must suppose the exception, or else we can never be able to make our Saviour to agree with himself. No∣thing more usual than to imply remote exceptions un∣der generals to reconcile the Scripture with it self, much
more in This case, where our Saviour himself so of∣ten joyned the Rule and the exception together. Our Saviour bids us positively in the same Chapter not to swear at all, in general terms, yet every man that is sober will, under This general, imply all the lawful swear∣ing the Scripture any where else enjoins or approves, because we must not make the Scripture militate with it self. Thirdly, There can be no good reason to limit what our Saviour said about Di∣vorce in the 5th. of Mat∣thew and the 19th. of Mat∣thew to the Jews only, but
we must needs admit it to be a general Law given in the case to all Ages, be∣cause he grounds his deter∣mination about it, not upon the Judicial Law, but upon reasons drawn from the ge∣neral Law of Nature, and the first institution of mar∣riage by God in the Creation of man and woman at the beginning, and such general principles, as had no pecu∣liarity at all to the Jews, (though they were ob∣liged by them) but such wherein all mankind were equally concerned: Our Saviour opposed the Phari∣sees and the Judaical practice, and establishes the Law he
introduceth about it, by re∣ducing the matter of Marri∣age and Divorce to the pri∣mitive rule of it, and to the natural and perpetual reason of the things in themselves considered, and therein spake not only to them, but to all mankind, and to the whole world; He directs them to look to the first rise and original of Marriage, God made at first but one man and one woman, a male and a female, and appoint∣ed Them two in those two kinds to be in the relation of Marriage one flesh, so that Nature and Institution, the very Laws of mans first Creation, make the marri∣age-Union
very sacred, and from thence our Saviour derives his direction about it; And for Divorce, whereas the Jews upon every trivial occasion allowed it, our Saviour denies it to be lawful upon any occasion but one, and that grounded upon the natural and ge∣neral reason of the thing in it self considered: The very essence of the marriage-Union, both by nature and primitive institu∣tion lyes in this, that two are one flesh; where forni∣cation is committed the Union is dissolved, for as St. Paul tells us, whoever joyns himself to an Harlot, is one
flesh with her, and so in cases of such turpitude two are no longer one, but three or four or more in that marri∣age-sense of oneness, and so the oneness of two in mar∣riage, which is the essence of it being dissolved, the marriage it self must needs be so likewise, nor can it in reason be supposed to con∣tinue, where the ends of God and Nature in that re∣lation are frustrated and made void: And this could not be limited to the Jews, nor have a peculiar and single respect to Them, be∣ing founded upon principles that are common and uni∣versal, moral and perpetual,
and wherein the interests of all men concenter, so that if it were lawful Then for a Jew, or any man, to put away his Wife for Forni∣cation, upon those grounds upon which our Saviour de∣clares it to be lawful, it seems reasonable to think it must continue to be so for every man to the worlds end, because those grounds are in their own nature general and perpetual, and will Justifie the doing of the thing for ever. Fourthly, There seems to be no ground▪ of belief, that our Saviour should indulge the Jews in this point, and frame this exception only
for Them, and not intend it to others, but rather the contrary, That he should have particularly restrained Them in this matter more than others, because of their enormous practices this way above any other Nation in the World; Besides that the general Rule without the exception, has a fairer inter∣pretation towards Them than any, and our Saviour might well say, pointing only to Them Whoever puts away his Wife, (that is, as your manner of putting them away now is) and marries another, commits Adulte∣ry: There seems no rea∣son at all to appropriate
that exception to Them, especially when 'tis made upon grounds common to all. Fifthly, To confine that Rule our Saviour Then gave about Marriage and Di∣vorce, as he conjoyned them, to the Jews only at That time, and to extend it in that conjunction no farther, is to confine it to that interpretation, wherein 'tis most hard and difficult to be understood, and deny the effects of it, where the inter∣pretation lyes most plain and easie. To our selves under the Gospel the direction of our Saviours Law is plain and evident, and without any
difficulty may be put in exe∣cution, but in its relation to the Jews, and the state of things Then, it seems some∣what obscure, and without an admittance of a non-execu∣tion in some cases of the Law of God Then in force, for punishing Fornication and Adultery with death, very hard to be understood, and therefore 'tis no way reasona∣ble to relate the Law solely to Them, and deny the bene∣fit of it to our selves. The practice in the Chri∣stian Church seems to have been regulated by our Savi∣ours direction, and Divorces admitted in case of Fornica∣tion. The Emperour Theo∣dosius,
who, as one sayes of him, was Christianus & pi∣us, & Episcoporum quotidi∣ano usus concilio, made Laws for a man to put away his Wife in case of Fornication and Adultery, and extended it to the very suspicion of it. Sufficere Judicavit, si mulier viro ignorante, vel nolente extraneorum virorum con∣vivia appeteret, si ipso invito sine Justa & probabili causa foris pernoctaret, nisi apud suos Parentes, vel si Circensi∣bus theatralibus, vel Ludis & Arenarum spectaculis ipso prohibente gauderet. The Emperour Justinian made many additions to these Laws, which although for
the manner of them, we must suppose accommodated much to the Customes of those times, yet were all built upon our Saviours direction in that case. St. Jerome is positive, That, Vbicunque est Forni∣catio, & Fornicationis suspi∣cio liberè uxor dimittitur; which yet we must not ex∣tend to every Jealous suspi∣cion, but suppose spoken, Ne ad legum subtilitatem res semper exigatur, and must be understood with restriction; 'Tis no way fit a mans own Jealous apprehension should be always the rule in the case, and yet in matters of That nature it may so fall out, that a man may be certain of that
of which he can make no evident proof. St. Austine plainly takes our Saviours direction Then to be the rule Now in this matter, in his 89th. Epistle, says he, Domi∣nus praecepit, ne quisquam uxorem dimitat, excepta causâ Fornicationis. Divorce à mensâ & toro seems to be a fiction in the Canon-law, and to have no ground, neither in any Law of God, nor in reason. Not in any Law of God, for wheresoever divorce was al∣lowed by any Divine Law, it was a total Divorce, and the persons were allowed to marry again; It was so amongst the Jews, whoever
was Then Divorced, might go to a second marriage; It is so in what our Saviour sayes, he evidently implyes it, (putting away and re∣marrying are conjoyned) whoever, sayes he, puts away his wife, and Marries ano∣ther, except for the cause of Fornication, &c. where the implication is evident, that in that case of Fornication, he may both put away his wife, and also lawfully Mar∣ry another, the first marriage being dissolved: the word constantly used by our Saviour in the New Testa∣ment for Divorce and putting away implyes a nulling of the marriage and discharge
of the obligation, and signi∣fies to absolve, loose, release, discharge; so that if what our Saviour hath said about Divorce in case of Fornica∣tion be a rule to the Church Now, 'tis plain the Divorce allowed by him in that case admits of a second marriage: If it be not a rule to the Church Now, then there is not the least positive allow∣ance under the Gospel for any Divorce at all, and if so, all Divorces a Mensâ & Toro are without any Divine war∣rant. Not in reason, for whatso∣ever can be sufficient to Justifie a Divorce from all the ends of Marriage, must
needs be sufficient to Justifie a Divorce from the obliga∣tion of Marriage, the one be∣ing but in order to the other; It seems no way reasonable to bring any man into that condition, that the obligati∣on of marriage should remain, and the helps and advantages of it be taken away; 'Tis to divide what God hath joyned, for he never appoint∣ed the one to go without the other; It seems very unde∣cent to say, two shall conti∣nue one flesh, and yet be ex∣cluded from all converse each with the other. If the essen∣tial bond of marriage be broken (as in fornication), That gives a rational ground
for a Total divorce; If it be not, while the bond continues unbroken, the duty ought to be performed, there appears no ground to suspend the one, and continue the other. The practice of marrying again after Divorce hath been frequent; The Greek Church practise it generally. Grotius says, some Christians have thought better to forbear it, Quam sententiam, says he, ex bonitate peculiari magis ortam, quam ex communi receptaque lege, tum ex aliis, tum ex Tertulliano apparet, qui non uno loco ostendit, solitos suo tempore ad matri∣monium alterum admitti, qui ob Adulterium uxorem
dimisissent. Origen tells us, that in his time many Bishops allowed it. 'Tis not with∣out the authority of some Councils, who have deter∣mined it lawful; Conciliis, Eliberino, & Aurelianensi, & Arelatensi primo decretum est id licere.
Animadversions upon the foregoing Dis∣course. 1. UNchastity before mar∣riage, in a Virgin, not in a Widow. 2. Vnchastity to be punish∣ed with death, if proved by two witnesses, if but one wit∣ness Divorce, if only strong suspicion the water of Jea∣lousie.
3. Found some unclean∣ness; some is a word super∣fluous, , the 72. In∣terpret. which is summam foeditatem carnis. 4. The learned men, Sel∣den and Grotius have their opinion, yet the Rabbies say; Albeit the liberty of the Law, few or none did use it: No instance of taking that li∣cense in Scripture; Joseph finding the blessed Virgins Womb swelled, presumed he had Just cause to dismiss her: for he knew she could not con∣tend with him in point of Law.
5. It is a strong argument to me, that whereas God says, the nations round about the Jews would admire their wise Laws, yet none of the Hea∣then had such a loose Law, as to divorce at every exception the husband took; It is Ter∣tullian in his Apology, who sayes, that from Romulus to Sp. Camilius for 500. years Divorces were never heard of in Rome, and he began it upon the barrenness of his Wife. Tully broke good or∣der above all men; For he marryed a young Gentle-wo∣man, his Pupilla, his Ward, as we call it, that he might pay his debts with her Por∣tion,
he never prospered af∣ter it. 6. The Jews to this day confess in their writings, that the penalty for Adultery was not inflicted, as it ought to have been, chiefly because it was so hard to prove it by two witnesses, and the con∣fession of the nocent party would not serve; because no such Trial appears in their Law. 7. In Matthew there's men∣tion of putting away, not a word to allow the innocent person to marry again: but here is a strong argument in∣deed, that the Law of Moses
never allowed their petulant putting away for every cause; For Christ, as you well observe rendred the right sense of the old Law, gave no new. 8. When the marriage-bond is dissolved; That is pre∣sumed not proved. 9. Matth. 19. 9. is not every way the same determi∣nation with his doctrine, Matth. 5.; for chap. 19. he speaks in his case that mar∣ries another, but Matth. 5. in his case that marries her that is put away. The Wo∣man was not legally dead, if not convinced by two wit∣nesses.
10. The first case of Lenes Mariti, and the third of a prosecutor that could not prove, in the Event come all to one, That with a good con∣science he might put the Adulteress away. I concur for putting away, but no far∣ther; But for the second member, when he prosecuted openly against her and could not prove, Surely she ought to have the common benefit of all Law, to be recta in curiis, and the utmost must be to take the water of Jealousie. 11. If you speak of the 5th. of Matthew (not of the 19th.) it is true that it is a
compleat exposition of the right understanding of some points in Moses Law, in the morality so to be in force for ever. 12. Punishment by death for Adultery not a general Law. But far more Nations have it, than others with whom it prevails not. 13. That Christ intended the obligation of the marri∣age should cease; Presumitur non probatur. 14. Mark sets down the same story recorded by Mat∣thew, that not to be denyed. Yes, 'tis evidently to be deny∣ed,
Matth. 19. 3. The Pha∣risees asked him him about divorce, so Mark 10. 2. the Pharisees asked him about that matter; but read fur∣ther, verse the 10th; and in the house the Disciples asked him again of the same mat∣ter, and he saith unto them, whosoever puts away his Wife, and doth marry ano∣other, commits Adultery, Luke 16. 1. The chapter be∣gins, He saith to his Disciples, not to the Pharisees; Then at the 19th. verse, whosoe∣ver puts away his Wife, and marries another, commits Adultery, &c. To his Disci∣ples our Saviour spake in Gospel rules, repealing the
license given to the Jews in their Law Judicial to marry again, if Divorced for Adul∣ter; I dissent from Cal∣vine, who will have the same carriage of the story in in all the three Evange∣lists. 15. Very right, his Disci∣ples were present at the Ser∣mon, Matth. 5. but there is no mention of a giving allow∣ance to marry after Di∣vorce; If you argue from Christs silence, that he for∣bids it not, 'tis your own assumption, but no argu∣ment. 16. Second Reason.] What
need you more ground than the express words of Christ; you say, Why should the rule be general to one sort of men, with exception to ano∣ther? Nay, the general Do∣ctrine is not to one sort of men, but to all the Chil∣dren of God and Disciples of Christ, the exception is to the Jews, for the hardness of their hearts. More strict duty required of Christians, for the exu∣berance of grace given us; Abundantia spiritus sancti est Elogium regni Christi; They are Calvines words. A command not to swear at all, is never in any place limitted by exceptions,
(except to swear by the name of the Lord) but hath an hundred Texts to allow it justly done, so hath not this case which you put. 17. The third Reason makes against you. Christ cites original Scriptures, light of Nature, grounds not to be shaken but by the God of Scripture and Nature, who indulged to the Jews, that albeit those great ob∣ligations, they might marry after Divorce for Adulte∣ry; those times of infir∣mity God winked at, as he did at many superstiti∣ons of the Gentiles, but these are the times of re∣formation
under the Go∣spel. 18. If either commit For∣nication, the Vnion is dis∣solved. Gratis dicitur; For may not the innocent person remit the fault of foul lust to the other? deductosque jugo cogat alieno; may they not live together as Man and Wife? which could not be, if the union were intrinse∣cally dissolved; As the Pro∣phets do often challenge the Jews for spiritual Fornica∣tion of Idolatry, yet the Lord took them again to him for his people, and it hath a great Evangelical considera∣tion in it, that for any
trespass, while the offended and the offender live together in this world, there may be a way left for reconciliati∣on, and to take that admo∣nition, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee: but marrying another while the offender lives, excludes all possibility of charitable pardon. 19. Fourth Reason.] Our Saviour did not restrain the Jews more than Moses had restrained, but expounds Scripture, that they had ta∣ken license above what God had indulged to them for the hardness of their hearts; It was the hardness of their
hearts, that caused the wis∣dom of God to give them a latitude, the Lord being gra∣cious to their infirmities; But you would have God lay more burden upon them, because of their perverse hearts, which is not Gods method, but to whom much is given, of him much will be required. 20. Fifth Reason] soon satisfied; whoever said that Christs precept about Divorce was injoyned Then to the Jews, and only at That times▪ It was in force from the beginning without indulgence but in force with that indulgence from Deut. 24. a
no time so opportune, as when Christ was on the earth, and spake with his own mouth to his Disciples, to let them know, they were not priviledged like the Jews, if their Wife were an Adulteress, but to take up their cross and bear it. 21. Divorce admitted in the Christian Church for For∣nication, but superinduction of another Wife is another thing. There were great mistakes in the Imperial Laws. Did not Valentinian make a Law for marrying within degrees prohibited? Others for Bigamy? I have not
leasure to search the Books. I lay St. Austine against St. Jerome, who did not write transcursorily, but two studied Books upon the Ar∣gument. 22. Why should not the orders of the Canon-Law be as rational as the Laws of Theodosius and Justi∣nian? Separatio à toro & mensa is for peace sake, till opportunity of attoning. Must all directions to keep them aloof, that are imbit∣tered one against the other, and to prove them for a time how they will piece again, be grounded upon Scripture? Shall humane
Prudence have no hand in such things? These are no fictions of the Canon Law, for they falsifie no Text, but make tryal of such ways as may conduce to the good of both parties. What if à toro & mensa have no divine warrant, is there any divine warrant a∣gainst it? They that look for divine warrant express in all frames of Govern∣ment, in all circumstances of Gods worship, have been told sufficiently how much they mistake the purpose and use of Holy Scri∣pture.
23. You say, 'Tis not rea∣sonable, that the obligation of marriage should remain, and the helps and advantages of it be taken away; why, what if a ma or a woman be taken Captive? Incur an irremediable diseass? or the Wife, though chaste, will not render due benevolence? or, her Joynture she brought be consumed by fire? Here are helps and advantages substracted, yet no wedlock broken. 24. By Divorce à toro & mensa they are not shut from all converse with one ano∣ther, they may return to
mutual embraces again; though the bond of mar∣riage be not broken, the use and comfort may be suspended. 25. Far more Bishops by thousands have disliked it, than that have allowed it. I reverence the Councils, yet they were but Provincial; Had I leisure to peruse them, I should know to interpret them. 26. Grotius lived in the Netherlands, and wrote af∣ter their practice and do∣ctrine. It hath been the practice of the Church of England but once in Par∣liament,
Edw. 6. and once in this late Session of Parli∣ament. I take no pick at any man that is of a con∣trary judgement to me. But the first instance of Parre Marquess of Northampton, who had two Children in secret, before the Act of Par∣liament passed on his side, makes his case far worse than the Lord Rosse's, but the Marquess and his posterity sunk quite away, and let survivors behold the end of this last In∣stance. For an Appendix, I will ingeniously add the unrea∣sonableness of the Church of Rome, who generally deny
him that puts away his Wife for Adultery, to mar∣ry again, yet they consent to the sentence of Pope Gre∣gory the first, who resolves this upon a question mo∣ved. Questio est, quidam parentes, mulieres preser∣tim, proprios filios susce∣perunt in lavacro; An illiviri & mulieres ad suum proprium redire possint usum? Imo separent se mu∣lieres; vero cum separata fuerint pro hac illicita re à propriis viris, totam preci∣pimus recipere dotem, & post expletum annum reci∣piant alium virum, similiter & viri uxorem; which is easily thus refuted by their
own doctrine, Si proprios filios in casu necessitatis baptizare, non solvit ma∣trimonium, quanto minus eosdem è Baptismo susci∣pere? 27. To end, such as hold to my opinion, lay it the more to Conscience, foresee∣ing that the contrary may stir up some wicked Hus∣bands to suborn false wit∣nesses upon Oath to con∣vince innocent Wives, that They being divorced, it may admit them to marry where they like better. Moreover it may fall out, not sel∣dom, that a wicked Wo∣man
will confess her self an Adulteress, upon assu∣rance of some ample com∣pensation. More might be added.
The Answer to the Animad∣versions. Animadversion. 1. UNchastity before mar∣riage, in a Virgin, not in a Widow.
Answer. The direction in the 22. of Deut. for conviction of un∣chastity before marriage re∣lates peculiarly to a Vir∣gin, and cannot be applyed to a Widow, yet should a Widow by other evident proofs be convicted of un∣chastity after the death of a First Husband before mar∣riage to a second, the equity and reason of the Law seems to reach her; 'Tis a firm Maxim in the Civil Law, ut ubi eadem est ratio, jus idem valet, I find no ex∣ception
any where made in that case, nor any particu∣lar direction given about a Widows previous unchasti∣ty to a second marriage to punish it any other way.
Animadversion. UNchastity to be punished wth death, if proved by two witnesses, if but one Divorce, if only strong suspicion the water of Jea∣lousie. Answer. The first is evident, that unchastity when punished with death was to be proved by two witnesses, not by rea∣son of any particular dire∣ction about the proof in That case, but because God established That as a general
rule for all Judicial pro∣ceedings, that by the testi∣mony of two or three wit∣nesses every sentence should be established, Deut. 19. 15. One witness shall not rise up against any man for any iniquity, at the mouth of two witnesses or three shall the matter be established. The second, that if un∣chastity were proved but by one witness, it was Then matter of Divorce, I crave leave to dissent from; Un∣chastity, if proved, could never be ground for Di∣vorce, for death was to en∣sue, so that if one witness in case of unchastity were sufficient proof, it produced
death, if it were not, it amounted to no more than suspicion; Nor do I find any direction for any proof at all to be made as Neces∣sary in case of Divorce, nor in any case, where proof was Judicially required was one witness sufficient, Nei∣ther by the first allowance of Divorce, Deut. 24. Nor in the subsequent practice of it amongst the Jews was there any proof required in case of Divorce, nor any Judgement to be passed by the Magistrate about it, far∣ther than that there should be libellum repudii given to the Woman; It seems to me that the judgement in
case of Divorce rested in every mans own breast, though every man was in his own private conscience obliged by rules in his act∣ings therein, and sinned if he transgressed them; For as one saith, God would by that expression in Deut. quae probrum, aut ut 72 Interpr. verterunt  sig∣nificat, admonere Hebraeos ne temerè uxores dimitterent, and sayes the same Author, Notum est quosvis Judices quorum summae & liberrimae potestati res aliqua permit∣titur, insontes non esse, si ab¦aequi bonique regula disce∣dant, jus ergo fuit, ut qua∣vis de causa uxorem mari∣tus
possit expellere, sed ea notione qua Praetor jus red∣dere dicitur, etiam cum in∣justè discernit, ut Paulus Jurisconsultus loquitur, qui & alibi dixit, non omne quod licet honestum esse, licere enim in Communi usu aliquid dicitur, quod extra poenam est, & quominus fiat a nemine impediri potest; The words of the Text cast it that way (And it come to pass, that she find no fa∣vour in his eyes) of which himself could only be the proper Judge; In the 19th. of Matthew, where the Pha∣risees urged upon our Savi∣our, that Moses required no more in the matter of Di∣vorce,
but to give a writing of Divorcement, our Savi∣our does not deny it, but seems to admit it, only tells them, Moses did it for the hardness of their hearts, but from the beginning it was not so; The antient form of their Divorces im∣ports thus much. (Mea sponte nullius coactu te uxo∣rem hactenus meam dimit∣tere, à me deserere ac repu∣diari decrevi, Jamque adeo te dimitto desero ac repudio atque à me ejicio, ut tuae sis potestatis, tuoque arbitratu ac lubitu, quò licet discedas, neque id quisquam llo tem∣pore prohibessit, atque itae dimissa esto, ut cuivis viro
nubere tibi liceat. Crotius Seems upon good grounds to be positive in this case, his words are, Errare autem eos, qui putant Ju∣daeis non licuisse uxorem di∣mittere, nisi causa apud Ju∣dicem probata, satis ex hoc loco apparet, Dictum enim esse, ait Christus, qui uxo∣rem dimissam vult, libel∣lum det repudii; Dubitatio∣nem omnem nobis Josephus eximit, qui de se agens ita ait, . Verum tamen est hunc actum, non minus quam haereditatis Cessionem, atque alios solenniores solitos coram Judicibus peragi, quod
nos Digesta Talmudica do∣cent, sed erat hoc jurisdicti∣onis voluntariae non conten∣tiosae, quomodo manumissio apud Praetorem Jure Ro∣mano; Cognitionem igitur suam judex non interpone∣bat, nisi de dote aut donatione propter nuptias controversia inciderat, planè ut & apud Romanos. And he adds after, Caete∣rum ut graviora mala evi∣tarentur, & veritatem & gravitatem causae noluit ad alienum arbitrium referri, sed ipsius mariti animo id aestimandum permisit; Quod mirum non est, cum vete∣rum Gallorum, aliarumque Gentium leges jus vitae &
necis in Vxores Maritis con∣cesserint. For the third, If strong suspicion, the water of Jea∣lousie, I assent to it, he that doubted his Wives chasti∣ty, and in case he could be assured of her chastity, re∣solved not to part with her, and if she were found un∣chaste, desired the executi∣on of the Law upon her, obtained his end by the Wa∣ter of Jealousie; But I much question whether That, be∣ing of an extraordinary na∣ture, were enjoyed by the Jews till our Saviours time: I rather suppose they never had the benefit of it after the Captivity, but that the
use of it ceased, as it did of the Vrim and Thummim, That Church being to de∣termine, God removed the Pillars of it by degrees; I believe in our Saviours time in fact things stood Thus; The Law against Adultery was not executed, nor in∣deed was it in their power to have it executed, for the Romans had reserved mat∣ters of life to their own Ju∣dicatories, (though some∣times the people would vi∣olently stone some persons as they did Stephen) and upon that account amongst others they thought to insnare our Saviour in the 8th. of John, when they brought to him
the woman taken in Adul∣tery; The water of Jealou∣sie, they had not the use of, and so nothing was done in these cases, but only they made use of the liberty Mo∣ses allowed for Divorces.
Animadversion. Found some uncleanness; some is a word super∣fluous, , the 72. In∣terpret. which is summam foeditatem carnis. Answer. There is great disagree∣ment in understanding the Hebrew words translated (some uncleanness in her); I shall make evident, it can∣not be restrained to uncha∣stity, for which the Law had otherwise provided, if either proved or suspected:
the Jews I confess differed much about it; I find in Mr. Selden there were three Schools amongst them, that maintained three seve∣ral opinions about it; The School of Hillel, the School of Sammai, and the School of Aquiba: That of Hillel maintained it lawful for a man to put his Wife away for any cause, but not sing∣ly upon his own pleasure; That of Sammai for some∣what of Turpitude only; and That of Aquiba, that a man might put away his Wife upon his own plea∣sure without any ground at all; That which was the most general received opi∣nion
amongst the Jews, he says, was, that for light causes, as dislike of Beauty, age, and many other such things, Wives might be put away, and he adds, idque ex sacrae legis mente, accord∣ing to the sense of the Law, and 'tis most certain they did so interpret it for the most part. The School of Sammai, as Grotius observes, had the fewest disciples, and yet un∣der the notion of turpitude they extended Divorce so far, that they thought a Womans going with open breasts a sufficient ground for it. Philo sayes, a man may Divorce his Wife for
any occasion; de spec. lg. ad praec. 7. Josephus sayes, for any dislike of manners, and he practised according∣ly, for he saith of himself, that he put away his Wife after he had had three Chil∣dren by her, only because he disliked her manners. Chrysostome in his Homilies upon Matthew speaking of what the Pharisees said to our Saviour about Divorce, sayes he, Erat hoc in veteri lege mandatum, ut qui pre∣priam quacunque de causa odisset uxorem, non eam prohiberetur ejicere, inque illius locum alteram du∣cere▪
Erasmus hath with very great learning in his Trea∣tise about Divorce proved that by Uncleanness in the 24th. of Deut. Unchastity cannot be meant, he is so confident and positive, that he stakes his credit upon it. Ainsworth and our best late Commentators render it ex∣actly from the Hebrew, (matter of nakedness) or by transposing the words (any thing of nakedness) which, saith Ainsworth, is not meant of Adultery, but of some evil thing in her conditions or actions that displeased her Husband, and he adds that the phrase is so taken in the same sense for
any thing unseemly in the 23 of Deut. v. 14 Nor did I ever yet meet with any that thought the Hebrew word used in the 24 of Deut. as the ground of Moses per∣mission of Divorce, could be rendred by the word , which is that used by our Saviour. But to put it out of all farther question, that the licence Moses gave to Divorce, cannot be restrain∣ed to Adultery and Forni∣cation, there is this unde∣niable evidence; If that were so, we must make our Saviour palpably to con∣tradict himself, and at the same time to establish what himself repeals, and to do
the same thing which he finds fault with as done by Moses, being not that which was from the beginning, but that which was done only temporarily and occa∣sionally for the hardness of That peoples hearts; our Saviour's speech would Then run Thus, Moses for the hardness of your hearts suf∣fered you to put away your Wives for Fornication and Adultery, which was not so from the beginning, (and so ought not to con∣tinue) But I say unto you, that whosoever puts away his Wife, except for For∣nication and Adultery, and marries another, com∣mits
Adultery in so doing; There needs no more than our Saviours own-words to assure us that the liberty Mo∣ses gave for Divorce, and That Christ gave were upon different grounds: The plain meaning of our Saviour seems to be this, Moses heretofore upon a particular reason, be∣cause of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives upon grounds that were not in∣tended to be a lawful cause of Divorce from the begin∣ning, I'le have that to be so no more, but I'le have it to be as it was from the begin∣ning, and from the beginning there was no good cause o
Divorce but Fornication, and This cause was a good cause from the beginning and the first institution of marriage, and appears by our Saviours interpretation of the first In∣stitution of Marriage to be so, and to be implyed in the general institution at the first, and reserved as much as the service of the Temple, and liberty to works of mercy and necessity are declared by him to be reserved and im∣plyed in the first positive in∣stitution of the Sabbath, though not expressed; so that, if we look to the liber∣ty given by Moses, our Sa∣viours Law about Divorce is a new Law, for he repealed
That, if we look to the Law of Creation and first institu∣tion of marriage, 'tis the same that was from the beginning, only the Mosaical indulgence had interposed, and our Sa∣viour by repealing That set∣tles the matter upon the old and lasting foundation, wherein Jews and Gentiles, and all men to the worlds end are to acquiesce, and de∣clares that exception of For∣nication, though not ex∣pressed to be virtually con∣tained and implyed in the in∣stitution of marriage from the beginning.
Animadversion. IT is a strong argument to me, that whereas God saith, the nations round about the Jews would admire their wise Laws, yet none of the Hea∣then had such a loose Law, as to divorce at every exception the husband took. Answer. It is a consideration of moment I grant, yet our Sa∣viour giving the reason of it and thereby seeming to ad∣mit the thing, determines us; It was rather a Toleration
than a Law, a permission of impunity, rather than an in∣stitution, and we have good reason to think, as things then stood, the best and most prudent expedient That people were capable of. Calvin speaks wisely of it, says he, we give general li∣berty without restraint for men to go to Law, yet that justifies no mans going to Law beyond the bounds of Charity; St. Chrysostome in his excellent Homily upon the 5th. of Matthew speaks more fully to th ground of it. Si enim retineri etiam exosam praecipisset uxorem, facilè profectò illam qui ode∣rat occidisset, Talis quippè
erat natio Judaeorum, qui enim ne filiis quidem pro∣priis parcere, & Prophetas solebant frequentèr occidere, ut aquam ita effundentes hu∣manum cruorem, multò illi minus odiosis conjugibus pe∣percissent, Moses, inquit, propter duritam vestram haec scripsit, ne clam mactaretis sed ejiceretis. The Christi∣an Roman Emperours gave much the same liberty to the Husband; Grotius sayes, Christiani Imperatores extra Adulterium aliquot scelera enumerant, quibus probatis, maritus sine ullo damno uxo∣rem repudiet, & quod est amplius, ea si probare ne∣queat, non simplicitèr repu∣dium
vetant, sed in arbitrio mariti relinquunt, malitnè uxorem retinere, an dotem reddere, & amittere quod propter nuptias donavit.
Animadversion. MAtth. 19 9. is not every way the same determi∣nation with his doctrine, Matth. 5.; for chap. 19. he speaks in his case that mar∣ries another, but Matth. 5. in his case who marries her that is put away. Answer. I conceive both places are alike to this purpose, to make remarriage upon Divorce lawful, for in the 5th. of Matthew, remarriage is plain∣ly intended by our Saviour,
for he saith, whosoever puts away his Wife except for Fornication, which is to be understood such putting away as they Then used, which was to remarry after it, for he sayes expresly, who∣ever puts away his Wife and marries another: and he sayes, if the woman marry again (except put away for the cause of Fornication she com∣mits Adultery, the excepti∣on plainly implyes her re∣marriage is no Adultery, if put away for Fornication, and if the woman so put away may lawfully marry again, much more the man that did put her away: if it be lawful for either
to marry, it must needs be for both, for it must be up∣on supposition of the Mar∣riage-bond dissolved.
Animadversion. IN Matthew there's menti∣on of putting away, not a word to allow the innocent person to marry again: but here is a strong argument in∣deed, that the Law of Moses never allowed their petulant putting away for every cause; For Christ, as you well observe rendred the right sense of the old Law, gave no new.
Answer. No new Law, if we re∣spect what Law was from the beginning, which the Jews were obliged by, but new in this case, if we re∣spect the permission of Moses, for he positively repeals That; The Law the Jews were to submit to was the Law of Creation and first institution which Moses re∣vealed to them, to That our Saviour reduceth them; The permission about Di∣vorce was accidental and temporary, that our Savi∣our positively repeals, and 'tis very plain that in Both
cases, That of Moses for Divorce, and That of Christ for Divorce, remarriage is admitted; in Moses, in ter∣minis expressed, and by our Saviour plainly and undenia∣bly implyed.
Animadversion. THat Christ intended the obligation of the marri∣age should cease; Presumitur non probatur. Answer. Christ must needs intend the obligation of the marri∣age should cease, where he gives liberty to a second marriage, as he plainly does in case of Fornication, both in the 5th. and the 19th. of Matthew. Christ reasons about marriage from the Law of creation, and the
first institution of it in Pa∣radise, and carries it up to the highest grounds of the obligation, and There gives liberty to Divorce and re∣marriage in case of Fornica∣tion, and therefore Fornica∣tion must needs be reckoned a dissolution of the marri∣age, and a dissolution of it considered in its strictest tyes; our Saviour would ne∣ver have gone about to prove the sacredness of the marri∣age-bond by the highest Proofs, and then have given liberty to divorce, where the bond of marriage was not directly broken, for in that case his proofs would only have served against his own
indulgence, and therefore he proves the sacredness of the marriage-bond to overthrow the Jewish divorces, and establishes divorce in That only case, where the bond it self was dissolved.
Animadversion. MArk sets down the same story recorded by Mat∣thew, that not to be denyed. Yes, 'tis evidently to be deny∣ed, Matth. 19. 3. The Pha∣risees asked him about divorce, so Mark 10. 2. the Pharisees asked him about that matter; but read fur∣ther, verse the 10th; and in the house the Disciples asked again of the same mat∣ter, and he saith unto them, whosoever puts away his Wife, and marries ano∣ther, commits Adultery, Luk, 16. 1. The chapter begins
He saith unto his Disciples, not to the Pharisees; Then at the 19th. verse, whosoe∣ver puts away his Wife, and marries another, commits Adultery; To his Disci∣ples our Saviour spake in Gospel rules, repealing the license given to the Jews in their Law Judicial to marry again, if Divorced for Adul∣tery; I dissent from Cal∣vine, who will have the same carriage of the story to be in all the three Evange∣lists.
Answer. I humbly conceive that the two Evangelists relate the same story, both from the matter of it, and all the cir∣cumstances that attend it, 'tis said in the 19th. of Mat∣thew, in the beginning of the Chapter▪ our Saviour came into Judaea beyond Jordan, and in the beginning of Mark 10. 'tis said he came into the same place, and in both the Evangelists 'tis said the multitude came unto him, and the discourse related be∣tween him and the Pharisees appears evidently in both Evangelists to have been the
same, at the same time, and in the same place, and be∣fore the same company, on∣ly somewhat varied in the relation, which is usual; In the 10th. of Mark there is no mention made, that our Saviour gave to the Pha∣risees any allowance of Di∣vorce in any case, which is expressed in the 19th. of Matthew, and 'tis granted our Saviour admitted it to the Jews; what our Saviour saith about it in the 19th. of Matthew, was as much spoken to the Disciples, as what he sayes in the 10th. of Mark, as appears from hence, that the Disciples themselves make immedi∣ately
the answer; In the 19th. of Matthew, where our Saviour saith, Whoever puts away his wife, except for Fornication, &c. If the case be so, say the Disciples, taking it to themselves, 'tis good not to marry, looking upon it as a strict doctrine, even with that exception and such a one as the world had not been acquainted with, and which they thought un∣supportable. Calvin says, 'tis the same passage that is reported in Mark, only Mark reporteth 'twas spo∣ken in the House to the Disciples, and Matthew omit∣ting that circumstance sets down barely our Saviours
speech; Dr. Hammond agrees with Calvin in this mat∣ter, speaking of these places and about this very occa∣sion, sayes he, that these places, That in Matthew on the one side, and in the other two Evangelists, at least in St. Mark on the other side, are a report of the same pas∣sage of story, and of the same part of Christs speech, appealing from the Mosaical permission to the first insti∣tution of marriage, there is no ground of making any question, and therefore it fol∣lows that one must be in∣terpreted by the other, so thinks he. But suppose it were otherwise, when seve∣ral
of the Evangelists relate discourses of our Saviour about the same subject, by all judgement of reason those Evangelists that are more explicite and large must in∣terpret those that are more implicite and brief, and there is no fitness at all in it to interpret those that are most large, and say most upon a subject, by those that are more brief and say least of it. But that which overrules me in this case is, that I find our Saviour no where Preaching one doctrine to the Jews and another to his Disciples, and that must be proved in this case, or else
the point of Divorce and remarriage is visibly esta∣blished in case of Fornica∣tion, if our Saviour gave that liberty only to the Jews, and made the excepti∣on singly for them, Then when he speaks generally to his Disciples, he must not only repeal the liberty Moses gave to the Jews, but the liberty which himself gave to the Jews, which is not fit to suppose; Nor indeed has our Saviour throughout the whole Gospel given any one new Law peculiar only to the Jews, which this about Divorce in case of Fornication only must needs be, if it be restrained to
Them, for they had no such Law before; Moses permis∣sion of Divorce, and this of our Saviour could not be the same, for our Saviour would never have condemn∣ed what Moses did, and im∣mediately have instituted the same thing himself: Nay, it must not only, if restrained to them, be a new Law to them, but a new Ju∣dicial Law, which were strange to suppose our Savi∣our should Then institute; for if we deny it to be Judicial, and acknowledge it to be (as indeed it is) a Law moral, sounded up∣on mans first Creation and the first institution of mar∣riage,
then it cannot be re∣strained to the Jews, but must needs by the nature of it belong to all.
Animadversion. THE third Reason makes against you. Christ cites original Scripture, light of Nature, grounds not to be shaken but by the God of Scripture and Nature, who indulged to the Jews, that albeit those great ob∣ligations, they might marry after Divorce for Adulte∣ry; those times of infir∣mity God winked at, as he did at many things in the superstitions of the Gen∣tiles, but these are the times of reformation under the Go∣spel.
Answer. I conceive Christ would never have established mar∣riage upon those grounds, and then have given a di∣spensation for divorce that those grounds would not ad∣mit of; our Saviours speech must then be thus understood, by the Law of mans first Creation, and the first insti∣tution of marriage this di∣vorce for Fornication and re∣marriage upon it, ought not to be, yet I will give you li∣berty to do it. Without doubt the divorce our Savi∣our then allowed was very well corresponding with
those principles upon which he established marriage, and those principles being general and perpetual, his allowance of divorce must needs be so too; Christs time was no in∣dulging time, not a word in the Gospel of Christs wink∣ing at any thing, he settles every thing upon its true and lasting foundation, they are times indeed of reformation, and from whence can we more reasonably expect That reformation than from Christs own mouth; He al∣lows not the Jews in any one Title of their corrupt practice, but exactly reduceth them to the rule, and in this case he plainly tells them,
the dispensation they had from Moses was not the rule, but the law of Creation and Gods first institution was the rule, and that admits of no exception but this of Forni∣cation: 'tis not reasonable to think Christ should indulge them for the hardness of their hearts in any thing, be∣cause he came to reform eve∣ry thing, but especially not in this matter, because he plain∣ly repeals what Moses had done in it before upon that ground.
Animadversion. WHere Fornication is committed, the Uni∣on is dissolved. Gratis dicitur; For may not the innocent per∣son remit the fault of foul lust to the other. deductosque jugo cogat alieno? may they not live together as Man and Wife? which could not be, if the union were intrins∣cally dissolved; As the Pro∣phets do often challenge the Jews for spiritual Forni∣cation of Idolatry, yet the Lord
took them again to him for his people, and it hath a great Evangelical considera∣tion in it▪ that for any trespass, while the offended and the offender live together in this world, there may be a way left for reconciliati∣on, and to take that admo∣nition, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee: but remarrying another while the offender lives, excludes all possibility of charitable pardon.
Answer. When we say the vincu∣lum matrimonii is dissolved, we speak not of actual dis∣solution, but virtual cause of dissolution; In this and in all other obligations arising from contract, when the bond is broken, 'tis a rule, Potest innocens cedere Juri suo, and if the offended will not take the forfeiture, the bond continues: Adultery does not ipso facto dissolve the marriage, but gives right to the inncent party to dis∣solve if he please, puts the power into his hand, which he may ad libitum make use of or
not, for as Divines say, Di∣vortium non est praecepium, sed tantum permissum & pro∣batum, 'tis a liberty given in favour to him that is wronged in the matrimonial contract, which he is not bound to make use of unless he will; God seems to in∣timate so much in the Pro∣phet, Where is the Bill of your mothers divorcement? there was cause enough, the Covenant was broken on their part, yet God pleased to forgive it and not take the forfeiture, no Bill of Di∣vorce was actually given, if it had, they could have returned no more, the sepa∣ration had been irremedia∣ble.
Now that Fornication in this sense is a dissolution of the marriage-bond, that 'tis a sufficient ground to dissolve it, if the innocent party please, will appear, both from Christ permis∣sion about it, and from the nature of the thing it self. First, From Christs per∣mission about it, he plainly admitted Fornication to be a good ground of Divorce, and permitted remarriage upon that Divorce: let his permission be to whom it will, our Saviour would ne∣ver have given liberty to any man to remarry upon Fornication, unless That had dissolved the first marriage,
for it had been to permit a positive sin upon those very grounds, upon which our Saviour himself in that very place does establish the bond of marriage; If the bond of marriage can be broken in no case, our Saviour would never have allowed putting away and remarrying in any case. Secondly, From the na∣ture of the thing it self, it cuts the very knot of the marriage-contract, which is, that two shall become one flesh, and in that case two are not one flesh, which they covenant to be, and are to be, in a chaste and peculiar enjoyment of each other in
the marriage-bed, for St. Paul sayes, He that joyns himself to an Harlot is one flesh with her; By the marriage con∣tract they have resigned their bodies over each to other, and have not power in that re∣spect over their own bodies; In case of Fornication, there is the highest breach of That obligation. All other things whatever relating to marriage may be enjoyed upon other accounts and in other relations, but only the body and the con∣cerns of it, and therefore when the Faith about the body is broken, Faith is broken about that which is the peculiar property of mar∣riage,
and that which does formally distinguish it from all other relations. A charitable pardoning spirit is very suitable to the Gospel and becoming a Chri∣stian, but I think a man ought not to be imposed upon in this case, where a man is wrong∣ed, and Christ hath provi∣ded a way to right him, ju∣stice in That case must not be denyed him, if he require it; A man may, if he please for∣give an unclean wife and con∣tinue to live with her, But I incline to Calvins opinion, that he will do much better to put her away and cleanse his house (nay his bed) from defilement and wickedness.
Animadversion. YOu say, It is not reasona∣ble, that the obligation of marriage should remain, and the helps and advantages be taken away; why, what if the man or woman be taken Captive? Incur an irremediable diseass? or the Wife, though chaste, will not render due benevolence? or, her Joynture she brought be consumed by fire? Here are helps and advantages substracted, yet no wedlock broken
Answer. I conceive it not reasona∣ble any thing should be thought of validity to take away the ends of marriage that is not sufficient to dis∣solve the obligation; because they are relatives intrinsecal∣ly conjoyned each to other, the ends and advantages of marriage ought never to be suspended, where there is not sufficient ground to dissolve the bond of marriage; because the bond being entred into for the sake of those advantages that belong to it, by the Law of God, and by the Law of Nature, those advantages
ought never to be denyed, where the bond is continued; our Saviour saith, Whom God hath joyned, let no man put asunder, that is, not put asun∣der as God hath joyned them, and he has joyned them so, that the duties to be perform∣ed and the obligation should go together; whoever divides in That kind, I think falls under the Text, if we ground divorce upon our Saviours exception, That is plainly for a total Divorce in that case of Fornication and remarri∣age after, He divides as God has joyned, from duty and obligation together. A di∣vorce à mensa & toro seems unreasonable, because une∣qual,
and 'tis unequal, be∣cause the innocent party is as much a sufferer by That as he nocent, and instead of be∣ng relieved, is farther punish∣ed, and all the help a man has by this partial divorce, that is abused and betrayed by an unchaste wife, is, to be put nto a kind of Matrimonial Purgatory, and be rendred hereby uncapable to enjoy, ither the advantages of a marryed man, or the freedom of a single man. When by providential dis∣bilities in either party, the duties of marriage cannot be performed, yet the marriage-bond continues unbroken, though the ends cannot be at∣tained,
this I assent to, but it will not reach this case; Abi∣lity to perform is implyed in all contracts, providential disability no way cancels the matrimonial obligation, be∣cause 'tis entred into with a supposition of them; But al∣though God in his just Judge∣ment, and as a punishment upon both, may bring marri∣ed persons into such a condi∣tion, yet 'tis not a ground for men to make a rule to go by, especially for the offence of one, 'tis There matter of ne∣cessity and not of choice, There the ends of marriage cannot be attained, Here they may, only we obstruct them. God does that many times
providentially, and Judicial∣ly, which we can neither do reasonably nor regularly; 'tis mens duty to submit to God when he takes away those helps marriage affords, but that is no ground for us to take them away, while he continues them. A man ob∣liged by an oath of Allegi∣ance to his Prince may pro∣videntially be brought into such a condition he cannot perform it, but That will ne∣ver warrant us to bring any man into such a condition, where the obligation to a du∣ty is necessary, and the suspen∣sion of it is voluntary; It may so fall out, a Prince cannot protect his subjects, nor his
subjects obey him, yet the ob∣ligations upon both remain, But this will never justifie us upon any account to bring things into such a posture. But suppose the woman refuse due benevolence, where there is no disability. I say she lives by so doing in a notori∣ous sin, and 'tis not fit that what is a sin in either party voluntarily to do, Both should be enjoyned to do, which they are by divorce à mensa & to∣ro: The woman in that kind is lyable to punishment for not performing matrimonial duties, and in case all means used to reduce her to her du∣ty prove ineffectual, 'tis wor∣thy consideration, whether
she may, not at last come un∣der the equity of St. Pauls di∣direction about desertion, which is nothing as I take it, relating to divorce or putting away in that sense our Savi∣our speaks of it, but a help that the Law of nature (which is ever implyed in all divine institutions) affords to an innocent wronged per∣son unjustly forsaken, and actually or perhaps virtually put away, the Apostle says, A brother or a sister is not inslaved in such a case. The truth of this whole matter is, our Saviour has in the Gospel established a Law for Divorce and Remarriage in the single case of Fornica∣tion
instead of That liberty given by Moses under the Law, it must be proved that he intended That part of the Gospel as a rule to the Jews only, which he never intend∣ed any other part of it to be, nor does any where say he intended This to be, or else the matter is determined. Amongst the Jews never any Divorce heard of without li∣berty to remarry, and it was only intended for that pur∣pose. Calvin upon that pas∣sage (He that marries her that is put away, commits Adultery) speaks fully, says he, This sentence hath been most corruptly expounded by many Interpreters, for they
thought generally and con∣fusedly that is was command∣ed to live sole after Divorce∣ment, so, if the Husband should put away the Adul∣teress, of necessity They both should live unmarried, as if This were the liberty of Divorcement, only to lye away from the Wise, as if also Christ did not evidently in this case permit That to be done, which the Jews were wont generally to usurp unto themselves according to their own pleasure; Therefore their errour was too gross, for when Christ condemneth him for Adultery that marries her that is put away, 'tis certain that this is to be understood
of unlawful and frivolous Divorcements. By the Roman Laws all Divorces admitted of a se∣cond marriage; In the Christian Church in the begin∣ning it was so: Nor indeed was Divorce ever thought of any where but in order to a second marriage, till this con∣trivement of a Divorce à mensa & toro came in, the effect of which in the Roman Church, where it hath been chiefly practised, has been such as does no way credit it; Cajetan, one of their own, is so ingenuous, that upon the 19th. of Matthew, he saith, Intelligo igitur ex hac Domi∣ni Jesu Christi lge, licitum
esse Christiano dimittere uxo∣rem ob fornicationem carna∣lem ipsius uxoris, & posse ali∣am ducere; And a little after adds, Non solum miror, sed stupeo, quod Christo clarè ex∣cipiente causam fornicatio∣nis, torrens Doctorum non admittat illam mariti liber∣tatem. Wherever that kind of Divorce has been practi∣sed, the consequence hath most commonly been, that the innocent party hath by temptation fallen into sin, the offending party into farther transgression; for 'tis not a thing probable or likely, that such who would not live chastely in a marryed condi∣tion, should do so in a single
condition, and at last greater inconveniences and animosi∣sities have arisen from such a separation and the parties ve∣ry rarely if ever again united. It inslaves mankind into a very sad dilemma, either to lye in a polluted bed, and yield to every impudent Adulteress, (for so they usu∣ally grow at last, or else to udnergo all those temptati∣ons men are subject to with∣out a Wife in a single and unmarried condition: God no where seems to have given the woman such an advantage over the Masculine Sex, as to be able to intrap the Man in such a snare.
Animadversion. TO end, such as hold to my opinion, lay it the more to Conscience, foresee∣ing that the contrary may stir up some wicked Hus∣bands to suborn false wit∣nesses upon Oath to con∣vince innocent Wives, that They being divorced, it may admit them to marry where they like better. Moreover it may fall out, not sel∣dom, that a wicked Wo∣man will confess her self an Adulteress, upon assu∣rance of some ample com∣pensation. More might be added.
Answer. 'Tis a thing likewise to be feared, that if no better re∣medy be provided for inno∣cent Husbands than a Di∣vorce à mensa & toro, it may provoke them to rid them∣selves of their Adulterous Wives by some undue means; the rage of a man is great in those cases, and truly sometimes unconquerable e∣ven in good men, sad events have ensued and may ensue in such cases. For suborning proof in this case, there's no more danger than in all other mens estates and lives and their highest concerns de∣pend
upon proof by witnesses, there is no surer or better ground to proceed upon in all humane determinations, this matter has the greatest ad∣vantage against proof of any, being rarely within the reach of it, and for one fact of That nature that can be brought to light by due proof, many will pass in the dark without proof, and so without punish∣ment. A womans own con∣fession in this case will not prevail, the rule in the Civil Law takes place. Revelanti turpitudinem suam fides non datur. In the raign of Henry the eighth, when the Popes pow∣er was excluded, an Act
passed to inable the King to elect thirty two able persons to reform Ecclesiastical Laws; This in the 6 year of Edward the sixth's Raign was put in execution, and the Quorum of them by letters Patents reduced to eight, they met and took great pains, there was present Cran∣mer Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Goodrich Bishop of Ely, and other the chief of the Bi∣shops, Peter Martyr and other eminent Divines, and the most eminent Canonists, Ci∣vilians, and Common-Law∣yers then in the Kingdom, they set forth a Book called Reformatio legum Ecclesiasti∣carum, which we may well
reckon the judgement of the Church of England at That time about those things, be∣ing composed by such men impowred by the supream Authority, and in That Book the lawfulness of Divorce in case of fornication and re∣marriage upon it is fully as∣serted and justified. I shall only add, that amongst learned men I find great disagreement in resolv∣ing this Question, whether the same right of Divorce be∣long to the Woman that does to the man; some say the superiority of the Sex makes this a peculiar prerogative to the man, who is the head of the Woman; `Tis certain, in
the Mosaical Law no such thing as a Womans putting away her Husband was ever allowed, sometimes in fact it was illegally and irregularly practised, yet very rarely, we find in all the Jewish Writers but one instance, and that is in Josephus; The Roman Laws allowed it; Those who espouse the Womans cause in this point, urge that passage of our Saviour in the 10th. of Mark, where he saith (And if a woman put away her husband, and marry ano∣ther, she commits Adultery) and so seems to make the right of putting away equal; Calvin upon this place saith that although the Husband
be superior in other re∣spects, yet in the marriage-bed the man and the woman are equal, therefore saith he, when as the Adulterer shall fall away from the knot of matrimony, the Wife is set at liberty: they also urge that of St. Paul, who saith, in case of desertion a Brother or a Sister is not bound; and so seems to put the matter between Man and Wife up∣on even terms in all conjugal respects. The Christian Church affords us but two instances that look this way; The first of one Thecla, who refused to marry one Thamy∣ris in Iconium, after she was contracted to him; This
story Mr. Selden relates at large, from the report of Ba∣sil of Selencia, but seems not much to credit it himself, however it was but a re∣fusing Marriage after con∣traction, Mr. Selden calls her only Sponsa, and saith, Nu∣ptias noluit, & sponsalibus renunciavit, and it was to one that most bitterly detest∣ed Christianity; The other instance is that in the begin∣ning of Justine Martyrs first Apology, where a Christian woman made use of the Ro∣man Laws to put away her Husband, and he commends her for it, but that was evi∣dently upon St. Pauls permis∣sion in case of desertion, for
her Husband was a notori∣ously wicked person and de∣parted from her. In this matter I shall make much a better choice, to sub∣mit to your Lordships learn∣ed Judgement, than to de∣clare my own. FINIS.
