W498 13012989 96506
AN HONORABLE, AND LEARNED SPEECH MADE BY Mr. WALLER in PARLIAMENT, Against the Prelates Innovations, False Doctrin, and Discipline; reprove∣ing the Perswation of some Clergie-men to his Majestie of Inconveniencies: VVho themselves, instead of tilling the Ground, are become sowers of TARES. VVith a Motion for the Fundamen∣tall, and Vitall Liberties of this Nation, which it was wont to have▪ Printed for Richard Smithers, 1641.
Mr. Waller his Speech, in Parliament. Mr. Speaker, WEE shall make it appeare; the errour of Divines who would that a Mon∣arch can be absolute, and that he can doe all things ad libitum receding not on∣ly from their Text, (though that bee wan∣dring too) but from the way their own pro∣fession might teach them. Stare super vias antiquas, and remoove not the ancient bounds and Land-marks, which our Fathers have set. If to be absolute, were to be restrained by no Lawes; Then can no King in Christen∣dom bee so, for they all stand obleidged to the Lawes Christian, and we aske no more, for to this Pillar, be our Priviledges fixt.
Our Kings at their Coronation, having taken a Sacred Oath, not to infring them, I am sorry these men take no more care, for the inform∣ing of our faith of these things, which they tell us for our soules health; whilst we know them so manifestly in the wrong way, in that which concernes the Liberties and pri∣viledges of the Subjects of England. They gain preferment, and then it is no matter, though they neither beleeve them∣selves, nor are beleeved by others. But since they are so ready, to let loose the Conscience of our Kings, we are the more carefully to proceed, for our protection against this Pul∣pit-law, by declaring, and reinforcing Muni∣cipall Lawes of this Kingdom. It is worthy the observation, how now this opinion, or rather this way of rising is even amongst themselves. For, (Mr. Speaker) Mr. Hooker, who was no refractory man, as they terme it thinks that the first goverment was arbitrary, untill it was found, that to live by one mans will, becoms all mens misery▪ these are his words, and that these were the originall of invent∣ing Lawes.
And (Mr. Speaker,) if wee looke farther backe, our Histories will tell us, that the Pre∣lates of this Kingdom, hath often been the Mediators, between the King and his Sub∣jects, to present and pray redresse of their greivances, and had reciprocally then, as∣much love and reverence from the people. But these Preachers more active then their Predecessors, and wiser then the Lawes, have found out a better forme of Govern∣ment. The King must bee a more absolut Mon∣arch, then any of his Predecessors, and to them he must owe it, though in the meane time, they hazard the hearts of his people, and involve Him into a thousand Difficul∣ties. For suppose, this forme of Government were inconvenient; (Mr. Speaker,) this is but a Supposition; for this five hundred yeares, it hath not onely maintained us in safety, but made us victorious over other Nations: But suppose, this form of Govern∣ment were inconvenient; and they have a∣nother Idea of one more convenient; Wee
all know, how dangerous Innovations are, though to the better; and what hazard those Princes runne, that enterprize the Change of a long established Government. Now, (Mr. Speaker,) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of all that are to succeed in this happy race, why should so pious, and so good a King, be exposed to this trouble and hazard? Besides, that King so diverted, can never doe any great matters abroad. But, Mr. Speaker, whilst these men have thus bent their Witts, against the Law of their Country; have they not neglected their own profession? What Tares are grown up in the field, wch they should have tilled? I leave it to a second Consideratiō, not but Religion be the first thing in our purpo∣ses and desires; But that which is first in dig∣nity, is not alwayes to preced in order of time; for well-being, supposes a being; and the first impediment which men naturally, endeavour to remoove, is the want of those things, without which they cannot subsist. God first assigned unto Adam, maintenance
of life, and added to him a title to the rest of the Creatures, before he appointed a Law to observe. And let me tell you, that if our Adversa∣ries have any such designe, as there is no∣thing more easie, then to impose Religion on a people deprived of their Liberties, so there is nothing more hard, then to do the same upon free-men. And therefore (Mr. Speaker) I Conclude with this motion, that there may be an Or∣der presently made, that the first thing this House goes about, shalbe, the restoring of this Nation in generall, to the fundamentall and vitall Liberties, the prosperity of our Goods, and freedome of our Persons: And then We will forth-with, consider of the sup∣ply desired. And thus shall We discharge the trust re∣posed in us, by those that sent us hither; And his Matie shall see, that wee will make more then ordinary hast to satisfie his de∣mands; and we shall let all those know that seeke to hasten the matter of supply, that they
will so farre delay it, as they give no inter∣ruption to the Former. FINIS.
