W510 12241408 56785
A POEM ON THE Present Assembly OF PARLIAMNT, November 9th. 1685. Licensed, November 7th. 1686. Ro. L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed for George Powell over against Lincolns-Inn-Gate. 1686.
A POEM ON THE Present Assembly OF PARLIAMENT, November 9th. 1685. BReak sacred Morn on our expecting I'le, And make our Albion's sullen Genius smile; His brightest Glories let the Sun display, He rose not with a more auspicious Ray, Since God-like IAMES receiv'd The Coro∣nation, April 23, 1685. Imperial State, Our only recompence for CHARLES his Fate.
A joyful Bridegroom then, our Eyes he drew, And now seems wedded to his Realms anew: Since when our panick Fears are quite o're-blown, And on our Enemies Coast the Terror thrown. Ye ancient Bards that Britain's Glory wrought As warmly as our British Heroes fought, Be still assisting to your Country's Fame, And in my daring Song revive your Flame. Behold, behold, the bright Assembly plac'd, And with our Monarch's Sacred Presence grac'd: Transported with a Vision so sublime, Our thoughts review the Infant-Pride of time, We think how at the New Creation sate Th' Eternal Monarch in his Heavens fresh State; The Stars yet wondring at each others Fires, And all the Sons of Glory rank'd in Quires. As various Streams from distant Regions fall, And in the Deep their gen'ral Counsel call, Conveying thence supplies to ev'ry source, And fail not to maintain the rowling Course;
Our Senate thus from ev'ry Quarter met, And with our Peers in awful Council set, Dispense their Influence to each Province round, And in our I'le no barren spot is found. Justice as freely as our Thames shall flow, In Peace the Sailer steer, and Peasant plow, Our Publick safe from foreign Wrongs shall be, And private Rights from Home-oppressors free. Proceed brave Worthies then to your Debates, And by your Counsels to direct our Fates. Thus, IAMES the pious, valiant, wise and just, Performs not only yours, but Europe's Trust; Whose Power or Prudence makes their Discords cease, Where he perswades not, he commands a Peace. So (if small things with great may be compar'd) We oft have seen two Monarchs of the Herd, Upon some long-disputed Plain engage With equal Vigour, and with equal Rage; Their goring Horns are in the Contest worn, The harrass'd Earth is in the Combat torn; But if a Lion from the Hill descends, Their Fury ceases, and the Battel ends.
What though the Gallick Pride has swell'd so high▪ A war-like Empires Forces to defie, To crush united States, confederate Powr, And quite suppress the Belgian Lions roar; Yet let their Troops in silent Triumph come From conquer'd Fields, and steal their Trophies home. Take care their Cannon at just distance roar, Nor with too near a Volley rouze our shore. The Terror still of our Third Edward's Name Rebukes their Pride, and checks their towring Fame: Nor can the Tide of many rowling Years, VVash the stain'd Fields of Cressey and Poictiers. A conscious Terror strikes their Bosoms still, VVhen they behold that famous fatal Hill, Where Edward, with his Host, Spectator stood, And left the Prince to make the Conquest good. Such was the Vertue of our Ancestours, And such, on due resentment, shall be ours; Averse from acting, as receiving wrong, VVeak States support, and Terror to the strong; VVhose temper'd Vallour just Pretence requires, As Flints are struck before they shew their Fires.
Once more great Patriots in the Nation's stead, VVith due respect, the Loyal Muses plead, Since from your gen'rous Trust our Peace did spring, Joyn'd with the matchless Conduct of our King. Secure the Blessing you so well begun, And take for Pattern what your selves have done. So Albion to her ancient Fame shall grow, By Heaven's Decrees above, and yours below. Nor shall your Influence in our lesser world Lie pent, but through the Universe be hurl'd: Thence Christian Leagues shall firmly be combin'd, While Turks and Rebels equal Fate shall find. Thus Earth and Seas with safety shall be blest, And Peace as calm as their great Masters Breast. Heaven to our I'le this Priv'ledge does allow, Besides her self to have no pow'rful Foe. By Rocks and Seas fenc'd round from foreign Harms, And only liable to in-bred Arms. Such shocks (alas!) too oft we have endur'd, But ev'n from home-bred Rage are now secur'd: No Storm can rise while Caesar guides the Helm, While you support the Throne, and He the Realm. Our Faith and Freedom trusted in his Hand, Immoveable as Fate's Decrees must stand.
Usurpers from their Promise may retreat, And Common-wealths their publick Trust defeat, While each his private Interest does pursue, But Heaven's and Britain's Monarch must be true. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. A Devout Exercise for every day of the Month, together with Medi∣tations upon the most important Truths of the Gospel, translated from the last Edition of the Original, enlarged by the Author. Sir Tho. Moor's Vtopia in English. All sorts of Law-Books printed for, and sold by George Powel over against Lincolns-Inn Gate.
