W647 11981443 51854
LETTERS AND POEMS, AMOROUS AND GALLANT. LONDON Printed for Iacob Tonson at the Iudge's-Head in Chancery-Lane near Fleet-Street. 1692.
PREFACE. IT has been so usual among modern Au∣thors to write Prefaces, that a Man is thought rude to his Reader, who does not give him some Account before hand, of what he is to expect in the Book. That which may make somewhat of this kind more necessary in my Case, than others is, That a great part of this Collection consists of familiar Letters, which sort of Writings some Learned Persons among us have thought unfit to be publish'd. It must be confess'd, indeed, that a great Beauty of Letters does often consist in little Passages of private Conversation, and references to particu∣lar Matters, that can be understood by none but those to whom they are written: But to draw a general Conclusion from thence, That fami∣liar Letters can please none, but those very Per∣sons, is to conclude against the common Experi∣ence of all the World; since besides the great ap∣plauses have been given the Letters of Cicero
and Pliny among the Romans; we see no Book has been better received among the Spa∣niards, than the Letters of Guevara; or a∣mong the French, than those of Voiture and Balsac: Not to mention the Italians, among whom there has been hardly any considerable Man, who has not publish'd Letters with good Success. What may have contributed very much to the kind Reception these things have met, is, that there is no sort of Writing so neces∣sary for People to understand as this. A Man may have a great deal of Wit, without being able to write Verses or make Harangues; and may live in very good repute, without having occasion of doing either. But a Man can hard∣ly live in the World, without being able to write Letters. There is no state of Life in which a Faculty of that kind is not requisite; and there are few Days pass, in which a Man has not oc∣casion to make use of it. The Stile of Letters ought to be free, easy and natural; as near approaching to familiar Con∣versation as possible. The two best Qualities in Conversation, are good Humour and good Breeding; those Letters are therefore certainly
the best that shew the most of those two Quali∣ties. There are some Men so surly, so ill na∣tur'd, and so ill-bred, that tho' we can hardly deny 'em to have Wit; yet we can say, at least, that we are sorry they have it. And indeed, as their Wit is troublesome to other People, so I can hardly imagine of what great use it can be to themselves. For if the end of Wit, be not to render one self agreeable, I shall scarce envy 'em any other use they can make of it. The second Part of this Collection consists of Amorous Verses. Those who are conversant with the Writings of the Antients, will observe a great difference between what they, and the Mo∣derns have publish'd upon this Subject. The occasions upon which the Poems of the former are written, are such as happen to every Man almost that is in Love; and the Thoughts such, as are natural for every Man in love to think. The Moderns on the other hand have sought out for Occasions, that none meet with, but them∣selves; and fill their Verses with thoughts that are surprizing and glittering, but not tender, passionate, or natural to a Man in Love.
To judge which of these two are in the right; we ought to consider the end that People pro∣pose in writing Love-Verses: And that I take not to be the getting Fame or Admiration from the World, but the obtaining the Love of their Mi∣stress; and the best way I conceive to make her love you, is to convince her that you love her. Now this certainly is not to be done by forc'd Conceits, far fetch'd Similes, and shining Points; but by a true and lively Representation of the Pains and Thoughts attending such a Passion. Si vis me flere, dolendum est: (laedent. Primum ipsitibi, tunc tua me infortunia. I would assoon believe a Widow in great grief for her Husband, because I saw her dance a Corant about his Coffin, as believe a Man in Love with his Mistress for his writing such Verses, as some great Modern Wits have done upon theirs. I am satisfied that Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid, were in love with their Mistresses, while they upbraid them, quar∣rel with them, threaten them, and forswear
them; but I confess I cannot believe Petrarch in Love with his, when he writes Conceits upon her Name, her Gloves, and the place of her Birth. I know it is natural for a Lover, in Transports of Iealousie, to treat his Mistress with all the Violence imaginable; but I cannot think it na∣tural for a Man, who is much in Love, to a∣muse himself with such Trifles as the other. I am pleas'd with Tibullus, when he says, he could live in a Desart with his Mistress, where never any Humane Foost-steps appear'd, be∣cause, I doubt not but he really thinks what he says; but I confess I can hardly for bear laugh∣ing when Petrarch tells us, he could live without any other sustenance than his Mistresses Looks. I can very easily believe a Man may love a Wo∣man so well, as to desire no Company but hers; but I can never believe a Man can love a Wo∣man so well, as to have no need of Meat and Drink, if he may look upon her. The first is a Thought so natural for a Lover, that there is no Man really in Love, but thinks the same thing; the other is not the thought of a Man in Love, but of a Man who would impose upon us with a pretended Love (and that indeed
very grosly too) while he had really none at all. It would be endless to pursue this Point; and any Man who will but give himself the trouble to compare what the Ancients and Moderns have said upon the same Occasions, will soon perceive the advantage the former have over the others. I have chosen to mention Petrarch only, as be∣ing by much the most famous of all the Moderns who have written Love-Verses: And it is, indeed, the great Reputation which he has gotten, that has given Encouragement to this false sort of Wit in the World: for People seeing the great Credit he had, and has, indeed, to this day, not only in Italy, but over all Europe; have satisfied themselves with the Imitation of him, never enquiring whether the way he took was the right or not. There are no Modern Writers, perhaps, who have succeeded better in Love-Verses than the English; and it is indeed just that the fairest Ladies should inspire the best Poets. Never was there a more copious Fancy or greater reach of Wit, than what appears in Dr. Donne; nothing can be more gallant or gentile than the
Poems of Mr. Waller; nothing more gay or sprightly than those of Sir Iohn Suckling; and nothing fuller of Variety and Learning than Mr. Cowley's. However, it may be ob∣serv'd, that among all these, that Softness, Tenderness, and Violence of Passion, which the Ancients thought most proper for Love-Ver∣ses, is wanting: and at the same time that we must allow Dr. Donne to have been a very great Wit; Mr. Waller a very gallant Wri∣ter; Sir Iohn Suckling a very gay one, and Mr. Cowley a great Genius; yet metbinks I can hardly fancy any one of them to have been a very great Lover. And it grieves me that the Ancients, who could never have handsomer Women than we have, should nevertheless be so much more in Love than we are. But it is probable the great Reason of this may be the Cruelty of our Ladies; for a Man must be imprudent in∣deed to let his Passion take very deep root, when he has no reason to expect any sort of re∣turn to it. And if it be so, there ought to be a Petition made to the Fair, that they would be pleas'd sometimes to abate a little of their Rigor, for the propagation of good Verse. I do not
mean, that they should confer their Favours up∣on none but Men of Wit: that would be too great a Confinement indeed: but that they would admit them upon the same foot with other Peo∣ple; and if they please now and then to make the Experiment, I fancy they will find Entertainment enough from the very Variety of it. There are three sorts of Poems that are pro∣per for Love: Pastorals, Elegies, and Ly∣rick Verses; under which last I comprehend all Songs, Odes, Sonnets, Madrigals and Stanza's. Of all these, Pastoral is the lowest, and, upon that account, perhaps most proper for Love; since it is the Nature of that Passion to render the Soul soft and humble. These three sorts of Poems ought to differ, not only in their Numbers, but in the Designs, and in every Thought of them. Though we have no Diffe∣rence between the Verses of Pastoral and Ele∣gy in the Modern Languages; yet the Num∣bers of the first ought to be looser and not so sonorous as the other; the Thoughts more simple, more easy and more humble. The Design ought to be the representing the
Life of a Shepherd, not only by talking of Sheep and Fields, but by showing us the Truth, Sincerity and Innocence that accompa∣nies that sort of Life. For though I know our Masters, Theocritus and Virgil, have not al∣ways conform'd in this Point of Innocence; Theocritus, in his Daphnis, having made his Love too wanton, and Virgil, in his Ale∣xis, plac'd his Passion upon a Boy; yet (if we may be allow'd to censure those whom we must always reverence) I take both those things to be Faults in their Poems, and should have been better pleas'd with the Alexis, if it had been made to a Woman; and with the Daphnis, if he had made his Shepherds more modest. When I give Humility and Modesty as the Character of Pastoral, it is not, however, but that a Shepherd may be allow'd to boast of his Pipe, his Songs, his Flocks, and to shew a Contempt of his Rival, as we see both Theocritus and Virgil do. But this must be still in such a manner, as if the Occasion offer'd it self, and was not sought, and proceeded rather from the Violence of the Shepherd's Passion, than any na∣tural Pride or Malice in him.
There ought to be the same difference observ'd between Pastorals and Elegies, as between the Life of the Country and the Court. In the first, Love ought to be represented as among Shep∣herds, in the other as among Gentlemen. They ought to be smooth, clear, tender and passionate. The Thoughts may be bold, more gay, and more elevated than in Pastoral. The Passions they represent, either more Gallant or more Violent, and less innocent than the others. The subjects of them, Prayers, Praises, Expostulations, Quar∣rels, Reconcilements, Threatnings, Iealousies, and, in fine, all the natural Effects of Love. Lyricks may be allow'd to handle all the same subjects with Elegy; but to do it how∣ever in a different manner. An Elegy ought to be so entirely one thing, and every Verse ought so to depend upon the other, that they should not be able to subsist alone: Or, to make use of the words of a My Lord Mulgrave. great Modern Critick, there must be —a just Coherence made Between each Thought, and the whole Model laid; So right, that every step may higher rise, Like goodly Mountains, till they reach the Skies.
Lyricks on the other hand, tho' they ought to make one Body as well as the other, yet may consist of Parts that are entire of themselves. It being a Rule in Modern Languages, that every Stanza ought to make up a compleat sence, without running into the other. Frequent Sen∣tences which are accounted Faults in Elegies, are Beauties here. Besides this, Malherb, and the French Poets after him, have made it a Rule in the Stanzas of six Lines, to make a pause at the third; and in those of ten Lines, at the third and the seventh. And it must be con∣fest that this exactness renders them much more Musical and Harmonious; tho' they have not always been so Religious in observing the latter Rule as the former. But I am engaged in a very vain, or a very foolish Design: Those who are Criticks, it wou'd be a presumption in me to pretend I cou'd in∣struct; and to instruct those who are not, at the same time I write my self, is (if I may be al∣low'd to apply another Man's Simile) like selling Arms to an Enemy in time of War. Tho' there ought, perhaps, to be more indulgence shewn to things of Love and Gallantry, than any
others; because they are generally written when People are young, and intended for Ladies who are not supposed to be very old; and all young People, especially of the fair Sex, are more taken with the liveliness of Fancy, than the correctness of Iudgment. It may be also observ'd, that to write of Love well, a Man must be really in Love; and to correct his Writings well, he must be out of Love again. I am well enough satisfi'd, I may be in Circumstances of writing of Love; but I am almost in despair of ever being in Cir∣cumstances of correcting it. This I hope may be a Reason for the Fair and the Young, to pass over some of the Faults; and as for the Grave and Wise, all the Favour I shall beg of them is, that they wou'd not read'em. Things of this Nature, are calculated only for the former. If Love-Verses work upon the Ladies, a Man will not trouble himself with what the Cri∣ticks say of them; and if they do not, all the Commendations the Criticks can give him, will make but very little amends. All I shall say for these trifles is, That I pretend not to vye with any Man whatsoever. I doubt not but there are several now living, who are able to
write better upon all Subjects, than I am upon any one: But I will take the boldness to say, That there is no one Man among them all, who shall be readier to acknowledge his own Faults, or to do Iustice to the Merits of o∣ther People.
LETTERS Gallant & Amorous. LETTER I. To two Masques. THough I cannot boast much of Particularity to the Person I love, yet as to the Love it self, I may safely say, It is one of the most particular under the Sun. Others think it enough to fall in love with a Lady after having seen her. I am in love with two, without having ever seen either: Not that I would willingly ad∣mit two Tyrants into my Heart; but
though one of you may perhaps be Monarch there, yet neither you nor I knowing which it is, the matter must rest in doubt 'till another opportunity. For he who condemned Paris as too bold a Man, in daring to judge of the three Goddesses Beauties, when he saw 'em naked, would have thought me a bold one indeed, if I shou'd pretend to make a Iudgment between two Ladies in Masques. Consider a little under what difficulties you make me labour: If I shou'd commend the Colour of your Hair, and it was all the while deep red; the smoothness and delicacy of your Skins, when they were rough and tawney; the fineness of your Shapes, while you were stuck up within Iron Bodice; the brightness of your Eyes, and they shou'd prove blear'd and squinting. Do but imagine when I had done this, what sort of an Effect it wou'd have upon you. Whatever Inconveniences of this nature happen,
it is your own Faults; for my part I leave this encountring with Helmets over their Faces, to Sir Amadis and his Knights Errant; the way of Duel∣ling is alter'd, People do not only encounter barefac'd, but strip when they go to it. As for this way, I can assure you, I find it not in the least fair; and had rather be in love with the most hard-hearted Beauty living, than continue in this uncertain state, and nei∣ther know what I love, why I love, nor whether I love, or no. Take pity, Ladies, upon a Lover in distress; clear the Business to me, and let me know if I am in good earnest, when I profess my self Your most passionate Admirer.
LETTER II. To one of the former. IT is by Faith alone that I fansie you the most charming, but I find by Experience you are one of the most unreasonable Ladies under the Sun. I concluded I had done the boldest Action in the World, to declare a Passion to two Masques; but you, Madam, set up a Title of your own, and are not satisfied without Particu∣larity, and Constancy. Your Charms I confess, Madam, as far as I saw of them, are very great: The Masque was very good Genoa Velvet; the Gloves very good Blois Gloves, and the Hackney Coach, for ought I know, lin'd with very good green Plush. Now, Madam, though so far I do stedfastly believe, yet to fall constant∣ly
and particularly in love with Masques, Gloves, or Hackney-Coaches, is what I do not find a Precedent for, in any of the French Romances; and being naturally diffident of my self, I shou'd be loth to begin a new sort of Gallantry, without knowing how it wou'd take. Consider, Madam, a little better upon the reasonableness of your Request; for Particularity and Constancy are very hardly to be an∣swer'd for, at our Years. It is, I doubt not, Madam, in your power to blow my Love up to that heighth whenever you please; and to confess a truth to you, I have a very great Stock of Particularity and Constancy lying upon my Hands at this time, and know not how to apply it. I have all the reason in the World to imagine it is kept for you; but however, Ma∣dam, it wou'd be necessary to have one view of you, before I can be po∣sitive in that point. I am satisfied in
my Conscience that I have done all my Duty in the thing; let it lie at your Door if the Humour break off; for my part I cannot imagine how you will be able to answer it to all the World, if you shou'd, for want of discove∣ring your self, lose the most constant and most faithful Lover under the Sun. LETTER III. To the same. Constancy and Fidelity are, with∣out doubt, great Vertues, though not always great Charms in a Mistress; but as to your Invisibility, it is a Qua∣lity that does not please me at all. I grant you, Madam, it is a pretty aëre∣al sort of Beauty, and may do very well for spiritual Lovers; but for me, Madam, who am a little embarass'd
with matter, and who generally car∣ry a Body of six foot long about with me, it wou'd be convenient to have some more corporeal Accomplish∣ments. Descend, Madam, in this case, to your Lover's Capacity, and make use of his Senses to represent you as charming as without doubt you are, to his Imagination. For though I must confess Fancy has been very kind to you in this point, yet it wou'd be convenient to call in the Help of the Eyes to strengthen the E∣vidence: I expect therefore from your next Letter, an appointment where I may meet you in a visible manner. These are the only Terms upon which I can treat any farther with you; for tho' you write the most agreeably in the World, yet you must certainly own, that after having been monstrously in love for a whole Week together, it is very reasonable that a Man shou'd know at last with whom it is.
LETTER IV. To the same. YEs really, Madam, I think you are in the right of it; Hanging and Drowning are such vulgar ways of Dying, that for my part I wou'd rather live a thousand Years, than make use of either. Then, Madam, they are the most inconvenient Me∣thods in the World; Drowning will spoil your Clothes, and Hanging your Complexion; besides several other things that might be said to dissuade you from it, but that I know a word to the Wise is enough. I am of Opi∣nion you had better deferr all sort of dying 'till another Opportunity; though if you are positive in it, I wou'd rather recommend Mr. Boyle's Air-Pump as a newer Invention; or being poisoned
in Perfumes, as somewhat that looks pleasant enough. But to be less se∣rious, Madam, make no doubt of your own Perfections, and reckon that in having me, you have the most reasonable Lover, of an unreasonable Lover, in the World. I confess were I to form a Beauty to my self, she shou'd be—let me consider a little upon it; she shou'd be—I protest, Madam, I know not what she shou'd be: monstrously in love with me, that is certain; for the rest, I shou'd trust the Stars, I think I may say, without Flattery, I love my self so well, that I can love any body else that does so too; and shou'd preferr that single Beauty, of an immoderate Pas∣sion for me in a Mistress, to all the other Charms in the World, as Bayes does the single beating of Armies in his Hero, to all the Moral Vertues put together. If you can answer for this Charm, Madam, take no care
for any other; he must be unreaso∣nable indeed, who is not satisfied with that, in a Lady of Sixteen. LETTER V. To the fair Unbeliever. ST. Ierome says, (St. Ierome I must confess is a very odd beginning of a Billet doux) That a Man who can with patience suffer himself to be call'd Heretick, ought not to be e∣steem'd a good Christian: And in common Account you see, one who is called Coward, if he does not resent the Affront, shall always be thought such. As my Provocations are much greater than either of these, so if my Indignation were answerable to 'em, you cou'd not expect to be forgiven by me, even in the Article of Death: For after all People can say of Here∣ticks
and Cowards, they will allow 'em to be Men; but by your Refle∣ctions upon me, you wou'd degrade me from that Rank, without allow∣ing me any place among the infe∣riour Creatures. Had you call'd me Brute, or Beast, I had not been so zealous in my own Iustification: Dai∣ly Experience convinces us, That Men who have no more Understanding than Horses, or Mules, provided they have all the other Qualifications of those Noble Animals, may be acce∣ptable enough to some or other of the fair Sex; but want of Virility is an Imputation that will cut a Man off from all sort of Communication with 'em. Had the Husbands or Old Women had this Opinion of me, I shou'd not have been so violent in my own Defence. Scandals, as well as Oaths, ought to be taken in the sense of those that impose 'em; I shou'd not be angry at a Turk, or
a Iew, for thinking me of their Reli∣gion; because whatever I thought it was what made them like me the bet∣ter; but this wou'd be no Reason to make me forgive a Christian for cal∣ling me so. In like manner, Madam, though I cou'd have pardon'd the Hus∣bands and Old Women for saying such a thing of me, yet I can very hardly pardon you for it. It were in vain to call Witnesses in this case, or turn you over to another hand for Satisfaction in that point, which can only properly be resolv'd by my self; and it were as vain to think to clear my self by Words from an Imputation that ought to be done by Actions; I shall therefore only challenge you to meet me at your own place and time; where I doubt not to give you full Sa∣tisfaction in this point, and convince you that I am not the Man (or rather indeed the No Man) that you take me
to be. In the mean time I shall re∣main your most Humble, (a Curse on that Humble) but I mean, Madam, Your most affectionate and passionate Lover and Servant. LETTER VI. I Have been waiting these three Months to tell you a thing that may be said in three Words; it is, I love you. I will grant you, Ma∣dam, that this is no necessary Rea∣son why you shou'd love me again; but you must grant me in recompence, That it is a very sufficient Reason why I shou'd tell you of it. I do not ex∣pect you shou'd write me a Letter in return to this, and therefore venture it without a Name: It is from your Eyes
alone, I shall attend my Answer. But, Madam, that we may not mistake one another in this point, and that I may not take for an Encouragement of my Passion, what you intend for a Dis∣couragement of it; I must tell you, That if you do not look upon me after this, I shall believe you are in love, and that makes you bashful: If you look angrily, I shall think it is to give me occasion to come and justifie my self; and if you look negligently, I shall conclude 'tis ma∣nagement to disguise the Amour from the World: In fine, Madam, I shall take nothing for a Refusal of my Heart, but looking very kindly upon me. But that you may not be mistaken in the Person who sends this, and imagine it to come from some Lord with a blue Garter, or white Staff, that comes from a Commoner with∣out either. I will describe my self so, as you may know me well enough
to encourage my Passion if you like it, but not so as to make a Trophie of me, if you do not. My Stature is somewhat above the ordinary; my Body neither very big, nor very small; my Hair light; my Eyes dark; and Love has not as yet made me either very lean, or very pale: My Humour is the most commodious for a Lover in the World, not so much enclin'd to Hanging or Drowning, perhaps, as some others; but for Passion and Constancy, no Man goes beyond me. If you will accept of a Heart with all these Qualifications, I offer you mine; if not, send it me back by the Penny-Post, if you know me by any other Title than that of Your most humble Servant.
LETTER VII. To the same. I Grant you, Madam, there are others who will love you as much as I; but are there any who will love you as little? Yes, Madam, I under stand very well what I say, Will they love you as little? for that is the only difficulty you have to apprehend. There is no question but a Man who is possess'd of the most charming-Creature in the Universe, will be con∣stant to her as long as she pleases; but it is a great Question if he will part with her as soon as she pleases. This is the Rock upon which those Ladies split, who will admit of none but constant Lovers; not considering that the Women are as changeable as the Men can be for the Lives of them
and consider, pray, into what pretty Circumstances a Lady brings herself, who is plagu'd with an obstinate old Lover, when she is passionately in love with a new one. I know not what those Crimes are the Lady you tell me lays to my Charge, but I fansie an importunate Perseverance in Love of the same Woman, is not one of the number: And whenever you please to make the Experiment, as the least sign in the World is sufficient after these Preliminaries, to make me a most passionate Lover; so the least sign you give me afterwards of any new Amour, shall make me lay a∣side that Title, for the less-ambitious one of Your most humble Servant.
LETTER VIII. To a Lady who had spoken against him. THere may have been other Men, perhaps, besides my self, who have fallen in love with a Woman they did not know; but for a Man to do it for no other reason than her decla∣ring against him, is, I believe, an Honour that has been reserv'd for your humble Servant. They tell me, Madam, you are so far from liking me your self, that you will not believe any Body else can: That you find nothing agreeable in my Person, from the Crown of my Head, to the Soal of my Foot: That for my Wit, (for every body, Madam, carries somewhat about them which they call Wit) it is all Affecta∣tion: That I am an Abstract of Vanity: That I am so much in love
with my self, that it is impossible for me to be so with any Body else. These things, Madam, that might have put some People into Anger, have put me into Love: For as those who are naturally peevish, will be angry at People, let them endeavour never so much to please 'em; so we who are naturally amorous, cannot avoid being in love with a Lady, let her take never so much pains to anger us. And indeed, Madam, did People ground their Passions upon Reason, you have given me one of the most reasonable Causes to love you in the World: For as there is no Man of Wit but knows himself to be a Fool, so he ought to have an Opinion of their Iudgments, who find it out as well as himself. It is reported as an Instance of the Bravery of the Amazons, That they wou'd never marry a Man, 'till they had fought with him first; and if he beat 'em very much, he
might expect to be loved very much by them. Now I, Madam, who profess as great a Veneration for Wit, as the Amazons had for Courage, cannot have so good a Reason for Love, as your having exercis'd your Wit upon me: Tho' it is possible you may attribute my Passion to another Cause, and as you think I love nothing beside my self, may have some kindness for you, because you are never like to be my Rival; however, assure your self, Madam, it is no such thing, but knowing the worst you can say of me to be true, and having a natural Affection for Truth, Wit, and Women, (you will think a Man a very general Lover, that can love Truth, Wit, and Women, at the same time) I must needs be infinitely in love with you, in whom I find 'em altogether. Be not however deluded into a better Opinion of me, by what any body can say; for as it is only your hating me that makes
me love you, as soon as that ceases, I am afraid my Love will do so too. As you therefore value my Kindness, take heed of having any for me; and satisfie your self, That as long as you continue to think me a silly, idle, conceited Fop, I shall continue to be, with all the Passion imaginable, Madam, Your, &c. LETTER IX. To a Masqu'd Lady. THo' I doubt not, Madam, but you have made the most considerable Conquests under the Sun, yet give me leave to say, You never made any so extraordinary as this before: You have subdu'd, with∣out
the Conqueror's common Vanity, of making your self known, and have gain'd the most absolute Victory in the World, without as much as sheahing your Face. I, who never knew a Woman cou'd overcome me, am now overcome by I know not who: And can both boast of the greatest Passion, and greatest Faith in Nature together: The seeing you, which is the reason of other People's Love, might, for ought I know, destroy mine; for I have rais'd Idea's of you, to which it is very diffi∣cult for any thing in Nature to ar∣rive. I imagine you the most charm∣ing Creature in the Universe, and at the same time fansie you to be some∣what more than I imagine. I have dress'd you up in all the most different shapes of Natute. In whatever you appear, it has been always the most amiable: And after having supposed you Maid, Wife, and Widow by turns, I 'find I can love you infinitely, be you any
one of them. Did I know in which state you were, I wou'd certainly make love to all of it, 'till I arriv'd at you; and for want of that, I am forc'd to confine my self to Womankind. I leave it to your own Conscience, Madam, whe∣ther you can leave the most constant Lover in Nature, in this Condition; tho' if it feel no remorse for the last Disappointment, I shall very hard∣ly ever trust it more: Yet however extravagant my Passion is, do not ap∣prehend that I shou'd make any mali∣cious Reflections on you to the World; let my other Vertues be what they will, my Fidelity is unquestionable: And assure your self, there is no Man breathing less apt to tell a Secret that he does not know, than, Madam, Your, &c.
LETTER X. To a Friend. SIR, FOr Friend I can hardly call you, since under that disguise, you have done me one of the grea∣test injuries in the World; and it is vain for me to guard my Territo∣ries against the malicious Designs of Enemies and Rivals; when you, whom I never took for either, have more prejudiced me in an Amour, than they cou'd with all their Forces together. But that I may not condemn you without a Cause, nor conclude you guilty 'till I hear what you can say in your own Iustification, I will give you a plain account of the Business. Meeting one of the Ladies last Night, with whom I am in love, she began a
discourse of Lovers, wherein she shew'd the many inconveniencies that atten∣ded the having a Man of Wit in that Capacity. I, who do not naturally love to dispute with a fair Lady, (especially in a Cause where I thought my self no more concern'd than if she had talk'd of Iews or Mahometans) agreed with her in all she said; when she turn'd briskly upon me, and told me, For that Reason a Woman must have a care of having any thing to do with me. I told her that was acting after the manner of some late Iudges; call a thing Treason with∣out Law, and then hang a Man for it without Proof: That I appeal'd to all the World for my Innocence in the matter, and defied my greatest Enemies to bring any Evidence of my guilt. She told me she had it from such a one, who had it from another; and that, in fine, the original Author of this Calumny was your self. Now
tho' I grant you that some People might have said such a thing as this, out of Inadvertency; yet I can hard∣ly believe a Man of your Prudence to have done it upon that account. You who very well know, That to com∣mend a Man for a Wit to the Women, is like commending him for a good Protestant to the Fathers of the Inqui∣sition; and he that reported me an Eunuch among 'em, cou'd not do it upon a more malicious account. They love a tame, easie, governable Fool, and fansie all Wits ill-natur'd and proud: Have not you often told me so? and after that to put me upon 'em for one! Well, Sir, I am a Gentle∣man; nor shall I pass by such a thing as this, without satisfaction. I expect therefore you shou'd either give it me under your Hand, That you never said any such thing of me; or if you really said it, That you shou'd go immediately to the Person to whom
you did it; and assure 'em you were mis∣inform'd in the thing, and that to your knowledge Ireland it self never bred a more tame, easie fool than I am: for here lies the greatest danger; I have gotten a Rival of that Country, and you know how difficult it is to succeed in a Contest with one of them, when want of Wit to give is the preference. After all, methinks if you wou'd be hearty in the thing, you may bring me out of these Difficulties: I know you have Wit enough to convince 'em that I have none; and if the worst come to the worst, it is but carrying you to 'em, to shew the difference. In that hopes, I resume the Title of Your, &c.
LETTER XI. To a Lady in the Country, who was go∣ing to be married. AFter having written you a Letter upon your first going down, I have never dar'd to venture one since, lest I shou'd be mistaken in my Ad∣dress; and for ought I know, to write to you now by the Title of Mrs—, may be as uncivil as to treat the King with the Title of Prince of Orange. However, Madam, blame not me for it, since we are here in perfect ignorance of the mat∣ter. We had very positive news one while of your being married; and as positive after, that it was not yet done; which some here took, I can assure you, for a great Act of Mercy. Half a dozen Sparks of your Acquaintance
have provided themselves either with Love-Songs, or Epithalamiums, to send you, as occasion shall require, without being yet able to know which wou'd be most proper: And here are half a dozen more, who have had Halters about their Necks, ever since the Report of your going to be mar∣ried; for they are resolv'd to be ready upon the first notice, That the same Post which brings the news of your Wedding, may carry back that of their Deaths. 'Tis true, Madam, I took the boldness to advise 'em not to be over-hasty in the Affair, since they might do it afterwards at their own Convenience; and Experiments of this nature were difficult enough to correct, when they were once ill done. But all I could say was in vain; they are positive in the matter, and half a dozen of the handsomest Trees in the Park, are mark'd out for the Execution. I must confess, I endea∣vour'd
to divert 'em as much as I cou'd from chusing that place, for the Benefit of the Company that walks there; I told 'em it was contrary to all precedent, to make use of Elms, or Lime-Trees, since the Willow had time out of mind been reserv'd for that use; and that a Lover who did not hang himself according to form, had as good never hang himself at all. They answer'd me very surli∣ly, (though very truly too I must own) That it was not my Business: That it was a very hard case People might not hang themselves without asking my leave; and as they wou'd not hin∣der me whenever I was going about such a thing, so they took it very ill that I shou'd pretend to hinder them. I must confess, Madam, I cou'd say very little in the case; and you may believe I had no great mind to en∣ter upon a Quarrel with People in
their Circumstances; but I thought the acquainting you with it, was a Duty that became Your, &c. LETTER XII. To a Lady that ask'd him for his Heart. THo' to tell a Man that you will dispose of his Heart to one who shall use it ill, is but a very small Encouragement for him to part with it; yet since you say you have a particular fancy for mine, I cannot refuse you such a trifle as that, upon whatever terms you demand it. I have enclosed it therefore in this Letter, and trusted it to the Penny-Post, lest your Generosity shou'd have made you give a Messenger more for the bring∣ing it, than the thing it self is really
worth. I wish, Madam, it were bet∣ter for your sake; and can assure you, That were it the most moish one in the World, it shou'd be at your Ser∣vice. As it is, Madam, I am afraid you will think it very old fashion'd, and too much given to those anti∣quated Qualities, Constancy and Fi∣delity. It is probable the Lady for whom you intend it, may despise those Things, and think a Heart of that sort as ridiculous as a Lover in a short Cloak, slash Sleeves, pinck'd Doublet, and trunk Hose. But let her not be prejudic'd against things for their first appearances; I have seen a very awkward Beginner, come to Dance very well at last; and it is not impossible but by good ma∣nagement the Heart may be brought quite off those disagreeable Qualities. You may please to tell her, That it having been bred up very tenderly 'till now, it wou'd be convenient to treat
it a little kindlier than ordinary at first, lest it shou'd be apt to run away: She shou'd encourage his Sighs now and then with a kind Whisper; and when she sees the Fire grow a little faint, let her give but one or two kind Looks, and it will blaze out afresh. Having been troubled with an extra∣ordinary Fever, since it was in the presence of a certain Lady, it ought not to be exposed to the open Air, for fear of catching cold; she may conveniently enough confine it to her Bed-chamber, where it may be of great use rightly manag'd, and wake her in a morning with half a dozen deep-fetch'd Sighs, better than any Larum-Clock. You see, Madam, what Confidence I have in your Con∣duct, since I trust you to dispose of a Heart for me, that I have never been able to dispose of my self. You will think, perhaps, it is but making a Vertue of Necessity, and surrendring
up a Fort which I am not able to hold out against you. However, Madam, the fiercest Conquerors are kind to Garrisons that yield upon the first Sum∣mons; and as I know your Power to be greater than any of theirs; so I doubt not but your Vertues are answerable to 'em. All the favour I shall beg for my Heart, is, That it may be treated as a Prisoner of War, and that I may have the liberty of keeping a Correspondence with it, du∣ring its Confinement. To show you I intend nothing but what is fair, I am satisfied you shou'd read all the Letters I write; and that none shou'd come to me, but by your Approba∣tion. And indeed you need not fear this making any escape; for if I can guess at all at his Humour, he will preferr such a Captivity to all the Li∣berty in the World; and will not be so proud of the Titles of Prince, or Con∣queror, as that of your Prisoner & Slave.
LETTER XIII. To the same. If streaming Blood my fatal Letter stain, Imagine ere you read, the Writer slain: One Hand the Sword, and one the Pen employs, And in my Lap the ready Paper lies. I Have been these six Hours in de∣bate, Whether I shou'd stab my self, or write to you first? At last, Madam, I have determin'd on the lat∣ter: For I consider that if you shou'd hear a Fellow mounted upon a Cricket, singing some doleful Bal∣lad of my Death, you wou'd be at a loss to know the cause of so sad an Accident; and, in an Age so inquisi∣tive as ours, wou'd take it much bet∣ter to have a relation of the thing
from the first hand, than be put to the trouble of stopping to enquire of it in the Street, or trusting to the Fi∣delity of a Grub-street Historian. The Business then in short, Madam, is this: Coming home about Twelve a Clock last Night, I found a Letter, to tell me, That I shou'd meet you in—at Five a Clock in the Afternoon. Now, Madam, I am really so sensible of my guilt of disappointing you in this manner, that after having arraign'd, judg'd, and condemn'd my self for it, I am just now upon the point of Executi∣on. I must confess, some People have advis'd me to the contrary, and tell me you cannot take it ill that I did not meet you, when you know how late it was before I receiv'd the Letter. But I told them, That after having written to you, I ought never to have stirr'd from home, but staid in expectati∣on of an answer. For tho' it was urg'd in my Defence, That I had some great
Business which call'd me out; and that I had little hopes you shou'd have granted me the Honour of meeting you so soon; yet this Excuse does not satisfie me in the least: For why a Devil shou'd a Man pretend to make Love, when he has great Business, and little Hope? This Consideration has absolutely determin'd me for a sud∣den Execution; and whatever you may think upon the first sight of this Letter, yet before you can have read it out, you may assure your self I shall be no more Your, &c. Postscript. I have a thing just now come into my Head, that may possibly make me deferr my Execution, till I hear farther from you. Different People having different Tastes; and there being as many ways of killing Lovers, as there
are of dressing Eggs, it wou'd anger me very much if I shou'd stab my self for your sake, when you wou'd rather have me hang'd or drown'd. LETTER XIV. To the same. IT is well, Madam, you prepa∣red me for a Disappointment in your Letter, otherwise, I confess, I am very impatient under those Cir∣cumstances. I hope it was not in re∣venge for my missing the other Assi∣gnation; if it be, reckon we are up∣on the square now. You will cer∣tainly grant, you have all the reason in the World to make me amends for this; and it is with a great deal of im∣patience I expect a more favourable Opportunity. In recompence, you shall dispose of me, in whatever manner
you please; and I am sure you must allow, That if I am not the most passionate Lover in the World, I am at least the most convenient: For whenever you have a mind to give Sir—, or Mr.— opportu∣nities of saying soft things, you shall see that I manage the other Party to your advantage, as naturally as can be. Then, Madam, if after this, you have any occasion to make 'em jealous again, there is no Man in the World fitter for such an Employment than my self. You may make use of me, Ma∣dam, in any of these Capacities, (but still make use of me) and you will not only oblige your self, but Your, &c.
LETTER XV. To the same. CErtainly the Lady who accus'd me of Indifference last night, has the least reason in the World to do so. Is it indifference to be always fol∣lowing her up-and-down? Is it indiffe∣rence to shun all Company for hers? Is it indifference to gaze upon her with all the tenderness in Nature? These are but the outward Signs; but, oh! cou'd she look within, and accuse of Indifference a Heart that burns with the most violent Passion that ever was! It is true, Madam, the rest of the World may, with justice enough, tax me with it: For as there is but one Person living, who can make me otherwise; so Prudence ob∣liges me to manage things so, as to
disguise my Passion from all the World beside. And is there no return due to this, but a Resolution to deceive me? Well, Madam; it is some com∣fort to me however, That if you can but for one half hour delude me into an Opinion that I am belov'd by you, that short Cheat will be a grea∣ter Satisfaction, than all Womankind can grant me beside. LETTER XVI. To the same. I See I am destin'd to destruction! Why, O Heaven! did I ever see her? Or since I did, why did any Body else? Had I never, I cou'd ne∣ver have been happy; and by ha∣ving seen you, I am the most miserable Wretch breathing. These will appear Mysteries, perhaps, to you; and if
you think me distracted when I writ this, you will think right: Love, Rage, Iealousie, and Despair, are tear∣ing my Soul in pieces. If you have any Compassion for a Man whom you have rendred the most miserable in the World, give me an Opportu∣nity of meeting you to day, though it be but for one half hour. I wou'd not have you come to the Walks after this Rain, for fear you shou'd catch cold; and a meeting at Shops or In∣dian Houses, may make People suspi∣cious. Though I die if I see you not, yet I wou'd rather do so, than bring your Health or Reputation in any danger. Think, oh think upon some way of satisfying my Request; and do not apprehend that this Distraction which I show you, shou'd appear to any body else, to your prejudice. I wish every one were as careful of you as I am; yet I lye, I do not wish it; for to be so, they must love you
at the same rate; and I had rather al∣low 'em all the Favours you can grant, than that. Adieu—I am—alas I know not what I am, but that I am miserable, and that I am Yours. LETTER XVII. To the same. I Think I have taken all the ways imaginable to convince you that I love you above the World; how∣ever, Madam, you shall see I will yet do more, which is, never to see you again. It is true, Mrs.—told me, I might come to you to day; but she told me at the same time, That you thought it improper for me to come so often. Had you any kindness for me, you cou'd not have
refus'd my Visits upon so cold a Rea∣son as their being improper; and if you have not, you cannot be pleas'd that I make 'em at all. You shall see therefore, Madam, how much I value your Quiet above my own, since I engage my Word to you (and I am sure, Madam, neither you, nor any Woman in the World, can say I have ever broken my Word with 'em) that I will never make you another Visit, or come into any place where you are, except you give me very good assurance that my Company will be more acceptable to you, than I have reason to believe it has been of late.
LETTER XVIII. To the same. THat this parting has not been sought of my side, Heaven can be my Witness; and how little satis∣faction I take in it, every Vein in my Heart can testifie. No; I tremble, I am all confusion, and I die when I think upon it; and it is only in com∣plaisance to you, that I have resolv'd it. I see you are picking little Occa∣sions of quarrelling with me; I see you are uneasie when I am with you, and I see you do not make a return that is suitable to a Passion so violent and so sincere as mine is. Heavens! Madam, what wou'd you have me do? Shou'd I come to put you out of Humour? Or wou'd you have me ap∣pear as a Spectacle of your Rigour to
your more-favour'd Servants. No, Madam, I had too much tenderness for you, to give you any disturbance; and give me leave to say, I have not so mean a Spirit as to follow any Woman, when I have reason to be∣lieve she thinks me troublesome, how difficult soever it may be to quit her. Since you command it, I shall not fail of waiting upon you once more, before we part for ever.
On the Author of a Dialogue con∣cerning Women, pretended to be writ in defence of the Sex. NEar Coven-Garden Theatre, where you know Poets their Sence, Players their Shapes do shew, There is a Clubb of Criticks of the Pit, Who do themselves admire for Men of Wit; And lo! an arbitrary Power assume On Plays and Ladies both to pass their Doom; Censure all things and Persons, Priest and Prince, And judge them by the Standard of their Sence: But scan these Sparks, or by their Words or Mien, You'll find them Fop without, and Fool with∣in.
One of these Brats dress'd up in shape of Satyr, Comes forth to be the Ladies Vindicator: And since for Chivalry he claims no War∣rant, Instead of Knight sets up for Poet Er∣rant. Bless us! said I, what mighty Hero's here? He thunders so, 'tis dangerous to come near. The beauteous Sex may set their Hearts at rest; Of all their Patrons, sure this is the best. This great dead-doing Champion of the Quill, Will all the Fry of lewd Lampooners kill; Then to begin with Dryden's dreadful Name, Shou'd mark out something of no common Fame. But when the boasted Matter I had read, I found my Expectation was misled,
And that the Poet, though he does pre∣tend To do them Iustice, is no Woman's Friend. Misogynes is made to shoot with Ball, Philogynes allow'd no charge at all. And howsoever he disguise the matter, To publish the First Part, be writ the latter. He that but strictly marks the whole De∣sign, May trace the Prefacer in every Line; And tho' he did not own the wanton Ape, He nurs'd the Cub, and lick'd it into shape. And, Ladies, now without the help of Day, You may discern who does the Weapon sway. And brandishes his Pen against your Credit; To Mr. Eat-finger himself that did it. He that sits silent in his Wits defence, Whose Mouth is fill'd with Fist instead of Sence; Or else he crams his Hand into his Iaws, Like Russian Bears that live upon their Paws.
At Coffee-House among the Men of Worth, He goggles like a Quaker holding forth. Like an Endymion he can court the Moon, And bark at her bright Glories when h'as done; Or like the Mouse in Fable he can plead, He has deserv'd t'aspire to Princess Bed, 'Till for his daring Arrogance he's spurn'd, And all his fop-Pretensions over-turn'd. Then like the little Vermin squeaks and dies, Or prints a Book of Ladies Cruelties. This is the Fool, fair Ladies, that does haunt you, That will from Dressing-Room: o Play Gallant you. W—he is call'd; what Name so much renown'd, Through all the Realms of Nonsence can be found?
LETTER XIX. To a Lady who sent him the foregoing Verses into the Countrey. I Receiv'd a Copy of Verses from you last Post, with a Command (for the Requests of fair Ladies are always Commands to me) that I shou'd answer 'em. I wou'd serve you, Madam, you may be sure, in any thing that was in my Power, but this I must own is quite beyond it; and after having read them over, I found my self utterly unable to cope with so dead-doing an Author: I sent there∣fore immediately to the Clerk of the Parish (a very honest Man, a good Weaver, and no ill Critick I can as∣sure you, as Criticks go) to beg the favour of him, that he wou'd come and assist me in the thing. With his
help, Madam, I read 'em over again: We both agreed, That there were never Words better chosen, Verse more delicately turn'd, Satyr more fine, or Raptures more poetical. As for example: Bless us! said I, what mighty Hero's here? He thunders so, 'tis dangerous to come near. The beauteous Sex may set their Hearts at rest; Of all their Patrons, sure this is the best. The Clerk indeed made some Excepti∣ons to the Lines that follow: But when the boasted matter I had read, I found my Expectation was misled. He said he cou'd not imagine that so wise a Person as the Author of those Verses, cou'd be misled in any thing.
And, Ladies, now (An Apostrophé to the Ladies:) without the help of Day, O God, Madam, by a Rush-light as plain as can be, You may discern who does the Weapon sway. If it were not too great a trouble to the Author, I wou'd desire to know of him who it is that does sway the Wea∣pon; for sometimes he makes us be∣lieve it is the Prefacer, and sometimes the pretended Author: And brandishes his Pen against your Cre∣dit, To Mr. Eat-finger himself that did it. This last was so very good a Con∣ceit, and so very new, that I thought the Clerk wou'd have died with laugh∣ing
at it. Well, said he, (when he had a little recover'd himself) that Eat∣finger is so ingenious, that a Man might have made five or six very good Verses of that one Thought. Set your Heart at rest, said I, and see if this Author has not as much Ma∣nagement as he has Wit. He that sits silent in his Wit's defence, I warrant this Poet never sat silent in his Life, Whose Mouth is fill'd with Fist instead of Sence, Or else he crams his Hand into his Iaws: That is to say, Either he eats his Fin∣gers, or fills his Mouth with his Fist, or crams his Hand into his Iaws. Never were there Fancies more sub∣lime, or more variety of 'em put together.
At Coffee-House among the Men of Worth, Observe here, Madam, if you please, a new Argument for Rhime, and that is the Civility and Good-breeding which proceed from it. Had it not been for the Rhyme's sake, those who were Fops and Fools in the beginning of the Poem, had little reason to ex∣pect to be adopted Men of Worth in the latter part of it. He goggles like a Quaker holding forth. This we both allow'd to be the very best Iest of all. It is true, indeed, the Clerk (who is a very good natur'd Man, tho' perhaps a little too curious in his Criticisms) said, He cou'd not find any very great resemblance be∣tween a Man who sat silent, and a Quaker that was holding forth. But I told him, He must suppose it was a
Quaker holding forth at a silent Meet∣ting. Like an Endymion he can court the Moon, And bark at her bright Glories when he's done. The Clerk told me, He doubted the Author was mistaken here: For as the Story has been always written, Endy∣mion did not make love to the Moon, but the Moon to Endymion. And as for the Barking, he assur'd me he had it from an ancient Greek Manuscript, whose Author was intimately acquain∣red with Endymion; and protests, That he never saw a Man less apt to bark at People in his Life than he was. But if all the little Currs of the Town have always bark'd at the Moon, it is very hard that Endymion, who was never known to bark at any body, must be supposed the Author of all that Noise.
But pray, Madam, inform your self a little better from the Author, of what follows: Was there ever any Mouse? or was there any Fable where∣in there was a Mouse? —did plead, He had deserv'd t' aspire to Princess Bed? For if the thing be really true, it was the most impudent Mouse that ever I heard of; and we must, both the Clerk and I, agree with the Author, in the just resentment he shews for so horrible a Presumption. But to be a little more serious, Madam: Tho' I can allow a Iest as far as any body, yet I wou'd not have People imagine I shall bear such things as these. You may advise the Author therefore, for his own sake, to keep his Name conceal'd. How great soever his Quality may be (for if I can guess at all at him, he's a Person of consi∣derable Quality) let him not imagine
that shall protect him from my Re∣venge. Had the Great Mogul written such a Copy of Verses against me (not that I have any particular Pique to the Great Mogul) without any re∣spect at all to his Quality, I wou'd have printed the Verses, and put his Name to 'em. However, Madam, in the midst of my Fury, he shall see how much more like a Christian I treat him, than he has done me: For tho' he has maliciously insinuated, That Mr. Dryden writes for me, and that I am covetous of M. L. D.'s Company, yet I must do him the justice to de∣clare, I do not in the least believe Mr. Dryden has any hand in his Works, or that he ever found any great Satis∣faction in the Conversation of M. L. D. I am, Madam, Your, &c. The Clerk presents his Service to the Author, and has written the En∣closed, which he desires may be de∣livered to him.
LETTER XX. To the most Noble Author of that incompa∣rable Poem, on the Author of a Dia∣logue concerning Women, &c. Most Noble Sir; YOu cannot imagine with what unexpressible satisfaction I read over your late Poem. It pleases me extreamly to see, that notwithstanding the Endeavours of our Enemies, the Wits, there are still some generous Spirits who tread in the Steps of our Predecessors, and imitate those hidden Graces that lie undiscover'd in the Works of Mr. Thomas Sternhold, and Mr. Robert Wisdom of Blessed Memory. I have seen several modern Lampoons that have gone some steps towards it; but I may say without flattery, I have seen no Man who has gone so far in
it as your self. And whereas most of the Pieces now in vogue are dull, flat things, taken from the Ancients; Yours is brisk, sharp, and all your own: Envy it self cannot say you have stoln one good thing from any body; and truly I think it will be very difficult for any Man to steal one from you. There is a Saying of Virgil's concer∣ning Homer, (for I wou'd scorn to compare such a Poet as you to any thing less than Homer) That it was casier to take the Club from Her∣cules, than a Verse from him. What was, perhaps, but a Compliment when said of Homer's Verses, may, with a great deal of Iustice, be af∣firmed of your Iests. I do no less approve your Generosity in underta∣king the Moon's Cause, than your Address in the management of it: I fansie, if your Modesty wou'd give you leave to own it, you are deeper in her Favour than ever Endymion was:
At least all the World must own she has a very great influence upon you; and I fansie your Fit of Poetry comes upon you, when she is at the full. No more at present, but that with all due Respects to her and the Mouse presented, I remain Yours, while W. S. LETTER XXI. To a Friend. Written from the Country. THe Dialogues of Plato, with your last Letter, have quite turn'd my Head. What delicacy of Invention! What sublimity of Thought! I talk no more of Women, of Gallan∣try; I think of nothing but Philoso∣phy
and Seraphick Love. Oh Vanity of Pomp, of Glory, of Trifles, falsly called Pleasures! They appear beauti∣ful to the sight, but once tasted, they leave nothing but Shame, Sorrow, and Repentance. Let us give others leave to play the Fool, while we enjoy the sweetness of Philosophy. O charming Quiet! Oh dear Repose! Oh Life truly celestial! Mounted upon the lofty tops of Philosophy, we regard at our ease the Vanity, the Folly, the Madness of the World: The greatest Cities appear nothing but great Herds of Madmen; so many Men, so many Follies. Suave mari magno turbantibus aethera ventis, Eterrâ magnum alterius spectare laborem. Sed nil dulcius est bene quam munita tenere Edita doctrinâ sapientum templa serena; Despicere, unde queas alios, passim{que} videre Errare, at{que} vias palantes quaerere vitae.
The Soul of Man, according to Plato, has two Wings; the one coelestial, with which she flies up to the Empyreal Heaven; the other terrestrial, which pulls her down to the Earth again. It is the first of these that raises you to those lofty divine Paths, reach'd by none but the greatest Wits, the noblest Souls; The other brings Men down to the things of this World; to Vanity, to Sin, to Marriage! Poor Husbands! you have truly observ'd how soon Beauty flies away; but, alas! Love flies away much sooner: Uncomplai∣sant Companion that he is, who tho' he comes with Beauty, will not stay with it. Great Politicians without doubt these Husbands! who suffer an eternal slavery for a thing of so little duration. But what signifies that to us? Let us leave 'em in peace (if there be any such thing as Peace in Marriage) and love me as I love you.
LETTER XXII. To the same. From London. IT is so long since I wrote to you, that I am almost asham'd of doing it now: But, to say the truth, I have too just an Excuse for my neglect, being relaps'd into my former mala∣dy, and notwithstanding all the As∣sistance of Philosophy, fallen in love ten times more than ever. I am a∣sham'd to tell you how long I have been so; but I am ten times more asham'd to tell you, I do not yet find the least decay in my Passion, tho' I have reason enough to believe the Lady did not care tho' she saw me hanging up at her Gate. Well; we may put as good a face upon the mat∣ter
as we will; but first or last I see Con∣stancy comes upon us all. In the humor I am at present, I had a good mind to forswear ever being in love again. And yet upon better thoughts, I think I had as good try it once more: For of three Amours I have had in my Life-time, (as for Amourettes, those are not worth mentioning) I va∣lu'd the one Mistress after I left lo∣ving her; I loved another, after I left valuing her; I love and value the third, after having lost all hopes of her: So that methinks according to the course of my Passions, I ought to love and value the next, after having ob∣tained her. However, from this time forward, upon what Follies soever you fall, be pleased for my sake to spare those of love; being very well sa∣tisfied, there is not one Folly of that kind (except Marriage) which I have not already committed. I have been, without raillery, in love with the Beauty
of a Woman whom I have never seen; with the Wit of one whom I have never heard speak, nor seen any thing that she has written; and with the Heroick Vertues of a Woman, without knowing any one Action of her Life, that cou'd make me think she had any. Considering how very common these Qualities are, I suppose you will not ask me if I have ever been mistaken. I know not what you think in the Country; but, for my part, I am of Opinion a Man must resolve to abandon Women or Philo∣sophy entirely, for they will never a∣gree well together. After an absence of five or six Months from Town, I find the Ladies still the same; that is to say, still various. Those who were in love when I went from hence, are in love still; but they are in love with other Men. They are constant to Love, but inconstant to the Lovers: And in this point, to speak the truth
among Friends, I think there is no great difference between the two Sexes. The Men complain of the Women's in∣constancy, and the Women of the Men's; for my part being unwilling to disoblige either, I am very apt to agree with both. But Cupid will have it so; and what can weak Mortals do against so potent a God? Adieu; live pleasantly, that is, philosophi∣cally; and guard your Heart from the Pains of Love.
POEMS.
POEMS. To his Book. GO, little Book, and to the World impart The faithful Image of an am'rous Heart: Those who Love's dear, deluding Pains have known, May in my fatal Stories read their own. Those who have liv'd from all its Torments free, May find the thing they never felt, by me. Perhaps advis'd, avoid the gilded Bait, And, warn'd by my Example, shun my Fate. While with calm Ioy, safe landed on the Coast, I view the Waves on which I once was tost.
Love is a medley of Endearments, Iars, Suspicions, Quarrels, Reconcilements, Wars; Then Peace again. Oh! wou'd it not be best, To chase the fatal Poison from our Breast? But since so few can live from Passion free, Happy the Man, and only happy he, Who with such lucky Stars begins his love, That his cool Iudgment does his Choice approve. Ill grounded Passions quickly wear away; What's built upon Esteem, can ne'er decay. ELEGY. The unrewarded Lover. LEt the dull Merchant curse his angry Fate, And from the Winds and Waves his Fortune (wait Let the loud Lawyer break his Brains, and be A Slave to wrangling Coxcombs for a Free:
Let the rough Souldier fight his Prince's Foes, And for a Livelihood his Life expose: I wage no War, I plead no Cause but Love's, I fear no Storms, but what Celinda moves. And what grave Censor can my Choice despise? But here, fair Charmer, here the diff'rence lies: The Merchant after all his Hazards past, Enjoys the fruit of his long Toils at last; The Soldier high in his King's Favour stands, And after having long obey'd, commands: The Lawyer to reward his tedious Care, Roars on the Bench, that babbled at the Barr; While I take pains to meet a Fate more hard, And reap no Fruit, no Favour, no Reward.
EPIGRAM. Written in a Lady's Table-Book. WIth what strange Raptures wou'd my Soul (be blest, Were but her Book an Emblem of her Breast? As I from that all former Marks efface, And, uncontroul'd, put new ones in their place; So might I chase all others from her Heart, And my own Image in the stead impart. But, ah! how short the Bliss wou'd prove, if he Who seiz'd it next, might do the same by me.
ELEGY. The Power of Verse. To his Mistress. WHile those bright Eyes subdue where-e'er (you will, And, as you please, can either save, or kill; What Youth so bold the Conquest to design? What Wealth so great to purchase Hearts like thine? None but the Muse that Privilege can claim, And what you give in Love, return in Fame. Riches and Titles with your Life must end; Nay, cannot even in Life your Fame desend: Verse can give Fame, can fading Beauties save, And, after Death, redeem'em from the Grave; Embalm'd in Verse, through distant Times they (come, Preserv'd, like Bees, within an Amber Tomb.
Poets, (like Monarchs, on an Eastern Throne, Restrain'd by nothing but their Will alone) Here can cry up, and there as boldly blame, And, as they please, give Infamy or Fame. In vain the Dido. Tyrian Queen resigns her Life, For the bright Glory of a spotless Wife, If lying Bards may false Amours rehearse, And blast her Name with arbitrary Verse. While Penelope. one who all the absence of her Lord, Had her wide Courts with pressing Lovers stor'd; Yet by a Poet grac'd, in deathless Rhimes, Stands a chaste Pattern to succeeding Times. With pity then the Muses Friends survey, Nor think your Favours there are thrown away; Wisely like Seed on fruitful Soil they're thrown, To bring large Crops of Glory and Renown. For as the Sun that in the Marshes breeds Nothing but nauseous and unwholesome Weeds;
With the same Rays on rich and pregnant Earth, To pleasant Flowers, and useful Fruits gives birth. So Favours cast on Fools, 'get only Shame; On Poets shed, produce eternal Fame: Their gen'rous Breasts warm with a genial Fire, And more than all the Muses can inspire. Iealousie. I. WHo cou'd more happy, who more blest (cou'd live, Than they whom kind, whom am'rous Passions (move? What Crowns, what Empires greater Ioys cou'd (give, Than the soft Chains, the slavery of Love? Were not the Bliss too often crost, By that unhappy, vile Distrust;
That gnawing Doubt, that anxious Fear, that dange- (rous Malady, That terrible tormenting Rage, that Madness Iea- (lousie. II. In vain Celinda boasts she has been true; In vain she swears she keeps untouch'd her (Charms; Dire Iealousie does all my Pains renew, And represents her in my Rival's Arms. His Sighs I hear, his Looks I view, I see her damn'd Advances too; I see her smile, I see her kiss; and, oh! methinks I (see Her give up all those Ioys to him, she shou'd reserve (for me. III. Ingrateful fair One, canst thou hear my Groans? Canst thou behold these Tears that fill my Eyes? And yet unmov'd by all my Pains, my Moans, Into another's Arms resign my Prize?
If Merit cou'd not gain your Love, My Sufferings might your Pity move: Might hinder you from adding thus, by jealous (Frenzies, more New Pangs, to one whom hopeless Love had (plagu'd too much before. IV. Think not, false Nymph, my Fury to out-storm, I scorn your Anger, and despise your Frown: Dress up your Rage in its most hideous form, It will not move my Heart when Love is flown; No, tho' you from my Kindness fly, My Vengeance you shall satisfie; The Muse that wou'd have sung your Praise, shall (now aloud proclaim To the malicious, spiteful World, your Infamy and (Shame. V. Ye Gods! she weeps; behold that falling Show'r! See how her Eyes are quite dissolv'd in Tears!
Can she in vain that precious Torrent pour? Oh, no, it bears away my Doubts and Fears. 'Twas Pity sure that made it flow; For the same Pity stop it now: For every charming, heavenly Drop, that from those (Eyes does part, Is paid with Streams of Blood, that gush from my (o'er-flowing Heart. VI. Yes, I will love; I will believe you true, And raise my Passions up as high as e'er; Nay, I'll believe you false, yet love you too, Let the least sign of Penitence appear. I'll frame Excuses for your Fault, Think you surpriz'd, or meanly caught; Nay, in the fury, in the heighth of that abhorr'd (Embrace, Believe you thought; believe at least, you wish'd me (in the place.
VII. Oh let me lie whole Ages in those Arms, And on that Bosom lull asleep my Cares: Forgive those foolish Fears of fansy'd Harms, That stab my Soul, while they but move thy (Tears. And think unless I lov'd thee still, I had not treated thee so ill; For these rude Pangs of Iealousie, are much more (certain signs Of Love, than all the tender Words an amorous (Fancy coins. VIII. Torment me with this horrid Rage no more; Oh, smile and grant one reconciling Kiss! Ye Gods, she's kind, I'm ecstasie all o'er! My Soul's too narrow to contain the Bliss. Thou pleasing Torture of my Breast, Sure thou wert fram'd to plague my Rest,
Since both the Ill and Good you do, alike my Peace (destroy; That kills me with excess of Grief, This with excess (of Ioy. Cure of Iealousie. WHat Tortures can there be in Hell, Compar'd to what fond Lovers feel, When doating on some fair One's Charms, They think she yields 'em to their Rivals Arms? As Lions tho' they once were tame, Yet if sharp Wounds their Rage enflame, Lift up their stormy Voices, roar, And tear the Keepers they obey'd before. So fares the Lover, when his Breast By jealous Frenzie is possest, Forswears the Nymph for whom he burns; Yet strait to her whom he forswears, returns.
But when the Fair resolves his Doubt, The Love comes in, the Fear goes out; The Cloud of Iealousie's dispell'd, And the bright Sun of Innocence reveal'd. With what strange Rapture's is he blest! Raptures too great to be exprest. Tho' hard the Torment's to endure, Who wou'd not have the Sickness, for the Cure? SONNET. Death. WHat has this Bugbear Death that's worth (our Care? After a Life in Pain and Sorrow past, After deluding Hope and dire Despair, Death only gives us Quiet at the last.
How strangely are our Love and Hate misplac'd! Freedom we seek, and yet from Freedom flee; Courting those Tyrant-Sins that chain us fast, And shunning Death, that only sets us free. 'Tis not a foolish fear of future Pains, (Why shou'd they fear who keep their Souls from Stains?) That makes me dread thy Terrors, Death, to see: 'Tis not the Loss of Riches, or of Fame, Or the vain Toys the Vulgar Pleasures name; 'Tis nothing, Caelia, but the losing thee.
ELEGY. To his false Mistress. CAElia, your Tricks will now no longer pass, And I'm no more the Fool that once I was. I know my happier Rival does obtain All the vast Bliss for which I sigh in vain. Him, him you love; to me you use your Art: I had your Looks, another had your Heart. To me y'are sick, to me of Spies afraid: He finds your Sickness gone, your Spies betray'd. I figh beneath your Window all the Night; He in your Arms possesses the Delight. I know you treat me thus, false Fair, I do; And, oh! what plagues me worse, he knows it too: To him my Sighs are told, my Letters shown; And all my Pains are his Diversion grown.
Yet since you cou'd such horrid Treasons act, I'm pleas'd you chose out him to do the Fact: His Vanity does for my Wrongs attone; And 'cis by that I have your Falshood known. What shall I do! for treated at this rate, I must not love; and yet I cannot hate. I hate the Actions, but I love the Face; Oh, were thy Vertue more, or Beauty less! I'm all Confusion, and my Soul's on fire, Torn by contending Reason and Desire: This bids me love, that bids me Love give o'er; One counsels best, the other pleases more. I know I ought to hate you for your Fault; But, oh! I cannot do the thing I ought. Canst thou, mean Wretch! canst thou contented (prove, With the cold Relicks of a Rival's Love? Why did I see that Face to charm my Breast? Or having seen, why did I know the rest?
Gods! if I have obey'd your just Commands, If I've deserv'd some Favour of your hands, Make me that tame, that easie Fool again, And rid me of my Knowledge, and my Pain. And you, false Fair! for whom so oft I've griev'd, Pity a Wretch that begs to be deceiv'd; Forswear your self for one who dies for you, Vow not a word of the whole Charge was true; But Scandals all, and Forgeries, devis'd By a vain Wretch, neglected and despis'd. I too will help to forward the Deceit, And, to my power, contribute to the Cheat. And thou, bold Man, who think'st to rival me, For thy Presumption I cou'd pardon thee; I cou'd forgive thy lying in her Arms, I cou'd forgive thy rifling all her Charms; But, oh! I never can forgive the Tongue, That boasts her Favours, and proclaims my Wrong.
Upon the same Occasion. WHat Fury does disturb my Rest? What Hell is this within my Breast? Now I abhorr, and now I love; And each an equal Torment prove. I see Celinda's Cruelty, I see she loves all Men but me; I see her Falshood, see her Pride, I see ten thousand Faults beside; I see she sticks at nought that's ill; Yet, oh ye Powers! I love her still, Others on Precipices run, Which, blind with Love, they cannot shun. I see my Danger, see my Ruine, Yet seek, yet court my own undoing: And each new Reason I explore To hate her makes me love her more,
The Antidote. WHen I see the bright Nymph who my (Heart does enthral, When I view her soft Eyes, and her languishing (Air, Her Merit so great, my own Merit so small, It makes me adore, and it makes me despair. But when I consider, that she squanders on Fools All those Treasures of Beauty with which she is (stor'd; My Fancy it damps, my Passion it cools, And it makes me despise what before I ador'd. Thus sometimes I despair, and sometimes I despise; I love, and I hate, but I never esteem. The Passion grows up, when I view her bright Eyes, Which my Rival's destroy, when I look upon (them.
How wisely does Nature things so diff'rent unite! In such odd Compositions our safety is found; As the Blood of the Scorpion is a Cure for the Bite; So her Folly makes whole, whom her Beauty does (wound. Upon a Favour offer'd. CAElia, too late you wou'd repent The off'ring all your store; Is now but like a Pardon sent To one that's dead before. While at the first you cruel prov'd, And grant the Bliss too late; You hinder'd me of one I lov'd, To give me one I hate. I thought you innocent, as fair, When first my court I made;
But when your Falshoods plain appear, My Love no longer stay'd. Your Bounty of those Favours shown, Whose Worth you first deface; Is melting valu'd Medals down, And giving us the Brass. Oh, since the thing we beg's a Toy, That's priz'd by Love alone, Why cannot Women grant the Ioy, Before our Love is gone? The Reconcilement. BE gone, ye Sighs! be gone, ye Tears! Be gone, ye Iealousies and Fears. Celinda swears she never lov'd, Celinda swears none ever mov'd Her Heart, but I; if this be true, Shall I keep company with you?
What tho'a senceless Rival swore, She said as much to him before? What though I saw him in her Bed? I'll trust not what I saw, but what she said. Curse on the Prudent and the Wise, Who ne'er believe such pleasing Lyes: I grant she only does deceive; I grant'tis Folly to believe; But by this Folly I vast Pleasures gain, While you with all your Wisdom live in Pain.
DIALOGUE Between a Lover and his Friend. (Irregular Verses.) Friend. VAlue thy self, fond Youth, no more On Favours Mulus had before; He had her first, her Virgin Flame; You like a bold Intruder came To the cold Relicks of a Feast, When he at first had seiz'd the best. Lover. When he dull Sot had seiz'd the worse, I came in at the Second Course, 'Tis Chance that first makes People love, Iudgment their riper Francies move.
Mulus you say first charm'd her Eyes; First, she lov'd Babies and Dirt-Pies; But she grew wiser, and in time Found out the folly of those Toys, and him. Friend. If Wisdom change in Love begets, Women, no doubt, are wondrous Wits. But Wisdom that now makes her change to you, In time will make her change to others too, Lover. I grant you no Man can forsee his Doom; But shall I grieve because an ill may come? Yet I'll allow her Change, when she can see A Man deserves her more than me, As much as I deserve her more than he. Friend. Did they with our own Eyes see our Desert, No Woman e'er cou'd from her Lover part.
But oh! they see not with their own, All things to them are through false Opticks shown. Love at the first does all your Charms encrease, When the Tube's turn'd, Hate represents'em less. Lover. Whate'er may come, I will not grieve, For Dangers that I can't believe. She'll ne'er cease loving me; or if she do, 'Tis ten to one I cease to love her too. EPIGRAM. LYCE. GO, said old Lyce, senceless Lover, go, And with soft Verses court the Fair; but (know, With all thy Verses, thou canst get no more Than Fools without one Verse have had before.
Enrag'd at this, upon the Bawd I flew; And that which most enrag'd me was, 'twas true. The fair Mourner. IN what sad Pomp the mournful Charmer lies! Does she lament the Victim of her Eyes? Or wou'd she Hearts with soft Compassion move, To make 'em take the deeper stamp of Love? What Youth so wise, so wary to escape, When Rigour comes, drest up in Pity's shape? Let not in vain those precious Tears be shed, Pity the Dying fair One, not the Dead; While you unjustly of the Fates complain, I grieve as much for you, as much in vain. Each to relentless Iudges make their moan, Blame not Death's Cruelty, but cease you own. While raging Passion both out Souls does wound, A soveraign Balm might sure for both be found;
Wou'd you but wipe your fruitless Tears away, And with a just Compassion mine survey. EPIGRAM. To his false Mistress. THou saidst that I alone thy Heart cou'd (move, And that for me thou wou'dst abandon Iove. I lov'd thee then, not with a love defil'd, But as a Father loves his only Child. I know thee now, and tho' I fiercelier burn, Thou art become the Object of my Scorn. See what thy Falshood gets; I must confess I love thee more, but I esteem the less.
EPIGRAM. Love and Iealousie. HOw much are they deceiv'd who vainly strive, By jealous Fears, to keep our Flames alive? Love's like a Torch, which if secur'd from Blasts, Will faintlier burn; but then it longer lasts. Expos'd to storms of Iealousie and Doubt, The Blaze grows greater, but 'tis sooner out. ELEGY. The Petition. (In imitation of Catullus.) IS there a pious Pleasure, that proceeds From contemplation of our vertuous Deeds? That all mean, sordid Actions we despise, And scorn to gain a Throne by Cheats and Lyes?
Thyrsis, thou hast sure Blessings laid in store, From thy just dealing in this curst Amour. What Honour can in Words or Deeds be shown, Which to the Fair thou hast not said and done? On her false Heart they all are thrown away; She only swears, more eas'ly to betray. Ye Powers! that know the many Vows she broke, Free my just Soul from this unequal Yoke! My Love boils up, and, like a raging Flood, Runs through my Veins, and taints my Vital Blood. I do not vainly beg she may grow chaste, Or with an equal Passion burn at last; The one she cannot practise, tho' she wou'd, And I contemn the other, tho' she shou'd. Nor ask I Vengeance on the perjur'd Iilt: 'Tis punishment enough to have her Guilt. I beg but Balsam for my bleeding Breast, Cure for my Wounds, and from my Labours rest.
ELEGY. Upon quitting his Mistress. I Know, Celinda, I have born too long, And, by forgiving, have encreas'd my Wrong: Yet if there be a Power in Verse to slack Thy course in Vice, or bring fled Vertue back, I'll undertake the Task; howe'er so hard, A gen'rous Action is its own Reward. Oh! were thy Vertues equal to thy Charms, I'd fly from Crowns to live within those Arms: But who, oh who, can e'er believe thee just, When such known Falshoods have destroy'd all (Trust? Farewel, salse Fair! nor shall I longer stay; Since we must part, why shou'd we thus delay?
Your Love alone, was what my Soul cou'd prize; And missing that, can all the rest despise. Yet shou'd I not repent my Follies past, Cou'd you take up, and grow reserv'd at last, 'Twou'd please me, parted from your fatal Charms, To see you happy in another's Arms. Whatever Threatnings Fury might extort, Oh fear not I shou'd ever do you hurt: For tho' my former Passion is remov'd, I wou'd not injure one I once had lov'd. Adieu! While thus I waste my time in vain, Sure there are Maids I might entirely gain: I'll search for such, and to the first that's true, Resign the Heart so Lardly freed from you.
To his Mistress. Against Marriage. YEs, all the World must sure agree, He who's secur'd of having thee, Will be entirely blest; But 'twere in me too great a Wrong, To make one who has been so long My Queen, my Slave at last. Nor ought those things to be confin'd, That were sor Publick Good design'd; Cou'd we in foolish Pride, Make the Sun always with us stay, Twou'd burn our Corn and Grass away, To starve the World beside.
Let not the Thoughts of parting, fright Two Souls which Passion does unite; For while our Love doeslast, Neither will strive to go away; And why the Devil shou'd we stay, When once that love is past? EPIGRAM. Chloe. CHloe new-marry'd looks on Men no more; Why then 'tis plain for what she lookt before. EPIGRAM. Cornus. COrnus proclaims aloud his Wife's a Whore; Alas, good Cornus, what can we do more?
Wert thou no Cuckold, we might make thee one; But being one, we cannot make thee none. EPIGRAM. Thraso. THraso picks Quarrels when he's drunk at (Night; When sober in the Morning, dares not fight. Thraso, to shun those Ills that may ensue, Drink not at Night, or drink at Morning too. EPIGRAM. Gripe and Shifter. RIch Gripe does all his Thoughts and Cunning (bend, T'encrease that Wealth he wants the Soul to spend. Poor Shifter does his whole Contrivance set To spend that Wealth, he wants the Sense to get.
How happy wou'd appear to each his Fate, Had Gripe his Humour, or he Gripe's Estate! Kind Fate and Fortune, blend'em if you can, And of two Wretches, make one happy Man. To Caelia, upon some Alterations in her Face. AH, Caelia! where are now the Charms, That did such wondrous Passions move? Time, cruel Time, those Eyes disarms, And blunts the feeble Darts of Love. What Malice does the Tyrant bear To Womens Int'rest, and to ours? Beauties in which the Publick share, The greedy Villain first devours. Who, without Tears, can see a Prince, That Trains of fawning Courtiers had,
Abandon'd, left without defence? Nor is thy hapless Fate less sad. Thou who so many Fools hast known, And all the Fools would hardly do, Shou'dst now confine thy self to one! And he, alas! a Husband too. See the ungrateful Slaves how fast They from thy setting Glories run; And in what mighty Crowds they haste, To worship Flavia's rising Sun! In vain are all the practis'd Wiles, In vain those Eyes wou'd Love impart; Not all th' Advances, all the Smiles, Can move one unrelenting Heart. While Flavia, charming Flavia still, By Cruelty, her Cause maintains; And scarce vouchsafes a careless Smile To the poor Slaves that wear her Chains.
Well, Caelia, let them waste their Tears, But sure they will in time repine, That thou hast not a Face like hers, Or she has not a Heart like thine. The Retirement. ALl hail, ye Fields, where constant Peace at- (tends! All hail, ye sacred, solitary Groves! All hail, ye Books, my true, my real Friends, Whose Conversation pleases, and improves! Cou'd one who study'd your sublimer Rules, Become so mad to search for Ioys abroad? To run to Towns, to herd with Knaves and Fools, And undistinguish'd pass among the Crowd? One to ambitious Fancy's made a Prey, Thinks Happiness in great Preferment lies; Nor fears for that his Country to betray, Curst by the Fools, and laught at by the Wise.
Others whom avaricious Thoughts bewitch, Consume their Time, to multiply their Gains; And fansying Wretched all that are not rich, Neglect the End of Life to get the Means. Others the Name of Pleasure does invite, All their dull Time in sensual Ioys they live; And hope to gain that solid sirm Delight By Vice, which Innocence alone can give. But how perplext, alas! is Humane Fate? I whom nor Avarice, nor Pleasures move; Who view with scorn the Trophies of the Great, Yet must my self be made a Slave to Love. If this dire Passion never will be gone, If Beauty always must my Heart enthral; Oh! rather let me be confin'd to one, Than madly thus be made a Prey to all!
One who has early known the Pomps of State; (For things unknown 'tis Ign'rance to condemn) And after having view'd the gawdy Bait, Can boldly say, The Trifle I contemn. In her blest Arms contented cou'd I live, Contented cou'd I die: But, oh! my Mind I feed with Fancies, and my Thoughts deceive, With hope of things impossible to find. In Women how shou'd Sense and Beauty meet? The wisest Men their Youth in Follies spend; The best is he that earliest finds the Cheat, And sees his Errors while there's time to mend.
Pastoral Eclogues. ECLOGUE I. Daphne. SIcilian Muse, my humble Voice inspire To sing of Daphne's Charms and Damon's Fire. Long had the faithful Swain supprest his Grief, And since he durst not hope, ne'er askt relief. But at th' arrival of the fatal Day That took the Namph and all his Ioys away; With dying Looks he gaz'd upon the Fair, And what his Tongue could not, his Eyes declare: Till with deep Sighs, as if his Heart-strings broke, Pressing her Hand, these tender Things he spoke: Damon. Ah lovely Nymph! behold your Lover burn, And view that Passion which you'll not return. As no Nymphs Charms did ever equal thine; So no Swain's Love did ever equal mine.
How happy, Fair, how happy should I be, Might I but sacrifice my self for thee? Cou'd I but please thee with my dying Verse, And make thee shed one Tear upon my Hearse? Daphne. Too free an Offer of that Love you make, Which now, alas, I have not pow'r to take: Your Wounds I cannot, tho' I wou'd, relieve: Phaon has all the Love that I can give. Had you among the rest at first assail'd My Heart, when free, you had perhaps prevail'd. Now if you blame, Oh blame not me, but Fate, That never brought you till 'twas grown too late. Damon. Had the Fates brought me then, too charming Fair, I could not hope, and now I must despair. Rul'd by your Friends, you quit the Lovers Flame For Flocks, for Pastures, for an empty Name. Yet tho' the blest Possession Fate denies; Oh let me gaze for ever on those Eyes. So just, so true, so innocent's my Flame, That Phaon did he see it, cou'd not blame.
Daphne. Such generous Ends I know you still pursue, What I can do, be sure I will for you. If on Esteem, or Pity you can live, Or Hopes of more, if I had more to give; Those you may have, but cannot have my Heart: And since we now perhaps for ever part; Such noble Thoughts through all your life express, May make the Value more, the Pity less. Damon. Can you then go? Can you for ever part (Ye Gods! what shivering Pains surround my Heart!) And have one Thought to make your Pity less? Ah Daphne, cou'd I half my Pangs express, You cou'd not think, tho'hard as Rocks you were, Your Pity ever cou'd too great appear. I ne'er shall be one Moment free from pain, Till I behold those charming Eyes again. When gay Diversions do your Thoughts employ, I wou'd not come to interrupt the Ioy: But when from them you some spare Moment find, Think then, oh think on whom you leave behind!
Think with what Heart I shall behold the green, Where I so oft those charming Eyes have seen! Think with what Grief I walk the Groves alone, When You, the Glory of them all, are gone! Yet, oh! that little time you have to stay, Let me still speak, and gaze my Soul away! But see, my Passion that small Aid denies; Grief stops my Tongue, and Tears o'erflow my Eyes. ECLOGUE II. Galatea. THyrsis, the gaiest one of all the Swains, Who fed their Flocks upon th' Arcadian (Plains; While Love's mad Passion quite devour'd his Heart, And the coy Nymph that caus'd, neglects his Smart; Strives in low Numbers, such as Shepherds use, If not to move her Breast, his own amuse. You, Chloris, who with scorn refuse to see The mighty Wounds that you have made on me; Yet cannot sure with equal Pride disdain, To hear an humble Hind of his complain. Now while the Flocks and Herds to Shades retire, While the fierce Sun sets all the World on fire;
Through burning Fields, through rugged Brakes I (rove, And to the Hills and Woods declare my Love. How small's the Heat? how easie is the Pain I feel without, to that I feel within? Yet scornful Galatea will not hear, But from my Songs and Pipe still turns her Ear. Not so the sage Corisca, nor the fair Climena, nor rich AEgon's only Care: From them my Songs a just Compassion drew, And they shall have them, since contemn'd by you. Why name I them, when ev'n chaste Cynthia stays, And Pan himself, to listen to my Lays? Pan, whose sweet Pipe has been admir'd so long, Has not disdain'd sometimes to hear my Song. Yet Galatea Scorns whate'er I say; And Galatea's wiser sure than they. Relentless Nymph! can nothing move your Mind? Must you be deaf, because you are unkind? Tho' you dislike the Subject of my Lays, Yet sure the Sweetness of my Voice might please. It is not thus that you dull Mopsus use, His Songs divert you, tho' you mine refuse. Yet I cou'd tell you, fair One, if I wou'd, (And since you treat me thus, methinks I shou'd)
What the wise Lycon said, when in yon Plain, He saw him court in hope, and me in vain; Forbear, fond Youth, to chase a heedless Fair, Nor think with well-tun'd Verse to please her Ear; Seek out some other Nymph, nor e'er repine, That one who likes his Songs, shou'd fly from thine. Ah, Lycon! ah! your Rage false Dangers forms; 'Tis not his Songs, but 'tis his Fortune Charms: Yet, scornful Maid, in time you'll find those Toys Can yield no real, no substantial Ioys; In vain his Wealth, his Titles gain esteem, If for all that you are asham'd of Him. Ah, Galatea, wou'dst thou turn those Eyes, Wou'dst thou but once vouchsafe to hear my Cries: In such soft Notes I wou'd my Pains impart, As cou'd not fail to move thy rocky Heart; With such sweet Songs I wou'd thy Fame make (known, As Pan himself might not disdain to own. Oh cou'dst thou, fair One, but contented be To tend the Sheep, and chase the Hares with me; To have thy Praises eccho'd through the Groves, And pass thy Days with one who truly loves;
Nor let those gaudy Toys thy Heart surprize, Which the Fools envy, and the Sage despise. But Galatea Scorns my humble Flame, And neither asks my Fortune, nor my Name. Of the best Cheese my well-stor'd Dairy's full, And my soft Sheep produce the finest Wool; The richest Wines of Greece my Vineyard's yield, And smiling Crops of Grain adorn my Field. Ah, foolish Youth! in vain thou boast'st thy store, Have what thou wilt, if Mopsus still has more. See whilst thou sing'st, behold her haughty Pride, With what disdain she turns her Head aside! Oh, why wou'd Nature, to our Ruine, place A Tyger's Heart, with such an Angel's Face? Cease, Shepherd, cease, at last thy fruitless Moan; Nor hope to gain a Heart already gone. While Rocks and Caves thy tuneful Notes resound, See how thy Corn lies wither'd on the Ground! The hungry Wolves devours thy fatten'd Lambs; And bleating for the Young, makes lean the Damms. Take, Shepherd, take thy Hook, thy Flocks pursue, And when one Nymph proves cruel, find a new.
ECLOGUE III. Damon. (Taken from the Eighth Eclogue of Virgil.) ARise, O Phosphorus! and bring the Day, While I in Sighs and Tears consume away; Deceiv'd with flattering Hopes of Nisa's Love; And to the Gods my vain Petitions move: Tho' they've done nothing to prevent my Death, I'll yet invoke 'em with my dying Breath. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Arcadia's famous for its spacious Plains, Its whistling Pine-Trees, and its shady Groves, And often hears the Swains lament their Loves. Great Pan upon its Mountains feeds his Goats, Who first taught Reeds to warble Rural Notes. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Mopsus weds Nisa! Oh, well-suited Pair! When he succeeds, what Lover can despair?
After this Match, let Mares and Griffins breed; And Hounds with Hares in friendly consort feed. Go, Mopsus, go; provide the Bridal Cake; And to thy Bed the blooming Virgin take: In her soft Arms thou shalt securely rest. Behold, the Evening comes to make thee blest! Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Oh, Nisa, happy in a lovely Choice! While you with scorn neglect my Pipe and Voice; While you despise my humble Songs, my Herd, My shaggy Eye-brows, and my rugged Beard; While through the Plains disdainfully you move, And think no Shepherd can deserve your Love; Mopsus alone can the nice Virgin win, With charming Person, and with graceful Mien. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. When first I saw you on those fatal Plains, I reach'd you Fruit; your Mother too was there; Scarce had you seen the thirteenth Spring appear: Yet Beauty's Buds were opening in your Face; I gaz'd, and Blushes did your Charms encrease. 'Tis Love, thought I, that's rising in her Breast; Alas, your Passion, by my own, I guest;
Then upon trust I fed the raging Pains. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Oh, Love! I know thee now; thou ow'st thy (Birth To Rocks; some craggy Mountain brought thee (forth: Nor is it Humane Blood that fills thy Veins, Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Relentless Love to bold Medea show'd, To stain her guilty Hands in Children's Blood. Was she more cruel, or more wicked he? He was a wicked Counsellor, a cruel Mother she. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Now let the Scriech-Owls vie with warbling (Swans; Upon hard Oaks let blushing Peaches grow, And from the Brambles, liquid Amber flow. The harmless Wolves, the rav'nous Sheep shall shun; And valiant Deer, at fearful Grey-hounds run: Let the Sea rise, and overflow the Plains. Begin, my Muse, begin th' Arcadian Strains. Adieu, ye Flocks, no more shall I pursue! Adieu, ye Groves, a long, a long Adieu!
And you, coy Nymph, who all my Vows disdain, Take this last Present from a dying Swain. Since you dislike whate'er in Life I said, You may be pleas'd, perhaps, to hear I'm dead: This Leap shall put an end to all my Pains. Now cease, my Muse, now cease th' Arcadian Strains. Thus Damon sung while on the Cliff he stood, Then headlong plung'd into the raging Flood. All with united Grief the Loss bemoan, Except the Authress of his Fate alone, Who hears it with an unrelenting Breast. Ah, cruel Nymph! forbear your Scorns at last. How much soe'er you may the Love despise, 'Tis barb'rous to insult on one that dies. FINIS.
