C645 R6936 12637147 64920
A NEW DISCOVERY OF THE Sham-Presbyterian Plot. OR, The substance of the Information of James Carol, given in upon Oath before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor of LONDON, July 1681. Together with an Account of the Apprehension of one Lam∣port an Irish Papist, that endeavoured to suborn the said Carol. The said Lamport being seized in his Bed the 10th. of this Instant August. The Information of James Carol a Protestant Englishman late of Dublin, and first Discoverer of the horrid Popish Plot in Ireland, in the Year 1672. sworn, and examined before the Right Honourable Sr. Patient Ward Knight Lord Mayor of London. THis Informant saith, That he hath been enforced to expend, and been at above 1000. l. Damages by the unjust Prosecutions of Papists of great Power in Ireland, by reason of his Discovery of an Horrid Popish Plot carrying on in that Kingdom in 1672. which has been to the utter Ruine of Himself and his Family; His Wife dying big with Child in 1680. of Blows received from the Papists; and this Informant narrowly escaping with his Life: That in 1673. he was dealt with to retract his Evidence, and tempted thereunto with the promised reward of 500 l. But the Informant Refused to be prevailed with, considering the everlasting Damage he must incur by such un∣just Actions: That about the beginning of June last, the Informant happened to meet with one Peter Lamport, an Irish Papist, and pretended Merchant, whose Lodging was in Rosemary-Lane, who inviting this Informant to drink a Dish of Coffee with him at Mr. Bridges Coffee-house in Popes-head Ally, over against the Royal Exchange, carryed him into an obscure and remote part of the Room a∣lone, and then and there told this Deponent, That there had a long time been a great talk of a Popish Plot; But shortly it would be proved by many wit∣nesses, That it was only a Presbyterian Plot; and That those that had endeavour∣ed to make out a Popish Plot, would be seized and hang'd, if they would not turn it on the Presbyterians; And that the Earl of Shaftsbury, and several other Pro∣testant Lords and others, would be seiz'd and sent to the Tower; abusing them, and many others, with many opprobrious and scandalous Names: And added,
That Fitz Harris is a great Rogue, and would be hang'd, although he now de∣clares the Presbyterians imployed him, and will do any thing in hopes that his Majesty will pardon him; But there is the word of a King for it, He shall dye, for ther's no trusting him. You see, (said the said Lamport, further directing his dis∣course to this Informant) how you and others have been slighted a long time; Therefore take my Advice, be you concern'd in making it out to be a Presbyte∣rian Plot. The Informant demanded, in what Particulars he might do it, and pray'd him to explain his mind. Lamport replyed—I am sure you understand me well enough; it is to be a Pres∣byterian Plot, and you will be easily believed and credited, having of late been conversant with them, and now is the time to make your own Terms; and were I in your case, I would make good Terms for my self. It will be the making of you: Therefore do not lose the Opportunity. To all which, the Informant made him only general civil Answers, and so for that time they parted. This Informant further saith, That a Week or thereabouts afterwards, the said Lamport met him in Tower-street, and then demanded of him, what he thought of the Discourse they had the other day. This Informant replyed, I believe Sir, you are concern'd, and know much of these Affairs, as to the making it out to be a Presbyterian Plot. Then the said Lamport swore, That he did know as much as any man, and more than this Informant would believe; And that this Informant might take what he said for Truth: For (said he) did I not tell you, That some of the Lords would be seiz'd on suddenly, and sent to the Tower? and don't you find my words to be true? The Informant answered, That he found some of his words to be true, for he had heard that the Lord Howard was Committed, and that he remembred their last Discourse very well. Yes, says Lamport, and you will hear of many more Warrants for the securing of several persons, for having an hand in this Presbyterian-Plot, and they sent to the Tower e're it be long. Therefore are you yet concern'd or imploy'd in the Business? To which this Informant, wil∣ling to sift his Intentions, replied,—I have, Sir, been towards Whitehal, since you gave me that advice. That's well, said Lamport, take my counsel, and you'l do well; be concern'd, and neglect not your time, for you'll never have such another opportunity. And so again we parted. Suddenly after the said Lamport, as I was credibly informed, went for France; and on the 26th of July I discovered this whole Transaction upon Oath, to the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor. And understanding since, That the said Lamport was returned into England, on the 10th of this instant August he was seized in his Bed in Rosemary-Lane aforesaid; and being carried before Justice Rycroft, I there again testified the Truth of the Premises against him. LONDON: Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head Ally, in Pater-Noster-Row. 1681.
