669.f.24[42] 99870457 163773
NEWS FROM HELL; Or the Relation of a VISION. ME thought I saw before mine eyes A meagre Ghost to stand: And if my fancie judg'd aright 'Twas one of Pluto's Band. Thou gastly Ghost I charge thee speak, And shew the reason why Thou waftest through the Stygion Lake To fright mortality. Yes mortal wretch, see I am come From our infernal King, From whom to 'th' English Nation Strange dolefull News do bring: Such News it is will make mens hearts To quake for dismal fear, To what I therefore shall relate Lend an attentive Eare. A great man lately to us came And tydings thither brought That treason 'gainst great Pluto's State The English Nation wrought. That very word of Treason did Belzebub so affright, That of all courage for a while He was bereaved quite. At length recover'd he burst forth, And thus in fury spoke, Thou wretch with this thy cursed news How durst thou me provoke? What? England my sweet darling dear Against me Treason-plot! England so late by us regain'd? Tush I believe it not. How many of my trusty sprites Have I therein imploy'd, In whose succesful labours I These sixteen years have joyed; My first born spirit of Pride I sent, Who Acts so well his part, There's scarse a man but he hath took possession of his heart. The Spirit of Mammon also is Of all so deified, As if the English Nation knew No other God beside; The Spirit of Lust and of the world, I, of envy and of lies, Have also place allotted them For their solemnities. But what black Sugar-candid tricks Doth th' Spirit of Errrour play? Who as the Wind, the Weather-cock, Mens Brains turn's every way. Now this opinion they embrace, And by and by another, Both these dislk'd, a third is best, Taught by an holy Brother. Shall all this labour care and pains (My England to regain) Which I, and all my Spiris have tane, Prove fruitlesse and in vane, Will England now from me revolt, And plot against my State? Whithout whose help and council they Themselves will ruinate. 'Tis true, they broke their Oaths and Vows Which they to Heaven made, But yet with me to break their League I am sure they are afraid. May it please your horrid Devilship? The new come Guest doth cry, May not the News I brought disturb Your hellish Majesty. But if it be not treason too What is the truth to tell, For truth should not (it is confest) At all be spoke in Hell; But truth it is, there is sprung up In England, late, a Sect, Who teach, Salvation doth belong To all, without respect. Make haste now to return again, Assume some body strate, And tell some Mortall Wight who may, What I shall speak, relate; Tell them although they do prevent Me in my great designe, Yet shall they not my vengeance scape For I have Rods in Brine. I'le muster Legions of my Spirits, And with them council take, How 'mong the sottish Elves I may Greatest confusion make. This Mortal Wight's the news which I Came hither thee to tell; My Errand's done, and I must now Return again to Hell. March: 28 1660 FINIS.
