e1060_59 99867612 119931
August .28. 1649. An Act prohibiting ye importing of any wines olle or silk from ye Kingdome of France into ye Com̄on: Wealth of England or Ireland or any the Dominions there-vnto belonging. vide voll. 8th fol. 69. single sheete.
blazon of the Commonwealth AN ACT For the admitting of the Purchasers of Bishops Lands TO Pay their whole Purchase-Moneys by VVeavers-Hall Bills. THe Parliament of England now assembled, finding upon due examination, that from the beginning of the sitting of the Con∣tractors for the sale of Bi∣shops Lands. to the Five and twentieth of July, One thousand six hun∣dred forty nine, exclusively there is paid and to be paid in ready money and Goldsmiths-hall Bills, upon the several Con∣tracts
for Bishops Lands made by them with∣in the time aforesaid, the full sum of Four hundred twenty three thousand, seven hundred sixty six pounds, fourteen shillings and ten pence: And being fully satisfied, That the said sum, together with the additional Secu∣rity of the Excize in course (as it now stands charged) is a visible and sufficient Security to the Lenders of the first Four hundred thou∣sand pounds, for whatsoever sum or sums of Money can remain due unto them or any of them, together with the growing Interest due for the same. And being deeply sensible, how slowly the Bishops Lands are now bought off, whereby a great Debt, with its growing In∣terest and great Charge is continued upon the Commonwealth, in regard that the Purcha∣sers of the said Lands are not admitted to pay their whole Purchase-Moneys by Weavers-Hall Bills, as is now most just and reasonable: Therefore be it Enacted and Ordained, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, That all persons who have made, or shall make from and after the Twenty fourth day of July, One thousand six hundred forty and nine inclusively, any Contract for Bishops Lands, shall be admitted to pay all or any part of their Purchase-Moneys, due or to be due upon such Contracts, either in ready Mo∣ney, Goldsmiths-Hall Bills, or Weavers-Hall Bills, as well for the Four hundred thousand pounds charged by Ordinance of the Thirteenth of May, One thousand six hundred forty seven, as the Eighty four thousand pounds charged by Ordinance of the Third of June, One thou∣sand six hundred forty seven, as the respective
Purchasers shall think fit: And the Trustees, Contractors and Treasurers for Bishops Lands, and all other Officers and persons whatsoever concerned herein, are required to take notice hereof, and to act accordingly. Die Martis, 28 Augusti, 1649. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Par∣liament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1649.
