e1061_71 99868229 169120
blazon or coat of arms AN ACT For Transferring the POWERS OF THE Committees for Indempnity. BE it Enacted and ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, and it is here∣by Enacted and Ordained, That all and every the Powers and au∣thorities which any Committee or Committees of Parliament had to give In∣dempnity to, or to save harmless and indemp∣nified any person or persons whatsoever, who have acted by Authority, or for the Service of the Parliament, be and are hereby transfer∣ted from the said Committee or Committees, and are hereby vested and setled in and upon Samuel Moyer, Iames Russel, Edward VVins∣low, Iosias Berners, VVilliam Molins, Ar∣thur
Squib and Richard Moor, Esquires; who by this Act and by the Authority thereof, or any four or more of them, are hereby autho∣rized to do and execute all and every the Acts, Ordinances and Orders of Parliament for Indempnity; and all and every the Powers and Authorities in or by them, or any of them, given, granted, limited or appointed, Any Law, Statute or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the persons abovenamed, or any four or more of them be impowred and authorized, by proof upon Oath, which they or any four or more of them have hereby power to administer, or by such other ways or means as shall be requisite and approved of by any four or more of them, to examine, adjudge, and finally determine all and every the Cases and Complaints, matters and things whatsoever, which at or upon the Twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundrey fifty and two, were complained of, undetermined, and depending before the said Committes or Com∣mittees of Parliament; or hereafter shall be exhibited and complained of to the persons a∣bovenamed, or any four or more of them, in pursuance of any Act, Ordinance or Order of Parliament, giving Indempnity for any mat∣ter or thing whatsoever done by Authority, or for the service or benefit of the Parliament; and to stay Proceedings in any Court of Iu∣stice or Equity in the mean time. And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Com∣missioners, or any five or more of them, be and
are hereby impowred and authorized to give and allow such Costs and Charges upon the dismission of any Petition or Complaint ex∣hibited before them, as to them or any five or more of them shall seem just and reason∣able. Provided always, That all and every Iudgement and Determination already had, made and given by the Committee or Commit∣tees of Parliament aforesaid, or any of them, shall by authority of this present Parliament stand good and confirmed, according to the Tenor and Purport thereof: And that all Pe∣titions, References and Examinations made and taken upon Oath, by or before the said Committee or Committees of Parliament, or any of them, in pursuance of the Powers to them granted, shall be allowed and admitted by the persons abovenamed, or any four or more of them, as if the same had been taken, had and done by or before them or any four or more of them; and the persons abovenamed, and every of them, are hereby enjoyned and requi∣ted, at or before the First day of July, in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hun∣dred fifty and two, to take the Oath hereafter expressed, before the Councel of State appoint∣ed by authority of Parliament, who are here∣by authorized to administer the same in these words following; That is to say, I A. B. do swear, That I will, according to my best skill and knowledge, faithfully discharge the Trust committed unto me, in re∣lation to an Act, Entituled, An Act for trans∣ferring
the Powers of the Committees for Indem∣pnity: And that I will not for favor or affe∣ction, rewards or gifts, or hopes of reward or gift break the same. Provided, That this Act shall continue and be in force until the First day of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and three. Wednesday the 23d of June, 1652. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.
