E667_13 99866011 166189
Another BLOVDY FIGHT AT SEA BETWEEN The English and the Dutch upon the Coast of Flanders. Sent in a Letter to the Parliament of England, and the Councel of State, on Saturday last; with their debates likewise, and Consultations, and Resolutions, on the Sabbothday in the afternoon at White-Hall. LIKEWISE The particulars of the Fight, the number sunk, and 40 men of War and Merchants taken, and brought into the Downs, under the command and protection of Dover Castle. ALSO A Declaration of the Lords Embassadours of the States of Holland, touching War and Peace, and the Parliaments final Answer and Resolution thereunto. Ordered to be forthwith Printed and Published, and dispersed throughout the several Counties in England and Wales, and the Town of Berwick. Signed G. Nothro, Cler. June. 15. LONDON: Printed for G: HORTON. 1652.
A PAPER Delivered by the LORDS EMBASSADORS To the Councel of State. Most Honourable Lords, WE are here by reason of an unhappy and unexpected mis∣chance; An horrible report hath amazed us, that a fight at sea should have been betwixt the Fleet of this Com∣mon-wealth and of the united Provinces, and that ours should have been the reason of this unfortunate busi∣nesse, That we began the fight, and that thereupon is fought most cruelly; and that from thence the rumor of the breaking off the treaty,
and of open war (which should be very near at hand between the two Nations) was spread: We astonished by this sad report, direct our selves to this honourable Assembly and do Declare before God, and out of all our Hearts, that the Fact, so as it is reported, is committed without the knowledge, and against the will of the States of the united Provinces our Lords, and of us their Embassadours. Moreover, we do affirm, That the hearts of ours do desire nothing but Unity, Peace, League, and a very near friendship with this Common-wealth, and hope that withall their wishes. In the mean while, we do think it not to be amisse, if we give notice unto your honours, that we have re∣ceived letters from the Admiral of the Fleet of the United Provinces Dated the 30 of the last moneth, wherein the occasion and reason of the said Fight quite otherwise is declared then the common Report is; for the truth of which businesse, we suppose to be convenient to inquire exactly; but this is worth observation in the mean time, That our Ad∣miral Trump in the same letter doth declare plainly to have no other Order from the Lords the States, then to sail about, and to view the shore and coast of our country, as far as Ostend and Newport, and no further. By which it doth appear as clearly as the Sun is under heaven that by all means the States of the United Provinces have had no mind to attempt any thing against the Fleet or other ships of this Common∣wealth. If any thing then in this businesse be done otherwise then ought to be, this doth not concern the said States, but them which have executed the said businesse, and let them make it good. We have been here now almost six moneths about the concluding a league, by spe∣ciall order of the States, and have delivered some days ago to your Commissioners a paper, in which not onely the different points touch∣ing the Treaty, but also the means by which the same could be brought to a good agreement, and reconciled one with another, were sufficient∣ly declared; so that we did expect nothing every day, but a happy end to so good a work; and truly that excellent matter may in very few hours be finished. But who should ever beleeve that so noble a work, and desired with so many wishes of all honest men, and especially of all the Churches of the Reformed Christian Religion, should be cut off or hindred by any such imprudent and turbulent man (whosoever he may be) without knowledge & against the wil of the Lords the States? by Law and custome of all nations is very well known, that he to
whom a charge is given in particular things, an Embassadour in pub∣lick Business going beyond the limit of their Commissions, a General of an army Depopulating without order of his Superiours any grounds of the Neighbours; a wild beast doing any mischief after it hath broken its bond, that not the Masters but those that have broken the bond are obliged, especially if the disapproving of the same Masters followeth thereupon; which without question (if the businesse be so as it is rela∣ted) is to be expected from the States of the United Provinces. In the mean while we make no doubt, that to attempt any Hostility be∣fore the other party is heard, cannot be approved neither by God, nor by any men, especially Christians. It is a custome by all reasonable na∣tions to demand restitution of their Goods if any trouble be done, and in case satisfaction be given or offered, to lay aside all Hostility. And it is no wonder that all Nations are so much against war, and inclined to establish a Peace, the War being plainly a cruel Monster, a world of evill, and a meer deluge of innocent bloud; therefore the most holy Fa∣thers of our Religion have expressely declared the war (although just) to be execrable, especially in relation to the Christians who are taught by their meekest Savior to spare other mens bloud as well as their own. But amongst all kind of wars this is reputed the most detestable and horri∣ble if between these nations war be risen. Truly the experience teach∣eth us, that the best and strongest wine (if it be corrupted) becomes the sowerest Vinegar; and indeed if two Nations having been friends of old times, of the same Religion, lovers of Liberty, joyning upon the same sea, next Neighbours, both valiant and warlike be clashed together, what is to be expected but the ruine of both, and as the Proverb saith; a Cadmean Victory. And what else is this then to afflict and depresse your Friends and Companions in Religion to please your enemies, and to give occasion openly for to hurt them both. An Author, being none of the least amongst yours, hath very well compared, as we conceive, both the two Nations to two earthen pots, driving in the sea with this device, if we hurt, we break; He hitted it very well that honest man, and we may believe you are of the same opinion. But if the two nations come to an agreement, Oh Lord, what store of Happinesse will this bring forth! The true Gods service will be established, the Sea be qui∣et, & opportunity taken away from all enemies to trouble them both, all Communions in Religion be resoiled, and which is to be reputed the chie∣fest  ll, to the most good and gracious Lord, Praises and Thanksgi∣gng will be lift up into the Heavens.
We conclude then, most Honourable Lords, and instantly demand and desire, so as we have longed to propose unto your Honours this three days since; First, That a Copy may be given unto us of the Relation of the things that are past. Secondly, That we may send that over by your leave to our Lords the States, and that the other part being heard, the truth of the business may be known. Thirdly, That in the mean while all things may be kept whole and untouched. Fourthly, That by no means the business of the concluding the Trea∣ty be put off, and that such unfortunate mischances may be avoided, and an everlasting Peace may be established between both the Nations. All which we desire of all our hearts, the great and bountifull God, the Author of Peace will be pleased to grant us. Signed, Cats. G: Schaep. Vandeperre. The answer of the Parliament of the Common wealth of ENGLAND. THe Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, calling to mind with what continued Demonstrations of Friendship and sincere Affections, from the very beginning of their inte∣stine troubles, they have proceeded towards their Neighbours of the U∣nited Provinces, omitting nothing on their part that might conduce to a good correspondence with them, and to a growing up into a more near and strict Union then formerly, Do find themselves much surprized with the unsuitable Returns that have been made thereunto, and espe∣cially at the acts of Hostility lately commited in the very Roads of England upon the Fleet of this Common-wealth, the matter of Fact whereof stated in clear proofs, is hereunto annexed, Upon serious and deliberate consideration of all, and of the several Papers delivered in by your Excellencies to the Councel of State, the Parliament thinks fit to give this answer to those papers:
The Parl. as they would be willing to make a charita∣ble construction of the Expressions used in the said Pa∣pers, endeavouring to represent the late engagement of the Fleets to have hapned without the knowledge, and a∣gainst the mind of your Superiors; So when they consi∣der how disagreeable to that profession the Resolutions and actions of your State and their Ministers at Sea have been, even in the midst of a Treaty offered by themselves, and managed here by your Excellencies, the extraordi∣nary preparations of One hundred and fifty sail of Men of War, without any visible occasion but what doth now appear (a just ground of Jealousie in your own judge∣ments, when your Lordships pretended to excuse it) and the instructions themselves given by your said Superiors to their Commanders at Sea, Do find too much cause to believe, That the Lords the States General of the United Provinces have an intention, by force to usurp the known Rights of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets that are, under God, their Wals and Bulwarks, and thereby expose this Common-wealth to Invasion at their plea∣sure, as by this late Action they have attempted to do: Whereupon the Parliament conceive they are obliged to endeavour, with Gods assistance, as they shall have op∣portunity, to seek repairation of the wrongs already suf∣fered, and security that the like be not attempted for the future. Nevertheless, with this mind and desire, That all diffe∣rences betwixt the Nations may (if possible) be peace∣ably and friendly composed, as God by his providence shall open a way thereunto, and circumstances shall be conducing to render such endeavors lesse dilatory, and more effectual then those of this kind heretofore used ave been. Hen: Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.
But to deviate from circumstances, and to proceed to realities, give me leave to present you with the Proverb of King James, who said, Fair words would butter no Parsnips; Even so it is with the Common-wealth of England: That during an honourable Treaty, high af∣fronts have been given, as before specified, which upon mature deliberation, produced further action; as appears by the Narrative sent to the Councel of State, who upon Sabbath day last, came to this result, That a Letter of thanks should be returned to Vice-Admiral Peacock, for his gallantry performed upon the Coast of Flanders; the perfect Relation whereof take as followeth. Capt. Peacock having intelligence of the Hollanders imperiousness, resolved to attempt some heroick At∣chievement for his Countries honour: In pursuance whereof, sailing to the coast of Flanders, met with two Dutchmen of War, who (upon Command in obedience to the Common-wealth of England) denied to strike sail, insomuch that a bloudy fight began, and after a sharp dispute, we sunk one, and took another, carrying about 40. pieces of Ordnance; since which time; divine Provi∣dence decreeing victory, about 40 sail are brought into Dover Peer under protection of the Castle; for which gallant service, the Parliament hath returned a Letter of thanks and gratuity, to the further encouragement of the Sea-men. FINIS.
