a322a 99895267 152533
An Account of the Manner of Taking the Late Duke of Monmouth, &c. By His Majesties Command. IMmediatly after the Defeat of the Rebels at Bridge-water; on Monday the sixth of July instant, the late Duke of Monmouth, late Lord Grey, and the Brandenburgh fled; and coming between Gillingham and Shaftsbury, got a Guide to lead them the way to the New Forrest, most free from Towns and Watches; he led them by White-Sheet four Miles East of Shaftsbury, and thence by Cranborne Chase; where their Horses being tir'd, they let them loose, and hid their Bridles and Sadles. In the mean time, the News of the said Defeat coming to the Lord Lumley, then posted at Ringwood in Hampshire, with three Troops of Horse of Collonel Staplyes Regiment, commanded by Major Bridger, Captain Monk and Captain Peckham, and four Companies of Foot of Collonel Alfords Regiment, Com∣manded by Lieutenant Collonel Cooper, Captain Bickely, Captain Best, and Captain Care, all of the Sussex Militia: His Lordship was pleas'd to send his Scouts e∣very way to take up suspected Persons; and Sir William Portman, for the same end, had taken care for strong Watches to be set, made up of his yellow Coats and others, on the Roads from Pool to the most Northern parts of Dorset. Upon the seventh Instant, about five in the Morning, some of the Lord Lumley's said Scouts (riding in the Road near Holt Lodge in Dorset, four Miles West of Ringwood) just at the turn of a Cross way, surpriz'd and seiz'd two suspected Persons; which (when the Lord Lumley came up) prov'd to be the late Lord Grey, and the said Guide: This put the Lord Lumley upon a strict examining of the Cottages (with which that Heathy Country abounds) and call'd in the Neighbourhood that were acquainted with the Country, &c. Notice of this being brought to Sir William Portman, by some of his Watches, &c. He hasten'd to the Place with as many Horse and Foot as he could of a sudden get together. It happen'd upon the Lord Lumley's inquiry amongst the Cottages, that a poor Woman, one Amy Farrant directed his Lordship to a Hedge, where she had seen two men go over; which Hedge prov'd to be part of the Out-bounds of very many enclosed Grounds; some overgrown by Fearn and Brakes, and others sown with Rye, Pease, or Oats, &c. Whereupon a strict Guard was put very near one another, round those Out∣bounds; whilst other Foot and Horse did beat within: These Guards kept their several Posts so well, that tho the late Duke, and the Brandenburgh attempted at least thirty times, to make their Escape out, yet they always found each Guard ready; and upon their last attempt to escape, two of the Troopers fire∣ing on them, made them immediatly to Retire and hide themselves apart from each other, in some of the adjacent Ditches, where they were afterwards found.
Upon the eight day by five of the Clock in the morning, the Brandenburgh was found; who upon Examination, confess'd, that he parted with the said late Duke within the same Out-bounds, about one of the Clock that morning: Whereupon every individual Person being encourag'd thereby, and by the hopes of having a share in the 5000. l. (as was before agreed of in the Field) did re∣new the pursuit of him with the strictest search and diligence imaginable; and about seven of the clock of the same morning, one Henry Parkin (servant to Samuel RollesEsq) happened to discover the said late Duke hid in a Ditch, covered with Fearn and Brakes, and calling to two of the Sussex Troopers that were by him, all three seiz'd him together: Sir William Portman happening to be near that place, rid presently in and quieted those that cried Shoot him, Shoot him! he laid hands on him as his Prisoner, and so preserv'd him from all violence and rudeness: And immediately in the same instant, the Lord Lum∣ley came in, and agreed that Sir William Portman should search him; which was done, and as soon as they had found his George, they dispatched that, with the News to his Majesty by Captain Bickely, and Mr. Chaldecot, a Sussex and Dor∣set Gentleman. The Prisoners after this were keept two nights at Ringwood. On Friday the Lord Lumley discharged the Foot there; and with the said three Troops of the Sussex Horse, and one Troop of the Dorset Militia, commanded by Captain Fownes, they were conveyed to Winchester, Where joyn'd them two Troops of his Ma∣jesties in pay, and two of the Northampton Militia Troops, all which condu∣cted them to Farnham Castle upon Saturday the 11th. and the next day to Guil∣ford, and upon Monday the 13th. to Fox-hall, where a Regiment of the Lord Dartmouths received them, with other Troops of His Majesties in pay, and thence by Barge they were carried to Whitehall. The Papers and Books that were found on him are since delivered to His Majesty. One of the Books was a Manuscript of Spells, Charms, and Conjurations, Songs, Receits, and Prayers, all written with the said late Duke's own hand. Two others were Manuscripts of Fortification and the Military Art. And a fourth Book fairly written, wherein are Computes of the yearly Ex∣pence of His Majesties Navy and Land Forces. And as for his Gold; only twenty Guinies were given to the said Parkin; and ten Guinies a piece to the two Troopers, that first seiz'd him; and the rest was return'd to the said late Duke. As the Prisoners passed through Rumsey, Winchester, Farnham, and Guil∣ford, one would admire to see the very great numbers of the Militia, with the Deputy Lieutenants, and Gentlemen of those parts, that were ready to guard them, and take off the Fatigue of such as were on the March. Within doors none but Commission Officers were trusted to watch by them; and besides those, the Lord Lumley and Sir William Portman took their turns to watch in Person, night and day, from the time of the taking of the said late Duke, until they had delivered him safe at Whitehal, from whence he was con∣veyed to the Tower. FINIS. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.
