A3660 E660_7 99865862 118113
A LETTER Sent from the Marquess of ARGYLE TO THE KING of SCOTS; Concerning the raising of a new Army a∣gainst the English; And his Desires and Proposals touching the same. Also, his Declaration to the People, and his Summons to the Gentry in the North; with the Rising of the Highlanders and Redshanks; their falling upon the Parliaments forces, and the event and success thereof. Likewise, the manner how they fortifie the Hills and Mountains; and the strange Engines of War which they have planted. Imprinted at London, for George Horton, 1652.
A DECLARATION Of the Marq. of ARGYLE Concerning the Parliament of England; and his Resolution and Summons to the Gentry: With the Rising of the Highlanders. SIR, THe Marquess of Argyle is returned to the Highlands, being possessed with sundry jea∣lousies and feares touching the present Go∣vernment of the Commonwealth of England; for, indeed, he hath declared, That he cannot give his
assent for the incorporating the Kingdom of Scot∣land, with the Commonwealth of England; but holds himself bound in duty, whilest he hath any power) to preserve the interest of the Kirk, and to include a Toleration for the Discipline of that Na∣tion, as it was concluded, enacted, and agreed upon by the General Assembly of Divines; And upon that account he was resolved to stand or fall: In pursuance whereof, he hath sent a Summons to the Lords and Gentry in those parts (a Copy whereof, I have sent you here inclosed) for them immediatly to make their personal appearance at Candress, to consult and determine upon the weighty and emer∣gent affaires of that Nation; for the defence and pre∣servation of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties. And accondingly on the fourth of this instant A∣pril, divers of the Gentry met at the aforesaid place, where the Marquess presented▪ 19 Propositions, touching their fundamental Laws and Government, the Presbyterian Proession, and the iviledges of the People; and after mature deliberatio thereup∣on their consultation produced these Results▪ That they found them to be consonant to the Word of God (yet the Voters Aliens to Religion) and ac∣cording to the solemn League and Covenant, and therefore thought themselves bound in Conscience,
and Duty to adhere therunto, and to give their con∣descensions for promoting thereof. Whereupon the Marquess desired their subscri∣ptions, and unanimously they assented thereunto; so that there is a new League and Confederacy a∣gainst the English; by which means, an Highland War is expected this Summer; in order whereunto, about 1000 Redshanks are levyed, beig armed with Bows and Arrows, Long Skeines, Cross-bows, Darts, and other strange Engines of War, (yet no∣thing so sure, but that they are instruments for their own destruction) and have made a spacious Line along the River neer Andress, with several Half-Moons, Flankers, and Sconces; but want great Ca∣non exceedingly to plant: however, they are very active and busie in making of Lether-Guns of seve∣ral sorts both great and small; and are raising divers Bulworks and Fortifications at sundry Passes, Ri∣vers, and Foords, and are as busie, as so many Rats in a Barley-mow. They talk high, and say they will level us with the Valleys, by stoning us from the Rocks; & think themselves as safe as so many Thieves in a Mill, be∣cause of their Mountainous Fortifications, having upon each Rock, where there is any possibility to attempt a paage, placed great heapes of stones and
flints, to tumble down upon their heads, in case they should attempt to storm. These Highlanders have lately made an attempt upon the Low-Lands, where they fell upon some of our Out-quarters; but the Allarm being given, our men very opportunely came in, and soon expelled them; killing twenty two, and took thirty four pri∣soners. We could not embrace the pursuit, by reason of the advantagiousness of the grounds for the Enemy, yet notwithstanding upon the securing of the pri∣soners, we demanded what their principles were they fought for; they answer'd. For God▪ their dear Lord Marquess, and their gude King; but seemed to be very passionate; and truly I must ingenuous∣ly confess, they are a stout (but Heathenish) Gene∣ration. For their Ministers are as crosse-grain'd as ever, and throw so many Fire-balls at the Government, that (if possible, and permitted) they will set all a∣gain in flames; and great is their spleen against those of their own Nation, that are satisfied in acting by Commission, under the Authority of England, or appear any wayes inclinable to an Incorporation with it. So much, for their own Ends, are they enemies to
the good of their domineering Hierarchy. If the yoke of the Lords, Lairds, and Priests be once taken off, then they will be deprived of that wicked com∣pliance, which was wont to be maintained betwixt themselves, as cruel Taskmasters, both in Spirituals and Civils, for inslaving of the poor people. But now (praised be God) things work pretty well; for, the Scales begin to fall off from mens eyes, to a lothing of former Vanities, insomuch that seve∣ral Kirks about Aberdeen are faln off, and have de∣serted that Presbytery, which gives a strong Allarm to the rest of the Clergy. Its reported, That the aforesaid Marquesse of Argyle hath fent a Letter to the pretended King Charles Stuart, for a supply of Arms and Ammunition, wherein he assures him that he will be both loyal ad faithful to the last minute, and that he hath now a new Game to play, &c. In∣deed, we may probably conjecture, That he hath some notable Design in hand, by reason of his Con∣federacy and Combination with the adverse Party; a cleer demonstration whereof, is apparently made evident by the ensuing Summons. THese are strictly to charge and require all Lords and Gentlemen whatsoe∣ver,
that they forthwith make their appear∣ance at Candress, there to consult and de∣termine upon such things as may tend to the honour of Religion, the peace and wel∣fare of this Nation, the preservation of our Liberties and Freedoms, and the due obser∣ving of our ancient Laws and Customes, in Kirk and State, against all those who shall endeavor the extirpation thereof. Dalkeith April 9. 1652. FINIS.
