A3850 E417_11 99859094 161320
ARTICLES OF High-Treason Exhibited against the FORT-ROYALL, With all other the Horn-works and Breast-workes about the CITIE. By the representative body of the Common-Counsell of the CITIE. WITH The last Will and Testament of the said FORT-ROYALL. ALSO, Her severall Legacies to divers eminent Persons of Qualitie. Also her Epitaph. Printed in the Yeare 1647.
Articles Of High-Treason, &c. Whereas this Fort for many Capitall crimes, and other notorious offences committed upon divers Members of the Citie, to the breach of our Priviledge, and City Customes; wee by advice of our great Counsell at Guild-Hall have drawn up against her these ensuing Articles following. INprimis, That this Grand Malig∣nant Horn-worke, known by the Name of the Fort Royall; hath a∣gainst the lawes of our dread So∣veraigne, and by the instigation of the devill, trayterously endea∣voured to foment and profecute a New and bloody War, and hath kept back Supplyes from Ireland, and likewise keept out his Majesty from his Children and Parliament, to the great decay of Tradings, and the forfeiture of our Charter, ann Secondly, the loud Reports of her Tormenters called Ca∣nons, &c. being very hurtfull unto us even in their names as well as their natures; have so thundred from time to
time in our eares to the great disturbance not only of our little wits, but to the great prejudice of our beloved wives, making so hideous a noyse that many of them have lately miscarried, and fell backwards at the very report of the Ordinance. Thirdly, she hath been the abbettor and maintainer of many unlawfull sports; for whilst she hath kept us drink∣ing, dicing, at nine-pins and the like games or playes, our Wives have played fast and lose with us, and have bin at Put, and In and In with others. Fourthly, she hath lately played the harlot, and prosti∣tuted her body, and delivered up the key of her Turn-pike; or Virginity to Sir Thomas; to the great shame and distur∣bance of the City. Fifthly, she hath commanded divers Citizens to guard her day and night, even as they tendred their duty, to stand bolt upright in their Armes, upon their guard, till their Wives have fortified their Halfe-Moones at home, and made new Horn-workes, and breast-workes, and arm'd their own men, and so put them in a posture to raise a new War, which hath caused much jarring and dissention, and many by-blowes in this City, to the great disturbance in the Head-quarters of their husbands. Resolved upon the question, that this pernicious Act of the said Royall Fort is an absolute invasion of the City Charter in the representative foreheads of their Deare Husbands. Resolved againe, that the said Royall-Fort is ill-affected to the State and City. Resolved that there be a publick thanksgiving for the great deliverance of the Trained-Bands their brow-ant∣lers; and for the demolishment of the said Fort, and all other Forts, Sconces, halfe-Moones, Horne-workes and
Breastworks about the City; and a Covenant drawn up to defie Sir Thomas, and all his works hereafter. Ordered, That speedy course be taken for suppressing all private and unlawful seperte Congregations. Ordered, That no person disaffected to the Presbyterian Govern∣ment be imployed in any publick trust in the Citie. Ordered, That Vnion be preserved between all Citizens and their Wives, and all Iealousie removed that may endanger their mutuall agreement. Ordered, That the Militia be fully and wholly setled upon the Citie, as it was presented at Ox bridge. Ordered, That the late Lord Major and his venerable Brothers be fully vindicated. Ordered, That Quarter-man, and all other Independents that be ill affected to the peace of the Citie, be forth with brought to exemplar punishment. The said Fort understanding that these Articles of High-treason were drawn up against her, being prompted by the consideration of the frailty of these changeable times, called a Scrivener, and made this Will following.
The last Vill and Testament of the Fort-Royall, and all other Brest-works and Horn-works a∣about the Citie. IN the name of Uulcan, and of the Committee for the safety of the Citie, Amen. I the Fort Royall, being a profest Presbyter, being sore sick in body, but in perfect memory doe make this my last Will and Testa∣ment, in manner and form as followeth. Inprimis, I doe bequeath my Ghost into the hands of Alderman Isaac that gave it; to be buried in a parcell of the waste ground of his lately revived credit, and to be bu∣ried without sound of Bell, or any words of Conjuration at my buriall. Jtem I give and bequeath all my Guns to Sir Thomas Fairfax, and by him to be disposed of for His Majesties use. Jtem, I bequeath my powder to the Citie boyes, that went to the Parliament to make Crackers, when the L. Major shall be released from the Tower. Jtem, I bequeath my bullets unto the Citie Rampants that brought their dust-baskets and fire shovels to helpe set me up; that with the said bullets they may grind Mustard, and so doe it in a dish, which shall be something for them to begin house withall; when the Wag-tayles shall be provided of yoak fellowes, otherwise called husbands. Item, I give and bequeath my stones unto the reverent new Dean of Pauls to help him build a stone-wall of Refor∣mation that may be as hard and flinty as the hearts of his brethren, and he himselfe more honest, then ever to make use of more Compurgators.
Item, I bequeath my souldiers, Montrosses, and other for the reliefe of distressed Ireland, provided they be first furnished with their Arrears from the Citie. Jtem, I bequeath my Sutlers wife to Doctor Sibbals to to be his Worships Nurse, provided that she nurse none but his ligitimate Children. Jtem, I give and bequeath all my wood unto Master German, Citie-Carpenter to make Gibits for the use of the Citie. Jtem, I give my earth to the Parliament to put them in mind that they are but men, and all made of no better mettall, and are as subject to fate or desolation as my selfe. Jtem, My Sutler I bequeath to the care of Instice Long, and Iustice Lowder when he keeps asutling Ale-house in the Suburbs, where I wish, that all his Guests may be pennilesse; that he may pawn his wifes Petticoat to pay his Brewer, and his glorious shelves shine not so much as with an earthen Platter; instead of sattin hangings, may the wals of his house be painted with choak, and the figers of of no more valew then Cyphers: May he weekly be sub∣ject to Informers, and his forfeited License be put to the last use of waste paper, &c. Lastly, all my grasse upon my work to Alderman At∣kins, to clense his Breeches, and constitute and ordain him and the rest of his Brethren in the Tower to be my lawful Executors for the administration of this my last Will and stament.
Epitah for a Post-script. Imperious Ignorance begot me first, Put me to Presbytery to be nurst: That I dy'd young, alas I do confesse J suck'd from her but varnish'd Rottenesse. Whilst I was one day in a sprightfull trance Fierce Death dismounted all my Ordinance, Seiz'd on all; now all was in his power, And (like to Traytors) sent us to the Tower, Where like dull Aldermen, we are doom'd to lye Till we be charg'd, and then must be let flye. No hopes of a Reprieve; the mutinous cru That stung brave Strafford, dispatch me and you. If we must hang, let not our states much vary Our office was alike, to * fetch and carry. Deare Citizens, for evermore farewell, For sins of Paracide, I must to Hell. FINIS.
