b3019b e288_38 99860917 113044
A MORE PARTICVLAR AND EXACT RELATION OF The Victory obtained by the Parlia∣ments Forces under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. WHEREIN Divers things very considerable are mentio∣ned, which before are omitted in the severall Relations formerly published. Being two Letters, the one written by G. B. a Gentleman in the Army, unto Lievtenant Colo∣nell Roe▪ Scoutmaster Generall for the City of LONDON. The other by Colonell Okey to a Ci∣tizen of LONDON. With the true Coppy of a Letter of the re∣gaining of Leicester. June 19th LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1645.
A more particular and exact Relation of the Victory obtained by the Parliaments For∣ces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. SIR, YOu have heard at large I beleeve of the good successe God hath given unto us; how hee hath raised us out of our graves, and caused our dead hopes to live again, by that fearfull overthrow he hath given the Adversary; the par∣ticulars of which Battail I could give you, but suppose you have heard it already, therefore I forbear, onely in short thus: About 11 of the clock wee were drawn both Armies into Battalia in Nasby fields, a place of little hills and vales, in a direct line equall to both parts, the ground some ploughed, some Champion. Our Battaile was thus ordered; Lievtenant Generall Cromwell commanded all the Horse, Major Generall Skippon the Foot; the Generall not in one place, but every where as occasion required. In our right Wing of Horse were the Generalls, (sometimes Lievtenant Generall Cromwells,) Colo∣nell Whaleys, Col. Peys, Col. Rossiters, Col. Fines, and Col. Sheffields, Regiments. In the left Wing were Colonell Iretons, (who was made Commissary Generall of the Horse in the Field,) Colonell Fleetwoods, Col. Rich, Col. Butler, Col. Ʋermudens, and the Suffolke Regiments, Dragoons equally divided on both parts. The Infantry thus ordered; in the right Wing, the Generalls, Colonell Mountagues, Col. Pickerings, Col. Sir Herdus Wallers Regiments. In the left, Major Generall Skip∣pon's, Colonell Bartlets, Col. Rainsboroughs, Col. Hammons Regiments. The wind was Northwest, and before we joyned battail, blew stiffe, e∣quall on both parts; onely the Enemy had it somewhat more advan∣tagious for them: in regard the wind was that way; both Parties sought to get the winde, which occasioned our left wing of Horse, and of Foot, and their right, first to engage; where was a most terrible dispute; at length the fury of the Enemy caused two Regiments of Horse to give ground a little, the rest stood, the retreat was upon Ma∣jor Generall Skippons Regiment, being the utmost of that Wing, and the Regiment next to him; the Enemy pursued, and cam neere the Train: In the mean time Lievtenant Generall Cromwell routed the Kings left Wing, drove them cleare away from that side, having made not
the least retreat; but was like a Torrant driving all before them: In which the Generall charged valiantly, and lost his Head-piece, who see∣ing the left scattered, hee with Lievtenant Generall Cromwell faced about to that Wing, with some Divisions of Horse, charged bare headed with∣in push of Pike, routed the Enemy; after this, both parts rallyed, and stood very neere each other, having silence for a short space, but ours ad∣vancing to charge, the Enemy fled, ours pursued them for the space of 14 miles, within two miles of Leicester, cutting them off as they went; all their Foot were cut off and taken, wee have about 4 or 5000 Prisoners, of Horse at least 2000. All the traine and Coaches, except the Kings, and Digbies Coaches. All their Armes, Provisions, Ordinance, &c. Bag and Baggage. Abundance of rich plunder for the Souldiers, a∣bout 400 slaine in the place, besides the chase; about 50 of ours con∣ceived to be slaine: one slaine that had a Plush Coat, with a Starre in Silver on it, conceived the Duke of Lenox, Sir Marmaduke, Langdale, the Lord Grandenson, and many other Officers of Note, as we conceive, and are informed, besides abundance wounded on the place, and 200 car∣ryed that night wounded into Leicester; many Women slaine that were in their Army, and many taken, which are every one wounded. By a Waggoner of the Kings taken, we understand that the King was woun∣ded in the Arm, and that he saw it bleed, and that at one time our horse were beyond him. On our part slaine, Captain Tomkins, Lievtenant Generall Cromwels Cornet, Colonell Whaleys Cornet, and a few others, but many wounded: Ʋiz. Major Generall Skippon shot through the right side, Colonell Ire∣ton wounded in foure place, but not mortall, Colonell Butler, Captain Blevin, and many others wounded. Our men came on with brave va∣lour and agility, as could be expected from men, the best demonstrati∣on of the Officers valour is their wounds. I doe not heare of one but discharged his Duty: and cannot praise one above another, least I should detract from any: Onely, concerning the Generals. Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax never appeared with that alaerity of Spirit, and that plea∣sant countenance, as then; greatly encouraging his Souldiers, and pro∣mised by his countenance Victory; before the fight, his former lookes were like a dead man, to what he had when he went to ingage: and the truth is, his very countenance discovered an Embleme of true valour, as ever we saw; and had a spirit heightned above the ordinary Spirit of man, hee was to and againe in the Front, carrying Orders, bringing on Divisions in midst of Dangers, with gallant bravery, and received not the least wound; though hee ingaged bare headed, and routed the Enemy.
That Noble Lievtenant Generall Cromwell behaved himself to the ut∣most; routed the Adversary as on Marston-Moore, and then relieved our Army on the other Party which was like to bee undone; whom God mightily honoured. And now hath given Prince Rupert his other I∣ron-side. And as for Major Generall Skippon, worthy to bee continually in the best thoughts of truest English: behaved himselfe with that Valour and Gallantry as possibly a man could doe: I heard the Generall speak wonderfully to him in his praise; with great expressions. In the first charge he received his wound, shot through the right side under the Ribbes, through Armour, and Coat, but not mortall, yet notwithstan∣ding hee kept his Horse, and discharged his place, and would by no meanes bee drawn off till the Field was wonne; for the space of two houres and a half. Truely Sir, you would scarce beleeve that undaun∣tednesse that was in him. I helped him to a House, and carryed him to his Chamber, stript him, and saw his wound drest; and never beheld such a gallant-Spirit in my life to beare such a wound. And when I said to him, Sir, your wound hath caused a little cloud on this glori∣ous day; hee answered, by no meanes let mine Ecclipse its glory, for it is my honour that I have received a wound, and it was my God that strengthned mee. Sir, these three Generalls I suppose have not their fellows in the world, all things considered. Notwithstanding our wounded and weary men in this great Battail, which may be the saving of the three Kingdomes, and is to us as life from the dead, yet we marched on Lords day last to Great Glinne, where was our head Quarters the last night, about four miles from Leicester. Lievtena. Gen Cromwell with our horse faced it last night; we are at this instant drawing to a Rendezvouz, & our General is resolved to attempt, the Lord appeare as formerly to us; and wee hope that hee will so blesse our poore despised Army, that he will make it a Saviour for this Nation. 2500 Horse of Derby and Nottingham, &c. are neare to joyn with us, now is the opportunity. The King went not into Leicester, nor any of the Horse, save the wounded men, but marched through Elsen that night: Part towards Litchfield, part towards Newarke: they left many Portmantles and tired Horses beyond Leicester. From the West by one that came from Bridgewater. I understand that our party were safe there on Wednesday last, and have Encamped them∣selves on this side Taunton, they have six miles Rainge, hee heard from the Enemy that they were lately releived from Lyme, and that they said, if reliefe came not within this fortnight, all would be there owne.
Sir, I had thought to have beene short, yet I have made somewhat a large Narration; you will pardon the prolixity of my lines, which cannot bee so digested in regard of our hasty march: I hope shortly to give you a good account of Leicester: This is all at present. June 16. 1645. Great Glinne. Your humble Servant George Bishop. Another Letter from Colonell Okey to a Citizen of LONDON. Noble Sir, HAving little opportunity and good newes through Gods goodnesse to send unto you, I thought good to neglect no opportunity, but by the first convenient messenger to send to you, that so you might receive true intellegence, and might with the rest of Gods people joyne together in praises to the Lord for his infinite Mercy to us in particular, and to all the whole Land in generall, I am not Ignorant that news will come to you of this great Victory before my Letter comes to your hands; But it is my desire so neere as I can to relate to you the certain∣ty of it. After many tedious houers night and day since I saw you, and Watching every night with my Regiment upon there quarters, having the forelorne guard every night, it pleased God that upon Sa∣turday the 14. of this instant month between 7 & 8 of the clock in the morning, wee drew neere to a place called Nasby, unto Clypsome field a mile and halfe from our quarters, where we had the guard the night before; and so soone as wee came into the field, the Enemy was drawn up into a Battalia ready to give us battell; and so ready that had it not pleased the Lord of his infinite Mercy to shew himselfe, wee had beene all cut off, for they were ready to advance upon us, be∣fore
wee were drawn up into a Battalia for to incounter with them; But our Noble Generall and Leivtenant Generall, Cromwell, and ma∣jor Generall Skippon were so carefull of the great worke in hand; as that they soone drew us up into a Body, in such a manner, as that wee were presently ready to encounter with the Enemy, as the Ene∣my was to fall upon us. For although they had marched in a very stately way in a whole Body towards us, thinking thereby to daunt us, or at least to take us before wee were ready to give them entertainement; for they had a very large Body both of Foot and Horse, but especially of Horse. I was half a mile be∣hinde in a Medow giving my men Ammunition, and had not the Lievtenant Gen. come presently, & caused me with all speed to mount my men, & flanck our left Wing, which was the Kings right Wing of horse; where was Prince Maurice, who charged at the head of his Regiment, and the King himself in the next reserve charged at the head of his men, but by that time I could get my men to light, and deliver up their Hor∣ses, in a little close, the Enemy drew towards us: which my men per∣ceiving, they with shooting and rejoycing received them, although they were incompassed on the one side with the Kings Horse, and on the other side with Foot and Horse to get the Close; but it pleased God that wee beat off both the Horse and the Foot on the left, and the right Wing, and cleared the Field, and kept our ground: When as the Kings Horse had driven our men a mile before them on the left Wing at their first comming on; then wee discovered many of the Kings Regiment, by reason that they came somewhat neare unto us; before ever they discharged a Pistoll at any Horse; and had not wee by Gods providence been there, there had been but few of Colonell Butlers Regiment left, after this wee gave up our selves for lost men, but wee resolved every man to stand to the last, and presently upon it, God of his providence ordered it so, that our right Wing, which was Co∣lonel Cromwell his Regiment drave the Enemy before them; which I perceiving (after one houres battail) caused all my men to mount and to charge into their Foot, which accordingly they did; and took all their Colours, and 500 Prisoners, besides what wee killed, and all their Armes. After this the King his Horse drew up into a body againe: and then I drew up my Dragoons, and charged the Kings Regiment of Horse, and they faced about and run away, and never made any stay till they came to Leicester, and we pursued them within three miles and a halfe of Leicester, which was about 15 miles from the place where we fought: wee took, as neare as we can guesse, between 4 and 5000 men,
with many Horse, all their Ordinance, Bag and Baggage; and there was as we were informed, but two Foot men went into Leicester; the King himselfe very hardly escaped. Now what remaines, but that you and wee should magnifie the name of our God, that did remember a poore handfull of dispised men, whom they had thought to have swallowed up before them. And I desire you, that you would in our behalf blesse God that hath made us any instruments for our Kingdomes good, and that wee may walke worthy of so great a Mercy and Deliverance. And I humbly desire that Thanks may be given to Almighty God that did so miraculously deliver us. I lost not one man, and had but three men wounded in all my Regiment. Thus in hast I rest, desiring the Lord to keepe you and all yours. And remain Your Friend to Command JOHN OKEY. A copy of a Letter written from Northampton, the 18 of June, 1645. at 10 of the clock in the Morning. By the High Shreiffe of Northampton shiere. Cozen, THe greatnesse of the late Victory appeares to us that are neare it, every day more and more; the Printed things out with you, being far short of it: we have every day Knights and Colonells fresh brought in. But as an addition to all, this morning we have the great goodnesse of the regai∣ning Leicester; the Officers so farre as Majors, goe away with their single Horses and Armes, all under Majors, and the common Souldiers, onely with staves in their hands; all Armes, Ammunition, Ordnance, Bag and Buggage is the Parliaments; the Lord in Heaven make us thankfull. So resteth Northampton, 18 June, 1645. at 10 in the morning. Your very Loving Vncle Edward Farmer. FINIS.
