B3294A 45578160 172116
The Bloody VINTNER: OR, Cruelty Rewarded with Iustice. Giving a true Account of one Edward (alias) Edmund Kirk, Vintner, who being privately Married to a Servant Maid, did, on the 25th. of May, delude her from her Masters House, under the pretence of visit∣ing some Relation; But having of her all alone in a private Road near Paddington, he most bar∣barously and cruelly Murdered her; for which Fact he was Indicted and found Guilty, and also received due Sentence of Death, which was accordingly Executed, on Friday the 11th. of this In∣stant July, 1684. To the Tune of,Aim not too high: OH it would make a Christians heart to ake, To think that Men they will no warning take, ut will run on, as being void of fear, lthough they know their Lives must pay full dear. ne dward Kirk, a Vintner was he, ho was the actor of this Cruelte; h hi to the World I here will now lay plain, i hopes they may take warning by the same. is Vintner was Married privatele to a Servant-Maid of low Degree; t yet, alas! her self for to maintain, e foced was in Service to remain And importuned her with him to go, But yet it prov'd her dismal overthrow. What cruel Wretch such thoughts could entertain? Sure Satan in his very heart did Reign: For though he see the Coach-maker to dye, That he should act this Bloody Villany! This Cruelty his very heart possest, And with the thoughts of Murder in his Breast, She went with him a Cousin for to see, As if in Love and perfect Vnity. And thus alas! alone with him  went He beat and bruised her, the more to blame, Vntil the Ferril flew from off his Cane: Vndoubtedly it did her then surprize, To see grim Death appear before her eyes. But then he pulled forth his Bloody Knife, Poor Soul! she strugl'd with him for her Life, As by her hands it plainly did appear; Also, he cut her Throat from Ear to Ear. And thus he left her Bleeding on the ground, When he had given her the Fatal Wound; Immediately he homeward went withal, And seemed not to be concern'd at all. This Murder was found out in God's good time, And he was Apprehended for his Crime; Then he confess'd the Fact, and laid it plain, Though he deny'd it afterwards again. But being brought unto the Bar at last, The Bill was found against him; he was Cast, Though he the Fact before them all deny'd, No Creature there could witness on his side. He was found Guilty, and Condemn'd to Dye, A just Reward for such like Cruelty: Though she was mean, she was his Lawful Wife, With whom he might have liv'd a happy Life. But let his dismal end a Warning be, That we may live in Love and Vnite; In true content, and prefect joy, and peace, That Murders may not dayly thus increase. For sure it is a dismal sight to see, That Men should end their days so shamefulle: And those that might have lived longer time, Are cut off like a Flower in their prime. O that all Men would learn to be more Wise, And set the fear of God before their eyes; That when we dye, our joys may then increase, And that we may lay down our heads in peace. FINIS.
