B5423 E107_16 99872165 124589
JULY 19. 1642. AN EXACT RELATION OF TWO Victorious Battels Fought by the English: Wherein they put to flight 2200, and kill'd 700 of the Rebels at Cardoughen in the Province of Munster; and 500 more at Youghall▪ at both which places they took a great quantity of Ammu∣nition, goods and victuals from the Rebels. As it was sent to Mr. Buller, a Member of the House of Commons, and another Gentleman of quality. Wherein is likewise a true Relation of the death of the Lord President. London, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for E. Husbands and I. Franck.
Cardoughen, 3. Iulii, 1642. IN MVNSTER. DEar Brother, my kind love remembred unto you. This is the third of my writing since my arrivall in Ireland, where we want both men and money, which if we have not supplyed suddenly we shall be forc't to retreat unto the Sea-ports. As for News, you may be pleased to take notice, that on Tues∣day last, there were 500 Musquetiers, and two troops of horse, which fell on 3000 of the Rebels, and beat them out of their quarters, taking all their baggage, and killing about 400; wee onely lost three men, and had five hurt, whereof my Corporall was kill'd, my Sargeant run clean through the body, but is yet living,
my Drummer dangerously hurt, with another of my common Souldiers. My Lo: President dyed yesterday about seven of the clock in the forenoon, the Rebels had besieged his Castle, but were likewise beaten off by the Lord Inchequeen, who kill'd between 6 and 700 of them, and possest himself of all the baggage, there were of the Rebells above 2200, over and besides what they killed. Thus with my duty to my father and mother, I rest Your loving Brother, IO: BƲLLER.
YOVGHALL, 4. JULII, 1642. Honest Mr. BAYLY, HAving this opportunity, and some good news to communicate to you, I could not choose but acquaint you, that upon Wednesday last a party of 500 Musquetiers, and 3 troops of horse marched from the camp at Dunarraile, into the county of Limrick to Shandrithe, where 2500 horse & foot of the Rebells were quartered, whom our men (de∣spising their numbers) very valiantly assailed in their quarters, but not before they were provided for them; for they had long before taken the Alarm, and had sent out a Troop of their horse, and after that their whole bo∣dy, whom our men declined untill they came into good ground, and then made a stand ready to receive them, but then they retreated to their quarter in the Town, and ours advanced both Foot and Horse, they intertai∣ned a pretty Skirmish with our foot, wherein we lost two men and had eight hurt, at last the Lord of Dun∣garvans Troop commanded by Lieutenant Carleton, observing that they with-guarded the entrance of their quarter and not suddenly to be releived flew in and forc'd it, whereupon as their manner is they fell to their
heeles, and our horse to execution for three miles space, untill they came to a wood their common refuge; there fell of the Enemie between four and five Hun∣dred: We took one Captaine and twelve others of qualitie, six Ensignes, six Drummes, two bagpipes, two waggons, one Hundred and twenty Musquets, abundance of Pikes, and some Ammunition▪ we had only two horses hurt. Yesterday the Lord Browhill with his Troop, and between two and three Hundred Foot going to releive Sir Richard Osborn, who was in great Dishes at his Castle, was encountred by Sir Ni∣cholas Welsh (neer Cappa) with three Troops and six or eight Colours of Foot, after an houres Skirmish they fell into disorder, brake and fled: Our men did execu∣tion upon them untill they got the wood to their shell∣ter, they found two Hundred and fiftie dead bodyes, took forty Musquets, abundance of Pikes, some pow∣der and bullets, and a great deale of good cheere, wher∣with they intended to be merry, after they had washed their hands in English blood: we lost one onely Gen∣tleman Master Maynard, eldest Son to the Ladie May∣nard, whom we all much lament. Your assured loving friend Thomas Moore.
