c2152 e428_6 99864072 116291
A BRIEFE ABSTRACT OF THE KINGS LETTERS TO THE QUEENE. VVith some OBSERVATI∣ONS thereupon. VVherein His MAjESTIES Actions are deciphered. By a Person of Qualitie. LONDON; Printed for Hannah Allen in Popes-head-Alley at the signe of the Crowne. 1648.
❧ To the Christian Reader. Courteous Reader; Last new discoveries should cause old actions to be forgotten, I thought it no lesse than part of my duty, in a briefe manner, to put thee in minde of some few par∣ticulars, whereby thou maist the better satisfie thy selfe and others in things of this nature; not that it is any way pleasing to me, to rip open old offences after renewed repentance, but surly per∣sisting in evill without remorse, deserves no lesse than sharpe reproofe, wheresoever it is found. Here I shall desire thee to consider of this fol∣lowing Letter from the King to the Queene. Farewell. S. E.
THE KINGS LETTER TO THE QƲEENE. DEARE HEART; I Will be ever constant to the rules and grounds thou lefts with me, and that the Treaty at Uxbridge was ac∣cording to the little Paper thou lefts with me, and I commend thee for thy dexterity and activity, and I think none more fit to be a means of a glo∣rious peace of this Kingdome, but thy selfe, and with∣out thy company, I can neither have peace nor com∣fort, for I value thy love above all earthly things, and that is my contentment, for all my actions are insepa∣rably joyned with thine; and shall ever tend to serve and please thee, and no danger of death or misery, (which I thinke much worse) shall make me doe any thing unworthy of thy love, and I hope the difference between the Scots and the Independents will increase, and the dissentions at London are rather increasing than ceasing; and be confident, I will not desert the Bishops and Papists, mine and thy best friends. And if thou ap∣prove of it, I will bestow Percies place upon the Earle of Newcastle, and will not engage my selfe before I have thy answer, and feare not, I have a little more wit than
to goe to London, or disband any Army before a peace. The Rebels now brutish Generall hath refused to med∣dle with forreine Passes, and I am well freed now from the base and mutinous motions by my mungrell Parlia∣ment here: and I advise thee, France is the best way for transporting of the Duke of Loraines Army into Eng∣land. As for trusting the Rebels, either in going to Lon∣don, or disbanding my Army before a Peace, doe no wayes feare the hazarding so cheaply and foolishly my discretion; for I esteeme the interest thou hast in me at a far greater rate, and pretend to have a little more wit, at least the sympathie that is between us, than put my selfe into the reference of perfidious Rebels. Also I give thee power in my name to promise to whom thou thinke fit to trust with so great a secret, that I will sus∣pend all Laws against the Romaine Catholicks in Eng∣land and Ireland, as soone as God shall enable me, I will take them away by a Law, so as by thy meanes and fa∣vour, I may have so powerfull an assistance against my Rebels of England and Scotland, as may deserve so great a favour, and enable me to doe it; and also to promise them in Ireland, if you can have it no cheaper, that I will joyne with their Forces against Inchqueene, and the Scots, and if I had had but two of my minde, I would ne∣ver have called them a Parliament: and the argument that prevailed with me, that the calling of them did not acknowledge them to be a Parliament: upon which consideration and condition, I did it and no otherwise, and accordingly it is regestred in the Councell-booke with the Councels unanimous approbation: and I pray consider above all earthly things, that my contentment is inseparably joyned with thine, for all my actions shall ever tend to serve and please thee. I remaine eter∣nally thine, C. R.
OBSERVATIONS UPON the Kings Letter to the Queene. THe Queene in the first place, in her Letter then taken, adviseth the King to disband this perpetuall Parliament, and she certainly saith, all the rest will easi∣ly follow. And if ever you goe to London before the Parliament is ended without an Army, you are lost: and above all, have a care not to desert the Bishops, and poor Catholiques, who have faithfully served you. And had not the King by a still March brought us a great way towards Popery and Tyranny; had not the Conductors missed their way, and led us too far North; and was not a strange wife prepared for him, which ac∣cording to the Scripture-truth, is a dangerous prepa∣rative for a strange god, for the King being in full con∣junction with the Popish Planet the Queen, he was to∣tally eclipsed by her counsell, who under the Royall Curtaines perswaded him to advance the plots of the Catholiques under the colour of the Protestant Religi∣on: Did not he goe into Spaine to learne the Protestant Religion? and then returned and married a Catholique Queene: Else what thinke you meant the suspending of Lectures, as an order of vagrants; then forbidding all Pastors to preach on the week dayes in their own Pari∣shes; then to inhibite preaching on the Lords day in the afternoone; the forbidding all prayer, but in the words of the Cannon; then bringing in Popish Cere∣monies; and the Table must be set Altar-wise, and all compelled to kneele before it, or not to be admitted to receive the Sacrament; and then it must be cryed up to be the Sanctum Sanctorum, and all must adore and bow
before it; Then an Edict must be read against our Bre∣thren the Scots, and an oath for Episcopacy, and pressing examples to dazell the eyes of the lesse judicious of the Kingdome. As the King, the Lord Bishops, the Lords of the most noble order of the Garter, bow towards the Altar at their Enstalment, in his Majesties Chappell, and it is thus and thus adorned, and so they do it by de∣grees, for feare of noyse, and do it so as we shall neither know nor see. And what have you forgotten the many indulgences done by Windebanke the Kings Secretary, to multitudes of condemned Priests and Jesuites: the Popes Nuncio's residence here, and the severall Letters to the Pope, and from the Pope about a reconciliation with Rome, and of a Cardinall Cap sent into this King∣dome? And can any reasonable man imagine, but it was sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, that great Pre∣late and favourite of the Kings? Also remember his Ma∣jesties Letter to Capt. Pennington, the Vice-Admirall, to deliver up the English Fleete to the French, and if any should disobey, he should sink them, to the utter ruine of the Protestants in France. Concerning Ireland, have you forgotten the often private meetings at White-Hall two months before the rebellion in Ireland broke forth by Muskery Plumket, Browne, and Gormonston, &c. the arch Rebels of Ireland, and now of the supreame Coun∣cell at Kilkenny in Ireland? and when the King first heard of that horrid rebellion, and of the massacre of 100000 of his Protestant Subjects (he being in Scotland) divers standers by then did discover by the Kings several que∣stions to the Messenger, and by his gesture, that he had little sorrow for so horrible & treacherous a massacre. And how often was he pressed at the beginning of the rebellion, to publish Proclamation against them, by the Proclamation of England, and to be read in all the
Churches of this Kingdome? And with what difficulty it was gotten, and but forty must be printed, and none issued out but by his Majesties speciall command. And did not the Irish Rebels call themselves the Kings and Queens Army in all their Papers and transaction of businesse; saying, they have good warrant under black and white for their proceedings, and crying out against the English-Parliament, and Puritans, as the Kings ene∣mies, and theirs? and divers depositions and papers, &c. extant and in print to that purpose before these unna∣turall wars began, that they have the broad Seale for their warrant. And have you forgotten the great Gene∣rall Oneale his offer to the Generall Monrose, the Scots Generall in that Kingdome, that who could shew, of them two, the best Commission from the King, should submit to each other? Did not the Lord Digbies Letters lately taken in a battell by the Lord Inchequeene, advise the Lord Taffe not to fight, for all the Kings designes and welfare, did much depend upon the good successe of that Army, which by the hand of providence is since broken? His imploying the Lord Taffe in England, and many other Irish in his Army against the Parliament, is too apparent. Must not glamongon make peace with the Irish Rebels, when the Earle of Ormond would not doe it; and Digby must accuse Glamorgon for so doing? both which have been Agents since for his Majesty, and granted them all they could desire of him under-hand, as fearing so broad fac'd iniquity, no mask either in Ox∣ford or Dublin would fit. And was not the Sabbath at White-Hall for divers yeares before these troubles sup∣plied with strange Chaplins, that constantly preached up the Kings Prerogative; and set before him; by way of emulation, the broken Parliament of France, &c. and that he was Lord of all the Kingdome, and that all
mens estates were his; And that if the King, like Nebu∣chadnezzar, should set up a golden image to be adored, the people if they refused that Idolatry, are bound to suffer death quietly, and not resist the King, as if whole Nations were made for the pleasure and will of a King, and be subject to him, as the beasts were to Adam: and such men as these generally were preferred by the Bi∣shops, which when they had another head the Pope, the matters of State, many times went very justly, for the interest of the Common-wealth; but of latter times were meere servants to Prerogative, and against all in∣terest of the Common-wealth. And hath not King CHARLES ever called Parliaments factious, &c. because they were ever opposite to his Tyrannicall Prerogative, and Court designs? And have you forgot the under hand dealings with the King of Denmarke, as appeareth by the Kings own Letters and practises with the Army raised against the Scots, and with the Scots Army. Also large proffers of the foure Northerne Countis, and pillage of London, as was commonly re∣ported, for the destruction of the Parliament, before any warre was thought on. And when he pretended to raise a Guard only for the safety of his person, soon af∣ter his endeavour of that horrid violation intended to the five members of the house of Commons. Was not the Jewels of the Crowne pawned by his Catholique Queene, for to buy Powder and Arms to fight in Eng∣land for the Protestant Religion, & liberty of the Sub∣jects? And were not all Papists forbidden to come to the Court at York, untill he had engaged great numbers of the prelaticall, ambitious, needy, & beggarly Court-Protestants, and he knowing they being once engaged, could not well goe back; then he sends for the Papists horses, that he might set Protestant-riders (as he pre∣tended)
upon them: and soone after issued out a Pro∣clamation, that all Papists might arme themselves for their own defence: and not long after, he did receive hundreds & thousands of them into his Army, in Eng∣land, Ireland, and Scotland, &c. And have not the Kings Army had all the prayers & contributions from Rome, and from all other Catholiques in Christendome, for his Majesties good successe in his warre against the Parliament? And hath he not for divers yeares been butchering and spoyling his protestant Subjects in these three Kingdomes (as a sacrifice to his preroga∣tive) by hanging up fourteen Clothiers, he being pre∣sent? And hath not he and his agents by his Lions skin and Machavilian policie, gone about to apply to every man in great trust and eminency, severall baits of ho∣nour and profit, according to their severall humours, & corrupted many eminent persons in this Kingdome, and have made them fall from their first principles? and hath not he used all means to divide, that he might destroy us, and to bring the King dome into that condi∣tion that the Parliament should be constrained to dis∣engage the people by requiring large contributions, rather than engage them by present freedome and re∣formation? Have not his designes been to bring in Po∣pery and Tyranny into Scotland, beyond expression, and his often breach of Treaties with them, & designs to have destroyed the most eminent persons amongst them; as the Marquesse Hamilton, Argile, and Lowden? And have you forgotten what hath bin commonly tal∣ked concerning King Jamses death, and what a great ac∣count he hath to make for not planting the protestants religion in Ireland: and for not ayding the protestants in Germany, and in the Palatinate? And did not Hinder∣son, that godly and learned Divine tell him, he had made
them 1500 widdowes in Scotland in one morning: And have you forgotten the Commissioners of Scot∣land, when he desired about three yeares since a perso∣nall Treaty, they told him in the name of that King∣dome plainly and honestly, that they could not admit of it, though desired by his Majesty, for they told him there hath been so much innocent bloud of his good Subjects shed in this unnaturall Warre by his Maje∣sties Command, and Commissions. First, Irish Rebels brought over into both his Kingdomes, and also from sorreine parts, &c. There being also Forces in Scotland against that Parliament, and the Kingdome by his Ma∣jesties Commission. The warre in Ireland fomented and prolonged by his Majesties Command, whereby the Kingdomes are brought neere to utter ruine and de∣struction; wee conceive that untill satisfaction be first given to both his Kingdomes, his Majesties coming hi∣ther cannot be convenient, nor by us assented unto: And hath he since recalled his Proclamations, and gi∣ven satisfaction for the bloud-shed, and security to the peace of the Kingdomes, yea or no; and have not the Scots consented to the making voyde the titles of ho∣nour bestowed on such as have fought against the Par∣liament (I hope the Scots have not considered better of the vertue and merits of those men that fought against the Parliament, though their language of late have been very large concerning Prerogative) look but back be∣fore this Parliament, if ever well minded Countrey∣men, that thought their Countryes priviledge and their own birth-right worth the standing for, was not called Puritans, and of late yeares Round heads; and take heed now, though you have a faire game to play, that you are not cheated of your Religion and Libertie, for Antichrist turnes himselfe now into another shape,
and name; now he sees his Kingdome almost destroy∣ed in this Kingdome by taking away the Prelates, which were the pillars thereof, &c. And now are not by him the great Champions of the Army, Parliament, and Countrey, that stand for a good peace, liberty, and free∣dome, of the free-borne people of England, and against a Regall Militia, and a negative voyce, and against an unlimited power, (that some of the Clergie desire un∣der the pretence that they and their Elders must be Judges of what is scandalous, and what is ignorance, a greater power than ever the Bishops had, though un∣der a new name;) called Independents, Brownists, Se∣ctaries, &c. whatsoever their opinions be, for by this tricke and some other, he thinks to gaine the Scots Na∣tion, with a considerable party of the Citie, to those he hath there already, and earnestly endeavoured to make a division in the House, by being in the likenesse of a Presbyterian, untill such time as wee have gotten the King into our power, PLACE="marg" The Kings party. and then a considerable Army of French, and our Catholique brethren of Ireland, about him, and then we will put the Scots in minde, it is no de∣ceit to deceive the deceiver; And then we will put the Londoners in minde of their former zeale to the Parlia∣ment cause; and let them know our good King hath often called them the Rebellious Citie, and hath long time since given them us for our arreares; And is it not now come to passe, that whosoever is an active man for the Parliament, whatsoever his judgement be, he must be called an Independent, or an Anabaptist; This Parliament did not begin to lop the branches as former Parliaments did, but to hew downe the maine body of the tree, as, Canterbury, and Strafford. And have not they broken many an iron yoke for you, by taking away Bishops, Councell-Table, Starre-Chamber,
Court of Wards, High Commission Courts, Ship∣money, Knight-hood, Forrests Lawes, and multitudes of severall Monopolies, even to the marrow-bones and ragges upon the dunghill; and freed you from the de∣signe of bringing in the Germaine-Horses; and from enslaving you, as in France, &c. And now Reader, judge whether a King or a Parlia∣ment is most likely to bring in Popery, and an arbi∣trary and tyrannicall government into this Kingdome. And are they not chosen by you, and had but onely these two things to choose, either to give you, & your posterity up to slavery, or ruine, or to hazzard the rui∣ning of themselves, and families; and if you desert them, you desert your selves. The Wolves desired the Sheepe to put away the Dogs, and then they would en∣ter into a League with them, and when they had there∣by stripped themselves of their best friends, and laid themselves open to their fierce foes, they were then devoured without pitty. And many other particulars might be instanced, to make as bloudy a History of this Kings Reigne, as ever was since the world began. Judge if it be agreeable with divine dispensation, that all this stirre, and bloud-shed, &c. should procure, now at last, but a cold accommodation: and God grant the draw∣ing of this Curtaine may be as fatall to Popery, and ty∣ranny, and all other Antichristian heresies, (here now) as the rending of the vaile was to the Jewish Ceremo∣nies (in Judea) at the Incarnation of our Saviour. FINIS.
