C318 E562_19 R206135 99865314 117553
ZIONS thankfull Ecchoes from the Clifts of IRELAND. Or the little Church of Christ in Ireland, war∣bling out her humble and gracefull addresses to her Elder Sister in England: And in particular, To the Parliament, to his Excellency, and to his Ar∣my, or that part assigned to her assistance, now in her low, yet hopefull Condition. Printed for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1648.
The Messengers humble Presentation. REnowned Christians, what I heere present, As from a persecuted Sister sent By my rude hand, to your judicious eye, Please to accept, and graciously survey: 'Tis neither hyperbolicall; nor newes From either Turkes, Antipodes, or Iewes; But Ecchoes sounding, what you ought to know, The state of Zion in a Land you owe: Her sighs, her suits, & in the same made known Her thankful spirit for your kindnes shown, And hopes of comfort by you late assign'd, And blest assistance to relieve her minde. As in this humble tender you may view In her owne language; Characters full true; Which I her servant, though the most unmeet; Am thus injoyn'd to offer at your feet, Which Heavens make powerfull in your hearts, so be't. EDVVARD CALVER.
Zions thankefull Ecchoes from the Clifts of IRELAND. To her Elder Sister in England. OH, thou my English eldest sister deare, Who hast tooke notice of my troubles heere, These times of sorrow, and hast had a heart To yeeld me succour, (which thou hast in part,) But wanted power to make thy purpose knowne, By reason of distractions of thine owne. Thou hast againe recal'd my cares to minde, And such assistance to my ayd assignde, That, if that malice doe not it prevent, I may be happy in your blest content. But thou that hast this blessed helpe assignd, Wilt not, I see, by a contrary winde Be beaten off thy purpose, when I see The winds againe doe with thy will agree. No, no, deare sister, thou hast more respect Unto my case, then to my cares neglect, Thou wilt not so our sister-hood betray; Nor doth thy safety stand with my decay. Our heavenly Father, in his tender care, Doth to his children like affection beare; And hath us ti'd by his most sacred lawes, We one should venture in anothers cause. But I have sin'd, tis true, but I repent, And teares have vertue to dissolve a flint.
But teares distild from tender childrens eyes, They stir the fountaine where compassion lies. God such affection to his children beares, That, out of question, he bewayles their teares; And in his time, will also still their cries, And grant their suits, and wipe their watery eyes. But in his wisedome, he for us thinks meet, We should have heere much bitter with our sweet: His grapes must be the most exactly prest, His wheat must be with greatest labour drest: His Dove must live where Ravens and Vultures flie: His Lambs must feed where Wolves in covert lie: His Lillies must amongst the thistles grow: His Rose of Sharon, with the briers blow: Ishmael and Isaac must be kept alive; Esau and Jacob must together strive. And therefore it is policy divine, That Isaac should with Israel combine And be united in a mutuall band, Who have such potent forces to withstand. Besides, our concord and our mutuall care, They are the garments we are bound to By Heavens injunction, that we may thereby Appeare we doe belong to the most High: Whose children heere are clad in peace and love. To make them fit to dwell with him above, Where faith, and hope, and patience shall surcease, But love, and peace, and unity increase. Faith, hope, and patience, are our wepe no heere; But Love the spirit that gives life and cheere. And we shall fayle in all our other parts, Unlesse that sacred fire enfame our hearts. But wherefore, Sister, should I goe about To bring thy love and care of me in doubt? When as I see thy love is so divine, Thou canst not from that principall decline.
To the Parliament of England. AND You, whom God, who passeth all selectors, Hath made his choice of to be our protectors, To labour to defend us by your Lawes, Who have besides, some intrest in our cause. I blesse the Heavens that you have heard our cries Which have beene earnest with you for supplies: And out of sacred sympathizing care, Have tooke in hand our low estate to rear, And still are acting, and in counsell sit To adde more comfort to our causes yet; Like brave and Christian Senators in trust, That feare no danger in a cause so just. Most brave resolve, ride on and prosper still, And what you have so well begun, fulfill: No doubt, but God, who set you such a hard And tedious taske, hath set out your reward, And will bestow it on you, if not heere, Yet when it shall to all the world appeare. Indeed, tis true, your weighty labours call For great rewards, which yet have beene but small; Unlesse reproachfull language and disdaine, With deadly hatred, may be counted gaine: For this from millions hath beene all your pay, Unlesse what force from such hath fetcht away. Whose tongues envenom'd with malignant spight Have breath'd out vapours to obscure your light; Infusing into foolish peoples braines, That stead of freedome, you procure their chaines. These, and too many such like scandals base, Have vented beene, to further your disgrace, By such as have beene enemies, and stood Against the progresse of all Christian good.
Nay these reproches have so publique bin, And so inticing to suspect herein, That many Christians, and good Christians some, Have so suspitious by this meanes become, As if they had deluded bin, because Their expectation could not brooke a pause, And wait with patience for those things which will Be worth a wonder, if an age fulfill. Nay in this nature, I my selfe have bin, Too much forgetfull; pardon me therein; Poore wretch, because that in my state of griefe, I had not from you, as I wish'd; reliefe: But, notwithstanding many speeches faire, I still lay under notions of dispaire; I grew impatient, and was much inclin'd To many perturbations in my mind: One while resolving that you were my friends, And would declare unto no other ends, But loo'd upon me with a melting eye, And were resolv'd that I should have supply, And to my comfort would your selves inlarge, Both out of pitty, and your speciall charge. Another while these hopes of mine were shaken. And I begun to think my selfe mistaken; And that you did not, as I hop'd, respect me, But either did delude me, or neglect me; And that the voice of people in this kind, So common, was not all malignant winde. Thus like the Phoenix, feeding on the ayre, 'Twixt heaven and earth, twixt hoping and dispair; My thoughts were restles, and my time was spent In various musing upon the event. When I consider'd what you had begun, And had already for my comfort done, Together with your promised supplies. My heart got comfort, and my hopes did rise;
And hourly look'd you should my ayd renew By every wind that from your confines blew. But when, alas, I look'd, and look'd again; And yet at last I saw I look'd in vain: No colours for me on my coast displayd, But windes and tides came empty still of ayd. Whiles what I had already did abate, Through the increase of such as do me hate, Who still persisting, and my life pursuing, With Oathes combining to effect my ruine. My heart oft fainted, and my fears got ground, And sometimes cast me into such a swound, That I did almost all beliefe refrain Of ever seeing good day here again, And that it was but trusting to a reed, To wait for help of mortall men at need, Whose strength was like their promises, but fraile, And at most need, most likely then to faile, Thus like a Turtle mourning for her mate, Or like an Orphan in a helplesse state: Or like a Captive in a Tyrants hand: Or like a Virgin in a Bruitish Land: In forced silence, with my face obscur'd, Through tears distill'd, and griping woes indur'd, My life hath long time in sad discontent, And fears, and cares, both night and day bin spent. Thus, worthy Patriots passion hath bin strong, And caus'd me sometimes to conceive you wrong, And look upon you with a frowning brow, Neglecting what I had more cause to know, Which were mine owne infirmities, my sin, In viewing which I have too partiall bin, When under heavens correction for the same, I layd on others (not my selfe) the blame. Nor did I duly, as indeed I ought, Regard the task wherein at home you wrought;
How hard it was, how difficult, and vast, And through what care and dangers must be past; How many hills and mountaines leveld be, Before you could have passage unto me. Besides, my elder Sister in your hand Must be secur'd, before you tooke in hand To state the yonger in her freedomes fit, Which would another tedious worke beget. In these respects I was, indeed, too blinde, The wofull sense of present griefe of minde, So far my senses, and my soule opprest, That I thought little of insuing rest. But you, whose judgements are pofound and wise, And foresee dangers, you have cleerd my eyes, And made me see and sensible in fine, That you did never pupose to decline Or slight my cause, but only were with-held, Or by a strong necessity compeld To rest content, till Heavens should permit Both time and opportunity most fit. But now so soone as that eternall hand, Which turnes and orders all things at command, Hath set his wheele of providence some stay Within that Nation where you doe beare sway, You have, unto your everlasting fame, To my rejoycing, and unto the shame Of such as have most wretchedly bely'd you, Assign'd me, by that providence that guide you, So brave an Army, such a strong supply, To ayd your part heere, and my cause to try, That if brave Worthies; heere may be no want Of those supplies you have beene pleas'd to grant, I doubt not but my cruell foes ere long Will prove as weake as ever they were strong, And flie as fast, and faster out of fight, As ever they did gather and unite.
For though the Heavens have us'd them as a rod, Yet in their hearts, they fighting against God, He hearing his afflicted ones complaine, Will cast his tod out of his hand againe, And make it knowne his children are belov'd, Though by the wicked, for their good, reprov'd. This is most certaine, therefore you that have So kindly sent to rayse me from the Grave, And give me life and freedome, once againe, In spite of all my enemies disdaine; I blesse you for it, and beseech you still Persist therein, and now the worke fulfill. And let not such impediments prevent, As spring from meere sinister discontent; But let the dread of the divine displeasure Which is concern'd heerein in such a measure, Exalt your thoughts above such triviall causes, As may incite you unto needlesse pauses. That God, whose hand did ever so appeare To ayd at home, will not be absent heere: Your case is still the same it was before, And your engagements equall, if not more. What though your foes be numerous? alas, Heavens, by your hands, bring miracles to passe: And though the worke you have to overcome. Doth threat to shake the very walls of Rome, And seems a Writ of Priviledge now hurld Amongst the Saints throughout the Christian world; Yet feare not, tis not multitudes nor art, Can rout that side, with whom the Heavens take part. Let not your hearts then, nor your hands decline, That worke shall prosper which is Heavens designe: You have a warrant that will beare you out In any Christian worke you goe about; Especially that worke above the rest, Suppressing of the Antichristian beast.
And you, whose wisedomes have so well beene try'd In circumventing of this man of Pride, You having courage, need not counsell'd be Which way to act to set me soonest free. Yet, out of feeling of my former woes, Admit me leave to shew what I suppose Hath beene a speciall or the master plot, Whereby the Papists heere such part have got. The watchfull souldier that doth centre keepe, When foes are waking, will not be asleepe: The skilfull boatsman that would make to shore, The windes not serving, plies his Oares the more: The Garden-dresser, that sowes tender seeds, Takes the more labour to prevent the Weeds: The prudent Husband that hath Corne to sow On grounds are doubtfull, the more seed doth throw; And when with care he hath bestowd his cost, He still doth labour that it be not lost. Even so, this many an unhappy yeare, The Romish seeds men, Seminaries heere Have beene most active, diligent, precise, By art and labour, what they could devise To sow this Land with their corrupted graines, And through their subtle and uncessant paines, This worke hath so far prosperd in their hands, That crops are plenteous in the very sands. But, to the scandall of the English care, Good seeds men in this Nation have been rare, And that amongst the English too, a shame That English Christians, who desire the fame, Of the Professors of the truth indeed, Should take so little paines to sow good seed; For want whereof so many grounds lie wast, So many soules are barren, or at least, Let lie, as Land that hath on purpose been Designd the foe, to sow his tares therein.
Nor lyes this blemish only here, no doubt, But partly upon such as sent these out; Those Pilots that sat at the helme to guide, They should this Charge with more repect have ey'd; They should as well have took the work in hand For to convert, as to subject this Land; Have sought to save the precious soules of men, As well as seise the substance was therein. And questionlesse, the want of this same care Of gaining soules, converting people here Hath mov'd that God who gave us this possession, Thus now to bring our holding it in question. But herein you that now are at the sterne, I meane you not, this doth you not concerne: This fault is ancient, these are passing by's, Or doors left ope before you had the keys. But now you are in trust in like condition, Your care already may prevent suspition; That when you have possession in your hand Of this rebellious, and revolting Land, You will proceed in what you have begun, And no good action shall be left undone, That heavens agreeing with your resolution, May by your means be put in execution. And in especiall that your care will be So far extended in respect of me, That you will use all diligence and speed To sow this Land with uncorrupted seed; Will plant a plentious Ministry herein, And far more faithfull then before hath bin, That every cornet of this continent May have a watchman from your confines sent. Or that some happy nursery of wits May here be founded, as indeed besits; From whence, as from a sacred foord, may flow, Such streames of knowledge, and such seed to sow:
This voyd, or rather this corrupted Isle, That it in time may prove a fruitfull soyle, Or second Canaan, where may safely dwell, The seed of Abraham, sonnes of Israell Without disturbance by the native part, The sonnes of Belial, or the Romish art. This famous Founders, I xpct sy If vens again shall give you here the dy; L in a plnteous Ministry, and sound In lif nd Doctrine pious, and profound, Dssenting not in judgement, as of lat, Consists the safety both of Church and Stte, And when an able Ministry is plantd, As it is sit such maintenance be granted, As may both keep their spirits up from filling, And adde a glory to their sacred calling: So it is needfull, on the other side: That it relates not to excesse, or pride. For what especially but the desire, And avaritious longing to aspire, And be above all moderated scope, Did first incite, and now hath set the Pope Upon the head of Emperours and Kings, Yea climbes above all sublunary things? But you that do these weighty causes pondr, And whose especiall charge thy do lye under; I need not question that you will be just, And wise, and watchfull in your charge in trust, Not onely in relation to that hand That made you great, and put you in command; But also in a serious respect, So many eyes upon your acts reflect, That almost all the Christians of this age Are gazet on the Actions of your stage; And lastly in regard unto the cry, My elder sister, in your armes, and I
Within your trust, upon our knees do make, That you will not our case in hand forsake, But speed and prosecute it in that kinde And blessed manner that you have design'd. And that division, that same bane of Peace, And foe to vertue, do not make you cease That work you have begun, and so far wrought Untill it be unto perfection brought. To His Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX. MOst Noble Champion, Englands chief Commander, Who in the tedious dangerous Meander Of Englands winding, waving, desperate waies, In wars intestine, have got through with praise; And brought those swelling, raging, roaring Seas, Through Gods assistance to a calme, and peace. For which your Kingdome, and therein my sister, That through your labours, God hath late so blest her, Are bound to write your name in gold so pure, That time, nor envy, may the same obscure; But after ages may so happy be, To read your worth, which we are blest to see. And now you have those craggy mountaines past, And gain'd a valley, well secur'd at last, Whiles friends at house are singing your deserts, Your care is how to succour other partes. A truly worthy Generall indeed, Whose actions are so generous at need,
That no good motion can have your deniall. To ayd where Christian quarrels are in triall. Of which brave Warrier I have cause of boasts, Or cuse to blesse you, and the God of hostes, Who in my geat necssity and grife, Have out of pitty thought o my reliefe; That I who long time have been forc'd to shifts, And diven for safety to the rocks and clifts, Am now in hope I shall ere long disclose, And shew my selfe in presence of my foes. Your foes at home are forced now to sooth, And out of fear do give you language smooth, Dissembling in your presence sugred Notes, Hiding like Aspes, the poyson in their throates; Which in your absence they are bold to vnt With secret friends, to your disparagement; And if they could advantage finde, and place, Are ready yet to spit it in your face. Whiles such as are your foes abroad, no doubt, In your disgrace are ready to speak out; And do proclaime their malice, and invite All others they confide in to unite; That it concernes you to have Argus eys To foresee dangers, and their plots surprize. But heavens, upon the other side I know Do ayd you, and the better part below Are on your side, and do esteem you dear, And out of doubt, are ready to appear With help, and hearts united to assist, And take your part, in whom they have bin blest. And therefore fear not such as shall oppose; You yet have made them all subdued foes That have adventur'd to resist your hand, And out of question shall do whiles you stand In the defence of Truth and right, although The world should joyn to work your overthrow.
And for that strength you have assign'd to me, Your force thereby shall not enfeebled be, The heavens herein will make supply no doubt, Whose case to aid you, send a party out, For God himself doth still assistance lend To aid all such as in his case contend. And what brave Joshua, can be judg'd hath bin The cause that since you did your task begin You have so prosper'd, and atchiev'd such fame That Europe wonders, and admires the same? But onely that the active hand of heaven, By which successe and victories are given: Hath still gone with you in each enterprise In an especiall and most pow'rfull wise. To withstand which in any time of trouble, The arm of flesh is but like straw, or stubble To withstand fire; or like a drop of rain Let fall to still the raging of the main. To order battells, and give victory Is the prerogative of the most high, To shew his greatnesse, who is strength indeed; That so no flesh should glory in their reed. Onely amongst men where he doth affect, As instrumentall he doth some select To fight his battells, and infuseth skill, And care, and force to execute his will. Which in your person doth appeare at large, He having granted to your noble charge The greatest work for latter times, that yet The heavens did to a humane hand commit: And in the same hath hitherto no lesse Renown'd you with miraculous successe. I long indeed have sighed for relief, And fill'd the aire with ecchoes of my grief, In hope the winds would on my woes so smile To beare the sense thereof into your Isle.
But long I look'd for what I long'd to heare, A sweet return of what the windes should beare, A happy answer of my heavy cry, Before my wofull wants could have supply. But now I see and to my comfort finde The cause my suits have been so long declin'd, Was not for want of pity in the rest, Nor want of courage in your noble breast, But want of opportunity to send Such ayd and comfort as you did intend. Let glory then eternallize your fame, Whose courage, whiles the cause remains the same, Doth constant hold, and tis not distance, fate, Nor fear, nor danger, can the same abate. Proceed and prosper then as you have done; Here is another conquest to be won, Which heaven I hope which have the same in birth, Will adde unto the Trophies of your worth. What though my state hath been full bad? you know The case of God can never be too low For him to raise it, but the lower cast, The higher he doth raise it at the last. Bsides, the wisedome of our Maker waits To tke a sweet advantage of our States, And then his help and comforts do explain, When help and hopes with men are counted vain. That so the world may see his working hand; His foes thereat the more amazed stand: And those whose state so desperate he raises, May be engag'd unto his greater praises. Thus God proceedeth often, as full well You by experience of the same can tell; Which is enough for ever to incline Your dauntles spirit to a just designe, How hard so ere it be to undergo, If God shall please to call you thereunto.
Now in assurance of the same I stand, Attending on Gods pleasure in your hand, And in submission to the same shall rest, Presenting of my most intire request Unto the heavens, that they your part may take, And favour all that sight for ZIONS sake. To the English Commanders and Souldiers assign∣ed forthe reliefe of Ireland. VVElcome that will come, noble friends indeed, That will vouchsafe a visit where is need: The rich, tis true have many friends, but such As do want riches, do want friends as much. But with you, Worthies, it is otherwise, You seem to grace where others do dispise. Oh that I had but means unto my mind, To welcome you, and those that are behind, That you might tast my thankfulnesse, and they Might heare thereof, and make no more delay! But though my hand be empty, I am poor, Yet there are riches plenty on my shoare: Such as have rob'd me, they have riches left They stole from me, to take which is no theft; And what is missing, tis but justice shown, If they make restitution of their own. Besides this Island is a fruitfull field. Or pleasant Garden which doth plenty yeld: The Sun, the Moon, the Stars consenting be; The Elements do all therein agree. The fire is not predominating here; But cold and heat do moderate appear: The Ayre so fare an Antidote and pure, That nothing poysonous can the same indure.
The water sweet and pleasant streames abound, Where foules and fishes are in plenty found. The earth a Garden, from whose fatnesse springs A blessed fullnesse of terrestriall things. Besides these strong inducements which invite In the respect of profit, and delight: You also have some int'rest here, 'tis known, That you, in part, contend but for your own: Your own by conquest, and should that be lost Through want of care, which in atchieving cost Your noble and renowned fathers dear, The price of blood, the work of many a year? Should that, I say, then, which bold fathers got Be lost by children? Oh! it were a blot, A scar, a shame, a scandall to your deeds, That Englands Cedars should become such reeds, The off-spring of such active, valiant, strong, And conquering hands, should put up such a wrong: Besides the losse; which is so great, that sure, True English hearts will not the same indure, They will not have it in records to find, That English spirits can be so declin'd. But valiant Leaders, you whose acts declare That English hearts are still without compare, And will not have your reputation stain'd, By losing honour your forefathers gain'd; If you thus claim an intrest in this Land, You have a greater prize then here in hand: And what more deeply doth ingage your fame Unto the prosecution of the same? Gods case is your case, as his instruments: And he in his especiall providence, Hath call'd you hither, as it doth appeare, To fight the battells of Jehova here. His holy word, his worship, truth, and name, With all sincere Professors of the same.
Have here a long time persecuted bin By Antichrist that active man of sin, And his adherents, who have here of late Prevail'd insulted, seem'd predominate. But now I hope the heavy sighes and grones, And cryes and teares of Gods afflicted ones; Together with the jealousie and care, He doth unto his word, and worship beare, Hath wrought upon his clemency so far, That he intends to be at open war Against his, and my enemies, and yours, And will rprove them, and confound their powers. This God can do, and will do too, although The times and seasons when we do not know, But when tis most unlikely in mans eye, 'Tis then Gods usuall opportunity. And why not now then, may not we conceit, When as our foes were got to such a height? For my part I remaine undaunted still, Because I know God can do what he will, He now I hope will in his tender love, His power and wisedome in this Land improve, In once more sowing it with holy seed, His sacred truths, and the most saving Creed; His worship, Sabbaths, Sacraments and Saints, In purest sense, and without sad restraints; And make this Kingdome (which hath been a cage Of unclean spirits, and a very stage For Antichrist to Act upon at pleasure, Too many years, and in too great a measure) To become now an holy Land, excelling In vertue, truth, and righteousnesse; a dwelling For God himselfe, in holinesse and grace, An earthly ZION for his Saints, a place Where I in peace, may henceforth sit and sing The holy praises of my heav'nly King.
Most glorious work! what heart that is upright, Can think upon the same without delight? Or yet what hand can closed up be found Against a work so pious, and renown'd? Sure you that are admitted to the same, It will for ever adde unto your fame, And if your hearts do answer this designe, Your works will surely render you divine. Brave and approv'd Commanders ther proceed, The case requires your diligence, and speed. Your hearts did never fail you, and I tust, Your hands, your help will to your hearts be just. What though your foes be numerous or mad. And shall prove desperate? yet their case is bad, And that which God doth, out of doubt detest, Which is enough to warrant you the best; For where, and onely where the heavens oppose That side proves ever the subdued foes. You have experience hereof and can tell Gods wonder working in this kind full well; Which cannot but your noble breasts inspire With such a valiant resolute desire To take his part, who still did succour grant you, That fear nor force, nor danger now can dant you. But what need other arguments herein, Then the suppressing of the man of sin? Who in this nation, and in other parts, The truths of God, and souls of men subverts. What can be more encouragement then this? No combate half so capable of blisse. The honour both of this world, and the fame Of that which is to come attends the same; Where such as have been souldiers in the warres For God, and souls, shall shine above the starres, And weare the crown of conquerours, more worth Then all the Crowns, and Diadems on earth.
Can you fear danger then in such a strife? In which to die, admi a better life? I trust you cannot, nay by tryall know it. Your constant actions do directly show it. Then, to plead further in this cause I need not, You so fear God, the face of men you dread not, That God who can, who hath, and sure who will Whiles you stand for him stand up for you still. And you the Souldiers under this command, Who are assigned to redeem this Land, And that indeed which is by oddes most deare, Profession of the true Religion here: By rooting out of Popery, that spell Of Antichrist, that active charm of hell. Wherewith this Kingdome is become inchanted; Nay most of Europe by this fury haunted. You ever have most willingly appear'd And resolutions readily declar'd For the defence, and manfully to fight For true Religion, piety, and right: Here you may have your element for this, Of all things here, such noble minds I misse: For true Religion here hath been disdain'd, And Popery hath domineer'd and reign'd, And I that have inhabited this Isle, Have been as banish'd, driv'n into exile. Consider this, and out of care Divine, And pity to this sad estate of mine; Together with the garlands you may weare If you persist; but shame if you forbeare. And rouze your warlike spirits, and be seen In holy zeal, above malignant spleen, Or superstitious jealousie, that fire; And make the world take notice and admire. That Jesus Christ hath better souldiers far Then Antichrist hath any in his war.
Besides, you know that savage beast of Rome Is sentenc'd by irrevocable doome, To be subjected, weaken and decline, And be a prey unto the Saints in fine, And Rome shall fall, and sure God is not slack Concerning this; do you not heare it crack? Sure if your ears were opened aright, To heavens predictions in this thing, you might. Can you be without comfort then, or cold? Or will you not be resolute and bold? In such a quarrell as hath such a warrant, As is in holy records so apparant? Yes, yes, brave Souldiers, these are sure such tis As will constraine you, make yur spirits rise, And stir your veines, and Christian valiant hearts In this designe to shew your true deserts. And stop the mouth of envy, and make known Those fatall blasts malignant breath hath blown Into your faces, are but out of spight. And false rports, which tell men that you sight For neither faith, nor truth, nor to defnd The true Religion, as you do pretend. But Christian Souldiers, though these be some scars, Or scndalls vented to disgrace you wars; Yet I am hopefull, nay, am confident, That these were never heads of your intent, Nor ever shalbe: and indeed I tremble, To think you should be thought so to dissemble. Moreover had Gods case been her let fall, And I left helplesse now in hopelesse thrall, I had not oly seem'd a sad compliance With Antichrist (whom God hath in defiance) But in the losse of this Land had be shown, The hazzard if not losing of yur owne. Tis time then to be stirring, and resolv'd To quit this cloud wherein you were involv'd,
And make it truly to the world appeare, You are in all such accusations cleare, And that your hearts doe with your case comply, And so resolved you will live and die. Tis time, I say, but not, I hope, too late, Though time delayd, yet not time out of date, But that you may recover all this losse, Yea make advantage of it, and ingrosse The greater honour by your hotter fires Of Christian zeale, to shew your just desires. And pious hearts for peace of Church, and State; And that you do abominate, and hate All fatall insurrection, mutinizing, First heavens abuse, of Lucifers devising; And ever since hath beene the overthrow Of all that practice in the same below. Elisha's servant was afraid, tis true, When as thir foes were only in his view; But when the heavens had made his eye-sight cleare, The strongest pat did on their side appeare. That part, indeed, is strongest which is Gods, Although it seems the weakest part by oddes; Nay, God doth mostly multitudes eschew, To try his case, and chuseth but a few; That so his greatnesse may the more be knowne; And men not chalenge what is not their owne. Nay God can make his snsles creatures stand His friends at need, his Army at command, Too great to be resisted, as is found In plaguing Pharoah, and his Army drown'd: The lemens, the Sun, the Moone, the Stars Are all his host to prosecute his wars. That tis, inded his clemency and love, To grace and honour men heerein, above His other creaturs, that he gives men art, And call them forth, as friends, to take his part,
When it is known he is sufficient, still, Without his creatures ayd to do his will; His Word is able in a trice to burst All earthen vessels, by it made at first. Oh! then, you men whom this great God hath chose To take his part, as friends, against his foes; You cannot sure be faint, or fearfull where 'Tis thus confirm'd, you have no cause to fear. Or may you not be rather seemly proud, That you are to that dignity allow'd, To help the Lord against the Mighty? when The Lord indeed is only Mighty: men Are earth, wormes, or his earthen vessels wrought, Which he can dash in pieces with a thought. Bsides brav Suldiers, if you could be faint, Or flse, or figt but upon meer constraint, Or wich is wors be disolute, and rude; To Gods dishoour, and your shame, conclude, G would not own you, though he might imploy you: B hd a purpos rther to destroy you, Ten to dfend you or to give you part Of cst with him, who had not your heart: But wherefore should I presuppose or qustion Such falings in you who have made profession Of your sincere, and Christian-like intents, And there to given unanimous consents? No, noble Warriers, Christian Souldiers, know, I do you better estimation owe; I cannot construe your intentions bad, Who so good Christian discipline have had. Proceed, proceed, then doubt not of successe; Your case in question promiseth no lesse; God will not faile you, nor your spirits yield, Which are by God and Conscience clear up held. As for supplyes, you need not fear delay: As for reward, Gods is the only pay:
His service with the best supplyes abound: His Souldiers with the richest Garlands crown'd. And as for men, I dare presume so far, That, where their purses to your former war Were oft forc'd ope: they to reliefe of me, Now out of zeal and pity will be free; Their purses, hands, and hearts to this designe Will freely ope, and joyfully incline: In which so fully is to be discern'd Both their owne safety, and Gods cause concern'd. Besides, what here you, by your valour shown, Shall conquer, shall in part become your own; You shall not beat the ayre, or the winde; But booty pray and pay, are yours assign'd, That with the greater courage you maintain This enterprize, the more shall be your gain. Do then, oh do then your brave hearts expresse, As to your honour you declare no lesse, And stop the mouth of malice, and compell Meer envy on your actions to speak well. Whiles I, and all the Saints on earth shall pray That you may prosper, and our foes decay: That ZIONS side may have the upper hand, And Romes impostures be expel'd this Land. FINIS
