C4124A R176644 45504437 171742
A Form of Prayer and Thanks∣giving to Almighty God for the Prosperity of the Christian Arms a∣gainst the Turks, and especially for taking the City of Buda: To be used publickly on Sunday the Twelfth of September in His Majesties Free Chap∣pel of St. Georges Windsor, In the Col∣legiate Church of St. Peters Westmin∣ster, and in the Parish-Church of St. Mary le Bowe in the City of London. ¶ The Morning Service shall be the same with the Common Office of the Day, Excepting these follow∣ing Alterations. TO the Lord our God belong mer∣cies, and forgivenesses,Dan. 9.9, 10. though we have rebelled against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he set be∣fore us. ¶ Proper Psalms. II, XLVII, LXII. ¶ Proper Lessons. The first, 2 Sam. Chap. 22. Te Deum. The second, Heb. 11. verse 24. to verse 35. Benedictus.
¶ After the Collect for the Day, let this follow. O Eternal God our heavenly Father, whose Name is the God of Hosts, who art the only giver of all Victory; We yield thee our hearty Praise and Thanksgiving for the late signal Deliverance, and glorious Success thou hast vouchsafed to those thy faithful Ser∣vants, who have not been ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ Crucified, but have man∣fully fought under his Banner. We adore and bless thy Divine Goodness, that thou didst not give them over as a prey to cruel and bloud-thirsty men; but hast taught their hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight, and hast shewed them a marvellous great kindness in a strong City. We humbly pray that these, and all other thy benefits, may raise in Vs, and in the whole Church of God, a Spirit of Holy Ioy, and Christian Charity, a Spirit of fer∣vent Zeal for thy Name and glory, and a stedfast faith and perseverance in thy pure and undefi∣led Religion, through Iesus Christ Our Lord and Saviour. Amen. ¶ In the end of the Litany after the Collect [We humbly beseech thee, &c.] Let the Collect be used (for Peace and deliverance from our Enemies.) O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defence unto thy servants against the face or their enemies; we yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we
were compassed. We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto them; beseeching thee still to conti∣nue such thy mercies towards us, that all the world may know that thou art our Saviour and mighty deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ In the Communion-Service, The Epistle. 1 S. John Chap. 4.1. BEloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesseth that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And every spirit that confes∣seth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that spirit of anti∣christ, whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have over∣come them: because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world. They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God, heareth us; he that is not of God, heareth not us. Hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of errour. Be∣loved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth, is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love.
The Gospel. S. Matth. 28.18. ANd Iesus came, and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in hea∣ven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Fa∣ther, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things what∣soever I have commanded you: and so, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen. ¶ After the Prayer (for the whole state of Christ's Church) Let these following Prayers be used. ALmighty and everliving God, who art glorious in Holiness, fearful in praises, doing Wonders, who by miraculous Ways and Means, hast raised thy Houshold, the Church, building it on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himself be∣ing the chief Corner Stone, who hast promi∣sed to be with it always even unto the end of the world, so that the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail against it; Who by so many marvellous Acts of thy Providence hast graci∣ously made good this thy Promise in all Ages, particularly at this time didst not give over thine Heritage to Confusion, but hast blessed the Armies engaged in this Christian War, crowning them with Victory and Honour. We meekly beseech thee, O Lord, that we and the whole Christian World may make a right use of these thy undeserved Mercies. To this
end we pray thee to keep and maintain all Christian Kings, Princes and Governours, in Peace, Amity and Concord, that being strengthned by thy Grace and Power, with uni∣ted Hearts and Hands, in defence of thy Cause and Truth, they may wax valiant in Battle, see their desires on their Enemies, and put to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Preserve, O Lord, thy most holy Faith in those Kingdoms and Nations, where it is already planted, re∣store it to its antient Purity and Brightness where it lies in obscurity, oppressed by Turkish Tyranny, and their abominable Superstition. Enlarge its Borders into all Lands, that all the Ends of the Earth may see the Salva∣tion of Our God. Grant this O Lord, for the sake of Our only Mediatour and Advocate Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then shall follow the third Collect for Good Friday. O Merciful God, who hast made all men, and hatest nothing that thou hast made, nor wouldest the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and live; Have mercy upon all Iews, Turks, Infidels and Hereticks, and take from them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word; and so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one Shepherd, Iesus Christ our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the holy Spirit, one God, world without end. Amen.
¶ And the Collect for the Fifth Sunday after Trinity. GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. THe Peace of God which passeth all under∣standing, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord: And the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen. By His Majesties Command, SUNDERLAND P. FINIS.
