c4184a 99895200 152633
FORMAThis Formulary of holding a Convoca∣tion as by ancient Custom it used to be Held, is unhappily Call'd by Dr. Atterbury in the First Edition of his Rights, Powers, &c. p. 376. A Directory of Archbishop CRANMER's: When it was certainly drawn up by Archbishop Parker (as soon after confest by Dr. A.) from all the Precedents before and at the Reforma∣tion: for a Rule to Himself in Opening his first Convocation, Jan. 12. 1562. and for a standing Pattern to his Successors. SIVE DESCRIPTIO Convocationis Celebrandae, Prout ab AntiquoDr. Atterbury has advanc'd a Pernicious as well as a Mistaken Scheme, that the Act of Submission entirely altred the Method and the very Nature of our English Convocations; be∣fore Summon'd by the Archbishop, Govern'd, Prorogu'd and Dissolv'd by Him: but since entirely Subject to the King; and the Arch∣bishop now made a Ministerial Officer, and a pure Instrument of the Crown. If our Refor∣mation had been built on this fatal Erastian Principle; The Form of holding Convocations must have needs altred with the Constitution of 'em. But as really there was no other change in the Nature of our Synods, but only as the Archbishops were restrain'd from Cal∣ling 'em without the King's License and Let∣ters: So this little Change did not at all affect the manner of their Sitting and Acting under the Government and Presidency of the Me∣tropolitan. And therefore this Solemn Form do's no where drop and old Custom, or advance a new Practise, or adapt any thing to the Act of Submission; but refers All to antecedent Usage and long Prescription— Prout ab Anti∣quo— consuevit.— Ex More — Ex laudabili & antiqua Ordinatione.—Solet observari, &c. observari consuevit. SCiendum est quod Omnes qui AutoritateIt was a late Artifice of Dr. A. to ex∣empt the lower Clergy from the Jurisdiction of Archbishop and Bishops in Convocation, by pretending, first, they were cited by the King in his Parliamentary Writs; and at last, by as∣serting, That the Provincial Writ was a like immediate Summons by the King, which the Archbishop barely executes as a proper Officer; his share in convening his Clergy, being no longer Authoritative, but purely Ministerial. Which yet does not only strike at the very Being of a Church, but directly contradicts this Form; where All the Clergy are expresly said to be Cited by the Authority of the Most Reverend the Archbishop, to Appear before Him. Reverendissimi Domini Archiepiscopi Cantuar' citantur ad comparendum coram Eo in Do∣mo Capitulari Ecclesiae Cathedralis Divi Pauli London' duodecimo die Januar' prox' tenentur praefixo tempore interesse, atque in eâdem Ecclesiâ Cath' praestolari Adventum dicti Reverendissimi. Qui ex More
paulo post octavam ante Meridiem illius diei solet cum celebri Comitatu apu Portum Thamisis vocatum Paul's Wharf in terram descendere, atque ex∣inde Praeeuntibus Advocatis & Procuratoribus Curiae Cantuar' certisque Reverendissimi Generosis ac Virgifero Convocationis, ad Ecclesiam Cath' Divi Pauli London recta tendere, atque in chorum ibidem ingredi. Ʋbi postquam in stallo Decani collocatus fuerit, ac preces dixerit, tam Ipse quam Reliqui Episcopi Praesentes habitu Convocationis togati ex atroque Chori la∣tere in suis Stallis sese constituunt & mox incipiunt PrecesThe Service and Sacrifice of the Mass, was reform'd into purer Latin Prayers, and a right Communion of the Blessed Sacrament. For the use of the Synod, there was drawn up by the Archbishop only, and by him alone pre∣scrib'd, Forma Precum in utraque Domo Convo∣cationis, &c. And according to this Preroga∣tive of the Archbishop at the Head of his Pro∣vince, this Ancient Form has receiv'd some Alterations and Additions, with new occasio∣nal Hymns and Collects, at the discretion of our successive Archbishops, without any ex∣press Consent, or active concern of the Lower Clergy, who herein submitted to the Judg∣ment and Authority of the Archbishop; who is presum'd indeed not to act in these Matters, without Counsel and Consent of his Suffra∣gans., quibus Spiritus Sancti gratia invocatur, ac Communio subsequitur. Ac tempore Offertorii tam dictus Reverendissimus quam coeteri Suffraganei Episcopi rem divinam celebranti ordine progredientes Oblationem offerre ex more debent. Peractâ in hunc morem Re Divina, solet doctus Aliquis ex Caetu Convocationis sive Superioris sive Inferioris Domus ad hoc selectus è Suggestu in medio Chori ConcionemAs the Archbishop in the Rubrick of the Form of Prayers for Convocation, has directed, That they shall be Read in the Upper House, by the Junior Bishop; and in the Lower House, by the Prolocutor: So the ordering of the Sermon, and appointing a Preacher, has been alway lest to the Archbishop's Sole Power; who assigns the Office to any One of his Suffragans, or any Other of his Inferiour Cler∣gy, as he thinks most Fit and Proper. ad Clerum ibidem congregatum Latine proferre: Quâ absolu∣tâ, Reverendissimus statim se confert in Domum Capitularem dictae Ecclesiae; sequentibus Episcopis & toto Clero. Quibus ingressis ac seclusis Extraneis, Reverendissimo ac caeteris suis Co-Episcopis in suis sedibus ordine considenti∣bus, ac reliquo CleroIt much explains the true nature of our Provincial Synods to observe, That the Arch∣bishop is alway represented, Pro tribunali se∣dens; and sometimes in throno suo collocatus. The Bishops are describ'd to be Ordine confiden∣tes, and Secum (i. e. cum Archiepiscopo) Assi∣dentes. But the Prolocutor and Lower Cler∣gy are evermore found in the Upper House, or Presence of the Archbishop and Bishops, to be Stantes and Circumstantes. Dr. A. indeed would make this Decency to be an Innovation: For he describes the old Provincial Synods, to have Presbyters alway Sitting with the Bishops, and the Deacons and People only standing.Rights, Pow∣ers, &c. p. 5. Yet as this was not the Figure of Provincial, but of Dio∣cesan Synods only, where the Priests were, and still are Co-Assessors with their Bishop: So he does not in any part of his Wri∣tings offer one Instance, where the Sitting of Presbyters in presence of the Bishops, was ever Allow'd in any one English Provincial Synod. circumstante, Reverendus Dominus Episcopus Lon∣don
MandatumIt is a shameful Assertion of the Author of the Power of the Lower-House, &c. p. 3. c. 1. that these Certificates or Returns to the Archbishop are All made in Virtue of the King's Writ of Summons, which they do or should Recite; not at all in Virtue of the Archbi∣shop's Mandate any further than it Executes this Writ. When in truth all the Returns from the Dean of the Province and from the other Suffragans regularly made, either do not recite the King's Writ, because they execute only the Archbishop's Mandate: Or when they do recite the King's Writ, it is only as they find it included in the Mandate, and so recite it as a Part of that Mandate. But it is not at all in Virtue of the King's Writ, that the Dean Cites the Suffragans, or those Suf∣fragans cite their Clergy, no such Civil Call; but a pure Ecclesiastical Summons, and a Ca∣nonical Execution of the Archbishop's Man∣datory Letters. Therefore at the Opening of a Convocation, the Archbishop does of late Order the King's Writ to be solemnly read, to justifie his Calling and Holding of it by Vir∣tue of the King's License and Command di∣rected to him. Yet the Bishop of London does not here at all refer himself to the Royal Writ, but Purely to the Archiepiscopal Man∣date, which alone he here introduces, and of which alone he certifies the Execution; with no manner of Return to the King, nor of immediate Respect to any Royal Writ. Mandatum sibi a dicto Reverendissimo — introducere tenetur — cum debito Certificatorio super Executione ejusdem, i. e. Mandati. sibi à dicto Reverendissimo ad Convocationem hujusmodi subeundam [submonendam] aliàs directum una cum debito Certificatorio super executione ejusdem introducere, ac debita cum Reverentia eidem Re∣verendissimo Patri presentare & tradere tenetur. Quo quidem Certificatorio perlecto, statim porrigitur eidem Reverendissimo Schedula descripta, per quam pronuntiat omnes ad eosdem horam & locum non comparentesTo disturb our Convocations, and de∣stroy the very Being of 'em, Dr. A. has ad∣vanc'd a Notion, that the Members are ac∣countable for their Absence to the House, and not to the President. When yet by the King's Writ, the Bishops and Clergy must meet be∣fore the Archbishop, and must therefore an∣swer for their Non Appearance to him before whom they ought to Appear. Such Non Ap∣pearance at first, or afterward withdrawing without His Graces leave, was reputed a Contumacy or obstinate Contempt of his Graces Authority; for which a Canonical Punishment or Censure was due; of which kind of Censure, and the time of inflicting it the Archbishop was the proper Judge, and therefore reserv'd it to himself, and all the Circumstances of it to his own Pleasure. contumaces, reservando poenam eorum contumaciae in aliquem diem competentem pro Bene∣placito ipsius Reverendissimi. Praemissis sic expeditis dictus Reverendissimus ad Episcopos & Clerum tunc Praesentes Anglice sive Latine causam sui Ad∣ventus ac dictae Convocationis InchoataeAnother fancy of Independence has been rais'd, that at the Opening of every Parlia∣ment, the Lower Clergy ought to be put into a capacity of doing Business, and may then chuse their own Business, and agree upon De∣bates, and even come to Resolutions, with∣out any preceding Advice or Directions from the President and Bishops. But this Liberty was never till now Assum'd. The Lower Clergy never thought themselves such abso∣lute Judges in Synodical Affairs, as to make the first Steps in them. They waited the Motion of the Archbishop and Bishops, and and were content to follow the Hints and In∣structions given by their Superiours: This did establish a Custom for the Archbishop to open the Synod in a Speech, that should set forth the Causes of his Coming there to meet his Brethren and the Rest of the Clergy; and the Reason of thus forming themselves in∣to a Synodical Assembly: Causam sui Adventus ac dictoe Convocationis inchoatoe exponit. exponit: Quodque ex lauda∣bili
& antiqua Ordinatione eadem Convocatio in duoAnother daring Notion has been rais'd, that the Lower House is a distinct Body from the Upper, Separate upon Essential Rights of it's own Body, with all the Powers and Pri∣vileges of a House, in the Parliamentary sense of the word House. But yet here the same Body the Convocation is divided into two Mem∣bers, the Upper and Lower House, which Members have the same common Head of the whole Body the Archbishop. Tho' the Au∣thor of the Power of the Lower House has most injuriously degraded the Archbishop into a Chair-Man or Moderator of the Whole Assem∣bly, when the two Houses are together; or when the Upper House is by it self, then the Arch∣bishop must not be President (tho it be his title in the very Act of Ʋniformity) but a chief Mem∣ber at most, or the proper Person to Intimate or Notifie the Act of the Bishops, p. 15. c. 2. p. 18. c. 1. while the Prolocutor is made by much the greater Man, Nothing singular in the Notion of representing the Prolocutor as Head resident or Governour of the Lower House. p. 9. c. 2. Membra divi∣ditur, nempe in Superiorem atque Inferiorem domum. Ʋnde Reverendis∣simus & caeteri Co-Episcopi Superiorem Domum efficiunt; Inferior vero Domus ex Decanis Ecclesiarum Cath' Archidiaconis Collegiorum Magistris & Capitulorum Cath' Ecclesiarum necnon Cleri cujuscunque Dioceseos Pro∣curatoribus constat. Et quoniam si in rerum tractandarum serie Ʋnusquisque ex inferiore Domo suam ipse sententiam quoties visum esset diceret, aut si omnes aut plu∣res simul loquerentur, pareret confusionem. Igitur semper hactenus obser∣vatum fuit, ut Ʋnus aliquis doctus & disertus ex gremio dictae inferioris Domus in eorum omnium locum ad hoc munus assumaturAgreeable to this wild Notion of Houses Co-ordinate, and a Prolocutor Supreme: It has been suggested, that the Lower Clergy by in∣herent right haue always had a Prolocutor as an Original President over them. But cer∣tainly there was a time when A. B. Bishops and Clergy made but one House; when the Lower Clergy had no right to with∣draw from the Bishops, but by Order or Leave of the President. So withdrawing and debating of a matter referr'd to them; they were but a Select Company or Committe of the Archbishops Appointment, and some One was taken as a Chairman to manage their separate Debates, and report their Sense to the Archbishop and his Brethren. When the Lower Clergy were by Degrees form'd into a more settled State of separation from their Lordships, the Archbishop allowed them a distinct Apartment, which soon came to be their Locus solitus, and a fixt Prolocutor to be chose at the Beginning, and continue to the End of every Convocation or Synod. But this Ministerial Officer in the Lower House did by no means exempt the Clergy from their Canonical Subjection to the Archbishop, who had hereby a larger exercise of Jurisdiction. For he now prevented Confusion in the Lower House by his prescribing this Method of Peace and Order: He asserted his own Authority, by not suffering them to chuse without his Leave and Admonition: He took care that the Elect should be presented to him for his Consent and Approbation: And when Actu∣ally in the Office he must be subservient to he Archbishop and the whole Synod, by elating the consent of his Fellow Members o the most Reverend, whenever he should e required if both Houses were together, r whenever he should be sent for if the Lower House were in a separate Place.; ut Is intel∣lectis
& scrutatis caeterorum Omnium votis, tanquam unum Eorum omni∣um Os & Organum loquatur, & consonam eorum sententiam eidem Re∣verendissimo, cum ad hoc rogatus seu missus fuerit, caeteris silentibus fide∣literThe Office of Prolocutor and very Name of Referendary is from his being the common Mouth and Organ of the Lower Clergy, to onvey and relate their joint Requests and Resolutions to the most Reverend; and car∣y back his Graces Answers and further Orders, s the only Messenger of Correspondence be∣ween the two Houses. This part of the Constitution they would have lately broke hrough, and would have sent chosen Mem∣ers without the Prolocutor to relate the nse of the Clergy to the Archbishop and he Bishops. A Violence that for ought ap∣ears, was never Attempted but in one odern Convocation, and even then it was ublickly declared to be against the judg∣ent of the President and Bishops, and a∣ainst the Authority of their Records. referat': Qui ex hoc munere Referendarius sive Prolocutor com∣muniter denominatur. Cujus eligendi libera facultas semper penes dictam Inferiorem Domum remanet. Ʋnde ipse Reverendissimus solet eosdem ex inferiori Domo monere & hortari, ut statim se conferant in dictam Inferiorem Domum'Tis observable, that tho' the Body of e Synod soon divides into two Members, an pper and Lower House: Yet the Place here the Archbishop and Bishops assemble,  always the Place of the Synod; which whole od of the Prelates and Clergy of the Pro∣nce is Prorogued in hunc locum, i. e. to the om where the Archbishop is then sitting o Tribunali, and his Suffragans as Co-As∣ssors with him. And as at the opening of the Synod, the Lower Clergy attended the President in the very same Place with the Bi∣shops; So at the beginning of every Session, they are presum'd to pay the same Attendance coram Archiepiscopo, in the same Place to which they as well as the Bishops were Continued and Prorogued, though to save unnecessary trouble the President does commonly accept the Atten∣dance of the Prolocutor and two or three Prin∣cipal Members as equivalent to the whole House; and may often excuse even their Absence, if it be not in Contempt or affected Separation. 'Tis further observable, that while the Lower Clergy are so attending the Archbishop and Bishops, they are never found to be at their own will, but at the Presidents Monition: He dismisses them from the Common Place of As∣sembling, with Leave to retire to their own Apartment., ibique de viro docto pio & fideli in Prolocutorem suum assumendo consultantes, unanimiter consentiant & eligant, sicque electum ipsi Reverendissimo in eadem Domo Capitulari prox' insequente Sessione debita solennitate prae∣sententThe Registers of the Upper House do prove, that when the Lower Clergy had in their Place of withdrawing elected a Prolocutor, they then came back to the Arch∣bishop and Bishops, and related the Names of the Persons they had chose for the Prolocutor and the Presenter of him, and had his Grace's Approbation before his Proroguing in their Presence to a day, in which the said Prolocu∣tor should be formally presented. But of late, the Parliament Opening the same day with the Convocation has called away their Lord∣ships to Westminster, before a Report could be made of such Election,. His dictis descendunt Omnes in Inferiorem Domum ad ef∣fectum praedictum.
FORMA Eligendi & Praesentandi PROLOCUTOREM. SOlet observari, ut postquam ingressi fuerint Inferiorem Domum, in sedibus se decenter collocentTaking Seats, and Sitting is the first Privilege of the Lower Clergy in their sepa∣rate Room from the Bishops. For the Pres∣byters of England as not at first admitted into the Provincial Council of the Metropolitan and his Suffragans; so when upon Secular Ac∣counts They were by degrees admitted to be a Part of that Council, they still rather waited as Assistants, and never join'd as Co-Assessors. So as when their Advice or Con∣sent was ask'd in a Matter, that requir'd longer consideration than could be taken on the Spot, then it was an Ease and Relief to them to withdraw to some distinct Adjacent Place, where they might with greater Rest and Free∣dom debate and determine of the Subject re∣ferr'd to them., & si Aliqui ex Iis sint Consi∣liarii sive Sacellani Regiae Majestatis, ut hi superiores sedes occu∣pent; atque ut Ʋnus ex Iis propter Dignitatem & Reverentiam, seu in eorum absentia, DecanusThe Dean of St. Paul's, if the King's Chaplain, has a Right to Preside within his own Church over his Brethren the Clergy Assembled by the Archbishop's Leave, in order to chuse a Prolocutor. Ecclesiae Cath' D. Pauli London' sive Archidiaconus London' PraesidentisThe name of President was at large ap∣plied to any Person who Presided or Moderated or took the Chair in any Ecclesiastic or Scholastic Meeting. And therefore it is an Affected Error in the Author of the Power of the L. H. to Adjourn, &c. to say, that whenever the Word is employ'd in Convocations, it constantly signifies One that Presides in the stead of, and by an authority derived from some other. p. 18. c. 1. It is hard to make this definition of a President agree with this title here given to the Dean of St. Paul's. And 'tis more Absurd in that Author to affirm, That the title of Pre∣sident as apply'd to the Archbishop, is wholly New— and implies a diminution of his Autho∣rity. For the Archbishop at the Head of his Province could have no greater title than that of his ordinary stile Reverendissimus, appropri¦ated to the Archbishop, and not capable o being assum'd by any other Person. Yet He was well known to Preside over the whole Sy∣nod, and is frequently said Praeesse and Prae¦sidere, from whence He might well have the Name as He had the Office of Praeses and Praesidens. But because the Archbishop had power to assign this Office to a Deputy or Representative commission'd by Him, there∣fore any One of his Suffragans so delegated, had the Name along with the Dignity of Pre∣siding, and is often said loco Reverendissimi prae∣sidere. And again, because in the vacancy of the See of Canterbury, the Dean and Chapter commit the Care of Presiding to the Dean of the Province, the Bishop of London; therefore his Lordship is then properly the President of Convocation. Not that He presides in stead of the Dean and Chapter, for they have no such Power of Presiding. But observe, when the title of President is so ascrib'd to his Gra∣ce's Delegate, or Sede vacante to the Bishop of London, it is still a borrowed title, and deriv'd from the Archbishop's original Power of Presiding, and imputed to Them only, as they pro hac vice fill the Place of the standing President of the Convocation of a Province, the Metropolitan. officio in hujusmodi Electione fun∣gatur. Atque ut ad hoc rite procedatur, primum jubebit nomina om∣nium
citatorum & qui tunc interesse tenentur à Clerico dictae Inferioris Domus recitari & praeconizariThis Preconization or calling over the Names of the Clergy now by order of the infe∣riour President, before they are a House; or af∣terwards by order of the Prolocutor, when they do become a proper House; is not by any inhe∣rent Power in either Person or Assembly: but 'tis done by the Authority and for the Service of the Archbishop; to Whom the Names of the Absents should be given; He Alone having the power to judge of the reasonable Cause of their Absenting, and Canonically to punish Such as He finds to be contumacious Ab∣senters.. Notatis{que} Absentibus, alloquatur prae∣sentes atque eorum sententiam de idoneo Procuratore eligendo sciscitetur. Et postquam de eo convenerint (quod semper quasi statimThe choice of a Prolocutor used to be thus dispatch'd with Ease and Expedition, be∣cause the Clergy had this only to consider, what Person among 'em would answer the Chara∣cter recommended by the Archbishop, De viro Docto Pio & Fideli: Agreeing alway on such a One as stood right in the Opinion of their Superiours; and so was the more Able to keep up the fair Correspondence and happy Union between the Archbishop and Bishops and Cler∣gy. Upon the first Establishment of a Prolo∣cutor, they continually chose the Archbishop's Official or other Minister, in Respect to their Metropolitan, and in hopes of having their Af∣fairs negotiated with more Success. In later times when his Grace's Official was not a standing Member, they generally chose the D. of S. Paul's, or whoever else was President at the Time of Electing. The first Divisions that are known to have hapned about the choice of a Prolocutor, were in 1689. when the Majority were for a Person to serve a particular Design of Not Acting, and indeed of Not Sitting, which they confess to have been rather their Desire. & absque ullo negotio perfici solebat) mox conveniunt inter se de Duobus eminen∣tioris Ordinis, qui dictum Electum Reverendissimo Domino Cantuar' in Die statuto debita cum Reverentia & Solennitate praesentent. Quorum Alter sicut, cum dies advenerit, ipsum Prolocutorem cum La∣tina & docta Oratione praesentare tenetur, sic etiam idem Praesentatus habitu Doctoratûs indutus consimilem Orationem ad dictum Reverendis∣simum Patrem ac Praelatos & caeteros Praesentes habere debet. Quibus finitis, praefatus Reverendissimus Oratione Latina tam Electores quam Praesentato∣rem & Presentatum pro sua gratia collaudare, ac demum ipsam Electionem sua
Archiepiscopali AuthoritateThe Archbishop had reserv'd to himself, the express Authority of Approving and Con∣firming the Choice of a Prolocutor. And if he never once rejected the Person presented to him, it proves, that the Clergy of this Province were alway so Wise and Happy, as to Agree in One very Acceptable to the Archbishop and Bishops. expresse confirmare & approbare non dedigna∣bitur. Et statim idem Reverendissimus Anglice (si placeat) exponere solet ulterius bene placitum suumThese Gravamina and Reformanda to be consulted of by the Lower Clergy, and re∣ported to the Archbishop, were such chiefly as concern'd their Civil Rights. Such Grie∣vances relating to their Properties and Per∣sons, which they had been used to complain of, to the King, and to Petition him for Redress when he requir'd their Subsidies and Taxes. And like the Temporal Commons, they often insisted upon such Redress of Grievances, as a Condition of granting their Aid and Bene∣volence. This by degrees taught the Clergy in Convocation a like Method of representing to the Archbishop and Bishops, any sort of Ec∣clesiastical Oppressions they lay under from Inferiour Courts and Officers. But then, whatever these Grievances were, they were never once cast into Resolutions, or Positions of Censure and Remonstrance; but were alway delivered in Articles of Request and Petition or Address, in a decent humble manner. The drawing up of Grievances in a Declaratory Stile, with a sort of Judicial Condemnation of em, was a new and peculiar Liberty of the last Convocation, when they also limited their Complaints, and made 'em against the Bishops only, and their Ecclesiastical Government: Never once thinking how to represent the Hardship of Poor Vicars in bearing an unequal Burden of Taxes; nor the want of a propor∣tion'd Number of Clergy-Commissioners to preserve their Brethren from being over∣charg'd in Assessments. Nor to recommend any other Relief or Favour, which upon suitable Application to his Grace and their Lordships, might possibly have been obtain'd from the Legislative Power.; Hortando Clerum, ut de rebus communibus quae Reformatione indigent, consultent & referant dieThis Passage was applied by Dr. K. to prove the Continuance and Intermission of Sit∣tings in the Lower House, as depending interme∣diately on the Metropolitan, and finally on the Prince. Occas. Letter p. 54. but the Author of P. L. H. applies it to a Meaning directly opposite, and makes it an express Argument, that the Consultations of the Lower House were to be held on Intermediate days as they saw best; But the Report of 'em was to be made above, on the day appointed for the common Sitting of Both Houses. p. 12. c. 2. So the Narrative in the Appendix p. xiii. would have these Words ca∣pable of being fairly Ʋnderstood of the free Li∣berty of so Ʋsing the Intervals of Sessions, i. e. of holding intermediate Sessions, so as die Statuto (the next Session) must be joined with Referant, and the Consultent be left at large. But there is Force as well as Art in detorting these Words to apply 'em to the New Pretences of Inter∣mediate Sessions. The Author of P. L. H. is first driven upon dividing consultent & referant that he may make the die Statuto refer to the latter only; and therefore he puts a stop after Consultent, which is not in the Manu∣script, nor in the two Copies Printed (before the thoughts of such a turn) by Dr. Atterbury himself in the two several Editions of his Rights, Powers, &c. Nay, it is not in the Ci∣tation at large that is made for the like pur∣pose in the Appendix to the Narrative. But in all the Books and Papers I have yet seen (ex∣cepting that P. L. H.) the words are joyn'd as the Conjunction requires, Consultent & refe∣rant die statuto. So as their Consulting and Re∣lating may well belong to the same Appointed Day, which in the sense of those Writers, is the next Session to which the Archbishop Continues and Prorogues 'em. Without breaking the words by that feigned stop, 'tis so hard to divide the application of 'em; that the Writer of the Ap∣pendix to the Narrative is free to own, we may so fairly presume, if not by common sense, yet by what we have seen; i. e. by far fetch'd Allusions to the Parliament. Certainly if this Form had meant to provide for any such se∣parate Practise, it would have said, De rebus communibus quae Reformatione indigent suo tempore consultent; ac denuo Referant die sta∣tuto. And yet after all, granting the Consul∣tation must have intervening Days, before the final Day of Report: Might not the Archbi∣shop direct 'em, or allow 'em to let a Part or Committee of 'em meet, and advise in the mean while, that they might be ready for a Report against the regular Day of Session. This is a Method frequent in the Registers, where the Archbishop commits Business to a Select Company, in order to adjust and offer it in some appointed Session. But in all our Re∣cords we meet not with one single Instance, be∣fore 1701, where the Lower House after the Prorogation by the Archbishop, formally Ad∣journ themselves to an Intermediate day; and call that Meeting a Session, and there consult Business of their own chusing, independently from the Bishops. In truth, there never was any proper Synodical Business of common con∣cern to the Church or Religion, that was ever treated of in a Committee of the Lower House Alone. But all such Business was constantly referr'd to a joint Committee of Bishops and Clergy, and by them together form'd into a Report to be made to the Archbishop and his Suffragans. statuto. Ac ad hunc
modum de Sessione in Sessionem continuabiturAd hunc modum must relate to the words immediately foregoing Die statuto, which the Author of P. L. H. allows to be the Day ap∣pointed for the common Sitting of Both Houses. And the Appendix to the Narrative, justly calls it, The next Session. Thus, or after this man∣ner, by the Archbishop's Appointment from one Session of both Houses to another, the whole Convocation shall be continued, as shall seem expedient to the Archbishop upon Counsel of his Brethren, and till the King him∣self shall interpose by Writ for the Prorogation or the Dissolution of it. Convocatio quamdiu expedire videbitur, ac donec de eadem dissolvendaNot a Writ that actually dissolves, but a Writ for dissolving presented to the Archbi∣shop, who in obedience makes the Dissolu∣tion. The Author of the P. L. H. having ascrib'd the Power of Assembling only and purely to the King's Writ, does then artfully infer, That the powers of Proroguing and Dissol∣ving are in Law and Reason the natural and ne∣cessary Result of the former, p. 3. c. 1. But the Supposition indeed is absolutely false. For our Reformed Princes did no more assemble the Clergy only and purely by their own Writ, than their Popish. Predecessors did, when they also sent the same Writ of Precept to the Archbishop, who thereupon did Convene the Clergy then, by the same Mandate as now. In truth as before the Reformation, the Archbishops Prorogued and Dissolved by their own power (as Dr. A. confesses) even when they assembled a Convocation at the King's Command: So the Act of Submission did not at all alter the Constitution of our Pro∣vincial Assemblies; only as it restrained the Archbishop from convening, without having License and Authority for so doing by the King's Writ; which Writ was to be now Al∣way, as it had Frequently before been, Prece∣ding to his own Mandate. But neither Pro∣rogation nor Dissolution were directly or im∣mediately affected by the Statute. Archbi∣shop Cranmer did all along actually Prorogue, and if he had seen a Necessity, he might yet have legally dismist his Provincial Assembly. But indeed King Hen. 8. to keep a Convoca∣tion of Popishly affected Clergy more in Awe of a Reforming Parliament, began (even be∣fore the Act of Submission, and therefore not by Vertue of it) to send his Precepts to the Archbishop, to Prorogue and Dissolve the Con∣vocation at the same Times with the Parlia∣ment; because he could best trust them un∣der such an Awe and Restraint. King Edw. VI. and Queen Elizabeth were put upon the same prudential Methods: While the Majo∣rity of Convocation were suspected as Averse to the Measures taken in Parliament. This Reason Alone began and confirmed the Cu∣stom of Royal Writs to command the Proro∣guing and Dissolving a Convocation concur∣rent with every Parliament. Yet the Custom did not bar the legal Prerogative in 1640. Nor is there Any Law but a like Custom, that can now restrain the Crown from Issuing or not Issuing the like Writs at Pleasure. But observe, whenever these Writs are Issu'd, the Writ it self does not of it self Prorogue or Dissolve (as the first Writ did not of it self Convene) but only declares an Expedience and a Resolution upon it; and then commands the Archbishop to exert his Authority, who in pur∣suance of such Precept, do's by Himself or his Commissary Prorogue or Dissolve the Convo∣cation by a Schedule of their own distinct from the Writ; as it was before assembled by a distinct Mandate in obedience to the King's Writ. Breve Regium eidem Reveren∣dissimo praesentetur.
Et sciendum est quod quotiescun{que} Prolocutor ad praesentiam Reveren∣dissimi causa Convocationis ac tempore SessionisBy this it appears, that the Prolocutor is never suppos'd to be at the Head of the Lower Clergy in any intermediate Session, but only tempore Sessionis, i. e. when both Houses hold a concurrent Session, and are rea∣dy for a mutual Intercourse. accesserit, utatur habitu praedicto, ac Janitor sive virgifer dictae inferioris Domus ipsum reveren∣ter antecedat. Ejusdem Prolocutoris est etiam monere omnes ne discedant à Civitate London' abs{que} licentiaIt is here declar'd to be an express Duty of the Prolocutor to Admonish All the Members not to go out of Town without Leave of the Archbishop. And in the Mi∣nutes of former Convocations, there is fre∣quent Entry of such Solemn Admonition. So as when Occasions requir'd any Member to retire into the Country, a proper Applica∣tion for Leave was made to the President, and to Him only. Till in this last Convo∣cation, among other ways of attempting to come up to the Appearance of a House of Commons; They fell upon this of asking Leave of the House for this or that Member to go into the Country; and this too some∣times in an Intermediate Session. As in their Minutes of May 14. Memorand. Mr. Arch∣deacon Hutton desired Leave to go into the Country to hold his Visitation. And several Others of the Majority Side went so away without Leave or Knowledge of his Grace, in contempt and open breach of our Syno∣dical Constitution. But upon second thoughts, their own Narrative condemns the Practice, and the Men that were guilty of it; by de∣nying not that his Grace has a Power of de∣manding the Attendance of our Members: and if the Lower House do give a Leave of Ab∣sence, yet the Member is not perfectly at Li∣berty without Leave from the Archbishop. Nar∣rat. p. 49. Reverendissimi. Quodque statutis diebusStatutis diebus do's alway signify the common Days appointed by the President for holding a concurrent Session of Both Houses. And no notice being ever given of any other Days, 'tis a sure Sign the Lower Clergy ne∣ver pretended to make intermediate Sessions of their own Appointment. The Prolocutor admonishing 'em to come early on these pro∣per Convocation Days, was to have 'em in Rea∣diness to attend at the opening of the Session, when the President often took occasion to instruct 'em and advise 'em in the Business of the Day. tem∣pestive veniant ad Convocationem. Quodque salaria ClericorumThe obligation of the Lower Clergy to pay the Salary of the Clerk of the Ʋpper as well as of the Lower House, is a clear Argument that they are not exempted from that Upper-House: But that indeed the whole Body of the Convocation under the Head of the Province requires every Member to con∣tribute to the common Occasions of being mutually serv'd and assisted. And therefore by the Constitution of our Provincial Synods there is but one Register of Convocation, and one Registry of Acts and Minutes: i. e. the Register of the Archbishop, and the Re∣gistry of his Metropolitan See. His Grace's Principal Register has commonly his Dele∣gate or Deputed Officer, and he or his Deputy by virtue of such Office is the standing Register of the whole Convocation. He being able to attend in Person only on the Upper House, deputes his Proxy or Assistant to attend upon the Lower House; as an Actuary or Scribe to form their Minutes, and prepare their written Correspondence with the Archbishop and Bishops: Which Actuary or Under-Clerk was never chose or rejected by the House or the Prolocutor, but was assign'd and dis∣miss'd by the Superiour Clerk or Register of Convocation. But in the late Assembly they were breaking these fix'd Rules of Property and Constitution, and pretended that the Clerk of the Upper House is but a Fellow Actuary with the Clerk of the Lower, who is chose and imploy'd by the Prolocutor, con∣contrary to all Right and Fact. Narrat. p. 33. 36. All true Sons of the Church of England will be content with a Convocation to be Held, Prout ab Antiquo observari consuevit. And 'tis for that Reason, I have here publish'd the En∣tire Form of Holding a Reformed Convocation or Protestant Provincial Synod, drawn up by an excellent Antiquary Archbishop Parker, under the Government of Queen Elizabeth, which a strict Regard to the Constitution of the Church and State, for a standing Rule to Posterity, as long as God should bless this Na∣tion with the Purity of Religion then Esta∣blish'd. And the Reading over this Form Alone, will abundantly discover and refute those late Wri∣ters who have labour'd for Change and Inno∣vation in these Matters. There is scarce any one of their Pretences, but what is really op∣posite to the Orders and Opinions here deli∣ver'd. As you find particularly, 1. Dr. Atterbury would have the Constitution of English Synods entirely alter'd by the Act of Submission ; when this Form refers All to Ancient Obser∣vation, and to antecedent Custom; without hinting at any one material Change occasion'd by the Reformation. 2. It is a Pretence of Dr. A. that the Parliament Writ is entred in the Front of the Acts of every Synod; and that even by the Provincial Writ the Bishops and Clergy are summon'd directly by the King, not at all by the authority of the Archbishop: Whereas here is nothing at all of a Parlia∣ment Writ; nor indeed of the King's Pro∣vincial Writ as a Royal Summons; but the Archiepiscopal Mandate only is mention'd, and All Members are expresly said to be cited by Authority of the Archbishop. 3. It is a Notion of the like Author of P. L. H. that the Certifi∣cates or Returns which the Dean and Suffragans make to the Metropolitan are in Virtue of the King's Writ, and not at all in Virtue of the Archbishop's Mandate; whereas here the Bishop of London brings in the Mandate only, and Certifies nothing but the Execu∣tion of that single Mandate. 4. He has ad∣vanc'd a new Claim to the Lower House to give leave of Absence to their Members, without Application to the Archbishop; when here the Members appear before the Arch∣bishop only, and the Penalty of their Ab∣sence is reserv'd to Him alone; and the Pro∣locutor is to admonish all the Lower Clergy of this Duty, that they do not presume to go out of Town without the Archbishop's Leave. 5. Another Practice was begun of the Lower Clergy chusing their own Business, and com∣ing to Resolutions, in very important Mat∣ters, without any consult with, or know∣ledge of the Archbishop and Bishops; Where∣as here the Archbishop is first to declare the Cause of his coming, and the Reasons of open∣ing the Convocation; and then the Inferiour Clergy proceed upon Instructions, and in mutual Concert with the Upper-House in joint Committees. 6. The Prolocutor has been made Head Governour and President of the Lower-House; but the Archbishop not a Pre∣sident of Convocation: When here a Prolocu∣tor is elected and confirm'd by Authority of the Archbishop, and is to attend his Grace when and where he shall be Bidden or Com∣manded: And when by the very Act of Uni∣formity 14. Car. 2. the two Archbishops are more than once call'd the Presidents of Con∣vocations within their respective Provinces. 6. They took up a singularity of intermediate Sessions: When here is no intimation of any Meeting but in Die Statuto, which they them∣selves acknowledge to be the next Session ap∣pointed by the Archbishop for the joint As∣sembly of both Houses. And so in many other Particulars, they have advanc'd Notions and Claims either directly Opposite, or at least not at all agreeing, to this GOOD OLD FORM. tam Superioris quam Inferioris Domus, & Janitoris inferioris Domus juxta antiquam taxationem, quatenus eorum quemlibet concernit, fideliter per∣solvant.
State super vias Antiquas. FINIS.
