C5571 669.f.10[31] 99869192 162572
A Common Obseruation upon these TIMES. AS I about the towne did walke, I heard the People how they talke, Of the brave Parliament. Some praise the Lords, and some the Scots, Some thinke that they have further plots, Some blame the Government. Cause Oxford Lords can sweare and rore, And breake a Lance halfe broke before, They talke of mighty Fights. But when they come to Leshlyes hand, Hee made them quickly understand, They were but Carpet Knights. The Caluinists may plainly see, That all election now is free, Yet Schismaticks complaine: Though Canterbury to their Face, Hath prov'd a Man may fall from grace, And never rise againe. Poore Prin and Bastwick now appeares, And Osbaston may shew his Eares, The Iustice being knowne: Of that high Court where plannets rul'd, Who too long had the World befoold, With knavery of their owne. Yet some of them did keepe a stir, And said they onely did concur, With those were wiser knowne. Twas Rhetorcick betraid their eares, And he hath none Long Philip sweares, Were it to save his owne. Thom Trevor made a iust complaint, That he in Lawes was ignorant, How far they would encroach: But Spanish Franck cannot say so, Nor some tunns else that I do know, VVhich are not yet abroach. There is a new Lord Keeper in, And for to pray can be no sinne, To keepe his Conscience free: And not grow greazy like his Purse, Who had no VVife to make him worse, As had old Coventrey, Our Secretary knavery, Hath left his Brother Vanity, VVho is of prattle full: And yet he could not find a speech, For to protect the Reverend Breech, Of Tom the great Mogull. Some say her ioyncture made the Queene, So oft at Westminster to be seene, Though Carlile shew her Face, To steele the forehead of that Lord, For whom the State proclam'd accord, More proper then such grace. And Heath they say might safely sweare, He never did a bribe for beare, VVhat ere was the condition; VVhen he was iudge with theeves he shard, And yet tis knowne that he was spard, His sonne brought the Petition. Although that Goring have a stroke, In tavernes and the Indian smoke, Let Dorset scape for one. Though he approves of Venus play, I never yet heard mortall say, He lov'd the whore of Rome. The Popes did never keepe such stirs, As his late Grace and Officers, For every small offence. For Venery was in their dayes, Which I remember to their praise, at most but sixteene pence. Let Arundell be punisht then, That plagud all were not Gentlemen, VVhich makes me much affraid. That he or his Posteritee. VVill prove as poore as thee or mee, VVhen all his debts be paid. Our Churches now are purged cleane, From Prelats, Chapters, and the Deane, VVho long have liv'd like Hogs. God gave no VVarrants for such toyes, Nor can he but abhor the noise, they made like masty Doggs. Will the German may reioyce, To heare that Mal that hath such choise, Doth place him by her side. Nor can the State be counted free, Vnlesse they set up Monarthy, to gratifie the Bride. Here is no roome for Conaway, Nor many more that run away, Of pardon that dispaire. Nor Hopton that no charge refus'd VVho hath already beene abus'd, Sufficient for his share. I may be thought an Heritick, Although I speake it in this fit, I sinne in that and wine. Because I creepe not to the Cope, But hold the Bishops from the Pope, But not by right Divine. If that the House continues still, To punish those that have done ill, and these our warres doe cease. The purer sort ile celebrate, To whom I owe both Life and State, I say God send us peace▪ FINIS. Printed in the yeare, 1645.
