C6114 E464_23 99864586 116817
THE COPIE OF A LETTER FROM A Commander in the FLEET with His Highnesse the PRINCE Of WALES. CONTAINING A true and exact Relation of the pro∣ceedings of His Highnesse and His Fleet, with the Fleet Comman∣ded by the Earl of Warwicke. printer's or publisher's device September the 7. 1648. Printed in the Yeare, 1648. Sept 20th
THE COPIE OF A LETTER FROM A Commander in the FLEET with HIS HIGHNESSE the Prince of WALES. September the 7. 1648. SIR, BE pleased to receive this narrative of the latest Occurrents from the Fleet with His Highnesse the Prince of WALES: His Highnesse landed at Helford-sluce the last Saturday, and on Munday night was received according to His quality at the Hague: The cause of His return so soon from Sea, was a generall want of Victuals of all sorts in the Fleet. The Earle of Warwicke avoided two whole daies to fight with His Highnesse; which had he had either wil or courage to do,
he might have done it at pleasure, the Prince having no means (the other being continually in the wind of Him) to avoid it; and the last of those two daies the Prince got so neer him, that both Fleets had been engaged, had not God in that instant of time, sent so sudden and vio∣lent a storme, as the like for the manner hath not been heard of, so that both Fleets were forced to take in their sailes, and come unto an Anchor: The Earle of War∣wicke went afterwarwards into the entrance of the River of Chatham: His Highnesse the next day advanced, but finding the Earle of Warwicke had no mind to engage without a very great advantage, which was offered him among the Sands: the Prince next morning being Fri∣day, set saile, and with▪ as little sayle as possible he could, stood unto the Eastward, hoping to have drawne the Earle of Warwicke from the Sands unto the open Sea: Warwicke being swolne to above thirty Sayle, by reason of all outward-bound Ships came in to him, set sayle likewise; but he first saw the Prince some three Leagues at least luward of him, the wind then at West. South∣west, and South-west, he following with the same sayle the Prince still made, and when His Highnesse lessened sayle, he lessened, and when His Highnesse lay by the lee, he did the like, keeping alwaies the same distance untill betwixt three or foure a Clock afternoon, and then fell from Him, and came unto an Anchor, 3 or 4 Leagues in the wind of the PRINCE's Fleet. Certainly Warwick had all the reason in the world to have engaged in Fight, considering all advantages were on his side, both of place and wind, and the prize for which he fought; whereas the Prince (all things well considered) had no reason at all, but His high courage drew Him thereunto, for when the Lords, the Officers, and whole company of the
Ship, had humbly on their knees desired Him to betake Himself unto a place of some security for His Person, and enforced the same by many strong reasons and per∣swasions: He onely replied, What doth this concerne mine Honour? and taking a scrued Gun in His hand, I am confident with this Piece this day to shoot Warwicke through the head, if he dares in Person appeare in the Fight: and so by His example, put a most invincible courage into the hearts of all His People. The Prince had a fair opportunity to make Himself master of Ports∣mouth Fleet, and that without blows; for His Highnesse Ship made them before night, and knew them to be the same, and the tyde of ebbe being come, they could not turne it up, the wind West-south-west, but were forced to come to an Anchor, His Highnesse passed through them, onely giving notice to a catch to awaken one or two of them▪ and command them to follow the Lord Warwicke, the Fleet being put to luward of them, and a strong tyde of ebbe bent, it was not possible again to re∣cover them, but the reer Admirall came in up the sterne most Ship: finding them (notwithstanding their for∣mer summons) asleep, awakened them with two or three shot. The Prince at His comming from the Downes, which was Saturday the 26 of August, had another designe then comming up the River, out of a hot desire the Sea-men had to fight with Warwicke, and I am con∣fident, they would have spent themselves unto the last man against him, such was their violent earnestnesse to fight with him. The businesse of force in Shipping, was I suppose e∣quall on both sides, there being not four peeces of Ord∣nance difference, the Prince had 17 Sayle, 11 onely bea∣ring Ordnance, the rest were Hoyes, Carches, and prize-Vessels
unarmed. Warwicke at first but 13. 11 whereof were wel-fitted, the other two Catches, but in courage and brave resolution of people His Highnesse far excee∣ded him. Surely never did an higher courage, and more gallan∣try of resolution appeare in man then, did in His Highnesse, whose great affability with His People, His readinesse and clearnesse of judgment, and His excee∣ding confidence in all appearing difficulties, prove Him of a most Martiall constitution, and give us visible, and infallible assurances, that with Gods blessing, He will prove with a little experience one of the most able Com∣manders both by Sea and Land, now in Christendome: and in Military prowesse will equall the most warlike Prnces that ever this Nation bred. The next opportunity you shall hear more from Your Servant. Roterdam, Septemb. 7. 1648. FINIS.
