C7686a R231895 99900077 133291
Law-Books lately Printed for J. Walthoe in the Temple Cloysters. 1 COke's Reports, with References to all the Ancient and Moder Books of the Laws, in 11 Vol. Fol. 2. Dalton's Countrey Justice, with large Additions, Fol. 3. Cases argued and decreed in the High Court of Chancery, Fol. 4. A Collection of the Orders rela∣ting to the Practice of the Courts of Chancery and Exchequer, 12mo. 5. The Law of Common and Com∣moners, or a Treatise shewing the Ori∣ginal and Nature of Common, 8vo. 6. The Method of Pleading by Rule and President, 8vo. 7. The Compleat Sheriff, wherein is set forth his Office and Authority, toge∣ther with that of a Coroner. 8vo. 8. A View of the Penal Laws con∣cerning Trades, Professions and Traf¦fick, and what Offences are punishable in the Crown Office, 12mo. 9. The Abridgement of the Statutes of King William, 8vo. 10. Bridgman's Conveyances is now in the Press, and will be speedily publish∣ed with Additions. Fol. 11. Tryals per Pais, or the Laws of England concerning Juries. 8vo.
A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND & IRELAND, AND DOMINIONS, Plantations and Territories Thereunto belonging, WITH THE Maritime Power thereof, AND Iurisdiction of Courts THEREIN. Methodically Digested under their Proper Heads. By H. C. sometime of the Inner-Temple. LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for I. Walthoe, and are to be sold by Iohn Deeve, at Bernard's-Inn-Gate in Holbourn. 1699.
THE PREFACE. TO THE READER. AT my first Entrance into the Study of the Laws of England, knowing Method and Order conduce much to the enlightning of the Ʋnderstanding, rendring things more perspicuous, and comprehensive to the discerning Judgment, and sitting them better for the retaining Memory; I resolved to observe a Regular Course, and therefore searched for such Au∣thors, and endeavoured to make use of such Means as might best correspond with my Design therein. But among the several Treatises of the Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and Ju∣risdiction of Courts heretofore written by several Eminent and Learned Men, finding none were so compleat, nor had that
Beauty of Order and Ʋniformity at might be expected. And the Lord-Coke in the Epilogue to his Fourth Institutets concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts, desiring the Wise-hearted and Expert Builders would amend both the Method, and Ʋniformity, and the Structure it self, where they should find any Deficiency in the Architecture; and considering that great Alterations have been made since by divers Acts of Parliament and otherwise, I was enduced to compile this. Methodical Compendium of the Laws and Go∣vernment of England, and the Domi∣nions thereunto belonging, to direct and facilitate my farther Studies. But the Importunity of some having pre∣vailed with me to promise (contrary to my first Intention and Inclination) to make it Publick: If it prove bene∣ficial to others, it will surmount all the Ambition may be thought to be in Yours To the extent of his Power, H. Curson.
A Table of Contents. Governments in General. ORiginal of Government, Pag. 1 Law is General, Pag. 4 Law Eternal, ibid. aw of Reason, Pag. 5 Divine Law, Pag. 6 Humane Law, Pag. 7 Fundamentals of the Laws of England, Pag. 8 The Government of England. The Government of England, Pag. 22 The King, ibib. Privy Council, ibid. Ecclesiastical Government of England. Ecclesiastical Government, Pag. 28 Convocation, Pag. 32 Executive Power in Causes Ecclesiaical, Pag. 36 High Commission Court, Pag. 36 Court of Arches, Pag. 39 Court of Audience, ibid. Court of the Faculties, Pag. 40 Prerogative Court of Canterbury, ibid.
Court of Peculiars, 41 Consistory Courts of Archbishops & Bishops, 42 Court of the Archdeacon or his Commissary, 44 Court of Delegates, 44 Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, 45 Trials Ecclesiastical in Civil Causes, 46 Trials, Ecclesiastical in criminal Causes, 46 Punishments by Ecclesiastical Courts, 47 Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar to the Clergy, 49 Civil Government of England. Civil Government of England, 51 High Court of Parliament, 51, 535 Executive Power in Temporal Affairs, 80 Court of the High Steward of Eng. 81, 539 High Court of Chancery, 90 Court of extraordinary Jurisdiction, 93 Court of the Star-Chamber, 104 Court for Redress of Delays of Judgment in the King's great Courts, 108 Court of Kings Bench, 113 Court of Common Pleas Court, 121 Court of the Exchequer, 127 Court of Inquiry to certifie untrue Accompts in the Exchequer. 140 Court of Equity in the Exchequer, 141, 544 Office of the Pleas in the Exchequer, 142 Courts of Justices of Assize & Nisi-prius, 144 Court of Justices of a Oyer and Terminer, 153 Court of special Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner, 166
Money collected for the Houses of Correction, or for the Poor, 166 Colledges, Hospitals or Alms-houses, or for charitable and lawful Purposes, and Uses, 167 Court of Justices of Goal-delivery, 169 Court of Justices of the Forrest, 175 Court of Justices in Eyre, 193 Court of Justices of Trailbaston, 195 Court of Wards and Liveries, 196 Court of Ancient Demesne, 196, 559 Court of Commissioners of Sewers, 198, 569 Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts, 201, 573 Commissioners for Examination of Witnes∣ses, 203, 578 King's Swanherd, 204, 587 King's Aulnager, 205, 590 The Government of Counties in Eng∣land, 207 Court of the Sessions of the Peace, 210 Court of Inquiry of the Defaults of Ju∣stices of the Peace, Justices of Assize, Sheriffs and Under-Sheriffs, 222 The Execution of Laws in each County, ibid. Court of the Tourn, 223, 595 Court Leet or View of Frankpledge, 224, 597 County Court, 228, 615 Court of the Hundred, 233, 630 Court Baron, 235, 632 Coroners Court, 237, 635 Court of Escheators and Commissioners for
finding of Offices, 239, 635 Court of the Clerk of the Market, 241 Court of Pipowders, 246 Court of the Dutchy-chamber of Lanca∣ster at Westminster, 247 Courts of the County Palatin of Chester, 251 Court of the County Palatin of Durham, 252 Royal Franchise of Ely, 254 Court of the County Palat. of Pembroke, 255 Franchise of Hexam and Hexamshire, 255 Courts of the Cinque-Ports, 256 President and Council in the North, 258 The Wardens Courts in the East, West and Middle Marshes adjoyning to Scot∣land, 260 Court of Stannaries in the Counties of De∣von and Cornwall, 261 Court of the Mayor of the Staple, 263 The Principality of Wales. The Principality of Wales, 266 Court of the President and Council of Wales, 269 The great Sessions in Wales, 270 Military Government of England. Military Government of England, 275 Court of Chivalry before the Constable and Marshal, 279 Colledge of Heralds, 283
Maritime Power of England. Maritime Power of England, 287 Court of Admiralty, 292, 638 Navy Office, 295 Court of Commission by force of the Statute 28 H. 8. Cap. 15. 298 Port Courts, 298 Commissioners and others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light-houses, Sea-marks, and concerning Watches, 299 De Conservatore Treugarum, i. e. Indu∣ciarum, &c. 302 Court of the King of England. Court of the King of England, 308 Ecclesiastical Government of the King's Court, 308 Civil Government of the King's Court, 312 Compting-House, 314 Court of Green-Cloth, 315 The Knight Marshal, 320 Court of the Marshalsea, 321 Court of the Palace, 322 Court of the Lord Steward, Treasurer and Comptroller of the King's Houshlod concern∣ing Felony, &c. 324 Court of the Lord Steward of the King's House, or in his Absence, of the Treasurer,
Comptroller and Steward of the Mar∣shalsea, 325 King's great Wardrobe, 332 The Office of the Tents, 335 The Office of the Robes, ibid. Military Government in the King's Court, 338 The Band of Pensioners, 339 The Yeomen of the Guard, 340 Court of the Queen of England. Government of the Queen's Court, 341 Ecclesiastical Government of the Queen's Court, 341 Civil Government of the Queens Court, 342 Officers of the Robes, ibid. Government of Cities. Government f Cities, 34 Ecclesiastical Government of Cities, 344 Civil Government of Cities, 345 City of London, 34 The Ecclesiastical Government of Lon∣don, 347 The Civil Government of London, 34 Court of Hustings, 351 Sheriffs Court in London, 352 Court of Conscience, 354 Court of the Mayor and Aldermen, 356 Court of Orphans, 356
Court of Common Council, 357 Court of Wardmote Inquest, 358 Court of Halmote, ibid. Chamberlain's Court for Apprentices, 359 Court of the Conservators of the Water and River of Thames, 360 Court of the Coroner in London, ibid. Court of the Escheator in London, ibid. Court of Policies and Assurances, 361 Military Government of London. 363 Tower of London, 365 Office of the Ordnance, 368 Office of the Warden of the Mint, 373 Office of Records in the Tower, 375 St. Katherine's, 378 Bridge, ibid. Custom House, 379 General Post-Office, 381 Law Study, 383 Inns of Chancery, ibid. Inns of Court, 384 Mootings in the Inns of Court 388 Mootings in the Inns of Chancery, 390 Keeping Christmas in the Inns of Court, ibid. Manner of holding Parliaments in the Inns of Court, 392 Serjeants Inns, ibid. Call or Creation of Serjeants, 393 The Judges, 394 Colledge of Civilians in London, 396 Colledge of Physicians in London, 400 Gresham Colledge in London, 402
Sion Colledge in London, 40 Chartreux in London, 40 Schools in London, 40 Southwark, ibid▪ City of Westminster, 40 City of Norwich, 41 Government of the Two Universitie The two Universities in England, 41 Oxford, ibid▪ Cambridge, 42 Government of Boroughs. Government of Boroughs is England, 43 Government of Villages. Government of Villages in England, 43 Ecclesiastical Government of Villages, 43 Civil Government of Villages, ibid▪ Islands adjacent to England. Islands adjacent unto England, 43 Isle of Man, ibid▪ Anglesey, 43 Jersey olim Caesarea, 437 Guernsey olim Servia, ibid▪ Insula Vectis or Vecta, 43 Sorlings, 44 Island Lindisfarne. 44
The Government of Scotland. Scotland, 445 The Islands near Scotland. The Lesser Islands near Scotland, 459 Orcades, ibid. Schetland, ibid. Hebrides, 460 The Government of Ireland. Ireland, 463 English Plantations in Asia. English Plantations in Asia, 491 Bantan, ibid. Bombaine, ibid. English Colonies in Africa. English Colonies in Africa, 492 Guinea, ibid. Tangier, ibid. English Plantations in America. 492 Newfoundland, 494
New England, 496 New York, 500 New Jersey, 504 Pensylvania, 505 Mariland, 507 Virginia, 510 Carolina, 512 Bermudas, 515 Caribee Islands, 519 Barbuda, ibid. Anguilla, 520 Montserrat, 521 Dominica, 522 St. Vincent, 523 Antegoa, 524 Mevis or Nevis, ibid. St. Christophers, 526 Barbadoes, 527 Jamaica, 530 See the Alphabetical Table at the End of the Book. Finis Tabulae.
OF GOVERNMENTS, &c. The Original of Governments. OF GOVERNMENTS there can be but Three kinds, viz. One, or More, or All, must have the Sovereign Power of a Nation: If one, then it is a Monar∣chy; If more, (as an Assembly of Choice Persons) then it is Aristocracy; if All (that is, a General Assembly of the People,) then it is a Democracy: And now in course we are first to speak of, The Monarchical Government, which as most resembling the Divinity, and approaching nearest to Perfection, be∣ing esteemed the most Excellent, is of two sorts, Regal and Political: The first sort, Monarchy Regal was begun by Nim∣rod, who (after the World began to increase) got unto himself a Dominion
over others; and yet in Scripture he is not called a King, but a Mighty Hunter before the Lord: So Belus did subdue the Assyrians, and Ninus the most part of Asia; and so did the Romans usurp the Empire of the World. And thus having set forth the begin∣ning of the Regal Government of King∣doms; which Law Regal was no other thing but the Pleasure of the Prince, as in the First of Kings you may read more at large: We will now, as being more for our purpose, declare how King∣doms of Political Government were first begun, which we may term, Monarchy Political. St. Augustine in the 19th Book De Civitate Dei, saith, A People is a Multitude of Men associated by the Consent of Law, and Communion of Wealth: And yet such a People without a Head, is not worthy to be called  Body; as in Natural things, the Head cut off is not called a Body, but a Trunk Wherefore Aristotle in his Civil Philoso∣phy saith, Whensoever One is made of Many, among the same, One shall be the Ruler, and the other shall be the Rule And this Ruler thus raised and ap∣pointed in Kingdoms is called a King from the Saxon word Koning, intima∣ting Power and Knowledge, wherewith every Sovereign ought especially to be
Invested: And thus of a Multitude of People ariseth a Kingdom, which is a Body Mystical. And in this Body Mysti∣cal, or Political, the Intent of the People (like Blood in the Natural Body) is the first lively thing; that is Politick pro∣vision for the Utility and Wealth of the same People, which is imparted to the Head and members of the same Body, whereby it is Nourished and Maintained; and by the Law, which cometh from Ligando, of Binding, this Mystical Body is knit and preserv'd to∣gether, and the Members and Parts thereof, as the Natural Body by Sinews, do every one retain their proper Fun∣ctions: And as the Head of a Natural Body cannot change his Sinews, nor withhold from his Inferiour Members their peculiar Powers of Nourishments; no more can a King, which is the Head of the Body Politick, change the Laws of that Body, or withdraw from the said People their proper Substance a∣gainst their Wills. And therefore it now follows, that we speak somewhat of the Fundamen∣tals of laws in General, and then de∣scend to the particular Fundamentals of the Laws of England; and afterwards briefly declare the Executive Powers of the same. And first of
Laws in General. WHich are Four, that more proper∣ly belong to this our Business; (viz.) The Law Enternal, The Law of Nations, Divine Law, and Human Law. The Law Eternal. LEx Aeterna is the Reason of the Divine Will, whereby God will ave all things of him Created, to be moved and directed to a good End; and it is called The first Law, and all other Laws are derived from it. And this Law Eternal none may be able to know, as in himself, but the Blessed alone: But God of his Goodness re∣vealeth it to all, in as much as is ne∣cessary for them, otherwise he should bind his Creatures to impossible things, which to be in God is most wicked to think. And God reveals this Law Eternal, or the Divine Will, to the Ra∣tional Creature Three manner of ways, that is, First by the Light of Natural Understanding, and then it is called The Law of Reason: Secondly, by Di∣vine Revelation, and then it is called The Divine Law: Thirdly, by Reason in the Prince, or any other Secondary Pe son Governing, who hath power to Impose a Law upon this Subjects, and
then it is called Humane Law, altho' it be Originally instituted from God: And because whatsoever the Second Cause doth, the First doth also by a more Noble manner; therefore the a∣foresaid Three Laws are called in God, One Law Eternal; and this is that Law of which it is written, Prov. 8. Perme Reges regnant, Et legum conditores justa discernunt. The Law of Reason. LEx Rationis, which amongst Doctors is also called The Law of Nature, or Jus Gentium, The Law of Nations, may be doubly considered, that is, either as it respects all Creatures, even Irratio∣nals, for all Irrational Creatures, not hindred, do live and subsist under cer∣tain Rules to them set by Nature, they also conserve their kind and by Instinct of Nature nourish their Young; and things by Nature contrary to them they fear, and especially when alone it re∣spects the Rational Humane Creature, created to the Image of God: And it is called The Law of Nations, for that it ought to be kept by all Nations, as well among the Jews and Gentiles, as Chri∣stians. And thus, The Law of Reason is a participation of The Law Enternal:
From whence it is said in the Psalms, Signatum est super nos Lumen vultus tui Domine, scilicet, Lumen Veritatis. Divine Law. LEx Divina, is a true Sign reveal'd to the Rational Creature of the Divine Reason, Willing the Rational Creature, to be held or bound to do something, or not do it, for obtaining Eternal Felicity, as are the Laws of the Old Testament, which are called Morals, and the Evangelical Law; and some∣times it is called, Law instituted by Man, but improperly nevertheless, when the Law is for obtaining Eternal Felicity. Moreover, besides The Law of Reason and Humane Law, it was necessary for the Direction of Humane Life, to have the Divine Law, for Four Reasons: First, Whereas Man was created to enjoy Eternal Beatitude, it was necessary that besides the Law of Reason and Humane Law, he should be Directed to his End by a Law Divinely instituted. Secondly, For the incertainty of Humane Judg∣ment, that he should be directed by a Law given by Divine Inspiration, from which it appeared, that he might by no means deviate. Thirdly, Because the Judgment of Man may not be of
Interior Acts; therefore it was neces∣sary to have a Law Divine, which should rectifie the Interiors, as well as the Exteriors of Men, Fourthly, Be∣cause Human Law cannot punish every evil Act, it was necessary to have a Divine Law, which should let no Evil go unpunished; and these four Reasons are touched in this Verse, Lex Domini immaculata convertens animas, Testimonium Domini Fidelis sapientiam praestants Parvulis. Humane Law. LEx Humana sive Positiva, is a Law Deduced by Reason, from the Law of Reason, and the Divine Law; and therefore in every Positive Law well Instituted, there is somewhat of the Law of Reason, and the Divine Law, And Humane Law is a true sign by Hu∣mane Tradition and Authority, imme∣diately Constituted: And that Human Law be Just, Two things are required; That is, Prudence and Authority, be∣cause it is called Lex à ligando, but every Sentence of a Prudent Man doth not bind the Community or any of them, if he do not preside over them. And in the Law of Men these Proprieties are required, viz. That they be Honest, Just,
Possible, according to the Custom of the Country, and convenient to the place and time; Necessary, Profitable, Manifest; also that they be Ordained for no Private end, but for the Com∣mon good; and Humane Laws not con∣trary to the Divine Law ought to be kept also in Conscience, Et qui eas sper∣nit Deo resistit. From what hath been said it appears, That the Divine Law respects the Spi∣ritual end, The Law of Reason the Natural end, and that Human Law may direct to both; And the Law of Reason takes of Nature of the thing for a Foundation, but Human Law, the pub∣lick Expedience or Good. Now of these Four Laws, all Laws in general consist and be sounded, if they are good. And that we may shew par∣ticularly, and more especially from whence arise, The Fundamentals of the Law of England. WE must know that the Law of England, or Humane Law in England, takes its Fundamentals from Six chief Principles: First, The Law of Reason. Secondly, Divine Law. Third∣ly, Divers Customs of the Kingdom. Fourthly, Divers Principles called
Maxims. Fifthly, Particular Customs in certain places. Sixthly, From divers Sta∣tutes of the Common Council of the King∣dom in Parliament; of which we shall speak something in order. And first, The Law of Reason is held in this as in all other Kingdoms; and the Learned in the Laws of England make two Degrees of the Law of Rea∣son, (scilicet) Lex. Rationis Primariae, & Lex Rationis secundariae: Ex Primaria, From the first are forbidden Murder, Manslaughter, Oppression of the Inno∣cent, Perjuries, Deceits and many such like. But the manner of punishing these sorts of Offences, is according to di∣vers Principles and Maxims or Statutes, to this end especially ordained; and it is called the Law of Reason primary; For that those things which are Com∣manded or Forbidden by that Law, are grounded upon Reason also, with∣out any other Law joyned or opposed to it: The Law of Reason secundary is likewise divided in two parts, That is, General and Particular; The Law of Reason secundary General, is de∣rived from that Law of Propriety Ge∣neral, which is held throughout the World; From this are prohibited Thefts, Disseisins, and many other, And it is called the Law of Reason
Secundary, for that it is founded not upon Reason alone, but from the Law of Propriety, and the Reason derived from that Law; for because the Law of property saith, Such a thing is the pro∣per Goods of such a Man; Therefore saith Reason, grounded upon that Law, that thing is not to be taken from him un∣justly against his Will. And the Law of Reason Secundary Particular, is that which is Founded upon divers Gene∣ral and Particular Customs, and divers Maxims and Statutes, only had and or∣dained in the Kingdom of England: As if a Distress dye, it shall not be imputed to him who distrained; but to him who hath the Propriety, because the Defect is to be assigned in him, for that he did not pay the Rent: And Reason is founded upon the Cu∣stom aforesaid, so that there need not be any Written Law had thereof. And we find so many Secundary Reasons in the Laws of England, that many are willing to affirms the whole Law of England, to be proved by Reason, which notwithstanding is by no means to be affirmed, as by another Example. By a certain Statute it is Ordained, That he who hath abjur'd the Realm, whilst he is in the publick High-way, shall be in peace with our Lord the
King and not in any sort molested; and by the Custom of the Kingdom, he is to be conducted from Town to Town, by the Constables, &c. to the Sea-port, &c. Now if he Escape, the Constable ought not to be charged to the King, because by reason of the Statute, he could not keep him in safe Custody, or use any Force or Impri∣sonment whereby he might be kept in safe Custody; and the Reason is ground∣ed upon that Statute. And some say, Rob∣bery is to be prohibited from Reason Primary, even before the Law of Pro∣perty, for that it was not Lawful even when all things were in Common, to take any thing from another by force, or to throw him out of his Habitati∣on; but that such Robbery is to be punished with Death, is from the Cu∣stom of the Law of England. Also from the General Law of Property aforesaid, by the Laws of England are excepted Birds, Wild beasts and Beasts of Warren, in which by the Laws of England is no Property to any One, unless they be Tame; yet ne∣vertheless by the Laws of England in the Eggs of Herons, and such like, Build∣ing in the Woods of any, is a Proper∣ty. And for that every Deduction of Reason in the Laws of England, pro∣ceeds
from the first Principles, or from somewhat from those Principles deri∣ved, no Man althô the most Wise, can Judge justly or Argue rightly in the Laws of England, if he know not these Principles. The Second Fundamental of the Law of England is Lex Divina, whereby to punish the Transgressors against the Divine Law. The Law of England in many Courts of our Lord the King doth Inquire of Hereticks: Also if any Statute be made or set forth against them; as that none shall give Alms, it ought to be of no force; also, Per∣sons Excommunicated in the Laws of England may not Prosecute, nor have Communication with others whilst the Excommunication is certified. And from the same Fundamental the Law of England admits the Spiritual Juris∣diction of Tithes, and other things which do of right belong to the Ec∣clesiastical Jurisdiction, and receives Ca∣nonical or Ecclesiastical Laws, Quae non Excedunt potestatem ferentis: so that in many Cases it behoves the Kings Ju∣stices to Judge according to the Laws of the Church; As if the Law of the Church be, that the Sentence of Di∣vorce is not in force till it is affirmed upon Appeal, The Judges of our Lord
the King, shall form their Judgment according to the Laws of the Church; And if A. B. and C. D. have Goods and Chattels joyntly, and A. B. by his last Will, give his part to E. F. the Ecclesi∣astical Judges are bound in this case to adjudge this Will void. The Third Fundamental of the Law of England, is the General Customs of the Kingdom, which are divers Ge∣neral Customs used and approved of in Ancient time, throughout the whole Kingdom of England, and who at∣tempts any thing against them Works against Law and Justice; And these are properly called the Common Law, and ought always to be determined by the Judges, whether a General Custom or not, and not by the Country; and of these and other Principles or Maxims, a great part of the Law of England de∣pends; and therefore the King by his Coronation Oath promiseth (inter alia) that he will faithfully observe all the Customs of the Kingdom; and the An∣cient Customs of the Kingdom, is the Original and Foundation of divers Courts in the same Kingdom; Where∣of one is The Chancery of the King∣dom, in which (inter alia) Writs origi∣nal are obtained, directed to other Courts of the King; another The Kings-Bench,
in which are handled all Trea∣sons, Murders, Homicides, Felonies, and other things done against the Kings Peace; another Court is called The Common Bench, in which Common Pleas are handled; (That is to say,) of Lands and Tenements, Debts and Chattels and such like; another Court is called The Kings Exchequer, in which are handled divers matters touching the King alone, as of Sheriffs, Escheats or Receivers, Bayliffs and other the Kings Officers and the like; and these are called Courts of Record, because those who preside as Judges ought to be assigned by the Kings Letters Patent; and these Courts have many and di∣vers other Authorities, of which we shall speak more hereafter in their proper places, and likewise of divers other Courts of inferiour Authority in the Kingdom of England: And althô in divers Statutes and Books, mention is made of the Authority of these Courts; yet we have no written Law of their Institution; for their Institu∣tion depends upon the Custom of the Kingdom, which hath so great Autho∣rity, that they may not be altered, or their Names changed or altered, but by Act of Parliament. Also there is an Ancient Custom, which is confir∣med
by the Statute of Marlebridge; That all shall do and receive Justice in the Kings Court, and another, that none shall be put to Answer, or be judged, but according to the Law of the Land; and this is confirmed by Magna Charta: And there are other General Customs in the Kingdom of England, which retain the force of Law, as that the eldest Son shall succeed the Father in the Inheritance, and many more, not here to be recited. From whence it appears, that Cu∣stoms in the Laws of England may not be proved by Reason alone, for how can it be proved by Reason, that the Husband shall have the Wife's Land for Term of his Life, as Tenant by that Law, and that the Wife shall have only the Third part, scilicet, that it shall be so done and not otherwise? And it is certain, that the Law of Property is not the Law of Reason, but a Custo∣mary Law, and ought to be accoun∣ted amongst the General Customs of the Kingdom, and there is not any Statute or written Law of the Institu∣tions of the Customs of the Law of England, but according to the Skilful in the Law of England: The Ancient Customs of the Law of England are of themselves of sufficient Authority;
and the Customary Law is the most firm Law, provided such a Custom be not against the Law of God, or the Law of Reason. The Fourth Fundamental of the Law of England consists of Divers Principles, which the Learned in the Law call Maxims, always esteemed and held for Law of this Kingdom of England, which none Learned in the Law may contradict, because every one of them gives Faith or Credit to it self; and whether a Maxim or not is to be tried by the Judges, as before is said of General Customs of the Kingdom, and not by the Country: And these Maxims are not alone taken for Law, but also all other like cases, and all things necessarily following upon them, are to be placed in like Law, and they are in the same force and strength in Law as Statutes; and althô all these Maxims might conveni∣ently be numbred amongst the afore∣said General Customs, since Ancient Custom is the sole Authority, as well of these as those; yet because those Ge∣neral Customs are diffused and known, they may easily and without study in the Laws be known, but these Max∣ims are only known in the Kings Courts, or by those who are Learned
in the Law; and now for example sake we will mention a few of them, since to declare them fully great Vo∣lumes would not suffice: And first, there is a certain Maxim in the Laws of England, that no Prescription in Lands maketh a Right; also, that Prescripti∣on in Rents and Profits to be taken in the Lands of another maketh a Right; also, that the limitation of Pre∣scription is generally taken à tempore cujus centrarij Memoria hominum non ex∣istit, &c. And further, there are many other Maxims, as in certain Actions, The Process is by Summons, Attachment and Distress Infinite; and in some by Capias Infinite, &c. and that there should be these divers Processes in di∣vers Actions, may seem expedient and reasonable; but that there should be these divers Processes had in the Law of England, and none other, cannot be proved by Reason; therefore they must necessarily have their force from the Maxims aforesaid, or the Ancient Cu∣stom of the Kingdom: And some Maxims seem to be founded upon Reason Secundary; and therefore some may think they may be put unto the first Fundamental of other Laws of England; as if any command a Tres∣pass, he is a Trespassor, &c.
And there are other Maxims and Customs, which are not so manifestly known, but may be known by the Law of Reason; partly by Books of the Law of England, which are called Year Terms, partly by Records in the Kings Treasury, and remaining in the Kings Courts; and by a Book cal∣led the Register, and by divers Statutes, in which such Customs and Maxims are often recited. Vide Doctor & Stu∣dent. The Fifth Fundamental of the Law of England consists of Divers particular Customs, used in divers Countries, Towns, Lordships, or Mannors and Cities of the Kingdom; which said particular Customs, because they are not against Reason, nor the Law of God, altho' they are contrary to the afore∣said General Customs, and Maxims of Law, yet they retain the force of Laws: And they ought not always to be de∣termined by the Judges, whether there be such a Custom or not, unless in a few particular Customs sufficiently known and approved in the Kings Courts, but ought to be tryed by the Country: And of these particular Cu∣stoms I shall put a few for Example; As there is a Custom called Gavelkind in Kent, where all the Brothers shall
Inherit as the Sisters do at Common Law: By Burrough English, in the Town of Nottingham, the younger Son shall Inherit: In some Countries the Wife shall have all the Inheritance of her Husband, in Name of Dower, so long as she continues a Widow: And in some Countries the Man shall have half the Inheritance of the Wife du∣ring his Life, although he hath no Issue by her: In some Countries the Infant may make a Feoffment at his Age of Fifteen years: And in some Countries, when he can Measure an Ell of Cloth; yet such Infant may not make Warranty, for if he do, it is void in Law, neither may he in such case make a Release. Thus are held many other particular Customs. The Sixth Fundamental consists of Divers Statutes Ordained in Parliament, when other Fundamentals of the Law of England are not sufficient; for it is to be known, that altho' the Law of Reason may be assigned to be the first and principal Fundamental of the Law of England: yet the Law of Reason is not of so great force and efficacy in the Laws of England, that it alone being known, all the Law of England is known: For besides the Law of Reason, he who desires to know the Laws of
England, ought to know the Custom of the Kingdom, as well General a Particular, and the Maxims and Sta∣tutes of Law, or otherwise, altho' h were the wisest of Men, he will under∣stand but few things of the Truth o the Law of England. From these things before contain'd it may be deduced, which often fall out, That in one and the same case two or three Fundamentals of Law ought to concur together before the Plaintiff may obtain his Right, as by Example may appear: As if any afte Entry by him made into any Land with a strong hand, make a Feoffmen for Maintenance, to defraud the Pos∣sessor of his Action; then the Deman∣dant by the Statute of 8 Hen. 6. cap. 9. shall recover his treble Damages, ac∣cording to what Damages shall be assessed by the Jury: In which case it appeareth that such Entry is prohibited by the Law of Reason Secundary; but that the Demandant shall Recover, his treble Damages, is by the aforesaid Statute: And that the Damages shall be Assessed by the Jury, is by the Custom of the Kingdom: And thus Three Fundamentals of Law concur in this case.
And it is to be noted, that there are many Customs, as well General as Par∣ticular, and also Divers Laws, called Maxims, which take not their force from strong Reason, but from the Cu∣stom of the Kingdom: For by Statutes they may be changed into the contra∣ry, and what can be changed, can ne∣ver be affirmed to be the Law of Reason Primary: As for Example; How doth it stand with Reason or Conscience, That if one Bound in an Obligation to pay Money, pay part of the Money, but takes no Acquittance, or lose it; by the Laws of England he shall be com∣pell'd to pay that Money again, because of the General Maxim, That in an Acti∣on of Debt upon Bond, the Defendant may not plead Nihil debet, or Quod poe∣cuniam solvit, nor otherwise discharge himself unless by Acquittance, or other sufficient Writing amounting to a Dis∣charge in Law; and this to avoid the great Inconvenience which would fol∣low, if every one by word alone might avoid an Obligation. And thus having briefly set forth the Fundamentals of the Law of England, we shall proceed to the Government, and the Legislative and Executive Pow∣er of the Laws of England.
The Government of England. THe Government of England is  the first and best kind, viz. Mo¦narchical Political Government. The King BEing Supream Governour in  Causes, and over all Persons, fro Him is derived all Authority and Jur¦diction, He being Quasi Intellectus Age Forma formarum, &c. And from th King with the Advice of His Majesties Privy Council. THat most Honourable Assemb in the Kings Court or Palace, a others receive their Motion. It is calle Concilium Secretum, Privatum, vel Cont¦nuum Regis Concilium. This is the Hig Watch-Tower, wherein the King an his Nobles Counsellors, survey all h Dominions, and sometimes all the D¦minions of the World, Consulting th Honour, Defence, Profit and Peace  his People, and their Protection fro Violence or Injuries, either at home  from abroad.
And these Privy Counsellors, by the Custom of the Kingdom (being part of the Fundamental Laws of England, as before is mentioned) are such as the King pleaseth to choose, and are made without Patent or Grant, being only Sworn, that according to their Power and Direction, they shall truly, justly and evenly Counsel and Advise the King in all Matters to be treated in His Majesties Council, and shall keep Secret the Kings Council, &c. And they are so to continue during the Life of the King, or during the Kings Pleasure. And these Lords of the Privy Council are, as it were, incorporate with the King, in bearing the burthen of his Cares; wherefore the Striking in the House or Presence of a Privy Counsellor, shall be grievously Fined: Conspiring his Death by any within the Cheque-Roll is Felony, and Killing any one of them is High Treason. And although before the latter end of Henry the Third, Quod provisum fuit per Regem & Consilium suum Privatum, Sigil∣loque Regis Confirmatum, proculdubio Legis habuit vigorem, saith Spelman; yet at present they take Cognizance of few Matters that may well be determined by the known Laws, and Ordinary Court of Justice.
The President of this Council was sometime called Principalis Conciliarius, and sometimes Capitalis Conciliarius; and this Office was never granted but by Letters Patent of the Great Seal durante bene placito, and is very ancient, for John Bishop of Norwich was Presi∣dent of the Council, Anno 17 Regi Johannis, Dormivit tamen hoc Officium regnante magna Elizabetha. The Lord President is said in the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 20. to be attending upon the King most Royal Person; and the reason o his attendance is, for that of latter times he hath used to report to the King the Passages, and the State of the Busi∣ness at the Council Table. Next to the President sitteth in Coun∣cil, &c. The Lord Privy Seal, who besides his Oath of a Privy Counsellor taketh a particular Oath of the Privy Seal, which consisteth of four parts. First, That he justly exercise the Office of Keeper of the King's Privy Seal to him committed. Secondly, Not lea∣ving so to do for Affection, Love, Doubt or Dread of any Person. Thirdly, That he shall take special re∣gard, that the said Privy Seal in all places where he shall go to, may be in such substantial wise used and safe kept, That no Person with∣out
the Kings Special Command or Assent, shall Move, Seal or Imprint any thing with the same. Fourthly, Generally he shall observe, fulfil and do all and every thing which to the Office of the Keeper of the Kings Privy Seal duly belongeth and ap∣pertaineth. This is an Office of great Trust and Skill: That he put his Seal to no Grant without Warrant nor with Warrant, if it be against Law, undue, or incon∣venient, but that first he acquaint the King therewith. Upon the Lord Privy Seal are at∣tendant four Clerks of the Privy Seal. How the Kings Grants, Writings and Leases pass the three Seals, viz. The Privy Signet, the Privy Seal and the Great Seal, and the Duties of the Clerk of the Privy Signet and Privy Seal, and what Fees shall be paid, and where none at all, &c. and many Ar∣ticles concerning the passing of the Kings Grant, &c. you may Read in the Stat. of 27 Hen. 8. This Officer is named in some Statutes, Clerk of the Privy Seal, in others Garden del Privy Seal, and in the Stat. 34 Hen. 8. Lord Privy Seal.
By Stat. 11. R. 2. cap. 10. It is pro∣vided, That Letters of the Signet, nor of the Kings secret Seal shall be from henceforth sent in Damage or Prejudice of the Realm, nor in Disturbance of the Law. It appeareth by Writs and Records of Parliament, that the High Court of Parliament is resolved to be holden by the King Per advisamentum Consilij sui, viz. by advice of his Privy Coun∣cil. Acts and Orders of Parliament for the Privy Council, and other things concerning them in the Rolls of Parli∣ament, you may Read in the Statutes and Originals at Large, mentioned in Cokes 4. Inst. cap. 2. No Lod of Parliament takes any place of Precedency in respect he is a Privy Councellor, but under that De∣gree, such place a Privy Councellor shall take, as is set down in Serie ordi∣num, tempore Hen. 7. The King by advice of his Privy Council, doth publish Proclamations binding to the Subject, provided they be not against Statute or Common Law. The Privy Councellors sit in order Bareheaded when the King Presides, and the lowest declares his Opinion first,
and the King last declares his Judg∣ment, and thereby determins the matter. For their Precedency and Place, see the Statute of 31 H. 8. directing the same. The time and place of holding the Council, is wholly at the Kings pleasure; which is seldom or never held without the presence of One of The Secretaries of State; of which, since the latter end of the Reign of H. 8. there have been Two, both of equal Authority, and both styled Prin∣cipal Secretaries of State; these every day attend upon the King, and receive and make dispatch of the Petitions and Desires of the Subjects at home, and for Foreign matters. The Sectetaries have the Custody of the Kings Seal called the Signet, which gives denomination to an Office con∣stantly attending the Court, called The Signet Office, wherein Four Clerks pre∣pare such things as are to pass the Sig∣net, in order to the Privy Seal or Great Seal. The Four Clerks in Ordinary of the Privy Council, are to Read what is brought before the Council, and draw up such Orders as the King and Lords shall direct, and cause them to be Regi∣stred:
And belonging to the Secretaries is, The Paper-Office, where all Paper-Writings and publick Matters of State, and Transactions of Ministers abroad, and what passes the Secretaries is trans∣mitted and kept. And now we pro∣ceed to The Ecclesiastical Government. THe King being Chief Person, as being Persona Sacra & Mixta cum Sacerdote, is the Supream Bishop of England: For at his Coronation, by a solemn Consecration and Unction, he becomes a Spiritual Person, Sacred and Ecclesiastical, having both Corona Regni & Stola Sacerdotis put upon him. He is Patron Paramount of all Ec∣clesiastical Benefices, to whom the last Appeal in Ecclesiastical Affairs is made, and who alone hath the Nomination of all Persons for Bishopricks and Chief Dignities and Deaneries, and some Prebends in the Church, &c. And next to the King are the Primates, Metropo∣litans, or Archbishops, one of Canterbury, the other of York, each of which have their peculiar Diocess, besides a Province of several Diocesses; and these Arch∣bishops
have the Style of Grace, with the Title of Lord prefixed in speaking to them, and are termed Arch or Chief Bishops, it seeming requisite to our An∣cestors (according to other Christian Churches, since the first Nicene Council) to have amongst a certain number of Bishops, One to be Chiefest in Autho∣rity over the rest, for the remedy of General Disorders, or when the Actions of any Bishop should be called in que∣stion, &c. And next under these Arch∣bishops are, Bishops Twenty four, whereof Twen∣ty one Bishops, with their Bishopricks or Diocesses, are in the Province of Canterbury, and the other Three in the Province of York, who are in Confor∣mity to the first Times and Places of E∣stablished Christianity, One of the Clergy Ordained in every City, to have the preheminence over the rest of the Clergy within certain Precincts: And these are likewise Lords in respect of their Baronies annexed to their Bishopricks, and for easing the Bishop of some part of his Burthen, as the Christians waxed Great; or as in respect of the Largness of the Diocess in the primitive Times, there were Ordained Chorepiscopi, Suf∣fragan, or Subsidiary Bishops; so in England are such Ordained by the Name of
Bishops Suffragans, or Titular Bishops, who have the Name, Title, Style and Dignity of Bishops; and as other Bishops are Consecrated by the Archbishop of the Province, each one to execute such Power, Jurisdiction and Authority, and receive such Profits as are limited by the Bishop or Diocesan, whose Suffragan he is. By Act of Parliament of King Henry the 8th, still in force, they are to be only of several Towns therein named; and in case the Archbishop, or some other Bishop desire the same, the Bishop is to present Two Able Men, whereof the King chuseth One, for any of the places named. And the next in the Church Government is the Arch-Deacon, who tho' a Presbyter him∣self, is so named for that he hath Charge over the Deacons, who are to be guided and directed by him under the Bishop; and of these are Sixty in England. And next under them are Deacons, or Deans, from the Greek , because anciently set over Ten Canons at the least, which Canons were prudent and pious Pastors, placed in a Collegiate manner at every Cathe∣dral or Apostolick See, where they might not only be ready to assist the Bishop in certain weighty Cases, but also fit themselves for Government and
Authority in the Church; and accord∣ingly in every Cathedral Church in England is A Dean, and under him a certain number of Prebendaries or Cannons; and this Dean is sometimes styled, Alter Episcopi Oculus, the other being the Arch-Deacon; and of these Deacons are 26 Deans of Cathedral and Colle∣giate Churches, and 544 Prebendaries. And next are Rural Deans, or Archi-Presbyters, so called, because they had usually charge over Ten Country Parsons, Presbyters or Priests, having the Guidance and Direction of them; and of these are many in England. And in the last place are Pastors, Presbyters or Priests of every Parish, commonly called Rectors, unless the Praedial Tithes are Impropriated; and then they are called Vicars, quasi Vice Fungentes Rectorum; and of these Rectors, or Parsons and Vicars are about 9700, besides Curates, who for Stipends assist such Rectors and Vi∣cars, that have the Cure of more Churches than One. Of all which, with their manner of Election, Consecration, Function, Pre∣cedence, Priviledges and Duties, &c. you may Read more at large in
several Authors, who have writ par∣ticularly thereof; to whom I refer, and proceed to the first Great Wheel moved by the King and his Privy Council in the Ecclesiastical Government, which is The Convocation BEing a National Synod, which the King (by the Advice of his Privy Council) usually Convokes, for the Church Legislative Power; or for making Ecclesiastical Laws, or consult∣ing of the more weighty Affairs of the Church, in this manner: The King directs his Writ to the Archbishop of each Province, whereup∣on the Archbishop directs his Letter to his Dean, citing himself peremptorily; and then willing him in like manner to Cite all the Bishops, Deans, Arch∣deacons, Cathedrals and Collegiate-Churches, and all the Clergy of his Province, to the Place, and at the Day prefixt in the Writ: But directeth withal, that One Proctor sent for each Cathedral and Collegiate Church, and Two for the Body of the Inferiour Clergy of each Diocess may suffice.
The Dean Provincial accordingly directs his Letters to the Bishop of every Diocess within the Province, Citing them in like manner to appear personally; and the Cathedral and Colle∣giate Churches, and Inferiour Clergy of his Diocess, to send their Proctors to the Place, and at the Day appoint∣ed; also to certifie to the Archbishop, the Names of all so Summoned by them. The Place where the Convocation of the Clergy was usually held, was here∣tofore at St. Paul's Church; of latter Times in King Henry the Sevenths Chappel at Westminster. The Higher House in the Province of Canterbury, consisting of Twenty two Bishops, of whom the Archbishop is President, sitting in a Chair at the Upper end of a Great Table, and the Bishops on each Side of the same Ta∣ble, all in their Scarlet Robes and Hoods, the Archbishops Hood Furr'd with Ermin, the Bishops with Minever. The Lower House, consisting of Twenty two Deans, Twenty four Pre∣bendaries, Fifty four Archdeacons, and Forty four Clerks, representing the Diocesan Clergy; in all One hundred Sixty six Persons.
Their Jurisdiction is to deal with Heresies, Schisms, and other meer Spi∣ritual and Ecclesiastical Causes, and therein to proceed Juxta Legem Divi∣nam, & Canones Ecclesiae; and as they are called, so they are often com∣manded by the King's Writ, to deal with nothing that concerns the King's Laws of the Land, his Crown and Dignity, &c. And the same is so De∣clared by Act of Parliament 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. And what Cannons they make with the Royal Assent, are binding upon themselves and all the Laity: But before the above-mentioned Act, a Dism granted by the Clergy in the Convo∣cation, did not bind the Clergy before the Royal Assent. The first Day of their meeting, the Upper House chuse a Bishop for their Prolocutor; and the Lower House (be∣ing required by the Higher) chuse them a Speaker or Prolocutor, whom by two Members they present to the Up∣per House, One of them making a Speech in Latin, and then the Elect Person makes another Speech in Latin; and then the Archbishop Answers in Latin, and in the Names of all the Lords approves the Person.
Both Houses Debate and Transact only such matters as His Majesty by Special Commission alloweth. In the Higher House all things are first proposed, and then communicated to the Lower House. The Major Vote in both Houses pre∣vails. Out of Parliament time they usually assemble about Nine of the Clock in the Morning: And first, the Junior Bi∣shop says (in Latin) Prayers, beginning with the Litany and Prayer for the King, &c. In the Lower House the Prolo∣cutor says Prayers. The Parliament, when required, con∣firms the Consults of the Clergy, that the People may be thereby induced to obey the Ordinances of their Spiritual Governours. The Archbishop of York, at the same time holds a Convocation for his Pro∣vince at York in like manner, and by Correspondence doth debate and con∣clude the same Matters with the Con∣vocation for the Province of Canter∣bury. Inter Leges Inae, Anno Domini 727, A Convocation of the Clergy is called Magna Servorum Dei frequentia.
All the Members of both Houses have the like Priviledges for themselves and Menial Servants, as the Members of Parliament, and this by Statute. Now they are required to subscribe Three of the XXXIX. Articles. Vide Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 19. And the Canons ratified by King James, 1 Jac. 1. And for The Executive Power in Causes Ecclesi∣astical. THere are provided divers Excellent Courts; the chief whereof for Criminal Causes, was The High Commission Court. THe Jurisdiction whereof was Ena∣cted 1 Eliz. That Her Majesty, Her▪ Heirs and Successors, should have power by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, to▪ Nominate and Authorize such person or persons, being Natural born Subjects to Her Highness, as Her Highness, her Heirs or Successors should think fit, to Exercise and Execute all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the Realms of Eng∣land and Ireland, or any other Her High∣ness Dominions, to Visit and Reform all Errours, Heresies or Schisms, Abuses, Of∣fences
and Contempts, &c. which by any manner of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power, can or may be lawfully Reformed, &c. And that such person or persons should have full Power by Virtue of the said Act, and Her Majesties Letters Patents, to Exercise and Execute the Premisses ac∣cording to the Tenour and Effect of the said Letters Patent. And upon Declaration of this Act the Lord Coke raises two Questions: First, What Causes should belong to this Court: Secondly, In what cases they may Fine and Imprison? As to the first it is certain, That by the principal Clause of Restitution in that Act, all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction heretofore exercised or used, or which might have been lawfully exercised or used, were by the Authority of that Parliament annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. For whatever Power or Jurisdiction did belong to, or was exercised by the Pope De facto, doth now De jure belong to the King: But by reason the Ecclesi∣astical Judges, before the making of that Act, ought to have proceeded accord∣ing to the Ecclesiastical Censures of the Church; and could not Fine and Imprison, unless they had Authority by Act of Parliament: Therefore the
Lord Coke, by reason of the Clause i this Act, That the Commissioners shall Ex∣ecute the Premisses, according to the Teno of the Letters Patent; which Clau refes o the former parts of this Act viz The Ancient Jurisdiction restore by this Act, ath, the Commissione had not power to Fine and Impri∣son. This Commission was usually grante to persons of the Highest Quality i Church and State, so often, and for  long time, as the King did thin fit. In Queen Elizabeths Time, saith th Lord Coke, it was Resolved, the Hig Commission should be limitted to certia Enormities and Exorbitant Causes▪ And many Presidents were brought  Prohibitions against their Authority  Fine and Imprison, both out of th Kings-Bench and Common-Pleas. B this Court being now Abrogated by th Statute of 16 & 17 Car. 2. cap. 11. The Courts of the Archbishop  Canterbury come next in course, th Highest of which is,
The Court of Arches. SO called from the Arched Church of St. Mary in Cheapside, where this Court hath been usually kept, as appears by Record in Edward the First's time. The Judge hereof is the Dean of the Arches, who under the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, hath Jurisdiction over a Deanery, consisting of Thirteen Parishes within London, exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. Hither are di∣rected all Appeals in Ecclesiastical Mat∣ters, within the Province of Canterbury. And to this Court belong divers Advo∣cates, all Doctors of the Civil Law, Two Registers and Ten Proctors. The next Court of the Archbishop is, The Court of Audience. KEpt within the Archbishop's Palace, and medleth not with any manner of Contentious Jurisdiction; but only with Matters pro forma, as Confirmation of Bishops, Elections, Consecrations, and Matters of Voluntary Jurisdiction; as granting the Guardianship of the Spiri∣tualties, Sede vacante of Bishops, Ad∣mission and Institution to Benefices, Dispensing with Banns of Matrimony, and such like.
The Court of the Faculties. THis is also a Court, although it holdeth no Plea of Controversie:  belongeth to the Archbishop, and his Officer, is called Magister ad Facultates. And the Authority is raised by the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 21. whereby Authority is given to the Archbishop and his Successors to grant Dispensati∣ons, Faculties, &c. by himself or his sufficient Commissary or Deputy, for any such matter heretofore had at the See of Rome, or by the Authority thereof. The Prerogative Court of Canterbury. THis is the Court where Testaments are proved, and Administrations granted, where the Party dying within his Province hath bona Notabilia within some other Diocess than where he dieth, which regularly is to be to the value of Five pounds, but in the Dio∣cess of London, it is Ten pounds com∣position. By 16 Rich. 2. Rot. Par. not in Print, It is assented in full Parliament, that the King may make his Testament, which before that was doubtful; and
Hen. 4th made his Testament, and his Executors refusing, Administration was granted by the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, with the Testament annexed to the same. When the King is made Executor, he Deputes certain Persons to take the Execution upon them, and appoints others to take the Accompt. The Probate of every Bishop's Te∣stament, or Granting Administration of his Goods, althô he hath not Goods but within his own Jurisdiction, doth belong to the Archbishop. From this Court the Appeal is to the King in Chancery. The Archbishop of York hath the like Courts, and also the Court of Au∣dience. The Court of Peculiars. THe Archbishop of Canterbury hath a peculiar Jurisdiction in divers Pari∣shes within the City of London, and other Diocesses, &c. and there are Fifty se∣ven such Peculiars within the Province of Canterbury. It is an Ancient Priviledge of the See of Canterbury; that wheresoever any Manors or Advowsons do belong unto that See, that place forthwith
becomes exempt from the Ordinary and is reputed a Peculiar, and of th Diocess of Canterbury. And there are certain peculiar Juri∣dictions, belonging to some certain Par∣shes; the Inhabitants whereof, are exem from the Archdeacon's Jurisdiction, an sometimes from the Bishops Jurisdictio And a Dean or Prebendary having  Rectory or Impropriation in anoth Bishop's Diocess, hath often a Court  Peculiars, held for him in that partic∣lar Parish. Note, That there are some Deans  England without any Jurisdiction, on for Honour so Stiled, as the Dean  the Chappel Royal, and Dean of th Chappel of St. George at Windsor. Mo∣over some Deans there are without a Chapter; yet enjoying certain Juri∣dictions, as the Dean of Croyden, th Dean of Battel, and the Dean of Bo∣ing, &c. The Consistory Courts of Archbishops and Bishops. THe Consistory Courts of every Arch∣bishop and Bishop of every Dioce in Ecclesiastical Causes, is holden befo his Chancellor in his Catheral Church or before his Commissary in places
the Diocess, too far remote for the Chancellor to call them to the Consi∣story. From these the Appeals are to the Archbishop of either Province respe∣ctively. By many Records in Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. It appears no Bishop could make a Will of his Goods or Chartels coming of his Bishoprick, &c. with∣out the King's License; wherefore the Bishops consented to give the King Six things, That they might freely make their Wills. First, Their best Horse or Palfrey, with Bridle and Saddle. Se∣condly, A Cloak with a Cape. Third∣ly, A Cup with a Cover. Fourthly, A Bason and Ewer. Fifthly, One Ring of Gold. Sixthly, His Kennel of Hounds, for which a Writ issueth out of the Exchequer after the Decease of every Bishop. The King by the Verdict of Twelve recovered 10000 Marks against the Bi∣shop of Norwich, for that he prosecu∣ted against the Abbot of St. Edmunds∣bury, to appear before him against the King's Prohibition; For which it was adjudged, That his Temporalities should be seised, and his Body taken. If an Alien or Stranger be presen∣ted to a Benefice, the Bishop ought not to admit him.
The Court of Archdeacon, or his Commissary. THis Court is to be holden, whe and in what place the Archdeaco either by Prescription or Compositio hath Jurisdiction in Spiritual Cases with in his Archdeaconry; and from hi the Appeal is to the Diocesan, and  is called Oculus Episcopi. And every Archdeacon hath  Court and Jurisdiction, where small differences arising within his Limits a pleaded. Also, the Dean and Chapter hath  Court, and take Cognizance, of Caus hapning in places belonging to th Cathedral. Lastly, There are some peculi Jurisdictions, the Inhabitants where are exempt sometimes from the Arc∣deacon's Jurisdiction, and sometim from the Bishops Jurisdiction. The Court of Delegates. THis Court is so called because De∣legated by the King's Commissio under the Great Seal, to sit upon an A∣peal to the King in the Court of Cha∣cery in three Causes. First, When
Sentence is given in an Ecclesiastical Court, by the Archbishop or his Offi∣cial. Secondly, When a Sentence is given in any Ecclesiastical Cause in places exempt. Thirdly, When any Sentence is given in the Admirals Court, by the order of the Civil Law. And having spoken of Appeals in Ecclesiastical Causes, that you may know the Resolution of the Judges, and Learned in the Ecclesiastical Law, in what Causes, from what Courts, and in what time Appeals are to be made. Vide Lord Dyer & Coke's 4 Inst. Ecclesia∣stical Courts. The Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiasticali THe Laws and Constitutions of the Ecclesiastical Government in Eng∣land are: First, General Canons made by General Councils, Arbitria Sanctorum Patrum, The Opinions of Fathers, the Grave Decrees of several Holy Bi∣shops of Rome. Next, our own Con∣stitutions made anciently in several Provincial Synods, either by the Le∣gates Otho and Othobone sent from Rome, or by several Archbishops of Canter∣bury. All which are by the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. in force in England, so far as they are not Repugnant to the
King's Prerogative, or the Customs, Laws or Statutes of the Realm: Then the Canons made in Convocations of latter times, as 1 Jac. and confirm∣ed by his Royal Authority: Also, Sta∣tutes Enacted by Parliament touching Ecclesiastical Affairs: And Lastly, Di∣vers Customs not written; and where these fail the Civil Law takes place. Tryals Ecclesiastical in Civil Causes. THe manner of these Tryals are first, a Citation goes out; Then they proceed to Bill, and Answer; then by Proofs, Witnesses and Presumptions, the matter is argued Pro and Con, and the Canon and Civil Laws Quoted; And then without Jury the Definitive Sen∣tence of the Judge passeth, and after that Execution. Tryals Ecclesiastical in Criminal Causes. THe manner of Trying Criminal Causes is by way of Accusation, Denunciation, or Inquisition. The first, When some one takes upon him to prove the Crime. The second, When the Church-Wardens present, and are not bound to prove, because it is pre∣sumed they do it without Malice, and
hat the Crime is Notorious. Lastly, By Inquisition, when by reason of com∣mon fame, inquiry is made by the Bi∣shop Ex officio suo, by calling some of he Neighbourhood to their Oath, or he party accused to his Oath Ex officio. But by the prevailing part in the Long-Parliament, this power was taken from the Church, the want whereof is one main cause of the Libertinism and Debauchery of the Nation. Punishments by Ecclesiastical Courts. PUnishments inflicted by these Spiri∣tual or Ecclesiastical Courts, accord∣ing to these Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Laws, are first, the party delinquent is admonished. Next goes forth Minor Excommunicatio, whereby he is Excommunicated or Excluded from the Church, or at least from the Com∣munion of the Lord's Supper, disabled to be Plaintiff in any Suit, &c. and this commonly for Non-appearance upon Summons, or not obeying the Orders of the Court: This power of lesser Excommunication the Bishop may Delegate to any Grave Priest with the Chancellor. Then Excommunicatio Major, is not only an Exclusion from the Company of Chri∣stians
in Spiritual Duties, but also i Temporal Affairs. And this common∣ly for Heresie, Schism, Perjury, In∣cest, &c. and for the more Terrour,  is done by the Bishop himself in prope person; and being so Excommunicate a Man cannot be in any Civil or Ec∣clesiastical Court either Plaintiff or Witness; and in case any contin Forty days Excommunicate, the King' Writ de Excommunicato capiendo is grant∣ed out of the Chancery against him▪ whereupon he is cast into Prison with∣out Bail, till he hath satisfied for th Offence. And then there is Anathematismus inflicted upon an ob∣stinate Heretick, whereby he is declar∣ed a publick Enemy to God, Rejecte and Accursed, and delivered over t Eternal Damnation: And this is to b done by the Bishop also in his ow person, assisted by the Dean and Chap∣ter, or Twelve other grave Priests. An Lastly, There is Interdictum, whereby is prohibited  Divine Offices, as Christian Burial  Administration of Sacraments, &c. i such a place or to such a people: If this be against a people, it followeth the wheresoever they go; but if against the place only, then the people may g to Divine Office elsewhere; and be∣sides
these general Censures of the Church, which respect Church-Com∣munion, there is another touching the Body of the Delinquent, called Publick Penance, when the Delin∣quent is to stand in the Church Porch on a Sunday, Bare-head and Feet, in a White Sheet bewailing himself, and begging every one that passeth by to pray to God for him, &c. and this by divers Writers appears to be the pra∣ctice used by the Primitive Churches. And this Punishment, if the Crime be not very notorious, may by the Canons of the Church of England, be commuted to a Pecuniary mulct to the Poor, or to some other pious Use. Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar to the Clergy. TO the before-mentioned Punish∣ments, both Clergy and Laity are subject; but there are Punishments to which the Clergy only are liable, as first, Suspensio ab Officio, Is when the Mi∣nister for a time is declared unfit to execute the Office of Minister. Then,
Suspensio à Beneficio, when the Mini∣ster is for a time deprived from the profits of his Benefice; and these two Censures are wont to be for smaller Crimes; Then Deprivatio à Beneficio is for a greater Crime, wherein a Minister is wholly and for ever deprived of the profits of his Benefice or Living. And Lastly, Deprivatio ab Officio, when a Mini∣ster is for ever deprived of his Orders; and this is called Depositio or Degradati and is commonly for some heinous Crime deserving Death, and is per∣formed by the Bishop in a Solemn manner, pulling off from the Crimi∣nal his Vestments, and other En∣signs of his Order; and this in the presence of the Civil Magistrate, t whom he is then delivered to be pu∣nished as a Layman, for the like Of∣fence. And this may suffice for a sho view of the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment.
The Civil Government, &c. A Brief Account of the Ecclesia∣stical Government having been given: In the next place we are to Treat of the Civil Government, the first great Wheel moved therein by the King and his Privy Council, Being The High Court of Parliament. BEfore the Conquest called the Great Council of the King, con∣sisting of the Great Men of the King∣dom. It was also called Magnatum Conventus, or Praelatorum Procerumque Consilium, and by the Saxons Michel Gemot and Witenage Mote; after the Conquest it was called Parliamentum, from the French word Parler, still consisting of the Great Men of the Nation, as some hold, until the Reign of Hen. 3. when the Commons also were called: The first Writs to Sum∣mon or Elect them being said to bear date 49 Hen. 3. above 400 years ago; so that now this High Court consists of,
The King, who being Caput, Princi∣pium & Finis Parliamenti, Sits there as in his Royal Politick Capacity. The Lords Spiritual; As the Two Archbishops, and Bishops being in number about Twenty four, who sit there by Succession, in respect of their Baronies; and to every one of these, Ex Debito Justitiae a Writ of Summons is to be directed. The Lords Temporal; As Dukes, Mar∣quesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons, who sit there by reason of their Dignities; and were in the Lord Cokes time about 106, now near twice that number. And every of these being of full Age, Ex Debito Justitiae ought to have a Writ of Summons. And The Commons of the Realm being Knights of Shires, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Burroughs; all which are respectively Elected by the Coun∣ties, Cities and Burroughs, and none of them ought to be omitted; and these were in number in the Lord Cokes time 493, now about 513 per∣sons. Spiritual Assistants, are Procuratores Cleri, who are so called as by the Writ to the Bishop before mentioned appears; to Consult, and to Consent, but never had Voices, as being no
Lords of Parliament: And by the Treatise De modo tenendi Parliamentum, they should appear cum praesentia eorum sit necessaria. Temporal Assistants, Are all the Judges of the Realm; Barons of the Exche∣quer, and of the Coif. The King's Learned Council, and the Civilians, Masters of the Chancery, are called to give their Assistance and Attendance in the upper House of Parliament, but have no Voice; and their Writs differ from the Barons, be∣ing Quod intersitis nobiscum, cum caeteris de concilio nostro, super praemissis tracta∣turi, vestrumque Concilium impensuri. Romulus Ordained 100 Senaours, which were afterwards increased to 300; and of that number were our House of Commons in Fortescue's time. The Person Summoning is the King, or in his Absence the Custos Regni, or in his Minority the Protector Regni doth Summon the Parliament, which can∣not be begun, without the Kings Pre∣sence, either in Person, or Representa∣tion by Commission under the Great Seal, or by a Guardian of England by Letters Patents.
The manner of Summoning a Parli∣ament is in manner following: About 40 days before their time of Sitting, the King cum Advisamento Consilij sui, Issues out of Chancery Writs of Sum∣mons to every Lord of Parliament Spiritual and Temporal, Commanding the Lords Spiritual in Fide & Dilecti∣one; and the Lords Temporal per Fi∣dem & Allegiantiam to Appear, Treat, and give their Advice in certain Im∣portant Affairs concerning the Church and State, &c. And the Warrant is per ipsum Regem & Concilium. And for Summoning the Commons, a Writ goeth to the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, for Election of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, who in Law are Burgesses; and to every Sheriff in the 52 Counties in England and Wales, for the Choice and Election of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, with∣in every of their Counties respective∣ly; Two Knights for each County; Two Citizens for each City; and One or Two Burgesses for each Bur∣rough, according to Statute, Charter or Custom. Persons Elected for each County ought to be Milites Notabiles, or at leastwise Esquires or Gentlemen fit to be made Knights; they ought to be Na∣tive
Englishmen, or at least such as have been Naturalized by Act of Par∣liament: No Alien or Denizen, none of the 12 Judges, no Sheriff of a Coun∣ty, no Ecclesiastical person having Cure of Souls, may be a Parlia∣ment Man. And for Legality of Sit∣ting in Parliament, he must be 21 years old. All the Members of Parliament both Lords and Commons, with their Me∣nial Servants and necessary Goods, are Priviledg'd during the time of Parlia∣ment Eundo, Morando, & ad proprium redeundo; But not from Arrests for Felony, Treason or Breach of the Peace. If the King do not think fit the Parliament shall Sit at the day of Re∣turn of the Writ, he may by Writ Patent Prorogue them till another day, as was done 1 Eliz. At the day of Meeting of the Parli∣ament, The King, and by his Dire∣ction the Lord Chancellor, The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, or some other by the Kings appointment, De∣clares the Causes of Calling the Par∣liament; as in Ed. 3. time, Sir Henry Green Lord Chief Justice, although the Lord Chancellor were present. And when a Bishop is Lord Chancel∣lor, he usually takes a Text of Scrip∣ture
in Latin and Discouses thereupon▪ And when a Judge, by way of Ora∣tion, he Declares the Cause of Calling the Parliament. The Lords in their House have power of Judicature. The Commons in their House to some purposes have power of Judicature, and both together have power of Judicature. But this will require a whole Treatise. 4 Co. Inst 23. The Lords give their Voices from the Puisne Lord Seriatim, Content, or not Content. The Commons give their Votes by Yeas, and Noes; and if it be doubt∣ful Two are appointed, one for the Yeas, another for the Noes, to number them; the Yeas going out, and the Noes sitting still as being content with their Condition; but at a Committee although of the whole House, the Yeas go on one side, and the Noes on the other, whereby the greatest num∣ber will easily appear. The Royal Assent to Bills passed both Houses, is given in this manner: The King Sitting in his Throne of State, with his Crown on his Head, in his Royal Robes, and the Lords in their Robes; The Clerk of the Crown Reads the Title of the Bills, to which the Clerk of the Parliament according
to directions from the King, Answers; if a publick Bill Le Roy le veut; if a pri∣vate Bill Soit fait comme el est Desire; or otherwise Le Royn s'advisera, being a absolute Denial in a Civil way. If it be a Bill for Money given his Majesty; then the Answer is, Le Roy remercie ses loyaux sujets accepte leur Be∣nevolence, & aussi le veut. The Bill for the King's General Pardon, hath but one Reading in ei∣ther House, for this Reason, because they must take it as the King will please to give it: so the Bill of Subsi∣dies granted by the Clergy, assembled in Convocation for the same Reason. When the Bill for the General Pardon is passed by the King; the Answer is thus, Les Prelates Seigneurs & Commu∣nes en ce Parliament Assembles, au nom de tous vos autres Sujets, remercient tres humblement votre Majeste & prient Dieu vous donner en sante bonne Vie, & lon∣gue. All Acts of Parliament before the Reign of Hen. 7. were passed, and en∣rolled in Latin or French, now in English. Most of our ancient Acts of Parlia∣ment run in this Stile: The King at the Humble Request of the Commons, with the Assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls
and Barons hath Ordained or Enacted; After it was thus, The King by the Ad∣vice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and with the Assent of the Com∣mons doth Enact: Of latter times it hath been thus, Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Ad∣vice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons; Al∣though the words of the Writ, for Summoning the Commons is only ad Consentiendum, and not ad consilium im∣pendendum; as it is in the Writ to the Lords. The Adjourments are made in the Lords House, by the Lord Chancellor, to what other Day, or Place the King thinks fit. The Prorogations are made in the same manner, only a Prorogation makes a Sessions, and puts an end to all Bills not passed the Royal As∣sent. At the Dissolution of the Parliament the King commonly comes in Per∣son, sending for the House of Com∣mons: After Speeches made, the Lord Chancellor by the King's Com∣mand Declares the Parliament Dissol∣ved.
The House of Commons is not prorogued or adjourned, by the prorogation or adjournment of the Lords House; but the Speaker, upon signification of the King's pleasure, by the assent of the House of Commons, doth say, This House doth Prorogue, or Adjourn it self. But when it is Dissolved, the House of Commons are sent for up to the Higher House, and there the Lord Keeper by the King's Commandment Dissolveth them. And it may be observed, That as the Parliament cannot begin with∣out the King's presence, either in Per∣son or by Representation, so it cannot end without; Nihil enim tam conveniens est Naturali Aequitati, unumquodque Dis∣solvi eo Ligamine quo ligatum est, Coke's 4 Inst. 28. The Proceedings and Transactions, being referr'd to Authors, who have Written thereof at large, we shall only mention some remarkable things con∣cerning the same. And first, Any Lord upon just cause to be absent, may make his Proxy; but he cannot make it but to a Lord of Parliament: And a Commoner may not make a Proxy. King John, in the Thirteenth year of his Reign, sent Embassadours to Admiralius Murmelius, Great Emperour
of Turkey, Sir Thomas Harrington and Sir Ralph Nicholson, Knights, and Sir Robert of London, Clerk, Nuncios suos Secre∣tissimos, to offer to be of his Religi∣on, and become Tributary to him, and He and his Subjects would be his Vassals, and to hold his Kingdoms of him: But that Infidel Great Prince, as a thing unworthy of a King to Deny his Religion, and betray his Kingdom, ut∣terly refused to accept. King John the next year surrendred his Kingdoms of England and Ireland to Pope Innocent the Third, paying 1000 Marks for them; which being afterwards De∣manded with Homage by the Pope, Anno 40. Ed. 3. In full Parliament it was fully agreed, That Answer should be Returned, That niether King John, nor any for him, could put Himself, his Realm, or People, in any Subjection without their Consent; And that if the Pope did attempt to gain it by Force, they would resist with all their power. Rot. Parl. 4.2 Ed. 3. It is Declared in full Parliament, That they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the Disherison of the King or his Crown, whereunto they were sworn.
By the Law and Custom of Parlia∣ment, when any New thing is Devised, they may Answer, That they dare not Consent to it without Conference with their Countries, Co. 4 Inst. 14, 34. As every Court of Justice hath Laws and Customs for its directions, some by the Common Law, some by the Civil Law and Canon Law, some by Pecu∣liar Laws or Customs, &c. so the High Court of Parliament, Suis propriis Legibus, & Consuetudinibus subsistit. Informations were preferr'd by the Attorney General against 39 Members of the House of Commons, for Depart∣ing without the King's License, where∣of six submitted to their Fines, and Edmund Plowden, the Learned Lawyer, pleaded, That he remained continual∣ly from the beginning to the end of the Parliament, and took a Traverse full of Pregnancy; and after his Plea was Sine die per demise le Reigne. In the Kings-Bench, Upon Petition of Right to the King, either in English or in French, and the Answer thereunto Fiat Justitia, a Writ of Errour may be had directed to the Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, to remove a Record in praesens Parliamen∣um.
An Act of Parliament must have th Assent of King, Lords, and Commons; but if it want this Threefold Consent, it is not an Act, but an Ordinance. Of Acts of Parliament some be De∣claratory of the ancient Law, some be Introductory of a New Law, and some be of both kinds, by addition of greater Penalties, or the like. In ancient Times all Acts of Parlia∣ment were in form of Petitions; and for the several Forms of Acts of Parliament, see the Prince's Case, 8 Co. Rep. 20. The Passing of a Bill doth not make a Sessions, but the Sessions continu∣eth till a Prorogation, or Dissoluti∣on. And the difference between an Ad∣journment and Prorogation is, that after an Adjornment all things stand as they did before; but after a Prorogation, al former proceedings not passed the Roy∣al assent, are made null and void. When a Parliament is called and doth sit, and is Dissolved without any Act of Parliament passed, or Judgmen given; then it is no Sessions, but a Con∣vention, Co. 4 Inst. 28. A Bill was preferred An. 6 Hen. 6. that none should Marry the Queen Dowa∣ger of England without license and assent of the King, on pain to lose all
his Goods and Lands. The Bishops and Clergy assented by content, so far as the same swerved not from the Law of God, or of the Church; and so far as the same imported no deadly Sin. The Act of Parliament is holden good and absolute; for that the assent of the Clergy could not be conditionally, neither was it against the Law of God, &c. as appears by Magna Charta, cap. 7. Confirmed by 32 Acts of Parliament, Co. 4 Inst. fo. 35. Of this Court it is said, Si Antiquita∣tatem spectes est Vetustissima, si Dignita∣tatem est Honoratissima, si Jurisdictionem est Capacissima, Fortescue. — Huic nec metas rerum nec tempora pono. Virgil. King Henry the Eighth commanded Thomas Earl of Essex to attend the Chief Justices, and know, Whether a Man that was forth-coming, might be attainted of Treason by Parliament, and never called to answer. The Judges answered, It was a dangerous Question, and that the High Court of Parliament ought to give Examples to Inferiour Courts, for proceeding ac∣cording to Justice, and no Inferiour Court could do the like; and they
thought the High Court of Parliament would never do it. But being by ex∣press Commandment of the King, pres∣sed by the said Earl to give a Direct Answer; they said, That if he be at∣tainted by Parliament, it could not come in question afterwards, whether he were called, or not called to Answer, which was according to Law: Altho' they might have made better Answer, since by Magna Charta, no Man ought to be condemned without being called to answer. But, Facta tenent multa, qua∣fieri prohibentur. By ancient Law, when any one was to be charged in Parliament with any Crime, Offence or Misdemeanour, The King's Writ was directed to the Sheriff, to summon and enjoyn the Party to appear before the King in the next Parliament; or otherwise it may be directed to the party himself, as appean by the Writs. King Henry the Eighth being in Con∣vocation ackowledged Supream Head of the Church of England, thought it no difficult matter to have it confirmed by Parliament; but was secretly desi∣rous to have the Impugners of it incur High Treason; but having little hope to effect that concerning High Treason, sought to have it pass in some other
Act by words closely couch'd; and therefore in the Act for Recognition of his Supremacy, the Title and Style there∣of is annexed to the Crown. After∣wards by another Act, whereby many Offences are made High Treason; It is amongst other things Enacted, That if any person or persons, by Word or Writing, Practise or Attempt to deprive the King or Queen, or their Heirs apparent, of their Dignity, Title or Name of their Royal Estates, should be adjudged Traytors: Whereupon many were put to death. The Will of Richard the Second, whereby he gives Money, Treasure, &c. to his Successors, upon condition that they observe the Ordinances and Acts made at the Parliament in the 21th year of is Reign, is adjudged void, it being in estraint of the Sovereign Liberty of his Successors. And it is a certain Maxim, That Leges posteriores, priores ontrarias abrogant. The Acts of Parliament, or Petition of Right, may be Inrolled in any, or all ther Courts of Record. Every Member ought to come, or e may be Fined; and the Sheriff, if he ake not due Return of all Writs may e punished.
King Henry the Eighth projected in Parliament, No King or his Kingdom could be safe without Three Abilities; First, To be able to Live of his own, and to be able to defend his own King∣dom. Secondly, To assist his Confe∣derates, else they would not assist him. Thirdly, To reward his well deserving Servants. Now the Project was, That if the Parliament would give all Priories, Monasteries, &c: That for Ever in time to come, He would take care the same should not be converted to private use, but employ'd to enrich hi Exchequer, for the purposes aforesaid. To maintain 40000. Soldiers for strength∣ning the Kingdom, The Subjects should not be burthened with Subsidies, Loans &c. That for 29 Lords of Parliament Abbots and Priors, he would create  Number of Nobles. Now the Mona∣steries were given to the King, but  Provision for the Project made by thes Acts, only Ad faciendum populum, thes Possessions were given to the King an his Successors, to do therewith at his an their own Wills, to the pleasure of Al mighty God, and the honour and pro of the Realm. Now observe the Cat∣strophe in the same Parliament of Hen the Eighth: When the Opulent Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem was given t
the King, he demanded and had a Subsidy both of the Clergy and Laity: And the like he had in the 34th of Hen∣ry the Eighth, and in the 37th of Henry the Eighth: And since the Dissolution of Monasteries he Exacted divers Loans, and against Law received the same. If the King by Writ call any Knight or Esquire, to be a Lord of Parliament, he may not refuse, for the good of his Country. The Fees of Knights of Parliament is Four shillings per diem, Citizens and Burgesses Two shillings, Coke's 4. Inst. 46. The Parliament at Coventry, Anno 6 Hen. 4. for that in the Writs it was Directed pursuant to the precedent Ordinance of the House of Lords, That no Lawyer should be Elected; It was called Indoctum Parliamentum; and such Prohibition was Null and Void, and the Ordinance afterwards Repeal'd. The Sheriff of Bucks was Returned Knight for Norfolk, and being after∣wards served with a Subpoena, pendente Parliamento, had the priviledge of Par∣liament allowed him, 1 Caroli Regis primi.
Judges are not to Judge of any Law Custom, or Priviledge of Parliamen they being more properly to be learne out of the Rolls of Parliament Record and by Presidents, and continual ex∣perience, than by or from any Man Penn. Parliament, from Parler la Ment  called, because every Member ough sincerly Parler la Ment for the good  the Common-wealth, is the Highest an most Honourable Court of Justice  England; consisting of the King, th Lord Spiritual and Temporal, and th Commons consisting of Knights; Citize and Burgesses; and in Writs and Judi∣cal Proceedings, it is called Comm Concilium Regni Angliae: It appeareth That divers Parliaments have bee holden before and since the time of the Conquest, which are in print, and many more appearing in ancient Records an Manuscripts. There have been in that time, and since the Conquest till the Lord Coke time 280 Sessions of Parliament; and at every Sessions divers Acts made, n small number whereof are not in Print Cokes 1 Inst. 110. a. The Jurisdiction of this Court is s Transcendent, That it Maketh, In∣largeth, Diminisheth, Abrogateth, Re∣pealeth
and Reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and Ordinances, concerning Mat∣ters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common, Civil, Marshal, Maritime, &c. And none can begin, continue or dis∣solve the Parliament but by the King's Authority, Cokes 1 Inst. 110. None can be sent out of the Realm, no not into Ireland against his will, albeit by Order of Parliament, Cokes 2 Inst. 47, 48. Trial by Peers, of Peers of Parlia∣ment, was very ancient and in the time of the Conqueror, both for Men and Women; and anciently those that were not Lords of Parliament were Judged in case of Treason or Felony, by the Peers of the Realm. By Authority of Parliament it was declared, That Urban the 12th was duly elected Pope, Cokes 2 Inst. 274. Few or none of the Acts made in Ed. 1. time have been Repealed, Cokes 2 Inst. 280. Where Communitatem Angliae, and many such Words are taken for the Parliament; and as there was a legal word Guidagium, being an Office for guiding Travellers through dangerous passages, so the Laws of the Realm are o guide the Judges in all Causes, Cokes 2 Inst. 526.
Cardinal Woolsey endeavouring to bring in the Civil Law, was the occa∣sion that but one Parliament was held from the 7th to 21th year of Hen. 8. Cokes 2 Inst. 626. George Nobles, a Priest, Attainted by Verdict for Clipping the Kings Coi was Adjudged and Executed at Tybur as a common person; and Merx  shop of Carlisle, for Treason again Hen. 4. had Judgment as in case  High Treason: But Cor Regis in manu D∣mini, he was pardoned, Cokes 2 Inst. 63 The Parliament at Oxford, 42 Hen.  was called Insanum Parliamentum 12 Ed. 2. The Parliament of Whiteband 5 Ed. 3. Parliamentum bonum, 10 R.  Parliamentum quod fecit Mirabilia, 21 R.  Magnum Parlimentum, 6 H. 4. Parl∣mentum indoctum, 4 Hen. 6. Parliam∣tum Fustium. 14 H. 8. The Black Parl∣ment. 1 E. 6. Parliament' pium, & 1 Ma Parliament' propitium, Parliaments of Q. Pia, Justa, & Provida, 21 Jac. 1. Foelix Pa∣amentum: And the Parliament in the  year of King Ch. 1. Benedictum Parl∣mentum. The Reasons of most of the Appellations appear upon Record, C 3 Inst. 2. It is Lex & Consuetudo Parliamen That wheresoever the Parliament S Proclamation should be made, forb∣ing
wearing of Armour, and all Plays and Games of Men, Women or Chil∣dren, Cokes 3 Inst. 160. The Britons loved the Laws of Eng∣land, and petitioned to have the Laws of England in all cases of the Crown used in Wales: And now seeing there are Sheriffs in Wales, the Writs for Election of Knights, Citizens and Bur∣gesses are directed to them, returnable in Chancery, Cokes 4 Inst. 241. Every Lord of Parliament ought to have a Writ of Summons, sent to him out of the Chancery at least 40 Days before the Parliament begin; and the Writ of Summons to the Barons is, Quod intersitis cum Praelatis Magnatibus & Proceribus super dictis Negotijs tracta∣turi vestrumque Consilium Impensuri; but the Writ to the Assistants, as all the Judges, Barons of the Exchequer, of the Coif, the Kings Learned Councel, and the Civilians, Masters of the Chancery, are different from the other; as thus, Quod intersitis Nobiscum, & cum caeteris de Concilio nostro, (and sometimes Nobis∣cum only) super Praemissis tractaturi, ve∣strumque Consilium Impensuri; and the Writs of Summons to the Bishops, &c. you may see in Cokes 4 Inst. 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 14, 47, 48, 50.
And at the Return of these Writs, the Parliament cannot begin but by the Royal Presence of the King, either in Person, or by Representation, Cokes 4. Inst. 6. The Writs of Summons are to be found in the Close Rolls, and the Forms of them you may see in Cokes 4 Inst. 9, 10. Which Forms, as also the Forms of all other original Writs, are not to be altered but by Act of Parliament; and where they Issued out of the Chan∣cery, and were Returnable in the Court of Parliament, the Return thereof could not be altered, and Returnable into the Chancery: But by Act of Parliament, 7 H. 4. cap. 15. They be now returned into the Chancery, and kept in the Of∣fice of the Clerk of the Crown there; see the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 15. and Cokes 4 Inst. 9, 10. Who shall be Electors, and the She∣riffs duty in Electing, you may see in the several Statutes, whereof some are mentioned in Cokes 4 Inst. 48. If Erroneous Judgment be given in the Kings-Bench, it shall upon petition of Right be brought into Parliament, to be reversed, or affirmed; and the proceedings thereupon you may read in Cokes 4 Inst. 21.
None of the Judges of Kings-Bench, Common-Pleas or Exchequer are Eligible, because Assistants in the House of Lords, nor any of the Clergy, because of the Convocation; but those who have Ju∣dicial places in other Courts are Eligi∣ble, Cokes 4 Inst. 47. Thorpe could not be Speaker, unless he were Knight of the Shire, Cokes 4. Inst. 47. in the margent. Tenants in ancient Demesne, not contributary to the expences of Mem∣bers in Parliament; nor Chaplains who are Masters in Chancery, to Proctors in Parliament, F. N. B. 507. Cokes 1 Rep. 25, 160. A saving in an Act of Parliament, Repugnant to the Body of the Act is void, Cokes 1 Rep. 47. Alton Woods's Case. He who taketh a Gift by Act of Parliament, shall not have other Estate than is given by the Act, Cokes 1 Rep. 47, 48. Alton Woods Case. An Act of Parliament, or the Com∣mon Law, may make an Estate void as to one, and good as to another, which a Man by his breath or words cannot do, Cokes 1 Rep. 87. Corbet's Case.
The Statute of 27 Hen. 8. Extirpa∣ting and Extinguishing all the Estate of the Feoffees, Non possunt agere seu permittere aliquid in prejudice of Cestuy que use, Cokes 1 Rep. 132. Chudley's Case. An Act of Parliament, may make Division of Estates, and therefore not like to Cases at Common Law, Cokes 1 Rep. 137. Chudleigh's Case, An Act of Parliament, is the Highest Conveyance, and a latter doth take away a former Act, Cokes 2 Rep. 46. Parliamentum, Testamentum, Arbitra∣mentum, to be construed according to the intent of the makers, Cokes 3 Rep. 27. Butler and Baker's Case. Of Statutes which concern the King, the Judges ought to take notice, Cokes 4 Rep. 13. Lord Cromwell's Case. The like of general Acts, Cokes 4 Rep. 76. Holland's Case. The of Stat 13 & 18 Eliz. concern∣ing Leases by Deans and Chapters are general Statutes, whereof the Court ought to take notice, although they be not found by the Jurors, Cokes 4 Rep. 120. Davenport's Case. Mistaking the word Districtionem for Destructionem, altering the sense of the Statute of Gloucester, although but by one letter, adjudged it was matter of
substance, and the Writ could not be amended, Cokes 5 Rep. 45. Freeman's Case. The Acts of 7 Hen. 7. and 3 Hen. 8. are perpetual Acts, for the word King doth include all his Successors, Cokes 6 Rep. 27. Case of Soldiers. Althô the Statutes speak only of the Party, yet Executors and Administra∣tors shall take advantage of it, Cokes 6 Rep. 80. Sir Edw. Phitton's Case. Resolved in Englefield's Case, That by tender of the Ring according to the Condition, the Uses were void, and the Estate vested in the Queen by force of the Attainder, and of the Act, 33 H. 8. Cokes 7 Rep. 15. In the case of the Prince, the King's Charter having the Force of Parlia∣ment, is sufficient in it self without any other Act; for it is affirmed by Parliament, by Stat. 9 H. 5. That it was agreed at the Parliament, 11 Ed. 3. That the eldest Sons of the Kings of England were Dukes of Cornwal, and that Dutchy should remain to them, without being given else where, Cokes 8 Rep. Case of the Prince, from 25 to 29. In many cases the Common Law doth comptrol Acts of Parliament, and sometimes shall adjudge them
void. For when an Act of Parliament is against common Right and Reason, or repugnant and impossible to be per∣formed, the Common Law shall ad∣judge it void, Cokes 8 Rep. 118. Dr. Bonham's Case, and 128, 129, Case of the City of London. When an Act of Parliament maketh any Coveyance good against the King or other Person certain, it shall not take away the Right of any other, althô there be not any saving in the Act, Cokes 8 Rep. Sir Francis Barington's Case 138. In case of Sentence of Deprivation of one, and Presentment, Institution and Induction of another after, by re∣lation of a General Pardon, all are restored without Appeal or new Presen∣tation, Admission or Institution, Cokes 9 Rep. Lord Sanchar's Case. In an Act of Parliament misnaming of a Corporation, when the express meaning appeareth, shall not avoid the Act, no more than in a Will, Cokes 10 Rep 54 to 57. Case of the Chancellor of Oxford. If an Act of Parliament were inten∣ded to Repeal a former Act, it could not be by general and doubtful words, Cokes 10 Rep 138. the Case of Chester Mills.
It cannot be intended that a Statute made by Authority of the whole Realm, should do any thing against Truth, Cokes 11 Rep. 14. Priddle and Napper's Case. The Title of the Act is no part of the Act, as the preamble is; and Penal Statutes shall be taken by intendment to remedy mischiefs, and suppress Crimes, Cokes 11 Rep. 34. Powlter's Case. Penal Statutes are to be followed (chiefly in Informations) strictly and in terminis, according to the purview of the Act, Cokes 11 Rep. 56. Dr. Forster's Case. Where the Rule is, Leges Posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, countrarium est duplex, Vide Cokes 11 Rep. 63. Dr. Fo∣ster's Case. Statut' Praerogativa Regis saith, The King shall have Annum Diem & Vastum, which is as much as to say; he shall have the Trees, &c. to his own dispo∣sition, Cokes 11 Rep. 83. Levis Bowles's Case. By Stat. 4. Ed. 3.14. A Parliament shall be holden once a year, and oftner if need be. By Stat. 36 Ed. 3.10. A Parliament shall be holden every year.
By Stat. 5 R. 2. Stat. 2.4. Every Per∣son and Comminalty having Summons of Parliament shall come thither, in pain to be amerced, or otherwise pu∣nished; and if the Sheriff doth not Summon them, he shall be likewise amerced, or otherwise punished, as hath been used in times past. What persons are to be Elected, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, to serve in Parliament; the manner of their Election and Levying of their Expences, and the divers Acts of Parli∣ament for regulating their Elections; you may see in the Statutes at large. By Stat. 6 Hen. 8.16. No Knight, Citizen, Burgess or Baron of any of the Cinque-Ports, shall depart from the Parliament without License of the Speaker, and Commons in Parliament assembled, to be entred upon Record, in the Clerk of the Parliaments Book, on pain to lose their Wages. By Stat. 33. H. 8.21. The Kings Royal Assent by his Letters Patents un∣der the Great Seal, and Signed by his Hand, and notified in his absence to the Lords and Commons assembled in the upper House, is, and ever was of as good strength and force, as if the King were personally present, and had publickly assented thereunto.
By Stat. 12 Car. 2. cap. 1. It's declared, That the Parliament begun the 3d of November 16. Car. 1. is dissolved, and that the Lords and Commons now sitting are the two Houses of Parliament, not∣withstanding any want of the Kings Writs of Summons, or any other de∣fect. Stat. 16 Car. 2 cap. 1. The sitting and holding of Parliament shall not be intermitted above three years; and now a new Parliament is to be cal∣led every Three years, Stat. 6 W. & M. Stat. 30 Car. 2. cap. 1. No Peer shall Vote, make Proxy, or Sit during any Debate in the House of Peers, nor any Member of the House of Commons Vote, or Sit there after their Speaker Chosen, till they first take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Subscribe, and Repeat the Declarati∣on in the Act mentioned, between the hours of nine in the Morning, and four in the afternoon, at the Tables in the middle of the said Houses, in a full House, in such order as each House is called over; for which Declaration and other Matters see the Statute at large: But now those Oaths by late Acts are altered, and others appointed in their stead.
Tbe Executive Power in Temporal Affairs. A Brief account having been given of the Parliament, in which is comprehended the Legislative power, in Temporal Affairs: We are next to consider the Executive power in the same, and that is generally in the King, he being the Fountain of Justice, and Lord Chief Justice of Englad; and because he is Caput, Principium, & Finis Parliamenti, by which the Laws are made, and nothing can have the force of Law, without his consent given in Parliament, by Le Roy le veut, there∣fore All the Laws of England are called the Kings Laws; All the Courts of Judi∣cature are called the Kings Courts; And all the Judges of these Courts are called the Kings Judges. And the High Court of Parliament, being the Highest Court of Judicature, all other Courts and Person in Eng∣land are subject to it.
The Court of the High Steward of England. HIs Stile is Seneschallus Angliae, which word Seneschallus hath several De∣rivations; yet as being applied to Eng∣land; it is properly derived from Sen, that is, Justice and Schale, that is, Go∣vernour or Officer; that is, Praefectus seu Officiarius Justitiae. And this agreeth well with his Authority and Duty, to proceed Secundum Leges & Consuetudines Angliae. This Office is very ancient, and was before the Conquest; For in an ancient and Authentical Manuscript, Intituled, Authoritas Seneschalli Angliae, where put¦ting an Example of his Authority; saith, Sicut accidit Godwino Comiti Kanciae tem∣pore Regis Edw' antecessoris Willielmi Du∣cis Normandiae pro hujusmodi male gestis & consilijs suis (per Seneschallum Angliae) adjudicatus & forisfecit Commitivam suam. In the time of the Conqueror, William Fitz Eustace was Steward of England; and in the Reign of William Rufus and Hen. 1. Hugh Grantsemenel Baron of Hinkley, held that Barony by the said Office.
Of ancient time this Office was of Inheritance, and appertained to the Earl∣dom of Leicester, as it also appear∣eth by the said Record: Seneschalcis Angliae pertinet ad Comitivam de Leicester, & pertinuit ab antiquo; That is, that the Earldom of Leicester was holden by doing of the Office of Steward of England. Other Records testified, tha it should belong to the Barony of Hink∣ley. The truth is, That Hinkley was parcel of the Possessions of the Ear of Leicester; for Robert Bellomont Ear of Leicester, in the Reign of Hen. 2 Married with Petronilla, Daughter and Heir of the said Hugh Grantsemenel Ba∣ron of Hinkley, and Lord Steward o England, and in her right was Steward of England: And so it continued, un∣til by the Forfeiture of Simon Mont∣ford, it came to King Hen. 3. who i the 50th year of his Reign, created Edmond his Second Son Earl of Leice∣ster, Baron of Hinkley, and High Stew∣ard of England, which continued is his Line, until Henry of Bullinbrook, So and Heir of John of Gaunt, Duke o Lancaster and Earl of Leicester; who was the last that had any Estate of In∣heritance in the Office of the Steward of England; since which time it wa never granted to any Subject, bu
but only hac vice; and the reason was, for that the Power of the Steward of England was so transcendent, that it was not holden fit to be in any Subjects hands: For the said Record saith, Es Sciendum est quod ejus Officium est super∣videre, & regulare sub Rege, & immediatè post Regem totum regnum Angliae, & om∣nes Ministros legum infra idem Regnum temporibus pacis & guerrarum, &c. and proceedeth particularly with divers ex∣ceeding High Powers and Authorities, which may well be omitted, because they serve for no present use. And albeit their Power and Autho∣rity have been since the Reign of Henry the Fourth, but hac vice, yet is that hac vice limited and appointed: As when a Lord of Parliament is Indicted of Treason or Felony, then the Grant of this Office, under the Great Seal, is to a Lord of Parliament, reciting the Indictment; Nos considerantes quod Ju∣stitia est virtus excellens & Altissimo com∣placens, aeque prae omnibus uti volentes; ac pro eo quod Officium Seneschalli Angliae, cujus praesentia pro administratione justitiae & executione ejusdem in hac parte facien requiritur, ut accepimus jam vacat: De fidelitate, strenuitate, provida circumspe∣ctione, & indutria vestris plurimum cn∣fidente ordnvimus & constituimus vos
ex hac causa & causis Seneschallum no∣strum Angliae ad Officium illus cum moni∣bus eidem Officio in hac parte debitis & pertinentibus hac vice gerend', accipiend' & exercend' dantes & concedentes vobis tenore praesentium plenam & sufficientem potestatem & authoritatem, ac mandatum speciale indictamentum praedict', &c. So that it appeareth that this great Officer is wholly restrained to proceed only upon the recited Indictment. And he to whom this Offic is granted, must be a Lord of Parliament, and his pro∣ceeding is to be Secundum Leges & Con∣suetudines Angliae; for so is his Com∣mission: And hereof you may read more at large in Coke's 3 Inst. Chap. High Treason. Also at every Corona∣tion he hath a Commission under the Great Seal hac vice, to hear and deter∣mine the Claims for Grand Serjeanties and other Honourable Services, to be done at the Coronation for the solem∣nization thereof: For which purpose the High Steward doth hold his Court some convenient time before the Coro∣nation. See a President hereof before the Coronation of King Richard the Second, John Duke of Lancaster, then Steward of England (who in Claims before him was styled, Tres Honourable Seignior Roy de Castile & Leon, &
Seneschalle d' Engleterre,) and held his Court in Alba Aula apud Westm. die Jovis proximè ante Coronationem; Quae quidem coronatio habita & solemni∣zata fuit die Jovis sequente, viz. 16 Julij Anno 1 Ric. 2. The first that was Created Hac vice, for the Solemnization of the Corona∣tion of Henry the Fourth, was Thomas, his second Son; and upon the Arraign∣ment of John Holland Earl of Hunting∣don, the first that was Created Steward of England Hac vice, was Edward Earl of Devon. When he sitteth by force of his Office, he sitteth under a Cloth of State, and such as direct their Speech unto him, say,  May it please your Grace, my Lord High Steward of England. The style of John of Gaunt was, Johannes filius Regis Angliae, Rex Legionis & Ca∣stellae, Dux Aquitaniae & Lancastriae, Comes Derbiae, Linconliae & Leice∣striae, Seneschallus Angliae. And in respect his Power, before it was limited, was so Transcendent, no mention is made of this Great Officer in any of our ancient Authors, the Mirror, Bracton, Britton or Fleta. It seemeth they liked not to treat of his Authority; neither is he found in any Act of Parliament, nor in any Book Case before the 1st of Henry
the Fourth, and very few since: which hath caused me to be the longer (saith the Lord Coke) in another place, to set forth his Authority and due proceed∣ing upon the Arraignment of a Peer of the Parliament, by Judicial Record and Resolution of the Judges, agreeable with constant Experience. As the Peers of the Realm that be Tryors or Peers are not sworn, so the Lord Steward being Judge, &c. is not sworn; yet ought he according to his Letters Patents to proceed Secundum legem & consuetudinem Angliae, Co. 4. Inst. cap. 4. In Enditemene de Treason ou Felony ver un des Pieres del Realm, le Tryal est per ss Pieres, quel maner de tryal in Appel, nes grauntable; per que depuis que cel Trial per ses Pieres, est le proper Trial que apper∣tient al piere del Realm, quant sur Endite∣ment de Treason ou Felony il ad plead d∣rien culpable, Veions l'order & proces d∣cest Tryal. Appiert An. 1. H. 4. fol. 1. & An 13 H. 8. fol. 11. que quant un Seigniour del Parlement serra arraigne de Treason  Felony dount il est endite: Le Roy pers Letters patents ferra un graunde & sag Seigniour d'estre de grand Senescha d' Engleterre pour le jour de l'arraign∣ment, qui devant le dit jour, ferra precept a son Serjaunt d'Arms qui est appoint d∣luy
servire durant le temps de son Commis∣sion, a faire venir devaunt luy 20 ou 18 Seigniours del Parlement a mesme la jour, Et puis al jour, quant le Seneschalle serra south le drape d'estate sur l'arraignment del prisoner, & ad fait lye son Commission, le dit Serjaunt retourna le dit precept, & les Seigniours serront de ceo demaund' & quant ils ount apparus, & serrount en lour places, le Constable del Tower serra demaund a amesner al Court son prisoner, quel serra conduct per luy al barre. Et donques le dit graund Seneschal monstra a le prisoner la cause pour quel le Roy avoit assemble la les Seigniours & luy, & commaundra luy de responder sauns ascun pavour, & sur ceo causera le Clerk del Coron a lier l'En∣ditement a luy, & de luy demander sil soit culpable ou nemy, a quel apres que il ad resp' de rien culpable, Le dit Clerk demand' ouster de luy coment il voile este try: A quel il peut dire per Dieu & ses Pieres. Et main∣tenant sur coe, Les Serjeants & Attorney le Roy, deneront Evidence vers luy: A quel quant le prisoner respondue; Le dit Constable serra commaund de retirer le dit prisoner del barre a ascun lieu pour le temps que les dits Seigniors secretment parleront en le dit Court ensemble. Et sur ceo les Seigniors se levent suis de lour places, & consultant ensemble, & ceo que ils facent ils facent sur lour honours, sans ascun serement
d'estre minister a eux. Et quant eux touts ou les greinder part de eux sont agrees, Ils returneront a lour places, & seeront. Et donque le grand Seneschal demaundera del plus puisne Seignior aperluy, sil qui est arraign, soit culpable, ou nemy, & issint del cestuy que est prochein al puisne, & issint del remenant seriatim tanque il est peruse touts, & chescun des Seigniors, respondra aperluy. Et donques le dit, Seneschal remaundra pur le dit prisoner, qui serra reamesnus al barr, a qui le dit Seneschal rehersera le Verdit & donera Judgment accordant. Et cest matter de Tryal, est done come semble per le Statute de Magna Charta cap. 29. qui est in cest manner: Nullus Liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut disseisietur, de libero tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut utla∣getur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo mo∣do destruatur, nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per le∣gale judicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae; Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus justitiam vel rectum.
Stat. 20 Hen. 6.9. Tryal of Dutchesses, Countesses and Baronesses, for Treason or Felony, shall be as Noblemen, Peers of the Realm, and not other∣wise, notwithstanding the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. which mention∣eth Men only to be Tryed by their Peers. Mes nul de ceux Statutes, ad este mise in ure d'extender a un Evesque ou Abbe, coment que ils injoyent le nosme del Seignior de Parlement, car ils nont cel nosme d'Evesque ou Abbe ratione Nobilitatis, sed ratione Officij, ne ont lieu en Parle∣ment in respect de lour Nobility, eins in respect de lour possession, scil. L'auncient, Baronies annexes a lour Dignities. Et accordant a ceo, il y ad divers Presidents d'ont l'un fuist in temps le Roy Henry le 8. Et vide P. 10 E. 4. f. 6. Que un des Piers endite de Treason ou Felony: Peut si pleist al Roy estre arraign de ceo en le Parlement, & donque les Seigniors Espirituels ferront un Procurator pur eux. Eo que per le Canonical Leys, ils mesmes ne doient condemner ascun a mort, Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, fol. 152.
The High Court of Chancery, CAlled Curia Cancellariae, because a some think the Judge of the Cou∣sate antiently Infra Cancellos, at th East end of our Churches, be∣ing separated per Cancellos from the Body of the Church, as peculiarly be∣longing to the Priest, were then called Chancels. But others derive it ∣ther from the Power of the Lord Chan∣cellor; who is called Cancellarius à Can∣cellando, The highest point of his Pow∣er being to Cancel the Kings Letter Patents, and damning the Inrollme thereof, by drawing strokes through  like a Lattice, in several cases; as whe the King grants any thing upon fa Suggestion, or what by Law he can∣not grant. And in the Chancery are two Court one of Ordinary Jurisdiction, Cora Domino Rege in Cancellaria; And th other of Extraordinary Jurisdiction. The Court of Ordinary Jurisdictio proceeds according to the Right Li of the Laws and Statutes of the Real Secundum Legem & Consuetudinem Ang∣liae; and hath power to hold Plea  Scire facias for Repeal of the King  Letters Patents, of Petitions, Monstra
de droits, Traverses of Offices, Parti∣tions in Chancery, of Scire facias upon Recognizance in this Court, Writs of Audita Querela, to avoid Executions in this Court, Dowment in Chancery by the Writ De Dote assignanda, upon Of∣fices found, Executions upon the Sta∣tute Staple, or Recognizance in nature of a Statute Staple, by the Act of 23 H. 8. But Execution upon Statute Merchant is retornable into the Kings Bench, or Com∣mon Pleas; all personal Actions, by or or against an Officer or Minister of this Court, in respect of their Service, or Attendance there: But these, if the Parties descend to Issue, this Court can∣not try by Jury, but the Lord Chan∣cellor, or Lord Keeper delivereth the Record by his proper Hands into the Kings Bench to be tried there; because for that purpose both Courts are ac∣compted but one, and after Tryal had, to be remanded into Chancery, and there Judgment to be given; but if there be a Demurrer in Law, it shall be argued and adjudged in this Court. This Court is Officina Justitiae, out of which all Original Writs, and Com∣missions under the great Seal do Issue, which great Seal is Clavis Regni, and for these ends this Court is ever open.
And for that, if any be wrongfully Im∣prisoned in the Vacation, the Lord Chancellor may grant an Habeas Cor∣pus to do him Justice, which only o∣ther Courts can do in Term time; and also, may grant Prohibitions in Term time or Vacation, which are not returnable; but if not obeyed, then may this Court grant an Attachment upon Prohibition returnable either in the Kings Bench or Common Pleas. The Author of Novae Narrationes written about the time of E. 3. saith, Curia Cancellariae Regiae est Curia Ordina∣ria pro Brevibus Originalibus emanandu, Sed non Placit is Communibus tenendis. The Proceedings of this Court remain in Filacijs in the Office of the Petty Bagg. Divers Acts of Parliament give Au∣thority to the Lord Chancellor to de∣termine divers Offences and Causes in the Court of Chancery, which is ever intended in this Court, proceeding in Latin, secundum Legem & Consutudinem Angliae; and the Defendant shall not be Sworn to his Answer, nor Examin∣ed upon Interrogatories; but upon Is∣sue joyned it shall be tried in the Kings Bench, ut in similibus Casibus solet. And thus having spoken somewhat of the Ordinary Jurisdiction of this Court, we now come to treat of
The Court of Extraordinary Jurisdi∣ction, PRoceeding according to the Rule of Equity, Secundum Aequum, & Bonum. But before we set forth the Jurisdiction and manner of proceeding therein, it may not be thought improper to set forth and describe what this Equity is, and that it may the better be un∣derstood, let us consider what leadeth thereunto, which is first, Synderesis; That is, a Natural power of the Soul, fixed in the higher part there∣of, moving to good, and abhorring evil; and the Divine Wisdom joyneth the beginning of Secondary things; to the latter end of the first things, as an Angel is Intellectual by Nature, and not made rational by Discourse; and to this nature Man by Synderesis approach∣eth, and is joyned. Secondly, Reason; For when Man was Crea∣ted he received from God a double Eye, the exteriour of the Flesh, where∣by he might see the visible things; and the Interiour of Reason, where∣by he might know the invisible; to the end that, by that of the Flesh, he might behold, know and avoid his visible Enemies, and by that of
Reason, be enabled to overcome his Spiritual Enemies, who war against his Soul. And moreover▪ Reason accord∣ing to the Learned is that power of the Rational Soul which discerneth between good and evil, the better by compang the one with the other, which also chooseth virtue and loveth God: And Reason is divided into two parts, the Superiour and the Inferiour; for the superiour part of Reason tend∣eth only to Divine Eternal things, and endeavoureth and reasoneth, that this is to be done, or not to be done, be∣cause God hath commanded or prohi∣bited it. The inferiour part of Rea∣son is declined, or bent to the Govern∣ment of temporal things; and endea∣voureth or reasoneth to prove by Hu∣mane Laws that this is to be done, o not to be done, or that it is honest o dishonest, or that it is expedient, o not expedient for the Common-wealth And in the next place we come to con∣sider and speak of Conscience, Which is a word com∣pounded of Cum & Scientia, and is as much as to say Knowledge of one thing with another; and is thus said to consi in two things, Knowledg by himself▪ and Knowledge with another: In the first, Conscience importeth a certain
natural Act, not of knowing only, but moving also, and also inclineth the Soul to prosecute good and to avoid evil; and in this manner it is accomp∣ted the same as above in Reason, and is also conjoyned to the superiour light of Reason, which is called Synderesis. Therefore St. Jerom and others, call Conscience it self Synderesis, and then Conscience it self is always right. In the second place, Conscience import∣eth more properly Knowledg with another thing, still with some particu∣lar Act; and thus Conscience properly speaking, is no other thing than the applying of a certain Knowledg to some particular Act, from whence it may be deduced, that from the most perfect knowledg of some Law or Science, and the right application of that knowledg to some particular Act, followeth the most pure, perfect and best Conscience; and if there be a defect in knowledg of the truth of that Law, or in the application of the same to some Act, there followeth thereof an Error, or defect of Consci∣ence. And as Synderesis delivereth a universal Maxim or Principle, in which it cannot Err, scilicet; That an unlaw∣ful thing is not to be done; now it may be assumed that an Oath is unlawful,
it being said Math. 5. Ego autem di∣vobis non jurare omnino; But if any wi hold from these words, that an Oath is lawful in no case, he erreth in Con∣science, because he hath not full know∣ledg of the truth of the said Gospel nor doth confer that place of Scripture with others, in which an Oath is al∣lowed to be lawful: And the reason why Conscience may Err in the afore∣said Assumption and the like, is, be∣cause Conscience is formed from the Assumption of some particular Propo∣sition or Question, under universa Rules of things to be done; and as the light of a Candle is put in a House, that they may see what things are i the House; so God hath placed Con∣science in the middle of the Rational Soul, as a Light whereby it may dis∣cern what is to be done, or not to be done; and now let us proceed to de∣scribe Equity, Which is Justice, weighing all circumstances tempered with the sweetness of Mercy, which ought to be kept in every Law, and this he well understood who said, Ipsae eteni Leges cupiunt, ut Jure regantur; and the Wiseman saith, Noli esse justus multu▪ otherwise Summa justitia, summa inj∣stitia fit.
But that we may more clearly de∣clare what Equity is, It is to be known, that because it is impossible to institute any General Rule of Law, which will in no case be defective, therefore Legi∣slators attend to that which happeneth in many things, and not to particu∣lar cases, nor indeed can they, since to observe the Sentence of Law in some Cases, is both against the Equality of Justice and Common Good; so that in some Cases it is good, yea absolutely necessary (praetermitting the words of the Law) to follow that which reason of Justice requireth. And to this end Equity is ordained, which is also cal∣led Epicaya, scilicet, to moderate the Rigour of the Law, and it taketh not away the very Right, but that which seemeth to be Right, by general deter∣mination of Law. And cases may happen in which the Law of God, and the Law of Reason, would be vi∣olated by the observance of them; as in the Law of England there is a gene∣ral Prohibition, that it shall not be law∣ful for any Man to enter into the Ground of another without Authority of the Owner, or of the Law; yet it is excepted, That if Beasts by the High∣way escape into another Man's Corn, he that driveth them may justifie the
Entry to fetch them out; and many other such like. And thus it appears, That Equity rather attends the inten∣tion than the words of Law. And thus having briefly set forth what Equity is, we are next to know that this Court of Extraordinary Juris∣diction grounded thereupon, relieveth none but such who are without remedy in other Courts; For nunquam decurri∣ter ad extraordinarium, sed ubi defecit Or∣dinarium. This Court is Superiour to the other Tribunals, that so the rigour of the Law in them might be here moderated, and amended according to Conscience and Equity; and proceeding by Eng∣lish Bill, the Witnesses are examined in private; the Decrees in English or Latin; no Jury, but all Sentences given by the Judge of the Court, much like to the Courts of the Civil Law; ∣binds the person only, and not his Lands or Goods. But referring the full proceeding an practise therein, to those Books a Authors who treat thereof at large We shall next give a rief accompt of.
The Officers. THe Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keep∣er of the Great Seal, is created Per traditionem Magni Sigilli sibi, per Do∣minum Regem; And by taking his Oath consisting of six Articles, the substance whereof is: That he shall well and truly serve the King and his People in the Office of Chancellor or Lord Keeper, Shall do Right to all People according to the Usages and Laws of the Realm, Shall truly Counsel the King, and preserve and advance the Rights of the Crown;  And he is sole Judge in both of the before mentioned Courts in Chancery, being Summum am∣bientis animi quasi solstitium, and is Ma∣gistratuum omnium Antistes. And to the Lord Chancellor are twelve Assistants, called Masters (anci∣ently Clerici Cancellariae) of whom the chief is, The Master of the Rolls, who hath a Place of great Dignity, and is in the Gift of the King; either for Life, or during the Kings Pleasure, and hath Jure Officij the gift of those consider∣able Offices of the Six Clerks in Chan∣cery, hath the keeping of the Rolls, and the House of the Converted Jews,
and in the absence of the Chancellor, hears Causes, makes Orders by virtue of a Commission with two Masters, and that Jure Officij. And the Masters of Chancery, who are com∣monly Doctors of the Civil Law, are Assistants to the Court and sit there by turns to shew what is the Equity of the Civil Law, and course of the Court, and what is Conscience: And these Masters ought to be expert in the Common Law, to see the framing of original Writs according to Law; which are not of course, whereupon such are called in ancient Authors Brevia Magi∣stralia. And next to these is, The Clerk of the Crown, who by himself or his Deputy continually at∣tends the Lord Chancellor for special matters of State, and hath a place in the higher House of Parliament; he makes all Writs for Elections of Mem∣bers of Parliament, Sitting in Parlia∣ment upon Warrant directed to him upon the Death, or removal of any Member, and all Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Gaol Delivery, and many other Commissions for distribution of Justice. And next is,
The Prothonotary of the Court, whose Office is chiefly by himself, or Deputy to Expedite Commissions for Embassies. And then The Clerk of the Hamper or Hanaper, sometime stiled Warden of the Ham∣per, whose Office is to receive all Mo∣ney due to the King, For the Seals of Charters, Patents, Commissions and Writs, and to attend the Keeper of the Seal daily in Term time, and at times of Sealing, with Leather Bags now (but anciently probably with Hampers,) wherein are put all Sealed Charters, Patents, &c. And then delivers those Bags to the Comptroller of the Ham∣per. The Warden of the Fleet is to take off the Prisoners sent from this Court for Contempt to the King or his Laws, or that will not pay their Debts, &c. who commonly Executes it by a De∣puty. The Serjeant at Arms, whose Office is to bear a great Guilt Mace before the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper for the time being. The Six Clerks, whose Office is to Inrol Commissions, Pardons, Patents, Warrants, &c. that are passed the Great Seal; they were ancienly Clerici, and afterwards forfeited their Places if they
did Marry. These are the Attorneys as well for Plaintiff, as Defendant in every Suit in Court. Two Examiners, Their Office is to Examine Witnesses upon Oath, and put their Depositions and Answers to their Interrogatories in Wri∣ting. Three Clerks of the Petty Bag, Their Office is to make all Patents for Cu∣stoms, Comptrollers, Conge d'eslire. First, Summons of Nobility, Clergy, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parlia∣ment. The Subpoena Office executed by a De∣puty, is to Issue out Writs to Summon Persons to appear in Chancery. The Clerk of the Patents, or Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, and may be executed a Deputy. The Register of the Court, hath un∣der him Deputies, Two Registers for the Court, Two Registers for the Rolls, Entring Clerks, and one Clerk of the Reports, or keeper of the old Book. The Affidavit Office granted by Let∣ters Patents, where all Affidavits are Filed, and may be executed by a De∣puty. The Cursitors are Twenty and four, who are appointed to several Shires, and are to make out original Writs
that belong to this Court, or Common Pleas, and these are a Corporation with∣in themselves, and many of them Exe∣cute their Places by Duputies. By Stat. 15 H. 6.4. none shall sue forth a Subpaena, untill he find surety to satisfie the Defendant his Damages and Cost, in case he do not verisie his Bill. Three things are to be Judged in Conscience, by the ancient Rule (viz.) Covin, Accident and breach of Confidence. This Chancery is ever open, and ne∣ver is or can be Adjourned, Cokes 2 Inst. 53. In se Defendendo lies no Appeal; And when it is found so, the King must pardon it of course; That is, in the Court of Chancery, The Pleas whereof be Coram Domino Rege in Cancellaria. And there the Lord Chancellor upon the Record certified to him in the Chancery, by a Writ of Certiorari, shall of course, by force of the Statute of Gloucester cap. 9. Grant him his Par∣don, without speaking thereof to the King, Cokes 2 Inst. 316. The ordinary power of the Chancery is very ancient; but no Court of E∣quity there until Hen. 4. time: But since, The Chancellors attend upon the King to decide matters in Equity,
as the other Judges did, to decide Mat∣ters in Law. The Chancellors in Edward the Thirds time, would come and sit in the Common Pleas, and speak there to Mat∣ters in Law, Co. 2. Inst. 552, 553. The Office of Keeper, same power with Chancellor, by the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 13. King Alfred, Anno Domini 872. gave a Pardon to Wolstan, which was enrol∣led in the Court of Chancery, which Record Wolstan Vouched, Coke's 2 Inst. 554. The Chancery cannot bind the Inter∣est in Lands, but the Person only, 1 Co. Rep. 139. Therefore if Copyholder after Seve∣rance alien, there is no Means against him, but by Decree in Chancery, and that cannot bind the Land, 4 Co. Rep. 25. Copyhold Cases. The Court of Star Chamber. Coram Rege in Consilio suo. HEld in a Chamber at one End of Westminster-Hall, having the Sign of a Star over one Door thereof, An∣ciently called Camera Stellata, The Chamber of the Stars, Star-Chamber, and
the Starred Chamber, in respect of the Roof of the Court, garnished with Golden Stars. Some have imagined, that it should be called the Starred Chamber, because Crimina Stellionat' was there handled: Others of the Saxon word Steeran, to Steer or Rule as doth the Pilot; because this Court did steer and govern the Commonwealth: O∣thers, because it is full of Windows: But the true cause of the Name was, because the Roof was starred. This Court sate twice a Week in Term-time, viz. on Wednesdays and Fridays, except either of those Days fell out to be the first or last Day of the Term, then it sate not, but was constantly held the next Day after Term ended: But if any Cause was begun to be heard in Term-time, and for length or difficulty could not be sentenced within the Term, it was continued and sentenced after the Term. Divers Acts of Parliament gave Juris∣diction to this Court, for to punish hor∣rible and enormous Crimes, and other exorbitant Offences in Great Men; but ordinary Offences, and such as may be sufficiently punished by the proceed∣ings of the Common Law, this Court left to the ordinary Courts of Ju∣stice.
The proceeding in this Court was∣by Bill or Information, by Examina∣tion of the Defendant upon Interro∣gatories, and by Examination of Wit∣nesses, and rarely Ore tenus, upon the Confession of the party in Writing un∣der his Hand; which he again must confess freely in open Court, upon which Confession the Court did pro∣ceed: But if the Confession was set down too short, or otherwise than he meant, he might deny it, and then they could not proceed against him, but by Bill or Information, which was the fairest way. The Informations, Bills, Answers, Re∣plications, &c. and Interrogatories were (in English) Engrossed in Parchment and Filed up. All the Writs and Pro∣cess of the Court were under the Great-Seal. The Sentences, Decrees and Acts of this Court were Ingrossed in a fair Book, with the Names of the Lords and others of the King's Council and Justices that were present, and gave their Voices. In the 28th year of the Reign of Ed∣ward the Third it appeareth, that the Retorns, Coram nobis, are in three man∣ners: 1 Coram nobis in Camera, (which was afterwards called Camera stellata.) 2. Coram nobis ubicunque fucrimus in An∣glia,
which is the Kings-Bench: And 3. Coram nobis in Cancellaria. By the Statute of 3 Hen. 7. the Let∣ter whereof followeth: It was Ordained, That the Chancellor and Treasurer of England, and the Keeper of the King's Pri∣vy Seal; or two of them, calling to them a Bishop, and a Temporal Lord of the Kings most Honourable Privy Council, and the two Chief Justices of the Kings-Bench and Common-Pleas for the time being, or other two Justices in their ab∣sence, upon Bill or Information put to the said Lord Chancellor, or any other against any person, for unlawful Maintenance, giving of Liveries, Signs and Tokens, and Retainers by Indentures, Promises, Oaths, Writings or otherwise, Imbraceries of his Subjects, Untrue demeaning of Sheriffs in making of Pannels, and other untrue Re∣turns, by taking of Money, by Injuries, by great Riots and unlawful Assemblies, have Authority to call before them by Writ or Privy Seal, the said Misdoers; and they and others by their Discretion, by whom the Truth may be known to Examine, and such as they find therein Defective, to punish them after their Demerits, after the Form and Effect of Statutes thereof, made, in like manner and form, as they should and ought to be punished, if they were thereof Convict after the due Order of Law.
Camerae Stellatae authoritatem pruden∣tissimus Princeps Henricus Septimus, ita Parliamentaria adauxit & Constabilivit nonnulli primum instituisse falso opinan∣tur. But the Act of 3. Hen. 7. did not raise a New Court; for there was a Court of Star Chamber before, and all the Kings Privy Council Judges of the same. But By the Statute of 16 & 17. Car. 1. cap. 10. this Court is absolutely Dissol∣ved. The Court for Redress of Delays of Judg∣ments in the Kings great Courts. THis Court is raised by the Statute of 14. E. 3. which followeth in these words: Item, Because divers Mischiefs have hapned of late, that in divers places as well in the Chancery as in the Kings-Bench, the Common-Bench, and in the Exchequer, before the Justices assigned, and other Justices to hear and determine matters, the Judgments have been delayed sometimes by Difficulty, sometimes by di∣vers Opinions of the Judges, and some∣times for some other Cause. It is assented, established and accorded, That from hence∣forth at every Parliament shall be chosen a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons, which
shall have Commission and Power of the King to hear by Petition delivered unto them, the Complaints of those that will complain to them of such Delays and Grie∣vances made, and they shall have power to come before them at Westminster, or elswhere, where the places or any of them shall be; the Tenour of Records and Processes of such Judgments so delayed. and to cause the same Justices to come before them, which shall be then present, to hear their cause and reasons of such de∣lays; which Cause and Reasons so heard by Good Advice of themselves, the Chan∣cellor, Treasurer, the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, and other of the King's Counsel, as many and such as shall seem convenient, shall proceed to take a good Accord, and make a good Judgment; and according to the same Accord so taken, the Tenor of the same Accord, together with the Judgment which shall be Accorded, shall be remanded before the Justices before whom the Plea did depend, and that they shall give Judgment according to the same accord: and in case it seems to them that the Difficulty be great, that it may not well be deter∣mined without Assent of the Parliament, that the said Tenor or Tenors shall be brought by the said Prelate, Earls and Barons in the next Parliament, and there shall be a final Accord taken what Judg∣ment
ought to be given in this case; and according to this Accord it shall be com∣manded to the Judges before whom the Plea did depend, that they shall proceed to give Judgment without delay. Before the making of this Statute delay of Judgments was forbidden, both by the Common Law and by Acts of Parliament. By the Common Law 1. It is required, That Plena, & celeris, Justitia fiat partibus, &c. not plena alone, nor celeris alone, but both plena & celeris. All Writs of Praecipe quod red∣dat are, Quod juste sine dilatione reddat, &c. All Judicial Writs are Sine dilatione, &c. 2. There did and yet doth lye a Writ De procedendo ad judicium, when the Justices or Judges of any Court of Re∣cord, or not of Record delayed the party Plaintiff, or Defendant, Deman∣dant, or Tenant, and would not give Judgment, and thereupon an Alias, Plur, and an Attachment, &c. doth lye: And the Words of the Writ be, Quia redditis Judicij loquelae quae est coram vobis, &c. de quadam transgressione eidem A. perprae∣fat. B. illata, ut dicitur, diuturnam cepit dilationem ad grave dampnum ipsius A. Sicut ex querela sua accepimus: Vobis praecipimus, quod ad judicium inde reddend cum ea celeritate quae secundum Legem & consuetudinem regni nostri procedas, &c.
Likewise when Justices or Judges of any Court of Record, or not of Record, give Judgment, and delayed the party of his Execution, the party grieved may have a Writ De executione Judicij; by which Writ the Justices or Judges are commanded, Quod executio∣onem judicij nuper redditi, &c. de loquela quae fuit, &c. per breve nostrum, &c. sine dilatione Fieri fac', and thereupon an Alias, Plur', and Attachment, &c. do lye. By the meeting together upon Ad∣journment of the Cause out of the Court where the Cause dependeth, &c. all the Judges, &c. which now we call an Exchequer Chamber Cause, Warrant∣ed by the Common Law and Ancient Presidents before this Statute; and the frequent use of this Court of Exchequer Chamber hath been the Cause that this Court upon the Act of 14 E. 3. hath been rarely put in ure. By the King's Writ, comprehending Quod si difficultas aliqua intersit, that the Record should be certified into the Parliament, and to Adjourn the parties to be there at a certain Day, Si obscu∣rum & difficile sit Judicium, ponantur judicia in respect' usque magnam curiam. An excellent Record whereof you may read in the Parliament holden
at Westminster the Tuesday after the Translation of St. Thomas Becket, Ann 14 E. 3. Secondly, By Acts of Parliament, Nulli vèndemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus, justitiam vel rectum. That it shall not be commanded neither by the Great Seal, nor by the Little Seal, nor by Letters, nor any other cause to delay Right; and albeit such commandment come, &c. that by them the Justices surcease not to do Right in no manner. In divers cases the party grieved, shall have an Action for unjust delay. Tolle moram, semper nocuit differre paratis. But seeing neither the Common Law, nor any of the Acts of Parliament, do extend to Ecclesiastical Courts, it is then demanded, What if an Inferiour Ordi∣nary will refuse, or delay to admit, and institute a Clerk presented by the right Patron, to a Church within his Diocess or the like, or delay, or refuse to give Sentence in a Case depending before him? It is Answered, That the Archbishop of the Province, may grant his Letters under his Seal to all and singular Clerks of his Province, to admonish the Ordinary within Nine
days, to perform that which by Justice is desired, or otherwise to cite him, to appear before him, or his Official at a day in those Letters prefixed, and to cite the party that hath suffered such delay, then, and there likewise to appear; and further to intimate to the said Ordinary, that if he neither perform that which is enjoyned, nor ap∣pear, he himself without further delay, will perform the Justice required; or in the former of the said Cases, the party delayed, may have his Quare im∣pedit, but that is thought not to be so speedy a remedy, Cokes 4 Inst. cap. 6. The Kings Bench Court. THis Court is so called, because an∣tiently the King sat there some∣times in Person upon a high Bench, and the Judges upon a low Bench at his Feet, to whom the Judicature belongs in the absence of the King. And the Pleas here are betwixt the King and Subject; As for Treasons, Felonies, Breach of the Peace, Oppres∣sion, Misgovernment, &c. And more∣over it examineth, and corrects all Errors in facto, and in jure of all the Judges and Justices of England, in their
Judgments and Proceedings, and this not only in Pleas of the Crown, but in all Pleas Real, Personal and Mixt, except only in the Exchequer. And in this Court are Four Judges. First, The Lord Chief Justice created by Writ thus, Mathis Hale Militi Salutem, Sciatis quod constitu∣mus vos Justiciarium Nostrum capitalem, ad Placita coram nobis tenenda, durant bene placito Nostro, Teste me ipso apl Westminst. Three other Judges hold their Places by Letters Patents in these word, Rea Omnibus ad quos Praesentes Litterae pe∣nerint Salutem, Sciatis quod Constitumus Dilectum & Fidelem R.R. Militem, un Justiciariorum ad placita coram nobis ∣nenda, durante bene placito nostro, Test &c. These Judges and all the Officers of this Court have Salaries from the King, and the Chief of them Liveries out of the great Wardrobe. In this Court all young Lawyers, who have been called to the Bar are allowed to Plead and Practise. This Court may grant Prohibition to keep other Courts, both Ecclesiasti∣cal and Temporal within their Bounds and due Jurisdiction.
The Jurisdiction thereof is General, and extendeth to all England, is more uncontrolable than any other Court, because the Law presumes the King always is present there in Person. None may be Judge here but a Ser∣eant, who upon taking his Degree is obliged to wear a Lawn Coif under his Cap for ever after. The King hath wholly left matters of Judicature according to his Laws, to his Judges; and albeit the Delin∣quent shall be Fined at the Will of the King, Non Dominus Rex Camera sua, nec aliter nisi per Justiciarios suos Finem imponit. Errors in the Kings Bench cannot be reversed, (except in certain particular cases, by Stat. 27 Eliz. c. 8. wherein the urisdiction of the Court is saved) but in the High Court of Parlia∣ment. A Record brought into this Court cannot (as it were being in its Center) be remanded back, unless by Act of Parliament; But Indictments of Fe∣onies, and Murders may be remanded, nd sent by the Justices of that Court nto the several Counties. The Justices of the Kings Bench may grant a Nisi prius in case of Treason, Felony, and other Pleas; but if they
perceive an Indictment to be removed into that Court by practise, or for de∣lay, they may send it back again for Justice to be done. In this Court the Sentence is give by the Chief Justice, the others all  the most part assenting. If they cannot agree, it is referred to a Demurrer i the Exchequer Chamber, before all the Judges of both Benches, and Chie Baron of the Exchequer: And now  us speak somewhat of The Officers. THe Prothonotary recordeth all Jud∣ments, Orders and Rules of Cour and all Verdicts given, being not  Crown matters. The Secondary is his Deputy for  said Cause, who keeps and mak up these Records in Books, and alway attends the Court. The Clerk of the Crown Frames  Indictments of Felony, Treason, M∣ther, &c. all manner of Appeals, a is after to Record them and enter  Verdict, and to make and keep th Records of these matters. And hath  Deputy. The Clerk of the Exigents Frames  Process of Exigi facias, and Reco the Oulawry.
The Clerk of the Papers keeps all Rolls, Script Pleadings, and other things which are not of Record. The Custos Brevium Files all Writs Original and Judicial, after their Re∣turn by the Sheriffs, and is chargable for the same if imbezled. The Custos Sigìlli Seals all Judicial Writs, Patents and Licenses issuing out of the Court, and taketh the Fee, and thereof makes Accompt. The Attorneys which are for Plain∣tiffs, and Defendants in every Cause Frame and make Pleadings. The Marshal of the Court who ei∣ther by himself, or his Deputy or Ser∣vants, attends the Court to receive Prisoners committed to their Custo∣dy. The Clerk of the Declaration, keeps and Files Declarations after they are In∣grossed, and continued on the Back, from the Term you Declare, till Issue Joyned. The Clerk of the Rules makes all Rules, and Enters them and gives Copies, and also Files all Affidavits, &c. The Phillizers, one for each County, to make all mean Process after Origi∣nal, in proceeding to the Utlary.
The Clerk of the Errors allows  Writs of Error, and makes the Super∣sedeas thereupon, and Transcribes the Records into the Exchequer Cham∣ber. The Cryers always attend the Court, to call Non-suits, give Oaths to Wi∣nesses, Jury Men at Tryals, and d such other Business as the Court sha direct, and at the end of every Term do attend the Court. The Porter of the Court, who bring all Records into Court, when they a to be used. This Court may Bail any person fo any Offence whatsoever; and if a Free man in any City, Burrough or Tow Corporate be Disfranchised unjustly, albeit he hath not priviledge in th Court, yet this Court may relieve the party, as appears in Coke's 11 Rep. Jam Bagg's Case. Et sic in similibus. H. P. Captus per querimoniam Merca∣rum Flandriae, & imprisonatus offert Domi∣no Regi Hus & Haut in plegio ad st∣dum recto, & ad respondendum praedi Mercatoribus, & omnibus alijs qui v∣sus eum loqui voluerint, &c. The French word Hus signifying an Elder-Tree, and Haut the Staff of a Halbert, a thought then to be Common Ba changed now to Doo and Roo, and th
then putting in Bail at one Man's Suit, was (in Custodia Mareschalli) to answer all others that should Sue him by Bill, and this continueth to this Day. A Scire facias to Repeal a Patent of the King, may be brought in this Court. In Ancient time when Pleas were holden in Parliament, when the Parties descended to Issue, the Record was Adjourned into the Kings-Bench. By Stat. 18 Ed. 3. The Oath to be given to Justices when they take their place is to this effect, viz. To serve the King in their Offices, To warn them of any Damage, do Justice, take no Bribe, give no Council where he is a Party, main∣tain no Suit, nor deny Right (though by command from the King,) To procure the Kings profit, and to be answerable to the King in Body, Lands and Goods, if found in default. By Stat. 10. H. 6. not in Print, The Justices, Serjeants and the King's At∣torney, shall be paid their Wages by the Treasurer of England at Easter and Michaelmas, without any other Suit. By Stat. 28 Hen. 8. All Attaints shall be taken in the Kings-Bench, and Com∣mon-Pleas, and not elsewhere.
Stat. 5 Ed. 3.12. If Outlary hap∣pen before Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner, and the Justices be risen before the Party yield himself, he shall do it in the Kings-Bench. The Justices in this Court are the So∣vereign Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Gaol Delivery, Conservators of the Peace, &c. in the Realm, and Sove∣reign Coroners of the Land: And therefore where the Sheriff and Coro∣ners may receive Appeals by Bill, à For∣tiori the Justices of this Court may do it. Out of this Court are other Courts derived in respect of the multiplicity of causes which have increased. Jurisdictio istius Curiae est Original seu ordinaria, & non delegata: And the Justices of this Court were called Anciently Justiciae, Justiciarij, Locum tenentes Domini Regis, &c. And the Stile of this Court is Anglia in the Margent, and the Chief Justice was called Justi∣cia Angliae, Justicia prima, Justiciarius Angliae capitalis, & Justiciarius noster, capitalis, ad placita coram nobis terminand, and in divers Acts of Parliament he is called, Chief Justice of England.
The Kings Bench hath Authority for Great Misprisions and Offences, to Ad∣judge and Inflict corporal Punishments, as Pillory, Papers and the like, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 7. The Court of Common Pleas. THis Court is so called, because there are debated the usual Pleas, between Subject and Subject, althô not in respect of Persons, but in re∣spect of the Pleas, being Communia pla∣cita: And some say this Court as well as others, was at first held in the King's House wheresoever he resided: But by Magna Charta it is ordained, This Court should not be Ambulatory, but held at a certain place, and that hath ever since been in Westminster-Hall. And this Court is the Lock and Key of the Common Law in Common Pleas; for here all Real Actions, whereupon Fines, Recoveries, and Common Assurances of the Realms do pass, and all Real Actions by Original Writs are to be determined, and all Common Pleas mixt, or personal, in divers whereof this Court, and the Kings Bench have a con∣current Authority.
This Court Regularly holds no Plea, but by Original Writ out of the Chan∣cery, and returnable into this Court; But in certain cases it holds Plea by Bill without such Writ, as for or a∣gainst persons priviledged in this Court. Also, without Original Writ, this Court may upon suggestion grant Prohibitions to keep Ecclesiastical Courts within their Limits and Jurisdi∣ction. This Court, (but no inferiour Court) may write to the Bishop to certifie Bastardy, or Legal Matrimony; so likewise upon ancient Demesne plead∣ed. The Lord Chief Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas or Common Bench, holds his place Durante bene-placito, by Letters Patent in this form, Rex, &c. Sciatis, quod constituimus dilectum & fidelem, E C. Militem Capitalem Justiciarium de Communi Banco habendum quamdiu nobis placuit, cum Vadijs, & Feodis ab anti∣quo debitis, & consuetis. In cujus rei Testi∣monium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Teste, &c.
And the three other Judges have Letters Patent: Sciatis quod constituimus dilect' & Fidelem, P. W. Militem, unum Justiciariorum nostrorum de Communi Banco, &c. The Jurisdiction of this Court is ge∣neral, and extendeth throughout all England: And for the Antiquity of this Court, Vide 6 E. 3. where a Fine was levyed in this Court, 6 R. 1. And none of the Judges of this Court may take Fee of any but the King; and they ought to observe (and likewise all other Of∣ficers) the Rule in Law, Nemo Duobus utatur Officijs. And now we come to The Officers. THe Custos Brevium, who is the Chief Officer of the Court. The Three Prothonotaries, in whose Of∣fices all Pleadings are Entred, and all Common Recoveries Recorded, and Exemplified. The Clerk of the Warrants, who en∣treth all Warrants of Attorney, and inrolleth all Deeds acknowledged be∣fore Justices of the Court. The Phillizers, who have the several Counties of England divided amongst them, and make all mean Process up∣on Original before Appearance.
The Clerk of Essoyns, who entreth all Essoyns, and Exceptions in all Actions, and prepareth and marketh all Rolls for the Court. The Clerk of the Utlaries, who makes all Capias utlagatum upon return of the Exigents brought him: The Kings At∣torney is Master of this Office. The Exigenters appointed for several Counties, who make the Writs of Exigents and Proclamations, upon the return of the Pluries Capias brought them. The Clerk of the Supersedeas, who makes Writs to supersede the Utlary, upon the Parties appearing to the Exi∣gent. The Clerk of the Juries, who makes Writs of Habeas Corpora Jur', & Distrin∣gas Jur', for Tryal of Issues. The Chirographer, who makes the In∣dentures of Fines Levied. The Clerk of the Kings Silver, who Enters upon Record the Money which the King is to have upon Fines, for the Post Fines, according to the value of the Land, as the same is rated upon the Writs of Covenant. The Clerk of the Errors, who makes the Supersedeas upon the Writs of Error, and doth Transcribe the Records out of the Common Pleas into the Kings Bench.
The Clerk of the Treasury, who keeps the Rolls of the Court and makes Copies, and Exemplifications thereof, and also all Records of Nisi prius, which are after the same Term wherein Issue is joyned. The Proclamator of the Court, The Keeper of the Court, The Office of Inrolment of Fines and Recoveries erected by Statute. Four Cryers or Tipstaffs, Substitutes to the Proclamator. The Warden of the Fleet, who by himself or his Deputy is to attend the Court; That Prison being proper for all Com∣mitments out of this Court. The Pleaders are Serjeants of the Coif; none under that degree are ad∣mitted to Plead at the Bar, nor to Sign any special Pleadings in that Court. The Attorneys are many, being not limitted. In this Court all Civil Causes, Real or Personal are usually tried according to strict Rule of Law; and Real Actions are Pleadable in no other Court. The Proceedings in this Court are by Originl Summons, Attachias, Capias, Alias Capias, Pluries Capias, Exigi Fa∣cias, and Proclamation into the County
where the Defendant dwelleth: And for their General Rule, see the Books at large. The King allows the Lord Chief Justice a Fee, Reward, Robes and Two Tun of Wine: And to the Three other Judges, and to Four Serjeants he al∣loweth Fees, Rewards and Robes to each. The Clerk of the Supersede as holds his Place by Patent: The Phillizers are in the Gift of the Lord Chief Justice, and hold for Life. The Four Exigenters are in the Lord Chief Justice Gift, and are for Life. This court hath Jurisdiction for granting Prohibitions upon Suggesti∣ons, where there is neither Writ of Attachment nor Plea depending, Coke's 4. Inst. 10. And this Court hath Jurisdiction for Punishment of their Officers and Mi∣nisters.
The Court of the Exchequer. IS so called (as some think) from the Chequer wrought Carpet Cover∣ing, the great Table in that Court▪ Or else from the French Eschequier a Chess-board, because the Accomptants in that Office were wont to use such Boards in their Calculation; And the Authority of this Court, as all the other Courts before mentioned is of Original Jurisdiction, without any Commission, not Instituted by any Statute or Written Law, but have their Jurisdiction Originally from the Anci∣ent Customs of the Kingdom. And this Court is divided into Two parts, (viz.) Judicial Accompts called Scaccarium Computorum, and the Re∣ceipt of the Exchequer. Una Origo Utriusque Scaccarij, Superioris, scilicet & Inferioris, sed quicquid in Superiori com∣putatur, in Inferiori solvitur': But before we proceed further it will be neces∣sary to declare The Officers. DOminus Thesaurarius Angliae, hath his Office by delivery of a White Staff at the Kings Will and Pleasure;
In former times by delivery of the Golden Keys of the Treasury: When Treasure failed the White Staff served to Rest him upon it, or drive away importunate Suitors. The Office and Duty of the Lord Treasurer appears by his Oath, Consisting of Eight Ar∣ticles, for the due Execution of his Of∣fice, and truly to Council and Advise the King; as in the 4th Institutes you may Read more at large. And he hath the keeping of the Kings Trea∣sure, and Records of the Exchequer; and hath many Officers at his sole Ap∣pointment, hath the nomination of Escheators in every County, and is to appoint a Measurer for Cloths; he with others joyned with him, grant Leases of the Crown Lands, and giveth War∣rants to certain persons to have their Wine Custom Free. The ancient Sala∣ry of the Lord Treasurer was, 383 l. 7 s. 8 d. lately it hath been 8000 per Annum. The Office is sometimes Exe∣cuted by Commission; and he is also Treasurer of the Exchequer, by Letters Patent under the great Seal. And next to the Lord High Treasurer is, Cancellarius Scaccarij, who keepeth the Seal, Et les Brev. usual in le Chan∣cery, en le Exchq', &c. sont pluis ancient
que le Register. He is sometimes under Treasurer, and Governor of the Court. Under the High Treasurer is, The Comptroller of the Pipe, and many Officers are at his Appointment, and these seldom sit in Court. But there is The Lord Chief Baron, who is crea∣ted by Letters Patent Quam diu se bene gesserit, and Answers the Bar, take Recognizances for the Kings Debts, &c. and with him commonly sit. Three other Barons, who in his Ab∣sence supply his Place according to Seniority. And there is also One Cursitor or Puisne Baron, who ad∣ministers the Oaths to the Sheriffs, Un∣der-Sheriffs, Searchers, Surveyors, &c. of the Custom-House. And in the upper Exchequer are these under Officers; The Kings Remembrancer, in whose Office are Two Secondaries, and Six others who are Sworn Clerks; and his Office and Duty is; First, To Write Pro∣cess against all Collectors of Customs, Subsidies, &c. Secondly, He entreh all Recognizanees before the Barons, and taketh Bonds for the Kings Debts, for observing of Orders, or for Appear∣ances, and makes out Process thereup∣on. Thirdly, He makes out Process
upon Penal Statutes, and enters all In∣formations in this Office. Fourthly, He makes Bills of Compositions upon Penal Statutes. Fifthly, He taketh the Stalment of Debts, and entreth them Sixthly, Into this Office ought to be delivered all Conveyances, and all Evi∣dences whereby any Lands, &c. are granted to the King. Seventhly, There being a Court of Equity holden in the Exchequer Chamber by English Bill; all the Bills and Proceedings thereupon are entred in this Office. See the Statute of 5 R. 2. cap. 14. Stat. 1. The Lord Treasurer's Remembrancer, whose Office is to make out Process against all Sheriffs, Receivers, Bay∣liffs, &c. And for their Accompts and many other things, as Estreat-Rules, all Charters and Letters Patent, where∣upon any Rents are reserved to the King; and formerly here were Two Secondaries, and Ten other Sworn Clerks. If any Clerk make Process for any Debt paid, the Tallies where∣of are joyned and allowed, he shall lose his Office, be Imprisoned, &c. He maketh Entry of Record of She∣riffs and Accomptants, paying their prof∣fers at Easter and Michaelmas, and makes Entry of keeping their days of Prefixion. The Green Wax is certified
into his Office, and by him delivered to the Clerk of Estreats: All Accompts of Customers, Comptrollers, &c. are here entred to avoid all delay and con∣cealment. The Clerk of the Pipe, the Original Institution of whose Office was from a Conduit, or Conveyance of Water in∣to a Cistern; For all Accompts and Debts to the King are drawn from and delivered out of the Offices of the Kings Remembrancer, and Lord Treasurers Remembrancer, &c. and charged in the Pipe: So as whatsoever is in charge in this Roll or Pipe, is said to be duly in charge. In the Patent of this Office he is called Ingrossator Magni Rot' in Scaccario: Here are under him Eight Sworn Clerks. Here Accomptants have their Quietus est, and Leases are made of Extended Lands. Comptroller of the Pipe, He writeth out Summons twice every year to the high Seriff, to levy the Farms and Debts of the Pipe, and keepeth a Comptrol∣ment or Roll of the Pipe Office Ac∣compts. Clerk of the Pleas, in whose Office all the Officers of the Exchequer, and Priviledged Persons, as Debtors to the King, &c. are to have their Priviledge, to Plead, and be Impleaded as to all
matters at the Common Law: And the Proceedings are accordingly by Declarations, Pleas and Trials as at Common Law, because they should not be drawn out of their Court, where their attendance is required. In this Office are Four Sworn Attorneys. Foreign Opposer, to whom all Sheriffs repair to be opposed of their Green-wax, and from thence is drawn down a charge upon the Sheriff to the Clerk of the Pipe. Clerk of the Estreats or Extracts, is every Term to receive from the Office of the Treasurers Remembrancer, all Debts or Sums to be levied for the King's use, and to make Schedules for such Sums as are to be charged. Auditors of the Imprest are Two, who Audit the great Accompts of the King's Customs, Wardrobe, Mint, First-fruits and Tenths, Naval and Military Ex∣pences, Moneys Impressed, &c. Auditors of the Revenue are Seven; These Audit all the Accompts of the Kings other Revenue that ariseth by Aids. Auditors of the Receipts is a kind of Filazer, for he Files all Tellers Bills, and Enters them. Secondly, He is a Remembrancer; for he giveth the Lord Treasurer a Certificate of the Money received the Week before.
Thirdly, He is an Auditor, for he maketh Debentures to every Teller be∣fore they pay any Money, and taketh and audietth their Accompts; and keep∣eth the Black Book of Receipts, And the Lord Treasurers Key of the Trea∣sury, and seeth every Tellers Money Locked up safe in the new Treasury. Remembrancer of the first Fruits Exe∣cuted by Two Deputies, they take all compositions for First-Fruits and Tenths, and make out Process against all which pay not the same. Clericus Nihilorum, maketh a Roll of all such Sums as the Sheriffs upon Process of the Green-wax return Nihil, and delivers that Roll into the Office of the Lord Treasurers Remembrancer to have Execution done of it for the King. Mareschallus, To this Officer the Court committeth the keeping of the Kings Debtors during the Sitting of the Term, to the end they may pro∣vide to pay the Kings Debts, or be fur∣ther Imprisoned; such Offices as are found Virtute Officij, and brought into the Exchequer, are delivered to him to be delivered over to the Lord Treasur∣er's Remembrancer. He also appointeth Auditors to Sheriffs, Escheators, Cu∣stomers and Collectors for taking their Accompts.
Clericus Summonitionum, Clerk of the Summons. Deputati Camerarij, which are Two, called Under-chamberlains of the Ex∣chequer: They cleave the Tallies writ∣ten by the Clerk of the Tallies, and read the same, that the Clerk of the Pell, and the Comptrollers thereof may see their Entries be true; They also search for Records in their Treasury: And there are other Officers as Clerk of the Parcels, Usher of the Exchequer, whose Office is Executed by a Deputy, and four Under-ushers. In the Lower Exchequer are these Officers. THe Lord High Treasurer of Eng∣land, of whose Office and Digni∣ty we have spoken before in the uppe Exchequer: And concerning the course of the Receipt in this Exchequer, you may read more in Rot' Claus' 39 E. 3. M. 26. The other Officers there are one Secretary. And next is The Chancellor, who hath a princip power, not only in the Exchequer Court, but there also, in the managing and disposing of the Kings Revenue.
Two Chamberlains, in whose Custody are many ancient Records, Leagues and Treaties with Foreign Princes; The Standards of Moneys, Weights and Mea∣sures; The Famous Books called Doomes∣day, and the Black Book of the Exche∣quer. Four Tellers, Their Office is to receive all Moneys due to the King, and there∣upon to throw down a Bill through a Pipe into the Chamberlains or Tally Court. Clerk of the Pells, is to enter every Tel∣lers Bill in a Parchment Skin, in Latin Pellis, whence this Office hath its name. The Two Deputy Chamberlains, Sit in the Tally Court, cleave the Tallies and examin each piece a part, as is said before in the Upper Exchequer. Two Ushers, who take care to secure the Court by Day and Night, and all the Avenues leading to the same, and are to furnish all Books, Paper, &c. One Tally Cutter, who provides fitting Hazel, cuts them square and of full lengths, and hath dividend Fees with the other Officers, of the Party who sueth it out. The Four Messengers of the Receipt, are Pursuivants Attendants upon the Lord Treasurer for carrying his Letter and Precepts to all Customers, Comp∣trolers
and Searchers, and all other His Majesties Messages, where the Lord Treasurer shall command them. In case of any Pension given by the King, there is only 5 l. per Cent. paid to all the Officers, for all publick pay∣ments, not 5. s. for the Hundred pounds. For all Moneys paid in by the King's Tenants or Receiver, it costs them but 6 d. or at most but 3 d. for every payment under 1000 l. The Collectors and Receivers cost the King not above Two in the pound, and at his Exchequer it costs no∣thing. For the Course of the Exchequer, and Duty of the several Officers, you may Read in the Authors, who have treated thereof more at large. There is a General Statute concern∣ing all the Courts of the King, made 2 Hen. 6. cap. 10. That all Officers made by the King's Letters Patents within his Courts, which have Authority (ab anti∣quo) to appoint Clerks and Ministers with∣in the said Courts, shall be Sworn to ap∣point for whom they will answer, and such as are sufficient, and will be Faithful and Diligent in their places.
In the same manner we have Ordained in the Right of the Barons of the Exchequer, that we have expresly charged them in our presence, that they shall do Right and Rea∣son to all our Subjects, and that they shall deliver the People reasonably and without delay, &c. And more of the Officers of this Court, and their Duty, you may read in the Statutes at large. Resolved in the Case of Auditor Pro∣vy, that if A. be indebted to B. and B. is indebted to the King, that the King by his Prerogative may Levy his Debt upon A. but this Levying ought to be of an immediate, and not of a medi∣ate Debtor to the Debtor of the King; As if A. be indebted to B. and B. to C. and C. to the King, the King cannot Levy his Debt of A. for then it might be Levied in infinitum; Quod reprobatur in Jure. The Barons of the Exchequer are the Sovereign Auditors of England; for if a Man Assign Auditors to a Bailiff, or Receiver to Accompt, and the Audi∣tors will not allow just and reasonable allowances, but will Commit the Bailiff or Receiver to Prison, such Prisoner may have an Original Writ of Ex parte talis returnable before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer for his re∣lief.
If the Barons do not allow an Ac∣comptant before them such just De∣mands as he maketh, he may have a Writ De Allocatione facienda, directed to the Treasurer and Barons, Command∣ing them to allow the same. Gifts by word of Mouth from the King, not allowable but void. Neither is a Warrant under the Signet, sufficient to Issue any Treasure of the King out of the Receipt, but it must be under the Great, or Privy Seal. Whereas it is said, That the King may Distrain in all the other Lands of his Tenant of whomsoever they are holden, it is thus to be understood; That the other Lands must be in the actual Possession of the Kings Tenant, for he cannot Distrain in those Lands in the Possession of his Tenant for Life, Tenant for Years, or at Will, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 11, 12, 13. The Oath of the Barons of the Ex∣chequer, expressing there Duties consist∣eth upon Ten Articles: 1st That well and truly he shall serve in the Office of Baron of the King's Exchequer: 2ly, That truly he shall charge and dis∣charge all manner of People as well Poor as Rich: 3ly, That for no highness, nor for Riches nor for hatred, nor Estate of no Person or Persons whatsoever,
nor for any Deed, Gift nor Promise of any Person the which is made to him, nor by Craft, nor by Engin he shall let the King's Right: 4ly, Nor none other Persons Right he shall di∣sturb, let or respite contrary to the Laws of the Land: 5ly, Nor the Kings Debts he shall put in respite where that they may goodly be le∣vied: 6ly, That the Kings need he shall speed before all others: 7ly, That neither for Gift, Wages, nor good Deed, he shall lain, disturb nor let the profit or reasonable advantage of the King, in the advantage of any other person, nor of himself: 8ly, That nothing he shall take of any person for to do wrong, or right to delay, or to deliver, or to delay the people that have to do before him, but as hastily as he may them goodly to deliver without hurt of the King, and having no regard to any profit that might thereof to him be therein, he shall make to be delivered: 9ly, Where he may know any wrong, or prejudice to be done to the King, he shall put and do all his power and diligence that to redress, and if he may not do it, that he tell it to the King, or to them of the Councel, which may make relation to the King,
if he may not come to him: 10ly, The King's Counsel he shall keep, and lain in all things. And like to the Chief Baron, the rest of the Baron are constituted by Letters Patent; and the Patents of the Attorney General, and Solicitor are also Quamdiu se bene gesserit, Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 11, 12. The Lord Chief Baron is Sworn by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being; and in matters of Law, Information, and Plea he answer∣eth the Bar and all Suitors. He ever giveth Judgment in the Term-time only, and gives his directions to the Remembran∣cer in this manner: If the King's Attor∣ney say nothing for the King, between this and such a day, for such a matter, enter Judgment for A.B. Or, if the Party fo nothing for such a matter, by such a day enter Judgment for the King. Practick part of the Law, Court of Exche∣quer. The Court of Inquiry, to certifie untrue Accompts in the Exchequer. THis Court Sits by Commission un∣der the Great Seal, by force of the Statute of 6 Hen. 4. Directed and sent with the Tenor of the Accompt to discreet persons in the County, where
the Officers be to Enquire, and certifie the profits by them received; and if they be attainted of Fraud, they for∣feit treble value, and their Bodies to Prison, until they make Fine, and Ran∣som at the discretion of the Judges. In the Exchequer Wall is this old Verse Ingraven. Ingrediens Jani rediturus es aemulus argi. The Court of Equity in the Exchequer. THe Judges of this Court are the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer. And generally their Jurisdiction is as large for matter of Equity, as the Barons in the Court of Exchequer have for benefit of the King at the Common Law. For all the Proceedings both in this Court of Equity, and of that at the Common Law ought to be touching the King; or otherwise, there lieth a Prohibition, which appears by the Register for all are Communia Placita, which are not Placita Coronae. More of the Jurisdiction and Autho∣rity of this Court, you may see by the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. and Coke's Instit. cap. 13.
The Office of Pleas in the Exchequer. THis is the Office of the Common Law, and the Proceedings in most things agreeable to the Kings-Bench, and Common Pleas. Their Leading Process is Quo minus, or Subpoena; the Quo minus is like the Capias, or Latitat to take the Body of the Defendant, and was anciently granted to the Kings Tenants, or Deb∣tors only. But now the Practice of this Office is grown General in all cases almost by the Subpoena, which being easier brings much into this Office, especially in Wales, where the King's Writ runs not, only Capias Utlagatum. There are Four Attorneys, and in their Declarations they always suppose the Plaintiff to be Debtor to the King. In this Office, all Officers of the Ex∣chequer are to Sue and be Sued, and all manner of Accomptants, and all Suits removed out of any Court of Record by the King's Writ, or out of any Court at Westminster by the Red Book.
The Execution after Judgment, or Verdict, is by Fieri Facias, or Capias ad satisfaciend', as in other Courts of Common Law. The Defendant in some cases must put in Sureties upon Appearances to render, if he be condemned, and this Bail or Recognizance must be taken before a Baron in Court, and not otherwise. First-Fruits and Tenths were granted to the Crown by the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 3. But the Clergy being discharged thereof Anno 1 & 2 Philip and Mary, they were again reunited to the Crown 1 Eliz. cap. 4. but no Court revived. And being under the Governance of the Exchequer, a New Office was created, and an Officer, viz. Remembrancer of the First-Fruits and Tenths. And more concerning them, and the man∣ner of Taxation of them, you may read Coke's 4th Inst. cap. 14. The Court of Augmentations. Within the Survey and Governance of this Court were all Lands belonging to Monasteries, and Purchased Lands; but Queen Mary by her Letters Patent in the First year of her Reign dissol∣ved it, and united it to the Exchequer; as by the Articles thereof may ap∣pear.
The Surveyor General's Court is Dissol∣ved, the Office only remaining. So that in the Exchequer are Seven Courts: 1. The Court of Pleas, 2. The Court of Accompts, 3. The Court of Receipt, 4. The Court of the Exchequer Chamber, being the Assembly of all the Judges in England for Matters in Law; 5. The Court of Exchequer-Chamber for Errors in the Exchequer; 6. The Court in the Exchequer-Chamber for Errors in the King's-Bench, And 7. The Court of Equity in the Exchequer, Chamber: of all which see the Books and Statutes mentioned in Coke's 4 Inst. c. 13. The Court of Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius. THese Justices take their Names from the Writ of Assize, called Assiza Novae Disseisinae, or Petit Brief de Novel Disseizin. And the Mirror saith, That for Expedition of Justice it was ordained by Ranulph de Glanvil; but by 26 Ass. 24. it appears to be more Ancient. At the Common Law Assizes were not to be taken, but either in Bank, or before ustices in Eyre: But by Magna Charta it is Enacted, Quod Recognitiones de Nova, Disseisina, & de Morte Antecessoris, non capiantur nisi in
suis propriis Comitatibus, &c. And upon that Statute of Magna Charta, the Let∣ters Patent to the Justices are framed in these Words, (viz.) Rex, &c. Dilectis & Fidelibus suis R. M. uni Justiciariorum suorum de Banco, & I.L. uni Justiciariorum suorum ad Placita coram nobis tenenda Assign', Salutem: Sciatis, Quod Constituimus vos Justiciarios nostros una cum hiis quos vobis associaveri∣mus ad Omnes Assizas, Jurat', Certificat', coram quibuscunque Justic', tam per di∣versa Brevia Domini Johannis nuper Regis Angl' Patris nostri, quam per diversa Brev' nostra in Com' nostris South', Wiltes', Dor∣set', Devon', & Cornub', ac in Civitate Exon', arranian' capiend'; Et ideo vobis Mandamus quod ad certos dies & loca quos vos ad hoc provideritis, Assis. Jurat', & Certificat', illas capiatis, Facturi inde quod ad Justitiam pertinet secundum Le∣gem & consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, Salvis nobis amerciamentis inde nobis pro∣venien'; Mandavimus enim Vicecomisibus nostris, Com' & Civit' praed', quod ad certos dies, & loca quos eis Scire faciatis, Assis. Jurat', & Certificat' illas una cum Bre∣vibus Originalibus & omnibus aliis ea tangen', coram vobis venire faciat'. In cujus rei Testimonium, &c.
By this Writ the Seisin and Possession was recovered, and became more fre∣quent, Quia non est aliud Breve in Can∣cellaria, per quod Querentes habent festi∣num remedium, quam per Assisam. And after the Statute of Westminster was, and thereby provided, Quod assignentur duo Justiciarij jurati, coram quibus, & non aliis, Capiantur Assisae, &c. ad plus ter per Annum. And Rot. Parl. 21 Ed. 1. Dominus Rex, &c. praecepit, quod de caetero assignentur Octo Justiciarij Circumspecti & discreti ad Assisas, Jurat', & Certificat' capiend', per Totum Regnum Angliae, and divideth the Realm into Eight parts. Per Stat. de Finibus 27 Ed. 1. cap. 1. Justiciarij ad Assisas capiendas assignati, deliberent Gaolas in Com' Illas tam infra Libertates, quam extra, de Prisonariis qui∣bus cumque. And Appeals of Murder, Robbery, Rape, &c. may be commen∣ced before Justices of Assize: And di∣vers other Powers and Authorities are given to Jstices of Assize, and Gaol-delivery; for which see the Statutes, and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 27. Justices of Assize shall enquire for Non Returning, and False Return of She∣riffs.
May hear and determine of Conspi∣rators, false Informers, and wicked Pro∣curers of Dozens, Inquests and Juries, at the complaint of any without Writ, and without Delay, and of Confedera∣cies and Champerties, and Maintainers, Bearers, and Alliances by Bond, &c. Of Defaults of Sheriffs, Escheators, Bay∣liffs, and other Officers. Justices of Assize may enquire of Defaults, &c. of Punishment of Victu∣alers, &c. which sell at unreasonable Prizes. They have power to hear and deter∣mine riding and going Armed, &c. and to punish Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, and others, for not doing their Office in that case. They may hear and determine Trea∣son in Counterfeiting of Money, &c. They shall do Execution of the Statute of 13 H. 3. of Riots done in their pre∣sence, upon pain of an Hundred pounds, and by the Statute of 2 H. 5. Commissions shall be Awarded to Enquire of the De∣fault of the Justices of Assize, and of Justices of Peace in that behalf. They shall enquire of, hear, and de∣termine all Offices contrary to the Statute of 23 H. 6. concerning Sheriffs, Under-sheriffs, and their Clerks, Coro∣ners, Stewards of Franchises, Bayliffs,
and Keepers of Prisons, for Extortion, and for letting to Bail such as were not Bailable, or for denying Bail to them that ought to be Bailed. Justices of Assize shall take Bail of him that is acquitted of Murder; with∣in the Year to answer to the Appeal of the party; 5 Eliz. cap. 5. of Informers, 5 Eliz. cap. 4. of Labourers. Justices of Assize, of Gaol-delivery, and of the Peace, shall enquire of the default of Coroners. Justices of Assize, &c. shall enquire of false making of Leather, of Amend∣ing of High-ways, of Hunters in Parks, of Unlawful taking of Fishes, of For∣gery of False Deeds, against deceipt in Linnen Cloth, against Perjury, of U∣sury, and many other things. Justices of Assize twice in every year ought to proclaim the Statute of 32 H. 8. and other Statutes against unlawful Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and unlawful Retainers; they ought to proclaim the Statute of Unlawful Games in their Circuit. See the Custumary of Normandy, c. 19. Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 27. The Justices of Nisi prius were first Instituted by Stat. W. 2. cap. 30. Of Issues joyned in the Kings-Bench, and their Authority is annexed to the Justices of
Assize, and is by force of a Judicial Writ, and therefore we have joyned them under one Title. And this ap∣peareth by the Writ: REx Vicecomiti Salutem: Praecipimus tibi, quod Venire fac' coram Justicia∣rus nostris apud Westm' in Octab' Sancti Michaelis, vel coram Justiciariis nostris ad Assisas in Com' tuo per formam Statuti nostri inde provis. Capiend' Assignatis, si prius die Lunae prox' ante Festum, &c. apud, &c. vene rint 12 tam Milites quam alios, &c. By the Statute of 7 R. 2. Nisi prius shall be granted in the Exchequer, as well as elsewhere. Of Issues joyned in the Chancery, Kings-Bench, Common-Bench, and Exchequer, the Chief Justices, or Chief Baron, or in their absence, two other Justices or Barons of the said several Courts, as Justices of Nisi prius for the County of Middlesex within the Term, or four days after each Term, shall severally Try, &c. And for their several other Powers and Au∣thorities, vide le Stat. and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 27. And this Writ of Nisi prius is (so called, because the word Prius is before Venerint in the Distring as, &c. which
was not so in the Venire facias, upon The Statute of Westm. 2. cap. 30.) although the words of the Writ are Si prius, &c. And albeit Justices of Assize have their Dignity and Authority much increased, yet they retain their Original Name, although Assizes are now rarely taken before them: For that the Common Action of Ejectment hath Ejected most Real Actions, and so the Assize is almost out of use. Justices of Nisi prius have power to give Judgment in Assize of Darrein Presentment, and Quare Impedit. And that Commissions, and Writs of Nisi prius shall be awarded, &c. It is to be observed, That there is but a Transcript of the Record sent to the Justices of Nisi prius. By the Statute of 27 E. 1. de Finibus, cap. 4. it is provided, Quod Inquisitiones & Recognitiones capiantur tempore Vaca∣tionis, coram aliquo Justiciario de utroque Banco, coram quibus placitum deductum fuerit. See the Statutes of York, 2. E. 3. cap. 16. 4. E. 3. cap. 2. and the Statute of 14. Ed. 3 cap. 16. which Statute doth provide, That Nisi prius may be taken in every Plea Real or Personal before Two, so that one be Justice of one of the Benches,
or the Chief Baron or Serjeant sworn, without any regard where the Plea de∣pended, and this standeth yet at this day. Concordatum fuit per totum Cocilium Regis, quod nullus Vicecomes aut Coranat' fiat Justiciarius ad Assisas capiend' Gaolas Deliberand', Transgress' audiend' & ter∣minand', seu ad aliquod aliud officium Justic' faciend', eo quod debent esse inten∣dentes aliis Justiciariis. Which Statute is Declaratory of the Common Law. 14 H. 6. cap. 1. Justices of Nisi prius have power in all cases of Felony, and Treason, to give Judgment, as well where the Prisoner is acquitted, as where he is Attainted, and to award Execution. Where the King is a Party, a Nisi prius may be granted, if the King's Attorney assent unto it. In Appeal of Murder, Robbery, Rape, brought in the King's Bench; if the parties be at Issue, a Nisi prius may be granted before Justices of Assize. And if Appeal be brought before Justices of Assize, they have also power to enquire and judge. These Justices of Nisi prius were In∣stituted for two causes, viz. 1. Propter intolerabilem jacturam Juratorum, & in exonerationem Juratorum. 2. Ad celerem Justiciam in ea parte exhibendam.
A Prohibition is grantable to Justices of Assize, Quod non caperent in patria inquisitiones quae magna indigent exami∣natione. By the Original Institution of Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius, the Tryal should be before Two at the least; for plus vident oculi, quam oculus, especially in Pleas of the Crown, concerning the Life of Man. The Justices of Nisi prius may grant a Tales de Circumstantibus, either when but one or more appear of the prin∣cipal Pannel, or where Eleven do ap∣pear; and all the Jury may be of the Tales de Circumstantibus, as it was upon a Tales at the Common Law. A Nisi prius may be granted in an Attaint. In Trespas between the Duke of Ex∣eter, and the Lord Cromwell; The Counsel of the Duke moved for a Nisi prius, and for the Duke was a Praepotent Prince in that Country, and the Venire facias being Return'd, there was a great Rout in the Hall, so as if a Nisi prius should be granted great Mis∣chief might ensue, therefore no Nisi prius was granted, 32 H. 6.9. Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 27.
The Court of the Justices of Oyer and Terminer. THe Authority of these Justices is by Commission; and of these are two sorts, The General Commission, which is so called, because it is General in re∣spect of the Persons, the Offences, and Places, where the Offences are com∣mitted, the substance of which Com∣mission is thus: REx, &c. Fidelibus suis R.M. & aliis, Salutem, Sciatis quod Assignavimus vos, & Tres vestrum, quorum aliquem ve∣strum vos praefat' R.M. & L.G. unum esse volumus, Justiciarios nostros ad inqui∣rendum per Sacramentum proborum & le∣galium hominum de Com' nostris South', Wiltes', Dorset', Somerset', Devon', & Cornub', & eorum quobilet ac aliis viis, Modis, & Mediis quibus melius sciveritis, aut poteritis tam infra Libertates, quam extra, per quos rei veritas melius scire poterit, de quibuscunque Proditionibus, Mis∣prisionibus Proditionum, Insurrectionibus, Rebellionibus, Murdris, Feloniis, Homicidis, Interfectionibus, Burglartis, Ropbus Mu∣lierum, Congregationibus, & Conventiculis illicitis, Verborum prolationibus, Coadiju a∣tionibus,
Misprisionibus, Confederationibus, Falsis allegantiis, Transgressionibus, Riotis, Routis, Retentionibus, Escapiis, Contempti∣bus, Falsitatibus, Negligentiis & Concela∣mentis, Manutenentiis, Cambipartiis, De∣ceptionibus, & aliis Malefactis, Offensis, & Injuriis quibuscunque; Necnon accessar' eorundem infra Com' praed', & eorum quem∣libet, &c. Et easdem proditiones, & alia praemissa, (hac Vice) audiend', & terminand', secundum Legem & Consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae, &c.  As you may read at large in Coke's 4th Inst. cap. 28. The particular Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, are so called in respect of particular Persons, Offences, or Places for which they are granted, whereof you may see Fresh Presidents in the Register; 1. Against the Bishop of Win∣chester, and his Ministers; 2. De Nave fracta, if the Goods ought to be taken for Wreck; 3. Of divers Oppressions, Extortions, &c. 4. For the Prior of Da∣ventry; 5. For the King in time of Vaca∣tion; of all which you may read there more at large. And concerning Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, Ten Conclusions are to be observed; 1. That they are not granted but before the Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, or before
the Justices Errant, and that for great and horrible Trespasses of the King's special Grace, according to the Statute of W. 2.13 Ed. 1. Commissions are like to the King's Writs, such only are to be allowed which have Warrant of Law, and continual Allowance in Courts of Justice. They cannot proceed upon any In∣dictment, but such only as are taken before themselves. They may upon Indictment found, proceed the same day against the party Indicted; as in Hill. 2 H. 4. Rot. 4. Thomas Merx, Bishop of Carlisle, was before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer Indicted, Tryed, and Adjudged for High Treason all in one day. And for other Conclusions and their proceedings therein, you may read more at large in Coke's Fourth Inst. cap. 28. If any Offence be prohibited by any Statute, and name not in what Court it shall be punished; or if the Statute appoint that it shall be punished in any Court of Record, in both these cases it may be heard and determined before Justices of Oyer and Terminer. The King may make a Commission of Association, directed to others to joyn with the Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner,
and a Writ of Admittance to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, to ad∣mit the others into their Society, which Writ is close. There is also a Writ of Si non omnes directed to the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and to their Asso∣ciates, the Forms of all which you may read in the Register, and in F. N. B. And in all these Commissions, and Writs, the Justices are directed with this Rule: Facturi quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum Legem & consuetudinem An∣gliae. If the Justices sit by force of the Commission, and do not adjourn the Commission, it is determined. Justices of Oyer and Terminer shall send their Records and Process deter∣mined, and put in Execution, to the Exchequer at Michaelmas every year, to be delivered there to the Treasurer, and Chamberlain, &c. to keep them in the Treasury. None of these Commissioners, or of Assize, or of Gaol-delivery, or of the Peace, or other of the Kings Commissioners, are counter∣manded by any New Commission, un∣less it be shewed unto them for so ma∣ny as it is shewed unto; or that it be proclaimed in the County, or that the New Commissioners do sit and keep their Sessions by force of the new Com∣mission,
whereby the former Commis∣sion is countermanded. Concerning which see the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 17. Co. 4. Inst. 165. Anno 1 Mariae, Stat. 2. cap. 2. Upon conclusion of her Marriage with Philip the Son of the Emperour and Prince of Spain; It is provided, That the said Prince shall not promote, admit, or receive to any Office, Administration, or Benefice in the Realm of England, and Dominions thereunto belonging, any Stranger or Persons not born un∣der the Dominion and Subjection of the said most Noble Queen, Co. 3. Inst. 225. Judges, and other Officers in Courts, may be increased, or diminished as need shall require; and at Entrance shall take an Oath to serve the King and his People duly, Wingate's Abridg∣ment of the Statute of 14 Ed. 3. Title Judgments, fol. 303. Association is a Patent sent by the King either of his own motion, or at the Suit of the party Plaintiff to the Justices of Assize, to have other Persons associated to them: And upon that Patent the King will send a Writ to the Justices to admit them; and if there be Three Justices, and one dye, the King may grant a Patent of Associa∣tion,
to Associate another to the Two; and a Writ which shall be close to the other two to admit him; Terms del Ley. Si non omnes, Is if those Associated or some of them cannot come, then the King may make a Patent for other Ju∣stices, or for One Justice to be Associ∣ated in his Room, to take those Assizes and Juries; And the Forms of these se∣veral Writs of Association you may see in F. N. B. 412 to 418. And if the King make Three Justices to take Assizes, and make them a Patent of si non omnes, if one of them dye, the other two may proceed, F. N. B. 416. And the King may make Association in Juries as well as in Assizes, as also in Attaints, and also one Association after another; and any Association may be made to a Sheriff in a Redisseisin; and although the Assize be discontinued, yet if the other Re-attachment is Sued, the Association shall stand good and the si non omnes; and a Re-attachment may be sued to revive those Assizes, altho' there be several Adjournments; and the Associations and si non omnes, shall serve for all the Assizes, F. N. B. 417, 418.
Bailiff in Magna Charta extendeth to any Judge or Minister of the King; and Bailie le Roy is understood Justice le Roy, Coke's 1 Inst. 168. Justices of Assize have also Commis∣sions of Oyer and Terminer, of Gaol-de∣livery, and of the Peace, of Association, si non omnes throughout their Circuits, so as they are armed with simple, yet ordinary Jurisdiction, they sometimes being bounded with express Limitati∣ons, Facturi quod ad Justitiam pertinet secundum Legem & Consuetudinem Angliae; And in former time according to their Original Institution, and their Commis∣sion both the Justices joyned, both in Common Pleas, and Pleas of the Crown, Coke's 1. Inst. 263. a. In ancient time, Prelates as well as other Noble-men were Chancellors, Treasurers and Judges, being Expert and well Learned in the Laws of the Realm, Coke's 1 Inst. 304, 8. Coke's 2 Inst. 98, 265. Capitalis Justiciarius in Glanvil is taken for Custos Regni, who may name Justi∣ces; and Original Writs shall bear Teste under his name, which no Officer may do whilst the King is within the Realm.
In the time of Ed. 1. Justices would not proceed in Case of the Death of Man without the King's Writ. By Magna Charta cap. 26. Nihil de caetero detur pro brevi inquisitionis ab eo, qui inquisitionem petit de vita, vel de mem∣bris, sed gratis concedatur, & non negetur. Breve inquisitionis, being the Writ Odio and Atia anciently called Breve de bono & malo, by this Statute of Life and Member; which the Common Law gave to a Man that was Imprisoned, though it were for the most hainous Crime, for the Death of a Man, for the which without the King's Writ he could not be Bailed; yet the Law fa∣vouring the Liberty, and Freedom of a Man from Imprisonment, and that he should not be detained in Prison, until the Justices in Eyre should come, at what time he was to be Tried, he might Sue out this Writ of Inquisition directed to the Sheriff; Quod assumptis tecum custodibus placitorum Coronae in pleno comitatu per Sacramentum proborum, & legalium hominum de, &c. inquiras (inde appellatur Breve inquisitionis) utrum A. captus, & detentus in Prisona, &c. pro morte W. unde rettatus (i. e. accusatus existit) sit odio, & atia, &c. nisi indicta∣tus vel appellatus fucrit, coram Justitia∣riis nostris ultimo itincrantibus in partibus
illis, & pro hoc captus, & Imprisonatus. For by the Common Law, in omnibus autem placitis de felonia, solet accusatus, per plegios dimitti, praeterquam de placito de homicidio, ubi ad terrorem aliter statu∣tum est. But this Writ was taken away by a late Statute, viz. in 28 E. 3. because as some pretended it became unnecessa∣ry, for that Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of Gaol-delivery came at the least into every County twice every year; but within Twelve years after this Statute it was Enacted, That all Statutes made against Magna Charta should be void, where∣by the Writs of Odio and Atia and De ponendo in Ballium are revived, and so in like cases upon all the Branches of Magna Charta: And therefore the Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and of Gaol-delivery, have not suffered the prisoner to be long detained, but at their next coming have given the prisoner full and speedy Justice by due Tryal, without detain∣ing him long in prison, Coke's 2 Inst. 42, 43. A person examined may require a Copy of his Examination, take time to answer, and put his answer in wri∣ting, and keep a Copy of it, Coke's 2 Inst. 51.
All causes ought to be heard and de∣termined before the Judges openly in the Kings Courts; the King having distributed his Judicial power to sever∣al Courts of Justice, Coke's 2 Institutes 103. If a prisoner be mute by act of God, The Judges who are to be of Council with the prisoner ex officio, ought to enquire if he be the same person, and of all other pleas which he might have pleaded; But if it be by his own Act, he is to be forthwith put to his pennance, Coke's 2 Inst. 178. If the Prisoner Demur, and it be Over-ruled he shall be hanged, but not have pain, fort & dure, ibidem. Justices may punish any act done in deceit of the Court, 2 Inst. 215. Judicis officium est Opus diei in die ipso perficere, according to the Statute of W. 1. cap. 47. and not defer it, or pre∣fer others upon any request or impor∣tunity, Coke's 2 Inst. 256. Sapientis Judicis est cogitare tantum si∣bi esse permissum quantum commissum & cre∣ditum, Coke's 4 Inst. 163. By Stat. 4 Jac. 1. cap. 1. It is pro∣vided, that whereas in regard of some difference, and inequality of the Laws, Tryals and Proceedings in case of Life, between the Justice of the Realm of
England, and that of the Realm of Scotland; It appeareth to be most con∣venient for the contentment and satis∣faction of all his Majesties Subjects to proceed (with all possible severity) against such Offenders in their own Country according to the Laws of the same, whereunto they are Born and Inheritable, and by, and before the Natural Born Subjects of the same Realm, if they be there apprehended. And by the next Clause is provided, that Felonies committed by English Men in Scotland, shall be inquired of, heard and determined before Justices of As∣size, or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer and Gaol-delivery, being Na∣tural born Subjects within the Realm of England and no other. And the like in another Clause, with an addition of Justices of the Peace to be Natural born Subjects within England, Coke's 3 Inst. 226. Justices of the Kings-Bench, Oyer and Terminer, Gaol-delivery, and of the Peace may enquire of, hear, and de∣termine all Murders, and Felonies with∣in the Verge; because their Jurisdiction and Authority are generally through the whole County, Coke's 4 Rep. 46, 47. Case of Appeals.
The Justices of Assiz have one Com∣mission of Oyer and Terminer directed to them, and divers other Inhabitants of the Shires, whereunto their Circuits extend, whereof each of the Justices of Assize are of the Quorum, for offen∣ces hapning in their Circuits, which without this Commission they cannot do, Terms del Ley, Cok's 4 Inst. En le Table. The Statute of 2 Ed. 3. requireth that no Commission of Oyer and Terminer be granted, but before Justices of one Bench or the other; or Justices Itine∣rant, and that for horrible Trespas∣ses. Where the Commission of Oyer and Terminer lies in case of Extortions, by Under-sheriffs, Escheators, Clerks of Markets, Hunters in Parks, taking of Goods not Wreck'd, in vacancy of Bishopricks for Hunting in Parks, for Robbing Piscaries, and in many other cases the Forms of Writs and Associa∣tions, and si non omnes to them, Vide F. N. B. 243 to 251. If the Trespass be not Enormis seu horribilis, a Writ of Supersedeas lieth, or Rev ation, Coke's 2 Inst. 419. Upon an Indictment found by the Commissioners before the Term, a Spe∣cial Commission of Oyer and Terminer
may be granted for them to proceed, altho' the Court of Kings Bench be sit∣ting in the same County: But it is best for the Commission to bear Teste after the beginning of the Term: But Gener∣al Commissions of Oyer and Terminer are suspended during the term or time the Kings Bench sits in the same Coun∣ty; or if the Kings Bench be adjourn∣ed, the General Commission may pro∣ceed, Coke's 3 Inst. 27. Coke's 4 Inst. 163. The Kings Bench is more than Eyre; Therefore in Term time no Commissi∣ons of Oyer and Terminer, or Gaol-Delivery by the Common Law may sit in the County where the Kings Bench sitteth, for praesentia majoris cessat pote∣stas minoris, and therewith agreeth 27 Ass. p. 1. But Carlisle and Erwing were Indicted and Arrained in London where the Murder was Committed, before Ju∣stices of Oyer and Terminer in the Term time, because in another County than where the Kings Bench sit, Coke's 9 Rep. 118. Lord Sanchar's Case. For Tryal of Treasons Committed out of the Realm, &c. by Commissi∣ons appointed by the King, &c. See the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. 33 Hen. 8. 35 Hen. 8. 5 and 6. of Ed. 6, &c.
If a Commission of Oyer and Ter∣miner be discontinued or expired, &c. the Indictments and Records shall be removed into the Kings Bench, as to their proper Center, Coke's 2 Institutes 419. The Courts of Special Justices of Oyer and Terminer. THese Courts are Four in number, Raised by several Acts of Parlia∣ment, Two of which, viz. That con∣cerning Purveyors, and that concerning Misdemeanors of Villains being obsolete We shall only give a Brief account of the Style, and Nature of the other Two, referring their Jurisdiction and Pro∣ceedings therein, to the Acts of Parlia∣ment themselves. And first of that con∣cerning Money collected for Houses of Correction, or for the Poor. THis Court is Raised by the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 4. wherein is to be observed, That their Proceedings, Judg∣ments, and Executions shall remain good, and available in Law, without any Redress to be had by Suit in any other Court; as you may see more at
large by the Statute, and Exposition thereof, in Coke's Fourth Institutes. And the other is concerning, Colledges, Hospitals, or Almshouses, for Charitable and Lawful purposes, and Uses. BY the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. 6. The Lord Chancellor (or Chancellor for the Dutchy of Lancaster, for Lands in that County) may award Commis∣sions to the Bishop of the Diocess, and his Chancellor, and other persons of good and sound Behaviour; To enquire of all Colledges, Hospitals, and other places Founded or Ordained for the Charitable relief of Poor, Aged, and Impotent people, Maimed Soldiers, Schools of Learning, Orphans, or for such other good, charitable, and law∣ful Purposes and Intents. And of all Lands, &c. given or appointed for those uses: As also for Reparations of all High-ways, Bridges, and Sea-Banks, for Maintenance of Free-Schools, and Poor Scholars, and of Orphans, and Fatherless Children, and such like good and lawful Charitable uses, and to enquire of the Abuses, Misdemeanors, Mis-employments, Falsities, defrauding the Trusts, Alienations, Misgovern∣ments,
&c. And to set down such Or∣ders, Judgments, and Decrees, that the same may be observed in full, ample, and most liberal sort, &c. Which Orders, Judgments, and Decrees (not being contrary to the Orders or De∣crees of the Donors) shall be firm, and good, and are to be certified by the Commissioners into the Chancery of England, or of the County Palatine of Lancaster, &c. And it is to be observed, that when any Act of Parliament doth authorize the Lord Chancellor or Keeper to make a Commission under the Great Seal, he may do it without further War∣rant, the King being party to the Act of Parliament. But this Statute was afterwards Re∣pealed by 43 Eliz. 4. Saving for the Ex∣cution of Orders and Decrees before made by Commissioners, according to the Sta∣tute. And by the Statute of 43 Eliz. 4. It shall be lawful for the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the time being, and for the Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster (within that Precinct) to A∣ward Commissions into any part of the Realm, respectively to the Bishop there and his Chancellor (if any at that time) and to other Persons of Good Beha∣viour,
Authorizing Four or more of them to Inquire as well by the Oaths of Twelve, or more Lawful Men, as other∣wise of all Grants, Gifts, Augmentations, Limitations, and Appointments, and of all Abuses and Misemployments of all Land, Tenements and Hereditaments, and of all Goods and Chattels given, limitted or appointed to Charitable uses, &c. See the Statute at large, and 21 Jac. 1. cap. 1. The Court of Justices of Gaol-Delivery. BY the Law Ne homines diu detinean∣tur in Prisona; but that they may receive, Plenam & celerem Justitiam. The Commission of Gaol-Delivery was In∣stituted 4 E. 3. and by this Commission Goals ought to be delivered Thrice in the year, and oftner if need be; and the Authority given thereby consisteth in these few Words, Constituimus vos Justiciarios nostros ad Gaolam nostram Castri nostri de C. de Prisonibus in ea existentibus, hac vice deliberand'. And these Justices may arraign any man in that Goal upon any Indictment for Felony, Trespass, &c. before Justces of Peace, though not found before themselves, which Justices of Oyer and Terminer cannot do; and they may
take a Pannel of a Jury Return'd by the Sheriff, without making any Precept to him, which Justices of Oyer and Terminer may not. To these Justices Commissions of Association, Writs of Admittance, and Si non omnes (like as to Justices of Oyer and Terminer are dire∣cted) and other Authorities, Jurisdicti∣ons, and Priviledges they have; of which you may Read at large Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 30. By the Statute of 6 R. 2.5. Justices of Assize, and Gaol-Delivery shall hold their Sessions in the chief Towns of every County, where the Shire Courts there use to be holden. By the Statute of 8 R. 2.2. no man of Law shall be Justice of Assize or Gaol Delivery in his own Country; and the Chief Justice of the Common-Bench shall be assigned amongst others to take Assizes, and to deliver Gaols; but as to the Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, it shall be as for the most part of 100 years last past hath been wont to be done. By the Statute of 14 H. 6.3. the Ses∣sions of the Justices of Assize and Gaol-delivery in Cumberland shall be holden (in the time of Peace and Truce) in the City of Carlisle, and not elsewhere, according to the Statute of 6 R. 2 5.
By Stas. de Finibus levatis, cap. 3.27 E. 1. Justices of Assize presently after the Assizes taken shall deliver the Gaols; but if one of them be a Clerk, the other that is Lay, associating unto him one of the most discreet Knights of the County, shall deliver the Gaols. The Justices shall then also Enquire, Whether Sheriffs, or any other, have let out by Plevin any Prisoners not plevi∣able, or have offended in any thing against the Statute of Westm. 2.13 E. 1. and shall punish them according to the force of the said Statute. By the Statute of 2 E. 3 2. Justices of Gaol-delivery, and Oyer and Terminer, procured by Great Men, shall not be made against the Form of the Statute of 27 E. 1. cap. 3. And Assizes, Attaints, and Certifications, shall be hereafter taken before Justices commonly assign∣ed, being good and lawful Men, and having knowledge in the Law, accord∣ing to the Statute of Westm. 2.29 Ed. 1. By the Statute of 4. E. 3.2. good and discreet Persons shall be assigned in all Shires of England to take Assizes, Juries, and Certifications, and to deliver the Gaols Three times in the year at least.
Justices of Gaol-delivery shall have power to Deliver the Gaols of those that stand Indicted before the Keeers of the Peace, which Keepers shalt send those Indictments before the Justices of Gaol-delivery, who shall have power to En∣quire of, and punish Sheriffs Gaolers and others, which do any thing against this Act. Judges ought not to Deliver their Opinions before-hand of any Criminal Case, tha may come before them Judi∣cially; For how can they e indifferent, who have delivered their Opinions before hand, wihout hearing of the party, Co. 3 Inst. 29. By the Statute of 19 H. 7.10. the She∣riff of every County shall have the keeping of the Common Gaol there, except such as are held by Inheritance or Succession; Also all Letters Patents of the keeping of Gaols for Life or Years, are annulled and void. Howbeit neither the Kings-Bench nor Marshalsea shl be in the custody of any Sheriff; ad the Patents of Edward Courtney Earl of Devon, and John Morgan, for Keeping of Prisons are excepted. By the Statute of 6 Hen. 8.6. the Ju∣stices of the King's-Bench have power (by their Discretions) to Remand as well the Bodies of Felons, as their In∣dictments
into the Counties where such Felonies were committed; and also to command the Justices of Gaol-delivery, of Peace, and all other Justices and Commissioners, there to proceed and determine such Felonies in like manner, as if their Bodies and Indictments had not been removed. Justices of Gaol-delivery may take a Pannel of a Jury Returned by the She∣riff without making any Precept to him, as Justices of Oyer and Terminer ought to make, because a General Commandment is made to the Sheriff by the Justices of Gaol-delivery, to Re∣turn Juries against their coming. They may deliver Suspects for Felo∣ny, &c. by Proclamation against whom there is no sufficient Evidence produ∣ced to the Great Inquest▪ to Indict them, &c. which Justices of Oyer and Terminer or Justices of Peace cannot do. If a Man be Indicted before Justices of the Peace, and thereupon Outlawed, and is taken and committed to Prison, the Justices of Gaol-delivery may award Execution of this Prisoner. They may assign a Coroner to an Approver, and make Process against the Appellee in a Foreign County.
They may punish those that let Men to Bail or Mainprize which are not Bailable by Law, or suffer them to Escape. By the Statute of 1 E. 6. In all Cases where any Person or Persons heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be found guilty of any manner of Treason, Murder, Man∣slaughter, Rape, or other Felony what∣soever; for the which Judgment of Death should or may ensue, and shall be Repried to Prison without Judgment at that time given against him, her, or them, found so Guilty, that those Persons that at any time hereafter shall by the King's Letters Patents, be assigned Justices to deliver the Gaol where any such Person or Persons found Guilty shall remain; shall have full Power and Authority to give Judgment of Death against such person so found Guilty and Repried, as the same Justices before whom such Person or Persons was or were found Guilty might have done, if their Commission of Gaol-Delivery had remained in force. Justices of Gaol-Delivery shall send their Records and Process determined, and put in Execution to the Exchequer at Michaelmas every year, to be deli∣vered there to the Treasurer and Chamberlains, &c. to keep them in the Treasury.
Justices of Gaol-delivery may receive Appeals of Robbery and Murder by Bill; but the Appellees must be in Prison be∣fore them. Co. 4 Inst. c. 30. And more of their Jurisdiction and Authority you may read in the Statutes at large. The Court of Justices of the Forests. THe word Forest is made by chang∣ing E. into O. from Feresta, (hoc est,) Ferarum statio; it being a Mansion, or safe dwelling of all Beasts of the Wood, and this Forest doth consist of Eight things, viz. Soil, Covert, Laws, Courts, Judges, Officers, Game and cer∣tain Bounds; of all which we shall speak somewhat in order as they lie. And First of The Soil of the Forest, which is Woody ground where there is good Covert, and Fruitful Pastures; and it is not ma∣terial that the Wood belong to the King or another; And when the King will make a Forest, a Writ shall be Issued to the Sheriff of the County where the Forest shall be, to Enquire what place shall be fit to make a Fo∣rest, who thereupon shall take an Inquest and Inquire of the content of the Place and the Bounds, and shall put
the same Bounds in certainty, and all he doth he ought to return into the Chancery, and when the King is thereof ascertained by such matter of Record, the King shall by Letters Patents com∣mand the Sheriff to make Proclama∣tion, That the place which he hath returned shall be afterwards a Forest, and that none shall Hunt within those Woods they being for his Pleasure to reserve the Wild Beasts, and Game to himself: And this Forest is not necessa∣rily to be made in every County. But in The Grand Covert, and Woody Ground where the Beasts may have place of Defence and Food, which are called Vert, and are to be preserved to the end that the Game may have both Shelter, and Browze; And yet altho' such Commandment be made by the King as aforesaid, it is no Forest until Wild Beasts are put there, which sort of Wild Beasts are those which are herein after mentioned. And are called The Game of the Forest, consisting of Seven kinds, which by the Laws of England are Beasts of the Forest, viz. The Hart in Summer, The Hind in Winter, with their proceed which are thus Termed; The Male, The first year A. Calf, The second A Brooket.
The third A Spayad, The fourth A Staggard, The fifth A Stagg, The sixth A Hart. And so afterward the Female, The first year A Calf, The second A Brocketts Sister, The Third A Hinde. The Buck in Summer, The Doe in Winter, with their proceed thus Term∣ed; The first year A Fawn, The se∣cond A Pricket, The third A Sorel, The fourth A Sore, The fifth A Buck of the First Head, The sixth A Great Buck. The Hare Male, and Female, with their proceed which are called, The first year A Leveret, The second A Hare, The third A Great Hare. The Wild Boar whose proceed is Termed; The first year A Pig, The second A Hogg, The third A Hogg-stear, The fourth A Boar, and after A Sanglier; And these four kinds be∣ing wholesome Food for Man, are called Beasts of Venery, and Venison. But the other Three kinds as, The Wolf, The Marton, The Fox, being Solivaga, and Nociva, are not called Veni∣son, although they are accompted Beasts of the Forest: And befor it be a perfect Forest, the King must appoint certain Officers, Foresters, or Keepers, in Fee, or for Life, who by Char∣ta de Foresta, are to be as many
as shall seem sufficient; Four Verder∣ors, Twelve Regarders, Agistators Four, Under Foresters Eight, The Wood-ward and the Game-keeper, or Master of the Game of the Forest. The Forestor is made by Letters Pa∣tents, The Verderors by Writ; How the Rest are made, and for their Au∣thority, See the Books at large. And next we shall briefly describe. The Courts of the Forests which are Four, To be held within the Forests at such places, times and in manner, herein after expressed, viz. The Court of Attachments, or the Woodmote Court; This is to be kept before the Verderors, every Forty days throughout the year, and there∣upon it is called the Forty-day Court: At this Court the Foresters bring in the Attachments de Viridi, & Venatione, and the Presentments thereof, and the Ver∣derors do Receive the same and Inrol them. But this Court can only Inquire and not Convict: But it is observed, That no Man is to be Attached by his Body for Vert or Venison, unless he be taken with the mayneer within the Forest, or otherwise the Attachment must be by his Goods.
The Court of Regard or Survey of Dogs, is holden every third year for Expeditation, or Lawing of Dogs. The Court of Swanimote, is to be holden before the Verderors as Judges by the Steward of the Swanimote, thrice in the year; and the Foresters ought to present their Attachments at the next Swanimote Court; and the Freeholders within the Forest are to appear at the Swanimote to make In∣quest and Juries: And this Court may Inquire De superoneratione Forestariorum, & aliorum Ministrorum Forestae, & de eorum Oppressionibus Populo Nostro illatis; And this Court may not only Inquire, but Convict also, but not give Judg∣ment. The Court of the Justice Seat, holden before the Justice in Eyre of the Forest, who hath Authority and Jurisdiction to hear and determine concerning Vert and Venison, by force of Letters Pa∣tents under the Great Seal; whereof there be Two, One for the Forests on this side Trent, the other beyond Trent; by which Letters Patents the King doth grant unto him, Officium Guardiani, Capitalis Justiciarij, ac Justiciarij sui itinerantis, omnium & singularum Forestarum, Parcorum, & Warrenarum suarum, cum suis Pertinentijs
quibuscunque ultra Trentam Existen', &c. Dantes & concedentes eidem A. B. plenam Authoritatem, & Potestatem tenore prae∣dictarum Litterarum Patentium; Omnia, & omnimoda Placita, Querelas, & Causas Forestarum, Parcorum, Chacearum, & Warrenarum praed', tam de Viridi Gram', quam de Venatione, ac de alijs causis qui∣buscunque infra easdem Forestas, Parcos, Chaceas & Warrenas, eveniend', sive emergen' audiend', & determinand', ha∣bend', Occupand', Gaudend', & Exercend', Officio praed' cum pertin' per se, vel per suf∣ficient'. Deputatum suum sive Deputatos suos, suffic' durante vita ipsius A. B. &c. And this Court of the Justice Seat can∣not be kept oftner than every Third year, and other Justices in Eyre kept their Courts every Seventh year: And it must be Summoned Forty days at least before the Sitting thereof; And one Writ of Summons is directed Custodi Forestae Domini Regis vel ejus Locum tenenti in eadem; And this Writ consists of two parts: First, To Summon all the Of∣ficers of the Forest, and that they bring with them all Records, &c. Secondly, All persons who claim any Liberties or Franchises within the Forest, &c. and to shew how they claim the same: And this Court of Justice Seat hath Ju∣risdicton to Inquire, hear and deter∣mine
two things: First, All Trespasses within the Forest, according to the Laws of the Forest: Secondly, All the claims of Franchises, Priviledges and Liberties within the Forest, as to have Parks, Warrens, Vivaries, to be quit of Asserts, and purprestures, To cut down his own Woods without view of the Forester, &c. And this Chief Justice may by the Statute of 32 Hen. 8. cap. 35. make his Deputy. And for Reparation to the Justice Seat, is a Writ of Regard directed to the Sheriff of the County as followeth: REx Vic Salutem, Praecipimus tibi quod venire fac' certis die & loco quos ad hoc duxerimus providend', Omnes Foresta∣rios, & Regardatores de Sherwood, ad Regard' faciend' in Forest' praed', ante ad∣veni' Justiciariorum nostrorum de Foresta, & loco Regardatorum nostrorum qui mor∣tui sunt, & infirmi alios Eligi fac' Ita quod 12 sunt in quolibet Regard' & No∣mina illorum imbrevientur: Et Forestar' debent Jurare quod 12 Milites ducent per totam Ballivam suam advidendum omnes Transgressiones quae exprimuntur in Scriptis Capitulorum quae tibi mittimus, & hoc non omittent pro aliqua re: Debent etiam Mili∣tes jurare quod facient Regard' sicut debet fieri, & solet. Et quod ibunt sicut Forestar'
eos ducent ad praedicta videnda, Et si Fo∣rest' noluerint eos ducere, vel aliquid foris∣fact'. Concelare noluerint, ipsi milites non Omittent pro illis, quin forisfac' illud, vi∣deant & imbreviari faciant: Et hoc pro nulla re demmittant. Et quod regard' fiat cira Fest' Beati Petri ad Vincula prox. fu∣tur', Teste, &c. For the Duty of Foresters, Verderours Agistators, &c. in presenting Offences in the Forest, Vide Ordinatio Forestae, 34 Ed. 1. and Coke's 4 Inst. cap 73. Any person having right to make any claim may in person, or by At∣torney the first day of the Eyre Exhi∣bit his Petition; But he shall be fined if he make false Claim. The other Writ of Summons is di∣rected to the Sheriff of the County, and the substance thereof is to Summon all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, &c. having Lands, &c. within the Forest, and Four Men of every Village within the Forest, and all others who ought to come before the Justices of the Pleas of the Forest, That they be at Pickering Launce, &c. before Four Great Learned Men, Justices in Eyre of the Forest, to do what thereunto belongs, and to bring their Regards with all Attach∣ments, &c. To which the Sheriffs make
a full Return, &c. And next we are to speak somewhat of The Laws of the Forest, which consist chiefly of the Statute De Charta de Fo∣resta, and Ordinatio de Foresta, 34. E. 1. And Forest Laws of England, which are certain and established by Authority of Parliament: Of which you may Read in the Statutes at large. And of Forests in England are Sixty nine; of so great Antiquity, that no Record or History doth mention their Beginnings; Except New Forest in Hamp∣shire, Erected by W. the Conquerour as Conquerour; And Hampton Court Fo∣rest, Erected by Hen. 8. by Authority of Parliament: And now we come to speak of The Metes, and Bounds of the Forest according to Charta de Foresta, Hugh de Nevill, and Bryan de Lisle were ap∣pointed Commissioners to Inquire what were the ancient Metes, and Bounds of such Forests as Hen. 2. Or any King after him had enlarged, which with divers other Perambulations, and Dea∣forestations were made, and are retur∣ned into the Chancery, and remain of Record in the Tower.
And a Perambulation of the Forest of Sherwood, was made the 9 of Sept. 30 Hen. 8. By Robert Brimesly, and Fif∣teen others Regarders of that Forest, which Perambulation began from the King's Castle of Nottingham, and from thence proceeding to Kingsbridge Mea∣dow Gate, from thence by the Old Trent, unto the Old Watercourse of Leen, &c. round the Forest. And now this leads incidently to speak of The Purlieus, which containeth such grounds as H. 2. R. 1. or King John ad∣ded to their Ancient Forests over others Mens grounds; and which were Disa∣forested by force of the Statute of Char∣ta de Forest' cap. 1. & 3. and the Peram∣bulations, and Grants thereupon is derived from a French Adjective, and a French Noun, viz. Pur, which sig∣nifieth clear, entire and exempt and Lieu (that is place) as a place clear and exempt from the Forest: And both of these derived from the Latin adjective, and Noun, viz. Purus Locus. And the Serambulation whereby the Purlieu is Deafforested is called in French Pour∣allèe i. e. Perambulatio. By this it ap∣peareth, That Chases that never were Forests cannot have any Purlieu, and consequently the case of 16 Eliz. Dyer 326. is mistaken, for the Chase of
Whaddon never was a Forest. The Owners of the Soil within the Purlieu may at their will and pleasure Fell, Cut down, Eradicate, and Stub up all Timber, Trees, Woods, and Un∣der-woods, and convert the same into Arrable Land, or dispose and inclose the same, as if the same had never been Afforested. The King's Ragers may Re-chase with their Hounds any Deer out of the Pur∣lieu into the Forest again, and may pre∣sent unlawful Huntings, and Hunters of the Kings Deer within the Purlieu, as in the Night, or at unseasonable Deer, or by one no Purlieu Man. As appears by the Rangers Oath, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 73. And where is no Purlieu, there are no Rangers. The Kings Game or Deer are not marked, therefore Ranging out of the Forest, and Purlieu (if any be) belonging to the King: Therefoe the Abbot of Whitby Huntting in Whitby Forest, ad∣joyning to the Forest of Pickering, which belonged to the Earl of Lanca∣ster; The Sheriff being commanded to Summon the Abbot before the Justices in Eyre, 8 E. 3. Rot. 42. He pleaded his Title to the Forest, and that all Abbots of that place by their Grants might with Engins, Netts, &c. take Wild Beasts.
By which it appears, That when the Kings Game range out of the Forest, they are at their natual Liberty, Et occupanti conceduntur. And now a word of The Drifts of the Forests by the Sta∣tute of 32 Hen. 8. all Forests, Chases, Commons, Heaths, Moors and Wast grounds, within England and Wales, are to be driven at the Feast of St. Michael yearly, or within 15 days after, or at any other season or time of the year. And the end of these Drifts is, First, To see if those who ought to Common do Common with such Cattel as by Prescription, or Grant they ought: Secondly, That they do not Surcharge: Thirdly, If the Cattel of any Stranger be there who ought not to Common at all. A Forrest being as it is described be∣fore, that which hath Power to hold the several Courts before mentioned; it is further to be observed, That if the King having a Forest, grant the same to a Subject in Fee, the Grantee shall have no Forest, because he hath no power to make Justices, and Officers of the Forests to hold Courts, &c. But if the King grant a Forest to a Subject with this further, That upon request made in Chancery, he and his Heirs
shall have Justices of the Forest, Then the Subject hath a Forest in Law. As the Duke of Lancaster had the Forests of Pickering and Lancaster. And the Ab∣bot of Whitby had the Forest of Whitby in the County of York. A Chase is where there are Keepers only, and no Court of Swanimote, but is governed by the Common Law. And when a Forest is granted by the King to a Subject (without the Power above mentioned to have Justice of the Fo∣rest,) Then that which was a Forest before, shall be said to be a Chase; and a Chase is a certain compass of Ground to nourish and maintain Deer granted by the King in my own Land, and is not inclosed, but lieth open. A Park is Land inclosed, and stored with Wild Beasts, which may be had by Prescription, as well as by Grant of the King; and a Park is always in∣closed with some Pale, Wall or the like, and is not open, for if it lie open, it is cause of Forfeiture or Seisure. A Warren is where one by Grant of the King, or by Prescription, doth use to have Pheasants, Partridges, Conies, and Hares, and no other Wild Beast, or Vermin within certain of his Lands. And none may make a Warren but the
King, no more than they may make a Forest, or Chase, because it is a special Priviledge which belongeth to the King only: But it may be had by Prescrip∣tion. And in every Warren is a Master, and Servants to attend for the safe∣guard of the Beasts, and Birds of War∣ren; but there is no Court of Swanimote or other Court; For Trespass done in a Warren is punishable by the Common Law; And the King may grant to me Warren which he hath in such his Demesne Land, And also which he hath in Lands of others; And may grant me Waren in my Lands for Conies and Hares, and to an other that he have Warren there for Partridge, and Phesant; And if the King grant that none shall Chase or Hunt any Beasts in my Land, it is a good grant for Beasts of Chase, and Warren, and it is not a Warren; but a Free Chase. And for other mat∣ters relating to Forest, Park, Chase, and Warren, Vide compton's Jurisdiction of Courts and Coke's 4 Inst. The Beasts of Park or Chase pro∣perly extend to the Buck, the Doe, the Fox, the Roe, the Marton, but in a com∣mon and Legal Sense, to all the Beasts of the Forest.
The Forest and Chase differ in Of∣fices and Laws, every Forest is a Chase, but every Chase is not a Forest. Beasts of Forest are properly a Hart, Hind, Buck, Hare, Boar, Wolf, ut supra but legally all Wild Beasts of Vene∣ry. There are both Beasts and Fowls of Warren, as Hares, Conies and Roes called in Records Capreoli; Fowls of two sorts, Terrestres and Aquatiles; Terrestres of two sorts, Silvestres and Campestres; Campestres as Partridge, Quil, Rail, &c. Silvestres as Phesants, Woodcock, &c A∣quatiles, as Mallard, Hern, &c Of the Officers of Park, Forest, &c and Condi∣tions annexed and causes of forfeiture, See Coke's 1 Inst. 233. a. b. Vivarium is taken for Waters where Fishes are kept, Coke's 2 Inst. 162. It is not lawful for any Man to Erect a Park, Chase or Warren without a License under the Great Seal of the King, who is Pater Patriae and Head of the Common-wealth, for the Common Law gave no way to matters of Plea∣sure, (wherein most Men do exceed) for that they brought no profit to the Common-wealth.
Unto a lawful Park three things are requisite. First, A Liberty either by Grant of the King, or by Prescription. Secondly, Inclosure by Pale, Wall or Hedge. Thirdly, Beasts Savages of Park. By Stat. Westm. 1. cap 20. Trespasses in Parks and Vivaries shall make good, and high amends according to the manner of the Trepass, have Three years Imprisonment, make Fine to the King, or otherwise find Surety no more to Offend, or else to Abjure the Realm. If one Hunt in a Park, or Fish in a Pond, altho' he kill no Deer, or take any Fish; yet this is a Misfeazance with∣in this Statute. And this Act being Affirmative to the Common Law, the party may bring his Action upon this Statute, or may waive the benefit of this Act, and bring his Action of Trespass Generally at the Common Law. If the Damages given be too small, the court may encrease the Dama∣ges. The King may pardon the Exem∣plary Punishments, Coke's 2 Inst. 200, 201. To Steal a Tame Deer not known is no Felony, Coke's 2 Inst. 20.
The Office and Duty of Foresters, how to be executed by Deputy for a Woman; of what a Forest doth con∣sist, Co. 4 Inst. 289. What pastes by Grant of a Forest, See Coke's 4 Inst. 289, 314. Forests called Walds and Buckholts; The several Courts of the Forest, Fo∣rests Laws, The Beasts and Seasons of the Beasts of the Forests, Deafforesta∣tions, Drifts of the Forests, Purlieus, Trespasses, &c. Vide Coke's 4 Inst. Parks called by the Saxons, Deor∣fald of Herbage, and Pawnage in Parks. The King cannot make a Forest or Park in other Mens Grounds. Parks are not to be guided by Fo∣rest Laws, Coke's 4 Inst. Where the Owners may cut down Woods in Free Chases, and where they must have Common; And divers mat∣ters concerning Forests, Chases and Warens, See Coke's 4 Inst. By the Statute of 22 E. 4. The Own∣er of Woods in Forest, &c. ought first to cut the Woods, and then to inclose. By the Statute of 35 Hen. 8. They ought first to Inclose, and then within four Months cut the Wood; And the Stature Westminster, De Malefactoribus in Parcis, Charta de Foresta, and other Acts concerning Forests, &c. are General
Laws concerning all Persons, whereof the Court Ex Officio ought to take no∣tice, Coke's 8 Rep 137, 138. Sir Francis Barrington's Case. If Fair, Market, Hundred, Leet, Park, Warren and the like are appendant to Mannors, or in Gross, and afterwards they come back to the King, they re∣main as they were before in Esse, not Drowned in the Crown, Coke's 9 Rep. 25. Abbot of Strata Marcella. If License be given to a Duke to Hnt in a Park; The Law for conve∣niency giveth him such attendance as is requisite to the Dignity of his E∣state. And what shall be causes of For∣feiture of a Parkership, By cutting more than necessary for Browse, or Misusing, Nonusing or Refusing his Of∣fice, &c. Vide Coke's 9 Rep. 49, 50. Earl of Shrewbury's Case. None can make a Park, Chase or Warren in his own Land without the Kings License, and if he do in a Quo Warranto, they shall be seised into the Kings hands: But a Man for his Plea∣sure may Hawk, Hunt, &c. in his own Land without any License. The King granted to another all the Wild Swans, between London-Bridge and Oxford, Coke's 11 Rep. 86, 87. the Case of Monopolies.
More concerning Forests, Game, &c. and the Discovery and Punishment of Offenders therein; you may Read in the Statutes concerning Forests, Deer-Stealers, Hunters and Game, &c. at large. The Court of Justices in Eyre. THey are Originally Instituted for the good Rule of the Subject, and for the Ease of the Countries, and that such as had Franchises might claim them. They were called Insticiarij in Itinere, or Itinerantes in respect of other Justices that were Residentes: In the Black Book in the Exchequer, they are called Insticiarij Deambulantes &, Perlustrantes. Their Authority was by the Kings Writ in nature a Commission, And the Stile of their Court was, Placita de Juratis, & Assisis, & Coron' Itinere Johan∣nis de Vallibus, & Sociorum Justic' Itiner' apud Ockham in Com' Rutland' in Crastino Epiphan' Dom' Anno Regni Regis Edw. 14. They had Jurisdiction of all Pleas of the Crown, and all Actions Real, Personal and Mixt, they Rode and held their Courts, from Seven years, to Se∣ven years; and first they began with
Pleas of the Crown. But now by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. All Justi∣ces in Eyre must be by Letters Patents under the Great Seal. In what County soever they came, All other Courts during the Eyre cea∣sed, and all Pleas in that County or arising there before any other, The Justices in Eyre might proceed upon as the other might have done. See the first part of the Institutes of their Antiquity, and Jurisdiction, and the Causes wherefore they vanished a∣way; And what Franchises, and Li∣berties, ought to be claimed before them, See the Case of the Abbot of Strata Marcella, Coke's Rep. Lib. 9. Eyre Justices or Itinerant as we call them, were Justices that used to Ride from place to place throughout the Realm to Administer Justice; And they had anciently Authority to Grant Land seized, for Alienation without License as Justices of the Forest, (who in Effect as to this purpose are Justices in Eyre) may do at this day of Land Inclosed without the Kings License, Terms del Ley. Justiciarij Itinerantes were so called in respect, that the Justices residing at Westminster were Justiciarij Residentes, Eyre being Quasi Iter: And these Justi∣ces were much like in this Respect to
the Justices of Assize at this day, al∣tho' for Authority and manner of pro∣ceeding far different, and as the Justi∣ces of Assize by many Acts of Parli∣ament, and other Commissions in∣creased in power, so the Justices Itine∣rant vanished away, Coke's 1 Institutes 293. a. The Court of Justices of Trailebaston. FRom the Proceeding, being as quick as one might trail, or draw a Staff, and having some Powers like that of Oyer and Terminer, being also vani∣shed we shall not further mention, but refer to Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 34. Three new things which have fair pretences are commonly hurtful to the Common-wealth. First, New Courts. Secondly, New Offices either in Courts of Justice, or out of them, which cannot be done but by Parliament. Thirdly, New Corporations Trading into Fo∣reign parts, and at home, which in the end produce Monopolies, Vide Stat. Art. super Chartas cap. 1. where was the first ground of raising the Justices of Trebaston or Trailbaston, who had such Authority as Justices in Eyre; But al∣beit they had their Authority by Par∣liament; yet Error upon their pro∣ceeding
did lie in the Kings Bench: Which being known, and their Au∣thority fettered with many Limitations, they by little and little vanished, Coke's 2 Inst. 540. The Court of Wards and Liveries. THis Court was raised by Authori∣ty of Parliament, 32 Hen. 8. cap. 46. concerning the Authority, and Juris∣diction whereof, you may see the Sta∣tute, and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 35. To which I refer, it being now taken away by the Statute of 12 Car. 2. cap. 24. The Revenue of Excise being setled in the Crown instead thereof. The Court of Ancient Demesne. THis is in nature of a Court Baron, wherein the Suitors are Judges, and is no Court of Record, For Bre∣via Clausa Recordum non habent. All those that hold of these Manors in Soccage are called Tenants in Anci∣ent Demesne, and they Ploughed the Kings Demesnes of his Manors; and Plowed, Sowed, Manured, and Man∣aged all like necessaries to the Kings Husbandry; And that they might ap∣ply themselves more freely to their
Labours, They had Six Priviledges: 1st, Not to be impleaded for their Lands out of the Mannors; But by the Little Writ of Right-close, dire∣cted to the Bailiffs of the Kings Ma∣nors, or to the Lord of the Manors, if in the hand of a Subject: 2ly, Not to be Impannelled to appear at Westmin∣ster, or else where upon any Inquest or Tryal: 3ly, To be Free of all Tolls for things concerning Husbandry, or Sustenance. 4ly, To be Free from Taxes, and Tallages by Parliaments, unless specially named: 5ly, Of Con∣tributions to Expences of Knights of Parliament: 6ly, If they be severally distrained for other Services, they all may join in a Writ of Monstraverunt to save charges. And these Priviledges remain, altho' the Manor be come to the hands of Subjects, and altho' their Services of the Plough, is for the most part chang∣ed into Money. Lands in ancient Demesne may be extended upon a Statute Merchant, Sta∣ple or Elegit, and regularly all general Statutes extend to ancient Demesne: But Redisseisin, and some others do not lie in ancient Demesne, For which see Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 58. and their Priviledge doth not extend to Personal
Actions, in which by common Intend∣ment the Title of the Freehold cannot come in debate. The Demandant cannot remove the Plea, but the Tenant may for Se∣ven Causes, Vide Coke supra. Those Manors are called Ancient Demesne of the Crown, which were in the hands of St. Edward the Confessor, or William the Conqueror, and so expressed in Doomesday Book, begun in the 14 year of Will. the Conqueror 1081, and finished in Six years; And against this Book for Trial of Ancient Demesne lies no Aver∣ment. And therefore is like the Doom and Judgment at Doomes-day. The Court of Commissioners of Sewers. THeir Authority is by Commission under the Great Seal, Now grounded and warranted by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 5. where upon menti∣oning only some Observations made by the Lord Coke, we shall briefly set forth their Juisdiction, and Authority. First, That the Commissioners shall be named by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, and two Chief Justi∣ces, or any Three of them, whereof the Lord Chancellor to be one. Secondly, Every Commissioner must
take the Oath prescribed by the Act before the Lord Chancellor or Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, And ought to have Lands, &c. of Forty Marks yearly, and no Farmer of Lands within the Precinct of the Commission, unless he have Lands of Freehold worth 40 l. yearly. Thirdly, The Avowry, or Justifica∣tion for a Distress taken, shall be ge∣nerally that the Distress was taken by force of the Commission for a Lot, or Tax Assessed by the Commission, or for such other cause. Fourthly, There must be Six Com∣missioners to Sit by force of the Com∣mission. Fifthly, The Act of 23 Hen. 8. Doth not extend to reform Nusance by Sand rising out of the Sea, and driven to Land by Storms: A special Provision is therein made for the County of Gla∣morgan. Sixthly, A Commission of Sewers shall continue Ten years, unless re∣pealed; or determined by any new Commission, or by Supersedeas. Seventhly, That Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions made by force of such Commission, and written in Parch∣ment, and Indented under the Seals of the Commissioners, or Six of them,
whereof one part to remain with the Clerk, and the other in such Place as Six of the Commissioners shall ap∣point, shall without the Royal Assent, or any Certificate stand in force. Eighthly, That if any such Commis∣sion be determined by Expiration of Ten years from the Teste, Then such Laws so Indented, and Sealed shall stand in force for a year after, and the Justices of the Peace, or Six, (whereof One to be of the Quorum) shall have Power to Execute the same. Ninthly, Upon granting a new Com∣mission during that year, the Power of the Justices shall cease. Tenthly, The Commissioners not to make any Certificate, or Return of their Commission, orany their Ordinances, Laws, and doings by force of the same. Eleventhly, See an Alteration by the Statute of 13 Eliz. concerning Fees. Twelfthly, Neither the Commission∣ers of Sewers, nor any other have any such Absolute Authority; but their pro∣ceedings are bound by Law. By Act of Parliament 3 Jac. 1. Walls, Ditches, Banks, Gutters, Sewers, Gates, Causeys, Bridges and Water-courses in or about the City of London, where is no Passage for Boats, nor the Water doth Ebb, and Flow, are made subject
to the Commission of Sewers, which they were not before. And of their Jurisdiction and Au∣thority to Supervise all Walls, Sewers and Gutters, &c. upon the Sea-Coasts, and else where, and to enforce all Per∣sons concerned to pay a proportiona∣ble part according to the Lands, or Estate they have towards the Repair of them, and to that end to make Laws, and Ordinances, and to force the Ob∣servation of them, Vide F. N. B. fo. 113, 114. Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 62. And the Statutes at large. And it is to be noted, that Sewer or Suera is derived from the word Sue, or Issue, as the Lord Coke observes, and taken for a Sewer, Channel or Gutter of Water. The Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts. THe name, and wickedness of Bankrupts, comes from Foreign Nations, for Bruque in French is Men∣sa, and a Banqueror or Exchanger is Men∣sarius in Latine, and Rout is a Sign, or Mark metaphorically taken for one that hath so spent his Estate that no∣thing remains but the Mark, or men∣tion thereof.
The Commission upon complaint made in Writing to the Lord Chan∣cellor, is granted under the great Seal of England, and their Jurisdiction and Authority is declared and warranted by the Statute of 34 Hen. 8. being the first made against English Bankrupts, and the Statute of 13 Eliz. 7. and 1 Jac. 1. cap. 15. and 21 Jac. 1. cap. 19, &c. And the Commissioners must pursue the Power given by those Acts, or they are liable to the Action of the Party grieved; But they may plead gener∣ally. They have power to Examine the Offender upon Oath, and after he be declared a Bankrupt, to Examine his Wife upon Oath, and Witnesses also, And have power to break open any Houses, Ware houses, Chambers, Trunks, Chests, &c. of the Offenders: For all which see Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 63. and the Statutes at large. There is a Court called Curia Cursus Aquae apud Gravesend, and others like it in private, Of which it belongs not to us to treat.
Commissioners for Examination of Wit∣nesses. COmmissioners and Examiners are not bound strictly to the Letter of the Interrogatory, but ought to Explain every other thing which ne∣cessarily ariseth thereupon, for mani∣festation of the whole Truth. They ought not to discover to either Party, or any other, any of the De∣positions taken, before publication granted. Nor ought to confer with either Party after the Examination begun, or take any new Instructions. They must take the Depositions Gravely, Temperately, and without Menace, or Interruption in hindrance of the Truth, which are grievously to be punished; And after the Depositi∣ons taken, must Read the same distinct∣ly to the Witnesses, and suffer them to explain themselves, and it is safe that the Witnesses subscribe their Names, or Marks to the Paper-Book; But they must be certified in Parchment. Interrogatories ought to be Single, and Plain, Pertinent to the matter in questi∣on, but in no sort Captious, Leading, or Directory.
In some cases the Courts of Common Law judge upon Witnesses, but they must ever give their Testimony Viva Voce, as in Dower, if the Issue be whether the Husband be alive or no. Bracton saith, an Alien may not be a Witness, but that must be understood an Alien Infidel, for the Bishop of Rosse a Scot was admitted a Witness, and Sworn, 4 Eliz. in the case of the Duke of Norfolk. Witnesses, ought to come to be depo∣sed untaught and without Instruction, And should say from his Heart, Non sum doctus, nec Instructus, nec curo de Vi∣ctoria, modo ministretur Justitia, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 64. The King's Swanherd. HAth been of ancient time by his Of∣fice Magister deductus Cygnoram, And or his Authority you may Read in Rot. Patentium, Anno 11 H. 4. Part. 1 M. 14, &c. and Coke's 4 nst. cap 66. But he hath no Court. No Powl can be an Estray but a Swan.
The King's Aulneger. AUlneger of Aulne in French, and that of Ulna. Ulnator: Is an an∣cient Officer of the Kings Gift before any Statute; For in 14 Eliz. Sir Thomas Darlington was by the Kings Letters Patents Aulneger of Broad Cloath, and had a Fee of the King; for the Fee he had of the Subject was by the Statute of 27 E. 3. Of ancient time no Custom was paid by the English, or Stranger but for Wools, Woolfels, and Leather; In the Reign of E. 3. a great part of the Wool was draped into Cloth, And it was ad∣judged notwithstanding, that because the Wool was changed by the Labour, and Industry of Man into another kind of Merchandizing, no Custom should be paid for it. The first Act of Parliament that gave any Subsidy of Cloath was Anno 23 Ed. 3. (not Printed) viz. 14 d. of Lie∣ges, and 21 d. of Strangers, for every Cloath of Assize, and 2 s. 4 d. of Lie∣ges, and 3 s. 4 d. of Strangers, for every Cloath of Scarlet, and the rea∣son of granting these of Broad Cloath was, Quia jam Magna Pars Lani Regni nostri in eodem Regno Pannificitur, &c.
And for further satisfaction of the King for Customs of Wools, Anno 27 E. 3. A Subsidy was granted to the King, his Heirs and Successors (over the Customs thereof due) viz. of every whole Cloath of Assize not Ingrained 4 d. the Half Cloath 2 d. every whole Cloth Ingrained 5 d. the Half Cloth 2 d. 1/2, The whole Cloth of Scar∣let 6 d. The Half Cloath 3 d. The Aulnegers Fee is granted by Act of Parliament, viz. for the Mea∣suring of every whole Cloath of Assize of the Seller, a Half penny, and for the Half Cloth One farthing, and no more, and for Cloth less, or not to be sold, nothing. Nota, Consuetudines, & Custumae, Cu∣stoms and Subsidies are taken as Syno∣nima's. In Hillary Term Anno 2 Jac. 1. Upon Suit to the King by the Duke of Lenox; a Question being moved, whe∣ther new Draperies, as Frizadoes, Bays, &c. were within the aforesaid Statute; It was resolved by the Judges, That all new made Drapery made wholly of Wool, as Frizadoes, Bayes, Northern Dozens, &c. are to yield Subsidy, and Aulnage according to the Statute of 27 E. 3. But Fustians, Canvas, Sackcloth, &c. made meerly of other Stuff are not to be charged therewith.
The Government of Counties in England. FOR the Civil Government of Counties, the King makes choice of some of the Nobility, Clergy, Gen∣try, and Lawyers, Men of Worth, and Parts, who have their usual Residence in the County, so many as the King pleaseth to keep the Peace of the Coun∣ty: And these by the Commission un∣der the Great Seal are called Justices of Peace, at first Styled, Wardens of the Peace; and such whom the King most confideth in, in, or doth respect, are made Justices of the Quorum, so called from those words in the Commission, Quorum A.B. Unum esse volumus; which imports, that some business of more importance may not be transacted without the presence or concurrence of one of them. One of the principal Justices of the Peace and Quorum, is by the Lord Chancellor made Custos Rotulorum; so called, because he hath the custody of the Rolls or Records of the Sessions, and is to bring them to each Quarter-Sessions.
Every Quarter of the year these Justices meet at the Chief or Shire Town, where the Grand Inquest or Jury of the County is Summoned to appear, who upon Oath are to Inquire of all Traytors, Hereticks, Thieves, Murderers, Money Coiners, Riots, &c. Those that appear to be guilty, are by the said Justices committed to Prison to be tryed at the next Assizes, when the Judges of Westminster come their Cir∣cuits before-mentioned. Every County being subdivided into Hundreds, so called at first either for containing one Hundred Houses, or an Hundred bound to take Arms; or Wa∣pentakes, (so called from touching a Weapon, as the manner at this day is in Sweden at their solemn Weddings, for their chief Witnesses to lay all their Hands upon a Launce or Pike) every such Wapentake, or Hundred, hath com∣monly a Bayliff, a very ancient Officer, but now of small Authority: Also Officers called High-Constables, at First ordained by the Statute of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. for Conservation of the Peace, and View of Armour; they disperse Warrants, and the Orders of Justices of the Peace, to each Petit Constable.
There are also in every County Two Officers called Coroners, whose Office is to Inquire by a Jury of Neighbours, how and by whom any Person came by a Violent Death, and to enter the same upon Record, which is a Matter Crimi∣nal, and a Plea of the Crown, and thence they are called Crowners, or Coroners. These are chosen by the Freeholders of the County, by virtue of a Writ out of the Chancery, they were Anciently men of Estates, Birth, and Honour. Every County hath also A Clerk of the Market, whose Office is to keep a Standard of all Weights and Measures exactly according with the King's Standard, and kept in the Exchequer; and to see that none other be used in the same County, to Seal all Weights and Measures made exactly by the Standard in his custody, and to burn such as are deficient. And these Justices and Officers have every of their several and respective Courts within the County; of which we shall briefly say somewhat particu∣larly, and First of
The Court of the Sessions of the Peace. BY Act of Parliament 1 E. 3. cap. 16. the King Wills, That for the better Keeping and Maintenance of the Peace, Good Men and Lawful be Assigned in every County to Keep the Peace. And thus began this Subordinate Government, for the Tranquility and Quiet of the Realm, which no part of the Christian World can parallel: But referring the Reader to several Acts of Parliament, and Authors who have Treated of their Jurisdiction and Authority both in and out of Sessions: We shall only make some short and brief Remarks and Observations thereupon. As, First, He that is named in the Commis∣mission of the Peace under the Great Seal, is certainly a Justice of Peace; Such of these in whom the King more particularly confideth are called Justices of the Quorum. Their Office and Duty is to be con∣sidered, that some Things cannot be done without Two Justices, and in some cases One or Two must be of the Quorum; and when a Statute appoint∣eth a thing to be done by Two Ju∣stices; if the Offence be against the Peace, one may grant a Warrant to
bring the Offender before these Two Justices, or may take Bail for his Ap∣pearance at the next Sessions; or he may bind him to the Good Behaviour, and so to appear at the next Sessions, but he may not determine the Matter alone. And whatever one Justice may do, may ever be done by more. And they may be punished for their Neglect. Any Justice may require any num∣ber of Men to assist him in his Duty, for apprehending all Felons, Murderers, and the like, and such as are able must obey them, or they may be bound to the Good Behaviour, or Fined for their Disobedience. But he cannot give War∣rant to break open any mans House, to Search for a Felon, or stolen Goods, upon a bare Surmise. A Justice of Peace may do all that a Constable or Private person may do, touching Keeping the Peace by Common Law. They are in the Room of the Anci∣ent Conservators of the Peace, and have the same power they had. Where a Statute giveth a power in general of any Offence, and doth not mention where it is to be done, it can∣not be done out of the Sessions of the Peace; but if it give power to do a
Special thing, it may be done out of any Sessions. They must act cautiously in Execu∣ing the power given them by Acts of Parliament, and see that they strictly pursue it; and therefore must observe the words of the Statutes, which are penned diversly, and consider if they are not Repealed. The Justices have power in small Offences, or Trespasses, to appoint such Recompence as he shall think fit; and if he judge him unable, or if he do not make, and pay such Satisfaction, he may order him to be Whipp'd; and for the second Offence he may order him to be bound to the Good Behaviour, or send him to the House of Correcti∣on. If the Offender be able, he must bear the Charge of himself, and those who convey him to Prison, or otherwise the Justice may give Warrant to levy it upon his Goods. Any one Justice may compel a Man to take Crack'd-Money, and may deter∣mine all Defaults about Money, 19 H. 7.15. 17 E. 4.1. 6 W. 3. There must be Two or more about dividing of a Wood, being appointed thereunto by the Sessions upon the Lord's Complaint, 35 H. 8.7. 13 E.
Any Justice of Peace may require such as are between 15, and 60 years of Age, to be Sworn to Keep the Peace. There must be Two Justices, one Quo∣rum, to give the Sheriff, and his Bay∣liffs, and Deputies their Oaths, and this Exì officio without Commission; other∣wise of a Special Bayliff. See 27 Eliz. 12. Recognizances must be Certified next Assizes, or Sessions, 5 & 6 Ed. 6 25. A Supersedeas out of Chancery is to be certified at the Sessions, together with the Recognizance. A Certiorari brought before the Day, will discharge the Recognizance; and this Writ of Certiorari comes from the Chancery. If any Officer have a Warrant from a Justice of Peace, and shall have a Supersedeas from the Chancery, or Kings-Bench, or any Justice of Peace of the County, and yet urge the party to find Sureties, he may refuse to give it, and if he arrest him he shall have False Impri∣sonment against him. An Alias Capias, or Exigent awarded against one Indicted of Trespass, or the like, upon Surety found in Chancery, may be stayed from thence, or the Sheriff commanded not to arrest him; or if
he be arrested, to take Sureties and let him go. So, when he hath given Sure∣ties. Two Justices, Quorum unus (some say one Justice) may grant a Supersedeas. The Certiorari to remove the Record is in it self a Supersedeas, but a Man may have a Supersedeas to the Sheriff also. Supplicavit is a Command out of Chancery, or Kings-Bench, to bind some one to the Peace, or Good Behaviour; concerning which Seven things are ob∣servable. Vide Shepherd's Justice 224. Mittimus is the Warrant to send the Prisoner to Gaol, and it must be in Writing under Hand and Seal, unless it be by Order of Sessions: The Cause must be expressed, otherwise it will not be the same Offence in him who suffers an Escape: If it be without Bail, or Mainprize, and yet the Cause expressed is Bailable, other Justices may Bail him. The Conviction of Offenders by the Common Law is by Indictment and Jury; For Trial by Examination and Witnesses, is not allowed but where it is at the Discretion of the Justices, or so directed by Statute. Justices of Peace ought to be cauti∣ous; for they may be Punished either
in the Sessions, or by Justices of As∣size. Their Reward is 4 s. per Diem for themselves, and 2 s. per Diem for their Clerks, to be paid with their Charges in some Cases out of Fines levied by the Sheriff, besides several Fees, and other Allowances. Vide Shepherd's Ju∣stice. They shall not be punished for Ignorance, &c. The Sessions is a Court where the Ju∣stices sit for Execution of their Office; and there are Two kinds of Sessi∣ons. The General, or Quarter-Sessions, for General Execution of their Commis∣sion over all their Limits, and kept Quarterly, viz. In the first Week after Epiphany, The first Week after the Clause of Easter, The first Week after Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr, being the 7th of July, And the first Week after St. Michael (or more often, if need be,) And in this Court the Justices are Judges, of whom there may not be less than Two, whereof one of the Quorum: And they ought to sit at the most Principal and Chief Towns, and where it hath been usually held. And all things done before them are of Record, against which no Aver∣ment lieth. And for their several Pow∣ers
and Jurisdictions, besides what is mentioned before, you may read the Statutes and Authors at large, who treat thereupon; To whom we refer, and pass on to their Power in The Special Sessions, which is of Special use, for Ridding the Gaols, and other purposes; And herein they may take as much, and as little business upon them, as they please, and have (unless in some particular cases) the same Power as in their Quarter-Sessions. And this Special Sessions may be kept at any place, and held at any time, and as long as the Justices think fit, and may be kept by One Justice, or more, who have like power in many cases with the Justices in or out of their Quarter-Sessions; of which you may read more in Authors at large. And this Special Sessions is also some∣times called Statute Sessions, It being en∣joyned by several Statutes, that they with the Constables of every Hundred do meet, and that Masters and Servants do appear, for deciding Differences, Rating Servant's Wages, and bestowing of People are fit to Serve, and Refuse, or cannot get Masters in Service: And now a word or two of their manner of
Proceeding, which in an ordinary way lieth in Three things: 1. Information, 2, Hearing and Tryal, 3. In giving Judgment and doing Execution. By Information the Judges of these Courts take knowledge of Offences, either by presentment of Publick Offi∣cers, as Stewards of Leets, Supervisors of High-ways, Constables, or the like: And these are not sent to the Grand Jury to be found by them, but are a Perfect Information of themselves, to which the party accused must answer. And the Information given by the Jury, is Two ways, either by Indictment or, Presentment; and the Justices are to re∣ceive in this such Indictments they ought but none other; and they must ex officio see they are well drawn. A Justice may present Defaults, as of High-ways, &c. upon his own View-And any Man may Inform against Offen∣ders without danger: But these Com∣mon Informers must be allowed of Re∣cord, and if once turned out, are never again to be admitted; and must prose∣cute within the time limited by the Statute of 31 Eliz. and must bring his Informations in the same County, and to these ends must be sworn, 21 Jac. 1.4. And now we proceed to
Hearing and Tryal, in which are in∣cluded the Calling the party, his Ap∣pearance and Defence. The Process for Calling the party upon Indictments for Treason, or Felony, is 1. Capias, 2. Alias Capias, 3. Exigi facias. If for Indict∣ments of Lesser offences, a Venire facias, and if Sufficient then Distringas, and Process Infinite. But if Nihil habet be Returned, then Capias, Alias, Pluries, and Exigi facias. The Process upon any Indictment, or Presentment for an Offence against a Statute, shall be such as the Statute shall direct; otherwise, the Ordinary Process of the Common Law. There are other Processes, as Freri Facias, and Capias after Judgment, for doing Execution, 5 amp; 6 Ed. 6.14. and in some cases Elegit. See 31 Eliz. 7. But touching Process Three things must be observed; 1. That no Process Issue but upon Inquisition of Twelve Men, or Return of a Sworn Officer, some Special Cases excepted; 2. They are not granted upon Suggestion by Word, or Writing; 3. Nor may Process Issue, but Sedente Curia; And sometimes the party comes in by Recognizances, which are to be Certi∣sied to the next Sessions after they are taken, when and where the Appear∣ance
of the party, or his Default of Ap∣pearance is Recorded and Certified. And Bail is to be taken Quando stat indiffer∣enter, but not otherwise. The Justices cannot Award Process upon Recognizance forfeited, but must certifie the same, and the cause of For∣feiture into some of the Courts of Re∣cord at Westminster, That Process may Issue from thence. Supersedew from above, must be brought by the party at the Sessions, for if he send, it will scarcely be al∣lowed. If one be bound to appear at the Quarter Sessions, he must appear there, If at the Sessions; he may appear at any Sessions, Dalt. J.P. 237. Certiorari coming before the day to remove the Recognizance into the Chancery, or Kings Bench, will discharge the appearance, Dalt. J. P. 237. After Appearance the Party must either confess, and submit to the Fine, or Traverse the Charge, and if so he must be bound to Prosecute it, unless it be Tryed presently, which must be by Pety-Jury. And this is called an Arraignment or Tryal, and if they pass for the King, And find him guil∣ty of the offence, or he confess it, or stand out an Utlary, so that it come to a
Conviction, Then are the Justices to give Judgment, and see Execution done according to Law, In which they must observe these Rules. First, In giving Judgment, They must adjudge Men according to Law, For where the Law appointeth a Corporal, they may not inflict a Pecuniary Punishment, Et sic è converso. Neither may the change the Degree of Punishment: They have power to inflict Corporal Punishments, as Death, cutting of the Parts of the Body, Burning or Marking, Imprison∣ing, Whipping, Stocking or Cucking Stool, and Pecuniary Punishments, as loss of Offices, Lands or Goods, Fines or Is∣sues, Amerciaments: In fame, as to Brand a Man that is Perjured, that his Testimony afterwards shall be of no Credit; They may not set a Fine, or Amerciament but Sedente Curia, and all Fines must be reasonable, Where the Stature appoints a Penalty, no o∣ther can be imposed, neither may the Justices mitigate it after the Party is Convicted by Confession, or otherwise; But if the Party Indicted before his Conviction come into Court, and Pro∣test his Innocency; yet Quia noluit pla∣citare, &c. he putteth himeself to the grace of the Court, the Justices may,
and do usually Impose a Moderate Fine, and by Order forbear the pro∣secution. Other Judgments being rare∣ly or more seldom given, or Executed by Order of these Courts, or the Ses∣sions; But the Pillory, Whipping, or Fine, The Execution of the two first being commonly known, we shall only speake of The Fine which, if it be at Common Law, hath Imprisonment incident, till it be paid, yet in such Case the Justi∣ces, may take a Recognizance for Pay∣ment of it, and deliver the Party out of Prison, or they may cause the Clerk of the Peace to Estreat all Fines, and Amerciaments, by Indenture into the Exchequer, for the Sheriff to levy, and they are to keep one part of the In∣denture themselves. Thus having giving a Short view of the Jurisdictions, and Proceedings of these Justices in their Sessions, I refer all other Matters con∣cerning them, and their Authority to the Authors, who have written largely upon that Subject.
The Court of Inquiry of the Defaults of Justices of Peace, Justices of Assize, Sheriffs, and Under-sheriffs, &c. THis Court is raised by the Statute of 2 Hen. 5. And is a Court only of Inquiry touching the Execution of the Statute of 13 Hen. 4 cap. 7. concern∣ing Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assem∣blies, And they are to certifie their Inquests incontinently into the Chan∣cery, As by the said Statute more at large appeareth, See 19 Hen. 7. cap. 13. For the Execution of Laws in each County. THe King every Michaelmas Term, upon nominating six by the Justices Itinerant, Three whereof are Struck out by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer and Judges, out of the re∣maining three; about Crastino Anima∣rum yearly pricks one fit person for Sheriff of each County, (except for Westmoreland and Durham) which are Hereditary, who is to Execute the Kings Mandates, and all Writs dire∣cted to him out of the Kings Courts, Impannel Juries, bring Causes and Criminals to Tryal, and to see Senten∣ces both in Civil and Criminal Affairs Exectuted, To attend, and Guard the
Itinerant Judges twice a year while in their County, with great Pomp, and Feasting at the Assizes, and hath attendant on him his Under-sheriff, Clerks, Stewards of Courts, Bailiffs of Hundreds, Constables, Gaolers, Ser∣jeants, and Beadles, with a Train of Servants on Horseback in rich Liveries, at the Reception of the Judges. He Collects all publick Profits, Fines, &c. of the County. And for Exercising his Judicial Power hath these Courts. The Court of the Tourn. THe Tourn called anciently Shi∣regmote, Is a Court of Record holden before the Sheriff, The ancient Institution whereof by King Alfred was before Magna Charta, To hear and determine all Felonies (Death of Man excepted) and Common Nusan∣ces. See the Charter of William the Conqueror: Magna Charta and Expo∣sition thereupon, the second part of Coke's Institutes, and Coke's 4 Institutes, cap. 53. The Stile of this Court is, Curia Visus Franc' pleg' Domini Regis apud B. coram Vicecomite in Turno suo; And seems to have its Denomination from the French Tour (i. e.) Ambitus, circui∣tus, And is as much to say as, The
Sheriffs Course, or Perambulation; For which and the Articles Inquirable there, See Greenwoods Jurisdiction of County, Courts, and other Authors at large, and Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 53. And this Court is said to be Schola Insigniendi Juvenes, A School to Instruct young Men in the ancient Laws of the Kingdom. The Court of Leet, or View of Frank∣pledge. THis is a Court of Record, at the first derived and taken out at the Tourn, because the people did under∣go great trouble in travelling to the Sheriffs Tourn; Leets, or Views of Frankpledge were granted to Lords of Manors, within certain Precincts; yet this Court in whose Manor soever it is kept, is still accompted the Kings Court, because the Authority is Origi∣nally apertaining to the Crown, and thence derived to inferior persons, And whosoever hath the Leet, hath the same Authority within the Precinct, as the Sheriff hath within the Tourn. And Lep or Leet is a Saxon word from the Verb Zelepian, (z) be∣ing added Euphoniae gratia, i. e. Conve∣nire to assemble together, unde Con∣veutus.
And the Stile of this Court is, Curia Visus Franc' pleg' tent' apud B. coram A.B. Seneschallo. This Court of the Leet, as likewise the Tourn, are Instituted for the Common Weal; As for Conservation of the Kings Peace, Punishment of Common Nusance, as for selling Cor∣rupt Wines, and Victuals, &c. And by divers Acts of Parliament, the Jurisdi∣ction of this Court hath been increa∣sed, to the end the Subject might have remedy, and Justice at his own Door. And therefore the Steward ought to be knowing in the Law, for Igno∣rantia Judicis, est calamitas Innocent is: Of the Antiquity and Jurisdiction of this Court which is very ample, you may Read more at large, Coke's 2 Insti∣tutes, Magna Charta, cap. 17.35. & 4 Institutes cap. 54, There are Three things to be con∣sidered in holding of Tourns, or Leets. 1st, Time which must be twice in a year, viz. within one Month after Easter, and one Month after Michaelmas, at the Tourn after Earst, No Actions Po∣pular are to be inquired after, &c But on∣ly to take their Suit who are Suitors, which at the Sheriffs Tourn are all Men from 12 to 60 years of age within the County, (Ecclesiastical Persons, Peers,
and Women excepted) and at the Leet the like Persons within the Precinct, which is called Suit Real, by Reason of their Allegiance to which they are Sworn to be true, and Loyal to the King; and to take the view, &c. And at the Tourn, or Leet after Michaelmas, then to inquire of such things which are inquirable there. 2ly, The place where the Leet is to be holden, and that must be within the Precinct, or Liberty in Loco debito, & cosueto, and if it be done other∣wise, whatever is acted in it is void. 3ly, The Persons who are all Freeholders within the Precinct, or Liberty, and are obliged to come by the Service of their Fees, and all others of fit age, except the persons above mentioned to be ex∣cepted. The Sheriff in the Tourn, or Steward in the Leet, as Judge hath a double Au∣thority: 1. Election of Officers: 2. Pu∣nishment of Offenders, And this Punish∣ment of Offenders is in a twofold manner, and in it are to be respected. 1. Actus Curiae for Punition of Offences in Curia, where the Sheriff, or Steward as Judge, may punish by Fine; without Inquiry by the Country, &c. As if a Juror sworn refuse to make Present∣ment,
depart without giving his Ver∣dict, or refuse to be Sworn, the Stew∣ard may impose a reasonable Fine up∣on him: 2. Actus Patriae for Punishment of Offences Extra Curiam, where the Jurors who are sworn have peculiar Cognizance, and have Authority to Present and to Assess Amerciaments, for them. And the Sheriff, or Steward by the Statute of 18 Ed. 1. may Inquire of se∣veral Misdemeanors from the highest Treason, to the lowest Trespass, tho' not here punishable; He may also Im∣pannel a Second Jury, to Enquire of the Defaults and Concealments of the First, and so Fine them for their offence. And for default of Resiants, he may compel a Stranger coming within the view, to be of the Inquest. And the Officers he hath Election of are. The Bailiff, who is to Collect the Rents, and Profits of the Manor, or Li∣berty, and Give a true accompt thereof, and to execute all the Precepts of the Court. The Constables who are chosen, and are to see the publick peace kept, Watch and Ward observed; Learn the Con∣tents of the Statute of Winchester made against Rogues, &c. And to punish such as play at unlawful Games.
The County Court. THe Stile of this Court is, Bucks Curia prima Comitatus E.C. Militis, Vicecomiti Com. praedict', Tent' apud B. &c. And the next Court is Curia secunda E. C. &c. And soforth of the rest. Of the Jurisdiction and Authority of this Court you may Read in the Sta∣tute of Magna Charta cap. 35. The Sui∣tors are Judges, except in a Redisseis in the Sheriff is Judge, and a Writ of Errour lieth upon his Judgment; And being no Court of Record, It holdeth no Plea of any Debt, or Damages to the value of Forty shillings or above, Nor of any Trespass Vi & armis, be∣cause a Fine was due thereby to the King; But of Debt, Detinue, Trespass, and other Actions personal above Forty shillings, The Sheriff may hold Plea by force of a Writ of Justicies, for that is in nature of a Commission to him, and is Vicountiel and not returnable; And the Sheriff may before any Coun∣ty Court, award a Summons to his Bailiff, returnable within two or three days at his Discretion, to Summon the Defendant by his Goods, &c. to an∣swer, and if the Bailiff return Nihil,
and the Plaintiff remove the same by a Pone, into the Common-Pleas, that Court shall not grant a Capias, for the nature of the Writ doth not warrant a Ca∣pias, and the Sheriff could not grant the same, neither doth the Writ of Justicies alter the nature of the Court of the County, for therein the Sheriff is not Judge, but the Suitors; and up∣on a Judgment given therein, a Writ of False Judgment doth lie, and not a Writ of Errour. And in divers Real Actions a Writ of Justicies doth lie, as in Breve de Admeasurement of Dower, of Pasture, De Nusance, &c. As by our Books may appear. And Pleas ought not to be hence removed (with∣out cause,) as appears by the Writs of Pone, Recordare, The Writ of False Judg∣ment, Accedas ad Curiam, which are yet in use. In this Court upon the Exigent after Quint' Exact', The Coroners give Judg∣ment, Ideo Utlagetur per Judicium Coro∣natoris; But by this Judgment No Goods are forfeited before the Outlary appear of Record, and that is the Reason, that no Man can Claim the Goods of Out∣laws by Prescription, neither shall such an Outlawry disable the party till the Exigent be returned.
This Court is holden at any place within the County, except in Northum∣berland, Sussex and Chester, where it is limited to be held at certain places by Statute; And is to be holden once e∣very Month, counting 28 days to the Month. No Fine can here be inposed, because it is no Court of Record: But a Man may be there amercied for Contempt, or Disturbance of the Court, In the presence of the Court. And in this Court are these Officers. The Sheriff who is Elected yearly, Crastino Animarum by the Statute of 9 E. 2. and 14 E. 3. cap. 7. And his Letters Patents bear date commonly the sixth of Novemb. unless in case of necessity: And before the next County day after his Election, and Discharge of the old Sheriff, he ought to de∣pute. A County Clerk, who according to Fleta ought to be Endued with Circum∣spection, Fidelity, Providence, Humi∣lity, Peace, and Modesty, Expert in the Laws and Customs of his Country, and of ability to direct the Bailiffs, and other Ministers in Dubious Things. He may not Practise as an Attorney at the same time, nor Act without consent of Suitors; he must Depute honest able
Bailisss to Execute the Process, and Pre∣cepts of the Court, and after Plaints entred (which must be in full County Sedente Curia, Except in case of Reple∣vins) he must Issue sufficient Precepts directed to his Bailiff to Attach, or Warn the Defendants to appear at next County Court, and at the Adjourn∣ment of every Court, must appoint a day certain for the next Court; To the intent the Country may know when to Resort thither, to hear the King's Exigents, and Proclamations read. The Coroner is a Principal Officer, being chosen in this Court by a Writ De Coronatore eligendo directed to the Sheriff, whereupon he is chosen by the Freeholders, or Suitors in full Court, and is there published; and afterwards his Election certified into the Chancery by the Sheriff, and the County Clerk Administers to him an Oath for due Execution of his Office: then he Sits there with the Sheriff every County Court, where Exigents and Proclama∣mations being proclaimed five County days, Once in open Sessions, and once at the Church Door, If at the fifth County day the Defendant appear not, the Coroner gives Judgment, That he be out of the King's Protection, and
out of the Aid of the Law. A Man being then said to be Outlawed as it were Extra Legem positus, because he is supposed to be once Sworn to the Law; But a Woman is said to be wa∣ved, (Waviatur) because she was never Sworn to the Law. The Attorneys may do all things in the Name, and as the Act of him who gave them the Authority, as if he did it himself, For he is Aliorum Negotiorum Gestor, and Qui per alium facit, per seip∣sum facere videtur. And these ought to be honest, and just, according to their Oath. And ought not to delay their Clients, (Argenti gratia) not demand Moneys otherwise than is al∣lowed them by the Court. The Bailiffs are Servants and Mini∣sters of the Law, and by Consequence to the party at whose Suit he is to distrain, And therefore ought to be True, Vigilant, and not exoculated with Bribes; Ought to be contented with the Fees allowed, for if they Extort more, or commit any Error contrary to their Precept, they forfeit Forty shillings, by the Stature of 27 Eliz. No Bailiff, or other Person, ought to take a Distress or Execute Process, till he be Sworn, but now Experience shews the Contrary. King Alfred hanged Judge
Arnold for saving a Bailiff from Death, who had robbed the People by Distress, and for Extorting of Fees. The Court of the Hundred. AS the Leet was derived for the Ease of the People out of the Tourn; So this Court of the Hundred for the same cause was derived out of the Court of the County; And is (in nature) a Court Baron, where the Sui∣tors are Judges, and is no Court of Record. The Stile of this Court is, Curia E. C. Milit is Hundredi sui de B. in Com' Bucks, Tent', &c. coram A. B. Senceschallo ibi∣dem. Officers Incident to this Court, are chiefly the Constables of the Hundred commonly called, The Chief Constables, so named, be∣cause the Constables of Towns are called Petit Constables; The Constables of the Hundred are Created by the Statute of Winchester 13 E. 1. And their Authority thereby limitted to five things: 1st, To make view of Armour: 2ly, To present before Justices Assigned all such Defaults, they see in the Country a∣bout Armour: 3ly, Defaults of Suits of Towns: 4ly, Of High-ways: 5ly, To
present such as lodge Strangers in up∣landish Towns, for whom they will not Answer. And these disperse all Warrants of the Justices of Peace to the Petit Con∣stable; and divers other Authorities are given to them, and the Petit Con∣stables by Acts of Parliament, which they must strictly observe; For that no Officer constituted by Act of Parlia∣ment, may Prescribe as the Officer by the Common Law may. Term. 2 Car. Regis, Fortescu of Bucks Plaintiff, and the Sheriff of the same Defendant, The Plaintiff had divers Hundreds granted to him for Life, Re∣serving a Rent which the Sheriff dis∣allowed, and put in Bailiffs of his own; And the Attorney General was com∣manded to avoid the like in other Counties, for that they were against Law, and belonged to the Office of the Sheriff. And this division of Counties into Hundreds is very Ancient, and thought to be so called at first, either for con∣taining an Hundred Houses, or an Hundred Men bound to bear Arms, and hath (commonly a Bailiff an An∣cient Officer, but now of small Autho∣rity, And if there be a Bailiff of a Li∣berty, Or a Sheriff's Bailiff of a Hun∣dred
Wapentake, or Tything, which hath not Lands or Tenements suffici∣ent within the County, there lieth a Writ De Ballivo Amovendo, by the Sta∣tute of 4. E. 3. cap. 9. The Court Baron. THe Stile of this Court is, Curia Ba∣ronis A. B. Militis Manerij sui prae∣dicti, (having the name of the Manor written in the Margent) Tent' tali die, &c. coram C.D. Seneschallo ibidem; And being calle Barons Court is the same as to say, Freeholders Court. This Court is incident to every Ma∣nor, and is of Two natures: The First by the Common Law, and the Suitors thereof are Judges, although the Plea be holden by force of a Writ of Right, and this is called a Court Baron, and may be holden from Three Weeks, to Three Weeks: The Second is a Cu∣stomary Court, and that doth concern Copyholderss, And therein the Lord or his Steward is Judge. And for as much as the Title, or Estate of the Copyholder is entred in the Roll, whereof the Steward de∣livereth him a Copy, he is therefore called Copyholder.
And as there can be no Court Baron without Freeholders, So no Customary Court without Copyholders; And a there may be a Court Baron of Free∣holders only, and then the Steward is Register; So their may be a Customary Court of Copyholders only, and then is the Lord or his Steward Judge. And when the Court Baron is of this Double Nature, The Court Roll con∣taineth matters appertaining to the Court Baron, as also to the Customary Court. For the Antiquity f this Court, it is to be observed, That by the Laws and Ordinances of King Alfred, and others, It appeareth, That the First Kings of this Realm, had all the Lands of England in Demesne; And Les grand Mannors, and Royalties they Reserved to themselves, and of the Remnant, they (for the Defence of the Realm) En∣feoffed the Barons, (under which Name are comprised all the Nobility,) with the like Jurisdiction the Court Baron now hath. And this Court was first Instituted for the ease of the Tenants, and for the ending of Suits for Debts and Damages under Forty shillings: And this Court may be held at any place within the Manor, unless a Lord who
hath Two or Three Manors, hath usu∣ally kept at one of them Courts for all the said Manors. For the Customs, and manner of Pro∣ceeding in this Court, you may Read more at large in Coke's 1 Inst. sect. 73. Greenwood of Courts, Shepheard's, Court∣keepers guide, &c. The Court of the Coroner. THe Coroner Coronator, is so called, because he deals principally with Pleas of the Crown, Or Matters concern∣ing the Crown; And as appears by the Writ De Coronatore Eligendo, he is Eli∣gible by the Freeholders of the County, and after he is Elected, the Sheriff gives unto him his Oath duly to Execute his Office; and being thus Eligible (as the Sheriff and Conservators of the Peace were in ancient Times,) they continue notwithstanding the Demise of the King. And of these are Fout in every County; But in the Twelve Shires of Wales, and Cheshire are but Two, and sometimes Six in a County, and sometimes but one. The Court which he holdeth is a Court of Record, And as the Sheriff in his Tourn may Inquire of all Felo∣nies by the Common Law, except the
Death of Man; So the Coroner can Inquire of no Felony but the Death of Man, and that super visum Corporis; He may also Inquire of the Escape of the Murderer, of Treasure Trove, Deodands, and Wrecks of the Sea. Besides his Judicial place, he hath also Authority Ministerial as Sheriff, &c. When there is just Exception▪ to the Sheriff, Judicial Process shall be awarded to the Coroner for the Exe∣cution of the King's Writs; in which case he is Locum tenens Vicecomitis, and in some especial Case the King's Origi∣nal Writ shall be directed to him. In ancient time none might have this Office but a Knight, and he must have sufficient Lands within the County, whereof he may answer all People: But more concerning this matter you may see in Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 59. And besides these General Coroners of Counties, there are Special Coro∣ners of Liberties, and Priviledged Places, who have the like Jurisdicti∣on, and Power within those Places, as the other have in the County, Vide Stat. de Coronatoribus, 3 and 4. E. 1.
When any person hath Murdered himself, or is Felo de se, The Coroner goeth to view the Body, and maketh out his Warrant to the Bailiffs of the Liberty to Summon a Jury, And fur∣ther. For the manner and method of keeping this Court; See Greenwood of Courts, and others who treat thereup∣on. The Court of Escheators and Commissioners for finding of Offices. THis Office is in the Gift of the Lord Treasurer, who grants it by Deed, and he is to continue in his Office but one year, or Once in Three years, and are One in every Coun∣ty. And this name Escheator cometh from the word Escheata, a word of Art derived from the French word Es∣chear (i. e.) excidere or accidere to hap∣pen, and signifies properly when the Lands by accident Fall to the Lord of whom they are Holden; And then we say the Fee is Escheated. And this Escheat happeneth Aut per defectum Sanguinis, For the default of Heir, Aut per delictum Tenentis, for Fe∣lony, and by Judgment Three ways,
Aut quia suspendatur per Collum, Quia abjuravit Regnum, Aut quia utlagatus est, And therefore such as are Hang'd by Martial Law in furore Belli, forfeit no Lands. He ought to be seised of Forty Marks Land, Except in Cities, and Counties Palatine. In case of Treason or Felony he may find an Office Virtute Officij. If he sit by force of a Writ, he ought to take the Inquest within a Month after he deliver the Writ, and he ought to Return the same within a Month after he taketh it either by Writ, or Virtute Officij. All Offices found before him, or Commissioners ought to be by Oaths of Twelve Men, every Juror to have Lands of the yearly value of Forty shillings in the same County, and ought to be Indented, and one part Sealed by them, and the other by him, which is to remain with the Foreman of the Jury, and they to be taken in good Towns, &c. He or the Commissioners, can take no Inquest of any, but such are Re∣turned by the Sheriff.
If he or the Commissioners, deny any Person to give Evidence to any In∣quest taken before him, he shall forfeit Forty pounds. If he or they refuse to take a Verdict of the Inquest they for∣feit One hundred pounds to the Party grieved. An Office found before Commissi∣oners is as forcible, as if it had been found before the Escheator himself. The Escheator ought to take no Fee but of the King: But if he find an Office by Writ for the King, he shall have a Fee of Forty shillings by the Statute of 23 Hen. 6. But if such Lands exceed not in value Five pounds, then he shall take but Fifteen shillings: And if it be found that Lands are holden of a Subject, he ought to take no Fee at all. And the Escheators may make De∣puties that are able, For all which see more in the Statute de Escheatoribus 29 E. 1. Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 43. &c. The Court of the Clerk of the Market. THe Clerk of the Market is to this day called Clericus Mercati Hospi∣tij Regis: And keepeth a Court, and Inquireth after Weights, and Measures whether they be according to the
King's Standard, and for that Purpose he maketh Process to Sheriffs, and Bai∣liffs to Return Pannels before him, &c. And he is to deliver Estreats of such things as concern his Office into the Ex∣chequer. He can hold no Plea, but what was holden in the Reign of E. 1. and at this day there is not so much occasion for him, or his Authority since Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner, Justices of Peace, and Sheriffs in their Tourns, and Lords in their Leets, may Inquire of False Weights, and Measures. Of Wine, Ale, Beer, Corn and Grain there ought to be but One Measure, and of all other Merchandize, per to∣tum Regnum, De Ponderib' vero, sicut de Mensuris. But notwithstanding divers Statutes, there are two kinds of weights used in this Kingdom, one called Troy weight com∣manded by the Statute, And is thus de∣duced, 24 Corns of Barley dry, and from the midst of the Ear make a peny weght, 20 peny weights an Ounce, and 12 Ounces a pound Troy, a Grain con∣tains 20 Minutes, a Minute contains 24 Droits, a Droit contains 24 Blanks, Twelve Grians of Fine Gold make a Caract, 24 Caractes an Ounce, and 12
Ounces a pound. By this Troy weight are measured according to Law, Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Bread, Wheat and such like. And this kind of Weight the Apothe∣caires do or ought to use, although by other Divisions, and Denominations, Their least Measure is a Grain, 20 Grains make a Scruple maked ℈ 3 Scruples make a Drachm marked ʒ 8 Drachmes make an Ounce marked ℥ 12 Ounces make a Pound marked lb Another called Avoir du Pois, A Pound of this consisteth of 16 Ounces, Every Ounce of 20 Peny weight, E∣very Peny weight 21 Grains and 9/10 of a Grain; It is called Avoir du Pois, be∣cause thereby they have full Measure; By this are weighed all Physical Drugs, Wax, Pitch, Tarr, Iron, Steel, Lead, Hemp, Flax, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and divers other Commodities, and especi∣ally every Commodity subject to Wast; And thereof an 112 Pounds are called an Hundred weight. There was another weight called Auncel weight, by Scales fixed to a Beam or Staff, and by the Hand or Fore∣finger, wherein was much Deceipt, and therefore abolished by several Statute. Measures of Troy, are of Three kinds, viz. Of Things that are Dry,
Of Things Moist or Liquors, and Of Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity. Of Dry things 4 Grains make a Peny weight, 20 Peny weight an Ounce, 12 Ounces a Pound or Pint, 2 Pints a Quart, 2 Quarts a Pottle, 2 Pottles a Gallon, 2 Gallons a Peck, 4 Pecks a Bushel, 4 Bushels makes a Comb, 2 Combs a Quarter, 6 Quarters make a Weigh, and 10 Quarters a Last. Of Liquors 12 Ounces make a Pint or Pound, and 2 Pints a Quart, and 4 Quarts a Gallon of Wine, which is 8 Pounds Troy weight, 18 Gallons make a Rundlet, 31 Gallons and a Half make Half a Hogshed, 42 Gal∣lons make a Tierce, 63 Gallons a Hogshead, 84 Gallons a Puncheon, 126 Gallons a Pipe, or Butt, and 252 Gal∣lons make a Tun of Wine: Of Ale and Beer 8 Gallons is a Firkin, 16 Gal∣lons is a Kilderkin, 32 Gallons is a Barrel, 63 Gallons is a Hogshead. The Wine Measure is smaller, than the Ale and Beer Measure, and holds Proportion as 4 to 5, So that 4 Gal∣lons of Beer, are 5 Gallons of Wine; And the Measure of Dry things is greater than the Wine, and lesser than the Ale and Beer Measure, so that the Gallon of this Measure being about 8 Pous Troy weight, is in proportion
to the Wine Gallon as 33 to 28, and is in Proportion to the Beer Gallon, as 33 to 35. Of Longitude, Latitude, and Profun∣dity 3 Grains of Barley make an Inch, 4 Inches make a Handful, 3 Handful make a Foot, 1 Foot and ½ make a Cubit, 2 Cubits a Yard, 1 Yard and ¼ an Ell, 5 Foot a Geometrical Pace, 6 Foot a Fathom, 16 Foot and ½ make a Perch, Pole, or Rod, 40 Perch make a Furlong, 8 Furlongs make a Mile, which according to the Statute of 11 Hen. 7. ought to be 1760 Yards, or 5280 Foot; That is 280 Foot more than the Italian Mile; 60 Miles, or more exa∣ctly 69 English Miles and ½, make a De∣gree, and 360 Degrees, Or, 25020 Miles, Compass the whole Globe of the Earth. For Measuring of Land, 40 Perch in Length, and 4 in Breadth, make an Acre, so called from the German Acker, and that from the Latin Ager, 30 Acres ordinarily make a yard Land, and 100 Acres are accounted an Hide of Land. By the Stat. of 7 Hen. 7. The Chief Of∣ficer of ever City, and Burrough shall take for Sealing of every Bushel a peny, of every other measure a Half peny, of every Hundred weight a peny, and every Half hundred weight a Half peny, of lesser weight a Farthing.
The Clerk of the Market ought not to take any Common Fine, nor to Claim any thing for Examining or Viewing of Measures Sealed, or other Measures: Of which see more in the Statute, and Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 61. The Court of Pepondres, Vulgarly Pi∣powders, Curia Pedis pulverisati. THis Court is incident to every Fair, and Market, as a Court Baron is to a Manor; and is so called for that Justice for advancement of Trade is as Speedy as the Dust may fall from a Man's Feet, Their Proceedings being De hora in horam. And this is a Court of Record, to be holden before the Steward of the Court, and the Jurisdiction thereof consisteth in Four Conclusions. 1st, The contract or cause of Action must be in the same time of the Fair or Market. 2ly, It must be for some mat∣ter concerning the same Fair, or Mar∣ket complain'd on, heard and deter∣mined. 3ly, It must be within the Precinct of the Fair, or Market. 4ly, The Plaintiff must take an Oath accor∣ding to the Statute of 17 Ed. 4. cap. 2.
But that concludeth not the Defen∣dant. And there may be a Court of Pipow∣ders by Custom, without a Fair or Market, and a Market without an Owner; And this Court of Pipowders by Prescription may be extended to all Contracts, Bonds, Actions of Tres∣pass, and upon the case, and no Writ of Faux Judgment; but a Writ of Error lies here, and in the Ordinary Court of Pipowders incident to a Fair or Mar∣ket: And this Court by Prescription may be used either by way of Grant, or Confirmation. For all which see in Coke's 4 Institutes, and Greenwood of Courts. The Court of the Dutchy Chamber of Lancaster at Westminster. KIng Ed. the 3. in full Parliament Ann. 50. E. 3. Erected the County of Lancastar a County Palatine by Letters Pa∣tent, and Honoured his Son J. Duke of Lancaster therewith for Term of his Life. It is called Comitatus Palatinus a County Palatine, à Comitatu, & Pala∣tio Regis, because the Owner be he Duke, or Earl, &c. Hath in that County Jura Regalia, as fully as the King had in his Palace; And he may have his
Chancery, and Writs under his Seal, for the Office of the Chancellor to Depute Justices, as well touching Pleas of the Crown, as all other Pleas, and Execu∣tion of Writs, and making Officers, and Servants, and all other, as by the Letters Patents above mentioned, grant∣ed in Parliament appears: And the King may Erect a County Palatine without Parliament by his Letters Pa∣tents; But now by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 24. several of those Jura Re∣galia are taken from them, and reconti∣nued, and annexed to the Crown: And all Writs are now to be made in the King's Name, but the Teste in Name of him who hath the County Palatine; And they shall have Forfei∣ture of Lands, and Goods for High-Treason, which Forfeiture accreweth by the Common Law; But Forfeitures given after the Erection of the County Palatine by an Act of Parliament, they shall not have. Justices of Assize, of Gaol-Deli∣very, and of the Peace are, and ever since the Erection have been As∣signed by Commission under the Seal of the County Palatine of Lan∣caster.
Fines were levied with 3 Proclama∣tions, &c. before the Justices of Assize there, or one of them, and all Reco∣veries to be had of Lands there, are to be had in the Court of the County Palatine at Lancaster, and not at West∣minster. All Lands, &c. Parcel of this Dutchy given to the King by the Statute of Monasteries, Chantries, &c. are still with∣in the Survey of the Dutchy. Lands within the County Palatine should pass by the Dukes Charter with∣out Livery of Seisin, or Attornment, But of Lands parcel of a Manor annex∣ed to the Dutchy without the County Palatine, there ought to be Livery of Seisin, and Attornment of Tenants, and in the same Degree is it in the King's Case. The Proceedings in this Court of the Dutchy Chamber at Westminster, is as in a Court of Chancery for Lands, and o∣ther Matters within the Jurisdiction of the Court by English Bill, &c. and De∣cree. But this Chancery is not a mixt Court, as the Chancery of England is, partly of the Common Law, and part∣ly of Equity, but admitting only some small mixture of the Common Law in some Cases: And in some Cases they are led by their pro∣per
Customs, and Prescriptions respe∣ctively. The Process of this Court is by Privy Seal, Attachment, and Commission of Rebellion as in the Chancery. The Officers of this Court be the Chancellor, The Attorney, The Re∣ceiver General, Clerk of the Court, The Auditors, Surveyors, The Messenger. There is an Attorney of the Dutchy in Chancery, and another in the Exche∣quer; And there are Four Learned in the Law, Assistants, and of Councel with the Court. The Seal of the Dutchy of Lanca∣ster remains with the Chancellor at Westminster, And the Seal of the County Palatine remains in a Chest in the County Palatine, under the safe Cu∣stody of the Keeper thereof. All Grants and Leases of Lands, Offi∣ces, &c. in the County Palatine of Lancaster, shall pass under that Seal, and no other: And all those out of the County Palatine, and within the Survey of the Dutchy, under the Seal of the Dutchy, See the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. For the great Royalties, Priviledges, &c. the Duke of Lancaster had, for him, his Men and Tenants, which are necessary to be known by all con∣cerned
in those Possessions, and o∣ther matters concerning the same: See Coke's 4 Institutes 36. and Books and Records their recited: And the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 1. c. 10. For dissolving the Court of Star-Chamber, and annul∣ling and making void the like Jurisdi∣ction excercised in the Court, called the Court of the Dutchy of Lancaster, held before the Chancellor and Coun∣cel of that Court, &c. The Courts of the County Palatine of Chester. THis is the most Ancicent, and most Honourable County Palatine re∣maining at this Day, with which Digni∣ty the King's Eldest Son hath been of long time honoured; And this is a County Palatine by Prescription. Within this County Palatine, and the County of the City of Chester, there is and aciently hath been a principal Officer called the Chamberlain of Che∣ster; who time out of mind, hath had the Jurisdiction of a Chancellor; and the Court of Exchequer at Chester is, and hath (time out of mind) been the Chancery Court for the said County Pa∣latine, whereof the Chamberlain of Chester is Judge in Equity; He is also Judge of Matters at the Common Law
within the said County, as in the Court of Chancery at Westminster, for the Court of Chancery is a mixt Court. There is also a Vice-Chamberlain, which is the Deputy of the Chamber∣lain; And also the Justice called the Justice of Chester, who hath Jurisdicti∣on to hear and determine Matters of the Crown, and of Common-Pleas, Of Fines, and Recoveries levied, and suf∣fered, as well within the County Pa∣latine, as of the City of Chester; For which and much more concerning the same, See Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 37. and the Statute of 16 & 17 Car. 1. c. 10. For disabling the Court of Star Cham∣ber; and Annulling and making void the like Jurisdiction exercised in the Court of Exchequer, in the County Pa∣latine of Chester, held before the Cham∣berlain and Council of that Court. The Courts of the County Palatine of Durham. THis is also a County Palatine by Prescription, parcel of the Bisho∣prick of Durham, and raised soon after the time of the Conquer∣or.
Here is a Court of Chancery, which is a mixt Court both of Law, and E∣quity, as in the Chancery at Westmin∣ster; But herein it differeth from the rest, that if any Erroneous Judgment be given either in the Chancery upon a Judgment there according to the Com∣mon Law, or before the Justices of the Bishop, a Writ of Error shall be brought before the Bishop himself, and if he give Erroneous Judgment thereupon; a Writ of Error shall be sued Returnable in the King's Bench. If the Bishop do wrong within his County Palatine, for that he cannot be Judge in his own Cause, Justices shall be Assigned to hear and deter∣mine the Cause, as was done in the case, when Richardus de Hoton Prior Dunelm' queritur de Anthonio Episcopo Dunelm', alledging several Plaints against the Bishop, whereupon. Issue was Joyned, and Verdict given against the Bishop; And by that Record which was Termino Paschae 30 E. 1. it appears, the Bishop had within the County of Duresme Regalitatem suam: And more concern∣ing the same you may Read in Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 38.
The Royal Franchise of Ely. KIng Henry the first, of the Rich Monastery of Ely made a Cathe∣dral Church, and of the Abbey made a Bishoprick, and for his Diocess As∣signed him the County of Cambridge, which was before within the Diocess of Lincoln, And this King Henry the first granted to this new Bishop, and his Successors Jura Regalia within the Isle of Ely; But the Priory, and Con∣vent were by Henry the eighth suppres∣sed, and instead thereof a Dean, and Prebendaries raised to be the Chapter of the Bishop, and a Grammar School for a Master, and 24 Scholars. This Royal Jurisdiction the Bishop hath by Prescription granted upon the said Grant, as well in Pleas of the Crown, as in Common Pleas before his Justices of his Liberties, and other Matters, Vide Coke's 4 Instituets cap. 39.
The County Palatine of Pembroke. THis was an ancient County Pala∣tine within Wales, and the Earl was Comes Palatinus, and had Jura Regalia, and all things belonging to a County Palatine, but the Jurisdi∣ction thereof was taken away by the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 26. It being then in the King's hands. The Franchise of Hexam and Hex∣amshire. THis was sometime parcel of the Possessions of the Archbishop of York, and claimed by him to be a County Palatine, And at the Parli∣ment, 2 Hen. 5. resolved that Hexam∣shire was a Franchise, where the Kings b Writ went not. And in the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. It is named a County Palatine, but by the Statute of 14 Elizab. cap. 13. It is declared no County Palatine, or Franchise Roy∣al.
The Courts of the Cinque-Ports. BY Doomesday-Book it appears, that the priviledged Ports were but Three at first, viz. Dover, Sandwich and Rumney; afterward Two more, Hastings and Hythe, were added to them by the Conqueror. And these have several Priviledges, as to be free from Burthens, and Charges, and many others; and every of these send Two Burgesses to Parliament, by Name of Barons of the Cinque-Ports; and although Two more, viz. Winchel∣sey, and Rye be added, yet they hold their former Names of Cinque-Ports. These lying towards France, Antiquity provided, they might be securely kept, for performance whereof they have a Governour by his Office, called Lord Wardon of the Cinque-Ports, who is Admiral also, and hath the Jurisdi∣ction of the Admiralty amongst them; He is also Constable of Dover Castel, of whose Jurisdiction as Constable, vide Stat' Artic' super Chartas, and Coke's 2 Inst. 556. There is a Diversity between the Principality of Wales, the Counties Pa∣latine, and the Cinque-Ports: For Wales was no part of England, but Counties
Palatine are parcel of the Realm of England; but divided in Jurisdiction, and the Cinque-Ports are parcel of the County of Kent, and yet Ubi Breve Domini Regis non currit, but have not Jura Regalia: And therefore regularly no Writ of Error did lye of a Judgment in Wales; otherwise it is in the Counties Palatine. A. Judgment here of Lands in Wales, or in the County Palatine is void; but a Judgment given here of Lands in the Cinque-Ports is good, if the Priviledge be not pleaded, for they are part of the County. And in the Cinque-Ports are Divers Courts; as first, The Court before the Constable of the Castle of Dover; And there be other Courts before the Majors and Jurators within the Ports themselves; and another called Curia Quinque Portuum apud Shepway. If any of the King's Courts write to have a Record in the Cinque-Ports, or for doing any thing within the same, the Writ is directed Constabulario Castri de Dover, & Guardiano Quinque Portuum. And all Plaints against the Barons of the Cinque-Ports, ought to be deter∣mined at Shepway before the Warden of the Cinque-Ports. And if an Erroneous Judgment be given in the Cinque-Ports before any
of the Mayors and Jurats, it is to be Redressed before the Constable of Do∣ver at the Court at Shepway, which Court was raised by Letters Patents of Edward the First. Vide more in Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 42. and Records there cited. The President and Counsel in the North. THis Counsel was raised by H. 8. by his Commission giving them two Authorities under one Great Seal; For the King having suppressed Mona∣steries of 200 l. per Annum by Act of Parliament 27 H. 8. Insurrection was raised by Lord Hussey, and 20800 Men in Lincolnshire, whom Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk appeased; and after∣wards of 40000 Men more command∣ed by Sir Robert Aske, whom the Duke of Norfolk dispersed; and afterwards a Great Commotion was raised in Lanca∣shire, Westmorland, Cumberland and Nor∣thumberland, whom the Earl of Derby quieted; and divers other Rebellions being raised, and overcome and ap∣peased, the King intending to suppress the Great Monasteries, which he brought to pass in 31 H. 8. for preventing future Dangers, By Commission 31 H. 8. gave power of Oyer and Terminer, De
quibuscunque Congregationibus, Transgres∣sionibus, Riotis, Routis, &c. per quae Pax, &c. in Com' Ebor', Northumberland, Westmorland, Durham, Com' Civitatis Ebor' Kingston super Hull, & New∣castle super Tinam gravetur, &c. secun∣dum Legem, &c. vel aliter secundum Sa∣nas Discretiones vestras, &c. Necnon quas∣cunque Actiones Reales, seu de Libero Te∣nemento, & Personales, &c. audiend & terminand'. But afterwards the said Com∣mission being adjudg'd to be against Law, First, For that the Clause Secundum Sa∣nas Discretiones vestras being Resolved by the Judges, 6 Jacobi primi, to be a∣gainst Law; and, Secondly, the latter Clause was then also so Resolved; For that Actions Real and Personal were not to be heard and determined by Commission, but Secundum Legem, &c. to the end their Authority should not be known, they procured their Com∣mission, should not give them any Au∣thority, but wholly to refer to Private Instructions given them, not to be Inrol∣led in any Court; whereof King James being informed, did give Order their Instruictions should be Inrolled for the Advantage of the Subjects. This Commission hath had continu∣ance, therefore the Lord Coke thinks it worthy of some Establishment by Par∣liament.
Henry the Eighth likewise raised a President and Council for the Western parts; but they of Devon and Cornwal opposed it: Et sic Commissio illa cito eva∣nuit. Likewise no doubt is that there hath been a President and Councl of York De facto; but what Jurisdiction they had is the Question. But now the Courts are Dissolved, the Jurisdiction being taken away by the Statute of 17 Car. 1. cap. 10. The Wardens Courts in the East, West and Middle Marshes, adjoyning to Scot∣land. THey proceed according to Marsh Law, or Borders Law; but their Jurisdiction was increased by Statutes, and confin'd to Northumberland, Cum∣berland, Westmorland, and Newcastle upon Tine. But since King James was Monarch of both Kingdoms the said Courts are vanished, and Hostile Laws on both Sides by Authority of Parliament, in either of the Kingdoms, are Repealed.
The Court of Stannaries in the Counties of Devon and Cornwal. Is so called à Stanno; and the Style of this Court is, Magna Curia Do∣mini Regis Ducatus sui Cornubiae apud Crokerenton in Com' Devon', coram A. B. Custode Stannariae dicti Domini Regis in dicto Com' Devon'. The Lord Warden hath Jurisdiction of all the Tynn in Cornwal and Devon, and is guided therein by Special Laws, by Customs, and by Prescriptions Time out of mind: And the Officers be the Steward, Under-Warden, &c. By Exposition of the Charters of 33 E. 1. Made and Declared in Parlia∣ment Anno 50 E. 3. it appears, that all Tynners, and Workers in the Tynn-Works, should be Free, so that they should not Answer for any Matter or Thing arising within the Stannaries be∣fore any other Judge or Officer, but only before the Warden of the Stan∣naries, (Except for Pleas of Land, Life, or Member) and should not depart from their Work, for the Summons of any the King's Officers, except of his said Warden of the Stannaries; and shall be quit of all Tallages, Tolls, Stallagiis, & aliis Custumis, in Towns,
Ports, Fairs, and Markets within the said County, De bonis suis propriis. Upon any cause of Complaint mi∣nistred the same is to be redressed by Appellation, First to the Steward of the Stannary-Court where the matter lyeth; Then to the Under-Warden of the Stannaries, and from him to the Lord Warden, and for want of Justice at his hands, to the Princes Privy Coun¦cil. For the Laws, Jurisdictions, &c. of this Court, see more in Co. 4 Inst. c. 45. and Records, &c. there cited. It was Resolved 4 Jac. 1. in Camera Stellata, That Stannum Tynne, otherwise White Lead, nor Black Lead, nor any other base Metal did belong to the King, by his Prerogative, as Gold and Silver do, albeit there may be tryed out of the base Metal Gold and Silver; but that is as the seed or strength of the base Metal, which being Extracted be∣comes Defective. There be Five kinds of Base Metals, viz. Aes, sive Cuprum, (because it was found out, as some hold, in Cypro) Cop∣per; Stannum, Tynn; Ferrum, Iron Plumbum, Lead; and Orychalcum, Latyn. Polybius 209 years before Christ wrote, That this Island was abundantly stored with Tynn. Britanni qui juxta Belerium
promontorium incolunt Mercatorum usu, qui eo Stanni gratia navigant humaniores re∣liquis hospites habentur; hij ex terra Saxosa cujus venas sectati effodiunt Stannum igne eductum in quandam Insulam ferunt Bri∣tannicam juxta, quam Vectam vocant: Ex hiis Insulis Mercatores emptum Stan∣num in Galliam Portant, inde diebus fere triginta cum equis ad fontem Eridani flu∣minis perducunt, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 45. The Court of the Major of the Staple. THis Court is guided by the Law Merchant, which is the Law of the Staple, and is holden at the Wool-Staple in Westminster; and there also are Two Constables, and a certain num∣ber of Correctors, to do that which per∣taineth to their Office, as in other Staples is accustomed. And though it be more ancient, is warranted by Parliament 27 Ed. 3. Whereby it is Ordained, That The Staple of Wools, Leather, Wool∣fells and Lead shall be holden at New∣castle upon Tine, York, Lincoln, Norwich, Westminster, Canterbury, Cicester, Winche∣ster, Exeter and Bristol. For Wales, at Caermardyn; and for Ireland at Deuelin, Waterford, Cork, and Droghoada. And that such as shall be carryed out of the
Land, shall be brought to some of the said Staple-Towns, to be weighed by the Standard, and the Customs paid. But from such of the said Staple-Towns which are not Port Towns, the said Staple Commodities shall be sent to the next respective Port Towns, as from Westminster to London, &c. there to be weighed again by the Customers. Item, That in every Town where the Staple is Ordained, shall be a Mayor chosen yearly by the Comminalty, who hath knowledge in the Law Merchant, and Two convenable Constables, who have power to keep the Peace, arrest the Offenders in Staples for Debts, Tres∣pass, and other Contracts, and them to Imprison and punish after the Law of the Staple, and a Prison appointed for that purpose. The Mayors, Sheriffs, and Bayliffs of the Towns where the Staple is, or joyning to the Staple, shall be at∣tending to the Mayors and Ministers of the Staple, for Executing their Commandments upon grievous Forfei∣ture; and one Lord or other of the most Sufficient where the Staple is, shall be assigned to be Aidant to the Mayor and Ministers of the Staple, to justifie the Rebels that cannot be justified by the Mayors and Ministers of the Sta∣ple,
and to redress all Complaints, &c. The Bounds of the Staple at Westmin∣ster, shall begin at Temple-Bar, and ex∣tend to Tuthill. In other Cities and Towns, within the Walls; and where there are no Walls, through all the City or Town. By the Statute of 27 Ed. 3. the Major of the Staple may take Recognizances of Debts under the Seal of the Office, but not with the Seal of the Par∣ty. By the Statute of 23 H. 8. the Major of the Staple at Westminster, and Re∣corder of the City of London, in the absence of the Two Chief Justices out of Term, have power to take Recogni∣zances of Debts, according to that Sta∣tute, and this is in the Nature of a Statute Staple; but it hath besides the Seal of those that take it; the Seal of the Party. By the Statute of 36 Ed. 3. Merchant Strangers may sue before the Major of the Staple, according to Law Merchant, or at the Common Law. By the Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 17. there are in England Five Staple Merchan∣dizes, viz. Wool, Woolfells, Leather, Lead, and Tyn.
The Mayor and Constables are sworn in Chancery, to do lawfully that which pertaineth unto them. That Staple cometh from the French Estape, signifying a Mart, or Market; and for other Matters concerning the Staple, see Coke's 4 Inst. cap 46. and the Statutes, and Records there mention∣ed. The Principality of Wales. WALLIA, Wales, by the Saxons called , Wales, unde Wallenses, Walli (i. e.) Exteri seu Pergrini. The Britons calling English∣men Saisons. They are of the Posterity of the ancient Britons, Inhabiting on the West part of Great Brittany. This was sometime a Realm, or Kingdom, Governed per Regulos suos. But Jure Feodali the Kingdom of Wales was holden of the Crown of Eng∣land, and thereby (as Bracton saith) was Sub potestate Regis, and so continued un∣til the 11th Year of King Edward the First, when he subdued the Prince of Wales, and Executed him for Treason. Whereof Fleta (who lived in those days) speaketh thus: Et unico Malefa∣ctori plura poterunt infligi tormenta, sicut
contigit de Davide Principe Walliae, cum per Edwardum Quinque Judiciis morta∣libus torquebatur, suis namque Meritis exigentibus, Detractus, Suspensus, Dismem∣bratus fuit, & combustus, cujus caput prin∣cipali Civitati, quatuorque Quarteria ad quatuor partes Regni in Odium tradit deferebuntur suspendendum. And in the 12th of E. 1. by Parlia∣ment it is declared,(speaking in the Person of the King, as ancient Statutes were wont to do) Divina Providentia quae in sua dispositione non fallitur, inter alia, suae dispensationis munera quibus nos & Regnum nostrum Angliae decorari dig∣nata est, Terram Walliae cum Incolis suis prius nobis Jure Feodali Subjectam, jam sui gratia in Proprietatis nostrae Dominium Obstaculis quibuscunque cessantibus Totali∣ter & cum Intergritate convertit, & Corona Regni praedicti tanquam partem corporis ejusdem annexuit & univit. Yet this Wise and Warlike Nation, was long after this not satisfied; especially for that taking part with their Rightful Liege Lord King Richard the Second, In Revenge thereof many severe Laws were made against them in the Reigns of H. 4. H. 5. &c. And they were never in quiet, till H. 7. their own Country-man (as de∣scended from Owen ap Meredith, ap
Theodore, who Married Katharine Daugh∣ter of France, and Dowager of King Henry the Fifth, and was by Commis∣sion found to be Lineally descended from Cadwallader King of the Britons) obtained the Crown. And yet not so really Reduced in his time, as in the Reign of his Son King Henry the Eighth, when The Principality of Wales, and Do∣minions thereof, was by Act of Parlia∣ment 27 H. 8. Incorporated and Uni∣ted to the Realm of England: And it is thereby Enacted, That every Sub∣ject born in Wales, should enjoy the Liberties, Rights and Laws of this Realm, and have Knights of Shires, and Burgesses of Parliament, &c. One Knight for each Shire, and One Bur∣gess for each Burrough, and the Laws of England used in Wales. Vide le Stat. And this Principality consisteth of 12 Counties, whereof Eight (viz.) Glamor∣gan, Anglesey, Carnarvan, Pembroke, Meri∣oneth, Flint, Carmarthan, and Cardigan, by Statutum Walliae, were Erected 12 E. 1. And the other, (viz.) Brecknock, Radnor, Denby, and Montgomeroy, by 27 H. 8. Besides the Shire of Monmouth, and other Lordships, and Manors in the Marshes united to Salop, Herefordshire, and Gloucester.
The Court of the President and Council of Wales. THis is a Court of Equity before the President and Council there, Warranted by the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 36. with Reference to Presciption before, in these Words: There shall be and remain a President and Council in the said Dominion, and Principality of Wales, and the Marshes of the same, with all Officers, Clerks and Incidents to the same, in manner as here∣tofore hath been used, who shall have Power to hear and determine by their Wis∣doms, and Discretions, such Causes and Matters as be, or hereafter shall be assign'd to them by the King's Majesty, as hereto∣fore hath been accustomed. They sit by force of the King's Commission and Instructions, and pro∣ceed as in a Court of Equity by their Wisdoms and Discretions; Hereford∣shire, Worcestershire, Shropshire, and Glou∣cester, are included within this Commis∣sion, pretending that these Four Shires are within the Marshes of Wales. This Court is now Dissolved.
The Great Sessions in Wales. BY the Statute of 34 H. 8. It is Or∣dained, That there shall be Sessions holden and kept Twive in every Year. in every of the said Shires within the Dominion of Wales, which shall be cal∣led The King's Great Sessions in Wales. The Justice of Chester should hold those Sessions in the Shires of Denbigh, Flint and Montgomeroy; and have no∣thing but his old Fee of 100 l. for the same. That the Justice of North Wales shall likewise hold the Sessions for the Shires of Carnarvan, Merioneth, and Anglesey, and shall have Fifty Pounds yearly of the King for his Fee. That one Person Learned in the Laws appointed by the King, shall be Justice of the Shires of Radnor, Brecknock, and Glamorgan, and shall hold the said Sessions there, and shall have Fifty Pounds yearly of the King for his Fee. That one other person Learned in the Laws, and appointed by the King, shall be Justice for the Shires of Car∣marthan, Pembroke, and Cardigan, and shall keep the Sessions there, and have the like
Sum of Fifty Pounds yearly of the King for his Fee. The said Justices shall have several Letters Patents, and Commissions for their Offices under the Great Seal of England, to be Excercised by themselves, or their sufficient Deputies, according to the purposes and intents in their Ordinance specified. These Justices may hear and deter∣mine all Pleas of the Crown, as the Chief Justice and other Justices of the King's-Bench may do in their places, and elsewhere in the Realm of Eng∣land; and all Pleas of Assize, and all other Pleas and Actions, Real, Personal, or Mixt, as the Chief Justice of the Common Place in England, or other Justices of the same Place, may do in the Realm of England. That open Proclamation being made in the Shire-Towns Fifteen days before of the Time, and Place they intend to keep the said Sessions, the said Sessions shall be held and continued for Six days together, according to the former Custom heretofore used in North-Wales. The Seals devised for each Division, to be kept by the Steward and Cham∣berlain of each Division.
Four Judicial Seals to be in the Cu∣stody of the Four Justices respectively, and the Teste of Process Judicial shall be in the Name of the Justice who shall pass it. Fines, Concords, Recoveries, &c. taken before the said Justices within their Authority respectively, without any Dedimus potestatem, as before the Justice of the Common Place in England. There shall be Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Quorum, and Custos Ro∣tulorum Commissionated by the King in Every of the said Counties, not ex∣ceeding Eight in a County; and those, or two of them in each County, where∣of one to be of the Quorum, may keep their Sessions Four times in the Year, or oftner if urgent occasion requires, and have like Authority, and Fees as Justices in England, Sheriffs, Escheators, Coroners, Constables of Hundreds, and other Officers, and their Courts to be had, and holden as in England. Vide le Statute. Rodry Maure King of VVales, who died Anno 877, in the time of Alured King of England, and left Three Sons, Mervyn, Anarawd, and Cadelh, Divided his Kingdom into Three parts; Guy∣neth, which the English call North-VVales, the Latins Venedotia, he gave to
Mervyn, or as some say to Anarawd; Powisland, in Latin Powisia, which some call VVest-VVales, he gave to A∣narawd, or as some say to Cadelh; and Deheobarth, which the English call South-VVales, and the Latins Demetia, he gave to Cadelh, or as some say to Mervyn: The First was the best, because the Quietest, the Second often Invaded by the English, and into the Third In∣cursions were often made by the English, Norman, and Fleming. The Division of this Kingdom, brought in time such Division amongst these Princes, that it was never quiet till it came under one Monarch and King again: For the Royal Dignity of a Monarch, or King, from whence all other Subordinate Dignities Tanquam Lumen de Lumine are derived, without any Diminution, will suffer no Division, Regia dignitas est Indivisibilis & quaelibet alia derivativa Dignitas est similiter indi∣visibilis. King Edward the Third in the 17th year of his Reign, by Charter Esta∣blished in Parliament, created his Son Son (called the Black Prince) Prince of VVales, in these words: De Concilio Praelatorum Comitum Baronum & Com∣muniam in Generali Parliamento nostro apud Wesmonaster' die Lunae in Quin∣dena
Paschae proximè praeterito convocato Ipsum Edwardum Pricipem Walliae feci∣mus & creavimus. Et dictum Princi∣patum sibi dedimus & concessimus, & per Chartam nostram confirmavimus ac ip∣sum de dicto Principatu, ut ibidem prae∣ficiendo praesidiat & praesidendo dictas partes dirigat & defendat per sertum in Capite & Annulum in Digito aureum, ac virgam argenteam investivimus juxta morem, Habendum & tenendum de nobis sibi & Haeredibus suis Regibus Angliae im∣perpetuum, &c. And in the same manner, is the No∣ble and primary County Palatine of Chester, granted to him at the same time with the same words, Sibi & Hae∣redibus suis Regibus Angliae, which im∣port a limited Fee; and that by his de∣cease, or attaining to the Crown, these Dignities might be Extinguished in the Crown, to the end the King for the time being, might have the Honour and power to create his Heir apparent Prince of VVales, and Earl of Chester, as he himself had been by his Progeni∣tors. But otherwise it is in the Case of the Dutchy of Cornwal, Vide Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 48. that being without Creation and ever since 11 Ed. 3. the First begotten Son of the King is ever Duke of Corn∣wal.
And this may suffice for a Short Sur∣vey of the Principality of Wales. And now proceed to The Military Government of Eng∣land. THe King hath the Sole Su∣pream Goverment, Command, and Disposition of the Milita∣ry Power of England, both by Land and Sea; As is at large declared in Parliament, Anno 14 Car. 2. And By Land, the next under the King is the Generalissimo (when in being) of all his Majesties Forces in his Three Kingdoms, Horse, and Foot in Say, as well within Garison, as without. These Forces in the late King Charles the Seconds time, consisted of 4 Regi∣ments of Foot, The King's Regiment 24 Companies and near 1700 Men, The Dukes Regiment 720 Men, Ano∣ther Regiment 600 Men, And the Earl of Craven's Regment of 960 Men, And the Earl of Oxford's Regiment, consisting of 8. Troops, about 500 Horse besides Officers.
There were likewise in King Charles the Seconds time, Three compleat Troops of Horse for his Life-Guard, The Kings Troop 200 Horse, The Queens Troop 150 Horse, and the Duke of Yorks Troop 150 Horse. The rest of his Majesties Forces in constant pay were disposed under se∣veral Governors in several Garisons, of which there are about Thirty two, and in some of them, the King had 500 Men in constant pay. The pay of a Colonel of Horse 12 s. per diem, A Collonel of Foot 20 s. per diem, and other Officers proportionably. Each of the Life-Guards 4 s. per diem, And each Trooper 2 s. 6 d. per diem, Each Foot Soldier in London 10 d. per diem, Each Foot Soldier in Garrison 8 d. per diem. These Forces were afterwards much encreased, but no Orders are yet set∣led by Act of Parliament for these Land Forces, as there are for Sea Forces. But now they are settled by Act of Parliament to be 7000 natural born Subjects, The Officers included. Besides these Forces before mention∣ed the Standing Militia of the King∣dom is settled in the King, by Acts of Parliament Tempore Car. 2. to be Go∣verned, Ordered, and Enlarged from time to time, as his Majesty shall see occasion.
For Government of these the King by Commission, Creates divers of the Peers of the Kingdom. Lieutenants of the several Counties, with power to Arm, Array, and Form into Compa∣nies, Troops, and Regiments, and to conduct upon occasion of Rebellion, or Invasion, and employ there Men so Armed within their respective Coun∣ties, or into any other County as the King shall direct, To give Commissi∣ons to Colonels, and other Commissi∣onated Officers, To present to the King the Names of Deputy Lieutenants, To charge ay person with Horse, Horse-Men, and Arms, or Foot Soldiers and Arms within the said County propor∣tionable to their Estates, with limitati∣on that no person be charged with a Horse, unless he hath 500 l. yearly, or 6000 l. personal Estate, or with a Foot Soldier unless he hath 50 l. yearly, or 600 l.personal Estate; Those that have meaner Estates are to joyn Two or Three together, to find a Horse, or Horseman, or a Foot Soldier. The said Horse, or Foot to Muster once or twice a year, and each Horse-Man while he serves to have 2 s. a day, and each Foot Soldier 12 d. per diem.
They have likewise power to levy a Fourth part of the Tax of 70000 l. per Mensem, for Ammunition; And in case of Marching against an Enemy, they have power to cause every Man so charged, to allow each Soldier a Months pay, which the King is after to pay, before they be charged, with another Months pay. In 1588, Upon the Muster made by Commission from Queen Eliz. in ex∣pectation of the Spanish Invasion, there were found to be Three Millions, and of those fit for War about 600000 Men. In all times of danger, some are set to watch at every Beacon, to give notice in a few Hours to the whole Kingdom. There were anciently many Castles in all parts of England; But Inland Castles have been either demolished, or willingly suffered to decay, that Re∣bels, or Invaders might have no Shel∣ter, or the Invaded any Refuge to Fly to, whereby to occasion any Lin∣gring. And now we come to the Military Courts, amongst which the chief is
The Court of Chivalry before the Constable and Marshal. THis Court is called Curia Militaris, and the Marshal Court, wherein the Lord Constable, and Earl Marshal of England are Judges; And is the Fountain of the Martial Law. Constable Is compounded of two Saxon words, Cunning, per contractionem King, & Stable, id est, Columen. q. Columen Regis anciently written Coningstable. Marshal, Likewise of two Saxon wards, Mare for Equus, and Stale for Curator. The Jurisdiction is declared by the Statute of 13 R. 1. To the Con∣stable it appertaineth to have Conu¦sance of Contracts, and Deeds of Arms, and of War out of the Realm, and also of Things that touch War within the Realm; which cannot be determined, or discussed by the Com∣mon Law, with other Usages and Cu∣stoms to the same pertaining, which other Constables have duly and rea∣sonably used in their time, joyning to the same that every Plaintiff shall de∣clare plainly his Matter in his Petition, before that any Man be sent for to an∣swer thereunto; And if any will com∣plain,
that any Plea be commenced be∣fore the Constable, and Marshal that might be Tried by the Law of the Land, the same Complainant shall have a Privy Peal of the King, without difficulty directed to the said Consta∣ble, and Marshal to Purcease in that Plea, till it be discussed by the King's Council, if that Matter ought and of right pertaineth to that Court; Or otherwise, to be Realm of England, and also, that they Purcease in the mean time. For Tryal by Battel between the Lord Morley, and the Earl of Sarum, and divers others there cited, See Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 17. In an Appeal between Upton and Down 8 Hen. 6. after Battle joyned, the King's Writ out of the Chancery Issued to the Sheriffs of London, as fol∣loweth: REx &c. Vic' London salutem Praecipi∣mus vobis firmiter injungentes quod quasdam Listas & Barras de Maremio for∣tes & satis sufficientes pro quodam Duello inter Joh. Upton Appellantem & Johan' Downe Defend' Secundum Legem Armo∣rum die Lunae prox' futur' apud Westsmith∣field in Suburb' Civitatis praed' Deodanti
perficiend' contra diem praed' nostris Sumptibus & Expensis erigi; construeri & fieri fac' in Omnibus prout in Ultimo Du∣ello ibidem facto fact fuer' & quod terra inter Listas praed' cum sabulo sufficienter & Equalitter cooperiatur Ita quod aliqui Lapides Grandes, aut arena infra easdem Listas minime inveniantur quovis modo: Et de omnibus & singulis paecuniarum Summis quas circa praemissa aplicaveritis nos vobis in computo vestro ad Scaccarium per praesens madatum nostrum debi∣tam allocationem habere faciemus, &c. And by a French Manuscript Inti∣tuled, Modus faciendi Duellum Coram Rege Bone Foy & Droit & Ley de Armes voet quel Apellant encourge mesme peyne que le Defendant deveroit sil soit Convicte & discomfit, And this seemeth to be consonant to the Law of God, Deut. 19, 18. They proceed according to the Cu∣stoms and Usages of the Court, and in cases omitted according to the Civil Law, Secundum Legem Armorum, and therefore upon Attainders before the Constable, and Marshal, no Land is Forfeited, or corruption of Blood wrought.
It was resolved in the Reign of Queen Eliz. in the Case of Sir Francis Drake, who struck off the Head of Dowty, in Partibus transmarinis; That his Brother and Heir might have an Appeal. Sed Regina noluit constituere Constabularium Angliae, &c. & ideo dormivit Appel∣lum. The Proceeding, and Sentences here is upon Witnesses or Combat, and not by Jury; and after Sentence in this Court in Case of Arms, the party grieved may Appeal to the King. What Judgment shall be given, when either party is vanquished, and when Tryal by Battel shall be for things within the Realm, before the Justices of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas, Vide Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 17. Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts, Fol. 82. The effect of the Grant of the Of∣fice of Constable, is in few words, Officium Constabularij Angliae unacum Omnibus Feodis, proficuis, comditatibus, & Emolumentis quibuscun{que} Offico, prae∣dicto qualitercun{que} pertinentibus, & ab antiquo debitis & consuetis. And now as in some respects incident to this Court, as being created by the Earl Marshal, we shall in the next place speak somewhat of.
The Colledge of Heralds. OF this Collegiate Society are Three Stiled Reges Armorum, Anglorum, Kings at Arms, the principal of which is called Garter, Instituted by King Henry the 5th, whose Office is to attend the Knights of the Garter at their Solem∣nities; To Advertise them of their E∣lection, And to call them to be Instal∣led at Windsor; To cause their Arms to be hung upon their Seats there; To carry the Garter to Kings and Princes beyond Seas; for which pur∣pose he was wont to be joyned in Commission with some principal Peer of the Realm, and to Marshal the So∣lemnities and the Funerals of all the Higher Nobility of England. The next is Clarencieux, So called from the Duke of Clarence, to whom he first belong∣ed, which Dukedom Escheating to King Edw. the 4th, by the Death of his Brother George Duke of Clarence; he made this Herald a King at Arms, and named him Clarencieux in French, and Clarentius in Latin.
His Office is to Marshal and dispose the Funerals of the Lesser Nobility, as Baronets, Knights and Gentlemen, on the Southside of Trent, and therefore sometimes called Surroy, or Southroy. And then Norroy or Northroy, whose Office is to do the like on the Northside of Trent; And these Two last are called Provincial Heralds. These by Charter have power to visit Noblemens Families, to set down their Pedigrees, to distinguish their Arms, to appoint Men their Arms and Ensigns, and with Garter to direct the Heralds. And next are the Six Heralds anciently belonging to Dukes have been sometime nam∣ed Dukes at Arms, and are thus called, and ranked, Windsor, Richmond, Chester, Sommerset, York and Lancaster; Their Office anciently was to attend Dukes in Marshal Execution, now to wait at Court, attend publick Solemni∣ties, Proclaim War, and Peace, &c. And perhaps named Heralds from the German Here, and Healt; that is, The Armies Champion, to denounce War, or offer Peace, as the Feciales of the Romans did.
These wait by turns upon the Kings at Arms, and have part of their Fees; And of these antiently were many, as likewise of Pursuivants. But now there are but Four Pursuivants named Rouge Crosse, Rouge Dragon, Portcullice and Blew∣mantle, from such Badges heretofore worn by them as is throught. These King's Heralds, and Pursui∣eants were anciently Crowned, and had their Creation from the Kings Hand; But of later times the Earl Marshal hath had a Commissions for every particular Creation by Letters Patents; The manner whereof, you may see in the Present State of Eng∣land. They were incorporated by King Richard the 3d, and afterwards had an∣other Charter of Priviledge, by King Edward 6th, in the Third year of his Reign. The Duty of the whole Colledge is to Marshal and Order Coronations, Marriages, Christnings, Funerals, In∣terviews, Feasts of Kings and Princes, Cavalcades, Justes, Tournaments, Com∣bates before the Constable, and Mar∣shal, &c. Also, they take care of the Coats of Arms, of the Genealogies of the Nobility, and Gentry, and whatso∣ever
concerns Honour is their Care and Study; They are Tanquam sacrorum Custodes, & Templi Honoris Aeditui. All these receive Annual Stipends out of the Exchequer; Are all to be Gentlemen at least, and the Six He∣ralds at their Creation are expresly made Esquires by the King. When Capias, or Exigent are award∣ed against a Peer, or Baron, he may have a Writ to command that they Sue out no other Process against him, than what they ought to have against Lords, and Great Men, which come to the Parliament by the ancient Laws, and Customs of England. Edmond Dein Court of Langley in Com' Lincoln'; By Letters Patents from Ed. 2. had License to Assign his Surname, Arms, and Possessions, which 19 E. 2. he accordingly did: But the Lord Hoc Tempore Edw. 4th Granting his Name, Arms, and Dignity over without the King's License, the same was in Par∣liament adjudged void. The Grant of Earl Marshal of Eng∣land by Letters Patents of Rich. the 2d, and other Grants thereof, you may see more at large, Coke's 4 Institutes cap. 17.
The Maritime Power of England. ALL the King's Maritime Forces, are under the Command of the Lord High Admiral of England, so called from Amir in Arabick, and  in Greek; that is, Praefectus Ma∣rinis, A compound word from the Eastern Empire, introduced into Eng∣land after the Wars in the Holy Land, by King Richard or King Edward the first. His Patent was antiently Angliae Hiberniae & Acquitaniae Magnus Admi∣rallus: But now it is Angliae & Hiberniae & Dominiorum & Insularum eorundem Villae Calesiae & Marchiarum ejusdem, Normandiae, Gasconiae & Acquitaniae Magnus Admirallus, & Praefectus Gene∣ralis Classis & Marium dictorum Regno∣rum: And this Office for the Great Trust and Honour, is usally given to the King's younger Son, near Kins∣man, Or one of the Principal Nobi∣lity. He hath power to Commissionate a Vice-Admiral, a Rear-Admiral, All Sea Captains, And also Deputies for particular Coasts, Coroners, Commissi∣oners,
and Judges for the Court of Ad∣miralty, to Imprison, Release, &c. and sometimes to confer Knighthood on such as deserve it at Sea. To him by Law and Custom belong Penalties, and Amerciaments of Tran∣sgressors at Sea, on the shore in Ports and from the first Bridge, on Rivers towards the Sea; Also the Goods of Pirates, Felons, or Capital Faulters con∣demned, Outlawed or Horned; All Waifs, Strays, Goods, Wrecks of Sea, Deodands, a share of lawful Prizes, Lagon, Jetsam, and Flotsam; that is, Goods lying in the Sea, on the Ground, Goods Floating on the Sea, and Goods cast by the Sea on Shore, not granted to Lords of Mannors adjoyning to the Sea; All great Fishes, as Sea-Hogs, and others of Extraordinary bigness called Royal Fishes, Except Whales, and Sturgeons. To the Crown of England belongs the Sovereignty of the Narrow-Sea round the Island of Great Britain, whereof by Ancient Right it hath had Possession in all times, and King Edgar stiled himself Sovereign of the Narrow-Seas. In Testimony whereof the Swedes, Danes, Hollanders, &c. were wont to aske leave to pass the British-Seas, and
to take Licenses to Fish therein: And to this day Strike Sail to all the Ships of War belonging to the King of England, as oft as they pass by any of them; thereby acknowledging his So∣vereignty according to an Ordinance made at Hastings in Sussex by King John, about 450 years ago. To maintain this Right, Protect Trade, and Defend their Kingdoms; The Kings of England have Ships of War for Strength, Beauty, and Sailing, Surpassing all other in the World; of these, such as Ships then were King Edgar is said to have 3600; And the late King Charles had 7 of the First Rate, 9 of the Second Rate, 22 of the Fifth, and 18 of the Sixth Rate, be∣sides 30 Fireships, and several Small Vessels, for Tenders, and Victual∣lers. The Royal Sovereign Built by King Charles the first 1637, being of the First Rate, was in Length by the Keel 127 Foot, in Breadth by the Beam 47 Foot, in Depth 49 Foot, her Draught of Water 21 Foot, Burthen in all 2072 Tunns, and 1492 Tunns besides Guns and Tackle, hath 6 Anchors, the big∣gest 6000 l. weight, and the least 4300 l. weight, 14 Cables, the greatest 21
Inches compass, and weighs 9000 l. weight, the least 8 Inches compass, weighing near 1300 l.weight, 18 Masts, and Yards, the Main Mast 113 Foot long, and 38 Inches Diameter, the Main Yard 105 Foot long, and 23 In∣ches Diameter, and her Main Top 15 Foot Diameter; Had 10 several sorts of Sails, Her greatest called the Main Course, contained with her Bonnet 1640 yards of Canvas Ipswich double, The least called the Foretop Gallant Sail 130 yards of Canvas. The com∣pleat suit cost 404 l. The weight of Sea store in point of Ground Tackle and other Cordage, 60 Tuns, 800 and odd Pounds. Shee carried a Long boat of 50 Foot, a Pinnace of 30 Foot, and a Skiff of 27 Foot long. The weight of her Rigging 33 Tun, She hath 3 Tires of Guns, 44 in the Upper, 34 in the Second, and 22 in the Lower Tire, in all 100 Guns. She carried Officers, Soldiers, and Mariners, in all 850 Men. The charge for Victuals, Ammuni∣tion, Wages, Wear, and Tear every Month at Sea costs 3500 l.
The Charge of Building a First Rate Ship, with Guns, Tackle and Rigging, doth usually amount to 62432, the lesser Rates Charge is proportionable, A Second Rate carries from 56 to 80 Guns, A Third Rate from 58 to 70 Guns, A Fourth Rate from 40 to 60 Guns, A Fifth Rate from 24 to 32 Guns, A Sixth Rate from 6 to 18 Guns. The Lord High Admiral may fitly be reputed Vice-Roy of the Maritime Kingdom of England; Nam in Mari sunt Regna distincta idque Jure Gentium sicut in arida Terra. The Vice-Admiral, is an Officer to whom next under the High Admiral it belongs, to see the Royal Navy kept in good Repair, The Wages of Mariners, and Shipwrights duly paid, and the Ships provided of all things neces∣sary. The Lord High Admiral doth ap∣point in divers parts of the Kingdom Vice Admirals, with their Judges and Marshals, by Patent under the Great Seal of the Admiralty; These do Ex∣ercise Jurisdiction in Maritime Affairs within their Limits, and if any be ag∣grieved by their Sentence, or Decree, he may Appeal to the High Court of Admiralty, and of these round the
Coasts, are about 22 in England and Wales. The Lord High Admiral hath Courts for the Maritime Affairs, whereof the Principal is at London and called The Court of Admiralty. IN this Court Erected as some hold by Edward the Third, The Lord Admiral hath a Lieutenant, called Judge of the Admiralty, who is com∣monly some Learned Doctor of the Civil Law. Because The Proceeding is in all Civil Mat∣ters according to the Civil Law; The Sea being without the Limits of the Common Law, and by Libel they Proceed to the Action, the Plaintiff giving caution to prosecute the Suit, and to pay what shall be adjudged a∣gainst him if he fail therein, The De∣fendant also giving Security, or Cau∣tion as the Judge shall think meet, that he will appear in Judgment, and pay that which shall be adjudged against him, and that he will ratify what∣ever his Proctors shall do in his name.
Besides the Civil Law, The Laws of Rhodes and Oleron are here used, The former for their Excellency being In∣corporated into the Volumes of the Civil Laws, And Oleron being an Island in the Bay of Aquitain, belong∣ing to the Crown of England, King Richard the first, there Compiled such Excellent Laws for Sea Matters, that in the Ocean Sea Westward, they had almost as much Repute as the Rhodian Laws in the Mediterranean, and these Laws were called La Rool de Oleron. Many Statutes and Ordinances were made by King Edward the Third, and other Princes and People, as at Rome, Pisa Genoa, Marseilles, Barcelona, and Messina, yet that Fragment of the Rho∣dian Law, still extant, holds the Pre∣eminence in Maritime Affairs. The Customs and former Decrees of the English Court of Admiralty are there, of Force for deciding Contro∣troversies. And under this Court there is also A Court of Equity for determining Differences between Merchant and Merchant. In Criminal Affairs, which is most commonly about Piracy, The Proceed∣ing in this Court was by Accusation, and Information, by a Man's own Con∣fession,
or by Eye — witnesses he was found Guilty before he could be Con∣demned; But that being found incon∣venient, there were two Statutes made by King Henry the Eighth, that Crimi∣nal Affairs should be Tried by Witnes∣ses, and Jury, and that by Special Commission from the King to the Lord High Admiral, wherein some of the Judges of the Realm are ever Com∣missioners, and the Tryal according to the Laws of England directed by those Statutes as is herein after menti∣oned. Between the Common Law of Eng∣land, and the Civil Law, there seems to be Divisum Imperium; For in the Sea so far as the Low Water mark is coun∣ted Infra Corpus Comitatus adjacentis, and Causes there arising determinable by the Common Law: yet when the Sea is full, the Admiral hath Jurisdicti∣on there also (so long as the Sea Flows) over Matters done between the Low Water mark, and the Land, as appears in Hen. Constables Case, Coke's 5 Rep. fol. 107. But for these Limitations, and Juris∣dictions of the Court of Admiralty, see the Statutes above mentioned, And the Statute of 13 R. 2. & 15 R. 2. & 27 Eliz. cap. 11. Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 22.
And for regulating his Majesties Na∣vies, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea, Vide le Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 9. And now as pertinent hereunto, we shall say somewhat of The Navy Office. THe Treasurer is to Receive out of the Exchequer by Warrant from the Lord High Treasurer of England, and pay all charges of the Navy by Warrant from the principal Officers of the Navy, his Salary is 220 l. 13 s. 4 d. besides 3 d. in the pound of all Moneys paid by him. The Comptroller of the Navy, who is to Attend and Comptrol all Payment of Wages, To know the Market Rates of all Stores belonging to Shipping, To Examine and Audit all Treasurers, Vi∣ctuallers, and Store-keepers Accompts, &c. his Salary 500 l. per Annum. The Surveyor of the Navy, whose Office is generally to know the State of all Stores, and see the wants supplied, to find Hulls, Masts, and Yards, and Estimate the value of Repairs, by In∣denture to charge all Boat-swains, and Carpenters of his Majesties Navy, with what Stores they receive, and at the end of each Voyage to State
and Audit their Accompts, his Salary 490 l. The Clerk of the Acts is to Record all Orders, Contracts, Bills, Warrants, and other Transactions, by the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Na∣vy. The Commissioners of the Navy, whose Office is as above specified, and Salary to each is 500 l. yearly. Two other Commissioners to be at Ports∣mouth, and Chatham, always in readi∣ness to give Orders for better Manage∣ment of his Majesties Affairs in his Yards, and Store-houses; Salary to each 350 l. Each of these Officers above-named, have Two Clerks and some more, all paid by the Treasurer of the Navy: All hold their Places by Patent from the King, and most of them during plea∣sure. The King hath for his Navy Royal, and Stores, Four Great Yards or Store-Houses, (viz.) at Chatham, Deptford, Woolwich and Portsmouth, where his Ships are built, Repaired, and Laid up, after their Voyage. In which Yards are employed Divers Officers, of which Six are principal; The Clerk of the Check, Salary about 180 l. per Annum; Store-Keepers, Salary 286 l. per Annum, Ma∣ster Attendants, Two at Chatham 100 l.
per Annum; Master Shipwright, Salary about 113 l. per Annum; Clerk of the Comptooll 100 l. per Annum; Clerk of the Survey 140 l. per Annum; The Charges of their Clerks, and Instruments are included in their Salaries. His Majesty hath Divers Rope-Yards, as at Chatham, Deptford, VVoolwich and Portsmouth; where are made the Cable, and Cordage for his Navy. In time of War the King hath a Yard at Harwich, where out of War is continued An Officer at 100 l. yearly. This whole Navy Office is govern'd by The Lord Admiral, whose Lieutenant Admiral hath Salary 20 s. per diem, and 10 l. per Mensem for each Servant, whereof he is allowed 16. The Lord Admiral's Secretary hath a Salary from the King of 500 l. per An∣num. All the Under Officers, as well those in Yards, as those belong to Ships, hold their Places by Warrant from The Lord High Admiral of England. The Ordinary Charge of the King's Navy in time of Peace is scarce 70000 l. per Annum, besides the Building of Ships, Setting out Fleets, &c. which some years even in Peaceable Times amounts to 12 or 1300000 l. more, as may easily be computed.
The Court of Commission by force of the Statute of 28 H. 8. cap. 15. THis Court must be held coram Ad∣mirallo Angliae seu ejus Locum tenente, and Three or Four such other substan∣tial Persons as shall be Named by the the Lord Chancellor. Their Jurisdiction is to hear and de∣termine all Treasons, Felonies, Rob∣beries, Murders, and Confederacies, committed or done upon the Sea, &c. These Offences shall be heard, and determined according to the Common Law; and therefore some of the Judges of the Realm are ever in Commis∣sion. The Mischief before making this Statute you may see Co. 3 Inst. cap. Piracy, Vide Co. 4 Inst. The Port Courts. A Port-Mote, is a Court kept in Ha∣ven Towns, or Ports, and there∣of taketh his Name Curia Portus. Portus à portando, Est locus in quo Expor∣tantur & Importantur Merces; and they are Portae Regni, The Gates of the Realm. Hitha, and Heda, often in Doomsday is taken for a Haven, or Port, anciently written
Hafne, and now Haven, and hereof cometh Queen-Hith in London, and Lambhith. Every Haven is within the Body of the County, whereof see more in Coke's 4th Institutes, Court of Admiralty, and the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 15. Commissioners and others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light-Houses, Sea-Marks, and concerning Watches. BEacon is from the Saxon Bechan, which is Signum dare, and we use the word to Becken at this day. Before Edward the Third they set Stacks of Wood in High Places; but in his time Pitch Boxes, as now they be, were set up, and this is properly called a Beacon. Light-Houses, Ignes Speculatorij seu Lumen Maritimum, are properly to direct Sea-faring Men in the Night when they cannot see Marks, and these also Signa speculatoria sui Pharus, unde Ver∣sus. Lumina Noctivagae tollit Pharus aemula Lunae. Sea-Marks, as Steeples, Churches, Ca∣stles, Trees, and such like for direction
of Seafaring Men in the Day time, are called signa Marina, or Speculatoria, or signa Nautis; whereof Virg. 5 Aeneis, Hic viridem Aeneas frondenti ex ilice Me∣tam, Constituit signum Nautis pater unde re∣verti, Sciverit & longos, ubi circumflectere Cur∣sus. At the Common Law none could Erect any of these Three, but the King; It being done ever by the King's Com∣mission under the Great Seal; But of later times by Letters Patents to the Lord Admiral, he hath power to Erect the same. By the Act of 8 Eliz. the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of Trinity-House of Deptford Stroud (a Company of the chiefest and most expert Masters and Governours of Ships) shall and may lawfully from time▪ to time, at their will and pleasure, and at, their costs, Make, Erect, and Set up such, and so many Beacons, Marks and Signs for the Sea in the Sea-shoars and Upland places near the Sea-coasts, or Forelands of the Sea, only for Sea Marks, as to them shall seem most meet, whereby the Dangers may be avoided, and Ships
the better come to their Ports: And all such beacons, Marks, and Signs so by them to be Erected, shall be conti∣nued, renewed, and maintained from time to time, at the Costs and Charges of the said Master, Wardens, and Assi∣stants. If any cut down, &c. any Beacon, &c. by the Statute of 8 Eliz. 13. he shall incur the Penalty therein menti∣oned; which if he be not able to pay, he shall be ipso facto convict of Ut∣lawry. Vide Coke's 4. Inst. cap. 25. The Tran∣script of a Manuscript. Ordination, which hath been observ'd for Watch to be kept in the County of Norfolk from Lyme to Yarmouth; and it is very probable the like hath been done by like Authority in other Maritime Coun∣ties. Vide Stat. 5 H. 4. cap. 3. Watches to be made in the Sea Coasts in places of Danger through the Realm, by the Number of People, and in manner they were wont to be made in times past.
De Conservatore Treugarum (i. e.) Indu∣ciarum & Salvorum Regis Conduc∣tuum. BY 2 H. 5. Conservatorum Induciarum & salvorum Regis conductuum was Praised, and Appointed in every Port of the Sea by Letters Patents; His Office was to Inquire of all Offences done against the King's Truces, and fafe Conducts upon the Main Sea (out of the Counties, and out of the Liberties of the Cinque-Ports) as Admi∣rals of Custom were wont. It concerns the Jurisdiction of divers Courts, especially the Court before-mentioned upon the Statute of 28 H. 8. and of the Court of Admiralty, to know the Rights of Leagues and Am∣bassadors, as far as the Laws of England Extend unto. All Leagues, or Safe Conducts are, or ought to be of Record Inrolled in Chancery, that the Subject may know who may be in Amity with the King, and who not; who be Enemies, and can have no Action here, and who in League, and may have Actions Perso∣na here. In all Treaties, the Power of the one and the other ought to be Equal.
A League may be broken by Levy∣ing of War, or by Ambassador, or He∣rald. Bryan 19 E. 4. held, if all the Subjects in England would make War with a King in League with the King of Eng∣land, without the Assent of the King of England, yet such a War was no breach of the League. See 2 H. 5. cap. 6. in the Preamble. But in the Duke of Norfolk's Case, 14 Eliz. the Question was, Whether the Lord Herise, and other Subjects of the King of Scots, who without his Consent had wasted and burnt divers Towns in England, and Proclaimed Enemies, were Enemies in Law within the Statute of 25 E. 3. the League be∣ing between the King and Scotland, and Resolved they were Enemies. And in the Bishop of Rosse's Case, Anno 13 Eliz. The Question being, An Legatus qui Rebellionem contra Principem ad quem Legatus concitat Legati, Privilegiis gaudeat, & non ut Hostiis Poenas sub∣jaceat; and Resolv'd he had lost the Priviledge of an Ambassador, and was subject to Punishment. Ambassadors were called Orators after∣wards Legati à legando, Nuntij à nnci∣ando; and afterwards Ambassiatores, or Embassatories and, sometimes Agents.
For, Omnis Legatus est Agens, sed Omnis Agens non est Legatus. In Sam. Palach's Case, 12 Jac. 1. affirming himself to be Ambassador of Mula Sedan, King of Morocco, men∣tioned Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 26. It was Re∣solv'd there could be no Ambassador without Letters of Credence from his Sovereign to another who had Sove∣reign Authority; and although in his Letters of Credence he be termed an Agent, or Nuntius, yet in such Case he is Ambassador or Legate. And it was likewise Resolv'd, That Ambassadors ought to be Free, and Safe in every place by the Law of all Nations; yea, although they be Ambassadors of our Enemies, or a Banish'd Man be sent to the place from whence he is banish'd. And in the Case of Cardinal Poole, fled to Rome from Henry the Eighth, the Pope sent him Ambassador to the French King; the King of England De∣mandeth him (as a Traytor) from the King, notwithstanding he was sent Ambassador; sed non praevaluit. But if a Sovereign Ambassador, be∣ing Prorex, committeth here any Crime which is contra jus Gntium, as Treason, Murder, Adultery, &c. he may be pu∣nished as another private Alien, and not remanded to his Sovereign but of
Courtesie: And so of Contracts that be good Jure Gentium he must answer here; but if any thing be Malum pro∣hibitum by an Act of Parliament, Pri∣vate Law, or Custom of this Realm, which is not Malum in se Jure Gentium, nor contra Jus Gentium, an Ambassa∣dor residing here shall not be bound by them; but otherwise it is of the Subjects of either Kingdom. Vide In∣formation upon the Statute of 19 H. 7. cap. 1. Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 26. concerning Prohibited Goods brought hither. See more in Palach's Case, Where one may not be Indicted of Piracy, for taking the Goods of the Subjects of an Enemy Prince, solo Amici, and where The Court of Admiralty shall have the Jurisdiction, and where not. And now a word or two concerning Leagues, of which are four kinds: I. Foedus Pacis, and that a Christian Prince may have with an Infidel, Si fieri possit quod ex vobis est, cum omnibus hominibus Pacem habeatis; 2. Foedus Con∣gratulationis, sive Consolationis. And this a Christian Prince may make with an Infidel, as David did with Hanon, I Chron. 19.2. 3. Foedus Commercij, sive Commutationis Mercium. And this also may be made with an Infidel, as King Solomon did with Hiram, and Joshua
did with the Gibeonites. 4. Foedus Mutu Auxilij. And this cannot be done with an Idolater, Jehosaphat King of Judah made Foedus mutui auxilij with Ahab King of Israel, an Idolater: For Ahab said to Jehosaphat, Veni mecum in Ra∣moth Gilead; cui ille respondet, Ut ego & tu, & sicut populus tuus sic & populus meus tecum erimus in Bello. In which War Ahab was slain, and Jehosaphat in extream danger. But seeing Foedus Pacis, and Foedus Commercij may be with an Infidel, Pa∣gan, and Idolater, and those Leagues are established by Oaths, whether the Infidel or Pagan may Swear by False Gods, seeing he thereby offendeth the True God by giving Divine Worship to False Gods. St. Austin moved by Publicola resolveth, That he who taketh the Credit of him that sweareth by False Gods, not for any Evil but Good, doth not joyn himself that Sin of Swearing by Devils, but is partaker of those Lawful Leagues wherein the other keepeth his Faith, and Oath: But if a Christian should any way induce another to Swear by them, herein he should grievously sin; And the League in these Cases is war∣ranted by the Word of God, Et per Praxin Sanctorum in Sacra Scriptura,
all incidents thereunto are permit∣ted. In ancient time no Ambassador came into this Realm before he had Safe Conduct: For as no King can come in without the King's License, or Safe Conduct; so no Prorex, &c. which re∣presenteth a King's Person can do it. For Safe Conducts see the Writs in the Register, and the Statute of the 15th, 18th and 20th of Henry the 6th, with all Incidents thereunto. King Henry the 7th, that Wise King, would not in all his time suffer Lieges Ambassadors of any Foreign King or Prince within his Realm, nor he any with them; but upon occasion used Ambassadors. Every Ambassador ought to have Four Qualities, Nuntie sis verax, tacitus celer, atque fidelis. And of him another saith, Foederis Orator, Pacis via, Terminus Irae, Semen Amicitiae, Belli fuga, Litibus hostis. The difference between a League, and Truce is, that a Truce is a Cessa∣tion from War for a certain time; A League is, a perfect striking of Peace.
It's said 9 E. 4. That a League be∣tween Two Kings, without naming of Successors, doth not extend to Succes∣sors; notwithstanding by our Law, Rex non intermoritur. See more of this, and Ambassadors to the Pope and General Councils, &c. Co. 4 Inst. cap. 26. The Court of the King of Eng∣land IS a Monarchy, or Common-wealth within a Monarchy, consisting of Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Military Persons, and Government. And for The Ecclesiastical Government of the King's Court. IS a Dean of the King's Chappel, cho∣sen by the King, and acknowledgeth no Superiour but the King: For as the King's Palace is Exempt from all Infe∣riour Temporal Jurisdiction, so is his Chapel from all Spiritual; His Fee is 200 l. per Annum, and a Table. And, By the Dean are chosen all other Officers, (viz.) A Sub-Dean, or Praecentor Capellae, Fee 100 l.
Thirty Two Gentlemen of the Chappel, whereof Twelve are Priests, and one of them is Confessor to the Houshold, whose Office is to Read Prayers every Morn∣ing to the Family, to Visit the Sick, to Examine, and prepare Communicants, to Inform such as desire Advice in any case of Conscience, or point of Reli∣gion, &c. The other Twenty Gentlemen, cal∣led Clerks of the Chappel, are with the aforesaid Priests, to perform the Office of Divine Service, in Praying, Sing∣ing, &c. One of these being well skilled n Musick is Master of the Children, whereof there are Twelve in Ordina∣y, To instruct them in the Rules and Art of Musick for service of the Chap∣pel; Three other of the said Clerks re Organists, to whom upon Sundays, Collardays, and other Holydays, are oyned the Sack-Buts and Cornets, be∣onging to the King's private Musick. Their Fee to each is 70 l. per An∣num. Four Vergers, so called from the Silver Rods they carry in their Hands; Also a erjeant, a Yeoman, and a Groom of the Chappel.
The King hath also his Private Ora∣tory, where some of his Chaplains read Divine 8ervice unto him on Working∣days every Morning and Evening. Twelve principal Feast-Days in the Year are called Offering-Days, viz. Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, and All Saints, called Houshold-Days, upon which the Besant or Gold to be Offered is delivered to the King by the Lord Steward, or some other of the princi∣pal Officers; then New Years-Day and Twelfth-Day, upon the latter of which are offered Gold, Frankinsence, and Myrrh in several Purses. Lastly, Can∣dlemass, Annunciation, Ascension, Trinity Sunday, St. John Baptist, and Michaelmas-Day, when only Gold is offer'd. These Offerings made by the King to God (In Signum Speciale Dominij) after Di∣vine Service, or at the Offertory, he being attended by the Principal of the Nobility, with their Collars of the Garter, did anciently belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Disposal; But now are to be Dispos'd by the Dean of the Chappel amongst the Poor. The Lord High Almoner, who is the Bishop of London for the time being, disposeth of the King's Alms; and be∣sides all Money allowed by the King,
hath all Deodands and Bona Felonum de se for that purpose. And under him is A Sub-Almoner, Two Yeomen, and Two Grooms of the Almonry. The High Almoner hath no Fee, his Sub-Almoner hath Fee 6 l. 6 s. 10 d. The Clerk of the Closet, or Confessor to His Majesty, who is to attend at the King's Right Hand during Divine Ser∣vice, to Resolve all Doubts concerning Spiritual Matters, to wait on His Ma∣jesty in his private Oratory, or Closet, and his Fee is Twenty Nobles. And there is A Keeper of the Closet, whose Fee is 5 l. per Annum. The King hath also Forty Eight Chaplains in Ordinary, (besides the Extraordinary) who wait by Turns, Four every Month. Anciently at Court were Sermons in Lent only, and that in the After∣noons in the open Air by Bishops, Deans, or principal Prebendaries: And them also appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Now on Ashwednesday in the Morning begins the Dean of the Chapel to Preach, on each Wednesday after one of the Chaplains. Every Fri∣day the Dean of some Cathedral, or Collegiate Church. On Good Friday the Dean of Westminster; on every Sunday
a Bishop, and on Palm Sunday an Arch∣bishop, On Easter-day the Lord High Almoner. The Civil Government of the King's Court. THe Lord Steward, is the Chief Offi∣cer of the King's Houshold, to whom is committed the State of the King's House, and all his Commands in Court to be obey'd; He hath Authori∣ty over all, except those of his Maje∣sties Chappel, Chamber and Stable. He is a White Staff Officer, and by his Office without any other Commission Judgeth of all Treasons, Felonies, Blood∣sheds, within the King's House, or within the Verge, which is 12 Miles round the Tunnel of the Court (only London by Charter is Exempted.) And this Jurisdiction of the Verge, hath from ancient time been executed by the Lord Steward with great Ceremo∣mony, in the nature of a peculiar King's Bench, and that not only with∣in, but without the King's Domini∣ons. The Lord Chamberlain is the next Of∣ficer, who hath Oversight of all the Officers belonging to the King's Cham∣ber; except the Precincts of the King's
Bed Chamber, which is wholly under the Groom of the Stole, and all above Stairs, who are all Sworn by him (Or by his Warrant to the Gentlemen Ushers to the King) Hath the Over∣sight of all the Officers of the Ward∣robes, at all his Majesties Houses, and of the removing Wardrobes, of the Tents, Revels, Musick, Comedians, Hunting, Messengers, Trumpetters, Drummers of all Handicrafts, and Artisans, Heralds, Pursuivants, Serje∣ants at Arms, Phisicians, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, Barbers, &c. and Chap∣lains, although himself be a Layman; Also the charges of Coronations, Mar∣riages, Entries, Cavalcades, Funerals, &c. His Fee is 100 l. yearly, and 16 Dishes each Meal, with the Appurten∣ances; And most of the Places before mentioned are in his Gift or Dispo∣sal. The Master of the Horse, is the Third Great Officer, And hath now the or∣dering of the King's Stables, and Races and Breed of Horses, and hath Power over Escuries and Pages, over Footmen, Grooms, Riders of the Great Horse, Farriers, Smiths, Coachmen, Sadlers, and all other Trades working to the King's Stables; To all whom he (or by his Warrant the Avenor) giveth an
Oath to be True and Faithful: He hath the charge of all Lands, and Re∣venues appointed for the King's Breed of Horses, and Charges of the Stable, and for Litters, Coaches, Sumpter horses, &c. He only hath priviledge to make use of any Horses, Pages, or Footmen, belonging to the King's Stables. At Solemn Cavalcades he Rides next the King, and leads a Leer Horse of State; His Fee is 666 l. 16 s. 4 d. yearly, And a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. Under these Three principal Offi∣cers of his Majesties Houshold, are al∣most all other the Officers and Servants. The Compting House. SO called because Accompts for all Expences of the King's Houshold are there daily, The Lord Steward, The Treasurer of the Houshold, The Comptroller, The Cofferer, The Ma∣ster of the Houshold, The Two Clerks of the Green Cloth; And the Two Clerks Comptrollers, who also make Provisions for the Houshold according to the Law of the Land, and make Payments, and Orders for well Gover∣ning of the Servants of the Hous∣hould.
And the Cofferer is to pay the Wages of the King's Servants below Stairs, and the Lord Chamberlain above Stairs, Vide 39 Eliz. cap. 7. And he is accomptable in the Exchequer for about 40000 l. And in the Compting House is. The Court of Greencloth. SO called of the Green Cloth whereat they sit, and is composed of the Persons last above mentioned, whereof the Three first are usually of the King's Privy Councel. To this Court being the first and most ancient Court of England, is com∣mitted the Oversight of the King's Court Royal, for Matters of Justice and Government, with Authority for maintaining the Peace within Twelve Miles distance, wheresoever the Court shall be, and within the King's House, the Power of correcting all the Ser∣vants therein that shall any way of∣fend. The Treasurer of the King's Houshold, in the absence of the Lord Steward, hath Power with the Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshalsea, to Hear and Determin Treasons, Felonies, and other Inferiour Crimes committed with∣in
in the King's Palace, and that by Ver∣dict of the Houshold; He bears a White Staff, and his yearly Fee is 124 l. 14 s. 8 d. And a Table of 16 Dishes each Meal. The Comptrollers Office, is to Comp∣trol the Accompts, and Reckonings of the Green Cloth; and his yearly Fee is 107 l. 12 s. 4 d. And bears a White Staff, and hath 16 Dishes each Meal. The Cofferer is a principal Officer, and hath special charge over other Offi∣cers of the House for their good Demea∣nor and Carriage, and is to pay the Wages to the King's Servants, and for Provisions by the Direction of the Green Cloth; He hath a Fee of 100 l. yearly, and a Table of 7 Dishes daily. The Master of the Houshold is the next Officer, who is to Survey the Ac∣compts of the House; His Fee 100 Marks, and 7 Dishes daily. Two Clerk's Comptroller's are to Tolt and Allow all Bills of Comptrolment, Parcels, and Brievements. And the Two Clerk's of the Green Cltth are to Sum them up; And the Fee to each of these Four Clerks is, 48 l. 13 s. 4 d. And between them, Two Tables of 7 Dishes to each Table.
The rest of the Compting House, being less considerable we pass over, And come to give a brief Accompt of the Officers, or persons in the several Offices. As first in the Acatery is a Serjeant, a Clerk, Pur∣veyors, Yeomen, In all Twelve. Poultry a Serjeant, a Clerk, Yeo∣man, Grooms, Purveyors, in all Ten. Bakehouse a Serjeant, Clerk, Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all Eighth. Woodyard, a Serjeant, a Clerk; Yeomen, Grooms, and Pages, in all Eight. Scullery a Serjeant, a Clerk, Yeo∣men, Grooms, and Pages, in all Twelve. Lardour a Serjeant, Clerk, Three Yeomen, Three Grooms, Two Pa∣ges. Pastry a Serjeant, a Clerk, Yeo∣men, Grooms, and Children, in all Eleven. Pantry a Serjeant, a Yeomen, Grooms, Pages. Cellar a Serjeant, a Gentleman, Yeo∣men, Grooms, Purveyors, Pages, in all Twelve. Buttery a Gentleman, Yeoman, Grooms, Pages, Purveyors, in all Ele∣ven.
Pitcher-house a Yeoman, Grooms, Page, and Clerk, in all Five. Spicery Three Clerks, and a Gro∣cer. Chandlery a Serjeant, Two Yeomen, Two Grooms, and a Page. Wafery a Yeoman, and a Groom. Confectionary a Serjeant, Two Yeo∣men a Groom, and a Page. Ewry a Serjeant, a Gentleman, Two Yeomen, a Groom, and Two Pa∣ges. Laundry a Yeoman, a Groom, Three Pages, and a Draper. Kitchen Three Clerks to the King, and Two to the Queen; The chief of these Clerks hath a Fee and Diet equal to an Officer of the Green Cloth; A Master Cook to the King, A Master Cook to the Queen, A Master Cook to the Houshold, each of these Three a Table of 5 Dishes, Six Yeomen, Seven Grooms, Five Children, in all Twenty six Persons. Boyling House a Yeoman, Two Grooms. Scalding House Yeoman, Grooms, and Pages, in all Six. Harbingers Office, a Knight, Three Gentlemen, and Seven Yeomen Har∣bingers; The Knight Harbingers Office, is by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England during Life, So oft as
the King goes broad either in Eng∣land or beyond Seas; He doth by him∣self or his Deputy provide and appoint all Lodgings and Harbingage for all Great Persons. All Noblemen, Bishops; All his Majesties Servants, and Atten∣dants, and for all other his Liege Peo∣ple, for Ambassadors, and Foreigners, &c. His Salary 20 Marks per Annum. and 10 s. per diem. Out of the Exche∣quer, besides Fees for Honour given by the King, and Homage done to his Majesty and divers other Perqui∣sites. Porters at Gate, a Serjeant, Two Yeo∣men, Four Grooms, Clerks of the Carriage, Two Yeomen Cart Takers, Six in Number, Surveyors of the Dresser Two, one above Stairs and another below; Marshals of the Hall Four, Sewers of the Hall Five; Waiters of the Hall Twelve, Messenger of the Compting House One; Bellringer One; Long Cart Takers Four; Wine Por∣ters Eight; Woodbearer One; The Cock of the Court One. Besides the aforesaid Officers blow Stairs, there are also under the Lod Steward, all the Officers belonging to the Queens Kitchin, Cellar, Pantry, &c. And to the Kings Privy Kitchin; and to the Lords Kitchin together with
Children, Scourers, Turnbroachers, &c. In all Sixty eight. These Officers according to their Degrees, are named Lords, Knights, Esquires, Serjeants, Gentlemen, Clerks, Yeomen, Grooms, Pages, or Children, and these Succeed each other, as they Outlive those next Degree above them. As likewise from the Pastry to the Acatery, as the Clerk of one Office dies the next succeeds; And as the Clerk of the Avenary, Spicery, or Kitchin dies; The Clerk of the Aca∣tery succeeds, and from thence to be one of the Clerks Comptrollers; Then Clerk of the Compting House; Then Master of the Houshold; Lastly Cof∣feror of the Houshold, Higher than which he cannot rise by Succession. Although the King pays but the ancient Fees, which at first were above Ten times the value; Yet the perquisites in many Offices make sometimes a place of 10 l. worth near 500 l. per Annum. The Knight Marshal CAlled Mareschallus Hospitij Regis, hath Jurisdicton and Cognizance of all Crimes within the Royal Palace, where one of the Parties is the Kings Servant; He is one of the Judges of the Court cal∣led,
The Marshalsea, or Marshals Seat of Judicature, which is held in Southwark, and hath a Prison belonging to the same. Upon Solemn Occasions he Rides before the King with a Short Baston, Tipt at both Ends with Gold, and hath Six Provost Marshals, Or Virgers in Scarlet Coats to wait on him, and to take care of the Royal Palace, That no Beggars, Vagabonds, Com∣mon Whores, Malefactors, &c. come within or near: And now we are led to speak of the Marshals Court before mentioned. And called. The Court of the Marshelsea. THis is an ancient Court of Record, Ordained to determine Suits be∣tween those of the King's House, and others within the Verge. The Judges are the Steward and Marshal of the King's House, who have Cognizance of all manner of Pleas of Trespass within the Verge, so as either party be of the same House; and of all other Actions personal wherein both Parties are the King Servants, and this is the proper Jurisdiction of the Mar∣shal's Court. And a Man shall have A∣mercement in an Action brought a∣gainst him in the Court of the Stew∣ard
and Marshal, when he is not of the Kings House, when the Trespass or Contract was made, or when the Plain∣tiff was not of the Kings House at that time, F. N. B. 141. Error in this Court, for that neither of the parties was of the Kings House at the time of Suit brought, or for that it is not shewn, that the Plaintiff nor Defendant were of the Kings House at that time or afterward, and every other Cause of Errour there, shall be amend∣ed in the King's Bench, 5 & 10 E. 3. c. 3. And having taken some short remarks upon the Marshalsey we come next to The Court of the Palace. CUria Palatij was Erected by King Charles the First, By his Letters Patents dated the 2d of July, Anno Reg∣ni sui sexto; And made a Court of Re∣cord, called the Court of the Kings Palace at Westminster, For the Tryal of all Personal Actions between Party, and Party; The Liberty whereof extends 12 Miles round Whitehal, which Juris∣diction was confirmed by King Charles the Second.
The Judges of this Gourt are the Stewards of the Kings House, and Knight Marshal for the time being, and the Steward of the Court, or his De∣puty, being always a Lawyer. This Court is kept every Fryday in th Court House on St. Margarets-Hill in Southwark, and may be held in any place within the Jurisdiction. The Proceeding is by Capias or At∣tachment, which is to be served upon the Defendant by one of the Knights Marshals Men, who taketh Bond with such Sureties for the Defendants Ap∣pearance at the next Court as he will be answerable for; The Process may may be had at several places within the Liberty of the Court, appointed by the Steward which every Marshals Man can help you to. The Defendant upon Appearance must put in Bail to Answer the Con∣demanation of the Court, which if he neglect to do, the Plaintiff may have the Bond for appearance assigned over to his use. The next Court after Ball put in, The Plaintiff ought to Declare, and set forth the cause of his Action, and so afterwards proceed to Issue and Trial by Jury, according to the course
of the Common Law, and that in Four or Five Court days. They hold Pleas of all manner of Personal Actions; as Debt, Tres∣pass, Battery, Slander, Trover, and all Actions of the Case, &c. But usu∣ally, if the Cause be considerable as (above Five pound) they carry the Cause away by an Habeas Corpus cum causa into the King's Bench, or Common-Pleas. The Fees of the Palace Court, or Marshalsea, as granted by the Letters Patent, You may see at large in the Compleat Sollicitor. The Court of the Lord Steward, Trea∣surer, and Comptroller of the Kings Houshold concerning Felony, &c. THey, or any of them have Au∣thority to Inquire by 12 Sad Men, and Discreet Persons of the Che∣que Roll; If any Servant in the Cheque under the State of a Lord make any Confederacies, Compassings, Conspira∣cies, or Imaginations with any Person, or Persons to Destroy or Murder the King; Or any Lord of this Realm; Or any Person Sworn to the King's Councel; Or the Steward, Trea∣surer or Comptroller of his Hous∣hold,
And if it be found, then to be put to Tryal by 12 other Sad Men of the Houshold, and no Challenge to be allowed but for Malice; And if they are found guilty, then to be adjudged Felony, Vide le Statute, 3 Hen. 7. cap. 14. The Court of the Lord Steward of the King's House: Or in his Absence of the Treasurer and Comptroller, and Steward of the Marshelsea. THey, or Two of them, whereof the Steward of the Marshelsea to be One, by vertue of their Offices without any Commission, Have Au∣thority by the Act of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 12. The said Steward of the Marshalsea be∣ing from time, to time appointed by the Lord Great Master, or Lord Stew∣ard for the time being; And whether the King be removed from his Palace House, or Houses, or not removed be∣fore such Offence, Inquired of, Tryed, Heard, and determined, the said Offi∣cers shall have a power to Inquire by Verdict of the King's Houshold-Ser∣vants within the Cheque Roll, of all Persons slain within the King's House, or where he shall abide, before the
Coroner of the King's Houshold, And all Officers named in the Act upon Precept to them have Power to Sum∣mon 24 Persons, Yeomen of the Hous∣hold, to Enquire of Treasons, Mispri∣sions of Treasons, Murders, Manslaugh∣ters, or other Malicious Strikings where Blood is, or shall be shed against the King's Peace; Upon the Presentment, Inquisition, or Indictment found and certified by the Coroner, The Judges, or Two of them, (whereof the Stew∣ard of the Marshalsea to be one) shall make another Precept to the Clerks, and other Officers of the Houshold, who have thereby power to warn ano∣ther Jury of 24 Gentlemen of the King's Chamber, and other Servants of the Houshold at a Day, Place; and un∣der a pain therein appointed, to ap∣pear (whereof the Judges or Officers before whom they shall be returned, shall cause 12 without Challenge to be allowed, (except for Malice) To try the Offenders, and if they are Found Guilty of Treason, Murder, or Man∣slaughter, they shall have Judgment of Life, and Member, and other Forfei∣tures as if Tried by the Common Laws of the Realm; If Guilty of Strking whereby Bloodshed, Then to have his Right hand stricken off, Imprisonment
during Life, and Fine and Ransom at the Kings Pleasure, The Execution to be done in the Solemn manner by the Act directed. A Cryer, to be appointed from time to time to call Juries, make Proclama∣tions, and do other things belonging to the Cryer of the Court. The Coroner to be appointed from time, to time by the Lord Stew∣ard. Tryal of Peers, as hath been used. The Priviledges, and Authorities of the Marshalsea Court within the Verge saved. The Limits and Bounds of the said House or Houses, to be for these offen∣ces within all the Edifices, Courts, &c. within the Porters Ward, or within 200 Foot of the Standard of any Gate or Gates of the said Houses. This Act extends not to any Noble∣man, or other Person that shall Strike to correct his Servants, or any of the Councel, or other Head Officers Stri∣king with their Hand, of small Strick in Executing their Office. To Steal the Kings Goods, or en∣tring his House to Steal, shall be Felo∣ny, Vide le Statute at large.
The Servants in Ordinary above Stairs. THe Groom of the Stole, (that is, ac∣cording to the Greek, from whence the Latin and French derive it) Groom, or Servant of the Robe, or Garment; he having the Honour to present, and put on His Majesties first Garment or Shirt every Morning, and to order things of the Bed-chamber. The Gentlemen of the Bed-chamber, consisting of the prime Nobility of England; Their Office in general is, To Wait a Week in every Quarter by, Turn in the King's Bed-chamber, there to lye by the King in a Pallat-Bed all Night, and in the absence of the Groom of the Stole to supply his place. More∣over they Wait on the King when he eats in private; for then the Cup-bearer, Carver, and Sewers do not Wait. The Fee to each is 1000 l. Of these are Fourteen, or more; Then there is The Vice-Chamberlain, The Keeper of the Privy-Purse, Treasurer of the Cham∣ber: He pays Riding, and Lodging Wa∣ges, as the Lord Chamberlain shall di∣rect.
The Master of the Robes belonging to His Majesty's person, who is to have the ordering of all His Majesty's Robes; as those of Coronation, St. George's Feast, Parliament, and of all His Majesty's Wearing Apparel; of his Collar of Esses, Georges, and Garters beset with Dia∣monds and Pearls. Grooms of the Bed chamber ought to be Twelve, these are to be under the Degrees of Knights: Their office is to Attend in the King's Bed-chamber, to Dress and Undress the King in private, and the yearly Fee to each is Five hun∣dred pounds. Pages Six, whereof one is Keeper of the King's Cabinet Closet. Gentlemen Ushers of the Privy-chamber; These Wait one at a time in the Privy Lodgings, &c. and are Four. Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in Ordinary, Forty eight Quarter-Wainters by Turns; Their office is Twelve eve∣ry Quarter to Wait on the King's Person within Doors, and without, so long as he is on Foot; and when the King eats in the Privy Chamber they wait at the Table, and bring in his Meat: they Wait also at Reception of Ambassadors, and every Night lye Two of them in the King's Bed-chamber.
A Gentleman of the Privy Chamber by the King's Commandment only, without any written Commission, is sufficient to Arrest any Peer of Eng∣land, as Cardinal Woolsey acknowledged; These wear Cloak, and Sword. Grooms of the Privy Chamber in Ordi∣nary, Six, all Gentlemen of Quality. These (as all Grooms) wait without Sword, Cloak, or Hat. Gentlemen Ushers, daily Waiters in the Presence Chamber, Four; The First whereof hath that considerable Office of the Black Rod, and in the time of Parliament is to attend every day the Lord's House, and is also Usher of the most Honourable Order of the Garter. Their office is to wait in the Presence Chamber, and to attend next to the King's person, and after the Lord Cham∣berlain, and Vice Chamberlain to order all Affairs, and all Under Officers above Stairs, are to obey these. Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter Waiters in Ordinary, Eight; These wait also in the Presence Chamber, and are to give Directions (in the absence of the Gen∣tlemen Ushers, Daily Waiters) to the Grooms and Pages, and other Under Officers.
Gentlemen Waiters, Six; Cupbearers, Five; Carvers in Ordinary, Four; Sewers to the Person in Ordinary, Four. Esquires of the Body in Ordinary, Six; Their office is to Guard the King's Per∣son by Night, to Set the Watch, and give the Word, and keep good Order in the whole House by Night, as the Lord Chamberlain, and his other Officers, are to do by Day. The Sewers of the Chamber, are Eight. Groom Porter; his Office is to see the King's Lodgings furnished with Tables, Chairs, Stools, and Firing; To furnish Cards, Dice, &c. To decide Disputes arising at Cards, Dice, Bowlings, &c. Serjeants at Arms, Sixteen; all Gen∣tlemen, or Knights, attending upon His Majesty. There are also Four other Serjeants at Arms, whereof one attends the Lord President of Wales, another the Speaker of the House of Commons, and another the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland▪ Physicians in Ordinary, Four; one assigned to the Queen, and one to the Houshold; besides Twelve more, who are not the King's sworn Servants, nor have Fee.
Master and Treasurer of the Jewel-House, and Three Under Officers called Yeomen and Grooms; Their office is to take charge of the Gold, or Silver Gilt, Plate for the King and Queens Table, of all Plate in the Tower, of Chains and loose Jewels not fixed to any Garment. The Master of the Ceremonies Fee 200 l. One Assistant Fee 120 l. and One Marshal. One Geographer, One Historiographer, One Hydrographer, One Library Keeper, One Poet Laureat, One Publick Notary. The King's Great Wardrobe. THe Master, or Keeper of the Great Wardrobe, is an Office of great Antiquity and Dignity, High Privi∣ledges, and Immunities were conferred by King Henry the Sixth, confirmed by his Successors, and enlarged by King James, the first who ordained this Great Officer should be an Incorporation or Body Politick for ever. His Office is to make Provisions for Coronations, Marriages, and Funerals; To furnish the Court with Beds, Hang∣ings, Carpets, and other Necessaries; To furnish Houses for Ambassadours at their first Arrival here, Presents for
Foreign Princes, and Ambassadours, Cloaths of State, and other Furniture for the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Lord President of Wales, and His Ma∣jesty's Ambassadours abroad; To pro∣vide all Robes for the Foreign Knights of the Garter, for the Officers of the Garter, Coats for Heralds, and Pursui∣vants at Arms, Robes for the Lord Chancelor, Lord Treasurer, &c. Rich Liveries for the Two Lord Chief Ju∣stices, All the Barons of the Exchequer, All the Officers of those Courts, All Li∣veries for His Majesty's Domestick Ser∣vants, All Linnen for the King's per∣son, &c. In which there is ordinarily Ex∣pended yearly about 25000 l. besides all Extraordinaries, as Coronations; Funerals, &c. His Salary, in compensation of all Ancient Fees, is 2000 l. per Annum. This Office is now kept in the Savoy. Under the Master is A Deputy, whose Salary is 200 l. A Clerk, whose Salary in compensation of all Fees, and Allowances, is 300 l. per Annum. To this Office have been lately added by Patent (during pleasure) A Comp∣troller, and Surveyor, Salary to each 300 l.
Belonging to this Office are divers Tradesmen, Artificers, and others to number of about Forty; all sworn Ser∣vants to the King. Besides the Great Wardrobe the King hath divers Standing Wardrobes at Whitehall, VVindsor, Hampton-Court, the Tower of London, Greenwich, &c. Whereof there are divers Officers. And Lastly, There is a Removing Wardrobe, which attends upon the Person of the King, Queen, and Chil∣dren, Ambassadours, Christnings, Masks, Plays, &c. at the Command of the Lord Chamberlain, who hath the disposing of the Vacant places. Here are six Officers, one Yeoman, two Grooms, and three Pages. The Salary of the Yeomen 200 l. each Groom 100 pounds, and each Page 100 Marks. To All these together is allowed six Dishes each Meal. All Moveables belonging to this Office are at length Divided into Three parts, whereof the Yeoman hath one for his own use, the Grooms another, and the Pages the Third part.
The Office of Tents, &c. IN this Office of Tents, Toyls, Hays, and Pavilions, are Two Masters, Four Yeomen, one Groom, one Clerk Comptroller, one Clerk of the Tents. The Office of the Robes. BEsides the Master before-mentioned there is one Yeoman, three Grooms, one Page, Two Surveyors, one Clerk, and Persons of several Trades. Faulconers. MAster of the Hawks, and other Officers under him about Lon∣don, and other Places belonging to the King, in all Thirty Three. Huntsmen. MAster of the Buck-Hounds, a Ser∣jeant, and Thirty Four others; one Master of the Otter-Hounds; one Master of the Harriers, and Five under him.
Messengers. OF the Chamber in ordinary, two Clerks of the Cheque, and Forty others. Musitians in ordinary, Sixty Two. Trumpeters in ordinary, and Kettle-Drummers, in all Fifteen. Drummers and Fifes, Seven. Tradesmen, one or two of all sorts. Watermen, Fifty Five. Comedians, Seventeen Men and Eight Women. Keeper of Birds in St. James's Park, one: Keeper of the Volery, and Serjeant Painter, one of each. With divers other Officers and Ser∣vants under the Lord Chamberlain, to serve His Majesty upon Extraordinary occasions. Many of these Offices and Places are of good Credit, great Profit, and En∣joyed by Persons of Quality. Officers under the Master of the Horse. FOur Querries (from the French Escurie, a Stable) of the Crown-Stable, and Eight of the Hunting-Stable; Their Office is to attend the King in
Hunting, or Progress, or on any occasion of Riding abroad, to help His Majesty Up and Down from his Horse. Fee to each of these is 20 l. yearly, the ancient Fee; but have 100 l. yearly Allowance for Diet, besides Lodgings, and two Horse Liveries. Avenor, from Avena, Oats; Fee 40 l. This Place, with all the following, is in the Gift of the Master of the Horse One Clerk of the Stable, Four Yeomen, besides Four Child Riders, Yeoman of the Styrup, Serjeant Marshal, and Yeoman Far∣riers, Four Groom Farriers, Serjeant of the Carriage, Three Surveyors, A Squire and Yeoman Sadler, Four Yeomen Grana∣tors, Four Yeomen Purveyors, A Yeoman Peck-man, A Yeoman Bill-maker, Four Coach-men, Eight Litter-men, A Yeoman of the Close Wagon, Sixty four Grooms of the Stable, whereof. Thirty Grooms of the Crown-Stable, and Thirty four of the Hunting, and Pad-Stable, Twenty six Footmen in their Liveries, to Run by the King's Horse, &c. The Clerk of the Market, who within the Verge is to keep a Standard of all Weights and Measures, and to burn all False Weights and Measures; And from the pattern of this Standard are to be taken all the Weights and Measures of the Kingdom.
The Military Government in the King's Court. THe Horse Guards, Life Guard, or Guard of the King's Body, consist∣ing of Five hundred Horsemen, all or most of them Gentlemen and old Offi∣cers, commanded by their Captain, who is at all times of War, or Peace, to Wait upon the King's Person, as oft as he Rides abroad, with a considerable number of those Horsmen well Armed, His pay is 30 s. per diem. These Horse have been divided into Three parts whereof 200 under the Command of the Master of the Horse, and 150 un∣der another Officer, and the other 150 Commanded by another Officer; The Pay to each of these Officers 20 s. per diem. Under the Captains of the Guards are Two Lieutenants, a Coronet, a Quarter-Master, and Four Brigadiers. The Hors∣mens Pay is 4. s. per diem.
The Band of Pensioners. FIrst Instituted by King Henry the Seventh, and chosen out of the Best and most Ancient Families of Eng∣land, not only as a Faithful Guard to the King's Person, but to be as a Nursery to breed up hopeful Gentlemen and fit them for Employment, Civil, and Military abroad, or at home; as De∣puties of Ireland, Ambassadors, Coun∣sellors of State, Captains of the Guard, Governours of Places, and Comman∣ders in Wars both by Sea and Land. Their Office is to attend the King's Person to, and from his Chappel, and all publick Solemnities; A Peer of the Realm is usually Captain, whose Pay is 1000 l. per Annum; his Lieutenant 200 l. yearly, his Standard-Bearer 200 l. year∣ly, Clerk of the Cheque 120 l. 1 s. 3 d. yearly, and Forty Gentlemen Pensioners, Fee to each is 100 l. yearly; a Gentle∣man Harbinger to provide Lodging for them, his Fee 70 l. 11 s. yearly. These Wait one Half by Quarter; Upon Extraordinary occasions, All are Summoned; Their ordinary Arms are Gilt Poleaxes; their Arms on Horse∣back in time of War, Curassiers, Arms with Sword and Pistol. They are not
under the Lord Chamberlain, but their own Officers, and always Sworn by the Clerk of the Cheque, who takes No∣tice who are absent from their Duty. The Yeomen of the Guard. ARe at present 100 Men in daily Waiting, and 70 more not in Waiting; as any of the 100 dye, his Place is filled out of the Seventy; these are chosen of the best Men under Gentle∣men, and of Larger Stature than or∣dinary, for they were formerly to be six Foot high. Their Office is in their Coats and Caps, one Half with Har∣quebusses, and the other Half with Partizans, to wait upon the King in his Standing Houses, Forty by Day, and Twenty to Watch by Night, and about the City, to Wait on the King's Person abroad, by Water or Land. Their Captain's Fee is 1000 l. year∣ly; the Lieutenant 500 l. Ensign 300 l. Clerk of the Cheque 150 l. Four Corporals 150 l. each. The King hath many other Inferiour Officers; which over-passing, we come now to
The Government of the Queen's Court IS suitable to the Consort of so Great a King, Splendid and Mag∣nificent: And hath all Officers, and a Houshold apart from the King; For Maintenance whereof there is usually setled 40000 l. per Annum, and is as followeth: The Ecclesiastical Government of the Queens Court. THe Lord, or Grand Almoner; He hath Superintendency over all the Ecclesiasticks belonging to the Queen. One Confessor to the Queen, and Four Almoners. One Treasurer of the Chappel, Two Preachers, Four Clerks of the Chappel, and Four Boys. Sixteen Chaplains Divers belonging to the Musick, and Two Vergers, or Porters.
The Civil Government of the Queen's Court. THere is a Counsel consisting of Persons of Great Worth and Dig∣nity; A Steward of the Revenue, A Keeper of Her Majesties Great Seal, A Chamberlain, Master of the Horse, A Vice-Chamberlain, A Principal Secretary, and Master of Requeste, A Treasurer, and Receiver General, Attorney General, Soli∣citor General, A Surveyor General. Six Gentlemen Ushers of the Privy Chamber, Two Cup-bearers, Two Carvers, Two Sewers, Five Gentlemen Ushers daily Waiters, Ten Grooms ef the Privy Cham∣ber, Seven Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter Waiters. Six Pages, attending at the Back-Stairs, Four Pages of the Presence. Officers of the Robes. A Surveyor, Proveditor, Clerk, Yeo∣man, Groom, Page, Tayler, and Brusher. Twelve Grooms of the Great Chamber, One Porter of the Back Stairs.
A Master of the Queens Barge, and Twenty Four Watermen. The Grooms of the Stole, Lady of the Robes, and of the Privy Purse, Seven Ladies of the Bed-chamber, One Keeper of the Sweet Coffers, Six Maids of Honour, and A Governess, or Mother of the Maids. Six Chamberers, or Dressers, A Laun∣dress, A Sempstress, A Starcher, A Necessary Woman. These are all paid by Her Majesty out of her own Revenue. There are besides Divers other Offi∣cers Below Stairs belonging to the Queens Table, and Stable, paid by the King, for which is allowed 20000 l. more. The Prince of Wales, and other the King's Children, have likewise their Courts, or Housholds apart; But these being not certain, no certain Allow∣ance or Settlement is of them, but are rather at pleasure: And therefore I shall not particularize them, but refer to Chamberlain's Present State of Eng∣land.
The Government of Cities. ALthough every City is within some of the Counties herein before mentioned; yet each of them are like a little Common∣wealth, Governed by Laws, and Cu∣stoms Ecclesiastical Civil, and Milita∣ry, within themselves; And this by Charter, or Priviledges granted and cofirmed to them by several Kings of this Realm. And there is for The Ecclesiastical Government of Cities. A Bishop, every City being or having been a Bishops See, and hath a Cathedral to which belong a Dean, A Chapter, A Treasurer, and Prebenda∣ries, who have Lands and Revenues belonging to them for their Mainte∣nance; and though the Bishoprick be dissolved, the City remains, as Westmin∣ster and Cambridge, which was antient∣ly reputed a City. And for The Ecclesiastical Government of Parishes there is a Rector, or Vicar for every Parish, who is to have the Cure of the Souls of his Parishioners, every one of which, hath a Parsonage, or Vicaridge-House, and a Compe∣tent
allowance of Tithes for their Maintenance. And there is for The Civil Government of Cities, A Mayor, who is the King's Lieue∣tenant, chosen by the Citizens, and approved by the King, and is for one year as a Judge, to determine all Matters within his Jurisdiction, and to Mitigate the Rigour of the Law: And next in Government of Cities are the Two Sheriffs, who are Judges in Civil Causes within the City, and to see all Execution done whether Penal or Ca∣pital, To Execute the Kings Mandates within the City, &c. And might rather be called State Reeves, or Port-Reeves, (i. e.) Urbis vel Portus Praefecti. The Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of every City, may make Laws called By-Laws, for the Government of the City, provided they are not Re∣pugnant to the Laws of the Kingdom. And these have several Courts which have Jurisdiction in all Civil, and Cri∣minal Causes, only with Restraint that all Civil Causes may be removed from their Courts to the Higher Courts at Westminster: But of all these we shall speak more at large, when we come to treat of the City of London, and o∣ther
Cities in particular, which may serve for an Example, or Pattern of all the rest. And therefore we shall begin with The City of London. LOndon, so called as some conjecture from the British word Longdin, signifying in the Saxon Tongue Shipton, or Town of Ships: But others derive it otherwise, And therefore not to insist thereon, Nam utere tuo Judicio, nihil im∣pedio; It was Built as some Write 1108 years before the Incarnation of our Saviour; In the time of Samuel the Prophet, Is in length about 7 Miles and half, and about 2 Miles and half in breadth: Hath above 500 Streets, and Alleys, and 15000 Houses within the Walls, which may not be accompted above a Sixth part of the whole City. The Cathedral Church of St. Paul, was Built, or begun by Ethelbert King of Kent, about Anno Christi 610, and is the only Cathedral of that Name in Europe: Besides this, there are 130 Parish Churches, besides Chappels, which is double the number to be found in any other City in Christen∣dom.
The Ecclesiastical Government OF London is, as before mentioned of Cities in General, By a Bi∣shop, and was in the time of the Bri∣tains by an Archbishop, but by the Saxons, the Archiepiscopal See was re∣moved to Canterbury, for the sake of St. Austin, who first Preached the Gos∣pel there to the Heathen Saxons, and was there buried, since which, there have been 100 Bishops to the present Bishop there. To this Cathedral belongs a Dean, a Chapter, and 30 Prebendaries, main∣tained in like manner before mention∣ed in the General Government of Cities. The Ecclesiastical Government of Parishes is as before mentioned, by a Parson, Rector or Vicar, To have cure of Souls in every Parish, who have a Parsonage, or Vicaridge-House, and a competent Allowance in Tithes, which was anciently besides the Tithes of Tradesmen's gains, and mor∣tuaries, &c. 3 s. 5 d. in the pound Rent, which they paid by a Half every Sunday and Holiday; Afterwards by 25 Hen. 8. It was ordained, and afterwards con∣firmed by 27 Hen. 8. and 37 Hen. 8. That 2 s. 9 d. in the pound should be paid
for the Rent of all Houses, Shops, &c. to the Parson, with power to the Lord Major, to Imprison any Person should refuse to pay the same. The Civil Government OF London is by a chief Magistrate anciently called The Prefect of Lon∣don, In the Saxons time Portegreeve, by the Norman's Bailiff or Bailiffs, till King Rich. the First, Anno 1189, changed the name of Bailiff to Mayor, which is now The Lord Mayor, and is a Citizen, yearly chosen by the Citizens, and ap∣proved by the King, unless sometimes for Disloyalty, their Priviledges, and Franchises are taken from them; and a Guardian set over them, as was done by Hen. the Third, and Ed. the First. He is usually Knighted by the King before the end of his Mayoralty, if he had not that Honour before; His and the Sheriffs Tables are open to all comers, and for his Grandeur is al∣lowed 1000 l. for his Sword-bearers Table; His Domestick attendance is very. Honourable, and hath Four Offi∣cers reputed Esquires by their places, (viz.) The Sword-bearer, Common Hunt, who keepeth a Kennel of Hounds, Common Cryer and the Water Bailiff;
There is also the Coroner, Three Ser∣jeant Carvers, Three Serjeants of the Chamber; A Serjeant of the Channel; Four Yeomen of the Water-side; One under Water Bailiff; Two Yeomen of the Chamber; Three Meat weighers; Two Yeomen of the Wood-wharfs, most of which have their Servants al∣lowed them, and have Liveries for them∣selves. Upon the Death, or Demise of the King, he is said to be the Prime Per∣son of England; On the day of the Kings Coronation, he claims to be chief Butler, and to bear the Kings Cup amongst the Highest Nobles of the Kingdom. His Authority reaches not only over all the City but part of the Suburbs, and on the River of Thames Eastward, as far as Yendale or Yenleete, and West∣ward as far as Colney Ditch above Stanes Bridge, and keeps several Courts in the Counties adjacent to the Thames for Conservation of the River, and Punish∣ment of Offenders therein, And there are Two Sheriffs of London, who are also Sheriffs of the County of Middlesex, and are Annually chosen by the Citi∣zens from among themselves in the Guild-hall upon Midsumer day, approved
by the King, and then upon Michael∣mas Eve Sworn, and presented to the Barons of the Exchequer, to be allowed by the Barons and Sworn; If the Per∣sons so chosen refuse to hold they in∣cur a Penalty, unless they will make Solemn Oath they are not worth 10000 l. Twenty six Aldermen, Preside over the 26 Wards of the City; When any of these die, The Lord Mayor, and Aldermen chuse another out of the most substantial Men of the City, and if any so chosen refuse to hold, he is commonly fined 500 l. All the Aldermen who have been Lord Mayor, and the Three eldest, who have not yet arrived to that Honour, are by their Charter Justices of Peace; And this City of London is Camera Regis Reipublicae, Cor & totius Angliae Epitome. To the Lord Mayor, and the City of London, belong divers Courts of Judicature, amongst which the chief is,
The Court of Hustings. DOmus Causarum, Hus, being in the Saxon Tongue House, and Dhing Things; It is the Highest Court of London, And is holden before the Lord Mayor and Sheriff, or now in the Sheriffs absence, Six Aldermen, which sit in Court there every Tuesday, altho' that it may not seem to Vary from the Command of St. Edward the Confes∣sor, that it should be holden every Monday, it is still written to be holden on the Monday; And hath Cognizance of all Pleas Real, mixt, and Personal; For the Rule in the Register is, Quodlibet breve quod tangit Liberum Tenementum in Lon∣don dirigitur Majori sive Custodi & Vice∣comitibus, Et lia Brevia tantum Vicecomi∣tibus. By Fleta lib. 28 & 48. It appears, that the name or Court is not appro∣priated to London only, for the King hath his Court in Civitatibus Burgis & Locis Exemptis sicut in Hustingis London, Winton, Lincoln, Eborum, & apud Shepway ubi Barones & Cives Recordum habent, &c. One Week the Judges sit upon Pleas Real, The next upon Actions mixt, or of any other nature, So that all Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Services within
London, and the Liberties and Suburbs thereof, are Pleadable at Guild-Hall in two Hustings, one called Husting de placito Terrae and the other Husting Commun' Placitorum. And if a Man be impleaded in the Common Pleas of Lands in London; The Tenant shall say the Lands are in Lon∣don, and time out of mind, &c. every one hath been impleaded for them, within the City in the Hustings. But since Real Actions have grown out of use by trying Titles by Ejection firmae, The ancient Customs and Pra∣ctise of this Court are much declined. The Sheriffs Court in London. THe Two Sheriffs keep each of them a Court of Record within the City, by Prescription, or Custom where they hold Plea of all personal Actions, and have belonging to these Courts Two Prisons, called Compters, the one in Wood-street; The other in the Poultry. They hold Two Court-days each in every Week, That for Wood-street on Wednesdays and Fridays, And that for the Poultry Compter on Thursdays and Satur∣days.
In Plaint of Debt, the Custom is, the Sheriffs Ore Tenus send to the Ser∣jeants to Summon, or Attach the De∣fendant without Warrant, and upon Nihil Returned within the City, the Serjeants by Commandment from the Sheriff have used to Attach; and Arrest the Defendant, to have his Body at the next Court, before the Sheriff at the Guild-Hall. They certifie their Records in that manner, but the usual practise is to en∣ter an Action in the Office for that purpose at one of the Compters, which Action must be carefully entred, for it is the Original of that Court, by which you declare, and from which there can be no variance: And when an Action is entred, the Serjeant may Arrest the Defendant and bring him into Custody, until he find Bail to answer the Con∣demnation, which Bail is taken by one of the Clerk Sitters at the Compter who constantly attend. The Plaintiff ought to declare the first Court after the Defendant is Ar∣rested; although further time is usually given, Ex gratia Curiae per mot'; But if the Plaintiff have no Attorney the first Court, a Non-suit may be had by the Defendant.
If the Defendant be a Freeman he hath four defaults; But they are al∣lowable only in Debt, Accompt, or Covenant broken, and not other∣wise. If the Defendant be in the Compter he is brought to the Bar by a Duci facias, which is but the Sheriffs Mandate, made by the Clerk of the Papers. They have in each Court a Steward or Judge who is Learned in the Laws, and besides their particular Customs, their Proceedings are generally ac∣cording to the Common Law at We∣stminster; But of their particular practise, Vide Compleat Sollicitor and others. There is also in London a Court of Chancery or Equity held before the Lord Mayor, which is commonly called The Court of Conscience. WHerein they do proceed by English Bill, Answer, Replica∣tion, and Rejoynder, much like the Proceedings in the High Court of Chancery.
And the Custom of London is, when a Man is Impleaded before the She∣riff, The Mayor may send for the Parties, and for the Record upon Sug∣gestion of the Defendant, and Exa∣min the Parties upon the Pleas, and if it be found upon Examination that the Plaintiff is satisfied, The Mayor may award the Plaintiff shall be Bar∣red; But by no Custom he can Exa∣mine after Judgment, 10 Hen. 6.14, 15. Also there is a practise called Mark∣ing of a Cause before the Lord May∣or, which is after a Verdict given for the Plaintiff in the Sheriffs Court, the Defendant may get the Cause marked by one of the Clerks in the Lord Mayor's Court, to stay Judgment and Execution until the matter be Examin∣ed in Equity, where the Lord Mayor doth oftentimes mitigate the Damages or give the Defendant time to pay it, &c. This Court is held Mondays, Tuesdays, and every day, if the Lord Mayor please to sit.
The Court of the Mayor and Aldermen. THis is a Court of Record consisting of the Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Twenty three Aldermen, whereof the Two Sheriffs are part; And their Proceedings is by Arrest of the Body, or Attachment of the Defendants Goods, and in that case much like the other Courts of Common Law. By the Statute of 43 Eliz. cap. 12. They have power to correct Errors used for default of good Governance, &c. in the City. The Court of Orphans. THe Mayor, and Aldermen by Cu∣stom have the Custody of Or∣phans within the City; And if they commit the custody to another Man, he should have a Ravishment of Ward, if the Orphan be taken away, And they shall have custody of the Lands and Goods of such Orphans. A Recognizance may be acknowledg'd, in this Court before the Mayor and Aldermen to the Chamberlain for Or∣phans, and he being a sole Corpora∣tion, the Recognizance and Bond made to him and his Successors con∣cerning
Orphans shall by Custom go to his Successors. Executors, or Administrator are to Ex∣hibite true Inventories before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and give Secu∣rity by Rocognizance, or the Court may commit them to Prison till they do it. If the Father advance any of his Children by part of his Goods, that shall bar him to demand any further, unless the Father under his Hand, or by Will declare, it was but in part of Advancement, and then that Child put∣ting his part in Hotchpot with the Executors, and Widow may have a Third part of the whole, and this the Civil Law calls Collatio Bonorum; How the Goods of a Freeman shall be di∣vided, See Coke's 1 Inst. Sect. 207. The Court of Common Councel. THis is held by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commonalty, Resembling the High Court of Parlia∣ment; The Commonalty being chosen out of every Ward, constitute the Lower House, and Represent all the Commonalty of the City.
Here they make Acts for the better Government of the City; For the Ex∣ecution of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, Pro Bono publico, and for the better advancement of Trade and Traffick; Provided such Constitutions be not contrary to the Laws of the Realm: And these being made by Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, do bind within the City, And they of the Common Assembly do give their Assent by holding up their Hands. The Court of Wardmote Inquest. THis Resembles the Country Leets, Every Ward being as a Hundred, and the Parishes as Towns; And in in every Ward there is an Inquest of Twelve, or more Sworn every year to Inquire of and present Nusances, and other Offences within the Ward. The Court of Hallmote. THis is as much as to say, The Court of the Hall, being the Court which every Company in London keeps in their Halls, which was anciently called, The Hallmote, or Folke Mote.
The Chamberlain's Court for Appren∣tices. BEfore the Chamberlain all Inden∣tures of Apprentices are, or ought to be Inrolled, and if they be not Inrol∣led, and if they be not Inrolled the Apprentice may refuse to Serve, and Sue out his Indenture in this Court at his Pleasure, and be discharged of his Master. The Chamberlain is Judge in all Complaints, either of the Servant a∣gainst the Master, or Master against the Servant, and punisheth the Offen∣ders at his Discretion. In this Court are all Apprentices made Free; And that may be Three manner of ways; By Service as are Apprentices; By Birthright as being the Son of a Freeman, which is called Freedom by his Fathers Copy, or by Redemption by Order of the Court of Aldermen.
The Court of the Conservator of the Water, and River of Thames. THe Lord Major of London for the time being, is the Conservator or Governor of the River of Thames, and the Issues, Breaches and Lands overflown from Stanes Bridge, to the Waters of Yendal or Medway; And hath Authority for punishment of such as use unlawful Netts, or Engins in Fishing, or take Fish under Size, or unseasonably, &c. 4 Hen. 7. cap. 15. And in all Commissions touching the Water of Lee, the Lord Mayor shall be one, 3 Jac. cap. 14. The Court of the Coroner in London. THe Mayor is Coroner within the City, And this Court is holden before him or his Deputy, See Coro∣ner before in the Counties. The Court of Escheator in London. THe Lord Mayor is also Escheator within the City; And this Court is holden before him or his Deputy, Vide Escheator before in Counties.
The Court of Policies and Assurances. THis Court Sitteth by Force of the Commission under the Great Seal, Warranted by Act of Parliament, Ann. 43 Eliz. cap. 12. there being an Officer, or Clerk to Register Assurances. The Jurisdiction of which Court you may read in that Act of Parliament being for Incouragement of Trade: The Judge of the Admiralty, Recor∣der, Two Doctors of Civil Law, Two Common Lawyers, Eight Mer∣chants, or any five of them to deter∣mine all differences concerning Assur∣ances, as they shall think fit without Formalities of Pleadings; And to Com∣mit to Prison without Bail all such as disobey their Decrees; And to that end they are to meet once a Week at the Assurance Office, and not to take any Fee. If any be grieved by their Decree, he may Exhibit his Bill in Chancery for Re-examination of that Decree. The Lord Mayor is Chief Judge at the Court, or Sessions of Gaol Delivery, held Eight times in the year, or oftner, at the Sessions-House in the Old Baily, for the City of London and County of Middlesex, for the Tryal of Criminals,
and hath power to Reprieve Condem∣ned persons. The Tradesmen in London are divided into Corporations or Companies, and are so many Bodies Politick; of these, Twelve are called Chief Companies, and he that is chosen Lord Mayor, if he be not before, must be made Free of one of these Companies, viz. Mercers, Gro∣cers, Drapers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths, Skinners, Merchant Taylors, Haberdashers, Salters, Ironmongers, Vintners, Cloth-Workers: All which Companies have Assembling places called Halls, and each of them hath a Master chosen Annually from amongst themselves, and Subordinate Governours called Wardens or Assistants; And these in their Compa∣nies exactly correspond to the General Government of the City. Several of our Kings have (to honour some of these Companies) taken their Freedom of it, as VII several Kings had been of the Taylors Company, whereof the last of these Seven being King Henry the 7th, gave them the Name and Title of Mer∣chant Taylors; And the late King Charles the Second was made Free of the Grocers.
There are near LX other Compa∣nies, or Corporations, All enjoying large Priviledges by the Charters of several Kings, and have Fair Halls to meet in. The Military Government in London. HIs Late Majesty King Charles the Second, after his Restoration, sent a Commission of Lieutenancy ap∣pointing several Persons His Lieute∣nants, giving them the same Power in London, the Lord Lieutenants have in their respective Counties. And in pur∣suance of that Commission, the Regi∣ments then in being were New setled in this manner, viz. Six Regiments of Trained Bands Commanded by six Ci∣tizens Knights, and their Lieutenant Colonels all Knights, and six Regiments of Auxiliaries; In these Twelve Regi∣ments were 20000 Men: Then there were Listed Two Regiments of Horse, each consisting of five Troops, in all 800 Horse: But in case of need, in London, and within the Liberties may in a Few days be Raised 40000 Men.
There is in Southwark One Regi∣ment of Trained Bands, Fifteen Hun∣dred Men. In the Hamlets of the Tower Two Regiments, in all Three thousand Men: Then Holbourn Regi∣ment, and Westminster Regiment Two thousand each; and in case of Neces∣sity they can Raise 20000 more. The Artillery Company, is as a Nursery of Souldiers, and hath been so for above 60 years; the late King Charles (when Prince of Wales) Listed himself therein, and the Duke of York did the like at the same time, who after the Restora∣tion took upon himself the Command thereof; and under him was a Leader who Exercised them every Tuesday Fort∣night, and the other Tuesday the Exer∣cise was performed by the several Mem∣bers of the Company, who are there Trained up to Command. Of this Society are many of the No∣bility, also the Lord Mayor, and most of the Aldermen: All the Commanders of the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries here Exercise Arms. This Company consists of 600 Men. Their Officers are A Leader, Two Lieutenants, Two Ensigns, Two Serjeants, A Provost Martial; Four Gentlemen of Arms, &c. They have also a Court Martial, consisting of A President, A
Vice-President, a Treasurer, and Twenty four Members of the Company. On the Second Tuesday in February, at a Gene∣ral Rendezvous every Year the Officers are Elected. For the Security and Defence of this Famous City, and River, there hath been anciently divers Fortresses: But the most Eminent and Chief is that called. The Tower of London. WHich is not only a Fort or Cit∣tadel to command, and defend, both City, and River; but also A Royal Palace, where our Kings with their Courts have sometimes Lodged, A Royal Arsenal, where are Arms, and Ammunition for 60000 Men, The Treasury for the Jewels and Ornaments of the Crown, The only Mint for coyn∣ing Gold and Silver, The Great Archive where are conserved All the Records of the Courts at Westminster, The Chief Prison for the safe Custody of Great Persons that are Criminals; and if the great Extent thereof within the Walls be considered, and its Authority over the several Hamlets without, and the many high Priviledges and Liberties
belonging thereunto, it may rather be Reputed a City, than a Cittadel. The Governour of this Important Fortress is the Constable, or Lieutenant of the Tower; Who is High Steward of a Court there held by Prescription, of Debt, Trespass, and other Actions of any Sum Greater or Lesser, and hath a Deputy; Before the late Act might re∣fuse a Habeas Corpus, may give Prote∣ction to all Debtors belonging to the Tower within the Realm of England; hath Priviledge to take Unam Lagenam of all Wine-Ships that come; Is Virtute Officij, to be in Commission of the Peace for the Counties of Kent, Surrey, and Middlesex, and (as some hold) to be Custos Rotulorum of the County of Mid∣dlesex: His Salary is 200 l. per An∣num. His usual Fee for every Prisoner is 20 l. at Entrance, and 3 l. a Week for an Esquire; For a Knight 5 l. a Week; For a Baron, or above, 50 l. at En∣trance, to whom the King allows 10 l. Weekly, whereof Two part goes to the Prisoner, the other Third part to the Lieutenant for Lodgings and Dyet, and 50 l. to the Lieutenant upon the Pri∣soners discharge. The Gentleman Porter of the Tower holds his Place by Patent, and at the
Entrance of a Prisoner hath for his Fee Vestimenta Superiora, or a Composi∣tion for it. The Gentleman Gaoler is put in by the Lieutenant of the Tower, his Fee is 41 s. of a Gentleman, 5 l. of a Knight. Forty Warders of the Tower accounted the King's Domestick Servants, and Sworn by the Lord Chamberlain of His Majesties Houshold, or by the Clerk of the Cheque. The Tower is not within any County or Parish (only a small part some ac∣count to be in Middlesex) but is a Li∣berty of it self, exempt from all Taxes to the King, Church, or Poor. It hath A Parochial Church, exempt from all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Arch∣bishop, and is a Donative bestowed by the King without Institution or Indu∣ction. And there are Thirteen Hamlets of large Extent be∣longing to the Tower, whose Train-Bands are all bound to Assist the Con∣stable or Lieutenant of the Tower, which are called The King's Company, and are to Wait on the King's Person in time of Need, and to go no further than the King. And within the Tower is kept
The Office of the Ordnance. BEing the grand and standing Maga∣zine of the principal Preparatives, Habiliaments, Utensils, and Instruments of War, as well by Sea as Land, for the Defence, and Safety of the King∣dom, and consequently hath Influence in the Navies, Forts, Castles, and Armies thereof; having the Superintendence, Ordering, and Disposing as well of the Grand Magazine lodged in the Tower, as at the Minories, Woolwich, Chatham, Windsor, Portsmouth, Plimouth, Hull, and elsewhere: And is under the Govern∣ment of The Master of the Ordnance, under whom, The Administration and Ma∣nagement of the said Office is com∣mitted to the Principal Officers following, viz. The Lieutenant of the Ordnance, who in the absence of the Master of the Ordnance, is to Impart all Orders and Warrants directed to the Office, and to see them duly Executed, and to give Order for Discharging the Great Ord∣nance when required, upon Coronation Days, Days Festival, Triumphs, &c. As also to see the Train of Artillery fitted
with all its Equipage, for Motion upon any occasion. The Surveyor is to Survey all the Ord∣nance, Stores, and Provisions of War in the custody of the Store-keeper, which he is to see so distinguished, and placed as shall be best for their Preservation and Safety, for a decent View and a ready Account; to allow all Bills of Debt, and to keep Check upon all Labourers and Artificers Works, and to see that all Provisions received be good, and serviceable, and duly proved with the Assistance of the rest of the Officers, and the Proof Masters, and marked with the King's Mark, if they ought so to be. The Clerk of the Ordnance is to Record all Orders, and Instructions given for the Government of the Office, as like∣wise all Patents and Grants, and the Names of all Officers, Clerks, Artificers, Attendants, Gunners, Labourers and others who enjoy the said Grants, or any other Fees from the King for the same; To draw all Estimates for Pro∣visions, and Supplies to be made, and all Letters, Instructions, Commissions, Deputations, and Contracts for His Majesty's Service; To make all Bills of Imprest; and Debentures for the payment and satisfaction of the respe∣ctive
Artificers and Creditors of the Office for Work done, or Provisions received; and Quarter-Books for the Salaries, Allowances, and Wages, of all Officers, Clerks, and other Ministers belonging to the said Office; and also to keep Journals, and Liegers of the Receipts, and Returns of His Majesty's Stores, that nothing be Bought, Bor∣rowed, Given, Received, Lent or Em∣ployed without due Record thereof, to serve as a Cheque between the Two Accomptants of the Office, the one for Money, the other for Stores. The Storekeeper is to take into his Custody all His Majesty's Ordnance, Munitions, and Stores thereunto be∣longing, and to Indent and put in Legal Security for the safe keeping thereof, and to make Just and True Accompt, from time to time, to Re∣ceive no Provisions whatsoever, that are manifestly inserviceable, or before they have been Reviewed by the Sur∣veyor; nor to Issue any proportion of Ordnance, &c. but what is agreed upon, and signed by the Officers, according to the appointment of the Master of the Ordnance, grounded upon the Order of the King, or six of the Privy Coun∣cil, or the Lord Admiral for Matters concerning the Navy: Nor to Receive
back any Stores issued till they have been Reviewed by the Surveyor, and Registred by the Clerk of the Ordnance in the Book of Remains; To look that all His Majesties Store-Houses be well Repaired, and well Accommodated, and the Stores kept in such order, and lustre, as is fit for the Service and Ho∣nour of the King. The Clerk of the Deliveries is to Draw all Proportions for Delivery of any Stores and Provisions, and to be present at the Delivery, and by Indenture to Charge the particular Receiver of the King's Munitions, whether Captain, Gunner, or other, and to Register as well the Copies of all Warrants for Deliveries, as the Proportions deli∣vered, whereby to discharge the Store-keeper. The Treasurer, and Paymaster of the Office, was formerly an Appendix to that of Lieutenant of the Ordnance: But the late King Charles Erected it into a particular and distinct Office, and granted the same (as all the other before-mentioned are,) by Letters Pa∣tent; And there are other Subordinate Officers, which likewise hold by Patent, as
The Master Gunner of England, who is to teach all such as desire to Learn the Art of Gunnery, and to oblige every Scholar by Oath not to serve any Foreign Prince or State (without leave,) nor to Teach any other the said Art, but such as have taken the said Oath; and to certifie the Master of the Ord∣nance the Sufficiency of any person Re∣commended to be one of the King's Gunners, and his Ability to discharge the said Duty. The Keeper of the Small Guns, who hath the charge and custody of the King's Small Guns, as Musquets, Harque∣busses, Carabines, Pistols, &c. with their Furniture. There are many other Inferiour Offi∣cers, and Ministers Attendants and Arti∣ficers, as Clerks, Proof-Masters, Messen∣gers, Master Smith, Master Carpenter, Master Wheelwright, Master Gunn∣smith, Furbusher, &c. which for Bre∣vity are here omitted, as likewise the King's principal Engineer: The Master of the Ordnance hath a Superintendency, and Jurisdiction over all the King's Engineers, Employed in the several Fortifications of the King∣dom, most of whom have their Sala∣ries, and Allowances payable in the said Office, to which they are account∣able,
and from whence they receiev their particular Orders and Instructi∣ons, according to the Directions and Commands given by the King, and signified by The Master of the Ord∣nance. Nota, The several sorts of Cannon seem to be denominated from the Rapacious kind of Creatures whose Names they bear; as Faulcons, Faul∣conets, Sakers, Culverins, from the Latin Coluber, Basilisks, Griffons, Dragons, &c. The Office of the Warden of the Mint. WHere is minted all the Bullion that is Minted in England, al∣though the King may set up a Mint in any other Place of the Kingdom. In this are divers Persons of Quality and Worth, whereof the principal is The Warden of the Mint, who is to Receive the Silver, and Gold brought in by Merchants or Goldsmiths, or others; to pay them for it, and to Over∣see all the rest; his Fee is 100 l. per An∣num. And next is The Master Worker, who Receives the Bullion from the Warden, causes it to be Melted, delivers it to the Moneyers, and receives it from them again when
Minted, and hath an Allowance by the Pound weight, but no set Fee. And next is The Comptroller, who sees all the Mo∣ney be made according to the Just As∣size, to oversee the Officers and Comp∣trol them, if the Money be not as it ought to be; his Fee is 100 Marks, and these three last above hold by Patent of the King. The next is The Assay-Master, who weighs the Bullion, and sees it be according to the Standard; his Fee is 200 Marks. The Auditor to take the Accounts, and make them up. The Surveyor of the Melting, who is to see the Bullion cast out, and not to be alter'd after it is delivered to the Melter, which is after the Assay-Master▪ hath made Tryal thereof. There are moreover A Clerk of the Irons, A Graver, A Weigher, A Teller, Melters, Blanchers, Moneyers, and other Officers belonging to the Mint.
The Office of Records in the Tower. IS of Venerable Antiquity, and the Keeper, and Deputy dignified with Special Trust. The Keeper hath a Sa∣lary of 500 l. per Annum, and is pro∣perly in the Gift of the Master of the Rolls, and afterwards His Majesty hath usually by Letters Patents Confirmed it. As the Chappel of the Rolls and Petty-Bag Office fill, the Records are sent hither by a Writ formed for that pur∣pose; and these Records (amongst other things) contain the Foundations of Abbeys and Religious Houses; as The Chappel of the Rolls contain those of their Dissolution, and the Donation of the Lands, of which many Families are now possessed; The Leagues and Treaties with Foreign Princes; The At∣chievements of this Nation in France, and Foreign parts; The Original of All Laws, that have been Enacted or Recorded until Richard the Third; The Homage and Dependency of Scot∣land upon England; The Establishment of Ireland in Laws and Dominions; The Dominion of the Brittish Seas, totally excluding French, and Dutch, to Fish therein without License from Eng∣land,
proved by Records before the Conquest; The Interest of the Isles of Man, and of Jersey, Guernsey, Sarke, and Alderney, the Four last being the Remaining part of the Norman Posses∣sions; The Title of our Kings to the Realm of France, and how obtained; And all that our Kings, and Princes have till that time Done or Confirmed at home or abroad; Tenures of all the Lands in England, Extents of Mannors, and Lands, Inquisitions Post mortem, being of great Advantage upon Trials of Interest or Descent, Liberties, and Priviledges granted to Cities, Towns Corporate, or private Men; as Court Leets, Waifs, Estrays, Markets, Fairs, Free Warrens, Felons Goods, &c. Or what else could come to the Crown or pass out of it, Writs, Pleadings, and Proceedings as well in Chancery as at Common Law, and in the Exchequer, Inspeximus, Inrolments, &c. Deeds, and Contracts, between party and party; and, The Just Establishment of all the Offices in the Nation; The Metes and Bounds of all Forests, with the Rights of the Inhabitants therein, and many other; And therefore in the Petitions of the Commons in Parliament 46 E. 3. said to be perpetual Evidence of every man's Right, and the Records of the Nation.
These Records are reposited in the place called Wakefield Tower, being ma∣ny Cart Loads; Thus distinguished, Rotuli Patentium, Chartarum, Parliamen∣torum, Clausarum, Finium, Scotiae, Vasco∣niae, Franciae, Hiberniae, Walliae, Norman∣niae, Almaniae, Oblatae, Liberatae, Extra∣ctae, Perambulationes, Forestae, Scut', Ro∣tul', Marshal', Romae de Treugis Chart', & Patent' fact' in Partibus Transmarinis Patent' de Domibus Judaeorum Protection' de Perdonation', &c. Stapulae, cum multis aliis, Depicted lately upon every Press belonging to each King's Reign, and very easie to be brought forth for use. This Office is to be open from 7 till 11 in the Morning, and from 1 till 5 in the Afternoon on all Working-days, only in December, January, and February they open an Hour later in the Morn∣ing, and shut up an Hour earlier at Night. All Records since Richard the Third, are yet in the Chappel of the Rolls. The Money allowed by the King for the Maintenance of all these Officers, and keeping thls Vast Structure in Re∣pair, amounts to a vast Sum.
Saint Katherines. NEar the Tower is St. Katherines, which hath a Royal Jurisdiction for the Ecclesiastical Causes, and Pro∣bate of Wills, and belongeth to the Queen; from whom if any will Appeal it must be to the King in his Chancery, who thereupon Issueth out a Commission under the Great Seal; as in Appeals from the Arches or Prerogative. The Bridge SUrpasseth all others in Europe; It hath 19 Arches, 20 Foot between each Arch, is 800 Foot in Length, 60 High, and 30 Broad, and hath a Draw-Bridge almost in the Middle, Built 1209, in the Reign of King John. The Charge of keeping it in Re∣pair is so Great, that our Auncestors thought fit to have a Large House, a vast Revenue in Lands, and Houses, and divers Officers to be apart for the con∣stant Care and Repair thereof. The Principal whereof are the
Two Bridgmasters chosen yearly out of the Body of the Liveries, upon Mid∣summer-day, after the Sheriffs and Cham∣berlain. The Bridge over the River Lee at Stratford was built an Hundred years before, and being the first Arched Stone-Bridge seen in England, gave it the Name of Stratford-Bow. Not far below this Famous Bridge, is the place for Receipt and Manage∣ment of all Impositions laid on Mer∣chandizes Imported, and Exported into and from this City, which is cal∣led The Custom-House. WHerein are Employed a great Number of Officers; whereof the First and Chief are Six Commissioners, who have Charge of all His Majesties Customs in all Ports of England, Salary to each is 2000 l. a year. And these have many Deputies Customers, Collectors, Comp∣trollers, Surveyors, Searchers, Waiters, &c. in the Port of London, and in all the Out-Ports. Collector of Subsidies, or Customs Outwards, Fee Two hundred seventy six pounds; Collector of Customs Inwards, Fee Four hundred sixty six pounds Thirteen shil∣lings
Four pence; Customer Inwards, Fee Sixty two pounds Six shillings Eight pence; Customers of Cloth, and Petty Customs, Fee Two hundred seven∣ty seven pounds; Customers of the Great Customs Two, Fee Fifty pounds a piece; Comptroller of Customs Inwards, and Outwards, Fee Two hundred fifty five pounds; Comptroller of Cloth, and Petty Customs, Fee One hundred pounds; Surveyors of Customs Inwards, and Out∣wards, Fee Three hundred pounds; Surveyor General, Fee Five hundred pounds; Comptroller of the Great Custom, Fee Thirty pounds; Register of the Seizures, Fee One hundred and six pounds; Chief Searcher, Fee One hun∣dred Twenty pounds; Five Under-Searchers, Eighteen King's Waiters, Fee to each Fifty two pounds; Surveyor of the Out-Ports, Fee Two hundred and Fifty pounds. The Perquisites to each of these Officers are very con∣siderable, and to some more than their Salaries. In all the Out-Ports the King hath the like Officers, who all Receive Sala∣ries likewise out of His Majesty's Re∣venue.
The General Post-Office. THe King by Letters Patent doth Constitute his Post-Master Ge∣neral, who keeps one General Office in the City of London, from whence Let∣ters, and Packets are dispatched. Monday to France, Italy, Spain, Flan∣ders, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, &c. and to Kent. Tuesday to the United Netherlands, Germany, &c. and to all Parts of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland. Wednesday to Kent only, and the Downs. Thursday to France, Spain, Italy, and all Parts of England and Scotland. Fryday to the Spanish and united Ne∣therlands, Germany, Sweden, Denmark and to Kent. Saturday to all Parts of England, Scot∣land and Ireland. And the Answers of these Letters are Received in the said Office in due Course, and dispersed from thence ac∣cording to the Directions. This Office is managed by a Deputy, and other Officers to the number of Seventy seven Persons, who give their actual Attendance.
Upon this Grand Office Depends 182 Deputy Post-Masters in England, and Scotland, Most of which keep Regular Offices in their Stages, and Sub-Post-Masters ink their Branches; And also in Ireland another General Post-office for that Kingdom, which is kept in Dub∣lin, consisting of 18 like Officers, and 45 Deputy Post-masters. The Post-master General keeps for Transport of Letters to France Two Packet-boats, to Flanders Two, to Hol∣land Two, to Ireland Three, at Deal, Two for the Downs, which he Main∣tains at his proper Charge. And the Market Towns of England are so well Appropriated to the Respe∣ctive Postages, that they have an easy, and certain conveyance of Letters in due Course of the Mails every Post. The number of the Letters Missive in England, tho' formerly inconsiderable, yet are now so great that the Office hath been Farmed at 30000 l. a year. The Charge of Letters here is Less, and the Expedition Greater, than in any Foreign Country. A Letter of a Sheet of Paper costs 2 d. for 80 Miles, Two Sheets 4 d. and an ounce 8 d. and in 24 Hours the Post goes 120 Mile, and in Five days
an Answer may be had from a place 300 Miles distant. And for Riding Post you pay only 3 d. a Mile, and 4 d. to the Post Boy at every Stage. For Study of Law. IN London, are the Colledges or Houses of the Municipal, or Com∣mon Law Professors, and Students, Which are Fourteen, still called Inns; the old English name for Houses of Noblemen, Bishops, or Men of Extraor∣dinary Note, The lowest of which as being heretofore Preparatory to the other, and therefore may properly be placed first are, The Inns of Chancery. WHich are Eight, and may pro∣bably be so called, because there dwelt such Clerks as did chiefly Study the forming of Writs, which regularly appertain to the Cursitors, which are Officers of Chancery; The first of these called Thavies Inn, was begun in the Reign of King Edward the Third, and since Purchased by Lincolns Inn, as was also Furnivals Inn; Then in Holbourn is
Bernards Inn, Then New Inn, St. Cle∣ments Inn, Cliffords Inn, anciently the House of the Lord Clifford, Staple Inn belonging to the Merchants of the Sta∣ple, and Lyons Inn, anciently a Com∣mon Inn with the Sign of the Lyon. Heretofore many were entred here before they were admitted of the Inns of Court; But they are now taken up with Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Clerks who have their Chambers apart, and their Diet at a very easie Rate in a Hall to∣gether, where they are obliged to Appear in Grave Long Robes, and Black knit round Caps; These belong all to some Inns of Court, who send yearly their Barristers to Read to them. The Inns of Court SO named as some think, for that the Students therein are to serve; The Courts of Judicature are Four. The Two Temples Purchased by some Professors of the Common Law above 300 years ago, and called the Inner and Middle-Temple in relation to Essex House; which was also a part of the House of the Knight's Templers, and called the Utter Temple, because Seated without Temple Bar.
Lincolns Inn, belonging anciently to the Earls of Lincoln. And Greys Inn belonging to the Noble Fa∣mily of the Greys. These Societies are no Corporati∣ons, nor have any Judicial Power o∣ver their Members, but have certain Orders among themselves, which have by consent the force of Laws; For Lighter Offences they are only Excom∣muned or put out of Commons, and for Greater they lose their Chambers and be expelled the House, after which they are not to be Received into any of the other three Societies: And these also at Chappel, Hall, or Courts of Ju∣dicature, Wear a Grave Black Robe, and Cap, and at other times walk with Cloak and Sword. They have no Revenues being not enabled to Purchase, But defray the Charges of the House, with what is paid at Admittances and Quitrents for Chambers, Pensions, and other small Duties. The whole Company of Gentle∣men in each Society, may be divided into Four parts; Benchers, Utter Barri∣sters, Inner Barristers, and Students.
Benchers are the Seniors, to whom is Committed the Government of the House, And out of those is yearly cho∣sen a Treasurer, who Receiveth, Dis∣burseth, and Accompteth for all Moneys belonging to the House. Utter Barristers are such, who for Learning and Standing are called by the Benchers, to Argue in the Socie∣ty Doubtful Cases, which are called Moots from the Saxon Mote, or French Mot, a Word, and whilst they Argue, Sit Uttermost on the Form's or Ben∣ches, which they call the Bar. Out of these are chosen Readers for the Inns of Chancery, belonging to the respective Inns of Court where in Term time, and Grand Vacations, they argue Cases in the Presence of Attorneys and Clerks. Inner Barristers are all the Rest, who for want of Learning or Time are not to Argue; and yet in a Moote before the Benchers, Two of these Inner Barristers do for their Exercise, Recite by heart the Pleading of the same Moot case in Law French, which Pleading is the Declaration at large of the same Moote Case, the one taking the part of the Plaintiff, the other of the Defendant. They divide the year into three Parts, That is, the Two Learning Vacations,
which begin the first Monday in Lent, and the first Monday after Lommas-day, and continue Three weeks and Three days each; the Term Times, and the Dead or Mean Vacations. The Exercises of Study in these Learn∣ing Vacations, are the greatest, which are in manner following: The Benchers appoint the eldest Ut∣ter Barrister to Read amongst them openly in the Hall, whereof he hath notice half a year before; He then the first day about 8 of the Clock chuseth some Statute, whereupon he grounds his whole Reading for that Vacation, and Declares such Mischiefs, and Inconveniencies as were unprovid∣ed for before the same Act, And then reciteth certain Doubts he hath devi∣sed, that may grow upon the Statute, and declareth his Judgment therein; After which, One of the younger Ut∣ter Barristers repeateth One question propounded by the Reader, and by way of Argument endeavoureth to prove the Readers Opinion to be a∣gainst Law, and after him the Senior Utter Barristers, and Readers one after another according to Seniority do de∣clare their Opinions in the same; and then the Reader who did put the Case, endeavoureth to confute Objections
laid against him, and to confirm his own Opinion; After which the Ser∣jeants, and Judges (if any be present) declare their Opinions; Then the youngest Utter Barrister again re∣hearseth another Case, which is prose∣cuted as the former was: And this Exercise continueth daily about three or four Hours. Out of those who have Read once in the Summer Vacation, and are Ben∣chers, is chosen always one to Read in Lent, who observes the like manner of Reading as before is Expressed. In the mean Vacation after Dinner Cases are Argued, and after Supper, Mootes brought and Pleaded by the Inner Barristers, in the Presence of the Utter Barristers. Mooting in the Inns of Court. IN these Learning Vacations after Supper (or Drinking on Fasting Nights) in the Hall the Reader, with one or two of the Benchers comes in, To whom one of the Utter Barristers propounds some doubtful Case, which being argued by the Benchers, and af∣terwards by him that moved the Case; The Benchers sit down on the Bench at the upper end of the Hall, whence
they are called Benchers, And upon a Form in the Middle of the Hall sit Two Utter Barristers, and on each side of them sits one Inner Barrister, who in Law French declareth to the Benchers (as Serjeants do at the Bar in the King's Courts to the Judges) some kind of Action: The one being as it were Retained for the Plaintiff, The other for the Defendant; Then the two Utter Barristers Argue such Questions as are disputable within the Case, after which the Benchers do likewise declare their Opinions, how they take the Law to be in those Que∣stions. In these Mootings the Junior argueth first, as do the Judges in the Exche∣quer Chamber, and Serjeants in open Courts of Judicature. The Inner and Utter Barristers Plead here in Law French, and the Benchers in English, and at the Rea∣dings, The Readers Cases are put in English.
Mootings in Inns of Chancery. IN the Learning Vacation each Ut∣ter Barrister, who is a Reader in the Inns of Chancery, go with Two Students of the Inn of Court, to the Inn of Chancery, where he is appointed to Read, and there meet him com∣monly Two of each Inns of Court, who sitting as the Benchers do in the Inns of Court at their Mootes, they hear and Argue his Case. In the Term time the only Exercise of Learning, is Arguing and debating Cases after Dinner, and Mooting after Supper, as in the Vacation time. The Keeping Christmass in the Inns of Court. IF there be a sufficient number of Students to keep a Solemn Christ∣mass, then the Students before Christ∣mass hold a Parliament, and certain of them are appointed to be Officers in Imitation of the Kings Court, as Comptroller of the Inner Temple, so of the Middle Temple, stiled Lieuten∣nant of the Tower, and Treasurer, &c. These bear Rule during the time of Christmass, and are to behave them∣selves
with that Port and Gravity, as if they (as perhaps they may after∣wards) were so in the Kings House. At such time they have divers Di∣vertisments, as Feasting every day, Singing, Dancing, Dicing, which is al∣lowed to all Comers, and is so Exces∣sive, that the Butlers Box usually a∣mounts to above 50 l. a Day and Night, With which and a Small Con∣tribution from each Student, are the great Charges of the Christmass de∣frayed. When their Treasure is great they sometimes create a Prince, giving him such Title they think fit, And he hath all Officers, and a Court Suitable to a Great Prince, and many of the Prime Nobility and Great Officers of State have been Entertained by him, with Feasting, Enterludes, &c. As was some∣time done with Great Magnificence by Sir John Lort, by the Title of Prince de la Grange. From All Saints-day to Candlemass, each House usually hath Revells on Holy days, that is, Musick, and Dancing, and for this is usually chosen some young Student to be Master of the Revels.
The Manner of holding Parliaments in the Inns of Court. EVery Quarter the Benchers cause one of the Standing Officers of the House, to Summon a Parliament, which is an Assembly of the Benchers (which are called the Sage Company) in a place called the Parliament Cham∣ber, Where they treat of matters for good Ordering of the House. Here are the Readers for Lent and Summer Vacation Elected; The Treasurer chosen; Auditors appointed, To take the Accompts of the old Treasurer; Offences committed by any of the So∣ciety Punished, &c. In the Four Inns of Court are about 800 Students. The Serjeants Inns. THe Common Law Student, when he hath been admitted of some Inn of Court, where he is first called a Moote Man, and after about Seven years Study an Utter Barrister, and af∣ter Twelve years more, and having performed his Exercises is chosen a Bencher, and sometime after a Reader; He then wears a long Robe different
from other Barristers, and is in Capa∣city to be made Serjeant, when the King please to call him, and when he is arrived to that Degree, he hath his Diet and Lodging in one of those Two Inns called Serjeants Inn, And these are called Servientes ad Legem Serjeants at Law, and are as Doctors in the Civil Law, Only Doctoris appel∣latio est Magisterij, Servientis vero Mi∣nisterij; And therefore Doctors of Law are allowed to Sit within the Bar, in Chairs covered, whilst Serjeants stand without the Bar bare Headed, Only their Coifs or Caps on: And, The Call or Creation of Serjeants. IS, when the number of Serjeants is Small, The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, by the Advice and Consent of the other Judges, makes choice of 6 or 8 more, or less, of the most grave, and learned of the Inns of Court, and presents their Names to the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper, who sends by the Kings Writ to each of them, to appear on such a day before the King to Re∣ceive the State and Degree of a Serjeant at Law; at the Time appoin∣ted; They being habited in Robes
of Two Colours, viz. Brown and Blew, come accompanied with the Students of the Inns of Court, and attended by a Train of Servants and Retainers in certain Peculiar Cloth Liveries to Westminster-Hall, there in Publick take a Solemn Oath, and are Clothed with certain Robes and Coifs, without which they may no more be seen in publick, and making their Count at the Common Pleas Bar, and causing Rings to be distributed amongst the Officers, and Clerks of the Court, they afterwards Feast the great Officers and Persons of the Kingdom in a Magnificent manner, and give Gold Rings to the Princes of the Blood, Archbishops, Chancellor, and Trea∣surer of Forty shillings value, to Earls and Bishops, Rings of Twenty Shil∣lings value, to other Officers, Barons, Prelates, &c. Rings of less value. And, out of these are chosen The Judges WHen any Judges are wanting, The King by Advice of his Counsel makes choice of some of these Serjeants to supply his or their Places, and Constitutes him, if Chief Justice of the King's Bench by Writ; But if
others, then he or they are Constitu∣ted by Letters Patents Sealed by the Chancellor, who Sitting in the Middle of the rest of the Judges, in open Court by a Set Speech Declares to the Serjeant, or Serjeants there brought in, the King's Pleasure, and to the People the Kings Goodness in providing the Bench with such Able, Honest Men, and causeth the Letters Patent to be Read, and being departed, The Chief Ju∣stice placeth him on the Bench Junior to all the rest, and having taken his Oath, well and truly to serve the King and his People in the Office of Justice, To take no Reward, To do equal and Speedy Justice to all, &c. he Sits to the Execution of his Office; And now be∣ing a Judge hath thereby great Ho∣nour and a Considerable Salary, be∣sides Perquisites, for each one hath at least 1000 l. a year from the King, and now besides his Serjeants Habit he hath a Cloak put over him, and closed on his right Shoulder, and instead of his Caputium lined with Lamskins, it is now lined with Minever, or De Minuto vario, only the Two Lord Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron of the Ex∣chequer, have their Hoods, Sleeves and Collars, turn'd up with Trimme.
To these Two Serjeants Inns belong the Twelve Judges and about Twenty six Serjeants. The Colledge of Civilians in London, CAlled Doctors Commons, being Pur∣chased by Dr. Henry Harvy long since Dean of the Arches, for the Professors of the Civil Law in this City, where Commonly the Judge of the Arches, The Judge of the Ad∣miralty, And the Judge of the Prero∣gative, and divers other Eminent Ci∣vilians Presiding, and having their Diet and Lodging there in a Collegiate Manner: It was usually known by the name of Doctors Commons, which be∣ing consumed in the late Dreadful Fire, and now Rebuilt at the Charge of the said Doctors, they now keep their Courts and Pleadings there every Term, which begins and ends almost at the same time with that at Westmin∣ster. Those that are allowed to be▪ Advocates, and plead in these Courts are all to be Doctors of the Civil Law, in one of the Universities of England, who upon their Petition to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and his Fiat ob∣tained are admitted by the Judge of
the Court, on condition, not to Practise one whole year after his Admittance, which is in this manner; Two Senior Advocates in their Scar∣let Robes, with the Mace before them, conduct him up to the Court, with Three low Reverences, and Present him with a short Latin Speech, and the Rescript of the Archbishop; Then the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy, and some other prescribed by The Sta∣tute of the Arches being taken, he is Admitted by the Judge, and a Place or Seat in the Court assign'd him, either à Dextris, or Sinistris, which he is al∣ways to keep when he pleads. The Judges, and all the Advocates in these Courts, when they plead, always wear their Scarlet Robes, with Hoods lined with Taffata if they be of Oxford, or White Miniver Furr if they be of Cambridge, and all Black Round Velvet Caps; and the Proctors wear, or ought to wear Hoods lined with Lambskin, if not Graduats; But if Graduats, Hoods, according to the Degree. There are divers other Civilians, whereof some not Advocates, are Chan∣cellors to Bishops or Commissaries: The Vicars Generals, and Chancellors are appointed by the respective Arch∣bishops, and Bishops by Letters Patent
under their Seals, and Confirmed by the Dean, and Chapter of the respective Cathedrals. The Proctors are persons that Exhibit their Proxies for their Clyents, and make themselves parties for them, and draw and give in Pleas, or Libels and Allegations in the behalf of their Cly∣ents, produce Witnesses, prepare Causes for Sentence, and attend the Advocates with their Proceedings. And their Admittance is also by the Fiat of the Archbishop, Introduced by the Two Senior Proctors, and are allowed to Practise immediately after their Admis∣sion; They wear Long Black Robes and Hoods lined with White Furr, Ta∣king the Oaths now Enjoyned by Act of Parliament. All Process in the Court of Arches, runs in the Name of the Judge thus: Robertus Wiseman Miles LL. Dr. Almae Curiae Cant' de Arcubus London', Officialis Principalis; and Returnable in the Comman-Hall at Doctors Commons. The Title of the Judge of the Admi∣ralty is, Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae Locum tenens Judex sive Praesi∣dens: The Writs and Decrees run in the Name of The Lord High Admiral; and the Court held also in the Com∣mon Hall at Doctors Commons.
The Title of the Judge of the Praero∣gative Court is, Curiae Praerogativae Cant' Magister Custos sive Commissarius; And all Citations and Decrees run in the Name of the Archbishop. The Judge is attended by the Register, who sets down the Decrees and Acts of the Court, and keeps the Records of all Original Wills, and Testaments of parties Dying, having Bona Notabilia, in the place called the Praerogative Office, where (for a moderate Fee) any one may Search for, and have a Copy of any Testament or Administration, since the Rebellion of Wat Tyler and Jack Straw. Upon Appeals to the Court of Dele∣gates, the Judges are appointed by the Lord Chancellor under the Great Seal Pro illa vice, which Court is also kept in the same Common-Hall the day after the Praerogative in the Afternoon. The Citations, and Decrees there run in the King's Name: And from thence of course lies no Appeal; but the King of his meer Praerogative Royal doth many times grant A Commission of Re∣view.
The Colledge of Physicians in London BY Charters and Acts of Parlia∣ment of Henry the Eighth, and since, have certain Priviledges, Whereby no Man though a Graduate in Physick in Oxford, or Cambridge, may without License under the said Colledge Seal, Practise Physick in London, or within seven Miles thereof, nor in any other part of England, (in case he hath not taken any Degree in Oxford or Cambridge) whereby they have power to punish Offenders, make By-Laws, purchase Lands, search Apo∣thecaries Shops, in and about London, are freed from Offices and bearing Arms, may practise Physick or Chyrur∣gery, not only in London, but in any other part of England. This Society had anciently a Colledge in Knight-Rider-Street, the Gift o Dr. Linacre, Doctor to King Henry the Eighth, afterwards had their Colledge in Amen Street, Endowed by Dr. He∣vey, with his whole Inheritance, which being consumed in the late Dreadful Fire: The Fellows having purchased Ground, have now Raised a Magnifi∣cent
Structure in Warwick Lane. And of this Colledge is A President, Four Censors, and Eight Elects, who are all Principal Members of the Society, one of which is chosen yearly to Preside. The Four Censors have by their Charter Power to Survey, Correct, and Govern all Physicians, or others that shall pra∣ctise Physick in London, or within seven Miles of the same, and to punish Of∣fenders as they shall see cause. For all which see the Statutes mentioned in Coke's 4 Inst. fo. 251. In Rot. Pat. 32 H. 6. M. 17. it's Re∣corded, That the King with Assent of his Council, assigned certain Physicians, and a Chyrurgeon, to Administer in and about his person Potions, and other parts of Physick, and to moderate his Dyet. To which they were every one commanded to be Attendant. Whereby it appears, No Physick ought to be given to the King without Warrant, and that by Advice of his Privy Council, and no other Physick than what is set down in Writing, and that hey may use the Aid of Chyrurgeons Named in the Warrant; but no Apo∣hecary, they being to prepare all things hemselves.
The Science of Physick by the Statute of 32 H. 8. is Declared, to contain the Knowledge of Chyrurgery. If one of the Mystery of a Physician take a Man in Cure; and give him such Physick that he dye within three days thereof without any Felonious intent and against his Will, it is no Homi∣cide. But Britton saith, If One, not of the Mystery of a Physician, or Chyrurgeon, take upon him the Cure of a Man, and he dieth of the Potion, or Medicine; this is Covert Felony. Gresham Colledge in London. BUilt by Sir Thomas Gresham, and Endowed by him with the Reve∣nue of the Royal Exchange, by him Built; before which he gave one Moiety to the Mayor and Commonalty of London upon Trust, That the Major and Aldermen should find Four able persons to Read Divinity, Geometry, Astronomy, and Musick there, and to Allow each of them Fair Lodgings, and 50 l. a year; and the other Moi∣ety to the Company of Mercers upon Trust, to find Three able Persons to Read Civil Law, Physick, and Rhetorick, and to have Lodgings, and the like
Allowance. These several Lecturers are to Read in Term time every Day, except Sundays; In the Forenoon in Latin, and in the Afternoon the same in English: The Musick Lecture only in English. There is also a Mechanick Sort of Lecture for Natural Philosophy, Instituted by Sir John Cutler, with a Salary of 50 l. per Annum, to be Read at the time nd place where the Royal Society shall meet. Syon-Colledge in London. THis was Founded by Thomas White Doctor in Divinity, for the use of the Clergy in London, and Liberties hereof, and a part thereof for Twenty oor People, for which he gave Three Thousand pounds, and for the Main∣enance of the poor People 120 l. yearly for ever, and 40 l. yearly for a Sermon in Latin at the beginning of very Quarter, and a plentiful Dinner or all the Clergy that shall meet here. There was a Spacious Library uilt by John Sympson Rector of St. Olaves Hartstreet, and well furnished with Books.
The Chartreaux in London. THis was heretofore a Convent of Carthusian Monks, called in French Des Chartreaux. It is called Sutton's H∣pital also, and consists of A Master, o Governour, A Chaplain, A Master, and Usher to Instruct 44 Scholars, beside 80 Decayed Gentlemen, Souldiers, an Merchants, who have all a plentif Maintenance of Dyet, Lodging, Cloath and Physick, &c. The Scholars fit for the University have Twenty pound yearly allowed them for Eight year after they come to the University  and others fitter for Trades have a con∣siderabl Sum of Money to bind them out Apprentices. And they have all Officers expedient for such a Society; as Physician, Apothecary, Steward, Cooks, Butlers, &c. who have all Competent Salaries: This vast Revenue was the Gift of an ordinary Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Sut∣ton, Born in Lincolnshire, and was of such Account, that by the King's Let∣ters Patents, Persons of the Highest Quality; as the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, Lord Chancelor, Lord Treasurer▪ and Thirteen others are Governours, and Overseers thereof.
Schools in London ARe St. Paul's, Founded An 1512. by John Collett Dr. of Divinity and ean of St. Paul's, for 153 Children to e Taught gratis; There being a Master, Usher, and Chaplain, who have arge Stipends, and the Master, War∣dens, and Assistants of The Company of ercers in London have the oversight hereof. And divers other Schools which are ndowed; as Merchant-Taylors, Mercers-Chappel, &c. which for brevity sake I mit. The Arms of the City of London re Argent, A Cross Gules, with the Sword of St. Paul, not the Dagger of William alworth, as some have conceited; or this Coat did belong to the City before Walworth slew Wat Tyler, as earned Antiquaries affirm. Southwark. THis Burrough was granted by King Edward the Sixth by Lett∣ers Patents to the Major, Commonal∣y, and Citizens of London, and is cal∣ed the Bridge-Ward, without (and Governed by One of the 26 Alder∣men
of) London; It hath nothing Re∣markable, but that it pays more in a Subsidy to the King, and Musters more Men than any City in England, except London. The City of Westminster. THE Ancient, Stately Abby Church here, was Founded by the Pious King Edward th Confessor, and richly Endowed, after∣wards Rebuilt by King Henry the Third with that rare Architecture now seen▪ Wherein are most Magnificent Tombs, and Monuments of our Kings, Queens, and Greatest Nobles; To the East-end of which is added A Chappel by King Henry the Seventh, which for curiou Artificial Work without, and within▪ For a Monument of Massy Brass most curiously wrought, is scarce to be pa∣rallel'd in the whole World. This huge Fabrick stands where first was the Temple of Apollo, and after∣wards King Sebert the First Christened King of the East Saxons, who first Built St. Paul's Church in London, Built here likewise this Church to St. Peter.
It taketh the name from this Mona∣stery, which Minster signifieth, it be∣ing called Westminster in respect of the East Minister, not far from the Tower of London. This Monastery 30 Hen. 8. was Surrendred to the King, who Erected thereof a Dean and Chapter, Anno 33 Hen. 8. It was raised to a Bishopick, and Tho. Thurlby made the first and last Bishop thereof. Queen Eliz. Converted it into a Collegiate Church, and therein placed a Dean, Twelve seculiar Ca∣nons, or Prebendaries, Pety Canons, and others of the Quire to the number of Thirty; Ten Officers, belonging to the Church, as many Servants belong∣ing to the Collegiate Diet; Two School-Masters; Forty Scholars; Twelve Alms-men with plentiful Al∣lowance for all, besides Stewards, Re∣ceivers, Registers, Collectors and o∣ther Officers, The Principal whereof is the High Steward of Westminster, who is usually one of the Prime No∣bility. The Dean is intrusted with the Rega∣ia at the Coronation, and Honoured with a place of necessary Service at ll Coronations, and with a Commis∣ion of the Peace within the City and Liberties of Westminster.
The Dean and Chapter invested with all Jurisdiction, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, not only within the City, and Liberties of Westminster; but within the Precincts of St. Martins le Grand, and in some Towns in Essex, Exempted in the one from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of London; And in the other from that of the Archbishop of Can∣terbury. It hath a Royal Jurisdiction for Ec∣clesiastical Causes, and Probate of Wills, and a Commissary from whom is no Appeal, but to the King in his Chan∣cery; Who thereupon Issueth out a Commission of Delegates under the Great Seal of England. When the Convocation is Adjourn∣ed from St. Pauls (for the conveniency of being nearer the Parliament) to Westminster: The Bishops first declare, (upon a Protestation made by the Dean there,) that they intend thereby not to violate that High Priviledge, viz. That no Archbishop, or Bishop may come there without leave of the Dean first obtained. There is also a fair publick Library, free for all Strangers to Study both Morning and Afternoon, always in Term time.
Within this City are Twelve Wards; Out of which are Elected One Bur∣gess, and One Assistant in every Ward, and out of these Twelve, Two are Elected yearly on the Thursday in Easter Week, to be Chief Burgesses, and so to continue for the year ensu∣ing; These Burgesses have Authority by Act 27 Eliz. To Hear, Examine, Determine, and Punish according to the Laws of the Realm, and lawful Customs of the City of London, Mat∣ters of Incontinency, Common Scolds, Inmates and Common Annoyances, and to commit such Persons as shall offend against the Peace, and thereof give knowledge within Twenty four hours to some Justice of Peace within the County of Middlesex. Next the Abbey Church stood the Palace Royal, and usual Place of Re∣sidence of the Kings of England, who ordinarily held their Parliaments, and Courts of Judicature in their Dwelling Houses, and many times sate themselves in the said Courts of Judicature, as they do still in Parliament: But after the Parliament was divided into two se∣veral Houses, which was about 50 Ed. 3. The Commons assembled in the Chapter House of the Abbot of West∣minster, until 1 Ed. 6. which gave to the
King Colledges Chauntries, Free Chap∣pels, &c. The King being thereby Pos∣sessed of the Ancient Beautiful Free Chappel of St. Stephen, Founded by King Stephen, which had Revenues of the old yearly value of 1085 l. It af∣terwards served for the House of Com∣mons. A great part of this Huge Palace was in the time of Hen. 8. destroyed by Fire, what remained hath still been Employed for the use of the Parlia∣ment and Courts of Judicature; The Great Hall where those are kept Built by King William Rufus, or by Richard the Second as some hold, being for all Dimensions not to be equalled by any Hall in Christendom. Radulphus de Ingham Chief Justice of England, a very poor Man being Fined before him at 13 s. 4 d. in another Term moved with Pity, caused the Record to be rased and made 6 s. 8 d. For which he for his Fine made the Clock to be heard into Westminster Hall, and the Clock-house which cost 800 Marks, Tempore Ed. 1. and con∣tinueth to this Day. Anno 37 Hen. 8. The King's Mannor of Westminster, was made an Honour.
The City of Norwich. THis is an Ancient City, For in Ancient Manuscripts it appears, That In tempore Steph. Regis de nova Fundata & ut Villa populata Communitas fact. And it is highly commended for many things, Quod suis Opibus Frequen∣tia, Aedificiorum Elegantia, Templorum Pulchritudine & Numero (Paraecias enim plus minus 30 complectitur,) Civum seduli∣tate in Principem fide in Exteros Huma∣nitate inter Celebrrimas Britanniae Urbes me∣rito connumeranda, &c. Moenibus Validis (in quibus crebrae dispositae Turres & Un∣decim Portae) undique Obsepta nisi ad or∣tam qua Flumen (cum sinuoso flexu 4 Pontibus pervium Septentrionalem urbis partem interluerit) profundo alveo & prae∣cipitibus Rupis defendit; It is preferred before all the Cities in England, ex∣cept London, hath above 30 Parishes, and is as large within the Walls as London; it had within it and the Li∣berties Six Religious▪ Houses, and One Hospital, Anno 27 Hen. 8. The Bishoprick of Norwich becoming void by the Death of Richard Nick, commonly called the Blind Bishop, The King nominated
the Abbot of the Monastery of St. Bennets de Hulmo in the County of Norwich, to be Bishop of Norwich. And afterwards 4 Feb. 27 Hen. 8. It was Enacted by Authority of Parlia∣ment, That such Person as should be Elected and Consecrated Bishop of Norwich, should have, and enjoy, u∣nited to the said Bishoprick the Mona∣stery of St. Bennets; And all Manors, &c. belonging to the same. And should be Abbot of the said Monastery of St. Bennets, and have the Dignity of the said Abbacy United, Incorpo∣rated, and Knit to the said Bisho∣prick. For the Courts of Justice in this City, we have Treated of the like in London, and therefore shall only men∣tion an Act of Parliament concerning the Jurisdiction thereof, 2 R. 2. N. 39. Not in Print; Whereby it is Enacted for the Citizens of Norwich, That if their Customs, and Usages heretofore used, or hereafter to be used be Diffi∣cult or Defective in part, or in all, Or that the same need any due amend∣ments for any matter arising, where∣of Remedy was not aforetime had; That then the Bailiffs and Twenty four Citizens of the same City, so therefore yearly to be Chosen, or the
greater part of them, shall from hence∣forth have Power to Ordain such Re∣medies as are most agreeable to Faith and Reason; and for the most Profit, the Good, and Peaceable Government of the same Town, and of Strangers thereto repairing as to them shall seem best; So as such Ordinance be profita∣ble for the King▪ and his People. By the Statute of 14 Hen. 4. The Merchants and Artificers of Worsteds in Norfolk, may sell their single Wor∣steds to any Place, or Persons in Amity with the King notwithstand∣ing any Inhibition, or Liberty to the contrary. In the time of King Edward the Confessor, there were 1300 Citizens within this City, and they paid 20 l. to the King, and 10 l. to the Earl; And besides these 20 s. and Four Preben∣daries, and Six Sextaries of Honey, a Bear, and Six Dogs to Bait him; Now it pays 70 l. to the King, and 100 l. to the Queen, and a Palfrey, and 20 l. of White Rent to the Earl. It is a County of it self, and hath Two Sheriffs, and large Liberties with∣out the Walls; See the Statute of 33 He. 8. How many Attorneys should be at Norfolk; See Rot. Parl. 18 Ed. 1.
f. 5. Concerning the ancient Liberties of this City. Burgi & Civitat' Fundat' & Aedificat' sunt ad Tuitionem Gentium & Populo∣rum Regni, & idcirco obsivdri debent, cum omni Libertate Integitate & Rati∣one. The Beautiful Cathedral was begun by Herbert Bishop of Norwich, Anno 9 Willielmi Rufi. The Strong Castle called anch Flower Environed with the City, but no part thereof, but of the County of Norwich, was not Built by Bigott Earl of Norwich, for we find a Charter of King Stephen. Rex, &c. Sciatis me Dedisse in Feode & Hereditate Willielmo Commiti Warren Filio meo Ca∣stellum Norwici cum Toto Burgo, &c. And Reef de Wet Earl of Norwich, Defended this Castel against William the Conquerour, who was driven out of England, and Travelled with his Wife to Jerusalem, Vide Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 52.
The Two Ʋniversities in England. THese are the Two Eyes, or Luminaries of the Kingdom, and are now Stiled Universi∣ties; A Professione Universalium Scientia∣rum & Artium Liberalium A Universi∣ty being properly an Incorporation, under one Government of many pub∣lick Schools, ordained especially for the Study, and Profession of Divinity, Civil-Law, and Physick, as also Philo∣sophy, and other Liberal Arts and Sciences. And of these Universities, the first and most ancient is thought to be Oxford. QUasi Ousford Isidis Uadum, From the name of the Chief River Isis whereon it is Seated; It lies in 51 De∣grees, 42 Minutes Latitude, and above 22 Degrees Longitude, almost the same Climate with the Famous Uni∣versity of Athens, and was a place for publick Studies above 900 years ago, and much Augmented by the Learned Saxon King Alured; And is an ancient City, consisting of Two sorts of Inha∣bitants,
viz. Students and Citizens li∣ving one amongst another; yet whol∣ly Separate for Government Laws and Manners▪ The University, next under the King being Governed by The Chancellor, who is commonly some of the prime Nobility, Elected by the Students in Convocation, to continue Durante Vita: And is to take care of the Government of the whole University, To maintain the Liberties and Priviledges thereof, To call Assem∣blies, To hear and determine Con∣troversies, Call Courts, Punish Delin∣quents; &c. And next to him in Dig∣nity is, The High Steward nominated by the Chancellor, and approved by the Uni∣versity, and is also Durante Vita; and to Assist the Chancellor, the Vice Chancellor and Proctors upon their Requests, in the Execution of their Places; Also to hear, and determine capital Causes, according to the Laws of the Land, and Priviledges of the University, so oft as the Chancellor shall require him. And the Third Of∣ficer is, The Vice Chancellor, who is common∣ly the Head of some Colledge nomina∣ted yearly by the Chancellor; And in the Chancellors▪ Absence may do al∣most
whatever the Chancellor might do, if present; Moreover he takes care that Sermons, Lectures, Disputa∣tions, and other Exercises be perform∣ed, That Heretiques, Fanatiques, Non∣conformists, Panders, Bawds and Whores, &c. be expelled the University, and Converse of Students, That the Pro∣ctors, and other Officers, and publick Servants of the University perform their Duty, And that Courts be duly called, and Law Suits determined without delay; In a word, that what∣ever is for the Honour or Profit of the University, or may conduce to the Advancement of good Literature, may be carefully obtained. And Fourth∣ly, The Two Proctors chosen every year out of the several Colledges by Turns; These are to Assist in the Government of the University, and particularly in Scholastick Exercises, taking Degrees, in Searching after, and Punishing all Vi∣olators of Statutes, or Priviledges of the University, all Night-Walkers, &c. They have also the Oversight of Weights, and Measures, that the Stu∣dents may not be wronged. And next is,
The publick Orator, who is to write Letters according to the Orders of the Convocation, or Congregation, And to make Solemn Harangues at the Re∣ception of any Prince, or Great Per∣son. And then is, The Custos Archivorum, who is not only to Collect and Keep the Char∣ters, Priviledges, and Records that concern the University; But also is to be always ready to produce them before the Chief Officers, and to Plead the Rights and Priviledges of the said University. And Lastly is, The Register of the University, who is to Register all Transactions in Con∣vocations, Congregations, Delegacies, &c. And besides these are certain pub∣lick Servants as, The Six Beadles, so called from the High Dutch Briton, or Low Dutch Bid∣den, To Summon, Admonish, or Pray. Three of these are called Squire Beadles, carry large Maces of Silver Guilt, and the other Three are Yeomen Beadles, and carry large Silves Maces Un-guilt; Their Office is always to Wait on the Vice Chancellor in Publick, doing what belongs to his Place, and at his Command to Seise any Delinquent and carry him to Prison, To Summon any, To publish the calling of Courts, or
Convocation, To conduct Preachers to Church and Lecturers to Schools, &c. And upon more Solemn occasions, is a Seventh called The Virger, from the Silver Rod which h carries, who with the other Six walks before the Vice Chancellor, and is ready to observe his Commands, and to wait on Grand Compounders, &c. The other publick Servants, of lesser note we shall not mention. The Students in Oxford anciently (as now in most Universities beyond Seas) without any Distinction of Habit lived in Citizens Houses, and had Meeting places to hear Lectures and Disputes; After that, were divers Houses for Stu∣dents only to live together called Inns from the Saxon, or Hostells from the French. And now Halls where every Student lived whol∣ly upon his own Charges. And of these were formerly Two hundred, and in them as Armachanus writes 30000 Stu∣dents, until Colledges were by the Bounty of di∣vers Kings, and other Patrons Endow∣ed with Revenues, to maintain such Students as by Merit, and Worth should be chosen from time, to time, in Lod∣ging, Dyet, Cloaths and Books, with
large Salaries; For Professors to In∣struct them, for a Head to Govern them according to certain Statutes, and Ordinances made by the said Patrons, and Founders. And the first of Col∣ledges, Endowed in Europe are University Baliol, and Merton, all made Colledges in the 12th Century after Christ. The other 15. Colledge's, viz. Christs Church, St. Mary Magdalen, New Colledge, All Souls, Corpus Christi, Queens Colledge, St. Johns, Trinity Colledge, Brazen Nose, Oriel Colledge, Wadham, Lincoln, Exeter, Jesus, and Pembroke Colledge, are of lesser Antiquity: And these Colledge have within their own Walls Lectures, Disputations, All Professions, and Li∣beral Sciences, Read and Taught, and in some of them publick Lectures for all Comers, and large Salaries for the Readers; In so much as they seem so many compleat Universities: And are not Inferiour to some in our Neigh∣bouring Countries. The Halls where Students live of their own Means (only Excepted some An∣nual Pensions annexed to One or Two of them) are in number Seven, viz. Magdalen Hall, Edmund Hall, Alban Hall, New Inn, Gloucester Hall, St. Mary Hall, Hart Hall.
The whole number of Students in Oxford, that live upon the Revenue of the Colledges are about 1000; And of other Students about twice as many, besides, Stewards, Manciples, Butlers, Cooks, Porters, Gardiners, &c. The Discipline in these Colledges, and Halls, is, First all that intend to take any Degree, are to take their Dyet and Lodging, and have a Tutor, constantly in some Colledge or Hall; then they are to perform all Exercises, to be Subject to all Statutes, and to the Head of the House: Next they are to be Subject to the Chief Magistrate of the University: To perform publick Ex∣ercises, and to be subject to the pub∣lick Statutes thereof; To suffer them∣selves to be shut up by Night in their Houses; They are never to be seen abroad out of their Chambers, much less out of their Colledges, without their Caps and Gowns (which is no where else observed but in Spain,) their Gowns are all to be Black, only the Sons of the Higher Nobility are herein Indulged, and all Doctors are Honour∣ed with Purple, or rather Scarlet Robes.
The Degrees taken in the University are only Two, viz. Batchelour, and Ma∣ster anciently as well in Divinity, Law, and Physick, as in Arts. But now the Degrees in those three Professions are Batchelours, and Doctors, The time required by Statute for taking the afore∣said Degrees, is Four years Study to be a Batchelor, and Three years more to be Master; To take the Degree of Doctor of Divinity, the Student must first take the Degree of Master of Arts; Then after Seven years more he may be Batchelor, and Four years after that Doctor in Divinity. Three years after Master of Arts, the Student may be Batchelor, and in Four years more Dr. of Laws, and the like for Dr. of Physick: The Exercises required for taking these Degrees are many, and difficult; yet not such but they may be performed in less time by any of good Ability. In the afore mentioned Three Pro∣fessions, and in the Arts there Proceeds Masters, or Doctors yearly about 150, and every Lent about 200 Batchelors of Arts. At the Act, or time of Compleating the Degree of Master, both in the aforesaid Three Professions, and Arts, which is the Monday after the 6th of
July yearly; there are usually great Solemnities, not only for publick Ex∣ercise, but also Feastings, Comedies, and a mighty concourse of Strangers from all Parts to their Friends, then com∣pleating their Degrees; whereby, and by the fet Fees, it costs a Doctor a∣bout 100 l. and a Master of Arts a∣bout 20 or 30 l. Many Priviledges have been granted to the Universities by Charter of di∣vers Kings, Favourers of Learning; As by Charter of King Edward the Third, The Mayor of Oxford is to obey the Orders of the Vice Chancellor, and to be in subjection to him. The Mayor with the Chief Bur∣gesses of Oxford, and also the High-Sheriff of Oxfordshire, every year in a Solemn manner take an Oath given by the Vice Chancellor; To observe and conserve the Rights, Priviledges and Liberties of the University of Oxford. And every year on the day of St. Scholastica, (being 10 February,) a cer∣tain number of the Principal Burgesses, Publickly and Solemnly do pay each one a Penny, in token of their Sub∣mission to the Orders and Rights of the University.
By Charter of Hen. the Fourth, It is left to the choice of the Vice Chan∣cellor, whether any Member in the University there Inhabiting, accused for Felony, or High Treason shall be tried by the Laws of the Land, or by the Laws and Customs of the University, Tho' now where Life or Limb is con∣cerned, the Criminal is left to be Tried by the Laws of the Land. No Student of the University may be Sued at Common Law for Debts, Accompts, Contracts, Injuries, &c. but only in the Courts of the Vice-Chancellor, who hath Power as afore∣said to Determine and Punish Delin∣quents; To Imprison, Inflict Corporal Punishment, To Excommunicate, To Suspend, and to Banish. The Universities are Subject to the Visitation, or Correction of none but the King, or whom he please to Com∣missionate. The Chancellor, and in his absence the Vice-Chancellor, is not only in Place, but in all Affairs of Moment (though concerning the City it self) Superiour to the Mayor of the Town. All Members of the University are subject to the Vice-Chancellor, and his Judicial Courts; which are Ruled wholly by the Civil Law.
By the Statute of 13 Eliz. The Two Universities are Incorporated (albeit they were ancient Corporations before.) All Letters Patent, Liberties, Priviled∣ges, &c. granted to either of the Uni∣versities are Established, and Confir∣med. King James the First Honoured both Universities, with the Priviledge of sending each Two Burgesses to Parlia∣ment. The Terms in Oxford begin the First on the 10 of October, and ends the 17 of December, and is called Michaelmas Term; Second called Hillary or Lent Term, begins the 14 of January, and ends the Saturday before Palm Sunday; The Third called Easter Term, begins the 10 day after Easter, and ends the Thursday before Whitsunday; The Fourth is called Trinity Term, begin∣ning the Wednesday after Trinity Sun∣day, and ends after the Act sooner or later, as the Vice-Chancellor, and Convocation think meet. There are besides in Oxford many stately publick-Schools, The famous Bodleian Library, which for a Noble, Lightsom Fabrick; number of choice Books, curious Manuscripts, diversity of Languages, Liberty of Studying, Facility of finding any Book, may
equal the Famous Vatican. The Curi∣ous Architecture of the Theater, The Excellent Printing Presses, The Publick Physick Garden, &c. are not for our purpose further to describe. Cambridge. WHat hath been said of Oxford, may suffice for the Universi∣ty, and Town of Cambridge; which if she will, in Complaisance at any time give place to Oxford, yet at the same time, she will Challenge it before any other University in the Christian World. But in some few things she differs from Oxford, as for that, The Chancellor is not so (Durante Vita) but may be elected every Two years, Aut manere in eodem Officio durante Taci∣to Consensu Senatus Cantabr': He hath under him a Commissary, who holds a Court of Record of Civil Causes, for all Priviledged Persons under the Degree of Master of Arts, where all Causes are Tried, and De∣termined by the Civil and Statute Laws; and by the Customs of the University.
The High Steward is chosen by the Senate, and holds by Patent from the University. The Vice Chancellor is chosen yearly by the Senate on the 3d day of Novem∣ber, Out of Two Persons nominated by the Heads of the several Colledges, and Halls. The Two Proctors are chosen every year as at Oxford, according to the Circle of the Colledges and Halls. There are also, Two Taxers, who with the Proctors have care of Weights and Measures, as Clerks of the Market. There are also, Three Squire Beadles, and one Yeo∣man, Beadle. The Students here have no Houses but what are Endowed: For the Colled∣ges, and Halls differ only in name. And these Houses, Endowed are but Sixteen, viz. St. Peters Colledge, Clare Hall, Pembroke Hall, Corpus Christi Col∣ledge, alias Bennet Colledge, Trinity Hall, Convile and Cains Colledge, Kings Col∣ledge, Queens Colledge, St. Katherines Hall, Jesus Colledge, Christs Colledge, St. Johns Colledge, Magdalen Colledge, Trinity Colledge, Emanuel Colledge, Sus∣sex and Sidney; But these are general∣ly so large, that the number of Stu∣dents
is commonly little different from those of Oxford. Degrees at Cambridge are usually taken as at Oxford, Except in Law, and Physick, whereof after Six years they may take the Degrees of Batche∣lour, and after Five years more, that of Doctor. The first Tuesday of July is always. Dies Comitiorum, there called the Com∣mencement; Wherein the Masters of Arts, and the Doctors of all Faculties, compleat their Degrees respectively, as the Batchelours of Arts do in Lent, beginning at Ashwednesday. Many Priviledges have been likewise granted by several Kings to this Uni∣versity, As every Michaelmass-day, The Mayor of the Town, at the En∣trance into his Office, takes a Solemn Oath before the Vice Chanceller to Observe, and Conserve the Priviled∣ges, Liberties and Customs of the Uni∣versity: Also on Friday before St. Si∣mon and Jude at a Magna Congregati in St. Maries Church, The Mayor brings with him Two Aldermen, Four Bur∣gesses, and Two of every Parish, to take their Oaths before the Vice Chan∣cellor, for the due search of Vagabonds, Suspected Persons, &c. At the same are Sworn 14 Persons for the University,
and Fourteen for the Town to look to the Paving, and Cleansing of the Street. The University hath also a Court Leet, held twice every year, wherein are presented all Nusances, &c. The Terms in Cambridge, begin Lent Term, the the 13 of January, and ends the Friday before Palm-Sunday, Easter Term the Wednesday after Easter Week, and ends the Week before Whit∣suntide; Trinity Term the Wednesday af∣ter Trinity Sunday, and ends the Friday after the Commencement, and Mi∣chaelmass Term begins the 10 of Octo∣ber, and ends the 16 of Decem∣ber. Cambridge lies in 52 Degrees, 20 Mi∣nutes Northern Latitude. Both these Universities are Two easie days Journey from the Capi∣tal City of London, and about the like Distance from each other.
The Government of Boroughs in England ANd other Towns Corporate, Is much after the same man∣ner with Cities. In some there is a Mayor, in others One or Two Bailiffs, who have equal Power with the Mayor and Sheriffs, and dur∣ing their Offices they are Justices of Peace within their Liberties, and have there the same Power that other Justi∣ces of Peace have within their Coun∣ty. The Government of Villages in Eng∣land. IN every Village is a Government Ecclesiastical, and Civil; which if only observed, might render the whole Kingdom Happy. And first the
The Ecclesiastical Government of Villages. THe Parson or Vicar, who hath Cu∣ram Animarum, The care of the Souls of his Parishioners, For which he hath the Tithes, Glebe, and Church Offerings. And hath under him, The Church-wardens and Sides Men, To take care of the Church and Church Assemblies. The Overseers of the Poor, To take care of the Poor, Sick, Aged, Or∣phans, and other Objects of Charity. And Lastly, The Clerk to wait on him at Divine Service. And for The Civil Government of Villages. THe Lord of the Manor or Soil, who from the Crown immediately holds or mediately holds Dominium Soli; Is said to have in him; The Royalty as if he were a little King; and hath a kind of Jurisdiction, and a Court Baron incident to the Ma∣nor, and sometimes a Court Leet, by Grant from the King to which the Inhabitants owe Suit and Service, and
where smaller Matters (as Escheats upon Felonies, or other Accidents, common Nusances, &c. Admitting of Tenants, pas∣sing of Estates, Reliefs, Herriots, Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, &c. or other matters Of which you may see more at large in the Description of the Jurisdiction of these two several Courts) may be heard and determined. And under the Lord is The Constable, or Headborough, Chosen yearly by the Lord or Steward in the Leet, to keep the Peace in case of Quarrels; to search any House for Robbers, Murderers, and others who have broken the Peace; to raise Hue and Cry after Robbers; to seize Offen∣ders, and keep them in the Stocks or other Prison, till they can bring them before some Justice of Peace, to whom the Constables are subservient upon all occasions, either to bring Criminals before them, or to carry them by their Command to the Common Prison. Thus having in a Brief and Metho∣dical manner described the Constitu∣tion of the English Government; For the Excellency thereof, we may wel conclude with the Poet, O Fortunatos nimium bona si sua Norint — Angligenas.
THE ISLANDS Adjacent to ENGLAND. CAlled by Heylin, The Sporades not (as he saith) that they are so named in any Author, but being many, he thought fit to include them under that general Name. The Chief of which are The Isle of Man. INsula Euboniae modo Manniae, hath been an ancient Kingdom, as ap∣pears by Walsingham, pag. 287. and Coke's Reports, Lib. 7. fol. 21. Calvin's Case. And yet we find it not Granted, or Conveyed by the Name of a King∣dom;
Sed per Nomen Insulae, &c. cum Patronatu Episcopatus. The Patronage of the Bishoprick of Sodor, being a Vi∣sible Mark of a Kingdom, Est nempe Jus ipsius Insulae, ut quisquis illius sit Do∣minus, Rex vocetur; cui etiam fas est Corona Aurca Coronari, Walsingh. 17 R. 2. This Island was taken from the Bri∣tains by the Scots, and from them regained by Edwin King of Northum∣berland. Afterwards the Norwegians seised it, from whom Alexander the Third wrested it; and about the Year 1340. William Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, de∣scended from the Norwegian Kings of Man, won it from the Scots, and after∣wards sold it to W. Lord Scroope, who for∣feiting the same for Treason to King H. 4 he granted it to H. Percy Earl of Northum∣berland, who being 5 H. 4. Attainted of Treason, In 7 H. 4. it was by Parliament Enacted, the King should have the For∣feiture of all his Lands and Tenements. And afterwards 7 H. 4. the King granted the Isle, cum Patronatu Episco∣patus unto Sir John Stanley, first for Life, and afterwards to him and his Heirs. Sir John had Issue Sir John Stanley Knight, who had Issue Sir Hen∣ry Stanly, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the Sixth, who Created him Lord Stanley. He had Issue Thomas, whom
King Henry the Seventh Created Earl of Derby, to him and the Heirs Male of his Body, &c. Vide Co. 4 Inst. cap. 69. The Laws and Jurisdiction of this Isle differs from other places; For they call their Judges Deemsters, which they chuse out of themselves: And they determine all Controversies without Process, Plead∣ing, Writing, or any Expence at all. If any Cases be ambiguous, or of greater weight, it is referred to Twelve, which they call Claves Insulae. They have Coroners (quos Annuos vocant) who supply the Office of Sheriff: But altho' the King's Writ runneth not into this Island, yet his Commission extendeth thither for Redress of Injustice, and Wrong. The Bishop was Instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth, is under the Archbishop of York, being annexed to that Archbishoprick by King Henry the Eighth, but hath neither Place nor Voice in the Parliament of England. In hac Insula Judex Ecclesiasticus citat, definit, & infra Octo dies parent, aut car∣cere intruduntur. The People are a Religious, Industrious and True People. They have peculiar Laws or Customs; For if a Man steal a Horse, or an Ox, it is no Felony, because he cannot hide them; but if he
steal a Capon, or Pigg, he shall be hanged, &c. In this little Kingdom are Two Ca∣stles, Seventeen Farishes, Four Market Towns, and many Villages. It is scituate against the South part of Cumberland, from which it is distant 21 Miles; Is in Length 30 Miles, in Breadth 15, but in some part only 8 Miles. The Soil is abundant in Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley, Wheat; and Bishop Merrick writing to Cambden, when he was composing his Britannia, saith, Our Island for Cattle, Fish, and Corn, hath not only sufficient for it self; but sendeth store into other Countries. The chief Towns are Balacurri, and Russin, or Castle-Town, the Seat of the Bishop. On the Hill Sceaful may be seen England, Scotland, and Ireland; Here are also, bred the Soland Geese. The People speak a Mixture of the Nor∣wegian, and Irish Tongues. Anglesey IS accounted a Shire of Wales, bor∣dereth on Carnarvanshire, is in Length 20, in Breadth 17 Miles, con∣taining in former times 360 Towns, and Villages, the chief whereof are
1. Beaumaris towards Wales, 2. Newburg, 3. Aberfraw, on the South-side. This Island for its abundant Fertility is called Mam Cymri, i. e. Mother of Wales. It was once the Seat of the Druids, first Conquered by Suet o∣nius Paulinus, and united to the English Crown by the Valour of Edward the First. Jersey, olim Caesarea. IS in Compass 20 Miles, and sufficient∣ly strong, by reason of the dangerous Seas. It containeth 12 Towns or Villages, the Chief being St. Hillary and St. Malo, and four Castles. The Ground is plen∣tiful in Grain and Sheep, most of them having four Horns, of whose Wool our Jersey Stockings are made. Gernsey, olim Servia, IS distant 20 Miles from Jersey, to whom it is much Inferiour in re∣spect of Fertility, and Largness; but more commodious by reason of the safe Harbours. It containeth 10 Pa∣rishes, the Chief being St. Peters, the Port or Haven, and Market Town. These Islands of Jersey and Gernsey lye both nigh unto Normandy, and Bretaign, and did in ancient time be∣long
to the Dutchy of Normandy. But Henry the First Overthrowing his El∣der Brother Robert, united the Dutchy of Normandy, with these Isles, to the Kingdom of England. And altho' King John lost Normandy, and Henry the Third took Money for it; yet these Isles continued Faithful to England, the possession thereof being a good Seisin of the whole Dutchy. Concerning the Judicature and Cu∣stoms of these Isles, it appeareth by Records in the Tower, Quod Rex Johan∣nes constituit 12 Coronatores Juratos ad Placita & Jura ad Coronam spectantia, custodienda, Et concessit pro securitate In∣sularum, Quod Ballivus de caetero per visum Coronatorum poterat placitare sine Breve de Nov. Disseisinae facta infra Annum, De Morte Antecessorum infra Annum, De Dote similiter infra Annum. And now they have a Governour ap∣pointed by the King of England, and Twelve Assistants selected out of every several Parish. And for the most part they proceed according to the Customs of Normandy: Altho' the King's Writ runneth not into these Isles, yet his Commission under the Great Seal doth. But the Commissioners must judge ac∣cording to the Laws and Customs of the Isles.
Insula Vectis, or Vecta. THe Isle of Wight is esteemed part of Hampshire, from which it is severed by a dangerous Streight of the Sea. It contains 20 Miles in Length, Twelve in Breadth, and is Governed by the Laws of England, as the other Shires have been; the Soyl is answer∣able to the Husbandman's Expectation; The Sheep bear fine Wool, and the Trees store of Fruit. Here are One Forest, Two Parks, and 36 Towns and Villages, the Chief being Newport, Yarmouth, and Brading. The Island is strongly scituated, be∣ing Inaccessible towards France; but because the North-shoar is Level, it is fortified on that side with Three Ca∣stles, viz. Yarmouth, Cows, and Sand∣head Castle; and in the Midst of the Island is Carisbrooke Castle, wherein hath sometimes been Armor for 50000 Men, and in every Village a Great Piece of Ordnance. This Isle was taken from the Britains by Wolphur King of Mercia, and here∣of King Henry the Sixth Crowned Henry Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, King, and he was after named Primus Comes
totius Angliae; sed cum illo Novus hic & insolitus Titulus omnino evanuit. The Sorlings. CAlled by the English, and Belgians, Scilly Islands; by Antonine in his Itinerary, Sigdoles; by Solinus, Silyres; by some Greek Writers Hesperides, and Casterides, are scituate against the We∣stern Cape of Cornwal, from which they, are distant 24 Miles. They are in Number 145, of which 10 only are of Estimation, viz. 1. Armath, 2. Agnes, 3. Sampson, 4. Scilly, 5. Bresar, 6. Ruso, 7. St. Helens, 8. St. Martins, 9. Arthur 10. St. Maries, Chief of all the rest, being 8 Miles in compass; sufficiently Fruitful, and strengthned with a Ca∣stle, called Stella Maria by Queen Eli∣zabeth. These Islands are stored with Grass, Grain, and Lead; which last was once carried hence into Greece. Hither the Roman Emperors Banished Condemned Men to Work in the Mines. These were subdued to the English Crown by Athelstane.
The Island Lindisfarne, Or LEndisfarne, scituate near the River Lied, called also Holyfarne, or Holy Island, on the confines of Northumber∣land; Hath one Castle, one Church, one Parish, and a safe Haven, defended by a Blockhouse. It was in ancient time a Bishops Seat, after Translated to Duresme, and is Governed by the Laws of England. It was called Holy Island, for that ma∣ny Religious Men in times past retired thither, being a Solitary place. There are divers other Islands, as Denny, Londay, and Chaldey in the Se∣vern Sea; Thanet, and Sheppey, near Kent; Farne Isle, near Lindisfarne, and Cockat Islands near Northumberland; and many others of small account.
A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government OF SCOTLAND, WITH THE ISLANDS Thereunto belonging. Anno Domini 1699,
SCOTLAND IS so called from Scotti, Scitti, or Scythi a People of Germany, over whose Northern Bounds the Name Scythia did once extend. These seized on a part of Spain next to Ireland, and Anno 424. on the West part of this Country. It is the rest of the Isle of Albion, or Great Britain; in Length from Dungesby-Head to the South parts of Gallway 250 Miles, in Breadth from Aberdeen to the Isle of Mule 150 Miles; hath no place distant from the Sea 62 Miles, and ends like the sharp point of a Wedge. It was anciently called Ca∣lidonia, and sometimes Albania; now by the French l'Escosse, by the Italians la Scotia, by the Spaniards la Escocia, and by the Germans Schotlandt; and is separated from England by the Rivers Tweed, and Solway, and the Cheviot Hills, in the midst between which, were
The Borders sometimes extended to Edinburgh, and Sterling in Scotland; and at other times were enlarged, and took in Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmorland in England, and were Secured or Defended by three Officers in each Kingdom; called Lord Wardens of the Marshes. But now by the Mar∣riage and Union of the two Kingdoms, The Officers and Warres, which were the cause of them, are extinct. Scotland was for many Ages Govern∣ed by its own Kings, (but with divers considerable Alterations) till the year 1602, it was to our great satisfaction united to England for ever; and does still remain under it, Governed by a Vice-Roy called Lord Commission∣er. Here were formerly two Populous Nations, the Scots before described, and the Picts, who were indeed very Britains, who Fled into the Northern parts (which are still almost Free) when the Romans entred the Scuth parts of Britain: These using the ancient Customs of Painting their Bodies, after the rest were more Civilized, were by the Romans called Picts: They Swayed here a long while alone till the year 424, when the Scots set footing in Britain, with whom they contracted a League
against the Britains; but after, Warring among themselves, Kenneth King of Scots, vanquished Dunsken King of the Picts, and thereby extinguished both their Kingdom, and Name Anno 839. After James the 6th, being the 36th King, united the Crown of England and Scotland. Their chief Commodities Cattle, Course Cloaths, Frizes, Fish, Lead Oar, Iron, Saltpetre, Linnen Cloath, Train Oyl, some Hides, and Tallow. The Country is divided into the High-lands, and Low-lands. The first Rude, The other of like Ingenious Disposition, and Language almost with the English; these being the Off-spring of the Saxons; and the High-landers The true Scots; who speak the Irish Tongue, and call both the Low-landers, and English, Saxons. The Gospel was first Preached here by Palladius Anno 431. They are now Protestants, and those chiefly Presby∣terians. Their Language in the South parts a corrupt English, and on the North, and West parts a Dialect of the Irish. The Division is into two Parts, viz. 1. High-land or North Scotland, some∣what the larger of the Two, the Seat of the old Scots 170 Miles long, and
130 broad, divided into 13 Coun∣ties, viz. 1. Cathness, Chief Towns-Wick, and Catness. 2. Strathnavern, Chief Town Strathy. 3. Sootherland, Chief Town Dornock. 4. Rosse, Chief Town Tayne. 5. Murray, Chief Town Elgen. 6. Loquabrea, Chief Town Innerlochy. 7. Broad-Alben, Chief Town  8. Athol, Chief Town Blaire. 9. Bu∣quihan, Chief Town Stanes. 10. Marr, Chief Town Aberdeen. 11. Mernis, Chief Town Bervy. 12. Anguis, Chief Towns Dundee, and Brechin. 13. Perth; Chief Town Perth; the Chief Town of the whole Aberdeen. 2. Lowland, or South Scotland, bordering on England; The Seat of the old Picts 156 Miles long, and 110 broad, divided into 22 Counties, viz. 1. Lorn, chief Town Dunstafag. 2. Can∣tire, chief Town Kiltan. 3. Argile, chief Town Innerera. 4. Lennox, chief Town Dunbarton. 5. Menteith, chief Town Dunblain. 6. Strathern, chief Town Abernethy. 7. Fife, chief Town St. Andrews. 8. Sterlin, chief Town Sterlin. 9. Lothien, chief Town Edin∣burgh. 10. March, chief Town Colding∣ham. 11. Tivedale, chief Town Jed∣burg. 12. Twedesdale, chief Town Pebles. 13. Cledesdale, chief Town Glascow. 14. Cunningham, chief Town
Irwing. 15. Kile, chief Town Aire. 16. Carrick, chief Town Bargenny. 17. Galloway, chief Town Kircowbrig. 18. Niddesdale, chief Town Dumfrees. 19. Annandale, chief Town Annand. 20. Eskedale. 21. Eusdale, and 22. Isle of Arran. Edinburgh is the Chief of the King∣dom, and Seat of the former Kings. These Provinces are divided into Sheriff-doms, which are Hereditary, and into 13 Diocesses for Ecclesiasti∣cal Government by Malcolm 3d An∣no 1072. And into the two Arch-bi∣shopricks of St. Andrew and Glasco, Ann. 1478. St. Andrew having 8 Bi∣shops under him, and Glasco 3. The Archbishop of York, before that time being Metropolitan of Scotland: And Palladius Anno 411, was sent by Celesti∣nus Bishop of Rome, to be their first Bishop. The chief Rivers are two, viz. 1. Spey, and 2 Tey. The chief Hills are those of Chevi∣ot, and Albany. The chief Lakes, 1 Lomond, 2 Nessa, and 3 Tay.
The miraculous things. 1. The Lake of Mirton, part of whose Waters Con∣geal only. 2. The Lake of Lennox, 24 Miles round, in which are 30 Islands, one of them driven with every Tem∣pest, and 3. the Deaf-stone 12 foot high, and 33 Cubits thick. The Archbishopricks two, Bishopricks 12, and Universities 4. The Arms Sol, a Lyon Rampant Mars, with a double Tressure Coun∣terflowry, added upon making the perpetual League with France. Barbarons were the Feides here, and the Custom changed into Mercheta Mulieris, by Malcolm Conmer, at Re∣quest of his Wife, Sister to Edgar Athe∣ling. Scotland was an Heptarchy, but now a Monarchy; King James the first, endeavoured in Parliament to make a Union of both Kingdoms: But the Judges Resolved, That Anglia had Laws, and Scotia had Laws: But the new Erected Kingdom of Britannia should have no Laws; and therefore, till there was a Union of the Laws, there could be no Union of the King∣doms. The mighty and ancient Kingdoms of England, and Scotland, were anci∣ently but one; and as their Religion,
and Language was one; so there was one kind of Government, and one Law, which Ruled both, with many Unanimous Agreements between them, which evidently appeareth, by many Proofs. First, That the Laws of Scotland are divided as the Laws of England, into the Common Laws, Acts of Parlia∣ment and Customs; their Common Laws being principally contained in two Books, One called Regiam Maje∣statem, because it beginneth (as doth Justinian's Institutes) with those words, And agreeth in substance with our Glanvil, and most commonly de Verbo in Verbum, and many times our Glan∣vil is cited therein. The second Book is called Quoniam Attachiamenta, it beginning with those Words. Secondly, The Descent of the Crown of Scotland, and of Lands to Subjects, is the same with England. Thirdly, They have the like High Court of Parliament, consisting of Lords Spirituals, Lords Temporal and Commons. But of latter times, the Lords Spiritual chuse eight Temporal Lords, and the Lords Temporal eight Spiritual Lords. These Sixteen make choice, of eight for Counties, and eight of Cities, and Burroughs, in all
32; But whatsoever is agreed upon by them, the King or his High Commis∣sioner doth allow or disallow, by mo∣ving of the Scepter, &c. Fourthly, They have the same De∣grees of Nobility, as, Dukes, Marquis∣ses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons. Fifthly, The same great Officers as Chancellor, Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, Secretary, &c. Sixthly, The same Ministers of Ju∣stice, as Sheriffs, Coroners, &c. Seventhly, The same Laws for the most part, appropriated unto Eng∣land, viz. Tenant by the Curtesy, because they had Laws as England had. Eighthly, The like Writs as De Recto, Assisa de Novel Disseisin, Mort de Ance∣stor, de Gard, de Ideot' inquirend', Reple∣giar', Attachm', &c. Ninthly, They agree with Magna Gharta, concerning Ward-ships. Tenthly, With Charta de Foresta, for it is lawful for Bishops, Earls and Ba∣rons, coming or returning through the Kings Forests, at the Kings Com∣mand to kill own or two Beasts, in the sight of the Forester; Or other∣wise in his Absence to blow his Horn, that he appear not to take it Thie∣vishly.
Eleventhly, The Lord of whom the Land is holden per Antiquius Feoffa∣mentum shall have the Wardship of the Body. Twelfthly, The Sheriffs should cause the Acts of Parliament, to be pro∣claimed as heretofore in England. Thirteenthly, The Sheriffs there have Inheritance in their Office, as some∣times in England, and still in Cumber∣land they have. Fourteenthly, The same Vocables of Art, are used in both Kingdoms. But by reason of their Acts of Parli∣ment, which in many Points have alter∣ed, diminished and abrogated, many of the old, and made new Laws, and other Proceedings, the distinct King∣doms, as they now stand, have many different Laws, Coke's 4 Inst. 345, 346. By the Statute of 1 Jac. 1.2. An Authority is given to certain Commis∣sioners of both Houses of Parliament, to Treat with certain Commissioners of Scotland, concerning the Settlement of an Union and Peace between the Kingdoms of England and Scot∣land. By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1. Laws of Hostility, and the dependences thereof between the two Nations
of Scotland, and England are Re∣pealed. Felonies Committed by English Men in Scotland, shall be Tried in Cumber∣land, Westmorland or Northumberland, before Commissioners and Jurors of England; for which see more in the Statute. By the Statute of 7 Jac. 1.1. If an English Man shall commit Felony in Scotland, and then fly into England, the Justices of Assize or one of them, the Justices of Gaol Delivery in their Gaol Delivery, or four of them, or the Justices of Peace in Sessions, or four of them, may send the Offender into Scot∣land, to be Tried. By the Statute of 19 Car. 2. cap. 13. Twelve persons to be nominated by the King, shall be Commissioners for this Kingdom; who, or five, or more of them, after the 10th of January 1667, and before the 25th of March 1688; and so from time to time may meet at such place in England as the King shall appoint, with Commissioners for the Realm of Scotland; and Treat and Determine concerning the Liberty of Trade between the two Kingdoms, by suspending Impositions, &c. charged since the 25 of March, in 12 year of the Kings Reign; upon Commodities
of the Growth or Manufacture of ei∣ther Kingdom, or of any of the English Plantations, or other Commodi∣ties Exported out of England into Scotland; their Determinations to be reduced into Writing, under the Hands and Seals of the Commissioners, and being Ratified by the King, shall be in force for a year, from the Date of such Ratification, or to the end of the next Session of Parliament. By the Statute of 22 Car. 2. cap. 9. Persons to be nominated by the King under the Great Seal, or so many of them as shall be appointed to be of the Quorum, shall have power to Treat with Commissioners, to be Authori∣sed by the Parliament of Scotland, con∣cerning an Union of the Realms, and such other Matters as they shall think fit, for the Kings Honour, and Good of both Kingdoms. Their Pro∣ceedings to be reduced into Writings or Instruments Tripartite, one part whereof to be presented to the King, another to the Parliament of Eng∣land, and a third to that of Scotland: Provided that nothing to be agreed on by them, shall be of force till con∣firmed by Act of the Parliament of England.
By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1.1. He that is once Tried in Scotland, shall not be called in Question again for the same Offence. By the Statute of 2 Ed. 4.8. Mer∣chandize carried into, or brought out of Scotland, or the Isles thereof, shall be first brought to Berwick, in pain to forfeit the same. As the Law hath wrought four Unions. 1st, The Union of both King∣doms, under one Natural Liege Sove∣reign King, being so acknowledged by the Act of Recognition. 2ly, The Union of Liegeance and Obedience of the Subject of both Kingdoms, due by the Law of Nature to their Sovereign. 3ly, The Union of Protection of both Kingdoms, equally belonging to the Subjects of either of them. 4ly, The Union of the three Lyons of England, with that one of Scotland United and Quartered in one Escutcheon. So the Law doth make four Sepera∣tions. 1st, England and Scotland remain several and distinct Kingdoms. 2ly, They are Governed by several Judi∣cial, or Municipal Laws. 3ly, They have several distinct and seperate Par∣liaments. 4ly, Each Kingdom hath se∣veral Nobilities; For albeit a Postnatus in Scotland, or any of his Posterity be
the Heir of a Nobleman of Scotland, and by his Birth Legitimated in Eng∣land, yet he is none of the Peers or Nobility of England, for his Natural Ligeance and Obedience due by the Law of Nature, maketh him a Sub∣ject, and no Alien within England: But that Subjection maketh him not Noble within England, for that Nobi∣lity had its Original by the Kings Cre∣ation and not of Nature. More of which matter you may Read at large here∣after in Ireland: And that the highest and lowest Dignities, as a King, and that of a Knight are nevertheless universal, Coke's 7 Rep. 15. Calvin's Case. In ancient time part of Scotland (be∣sides Berwick) was within the Power, and Ligeance of the King of Eng∣land; yet was Governed by the Laws of Scotland. The Case in 42 Ed. 3.2. Ruleth it, That so many as were Born in that part of Scotland, that was under the Ligeance of the King, were no Aliens, but inheritable to Lands in England; yet was that part of Scotland in ano∣ther Kingdom governed by several Laws: And certainly, if they were Natural Subjects in that Case, when the King had but part of Scotland,
when the King hath all Scotland, they shall be Natural Subjects, and no Aliens. Barwick is no part of England, nor Governed by the Laws of England; yet they that have been Born there, under the Obedience of one King, are Natural Born Subjects and no Aliens. There were sometimes in England, whiles the Heptarchy lasted, seven se∣veral Crowned Kings, of several and distinct Kingdoms; but in the end the West Saxons got the Monarchy, and all the other Kings melted (as it were) their Crowns, to make one Im∣perial Diadem for the King of the West Saxons over all: Now when the whole, was made the actual and real Ligeance and Obedience of one King, they were all Natural born Subjects, and capable of, and Inheritable unto any Lands in any of the said King∣doms. Of all which matters and things last above mentioned, you may read at large in Coke's 7 Report, Calvin's Case. By the Statute of 4 Jac. 1. For Re∣peal of Hostile Laws, It is Enacted, That no Englishman shall be sent out of England into Scotland, for any Offence done in Scotland, until the
Realms be made one in Laws and Go∣vernment. There was a Proclamation the 20 of Octob. 20 Jac. 1. concerning the Kings Stile of Great Britain, wherein all Judicial, and Legal Proceedings are excepted, Cokes 4 Inst. 345. The Lesser Islands near Scotland ARE the Orcades or Isles of Orkeny in number 32, Situate against the North Cape of Scotland: The chief being Pomonia, whose prime Town is Kirkwal, honoured with a Bishops See, and strengthened with two Castles; It is stored with Tinn and Lead, and called by the Inhabitants Mainland. The 2d Hotlands or Oceti, the Inhabitants Bi∣bacissimi sunt, tamen non inebriantur. These Isles in Solinus time were not Inhabited, being over-grown with Rushes: Now are they Populous, and Fertile, were first discovered by Julius Agricola, and first possessed by Normans, or Norwegians who surrendred them to Alexander, King of Scotland 1266. They speak the Gothish Language. Schetland lies two days Sailing North of Orcades, and is supposed to be the Thule of the Ancients.
The Hebrides, because Scituate West of Scotland, in number 44. The chief Ila 24 Miles long, and 16 broad, Plen∣tiful in Wheat, Cattle and Herds of Red Deer: The Isle of Sky 40 Miles long; Iona famous for Sepulture of the Kings of Scotland: Mula 25 Miles bigger than the other. The People both in Language and Behaviour resemble the Wild Irish, and are called Red∣shanks.
A COMPENDIUM OF THE Laws and Government OF IRELAND, WITH THE ISLANDS Thereunto belonging. Anno Domini 1699,
IRELAND. FROM Erinland, signifying in their Language a Western Land, lies on the West of England and Wales, in length from the North parts of Antrim, to the South parts of Cork 285, in breadth from the East parts of Down, to the West parts of Mayo, 160 Miles long; Anciently called Juverna, Hibernia, Overnia, Jernia, Scotia minor, Bernia and Vernia, now by the Natives Eryn; by the Welsh, Yverden; by the Germans, Irlandt; by the Italians, Ir∣landa; and by the French, Irlande. The first Inhabitants came out of Britain, were anciently Rude and Bar∣barous, having little Law or Govern∣ment. First, partly Conquered by the Saxon Monarchs of England, Then by the Norwegians, not long after by Henry the Second of England, till by little and little it was wholly Reduced to England, and still remaineth so; Governed by a Vice-Roy, call the
Lord Lieutenant or Deputy of Ire∣land, whose Seat is at Dublin. They received the Christian Faith by St. Patrick, Anno 335, and are both Protestants and Papists: Their Lan∣guage is a Dialect of the Old British, intermixed with Norwegian, Danish and English; The English is also frequently used among them, and in some places a Mongrel Speech between both: Their chief Commodities, are Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese, Honey, Wax, Furs, Salt, Hemp, Linnen Cloath, Pipe-Staves, Wool, Frizes, &c. This Country is divided into Four Great Provinces, Anciently King∣doms, viz. 1. Ulster Ineol. Cui-Guilly, on the North, the Seat of the old Robogni, Darnij, Volentij, Venicnij and Erdini; 116 Miles long, and 100 broad: It contains Ten Counties, viz. 1. Antrim divided into Nine Baronies, the chief Towns Carrick-fergus, Belfalst and An∣trim. 2. London-Derry or Colerain, di∣vided into Five Baronies, chief Towns London-Derry and Colerain. 3. Dunnagal or Tir-Conel, divided into 5 Baronies, chief Town Dunnagal, and Balishannon. 4. Tyrone, divided into Four Baronies, chief Towns Dungannon. 5. Fermanagh, divided into Eight Baronies, chief Town Ennis∣killing.
6. Cavan, divided into Seven Baronies, chief Town Cavan. 7. Mo∣naghan, divided into Five Baronies, chief Town Monaghan. 8. Armagh, divided into Five Baronies, chief Towns Charle∣mont and Armagh. 9 Down, divided in∣to Eight Baronies, chief Town Down and Newry: And 10 Louth often reckoned in Lemster, divided into Four Baronies, chief Towns Drogheda, Dundalk and Louth, the chief Town of the whole is London-Derry. 2. Connaught, Incol. Connauhty, on the South-west of Ulster, bordering on the Western Ocean; The Seat of the old Gangani, Auteri and Nagnatae, 130 Miles long, and 84 broad. It con∣tains Six Counties, viz. 1. Letrim, di∣vided into Five Baronies, chief Towns Letrim and James Town. 2. Slego, di∣vided into Six Baronies, chief Town Slego. 3. Mayo or Majo, divided into Nine Baronies, chief Towns Mayo or Moy, and Killalore. 4. Roscommon, di∣vided into Six Baronies, chief Towns Athlone, Roscommon and Boyle. 5. Gal∣way, divided into Seventeen Baronies, chief Towns Galway, Tuam and Clone∣fart: And 6 Thomond or Clare (oft rec∣koned in Munster,) divided into Eight Baronies, chief Towns Clare and Killa∣low; The chief Town of the whole, is Gallway.
3. Leinster, Incol. Leighnigh, on the East of Connaught, and South of Ulster, The Seat of the old Briguntes, Menapij, Cauci and Blani, 112 Miles long, and 70 broad. It contains 11 Counties, viz. 1. Longford, divided into Six Baronies, chief Town Longford, 2. VVest Meath, divided into Eleven Baronies, chief Town Molingar. 3. East Meath, di∣vided into Eleven Baronies, chief Towns Trim and Athboy; (these three made the Province of Meath.) 4. Dub∣lin, divided into Six Baronies, chief City Dublin, the Metropolis of all Ireland, Seated on the Liffie, Built by Harfager the first King of Norway, and after the English Conquest, was Peopled by a Colony of Men from Bristol. 5. VVicklow, divided into Six Baronies, the chief Town VVicklow and Arcklow. 6. Kildare, divided into Eight Baronies, chief Town Kildare. 7. Kings County, divided into Eleven Baronies, chief Town Phillips Town. 8. Queens County, divided into Seven Ba∣ronies, chief Town Martborow or Queens Town. 9. Kilkenney, divided in∣to Eleven Baronies, chief Towns Kil∣kenny and Thomas Town. 10. Catherlagh, divided into 5 Baronies, chief Town Catherlagh: And 11. Wexford, divided into Eight Baronies, the chief Towns VVex∣ford
and Ross; The chief Town of the whole, is Dublin. 4. Muuster or Mounster Incol. Mown, on the South of Leinster and Connaught, The Seat of the old Ulterni, Coriandi, Luceni, Velibori, and Vodij, 135 Miles long, and 120 broad. It contains Five Counties, viz. 1. Tipperary, divided into Fourteen Baronies, the chief Towns Clonmel, Cashel and Tipperary. 2. VVa∣terford, divided into Six Baronies, chief Town VVaterford and Dungar∣van. 3. Limerick, divided into Nine Baronies, chief Towns Limerick and Kilmalock. 4. Kerry, divided into Eight Baronies, chief Towns Dingle and Ardfeart: And 5 Cork, divided in∣to Thirteen Baronies, chief Towns Cork, King-sale and Youghil; In this lies the County of Desmond, divided into Two Baronies, chief Town Bantry, chief Town of the whole is Lime∣rick, but many reckon Cork. The Rivers. 1. Shannon. 2. Barro. 3. Shure and Black-water. The Soil is Fertile, if improved by Industry. Amongst other Prerogatives, no Venemous Serpent breeds here, ac∣cording to the Verses, — Illa ego sum, &c.
The chief Loughs are 1. Lough-Earne, 2. Lough-Neagh and Lough Corrib; the last 26 Miles long, and in breadth 4 Miles, hath 20. Ilets abounding in Pine Trees. The Mountains, 1. Knock Patrick, 2. Sliew-Bloemy, 3. Curlew Hills. The Archbishops here are 4. Bishops. 19. Universities. The Arms Azure, an Irish Harp: Or, Stringed Argent; King James the first First Marshalling them with the Arms of England, as the first Absolute King thereof, altho' Henry the eighth was declared King in Dublin, by an Irish Parliament: In each of the Counties is a Sheriff, and Justices of the Peace; and they are Governed by the Laws of England, and Statutes Enacted at our English Parliaments; But the Deputy hath now Power to Asemble the States here, and make what Laws the neces∣sity of the time requireth. King John in the 12th year of his Reign went into Ireland, and there by advice of Grave and Learned Men, whom he carried with him, by Par∣liament de comuni omnium de Hibernia consensu, Ordained that Ireland should be Governed by the Laws of England, which of many of the Irishmen accor∣ding to their own Desire, was joyfully accepted and obeyed; and by many
the same was soon after absolutely re∣fused, preferring their Brehon Law, before the Just, and Honourable Laws of England, Co. 1 Inst. 14.1. By Poyning's Law, made by Authority of Parliament in Ireland, Anno 10 H. 7. all the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England before that time made, do extend to Ireland, so as now Magna Charta doth extend to Ireland, Co. 2. Inst. 2. Resolved by all the Judges in Eng∣land, That for a Treason done in Ire∣land, the Offender may be Tryed by the Statute of 35 Hen. 8. in England, because the Words of the Statute be; All Treasons committed out of the Realm of England; and Ireland is out of the Realm of England, Coke's 3 Inst. 11. Albeit Ireland be a distinct Kingdom, and out of the Realm of England to some purposes, as Protections, and Fines levied, &c. yet to other intents, is as a Member of, or belonging to the Crown of England. And therefore a Writ of Error is maintainable here in the King's Bench, of a Judgment given in the King's Bench in Ireland; so as the Judges did construe that part of the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Making it High Treason to bring in false Money into this Realm, Counterfeit to the Money of England; not to extend to Money
brought out of Ireland, Coke's 3 Instit. 18. The Irish being Descended from the Ancient Britains, now have the same Laws with us in England; therefore I shall not write of the Jurisdiction, or particular Courts of Justice there, they being the same in England; But take Notice, That King John, and also Henry the Second, the Father of King John, did Command at the Request of the Irish, That such Laws as he had in England, should be of Force in Ireland, and hereby Ireland being a distinct Kingdom, was to have Parliaments hol∣den there as in England: And there∣upon in the Reign of King John a Par∣liament was holden there, as by Record appeareth, Co. 4 Inst. 349. King Henry the Second, when he had Conquered Ireland, sent thither that Treatise fairly Written in Parchment, Intituled Modus tenendi Parliamentum, for better holding of Parliaments there, Coke's 4 Inst. 349. And sometimes the Kings of England have called the Nobles of Ireland, to come to the Parliaments of England, Coke's 4 Inst. 350. And by Special Words the Parlia∣ments of England may bind the Sub∣jects of Ireland, Co. 4 Inst. ibid.
And seeing good Acts of Parliament made in England since the Reign of King John, extended not to Ireland, unless it were especially named, or by General Words included a Right profi∣table Act was made at a Parliament holden in Ireland, Anno 10 Hen. 7. be∣fore Sir Edward Poynings, then Deputy or Pro-Rex in Ireland, and thereupon called Poyning's Law, That all Statutes late made in England concerning the publick Weal, should be accepted, used, and executed in Ireland, Co. 4 Inst. 351. In what manner a Parliament is to be holden in Ireland, and how Bills offered to the Parliament there, shall be first Transmitted hither under the Great Seal of that Kingdom; and ha∣ving received Approbation here, shall be returned hither, to be preferr'd to the Parliament, and several Questions and Doubts Resolved concerning this matter, Vide Co. 4 Inst. 353. By the Statute of 3 Hen. 2. all Persons having Lands, Tenements, or Offices Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, shall Re∣side upon the same; and those that have Castles must there reside, and repair, and fortifie them. And if they Depart, they must appoint some able to supply their room, or the Governour may dis∣pose half their Living to such Defence, Co. 4 Inst. 356.
At a Synod holden by St. Patrick in Ireland, it was unanimously agreed, That Irish Priests should have Wives, Co. 4 Inst. 356. There is an Ancient Record con∣cerning Ireland, necessary to be Ex∣plained; In these Words: REX Thesaurario Hiberniae, Solutem. Cum Edwardus primogenitus noster terram Hiberniae habeat & teneat de dono nostro cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, adeo libere & quiete sicut eam in manu nostra teneremus, per quod charissima filia nostra Alianora Consors dicti filij nostri Aurum suum tam de finibus quam sponte Oblatis in terra Hiberniae habere Debet, sicut charissima Consors nostra Alianora Regina Angliae Aurum suum habet de eisdem in Regno nostro Angliae. Vobis mandamus, &c. quatenus praefat' Consorti filij nostri praedicti Aurum praedictum de finibus & sponte oblatis, & etiam de quibuscunque aliis finibus praedictis habere facias in for∣ma praedicta. Et hoc, &c. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege 29 die Februarij, Anno 52 Hen. 3. By this Record first it appeareth, that as the Law was taken at that Day by Gift of King Henry the Third, his Eldest Son Prince Edward was Lord of
the Dominion, and Lordship of Ireland. Secondly, That albeit the Wife of Prince Edward was not Queen in Name, but had the Effect of it; there∣fore she should have a Duty, called Aurum Reginae, as well as the Queen of England, being but Lady in Ireland. For albeit the Kings of Ireland were (until the Statute of 33 Hen. 8.) styled by the Name of Lords of Ireland; yet was he Supremus, and absolutè Dominus, and had Royal Dominion, and Autho∣rity, and that his Consort was in rei veritate Regina, or else she could not have had Aurum Reginae. Albeit this Royal Dominion, and Land of Ireland was of ancient time permitted to be granted De facto, to the King's Sons before-mentioned; yet by the Law, the King by his Letters Patent could not grant so Royal a Member of his Imperial style to any, no more than he could do of the Kingdom of England, Co. 4 Inst. 357. What was the Duty of Aurum Re∣ginae, and when due, Vide 4. Coke's Inst. 358. At a Parliament holden in Ireland by Howel Duke of Clarence, Lieutenant there Anno 40 Edw. 3. called The Sta∣tute of Kilkenny, The Brehon Law (which was the Irish Judges Law,) is no Law,
but a Lewd Custom crept in of later times, and never was the Law of the Ancient Britains, from whom they are descended, Co. 4 Inst. 358. The Pro-Rex there hath been some∣time called, Custos, Warden, Lieutenant, Chief Justice, Deputy of Ireland, Coke's 4 Inst. ibid. If an Archbishoprick, or Bishoprick in Ireland be void, then the Chapter shall Sue to the King in England, to go to Election; and after Election made, they ought upon Certificate thereof made to the King, to obtain his Royal Assent to this Election; and thereupon a Writ shall be directed out of the Chancery here, to the Chief Justice of Ireland, or his Lieutenant, re∣hearsing all this matter, and com∣manding him to take Fealty of the Bishop, and to restore him to his Tem∣poralties. But now the Course is in Ireland, to make such Writs there in the Name of the King: But the King Names the Archbishops, and Bishops there, as he doth in England, and then the Chapter chuse him whom the King Names, and thereupon Writs are made of Course, Coke's 4. Institutes 359.
And whereas some have Divided this Kingdom into the English Pale, and Wild Irish, let Oblivion bury it, for now all are reduced to Obedience and civil Behaviour: So as a Man may justly say of the Old Britains, Sunt in Bello fortes, & in Pace fideles. And whereas some have said the Crown of England had the Country of Ireland by Donation from the Pope, the following Record will ma∣nifest the Truth therein. Altitonantis Dei largiflua Clementia, qui est Rex Regum, & Dominus Domi∣nantium, ego Edgarus Anglorum Basileus, omniumque rerum Insularum Oceani qui Britanniam circumjacent; cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur Im∣perator & Dominus, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo, qui meum imperium sic ampliavit & exaltavit super regnum patrum meorum; Qui licet Monarchiam Totius Angliae adepti sunt à tempore A∣thelstani, qui primus Regum Anglorum omnes Nationes quae Britanniam incolunt sibi armis subegit, nullus tamen eorum ultra fines Imperium suum Dilatare ag∣gressus est. Mihi tamen concessit propitia Divinitas cum Anglorum imperio omnia
regna Insularum Oceani cum suis ferotissi∣mis Regibus usque Norvegiam maximam∣que partem Hiberniae, cum sua Nobilissima Civitate de Dublina Anglorum regno Subjugare quos etiam omnes meis imperiis colla subdere, Dei favente gratia, Coegi. Quapropter & ego Christi gloriam & laudem in regno meo exaltar, & ejus servicium amplificare devotus deposui. Et per meos fideles fautores, Dunstanum, viz. Archiepiscopum Ayelyolanum ac Oswal∣dum Archiepiscopos, quos mihi patres spirituales & consiliatores eligi, magna ex parte disposui, &c. Facta sunt haec An∣no Domini 964, Indictione 8. Regni vero Edgari Anglorum Regis 6 in Regia urbe quae ab incolis Ocleayeceastrie nomina∣tur in natale Domini festivitate Sancto∣rum Innocentium feria 4, &c. ✚ Ego Edgar Basileus Anglorum, & Imperator Regum gentium, cum consensu & principrim & Archiepiscoporum meorum hanc meam munificentiam signo meo corroboravi. ✚ Ego Alfrye Regina consensi & Signo Crueis confirmavi. Ego Dunstan Archiepiscopus Dorobor' Ecclesiae Christi consensi & sub∣scripsi. ✚ Ege Osticel Archiepiscopus Eboracenses Ecclesiae consensi & subscripsi. Ego Alferic Dux. Ego Buthnod Dux. Ego Arigdary Dux.
And what Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction the Archbishop of Canterbury, had in Ireland in ancient time, before it was Subject to the Crown of England, you may read in Cambden's Britannia p. 735, & 765. as namely in the Consecration, and Confirmation of their Bishops, by reason of his Primacy in Ireland, Co. 4 Inst. 360. King Henry the Second at a Parlia∣ment holden at Oxford, Created his Son King John, King of Ireland. But succeeding Kings wrote themselves Domini Hiberniae, till 33 Hen. 8, in which year he took upon himself the Style of King of Ireland, being so Declared at a Parliament in Dublin, Coke's 4 Inst. 360. Certain it is, that whilst the Liberal Sciences in Europe lay Buried in Dark∣ness, their Lustre did shine forth clearly in Ireland. Thither did our English Saxons repair, as to a Mart of good Literature; whence of the Holy Men of those times we often read, Aman∣datus est ad Disciplinam in Hiberniam, Co. 4 Inst. 360. In the Book of Magna Charta is an Ordinance for Ireland, concerning di∣vers Matters, Entituled, Ordinatio pro statu Terrae Hberniae.
By the Statute of 17 Ed. 1 cap. 1. The King's Officers in Ireland, shall purchase no Land there without the King's Li∣cense. King's Officers in Ireland shall make no Purveyance there, but by Writ out of Chancery there, or in England, and that in time of Necessity only, and by the Advice of the Council there. All kind of Merchandizes may be Exported out of Ireland, except to the King's Enemies, and if any Officer restrain them, he shall satisfie double Damages to the party grieved, and be also punished by the King. The Fees for every Bill of Grace in Ireland under the Seal of the Justice there, shall be Four pence for the Bill, and Two pence for the Writing thereof. The Marshals Fee for a Prisoner, when he shall be Delivered is Four pence. No Pardon of the Death of a Man, or other Felony, or for flying for the same, shall be granted by the Justices there, but only at the King's Command, and under his Seals. No Officers there shall receive any Original Writ, which is not Sealed by the Seal of Ireland, or by the Exche∣quer Seal there, of things concerning that Court.
The Justices of Ireland shall not De∣lay, or Adjourn Assize of Novel disseisin there, save only in the County where he is, and while he shall remain there. By the Statute of 34 Ed. 3.17. all kind of Merchandize may be Exported, and Imported out of, and into Ireland, as well by Aliens, as Denizens. Persons who have Lands, and Pos∣sessions in Ireland, may freely Import and Export their Commodities thither, and from thence, without Impeach∣ment. By the Statute of 1 Hen. 6.3. all Irish Men shall avoid the Kingdom, except Graduates, Beneficed Men, Lawyers having Inheritance in England, and English Parents, Religious Persons, Pro∣fessed Merchants, Burgesses, and other Inhabitants of good Fame, and Persons Married in England, and all they shall find Surety for their Good Beha∣viour. No Irish Man shall Inhabit here in the Universities, or elsewhere without a Testimonial, under the Seal of the Lieutenant or Justices of Ireland, (Testi∣fying that he is of the King's Obey∣sance) to be Delivered to the Chancel∣lor here, in pain to be punished as a Rebel.
No Irishman shall be Head or Gover∣nour of any Hall, or House. By the Statute of 2 Hen. 6.8. Irish∣men coming to live in England, shall give Surety for their Good Behaviour; viz. in the Universities to the Chan∣cellors; in Counties to the Justices of Peace; and in Corporations, and other Liberties, to the Head Officers respe∣ctively. By the Statute of 16 & 17 Car. 1.30. an Act for a speedy Contribution and Loan, towards the Relief of the King's Distressed Subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland. See the Statutes at large. An Act for the Speedy and Effectual reducing of the Rebels in Ireland to their due Obedience, to the King and the Crown of England; and certain other Additional Acts were made for the same purpose, and for the Sale of Forfeited Lands there. By the Statute of 32 Car. 2. cap. 2. The Act made 18 Car. 2. Entituled, An Act against Importing Cattle from Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, and Fish taken by Foreigners, is revived, and Power given not only to Constables, and Offi∣cers, but to every Person whatsoever, in any place whatsoever, to take and seize the Cattle, and Goods Imported, contrary to the said Act; And that
such Seizer shall have the Benefit given by this Act. The other Acts concerning Ireland made in England, and the divers Acts made in Ireland, you may see in the Books of the Statutes of either King∣dom at large. The Rule, Quando duo jura concurrunt in una persona aequum est acsi in diversis, holdeth not in Personal things; that is, when two Persons are necessarily and inevitably required by Law; For no man can now say, That the King of England can make War, or League with the King of Scotland, or King of Ire∣land, &c. there being but One Head of both; and as Liegance of the Sub∣jects of both Kingdoms is due to their Sovereign by one Law, and that is the Law of Nature: So there is a Union of Protection of both Kingdoms equal∣ly belonging to either of them; altho' in other respects they are distinct King∣doms. For and Earl or Baron of Ireland is not a Peer, or of the Nobility of this Realm, as appeareth by the Book 8 R. 2. where in an Action of Debt, Process of Outlawry was awarded against the Earl of Ormond in Ireland, which ought not to have been if he had been Noble here.
But there is a diversity worthy of Observation, for the highest and lowest Dignities are Universal; For if a King of a Foreign Nation come into Eng∣land by leave of the King, (as it ought to be) in this case he shall Sue and be Sued by the Name of a King; And a Knight shall be so named wheresoever he received that Dignity, Co. 7 Rep. Calvin's Case. If a King come to a Christian King∣dom by Conquest, he having Vitae & Necis potestatem, may alter the Laws of that Kingdom at his pleasure; but until such alteration, the Ancient Laws of that Kingdom remain. But if a a Christian King Conquer the King∣dom of an Infidel, there ipso facto the Laws are abrogated, and in that case, until certain Laws be established, the King by himself, and such Judges as he shall appoint shall judge them, and their Causes according to Natural Equity, in such sort as Kings in ancient time did their Kingdoms, before any certain Municipal Laws were given: But if a King have a Kingdom by Title of De∣scent, for that by the Laws of that Kingdom he doth Inherit, he cannot change those Laws of himself, without Consent of Parliament.
Also if a King have a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, as King Henry the Second had Ireland, after King John had given to them (being under his Obedience and Subjection) the Laws of England for the Government of that Country, no succeeding King could alter the same without Parlia∣ment. And in this case, whilst the Realm of England, and that of Ireland were Governed by several Laws, any Born in Ireland was no Alien to the Realm of England. And in case of a Conquest of a Christian Kingdom, as well those that served in the Wars at the Conquest, as those that remained at home for the Safety and Peace of their Country; and other the King's Sub∣jects, as well Antenati as Postnati, are capable of Lands in the Kingdom or Country Conquered, and may maintain any Real Action, and have the like Pri∣viledges there, as they may have in Eng∣land, Co. 7 Rep. 17 Calvin' Case. Ireland came to the King's of Eng∣land by Conquest; but who was the first Conquerour hath been a Que∣stion. The Lord Coke saith, he had seen a Charter made by King Edgar in these Words: Ego Edgarus Anglorum , omniumque, Insularum Oceani, quae Bri∣tanniam
cirumjacent Imperator & Domi∣nus, gratias ago ipsi Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo, qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit, & exaltavit super Regnum Patrum meo∣rum, &c. mihi concessit propitia Divinitas, cum Anglorum Imperio omnia Regia In∣sularum Oceani, &c. cum suis ferocissimis Regibus usque Norvegiam, maximamque partem Hiberniae, cum sua Nobilissima Civitate de Dublina, Anglorum Regno subjugare, quapropter & ego Christi glo∣riam & laudem in Regno meo exaltare, & ejus servitium amplificare devotus dis∣posut, &c. Yet for that it was wholly Conquered in the Reign of King Henry the Second, the Honour of the Con∣quest of Ireland is attributed to him; and his Style was, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae, Dux Aqui∣taniae, & Comes Andegaviae. It is evident by our Books, that Ire∣land is a Dominion separate and divided from England. And 2 R. 3.12. Hibernia habet Parliamentum & faciunt Leges, & nostra Statuta non ligant eos, quia non mit∣tunt Milites ad Parliamentam; which is to be understood, unless they be especially named; sed Personae eorum sunt Subjecti Regis sicut Inhabitantes in Calesia, Gas∣conia, & Guyan.
Concerning their Laws, Ex Rotulis Patentium de Anno 11 Regis H. 3. there is a Charter which that King made, beginning in these Words: Rex, &c. Baronibus, Militibus, & omnibus libere Tenentibus, Salutem. Satis ut credimus vestra audivit discretio, Quod quando bonae memoriae Johannes quondam Rex Angliae Pater noster venit in Hiberniam, ipse duxit secum Viros discretos, & legis peritos, quorum Communi consilio, & ad instantiam Hibernensium Statuit & praecepit Leges Anglicanas in Hibernia, ita quod Leges easdem in scripturas redactas reliquit sub Sigillo suo ad Scaccarium Dublin'. So as now the Laws of England be∣came the proper Laws of Ireland: But because they have Parliaments holden there, whereat they have made divers particular Laws, and for that they re∣tain unto this day divers of their Anci∣ent Customs, The Book 20 H. 6.8. hold∣eth, That Ireland is governed by Laws and Customs separate and diverse from the Laws of England. A Voyage Royal may be made into Ireland, which pro∣veth it a distinct Dominion. In the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. Of Fines, Provision is made for those that be out of this Land; and it is holden in Plowden's Commentaries in Stowel's Case 375. That he that is in Ireland, is out
of the Land, and consequently within that Proviso, Co. 7 Rep. Calvin's Case. But he is no Alien that is Born within the King's Obedience; And no Man can be Alien to the Subject, that is no Alien to the King. Non potest esse Alie∣gena Corpori, qui non est Capiti, Non gregi, qui non est Regi. If an Irish Man dwelling in Ireland hath Lands in England, he shall be chargable for the same to all intents, as if an English Man were Owner thereof, and dwelt in Ireland: But if Irish Men or Men of the Isles of Man, Jersey, Guernsey, &c. have Lands within Eng∣land, and dwell here, they shall be sub∣ject to all Services and publick Charges within this Realm, as an English Man shall be, Co. 7 Rep. 26. Calvin's Case.
A COMPENDIOUS DESCRIPTION OF THE English Plantations IN ASIA, AFRICA AND AMERICA Anno Domini 1699,
English Plantations IN ASIA. BAntan or Banda, Scituate near the Molucco's in the East-Indies, abounding more in Nutmegs, than any other Island of India, and for that cause much frequented; but this Trade is now taken from us by the Dutch: The chief Town is Nera. Here the Christian Faith hath taken deep Root, according to the Church of Rome; The English have a Colony at Surrat, and Fort called the Fort of St. George, &c. which are not for our purpose more to describe. Bombain, Is also under the English Government, but being of no great account, we shall no further de∣scribe it.
The English Colonies in Africa. GUinea in Terra Nigritarum doth acknowledge the English Go∣vernment. It extendeth from Sierra Leona, in the 10th Degree of Longi∣tude to Benin in the 30th: Here is neither Town or Castle, except Mina Built by the Portugals. This is a Coun∣try very Fruitful having Mines of Gold, The Juice of a Tree as Strong as Wine, and much abounding in Rice, Barley, Ivory and Guinea Pepper. Tanger, Did here formerly belong to the English, but the Mole and Castle is now Demolished. The English Plantations in America. THis Immense Country may be properly called a New VVorld, being discovered by Christopher Columbus, Anno 1492. The ancient Fa∣thers, Philosophers and Poets being of Opinion, That the places near the North and South Pole were not Inhabi∣table, by reason of the Extremity of Cold, and the Middle part, because
of Excessive heat, and thought it a great Solecism to believe the Earth was round: For holding which Opi∣nion, 'Tis said Pope Zacheus was so Zealous against Bishop Virgil, That he Sentenced him to be cast out of the Temple and Church of God, and to be deprived of his Bishoprick for this perverse Doctrin, That there were An∣tipodes, or People whose Feet are placed against ours; although this dis∣covery of America hath fully confirm∣ed these Opinions, and the yearly compassing the World evidenceth, the necessity and certainty of Inhabitants living on all Parts of the Earthly Globe. But the particular Discoveries and Voyages into the several parts of A∣merica being not for our present purpose, I shall proceed to give some Relation of the Discovery, Plantation and Govern∣ment of those Countries, and Islands in the VVest-Indies, which are in the Possession of the English at this day; and intending to begin from the North, and proceed South towards the Equino∣ctial Line. The farthest as being North is.
Newfoundland. CAlled also by some Estotiland, Sci∣tuate between 46 and 53 Degrees North Latitude. Hath South Terra Cor∣terialis, North, the Streights called Fre∣tum Davisij from John Davis an Eng∣lishman, who endeavoured by the North of America to find a more quick passage to Cathai and China, Sebastian Cabot first attempting it Anno 1527. Who is said to be the first discoverer of this Country, not then known to be an Island; and Sir Martin Frobisher se∣conded him in 1576, who made three Voyages, and called a great Promon∣tory there, Queen Elizabeth's Foreland, and the Sea runing by it, Frobisher's Streights, on the other side of these Streights, lieth Groenland, and not far distant Friesland. This Island is Esteemed as big as England, The North part being more Inhabited than the South, tho' that be fitter for Habitation; within 50 Leagues of the Shore is a Bank, or Ridge of Ground many Hundred Leagues long, in breadth (where broadest) only 24: About it are certain Islands, which Calvert called Baccaloes, for the great number of Codfish; of which, one
Man may catch One hundred in an hour, the Sea Coasts abounding like∣wise with Salmons, Herring, Thornbacks, Oysters, Muscles with Pearls, and the Island with Bears and Foxes. After the first discovery, the busi∣ness of Trading thither was laid aside for many years, in the mean time the Normans, Portugals and Britains of France resorted to it, and changed the Names which had been given by the English to the Bays and Promontories, but the English not willing to Relinquish their Pretensions in 1583. Sir Humphrey Gil∣bert took Possession thereof, in the Name and by the Commission of Queen Elizabeth, forbidding all other Nations to use Fishing, and intended to have setled an English Colony there, but be∣ing Wreckt in his Return, the setling of the Colony was discontinued till 1608; when John Guy a Merchant of Bristol, in 23 days Sailed from thence to Conception Bay in Newfound∣land. By Jus Gentium or the Law of Na∣tions, whatever wast Country is dis∣covered at the charge of any Prince; It is the right of that Prince, who was at the charge of the discovery; now this Country being among others in that part of America, which hath
been discovered at the charge of the Kings of England; King James the first by Letters Patents Anno Dom. 1623. Granted unto Sir George Calvert, after∣wards Lord Baltimore part of New∣foundland, which was Erected into the Province of Avalon, where he setled a Plantation; and erected a stately House and Fort at Ferriland, where he dwelt sometime, which since his Death, is descended to the present Lord Baltimore. New England. WAs first discovered by Sebastian Cabot in 1497, and in 1584 Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow, were the first who took Posses∣sion of it for Queen Elizabeth. The next year Sir Richard Greenvil convey∣ed an English Colony thither, under the Government of Mr. Ralph Lane, who continued there till the next year, and then returned with Sir Francis Drake into England, who is by some accounted the first discoverer thereof; It hath New France North, and Virginia South, North East, Norumbegia, and South West Novum Belgium, on other parts it hath Woods, and the Sea-coast Si∣tuate between 40 and 41 Degree of North Latitude, In the midst of the
Temperate Zone; yet is the Clime more uncertain, as to Heat and Cold, than those European Kingdoms, which are in the same Latitude. The Air is Clear, Healthful, and agreeable to the English, well watered with Rivers, having variety of Beasts, Tame and Wild, with several sorts of Trees and excel∣lent Fruits. The Commodities it Yieldeth, are Rich Furs, Flax, Lin∣nen, Amber, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Ca∣bles, Masts, and Timber to Build Ships, with several sorts of Grain, wherewith they drive a considerable Trade to Barbadoes; and other English Planta∣tions in America, supplying them with Flower, Bisket, Salt, Flesh and Fish, and in return bring Sugars and other Goods: To England they Trade for Stuffs, Silks, Cloath, Iron, Brass and other Utensils for their Houses. The Weights and Measures are the same with England. Though the Planting of this Coun∣try by the English, was designed by divers; yet it lay much neglected till a small Company of Planters, under the Command of George Popham, and Cap∣tain Gilbert were sent over, at the charge of Sir John Popham in 1606. to begin a Colony in the Northerly part of this Country, but that design
in Two years expiring with its Foun∣der; soon after some Honourable per∣sons of the West of England, common∣ly called the Council of Plymouth, being well informed of several Navigable Rivers, and Commodious Havens with other places fit for Traffick and Plan∣ting, obtained of King James the first a Patent under the Great Seal, of all that part of North America called New-England; from Forty to Forty eight Degrees of North Latitude. In 1612, It was Canton'd and Divided by Grants into many lesser parcels, according as Adventurers presented: But afterwards for want of good Conduct, they were by degrees in a manner destitute of Laws and Government. In 1610, One Mr. Robinson a Presbyterian, or Inde∣pendent Preacher, and several English then at Leyden in Holland, Intreated King James to grant them Liberty under his Royal Authority, to place themselves in some part of New-Eng∣land, and obtaining a Patent or Grant, they Sailed from Plymouth in England, to the Southern parts of New-England, there laying a Foundation for a new Colony, naming their Town New Plymouth; after which things were very prosperously and succesfully carried on in New-England till An. 1636. The
Indians committed many Outrages up∣on the English and Dutch, whereupon all the Colonies unamimously falling upon them, suppressed them in 1637. The English possess many potent Co∣lonies, being since very numerous and powerful, and are Governed by Laws of their own making (having several Courts of Judicature, where they meet once a Month,) so they be not Repug∣nant to the Laws of England. Every Town sends two Burgesses to their Great and Solemn General Court. The Government both. Ecclesiastical and Civil, is in the Hands of the In∣dependents or Presbyterians: The Mi∣litary part of their Government, is by one Major General, and three Ser∣jeant Majors, to whom belong the 4 Counties of Suffolk, Middlesex, Essex, and Norfolk; They have several Towns, whereof Boston is the Metro∣polis, likewise Dorchester, Cambridge, Beautified with two Colleges, and many well Built Houses: Reading, Salem, Ber∣wick, Fraintree, Bristol, and many o∣thers, having most of them Names of some Town in Old England.
New York. FOrmerly named New Netherland, being part of that New England which the Dutch once possess'd. It was first Discovered by Mr. Hudson, and sold presently by him to the Dutch, without Authority from his Sovereign the King of England in 1608. The Hollanders in 1614 began to plant it there, and called it New Netherlands; but Sir Samuel Argall, Governour of Virginia, routed them; after which they got leave of King James to put in there for Fresh-Water in their passage to Brasile, and did not offer to plant till a good while after the English were settled in the Country. In 1664. His late Majesty King Charles the Second sent over Four Commissioners to Re∣duce the Colonies into Bounds, that had before Incroached upon each o∣ther, who Marching with Three Hun∣dred Red-Coats to Manhades, or Man∣hatees, took from the Dutch their Chief Town, then called New Amsterdam, now New York, and August 29. Turned out their Governour with a Silver-Leg, and all the rest, but those who acknowledg'd Subjection to the King of England, suffering them to enjoy
their Estates and their Houses as before; Thirteen days after, Sir Robert Carr took the Town and Fort of Aurania, and Twelve Days after that the Fort and Town of Arosapha, then De la Ware Castle, Mann'd with Dutch and Sweeds; so that now the English are Masters of Three handsom Towns, Three strong Forts, and a Castle, without the loss of one Man. The first Governour of these parts for the King of England was Colonel Nichols, one of the Commis∣sioners. This Country is blessed with the Richest Soil in all New England. I have heard it Reported (says an Author,) That one Bushel of European Wheat, hath yielded One Hundred in a Year. The Town of New York is well seated both for Trade, Security, and Pleasure, in a small Isle called Mana∣haten, at the Mouth of the Great River Mohegan, which is very commodious for Shipping, and about Two Leagues broad. The Town is large, built with Dutch Brick alla Moderna, consisting of above Five hundred Houses, the meanest not valued under One hun∣dred Pounds. To the Land-ward it is encompassed with a Wall of good thickness, and Fortified at the Entrance
of the River so as to Command any Ship which passeth that way, by a Fort called James Fort. It hath a Mayor, Aldermen, a Sheriff and Justices of Peace for their Magistrates. The Inha∣bitants are most English and Dutch, and have a considerable Trade with the Indians, for Bever, Otter, Raccoon Skins, with other rich Furrs; Likewise for Bear, Deer, and Elk-Skins, and are supply'd with Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the Indians at an easie Rate. The Province of New York, formerly contained all that Land which lyes in the North parts of America, betwixt New England and Mary-Land, the Length towards the North is not fully known, the Breadth is about 200 Miles. The Principal Rivers are Hudson's Ri∣ver, Raritan River, and De la Ware Bay. The chief Islands are Manahaten Island, Long Island, and Staten Island. Manahaten Island, so called by the Indians, lieth within the Land betwixt 41 and 42 Degrees of North Latitude, and is about 14 Miles long, and two broad. New York is seated on the West of this Island, having a small Arm of the Sea, which divides it from Long Island on the South.
Long Island runs Eastward above 100 Miles, and is in some places 8, 12, or 14. Miles broad, Inhabited from one end to the other, having an Excellent Soil for all English Grain; the Fruits, Trees, and Herbs, very good. In May you may see the Woods and Fields so curiously bedeck'd with Roses, and a multitude of other delightful Flowers, as equal, if not excel many Gardens in England: There are several Navigable Rivers which run very swift, and are well furnished with Variety of Fish, as the Land is with all sorts of English Cattle, besides Deer, Bears, Wolves, Raccoons, Otters, and Wild Fowl in abundance. Hudson's River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the Head of which is seated New Al∣bany, a place of great Trade with the Indians, betwixt which and New York, being above 100 Miles distance, is as good Corn Land as the World affords. It was reduced to his Majesties Obedi∣ence by Colonel Nichols, and a League of Friendship concluded between the Inhabitants, and the Indians, by whom they have never been since disturbed, but every Man hath sate under his own Vine, and hath peaceably Reaped and Enjoyed the Fruits of his own La∣bours.
New Jersey IS part of the Province of New Al∣bion afore-mentioned, and is Sub∣divided into East and West Jersey. East Jersey lies between 39 and 41 De∣grees of North Latitude, being about 12 Degrees more to the South, than the City of London. It is bounded on the South-East by the Main Sea, East by that vast Navigable Stream called Hud∣son's River, West by a Line of Division which separates it from West Jersey, and North upon the Main Land, and extends it self in length, on the Sea-Coasts, and along Hudson's River, 100 Miles and upwards. The Proprietors of this Province, Anno 1682. Published an Account of the Scituation, Conveniences and Pro∣duct thereof, for Incouragement of such who had an Inclination to Settle there. Which you may read in Burton's De∣scription of America, fol. 99. The Constitutions of this Country were made in the time of John Lord Berkley, and Sir George Carteret, the late Proprietors thereof, in which such Pro∣vision hath been made for Liberty in matter of Religion and Property in their Estates, that under the Forms
thereof this Country hath been consi∣derably increased. Pensylvania BY Letters Patent Dated the 4th of March 1680. King Charles the Se∣cond, in Consideration of the Faithful Service of Sir William Penne, Deceased, did Grant unto William Penne Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir William Penne, all that Tract of Land called Pensylvania, as the same was Bounded on the East by De la Ware River from 12 Miles distance of New-Castle Town unto the 43 Degree of Northern Lati∣tude, with other Boundings and Limits therein mentioned. And all Powers, Preheminence, and Jurisdictions neces∣sary for the Government of the said Province. And by other Letters Patent Dated April the 2d, 1681. did Publish and Declare his Will and Pleasure, That all Persons settled or inhabiting within the Limits of the said Province should yield all due Obedience to the said William Penne, his Heirs and Assigns, as absolute Proprietors and Governours thereof; as also to the Deputy or Depu∣ties, Agents or Lieutenants, Commissi∣oned by him or them. Whereupon William Penne taking upon him the Go∣vernment
in a Letter from Philadelphia, the then intended Chief City, Dated 16 Aug. 1683. giveth a full Description of the Province and the Soil, Air, Sea∣sons, and Produce thereof. The Planted part of the Province being cast into six Counties, viz. Philadelphia, Buckingham, Chester, New-Castle, Kent, and Sussex, containing then about 4000 Souls: Two Assemblies had then been held with such Concord and Dispatch, that in Three Weeks time at least Seventy Laws were past. And for the Well-Government of the Counties, Courts of Justices are Established in every County, with proper Officers; as Ju∣stices, Sheriffs, Clerks, Constables, &c. Which Courts are held every. Two Months; but to prevent Law-Suits there are Three Peace-Makers, chosen by each County-Court, in the Nature of Common Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences betwixt Man and Man. And Spring and Fall there is an Or∣phans Court in each County, to In∣spect and Regulate the Affairs of Wi∣dows and Orphans. The Government of the Natives is by Kings, which they call Sachema, and those by Succession, but always of the Mothers side; For Instance, the Children of im who is now King will
not succeed, but his Brother by the Mother, or the Children of his Sister, whose Sons, (and after them the Chil∣dren of her Daughters) will Reign; for no Woman Inherits. This they do, that their Issue may not be spuri∣ous. Every King hath his Council, and that consists of all the Old and Wise Men, and also the Young, without which Assembly nothing of moment is under∣taken. The Justice they have is Pecuniary, even for Murther it self: And it's agreed, That in all differences between the Natives and English, Six of each side shall end the matter. The Chief City Philadelphia; In the Center of which is a Square of Ten Acres; at each Angle, is, or was intended Houses for publick Affairs; as a Meet∣ing House, Assembly, or State-House, &c. Mary-Land. THis Province is bounded on the North with Pensylvania, on the East by De la Ware Bay and the Atlan∣tick Ocean, on the South by Virginia, from whence it is parted by the River Patowmeck. Chesapeack Bay is the pas∣sage
for Ships, both into this Country and Virginia, and runs through the Middle of Mary-Land, being found Navigable near Two hundred Miles into the Land, into which fall divers considerable Rivers. The Climate is very agreeable to the English Constitu∣tion, especially since the clearing of the Ground from Trees and Woods, which formerly caused much unhealth∣fulness; neither is the Heat extream in Summer, being much qualified by the Cool Winds from Sea, and the refresh∣ing Showers; and the Winter so Mode∣rate, as doth no way Incommode the Inhabitants. It is seated between 37 Degrees, and 40 Degrees of Northern Latitude, and was discovered at the same time with Virginia. The Country is generally Plain and Even, the Soil rich and fertile, Natu∣rally producing all such Commodities as are found in New England; as to Fish, Fruits, Plants, Roots, &c. The chief Trade of the English hither is Tobacco, which is not inconsiderable, since 100 Sail of Ships have in One Year Traded hither from England, and the Neighbouring English Planta∣tions.
It is divided into Ten Counties, in each of which a Court is held every Two Months for little Matters, with Appeal to the Provincial Court at St. Maries, which is the Principal Town, seated on Saint George's River, and Beautified with several well Built Houses. This Province was granted by Pa∣tent to the Right Honourable the Lord Baltimore, and to his Heirs and Assigns, with many Civil and Military Prero∣gatives, and Jurisdictions; as confer∣ring Honours, Coyning Money, &c. paying Yearly as an acknowledgment to His Majesty and Successors, Two Indian Arrows at Windsor Castle upon Easter Tuesday. The Lord Baltimore hath his Resi∣dence (when there) at Mattapany, about 8 Miles distant from St. Maries, where he hath a pleasant Seat, tho' the Gene∣ral Assemblies, and Provincial Courts are kept at St. Maries; and for Encou∣raging People to settle here, His Lord∣ship, by the Advice of the General Assembly, Established a Model of excel∣lent Laws, for the Ease and Security of the Inhabitants, with Toleration of Religion, to all that profess Faith in Christ, which hath been a principal Motive to many to Settle here.
Virginia. DIscovered, with others, by Sebastian Cabott 1497; after was Visited by Sir Francis Drake, and called Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, in Honour of his Mistress Queen Elizabeth. In 1603 some Persons at Bristol, by Leave from Sir Walter Rawleigh, who had the Propriety thereof, made a Voyage hither, who Discovered Whit∣son's Bay in 41 Degrees; and after∣wards in 1607. Sir John Popham, and others, settled a Plantation at the Mouth of the River Sagahador, the Captain James Davis choosing a small place almost an Island to sit down in, where having heard a Sermon, and read their Patent and Laws, and Built a Fort, They Sailed farther, Discovering a River, the Head whereof they called Fort St. George, Captain George Popham being President. After the first Discovery, Virginia cost no small Pains and Experience before it was brought to perfection, with the loss of many English Lives. In the Reign of King James the First, a Patent was granted to certain Persons at a Corporation, who were called The Company of Adventurers of Virginia.
But upon several Misdemeanors and Miscarriages, in 1623 the Patent was made void, and hath since been free for all His Majesty's Subjects to Trade to. It is scituate South of Mary-Land, and hath the Atlantick Ocean on the East; The Air is good, and Climate agreeable to the English, since the clearing it from Woods; The Soil very fruitful, but Tobacco is their chief Com∣modity, and the Standard whereby all the rest are prized. This Country is well Watered with many great and swift Rivers, that lose themselves in the Gulph or Bay of Chesapeak, which gives Entrance into this Country as well as Mary-Land, be∣ing a very large and capacious Bay, and running up into the Country Northward above 200 Miles. The Ri∣vers of most account are James River, Navigable 150 Miles; York River, large, and Navigable above 60 Miles; and Rapahanok, Navigable above 120 Miles. Adjoyning to these Rivers are the English settled for the Conveniency of Shipping, having several Towns, the chief whereof is James Town, com∣modiously seated on James River, very neat and well beautified with Brick-Houses, where are kept the Courts of Judicature, and all publick Offices
which concern the Country. Next to James, is Elizabeth Town, well built, and seated on the Mouth of a River so called. Likewise the Towns of Bermu∣das, Wicornoco, and Dales-Gift. The Country is Governed by Laws agreeable to those in England; for the better observing whereof, those parts possessed by the English, are divided into the Counties of Caroluck, Charles, Gloucester, Hartford, Henrico, James, New Kent, Lancaster, Middlesex, Nause∣mund, Lower Norfolk, Northampton, Nor∣thumberland, Rappohanock, the Isle of Wight, and York. In each of which Counties are held petty Courts every Month, from which there may be Appeals to the Quarter Court at James Town. The Governour is sent over by the King of England. Carolina. SO called from the late King Charles the Second, is a Colony not long since Established by the English, and is that part of Florida adjoyning to Vir∣ginia, between 29 and 36 Degrees of North Latitude; On the East it is washed with the Atlantick Ocean, and is bounded on the West with Mare Paci∣ficum,
or the South-Sea; and within these Bounds is contained the most fer∣tile and pleasant parts of Florida, which is so much commended by the Spanish Authors. Of which a more ample Account cannot be given, than what an English Man who Lived, and was concerned in the Settlement thereof, Delivered in these Words: This Province of Carolina was in the Year 1663. Granted by Lettes Patent of His late Majesty King Charles the Second, in Propriety unto the Right Honourable Edward Earl of Clarendon, George Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkley, Anthony Lord Ashley, (after Earl of Shaftsbury) Sir George Carteret, (after Lord Carteret) Sir John Coleton Knight and Baronet, and Sir William Berkley Knight. By which Letters Patent, the Laws of England are to be in force in Carolina: But the Lords Proprietors have power, with the Consent of the Inhabitants, to make By Laws for the better Government of the said Province; so that no Money can be Raised, or Law made, without the Consent of the Inhabitants, or their Representatives. They have also power to appoint and impower▪ Governours, and other Magistrates, to grant Liberty of Conscience, make Constitutions, &c.
with many other great Priviledges, as by the said Letters Patent will more largely appear. And the said Lords Proprietors have there settled a Con∣stitution of Government, whereby is Granted Liberty of Conscience, and wherein all possible Care is taken for the equal Administration of Justice, and for the lasting Security of the Inhabi∣tants, both in their Persons and Estates, by the Care and Endeavours of the said Lords Proprietors; and at their very great Charge Two Colonies have been settled in this Province, the one at Albe∣marle, in the most Northerly part, the other at Ashley River, which is in the Latitude 32 Degrees odd Minutes. Care is taken by the Lords Proprie∣tors, That no Injustice be done the Natives, (who are here in perfect Friendship with the English,) in order to which is established a particular Court of Judicature, to Determine all Differences. The Lords Proprietors do at present Grant to all Persons that come to Inha∣bit there, several reasonable Advantages to all Conditions of Men, and sell their Land to any after the Rate of 50 Pounds for 1000 Acres. The manner of Purchasing is, The Party seeks out a place to his mind, (not pos∣sessed
by any other) then applies to the Governovr and Proprietors Deputies, who thereupon Issue out their Warrant to the Surveyor General, to measure him out a Plantation; who making Certificate, That he hath Measured out so much Land appointed, a Deed is pre∣par'd of course, which is Signed by the Governour and the Lords Proprietors Deputies, and the Proprietors Seal affixed to it, and Registred, which is a good Conveyance in Law, of the Land therein mentioned to the Party, and his Heirs for ever. Thus having Travelled the Main Land of America we must Cross the Seas, and take a View of the Islands belonging to the Crown of England in the West Indies. The first being Bermudas, OR Summers Islands, which are a Multitude of Broken Isles (some write no less than 400) scituate direct∣ly East from Virginia, from which they are distant 500 English Miles, and 3300 Miles from the City of London, so named from John Bermudaz a Spaniard, after Summers Islands, from the Shipwreck of Sir George Summers there.
The Island of more Fame and Greatness than all the rest, and to which the Name of Bermudaz is most properly ascribed, is scituated in the Latitude of 32 Degrees and 30 Min. North. The Air is sound and healthy, very agreeable to the English Bodies, the Soil as fertile as any, well Watered, plentiful in Maize, of which they have Two Harvests yearly; that which is sowed in March being cut in July, and what is sowed in August is mowed in December. No Venemous Creature is to be found in this Isle, nor will Live if brought thither; and besides these Advantages, it it so fenced about with Rocks and Islets, that without knowledge of the Passages, a Boat of Ten Tun cannot be brought into the Haven, yet with such knowledge there is Entrance for the Greatest Ships. The English have since added to these Natural Strengths such Artificial Helps by Block Houses, Forts and Bulwarks in convenient places, as may give it the Title of Impregnable. It was first Discovered rather Acci∣dentally than upon Design, by John Bermudas a Spaniard about 1522, and thereupon a Proposition made in the Council of Spain, for settling a Plan∣tation therein, as a place very conveni∣ent
for the Spanish Fleet in their Return from the Bay of Mexico, by the Streights of Bahama; yet was it neglected, and without any Inhabitants, till the like Accidental coming of Sir George Sum∣mers, sent to Virginia with some Com∣panies of the English by the Lord De la Ware in 1609, who being Shipwreck'd on this Coast, had the Opportunity to survey the Island, which he so well liked, that he Endeavoured to settle a Plantation in it at his Return in 1612. The first Colony was sent over under Richard More, who in Three years Erected 8 or 9 Forts in convenient pla∣ces, which he planted with Ordnance. In 1616 a New Supply was sent over under Captain Tucker, who apply'd themselves to sowing of Corn, setting of Trees brought thither from other parts of America, and Planting that gainful Weed Tobacco. In 1619. the Business was taken more to Heart, and made a Publick Matter, many Great Lords and Persons of Honour being interested in it; Captain Butler was sent thither with 500 Men. The Isle was divided into Tribes or Counties, a Burrough belonging to each Tribe, and the whole reduced to a settled Go∣vernment both in Church and State, according to the Laws of England. After
this, all succeeded so well, that in 1623 there were said to be 3000 English, and Ten Forts, whereon were planted Fifty Pieces of Ordnance, their Numbers since increasing daily, both by Chil∣dren born within the Island, and Supplies from England. All the Isles together represent an Half-Moon, and Inclose very good Ports; as the Great Sound, Harrington Inlet, Southampton, and Paget's Bay, with Dover, and Warwick Forts, having their Names from the Noble Men, who were Undertakers therein. The great∣est Isle is called St. George five or six Leagues long, and almost throughout not above a quarter or half a League broad. The Air is almost constantly Clear, (Except when it Thunders and Lightens) is extream Temperate and Healthful, few dying of any Disease but Age; so that many remove from Eng∣land hither only to enjoy a long and healthful Life, and after having conti∣nued there, are fearful of Removing out of so pure an Air. The very Spi∣ders here are not Venemous, but of di∣vers curious Colours, and make their Web so strong, that oftentimes small Birds are entangled and caught therein. Their Cedar Trees are different from all others, and the Wood very sweet.
In 1685. the Governour hereof was Sir Henry Heydon. The Caribee Islands NExt present themselves, so cal∣led in General, because Inha∣bited by Canibals or Man-eating People, at the first Discovery, as the word Caribee imports. They ly extended from the Coast of Paria to the Isle Porto Rico, many in number, 27 of them known by proper Names. In Nine whereof the English are con∣cerned, viz. Barbuda, Anguilla, Mont∣serrat, Dominica, St. Vincent, Antegoa, Me∣vis or Nevis, St. Christophers, and Bar∣badoes. And first in Barbuda. SCituate in 17 Degrees of North Latitude, of no great Extent, not above 15 Miles long, lying North-East from Montserrat. The English are rec∣koned between 4 and 500 Men, who find thereupon conveniently to subsist. The Soil is Fertile, and well stored with Cattle and Sheep, and may produce other Commodities, if well
Manag'd, but subject to one great An∣noyance, as well as some other of these Islands, that the Caribians of Dominico, and other places, many times commit great Spoils in it; The Enmity and Aversion which these Barbarians have conceived against the English Nation in General being such, that there hardly passes a Year, but they make Irruptions into one of these Islands; and if not timely Discovered, and Valiantly op∣posed, kill all the Men they meet, Ran∣sack the Houses, and burn them, and if they get any of the Women and Children, carry them Prisoners to their own Territories, with all the Booty they have a mind to. Here is the Sensible Plant, and Sen∣sitive Trees. Anguilla. SOmetimes called Snake-Island from its shape, is a long Tract of Land of about 30 Miles long, and 9 broad, winding almost about near St. Martin's Island, whence it is very plainly per∣ceived. There is not any Mountain in it, the Ground lying even and low; where it is broadest there is a Pond, about which some English have settled themselves in Number 2 or 300, and
where they Plant Tobacco, which is highly esteemed by those who are good Judges in that Commodity. The Island lyes in 18 Degrees and 20 Minutes on this side the Aequinoctial. Before the Discovery of America there were not to be found in these parts any Horses, Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, or Dogs; but for the better Conveniency of their Navigations, and supply of their Ships in case of Necessity, they left some of these Creatures in several parts of this New-found World, where they have since multiplyed so exceed∣ingly, that now they are more common, as well on the Continent, as the Caribees, than in any part of Europe. Montserrat. REceived that Name from the Re∣semblance of a Mountain therein, to that of Montserrat near Barcelona in Spain, and hath retained the Name ever since. It is of a small extent, not above Three Leagues long, and as much broad, so that it seems almost round. It lies in the Latitude of 17 Degrees on this side the Line, full of Mountains, whereon grow-plen∣ty of Cedar, and other Trees; the Val∣lies and Plains being very fertile.
It is chiefly inhabited by the Irish, with some English. There is in it a very fair Church of a delightful Stru∣cture, Built by the Contributions of the Governours and Inhabitants. The Pul∣pit, Seats, and all the Joyners and Car∣penters Work within it, are of the most precious and sweet-scented Wood, grow∣ing in the Country. Dominica. LIes in the Latitude of 15 Degrees and 30 Minutes, judged to be 13 Leagues, or 40 Miles long, and not much less in breadth where broadest. On the West side of the Isle is a conve∣nient Harbour for Ships. It is very Mountainous in the midst, which En∣compasses an Inaccessible Bottom, where from the Tops of certain Rocks may be seen an infinite Number of Vipers, Dragons, and other dreadful Venemous Creatures, whom none dare approach to. Yet there are many fruitful Vallies, producing several Commodities, but especially Tobacco, which is planted by the English.
St. Vincent IS 16 Degrees North from the Line, and is about 24 Miles long, and 18 broad, wherein are several high Moun∣tains, between which are very fruitful Plains, yielding abundance of Sugar-Canes, which grow Naturally without Planting. It is well Watered with Ri∣vers, and hath several good Harbours and Bays for Shipping. The English have here some Plantations, but they are neither very considerable nor powerful herein. It being the most Populous of Caribeans of any possessed by them, who have here many fair Villages, where they dwell pleasantly, and with∣out any disturbance; and tho' they are Jealous of the Strangers that Live about them, and stand on their Guards when they come to their Roads, yet they do not deny Cassavy Bread, Water, Fruits, and other Provisions growing in their Country, to them that want them, taking in Exchange Wedges, Hooks, and other Implements of Iron, which they much esteem.
Antegoa LIes in the Latitude of 16 Degrees and 11 Minutes between Barbadoes and Desiderado, in length about 20 Miles, and much of the same breadth; The Access to it is dangerous, by reason of the Rocks which Encompass it. It was conceived heretofore, that it was not to be Inhabited, upon Presumption that there was no Fresh-water in it, but the English, who have Planted them∣selves in it, have met with some, and make Ponds and Cisterns to supply that Defect, it being Inhabited by 8 or 900 Persons. The Commodities this Isle affords area Sugar, Indico, Ginger, and Tobacco; It abounds in Tame Cattle; and all sorts of Fish, among which the Shark Fish deserves Remark. Mvis, or Nevis. IN 17 Degrees 19 Minutes North of the Line, not above 18 Miles round, in the midst whereof is one only Mountain, which is very high, and covered with Trees up to the very top, about which all the Plantations are settled, beginning from the Sea-side to the very highest part of it. It hath
within it divers Springs of Fresh-water, whereof some are strong enough to make their way into the Sea; One Spring hath the Waters so Hot and Mineral, that from the Force of it there are Baths made, found very bene∣ficial in several Diseases. The English who planted themselves there in 1628. and are still Possessors thereof, being now about 3 or 4000 Inhabitants, drive a very handsom Trade with Su∣gar, Ginger, Tobacco, and Cotton, which they Exchange for other Conveniencies It is best Governed of any of the Ca∣ribee Islands, impartial Justice being ad∣ministred, and all Debauchery and Immorality severely punished by a Council of the most eminent and an∣cient Inhabitants. There are Three Churches erected for the Service of God: And for the Security of Vessels in the Road, there is a Fort wherein are several Great Guns planted that Command at a distance, which like∣wise all the Commodities impored for the use of the Inhabitants are dis∣posed, and from thence distributed to those that have occasion for them. It is indifferent Fruitful, and hath store of Deer, and other Game for Hunting.
St. Christophers. SO named by Christopher Columbus, who finding it very pleasant, gave it his own Name, which the shape of the Mountain likewise inclined him to; for it hath on its upper part, as it were upon one of its Shoulders, ano∣ther lesser Mountain, as St. Christopher is painted like a Giant, carrying our Saviour upon his, as it were a little Child. It is scituated 17 Degrees and 25 Minutes on this side the Line, and is about 25 Leagues in Compass, the Soil being Light and Sandy, is apt to produce all sorts of the Country Fruits, with many of the choicest growing in Europe. It lies highest in the midst, by reason of some very high Mountains, out of which arise several Rivers, which do sometimes so suddenly over∣flow, through the Rains falling from the Mountains, that the Inhabitants are thereby surprized. The whole Island is divided into Four Cantons or Quarters, Two whereof are possessed by the English, and Two by the French; but so separated, that People cannot go from one Quarter to the other, without passing over the Lands of one of the two Nations. The English have more
little Rivers in their Division; The French more of the Plain Country, fit for Tillage. The English exceed the French in Number, but the French have Four Forts, and the English only Two; and to prevent Differences between the Two Nations, each of them have a Guard upon the Frontiers of their Division, which is renewed every Day. Barbadoes IS the most Considerable Island the English have amongst the Caribees, and lies in 13 Degrees and 20 Minutes on this side the Aequator, and tho' not above 24 Miles long, and 15 broad, yet was many years ago accounted to have above 20000 Inhabitants, besides Negro Slaves, who are thought a far greater Number. In the Reign of King James the First, a Ship of Sir William Curteens returning from Fernambuck in Brasile, being driven by foul Weather upon this Coast, chanced to fall upon this Island, and Anchoring before it, staid sometime to inform themselves of the Nature thereof, which was so ex∣ceedingly overgrown with Woods, that they could find no Champain or Sa∣vana's for Men to Live in, nor any
Beasts, but a multitude of Swine, which the Portugals put ashoar long before for Breed, if they should at any time be cast on that Shoar in foul Wea∣ther, and the Fruits and Roots that grew there afforded so great plenty of Food, as they multiplyed abundantly, so that the Natives of the other Islands use to come hither to Hunt. This Discovery being made, and Advice given to their Friends in England, other Ships were sent, and having cut down the Woods, and clear'd the Ground; they planted Potatoes, Plantain, and Maize, which with the Hogs-flesh they found serv'd to keep Life and Soul toge∣ther, and their Supplies from England coming slow and uncertain, they were oft driven to great Extremity: But in the Year 1627. when they had more Hands, and having Tobacco, Indico, Cotton, Wool, and Fustick Wood to Trade with, some Ships were Invited with hope of Gain to Visit them, bringing for Exchange such things as they wanted, as Working Tools of Iron and Steel, Cloths, Shirts, Drawers, Hose Shoes, Hats, and more Planters; so that in a short time they grew very Considerable, especially when their Sugar-Canes were grown, and they had Learned the Art of making Sugar. The Inhabitants,
which consist of English, Scotch, Irish, with some few Dutch, French and Jews, were Calculated lately to be above 50000, and the Negroes about 100000. So that they can in a short time Arm 10000 Fighting Men, which with the Natural Advantage of the Place, is able to Defy the most potent Enemy, as the Spaniards have found to their Cost, having in vain Assaulted it several times. It hath only one River, or rather a Lake, which runs not far into the Land, yet the Country lying low and level; they have divers Ponds, and are supply'd with Rain-water, by making Cisterns in their Houses. The Air is very hot for 8 Months, and would be more insupportable, were it not for the cool Breezes, which rise with the Sun, and blow still fresher as that grows higher, but always from the North-east, except in the Turnado, and then it chops about to the South and hour or two, and after returns as before. The other 4 Months are not so hot, but like the Air of Eng∣land about the middle of May, and tho' they Sweat, find not such Faintnes as in England in August; neither are they Thirsty, unless over heated with La∣bour, or strong Drink; their Bread is made of the Root of a small Tree or Shrub, which they call Cassavy, and
account it wholsom and nourishing. The Chief Towns in this Isle are St. Michael's, formerly called Bridge Town. Little Bristol, St. James, and Charles Town, with other Parishes of less Note, and se∣veral Bayes on the Sea-Coasts. The Government is by Laws agree∣able to those in England; for which they have Courts of Judicature, Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and the like. The Island is very strong, as well by Nature as Art. It is divided into 11 Precincts, wherein are 14 Churches or Chapels, the whole so filled with Houses, that it may almost seem one Great Town. Jamaica. SCituate in 17 or 18 Degrees of Nor∣thern Latitude, it's shape somewhat Oval, being about 170 Miles long, and about 70 broad, in the midst whereof runs a continued Ridge of Mountains, so that some have compared the Island to a Saddle. From hence flow divers fresh Springs, which cause many Rivers, to the great Refreshment of the Inha∣bitants. The Island is divided into 14 Precincts, or Parishes Named, Port Royal, St. Catherines, St. Johns, St. Andrews, St Davids, St. Thomas, and Clarendon, &c.
many whereof are well Inhabited by the English, that have there very good Plantations, whose Number is not cer∣tainly known; but according to Survey taken, and returned into England some years since, there were about 1700 Families, and more than 15000 Inhabi∣tants in the fore-named 14 Precincts; and in the Four Parishes on the North-side of the Isle, that is, St. Georges, St. Maries, St. Anne, and St. James, above 2000 more; all which are now extream∣ly increased, even to Double, if not Treble that Number; The great En∣couragement of gaining Wealth, and a pleasant Life inviting abundance of People, to Transplant themselves from Barbadoes, and other English Planta∣tions every year, so that in a small time it is like to be the most Potent and Rich Plantation in all America. And besides the afore-mentioned Num∣ber of Inhabitants, there are reckoned to belong to Jamaica of Privateers or Buccaneers, Sloop, and Boat-men, which Ply about the Isle, at least Thirty Thousand stout Fighting Men, whose Courage is sufficiently discovered in their daily Attempts upon the Spaniards in Panama, and other places; which for the Hazard, Conduct, and Daring∣ness of their Exploits, have by some
been compared to the Actions of Caesar and Alexander the Great. The Laws of this Island are as like those of England, as the difference of Countries will admit; They having their several Courts, and Magistrates, and Officers for Executing Justice on Offenders, and Hearing and Determi∣ning all Civil Causes between Man and Man.
ADDENDA, OR, A SUPPLEMENT OF Things omitteed in the Im∣pression of the Book, To be Added To The Respective COURTS, in the PLACES after-mentioned WITH REFERRENCES To the same COURTS In the Book before contained. By the Author. Anno Domini 1699.
ADDENDA, OR A SUPPLEMENT Of Things omitted in the Impression. In the High Court of Parliament. THE manner of Debates or pas∣sing of Bills into Acts, is thus. It is the Practice of each House to debate not only of what the King hath proposed, but of any other Lay-matters, unless their Sovereign shall expresly forbid the same, as heretofore hath sometimes been done. It is free for any Man of the Parlia∣ment, or not of the Parliament, to get a Bill drawn by some Lawyer, and
give the same to the Speaker, or Clerk of the Parliament to be presented at a time convenient, and this Bill may be put first either in the Lords House or the Commons House. Whatever is proposed for a Law, is firt put in Writing, and called a Bill; which being read commonly after Nine of the Clock in a full Assembly, it is either unanimously Rejected at first, or else allowed to be Debated, and then it is committed to a certain Number of the House presently nominated and called a Committee. After it hath been amended, and twice read two several Days in the House, then it is Ingrossed, that is, written fair in Parchment, and read the third time another Day, and then if it be in the Lords House, the Lord Chancellor, in the Commons House the Speaker demandeth if they will have it put to the Question, Whe∣ther a Law or no Law? If the Major Part be for it, there is written on the Bill by the Clerk, Soit Baille aux Com∣munes, or Soit Baille aux Seigneurs, re∣taining still in this and some other things about making Laws, the Custom of our Ancestors, who were generally skilled in the French Tongue.
Note, That when the Speaker finds di∣vers Bills prepared to be put to the Que∣stion, he gives notice the Day before, That on the Morrow he intends to put such Bills to the Passing or third Reading, and desires the special Attendance of all the Mem∣bers. Note also, That if a Bill be Rejected, it cannot be any more proposed during that Session. A Bill sent by the Commons up to the Lords, is usual (to shew their Re∣spect) attended with Thirty or Forty of the Members of the House: As they come up to the Lords Bar, the Member that hath the Bill, making three pro∣found Reverences, delivereth it to the Lord Chancellor, who for that purpose comes down to the Bar. A Bill sent by the Lords to the Com∣mons, is usually sent by some of the Masters of the Chancery, or other Per∣son, whose Place is on the Wooll-sacks (and by none of the Members of that House) and they coming up to the Speaker, and bowing thrice, deliver to him the Bill, after one of them hath read the Title, and desired it may be there taken into Consideration; if af∣tewards it pass that House, then is writ∣ten on the Bill, Les Communes ot as∣sentez.
When any one in the Commons House will speak to a Bill, he stands up uncovered, and directs his Speech only to the Speaker; then if what he delivers be confuted by another, yet it is not allowed to answer again the same Day, lest the whole time should be spent in Debate. Also if a Bill be debating in the House, no Man may speak to it in one day above once. If any one speak words of Offence to the King's Majesty or to the House, he is called to the Bar, and sometimes sent to the Tower. The Speaker is not al∣lowed to perswade or disswade in pas∣sing of a Bill, but only to make a short and plain Narrative, nor to Vote, ex∣cept the House be equally divided. After Dinner the Parliament ordina∣rily assemble not, though many times they continue sitting long in the After∣noon. Committees sit after Dinner, where it is allowed to speak and reply as oft as they please. Note, By Death or Demise of the King, the Parliament is ipso facto dissolved. Anciently, after every Session of Par∣liament, the King commanded every Sheriff to proclaim the several Acts, and to cause them to be duly observed; yet without that Proclamation, the Law
intending that every one hath Notice by his Representative, of what is trans∣acted in Parliament; of later times since Printing became common, that Custom hath been laid aside. See before in High Court of Parlia∣ment, Page 51. To the Court of the High Steward of England. BUT now by Stat 7 W. 3. Upon the Trial of any Peer or Peeress, ei∣ther for Treason or Misprision, all the Peers who have Right to sit and Vote in Parliament, shall be duly summoned Twenty days at least before every such Trial to appear at every such Trial; and every Peer so summoned, and ap∣pearing at such Trial shall Vote in the Trial of such Peer or Peeress so to be tried; every such Peer first taking the Oaths mentioned in the Act of Parlia∣ment made 1 W. &. M. Intituled, An Act for Abrogating the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and Appointing other Oaths. And subscribing and audibly repeating the Declaration mentioned in the Act made Anno 30 Car. 2. Regis, For disabling
Papists to sit in either House of Parlia∣ment. Provided that neither the Act, nor any thing therein contained be constru∣ed to extend to any Impeachment or other Proceedings in Parliament in any kind whatsoever. Provided also, That the Act, nor any thing therein contained shall any ways extend to any Indictment of High Treason, nor to any Proceedings there∣upon for Counterfeiting the King's Coyn, his Great Seal or Privy Seal, his Sign Manual, or Privy Signet. See before in The Court of the High Steward of England. Page 81. Of the Power and Authority of the Pro∣tector and Defender of the Realm and Church of England during the King's tender Age. And Guardian, &c. of England in the King's Absence. FOR his Authority, Place and Pre∣cedency, See Rot. Parl. Anno 1 Hen. 6. Nu. 26 & 27. 2 Hen. 6. Nu. 16. 6 Hen. 6. Nu. 22, 23, & 24. 8 Hen. 6. Nu. 13. 11 Hen. 6. Nu. 19. 32 Hen. 6. Nu. 71.
The Lord Coke in his 4th. Inst. Cap. 3. saith, The surest way is to have him made by Authority of the Great Coun∣cil in Parliament. Richard Duke of Gloucester Uncle to King Edward the 5th. (and afterwards King by the Name of Richard the 3d.) was by the Council then Assembled made Protector of King Edward the 5th and his Realm during his Minority. Ho∣linshead's Chron. fol. 1363. And for the Government of the Realm and Surety of the Person of King Edward the 6th. his Uncle Edward Earl of Hertford was by Order of the Council and the Assent of his Majesty appointed Governour of his Royal Person and Pro∣tector of his Realms, Dominions and Subjects, and so proclaimed the 1 st. of February, Anno 1547. by an Herauld at Arms and Sound of Trumpet through the City of London in the usual places thereof. And on the 6th. of Feb. Anno 1547. the said Earl of Hertford Lord Protector, Adorned King Edward with the Order of Knighthood, remaining then in the Tower, and therewith the King stand∣ing up, called for Henry Hubblethorn Lord Mayor of the City of London, who coming before his Presence, the King took the Sword of the Lord Protector
and Dubbed the said Hubblethorn Knight Holinshead Chron. fo. 1614. The King when he intends to go, or is in remotis out of the Realm, appoints a Guardian, &c. of England by Letters Patent under the Great Seal. Or in re∣spect of some Infirmity or other urgent Occasions, hath sometimes by Commis∣sion under the Great Seal of England ap∣pointed certain Lords of Parliament to represent his Person, he being within the Realm. The Patent of the Office of a Guar∣dian of England, reciteth his speedy go∣ing beyond Sea, or in remotis, or ur∣gent Occasions, and the Causes thereof. Nos quod pax nostra tam in nostra absen∣tia quam praesentia inviolabiliter observe∣tur, & quod fiat communis Justitia sin∣gulis conquerentibus in suis actionibus & querelis, de fidelitate dilecti & fidelis no∣stri Edwardi Ducis Cornub. & Comitis Cestriae, filii nostri primogeniti plenarie confidentes, constituimus ipsum Custodem dicti Regni nostri ac locum nost um tenent' in eodem Regno quamdiu in dictis trans∣marinis partibus moram fecerimus, vel do∣nec inde aliud duxerimus. (And this is that Capitalis Justiciarius mentioned in Magna Charta Cap. 1. when the King is extra Regnum) with a Clause of Assist∣ance.
But yet if any Parliament is to be hol∣den, there must be a Special Commis∣sion to the Guardian, to begin the Par∣liament and to proceed therein: But the Teste of the Writ of Summons shall be in the Guardian's Name. A Parliament was holden Anno 5 H. 5. before John Duke of Bedford Brother and Lieutenant to the King, and Guar∣dian of England, and was summoned under the Teste of the Guardian or Lieu∣tenant. By Stat. 8 H. 5. Cap. 1. It was Enact∣ed, That if the King being beyond the Seas, cause to summon a Parliament in this Realm, by his Writ under the Teste of his Lieutenant, and after such Sum∣mons of Parliament gone out of the Chancery, the King arriveth in this Realm; That for such Arrival of the same King, such Parliament shall not be dissolved, but the Parliament shall proceed without new Summons. In 3 E. 4. a Parliament was begun in the presence of the King, and proro∣gued until a further day, and then Wil∣liam Archbishop of York the King's Commissary by Letters Patent held the same Parliament, and Adjourned the same, &c. The Cause of the said proro∣gation was for that the King was en∣forced to go in person to Gloucester∣shire
to Repress a Rebellion there. The King's Person may be repre∣sented by Commission under the Great Seal, &c. as before is said to certain Lords of Parliament, authorizing them to begin the Parliament. Both the Guar∣dian and such Commissioners do sit on a Form placed near the Degrees that go up to the Cloth of Estate. Coke's 4th. Inst. Cap. 1. fo. 6 & 7. To the Court of Equity in the Ex∣chequer-Chamber. BY the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. Cap. 39 the Judges of this Court have full Power and Authority to discharge, cancel and make void all and singular Recognizances and Bonds made to the King for Payment of any Debt or Sum of Money, or for performance of Con∣ditions, &c. upon shewing the Acquit∣tance, &c. or any Proof made of Pay∣ment and performance; also to cancel and make void by their Discretion all Recognizances made for any Appear∣ance or other Contempt. And that if any Person of whom any such Debt or Duty is demanded, alledge, plead, de∣clare, or shew in the said Court suffi∣cient Cause and Matter in Law, Rea∣son
and good Conscience in Barr, or Discharge of the said Debt or Duty, and the same Matter sufficiently prove in the said Court, then the said Court shall have Power and Authority to judge and allow the said Proof, and clearly acquit and discharge such Per∣son and Persons. Also Lands chargeable to the King's Debts in the Seisin and Possession of divers and sundry Persons, the same shall be wholly and intirely, and in no wise severally liable to the payment of the said Debt and Duty: But in the said Act of 33 Hen. 8. All manner of Estate, Rights, Titles and Interests as well of Inheritance as Free∣hold, other than Joyntures for Term of Life are excepted. J. S. holdeth Lands of the King by Fealty and yearly Rent, and maketh a Lease thereof for Years to A. B. pre∣tends that J. S. leased the same to him by a former Lease; Albeit there is a Rent issuing out of these Lands to the King, yet neither A. nor B. can sue in this Court by any priviledge in Respect of the Rent, for that the King can have no prejudice or Benefit thereby: For whether A. or B. doth prevail, yet must the Rent be paid: And if this were a good Cause of Priviledge, all the Lands in England holden of the
King by Rent, &c. might be brought in∣to this Court. But if Black-acre be extended to the King for Debt of A. as the Lands of A. and the King leaseth the same to B. for Years, reserving a Rent; C. pre∣tends that A. had nothing in the Land, but that he was seized thereof, &c. this Case is within the Priviledge of this Court, for if C. prevail, the King loseth his Rent. The King maketh a Lease to A. of Black-acre for Years, reserving a Rent, and A. is possessed of a Term for Years in White-acre, the King may distrain in White-acre for his Rent. Yet A. hath no Priviledge for White-acre, to bring it within the Jurisdiction of this Court. Some are of Opinion, that a Court of Equity was holden in the Exchequer-Chamber before the Stat. of 33 Hen. 8. And then it must be a Court of Equity by Prescription; for we find no former Act of Parliament that doth create and establish any such Court: And if it be by Prescription, then Judicial Presidents in Course of Equity must guide the same. As to the Jurisdiction, certain it is, that there hath been of ancient time an Of∣ficer of the Exchequer called Cancella∣rius Scaccarii, of whom, amongst other Officers of the Exchequer, Fleta saith
thus: Officium vero Cancellarij, est Si∣gillum Regis custodire simul cum contro∣rotulis de proficuo Regni. And the Mirror saith, Perjure est per la ou il fuit Chancellor del Exchequer vea a tiel a fair luy Acquit∣tance de tant que avoit payè al Eschequer de la deit le Roy south le Seal del Exchequer ou delay faire Acquittance de tiel jour tan{que} a tiel jour, &c. His ancient Fee is 40 Marks, Livery out of the Wardrobe 12 l. 17 s. 4. d. in toto 39 l. 10 s. 8 d. See 15. Hen. 8. Cap. 16. The Exchequer hath a Chancellor and Seal, and the Writs usual in the Chancery in the Exchequer to seize Lands, are more ancient than Praerog. Regis. Hereunto it is collected, that seeing there hath been timeout of mind a Chan∣cellor of the Exchequer that there should also be in the Exchequer a Court of E∣quity. In Rot. Par. 2 Hen. 4. we find a Pe∣tition of the Commons, That no Writs or Privy Seals be sued out of the Chan∣cery, Exchequer, or other place to any Man to appear upon a Pain, &c. to an∣swer, &c. contrary to the ordinary Course of the Common Law. Where∣unto the King answered, That such Writs should not be granted without Necessity. Anno 3 Hen. 5. the Commons peti∣tioned, That all Writs of Subpaena and
Certis de Causis, going out of the Chan∣cery and the Exchequer might be Inrol∣led and not Granted of matters deter∣minable at the Common Law on Pain of Forty Pounds. The King's Answer was, That he would be advised. See before in Court of Equity in the Exchequer-Chamber. Page 141. The Court of First Fruits and Tenths Ecclesiastical. A Court of First-fruits and Tenths was raised by Stat. 32 Hen. 8. Cap. 45. Officers constituted of Chancellor, Treasurer, King's Attorney, Two Au∣ditors and Two Clerks, Authority given them to compound for First-fruits, Bonds taken therefore should be of like force as a Statute-Staple: But this Court was dissolved by Queen Mary, Parl. 1. Sess. 2. Cap. 10. These were granted to the Crown by the Stat. of 26 H. 8. Cap. 3. But all the Clergy were Exonerated and Discharg∣ed thereof afterwards, Anno 2 & 3 Phi∣lip and Mary, Cap. 4. The Statute of 26 Hen. 8. revived, and First-fruits and Tenths of the Cler∣gy reunited to the Crown Anno 1 Eliz.
Cap. 4. But no Court is revived, but First-fruits and Tenths to be within the Rule, Survey and Government of the Ex∣chequer, and created a new Office and Officer, viz. a Remembrancer of the First-fruits and Tenths of the Clergy, who taketh all Compositions for the said First-fruits and Tenths, and maketh Process against such as pay not the same. First-fruits, or Annates, Primitiae are the First-fruits after Avoidance of eve∣ry Spiritual Living for one whole Year, except Vicaridges not exceeding Ten Pounds, and Parsonages not exceed∣ing Ten Marks, but all are to pay Tenths. Ecclesiastical Livings were sometimes valued by a Book of Taxation made in 20 E. 1. which remaineth in the Ex∣chequer; and by another Taxation in 26 Hen. 8. which also remaineth in that Court. And according to that latter Taxation are the Values of Ecclesiasti∣cal Livings computed for the First fruits and Tenths. What is of Record concerning First-fruits we will thus briefly relate. 2 Ed. 3. Rot. Claus. m. 4. The King forbiddeth H. P. the Pope's Nuncio to Collect First-fruits, &c.
Parl. 1. R. 3. N. 66. That the Pope's Collector be willed no longer to gather the First-fruits of Benefices within this Realm, being a very Novelty, and that no Person do any longer pay them. Rot. Par. 4 Rich. 2. Nu. 44. The Com∣mons do petition that Provision may be made against the Pope's Collector for Levying the First-fruits of Ecclesia∣stical Dignities within the Realm. The Answer of the King in Parliament, is, There shall be granted a Prohibition in all such Cases where the Pope's Collectors shall attempt any such Novelties. For, note, They were not so ancient with us as is pretended. Rot. Par. 6 R. 2. Nu. 50. Upon Com∣plaint made by the Commons in Par∣liament: The King willeth that Prohibi∣tions be granted to the Pope's Collectors for receiving of First-fruits. 6 Hen. 4. Cap. 1. Against First-fruits by Archbishops and Bishops to the Pope, terming it an horrible Mischief and damnable Custom. Rot. Par. 9 Hen. 4. Nu. 43. It is En∣acted, That the Pope's Collectors should not from thenceforth levy any Money within the Realm for First-fruits of any Ecclesiastical Dignity by any Provision from Rome upon Pain of the Statute of
Provisors; but this is omitted out of the Print of 9 Hen. 4. Cap. 8. 19 E. 3. Tit. Jurisdiction 22. The Bishop of Norwich had by Prescription time out of mind, First-fruits within his Diocesse of all Churches after every A∣voidance. But these also were given to the Crown by the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 3. Tenths Ecclesiastical, Decimae, these are the Tenth part of the Value of all Ecclesiastical Livings yearly payable to the King, his Heirs and Successors by the said Satute of 26 Hen. 8. and 1 Eliz. to be valued as is abovesaid. These the Pope (as the Canonists hold) pretended to have De Jure Divino, as due to the High Priest, by pretext of these Words; Praecipe Levitis atque de∣nuncia, cum acceperitis à filiis Israel De∣cimas quas dedi vobis, Primitias earum offerte Domino, id est, decimam partem decimae, ut reputetur vobis in Oblationem Primitiarum tam de areis, quam de tor∣cularibus & universis quorum accipietis Primitias offerte Domino, & date ea Aaron Sacerdoti. But the Parliaments in 25 Hen. 8. and 26 Hen. 8. were not of Opinion that these Tenths did belong to the Bi∣shop of Rome, as by the several Pream∣ambles thereof appeareth, which we have added; for that we have endea∣voured
to shew (as the Lord Coke saith) the several Claims and Pretences of e∣very thing whereof we have treated. And King Philip and Queen Mary yield∣ed not these Tenths to the Pope, but (as hath been said) by Authority of Parliament discharged the Clergy there∣of: Which they would never have done, if they had taken them to be due to the Pope de Jure Divino. And the Bishop of Norwich could not have pre∣scribed to have First-fruits within his Diocesse, if they had been due to the Pope de Jure Divino: and the rather for that Anthony de Beck, for whom the Prescription was made, was a Retainer to the Court of Rome, made Bishop of Norwich by the Pope See the Statutes at large, and Coke's 4 Inst. Cap. 14. By Statute 26 Hen. 8. Cap. 17. Far∣mers of Spiritual Persons shall not be compelled to pay First-fruits and Tenths for their Lessors. By the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 8. Every Spiritual Person at his Entry into Specialty for the Payment of his First-fruits shall have Deduction of the Tenth part thereof, in respect of the Tenth which shall be by him payable that year.
Where the last Incumbent leaves the Tenth unpaid, the Successor may Di∣strain the said Incumbents Goods found upon the Benefice, and keep them un∣til the Incumbent (if Living) or (if Dead) his Executors, Administrators, or other Owner of the said Goods shall satisfie the Arrears; which if not done within 12 days the Goods may be Ap∣praised upon Oath, and Sold for the satisfying thereof, together with reason∣able Costs, and in Case there be no Distress, the Successor may prosecute the Incumbent (if Living) or (if Dead) his Executors, Administrators, or other Owner of his Goods, by Bill in Chan∣cery, or Action of Debt, for the Reco∣very of the same. By Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 22. If a Bishop or any of his Deputies will make Oath that they cannot Levy a Tenth, they shall be discharged thereof upon their Account in the Exchequer, which Court shall also have Power to Examin the Truth thereof by Witnesses or otherwise, and also to Issue out Commissions, and to receive Certificates for that pur∣pose. If it be Certified into the Exchequer by Commission or otherwise, that any Spiritual Promotion is omitted out of the Original Certificate of Tenths,
which ought to have been there insert∣ed; That Court shall have power to enter it into the said Original Record, to the end it may from thenceforth be chargable therewith. By Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 47. The Bi∣shop of Norwich and his Successors shall Collect the Tenths of all Spiritual Pro∣motions within his Diocess, notwith∣standing the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. (not Printed) which did Exempt them from the Collection thereof. By Stat. 34 and 35. Hen. 8. cap. 17. The Tenhs and Pensions reserved up∣on the Patents of the Five new Bishops of Chester, Gloucester, Peterborough, Bri∣stol and Oxford, shall be paid in the Court of the First fruits and Tenths, and not elsewhere. But note, That the Court was afterward annexed to the Ex∣chequer by divers Acts of Parliament, and Patents of Hen. 8. and Queen Mary. By Stat. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 20. The penalty for default of Payments of Tenths, shall be the Forfeiture of that only Benefice out of which the same is due, notwithstanding the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3. By Stat. 7. Ed. 6. cap. 4. The Collectors of Tenths shall before Midsummer next give good Security, to save the Bishop harmless against the King.
The Bishop shall have the last day of May for the payment of Tenths, and for making Certificates for such as have refused to pay them, notwith∣standing the Statute of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3. If a Benefice be void, so that no Tenth can be there received, the Bi∣shop (upon Certificate) shall be dis∣charged thereof, and then the King shall have it levied upon the Glebe by way of Seisure. The Patent of a Collector of Tenths, shall be good no longer, than during the continuance of the Grantor in the See. By Stat. 1 Eliz. cap. 4. The First-fruits and Tenths, restored to the Crown the Statutes prescribing the Grant and Order of them recontinued; The Statute of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary, (by which they were taken away) re∣pealed: and they shall from hence∣forth be within the Survey of the Court of Exchequer. All Advowsons of Vicaridges, inci∣dent to any of the Queens Impropri∣ations, shall be re-setled in her, not∣withstanding any Act done by Car∣dinal Pool, or Grant made by Queen Mary; saving unto all Persons (except such unto whom such Grants have
been made) their Right and Interest into, or out of such Impropriations. Pensions, and all other yearly Pay∣ments shall be paid as before the Act of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary. All Persons in Arrear for those Duties shall not be answerable for them to the Queen. If an Incumbent continue in the Bene∣fice half a year after the last avoidance, and die, or be legally ousted before the end of the year, He, his Executors, Administrators or Sureties, shall only pay the Fourth part of the First fruits, if he live out the year and die, or be ousted within Six Months after the year, only half the First-fruits shall be paid: And if he live out the year and half and die, or be ousted within one year, only the quarter thereof shall be paid. Discharge of First-fruits and Tenths, heretofore granted by any of the Queens Predecessors to the Universi∣ties, or the Colleges in them, or to those of Eaton and Winchester, shall re∣main good notwithstanding this Act; Also the Dean and Canons of Windsor, shall be from henceforth discharged thereof.
All Grants of Impropriations be∣longing to the Arch-deaconry of Wells shall remain good notwithstanding this Act; yet the said Arch-deaconry, and all Spiritual Promotions Assigned to it, shall from hence forth pay First-fruits and Tenths. All Impropriations, and other Pro∣fits or Emoluments, Ecclesiastical, which were formerly within the Sur∣vey of the Dutchy Court of Lancaster, shall be recontinued notwithstanding this Act, or that of 2 and 3 Philip and Mary. The Revenues of Hospitals and Schools, shall not be charged with the Payment of First fruits, or Tenths not∣withstanding this Act. By Stat. 28 Hen. 8. cap. 11. The year in which the First-fruits shall be paid to the King, shall begin immediately after the avoidance or vacation of the Benefice. In the time of Hen. 8. There were 3 new Courts erected (amongst others) viz. Those of the Augmentations, First-fruits and Tenths, and General Survey∣ors: But these were afterwards annex∣ed to the Exchequer, by divers Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patents of Hen. 8. and Queen Mary. Neverthe∣less in some of these Acts there remains
yet somewhat in force; As you may see in the Statutes concerning Courts. By Stat. 1 Mary Parl. 2.10. The Queen may by her Letters Patents Al∣ter, Dissolve or Reduce into one or more the Courts of Augmentations, First-fruits and Tenths, Wards, Survey∣ors and the Dutchy; or may annex any of them together, or unto any other Court of Record; or erect of the same any other new Court or Courts. Provided, That nothing in the said Letters Patent to be contained, shall charge the Subject otherwise than as he ought to have been charged, be∣fore the Second day of this Parliament, and that the Officers of the said Courts shall not hold Plea, but only where the Queen is party against any of her Subjects. Provided also, That if the Queen shall annex any of the said Courts to the Exchequer, all things within the Survey of the said Court or Courts so annexed, shall be ordered the Exche∣quer way, saving to all persons their Offices, Rents, Annuities, and Fees to be paid out of any of the Queens Courts, where shall be sufficient Reve∣nue to answer the same. Vide le Statute.
To the Court of Ancient Demesne. IN the Book of Doomes-day it self, it appeareth that it was made in the time of the Conquerour. And as Tenants in Ancient Demesne are careful to preserve their Pri∣viledges; so the Lord is as careful to preserve his Seigniority, and the Tenure of his Tenancy in Ancient Demesne. And therefore, if the Tenant Levy a Fine, or suffer a Recovery in the Court of Common Pleas, &c. whereby for a time the Land is become Frankfee, the Lord by a Writ of Disceit, may not only restore himself to his true Seigniority, but utterly avoid the Fine, and restore his Tenant against the Recovery, and his own Fine to the Land again in his former Estate; and the Reason thereof is, for that the Recovery or Fine was not suffered, or Levied before a Com∣petent Judge in the Right Court, which ought to have been in the Court of Ancient Demesne: And therefore, af∣ter the Reversal in the Writ of Dis∣ceit, it is now Tanquam coram non Judice, and the Parties to the Fine, or Recovery shall be Fined and Impri∣soned pro deceptione Curia.
But if in a Writ of Right Close in Ancient Demesne, the Demandant maketh his Protestation to Sue in the nature of Assize of Mortdancester, the Tenant Pleads in Abatement of the Writ, and the Writ by Judg∣ment is abated; the Demandant brings a Writ of false Judgment, wherein the Writ is affirmed to be good; the Court of Common Pleas shall proceed as the inferiour Court should have done; and altho' that Judgment be given to recover the Land in the Common Pleas; yet the Land is not Frank-see but re∣mains Ancient Demesne, because the beginning and foundation thereof was in Ancient Demesne. They may Levy a Fine in Ancient Demesne, which by Custom is said to be a Bar of an Estate Tail; but cer∣tainly that will not hold. If the Tenant remove the Plea, for the cause mentioned in the Recordare, he may come into the Kings Court, and Assign other Cause: And Twenty, if he hath, to maintain the Jurisdiction of the Kings Court, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 58. All those Manors which were in the Hands of St. Edw. the Confessor, were caused to be Written in Doomes-day Book, Sub Titulo Regis, and all the
Lands holden of the said Manors, are held by Tenure of Ancient Demesne. And the Tenants shall not be Im∣pleaded out of the said Manors, and if they be, they may shew the Matter, and abate the Writ. But if they An∣swer to the Writ, and Judgment be given, then the Lands become Frank-fee for ever. And Tenants in Ancient Demesne which held their Lands by Soccage; That is, by Service with the Plow, are called Sockmans, That is, Tenants or Men that hold by Service of the Plow, or Plowmen, for Sock signifies a Plow. Terms del Ley. All the Lands that are in the Kings Hands are Frank-fee, and Pleadable at the Common Law, F. N. B. 35. The Manor it self, and the Demesne Lands within the Manor is Pleadable at Common Law; and a Man ought to Sue his Action for the Manor, and for the Lands which are Parcel of the Manor at the Common Law, and in the Common Pleas, F. N. B. 24. But if a Man Sue for Lands holden of the Manor in the Hands of a Free Tenant, he ought to Sue the Writ of Droit Close, directed to the Lord of the Manor, and there he shall make his Protestation, to Sue in the same
Court, the same Writ in the nature of what Writ he will Declare: And if false Judgment be given, the Tenant or Demandant may Sue a Writ of false Judgment, F. N. B. 24. But he, who holdeth in Ancient De∣mesne by Copy of Court Roll, at the Will of the Lord, who is called Tenant by base Tenure, (and ancient∣ly Tenure in Villenage,) if he be ou∣sted of his Lands, he shall not have this Writ of Droit Close, but ought to Sue by Bill in the Court of the Lord of the Manor, and shall make Prote∣station to Sue there in nature of what Writ he will; but he shall not have a Writ of false Judgment or other Re∣medy, but to Sue to the Lord by way of Petition, F. N. B. fo. 26, 27. And when the Writ of Droit Glose cometh to the Lord or his Bailiffs, he ought to hold a Court, and if he will not hold it, The Demandant may Sue a Writ out of Chancery commanding him to hold it, and thereupon an At∣tachment directed to the Bailiff, return∣able in the Kings Bench or Common-Pleas, whereupon he shall recover Da∣mages or the like, against the Bai∣liff.
And if the Lord oust his Tenant that holds in Fee, he may have a Writ of Droit Close, or an Assize, or other Writ at Common Law, against the Lord for those Lands, F. N. B. 26. No Lands are Ancient Demesne, but Lands holden in Soccage. And By this Tenure is intended, that the Tenants shall do the Service of the Plow, viz. To Plow and Till the Lords Lands, to Mow the Lords, Meadows, and such like Services as are for the maintaining of the Kings Su∣stenance or Victuals, and his Subjects. And for such Services the Tenants have divers Liberties and Priviledges in Law, as to be quit of Toll and Taxes, if not charged upon Ancient Demesne, To be free from Charges of Knights of Parliament, and not to be put on En∣quests out of their Manors, unless they have other Lands, &c. And if the Lord Distrein for other Service or Customs than they are used to do, they may have a Monstraverunt, F. N. B. fo. 30, 31. The Lord shall not answer to At∣tachment upon the Monstraverunt, be∣fore the Court be certified by the Trea∣surer, and Chamberlain of the Exche∣quer, whether the Land be Ancient Demesne, F. N. B. 35.
The Lord shall have a Writ of Dis∣ceit against him, who levieth a Fine of Demesne Lands, and he who is Tenant shall avoid the Fine; But if he Release to him in Possession it shall bind, F. N. B. 216. Lands in Ancient Demesne may be extended, by the Statute de Mercatori∣bus, 13 E. 1. Coke's 2 Inst. 397. And upon Statute Staple. And general Statutes extend to it, Coke's 4 Inst. 270. Fine in Ancient Demesne by Cu∣stom Bars an Estate Tail, Coke's, 2 Inst. 207, 270. The Jurisdiction extends not to per∣sonal Actions, Coke's 2 Inst. 224, 270. The Demandant in a Writ of Droit Close, cannot remove the Plea out of the Lords Court for any cause, &c. nor can the Tenant remove the Plea out of the Ancient Demesne, if not for Causes which prove the Land to be Frank-fee, and not Ancient De∣mesne; And when the Court is re∣moved by Recordare, he ought to shew some Special matter to prove the Land to be Frank fee, and not Ancient De∣mesne; otherwise, the Plea shall be sent back unto the Lords Court: But to shew a Fine levied in the Kings
Court of the same Land, or a Recovery had upon a Praecipe quod Reddat, is a good cause to prove the Land to be Frank-fee, &c. Tenants in Ancient Demesne may make Attorneys, Coke's, 2 Institutes 700. Ancient Demesne, Tryable by Book of Doomes-day, Coke's 4 Inst. 270. In a Replevin, Writ of Mesne, Writ of Ward, in Accompt against Guar∣dian in Soccage, Ancient Demesne is a good Plea for the Appearance and Common Intendment, that the Realty doth come in Debate; so in Accompt against a Bailiff. For it is brought for the Issue and Profits of the Land, which is Ancient Demesne, which ought to be determined in the Court of Anci∣ent Demesne. And in Assize brought by Tenant by Elegit, Ancient Demesne is a good Plea. For the manner of Proceeding and Tryal, See Coke's 5 Rep. 105. Alden's Case, 105. If Ancient Demesne be pleaded of a Manor and denied, it shall be Tryed by the Record of the Book of Doomes-day in the Exchequer. But if Issue be taken, that certain Acres are parcel of the Manor which is Ancient Demesne, it shall be Tryed by Jury, for it cannot be Try∣ed by the same Book, Coke's 9 Rep. 31.
Case of the Abbot of Strata Mar∣cella. If a Man Levy a Fine of Land in Ancient Demesne to another at Com∣mon Law; now the Lord shall have a Writ of Disceit against him who levi∣ed the Fine, and him who is Tenant and thereby he shall make void the Fine, and the Conusor shall be restored to the Possession, which he hath given by the Fine. But if the Conusor after the Fine Release to the Conusee by his Deed being in Possession, or by his Deed confirm his Estate in the Land, then the Conusee shall retain and have the Land, notwithstanding the Fine be avoided, Coke's 10 Rep. 50. Lam∣pet's Case. In a Praecipe if one plead, That the Manor of D. is Ancient Demesne, and the Land in Demand is parcel of the Manor, and so Ancient Demesne, The Demandant cannot say, That the Land in Demand is not Ancient Demesne, for the same is the conclusion upon the precedent proposition, viz. The first, That the Manor is Ancient Demesne. The second, That the Land in De∣mand is parcel of the Manor, for Sequi∣tur Conclusio super Praemssis, and there∣fore cannot be denied, Coke's 11 Rep. 10. Priddle and Napper's Case.
The like in Case of Tithes ibid. Neither the Lord of Ancient De∣mesne, Nor of a Court Baron, Nor the Sheriff in the County Court, when the Plea is holden by Writ of Right, Ju∣sticies, Admeasurement, &c. are Judges, but the Suitors who by the Common Law are the Judges of the Court, Coke's 6 Rep. 12. Jentleman's Case. The Writ of Droit Close is directed unto the Lord of Ancient Demesne, and lieth for these Tenants who hold their Lands by Charter in Fee-simple, Fee-Tail, for Life, or in Dower, if any of them be Ousted or Disseized, he, or his Heir may Sue this Writ, F.N.B. 23, &c. If any Land in Ancient Demesne be in variance between the Tenants, then the Tenant so grieved shall have against the other a Writ of Right Close, after the Custom of the Manor, and that shall be always brought in the Lords Court; and thereupon he shall Declare in the Nature of what Writ he will, and this Writ shall not be removed but for a great Cause, or Non power of the Court, Terms del Ley. If the Lord in Ancient Demesne con∣firm the Estate of the Tenant, to hold by certain Service at the Common
Law, altho' the Estate of the Tenant be not changed, nor any Transmuta∣tion of the Possession; yet the quality of his Estate is changed; for the Te∣nant shall not be afterwards Implead∣ed by Petit Writ of Droit. And the Land by the Confirmation is discharg∣ed from the Customs of the Manor, Coke's 9 Rep. 140. Beaumont's Case. Monstraverunt is a Writ that lieth for Tenants in Ancient Demesne, who hold by Free Charter (but not those Tenants who hold by Copy of Court Roll, Or by the Rod according to the Custom of the Manor at the Will of the Lord.) And it is directed to the Lord, commanding him not to Di∣strein his Tenant to do other Service; And if the Tenants cannot be in quiet, they may have an Attachment against the Lord, to appear before the Justices, and all the names of the Tenants shall be put in the Writ, although but one of them be grieved, F.N.B. 31, 32, 33, &c. The Lord shall not be put to Answer to the Writ of Attachment upon the Monstraverunt, before the Court be cer∣tified by the Treasurer, and Chamber∣lains of the Exchequer, whether the Manor be Ancient Demesne; And it therefore behoveth the Plaintiff to
Sue forth a Writ, directed to the Trea∣surer and Chamberlain for that pur∣pose, Fitz. Herb. N. B. fo. 31. to 35. If a Lord in another place out of Ancient Demesne, Distrein his Te∣nant to do other Service than he ought, He shall have a Writ of Right, called Ne injuste Vexes, and it is a Writ of Right Patent, which shall be Tryed by Battail or Grand Assize, Terms del Ley. See before in Court of Ancient De∣mesne, Page 196. To the Court of Commissioners of Sewers. SEwers seems to be a Word com∣pounded of two French Words, Seoir to Sit, and Eau Water, for that the Sewers are Commissioners that Sit by Virtue of their Commission and Authority Grounded upon divers Sta∣tutes, to Enquire of all Nusances and Offences committed by the Stopping of Rivers, Erecting of Mills, not Re∣pairing of Banks and Bridges, &c. and to Tax and Rate all whom it may con∣cern, for the amending of all defaults,
which tend to the hindrance of the free passage of the Water, through the old and ancient Courses. See the Statute of 6 H. 6. cap. 5. and 23 H. 8. cap. 5. for the form of their Commission. Commission is as much in the Com∣mon Law, as Delegate in the Civil, and is taken for the Warrant or Letters Patent, which all Men using Jurisdi∣ction either Ordinary or Extraordi∣nary, have for their Power to hear and determin any Matter or Action. Yet this word sometimes extends more largely than to matters of Judgment, as the Commission of Purveyors, &c. And all Commissions are grounded upon the Words in Magna Charta: Terrae Legem, And have this Clause, Facturi quod ad Justitiam pertinet secundum Le∣gem & Consuetudinem Angliae. And no new Commission can be rai∣sed but by Statute Coke's 2 Inst. 51, 54, 57. The King may send his Commission to Repair a Bridge, F. N B. 281. Legal Commissions have their due Forms as well as Original Writs, and therefore cannot be newr famed without Act of Parliament: The like of Oaths, Coke's 2 Inst. 478, 479.
Rumney Marsh in Com. Kanc. contain∣ing 24000, Acres Is at this day, and long time hath been governed by cer∣tain Ancient, and equal Laws of Sew∣ers, made by a Venerable Justice Hen∣ry de Bathe, in the Reign of Hen. the 3d, from which Laws not only other parts in Kent, but all England receive Light and Direction: For Example, The General Act of 23 Hen. 8. cap. 5. in the Clause which giveth power to the Commissioners to make Statutes, Ordi∣nances, and Provisions, &c. necessary and behoveful after the Laws and Cu∣stoms of Rumney Marsh, in the County of Kent, or otherwise by any means or ways, &c. Both the Town and Marsh of Rum∣ney took their name of one Robert Rumney, which Robert (as it appeareth by the Book of Doomes-day,) held this Town of Odo Bishop of Baieux, where∣in he had 13 Burgesses, who for their Service at Sea, were discharged of all Actions and Customs of Charge, ex∣cept Felony, Breach of the Peace, and Forestalling. The Lord Mayor hath Jurisdiction for the time being, for the Conserva∣tion and Rule of the Water, and Ri∣ver of Thames, and the Issues, Breaches, and Lands over-flowed, &c. from the
Bridge of Stanes, unto the Water of Yendal and Medway: And in all Com∣missions touching the Water of Ley, The Mayor of London shall be one. By Stat. 3 Jac. cap. 14. Sewers that fall into the Thames, shall be Subject to the Commission of Sewers, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 62. The Commissioners ought to Tax all, who are in danger to be endam∣aged for the not repairing equally, and not he who hath the Land next ad∣joyning to the River only. And Walmesley Justice held, and it was not denied by any, That if the Owner of the Land were bound by Prescription to Repair the River Bank, that yet upon such Commission Award∣ed, the Commissioners ought not to charge him only, but ought to Tax all who had Land in danger: And to this purpose the Statutes concerning Sewers were made, See the Statute of Hen. 6. cap. 6. In which the Commission of Sewers is formed and specified, and other Statutes, and Coke's 5 Rep. Rooke's Case, and 10 Rep. 139, Keightly's Case. And this Commission of Sewers is a Court of Record, Coke's 6 Rep. 20. Gregorie's Case.
See Coke's 10 Rep. The Case of Che∣ster Mill, Keightly's Case, and Case of the Isle of Ely, upon the Commissions of Sewers, and the several Acts of Parliament concerning the same, where you may Read more at large of this matter. See before in the Court of Commis∣sioners of Sewers, Page 292. To the Court of Commissioners, upon the Statute of Bankrupts. THE first Statute made against Bankrupts, was against Strangers, viz. against Lombards, who after they had made Obligations to their Credi∣tors, suddainly escaped out of the Realm without any Agreement made with them. It was therefore Enacted, 51 Ed. 3. That if any Merchant of the Company knowledge himself bound in that manner, that then the Com∣pany shall answer the Debt; so that another Merchant which is not of the Company, shall not be thereby Grie∣ved or Impeached; neither do we find either any Complaint in Parliament, or Act of Parliament made against
any English Bankrupt, until the afore∣said Statute of 34. Hen. 8. when the English Merchant had rioted in three kinds of Costliness, viz. Costly Building, Costly Dyet and Costly Apparel, accom∣panied with neglect of his Trade and Servants, and thereby consumed his Wealth. He is called in Latin Decoctor à Deco∣quendo, for consuming his Estate in Riotous and Delicate Living. The Law provideth, That the Com∣missioners upon the Statute of Bank∣rupts ought to have Three qualities, viz. Wisdom, Honesty and Discretion; Which if it be observed, it is the best means for the due Execution of the said Statute, and the Life of these Laws doth consist in the due Execution thereof: And for such Commissioners, if any Action shall be brought against them, &c. for doing of any thing by force of the said Statutes, they may plead Generally, and not be driven to any Special Pleading, Coke's 4 Inst. cap. 64. By Stat. 34. Hen. 8. cap. 4. The Lord Chancellor, Treasurer, &c. might take Order with the Bankrupts Bodies, Lands and Goods, for the payment of their Debts; but this was altered by Stat. 13 El. 7. 1 Jac. 15, &c.
And by the said Statute of 13 El. 7. It is Enacted, That if any Person (Sub∣ject or Denizen) exercising Trade doth depart the Realm, conceal him, or her self, take Sanctuary, suffer him or her self to be Arrested, Outlawed or Imprisoned without just Cause, to the Intent to Defraud Creditors, being also Subjects born, he shall be Deemed a Bankrupt. And that the Lord Chancellor or Keeper upon a Complaint in Writing against such Bankrupt, may appoint Honest and Discreet Persons to take such Order with the Body of such Bank∣rupt, wheresoever found, and also with the Lands (as well Copy as Free) Here∣ditaments, Annuities, Offices, Wri∣tings, Goods, Chattels and Debts, wheresoever known; which the Bank∣rupt hath in his own Right, with his Wife, Child or Children, or by way of Trust to any Secret use; and to cause the said Premisses to be Searched, Rented, Appraised and Sold for the pay∣ment of the Creditors, Ratably accord∣ing to their Debts, as in the Discretions of such Commissioners, (or the most part of them) shall be thought fit. Such of the Commissioners as Exe∣cute the Commission, shall (upon the Bankrupts request) render him an Ac∣count,
and also the Overplus (if any be) unto him, his Executors, Admini∣strators or Assigns. The Commissioners have Power to Convene before them any Person ac∣cused, or suspected to have any of the Bankrupts Goods, Chattels or Debts, or to be Indebted unto him, and for Discovery thereof, to Examin upon Oath or otherwise, as they (or the most of them) shall think fit. The Person refusing to Disclose or Swear, or Demanding, or Detaining any of the Bankrupts Lands, Goods, Chattels or Debts, not justly shall for∣feit the Double. By Stat. 1 Jac. 1. cap. 15. Any Credi∣tor shall be received, to take his part, if he comes in within Four Months af∣ter the Commission Sued out, and pay his part of the Charge; otherwise, the Commissioners may proceed to Distribution. If any Person be suspected to detain any part of the Bankrupts Estate, and do not Appear or send some lawful ex∣cuse, at next Meeting after warning given him, or appearing, refuseth to be examined upon Oath; The Com∣missioners by Warrant shall cause him to be Arrested, and if he still refuse, shall Commit him until he Submit.
If a Bankrupt grant his Lands or Goods, or Transfer his Debts into other Mens names, except to his Children upon Marriage (they being of Age to consent,) or upon valuable Considera∣tion, the Commissioners may (notwith∣standing) sell them, and such sale shall be good. By Stat. 21 Jac. 19. In the distribu∣tion of the Bankrupts Estate, no more respect shall be had unto the Debts upon Judgments, Recognizances, Specialties with Penalties, or the like, than to other Debts. Another Mans Goods in the Bank∣rupts Possession and Disposition, shall be also distributed by the Commission∣ers, as the Bankrupts own Goods. No Purchaser shall be Impeached for this or former Acts, unless the Com∣mission be sued forth within Five years after he becomes Bankrupt. By Stat. 13 & 14 Car. 2. cap. 24. None that adventure in the East-India, or Guinea Company, or put Money into any Stock, for Carrying on the Fishing Trade, and receive their Dividend in Goods, which they Sell or Exchange, shall by reason thereof only, be lya∣ble to the Statutes of Bankrupt.
Much more of this matter you may Read in the Statutes above mentioned, and other later Statutes concerning Bankrupts at large. See before in Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts. Page 201. To the Court of Commissioners for Ex∣amination of Witnesses. THe Commissioners albeit named by the Parties reciprocally, ought to stand indifferent, and do their ut∣most endeavour to find out by due Ex∣amination the whole Truth, and to suppress no part thereof, for their Au∣thority is to that end meerly, and wholly from the King by force of his Commission. There may be Propriety, but no Su∣periority amongst Commissioners. Witness, Is derived of the Saxon word Weten i. Scire, Quia de quibus sciunt, te∣stari debent. Et omne Sacramentum debet esse certae Scientiae. In Latin a Witness is called Testis à testando, & testari est Testimonium perhi∣bere; unde Regula juris, Plus valet unus
oculatus Testis, quam auriti decem: Testis de visu praeponderat alijs. And Oath ought to be accompanied with the fear of God, and Service of God for the Advancement of Truth, Dominum Deum tuum timebis, & illi soli servies, & per nomen illius jurabis. Testis falsus non erit impunitus. Nocte dieque suum gestat sub pectore Testem. Vox simplex nec probationem facit, nec praesumptionem inducit. Testibus deponentibus in pari numero, dignioribus est credendum. Tessemoignes ne poent testifie le negative, mes l'affirmative. Allegans contraria non est audiendus, verum vero consentiens est falsum nec vero nec falso. Juramentum est indivisibile, & non est admittendum in parte verum, & in parte falsum. Allegans suam turpitudinem non est au∣diendus, Coke's 4 Inst. 279. Antiquity did add hijs Testibus in the Continent of the Deed, after the In cujus rei Testimonium written with the same Hands the Deed was, which Witnesses were called, The Deed read, and then their Names entred. And this is called Charter Land, and by the Saxons Bookland, which Clause of
hijs Testibus continued until and in the Reign of Hen. 8. but is now whol∣ly ommitted. Before Stat. 12. Ed. 2. cap. 2. Process should be awarded against the Wit∣nesses, and therefore that Statute was but in Affirmance of the Common Law; But the delay therein was great, And sometimes (tho' rarely) the Ex∣ceptions to those Witnesses being found true, they were not to be Sworn at all, neither to be joyned to the Jury nor as Witnesses; As if the Witness were Infamous, as Attainted of False Verdict, or Conspiracy, at Suit of the King Convict of Perjury, Forgery, Felony or Praemunire, or by Judgment lost his Ears, or stood upon the Pillory or Tumbrel, or been Stigmaticus where∣by they become Infamous for some Offences, Quae sunt minoris Culpae sunt Majoris Infamiae. If a Champion in a Writ of Right become recreant, he thereby loseth Liberam Legem, becomes Infamous and can be no Witness, or if a Witness be an Infidel, or non sanae memoriae, or not of Discretion, or a Party interested, or the like. But a Man may be challenged to be of a Jury, that cannot be challenged to be a Witness; and Witnesses cannot prove a Negative; of all which you
may Read more in Coke's 1 Inst. 6. a. b. Coke's 2 Inst. 662. When Tryal is by Witnesses, regu∣larly the Affirmative ought to be pro∣ved by 2 or 3 Witnesses: But when it is by Verdict of 12 Men, There the Judgment is not given upon Witnesses, or other kinds of Evidences; But up∣on the Verdict, and upon such Evi∣dence as is given to the Jury, they give their Verdict. Bracton saith, There is Probatio du∣plex, That is, Viva, as by Witnesses, Viva Voce; & Mortua, as by Deed, Wri∣tings and Instruments. And many times Jurors are (with o∣ther matter) much induced by presump∣tion, which is of three sorts, Praesump∣tio Violenta, which is many times Plena probatio, Praesumptio probabilis, which mo∣veth litle, and Praesumptio levis seu te∣meraria, which moveth not at all. If all the Witnesses to a Charter, or Deed be Dead, then violent presump∣tion which stands for a proof, is con∣tinual and quiet Possession. A Wife cannot be a Witness, for or against her Husband, for they are Duae animae in carne una; And in some Cases Women by Law are wholly excluded to bear Testimony.
A Party cannot be Witness against the Usurer. And he that Challengeth a Right to the thing in Demand, can∣not be a Witness for that he is a Par∣ty in Interest, Coke's 1 Inst. 6. a. b. 25. a. Witnesses Viva voce, whereupon Jurors try matter of Fact, are much better Courses than the Conscience of one particular Man, Guided by Paper Proofs, Coke's 2 Inst. 111. Bracton saith, Post intervallum tempo∣ris Accusator non erit audiendus, nisi di∣cere potest se fuisse justis rationibus impe∣ditum. In Misprision of Treason, there ought to be two Witnesses as well upon Tryal, as upon Indictment. By Stat. 1 & 5 Ed. 6. None shall be Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned, Convicted or Attainted of any the Treasons aforesaid, or other Treasons unless accused by two lawful Witnes∣ses, Coke's 3 Inst. 24, 25. One may not be Accuser by hear∣say, ibidem. No Act of Parliament, Ancient Au∣thor, Book Case, or Record, That in Criminal Cases the Party accused should not have Witnesses Sworn for him, Coke's 3 Inst. 79.
In some Cases, as in Dower, &c. The Courts of Common Law Judge by Witnesses, but they must ever be Viva Voce. An Alien (if not Infidel) may be a Witness; and how Examiners and Wit∣nesses ought to behave themselves, See Coke's 4. Inst. 278, 279. Proof is intended Tryal by Verdict, and an Extent and Appraisement ought to be per Sacramentum duodecim and not by the Sheriffs; But if the Sheriff upon a Fieri facias Sell all the Interest the Defendant had in the Land, the Sale is good notwithstanding misrecital of the Term; The like if he do not take upon him to recite the Term, other∣wise than pro Termino diversorum anno∣rum ex tunc ventur' it is good, Coke's 4 Rep. 74. No proof allowed by Law, but the Verdict of 12 Men, Coke's 5 Rep. 108. Sir Henry Constable's Case. If it be generally spoken of proof generally, altho' there be many proofs in Law; yet it shall be of the best proof, and that is by Jury; See more of General Expressions in other Cases, Coke's 6 Rep. 20, Gregories's Case. If a Man be bound to prove a thing, he ought to prove it by the principal proof in Law, and that is by Jury,
Coke's 11 Rep. 39. Metcalf's Case. Tryals per Primos Juratores & alios, Et per Primos only; By Jury with Witnesses adjoyned, See Coke's 9 Rep. 32. Case of Abbot of Strata Marcella, and Statutes and Books there menti∣oned. Where Witnesses not appearing shall forseit Issues, See Stat. 12 E. 2. And where convenient Charges being tendred they shall forfeit 10 l. See Stat. 5 El. 9. Besides the 10 l. shall forfeit such Damages for Recompence as the Judge shall think fit, ibid. Witnesses upon Statute of Bankrupts allowed their Charges, See Statutes concerning Bankrupts. Null Justice, Null Minister le Roy, &c. Ne eit power a Mitter Frank home Sere∣ment faire sans le Comandment le Roy, Coke's 2 Inst. 44. By Stat. de Marlebridge, Nullus possit distringere Liberae Tenentes suos ad re∣spondendum de aliquibus ad liberum Tene∣mentum suum spectantibus, nec jurare fa∣ciet contra voluntatem suam, Coke' 2 Inst. 142, 143. A new Oath cannot be imposed upon any Judge, Commissioner, or other Sub∣ject, without Authority of Parliament, or by Common Law, Time out of mind.
By Stat. Articuli super Chartas. Vice∣comites non permittant quod Laici in Bal∣liva sua conveniunt, ad aliquas recogni∣tiones per Sacramenta sua faciendum nisi in Causis Matrimonialibus & Testamen∣tarijs, Coke's 2 Inst. 600. Persons proceeded against Ex Officio, ought to have the Cause made known to them before their Examination, that it may appear whether the Cause be of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, for otherwise they ought not to Exa∣min them upon Oath, Coke's 2 Inst. 618. Clergy Men better able to take Ju∣ramentum Calumniae; for concerning the Testimony of Witnesses in the Ecclesi∣astical Court, the Act of Articuli, &c. above extends not unto; but if in a Penal Law the Jurisdiction of the Or∣dinary be saved, as by 1 Eliz. in case of hearing Mass, or 13 Eliz. for Usury or the like, neither Clerk nor Layman, shall be compelled to take Juramentum Calumniae, because it may be an Evi∣dence against him at the Common Law upon the Penal Statutes. The Oath Juramentum Calumniae, was warranted by Act of Parliament. It is an High Contempt to Minister an Oath without Warrant of Law, to be punished by Fine and Imprisonment.
A Christian may not induce an Infidel or Idolater to Swear by false Gods, but may take his Credit by so Swearing to a good end, Coke's 4 Inst. 155. No Ecclesiastical Person shall tender the Oath Ex Officio, or any Oath where∣by the party shall be compelled to Ac∣cuse or Purge himself, See Statutes Title, Crown 162. The 2 Houses of parliament being either of them Courts, may take volun∣tary Oaths, Coke's 2 Inst. 536. The Lord Coke saith, I wonder so little consideration is had of an Oath as I daily observe; Cum jurare per Deum, actus Religionis sit; Quo Deus testis ad∣hibetur, tanquam is qui sit omnium rerum Maximus, &c. Coke's 4 Rep. 95. Slade's Case. Jurare in propria causa est Saepenumero hoc Seculo praecipitium Diaboli ad destruen∣das miserorum animas ad infernum, Coke's 4 Rep. 95. Slade's Case. See before in Commissioners for Exa∣mination of Witnesses. Page 203.
To the King's Swanherd. BY Stat. 1 Jac. 1.27. Every Person Convicted by his Confession or 2 Witnesses, before 2 or more Justices of Peace, To have killed, or taken any Pheasant, Partridge, Pigeon, Duck, Heron, Hare or other Game, or to have taken or destroyed the Eggs of Pheasants, Partridges or Swans, shall by the said Justices be Committed to Prison with∣out Bail, unless he pay 20 s. to the use of the Poor for every Fowl, Hare and Egg; And after one Months Commit∣ment, to give Sureties in 20 l. each ne∣ver to offend; Vide Statutes for Preser∣vation of the Game. All White Swans not marked, which have gained their Natural Liberty, and are Swimming in an Open and Com∣mon River, may be seized to the King's use by his Prerogative; Because Volatilia (Quae sunt ferae naturae) alia sunt Regalia, alia Communia. And so A∣quatilium alia sunt Regalia alia Communia. And as a Swan is a Royal Fowl, and all those the Property whereof is not known, do belong to the King: So Whales and Sturgeons, are Royal Fishes, and belong to the King; But the Subject may have property in White Swans not marked,
as in his own private Waters, And if they go out of those private Waters into Open and Common Rivers; yet Eousque nostra intelliguntur quandin habue∣runt animum revertendi. The like are Cervi, Pavones, Colum∣bae, & hujusmodi. Resolved, That every one who hath Swans within his Manor (that is to say) within his private Waters hath a pro∣perty in them: For a Writ of Trepass was brought of wroungful taking his Swans, scilicet, Quare Cygnos suos, &c. 2. One may prescribe to have a Game of Swans within his Manor, as well as to have a Warren or a Park. 3. He who hath such a Game of Swans, may prescribe that his Swans may Swim within the Manor of another. 4. A Swan may be an Estray, and so can∣not any other Fowl, Coke's 7 Rep. 16. Case of Swans. The Custom of the County of Bucks, is for him who hath property of Swans in the Thames to have two Cy∣gnets, and Owner of the Land where the Swan buildeth, shall have one Cyg∣net. If one ave a Cock and tother a Hen, the ygnets of them, shall be equally divided between them.
None can have a Swan-mark called Cygni-nota, but by Grant of the King, or of his Officers thereto authorised, or by Prescription; and if a Man hath a Swan-mark, and hath Swans swimming in an open River, lawfully marked therewith, they belong to him ratione Privilegii, and he may grant such Swan-mark over: But if he hath not Five Marks per Annum, he forfeits his Swan-mark. The King may grant Swans un∣marked, and by consequence a Man may prescribe to have Swans unmarked in such a place. In some Creatures which are ferae Naturae, a Man hath Jus Proprietatis, and in others, Jus Privilegii; and there are three kinds of Property, 1. Absolute, 2. Qualified, 3. Possessory. Of all which you may read in Coke's 7 Rep. 16 to 18. Case of Swans. By Stat. 22 Ed. 4.6. None (but the King's Son) shall have any Mark or Game of Swans of his own, or to his use, except he hath Lands and Tene∣ments of Freehold worth Five Marks per Annum besides Reprizes, in pain to have them seized by any having Lands of that Value, to be divided between the King and the Seizor. See before in The King's Swanherd. Pag. 204.
To the King's Aulnager. NOte, by Stat. 12 Ed. 3.3. No Clothes made beyond Sea, shall be brought into the King's Dominions, on pain to forfeit the same, and to be further punished at the King's Will. By Stat. 11 Ed. 3.5. Cloath workers of strange Lands, which come into the King's Dominions, shall have the King's Protection, dwell where they please, and have convenient Franchises grant∣ed unto them. By Stat. 17 E. 3. Stat. 1.4. Cloaths shall not be forfeit for want of Measure, but the Aulnager shall measure them, and fix a Mark thereunto, expressing what each Cloath contains. By Stat. 3 R. 2.2 the Aulnager shall not feal a pieced Cloath, in pain that the Owner shall forfeit the Cloath, and the Aulnager his Office. By Stat. 17 R. 2.2. No Cloath shall be sold before it be measured and sealed by the Aulnager, upon the Pains con∣tained in the Statutes thereof made. By Stat. 4. H. 4.24. the Aulnage may be let to Farm by Improvement, accord∣ing to the Discretion of the Lord Trea∣surer and barons of the Exchequer, not∣withstanding
the Statute of 17 R. 2. And much more of his Office, and Duty and Measuring, Regulating and making of Cloaths, &c. you may read in the many divers Statutes concerning the same. Vid. the Statutes concerning Drapery. See before in the King's Aulnager. Page 205. To the Court of the Sessions of the Peace. A Justice of Peace may make a Warrant to bring the Party be∣fore himself, but if the Warrant be any Justice, then the Constable may carry the Party before whom he will, Coke's 5 Rep. 59. Foster's Case. Where Stat. 8 H. 6. speaketh of Ju∣stices of Peace, Justices of King's-Bench are within the Statute, because they have the Sovereign and Supreme Autho∣rity in such Cases. Stat. 5 H, 4. Enacts, That no Justice of Peace shall commit any to Prison, but only in the Common Goal, saving to Lords and others who have Goals, their Franchises in such Case: Therefore Ju∣stices of Peace offend in committing
Felons, &c. to the Compters in London, Coke's 9 Rep. 118, 119. Lord Sanchar's Case. A Justice of Peace upon the View of the Force may commit, but he ought to make a Record of it, Coke's 8 Rep. 120. Dr. Bonham's Case. Justices of Peace may commit Va∣grants to Prison, if they will not serve; and they may command the Goalers to set 'em at liberty without any other Writ, F. N. B. 374. Justices of Peace shall be made of the most sufficient, by the Advice of the Chancellor and King's Council, without taking others dwelling in Foreign Counties, except Lords Justices of As∣size, and the King's Chief Steward of Dutchy Lands in North and South, St. 2 H. 5. Cap. 2. 18 H. 6. None, except Men Learned in the Law, or inhabiting Corporations, shall be Justices of peace, unless their Lands be worth 20 l. per Annum. Justices in Middlesex not compellable to keep their Sessions more than twice in the Year, but may keep them oftner, Stat. 14 H. 6. Vid. the Statutes concern∣ing Justices of Peace. Sat. 5 & 6 W. & M. Certiorari to re∣move Indictments shall not be out of the King's Bench before Trial, and from
before Justices of General or Quarter Sessions of Peace, unless upon Motion of Council and Rule in open Court, and the Party indicted find two Manucap∣tors before one or two of the Justices in the County in 20 l. to plead to the said Indictment in the King's Bench, and at their own Charges to procure the Issue joyned upon such Indictment to be tried at next Assizes after the Certiorari re∣turnable: Or, if in London, Westminster, or Middlesex, then next Term, or Sit∣ting after Term, unless the Justices ap∣point some other time, of which No∣tice must be given. Costs against the Prosecutor of the Certiorari, if he be Convicted. In Vacation time Writs of Certiorari shall be granted by any Justice of King's Bench, the Justice and Parties Name being indorsed, and finding Sure∣ties. If upon any Indictment for not re∣pairing High-ways the Title may come in Question, upon Affidavit thereof a Certiorari may be granted to remove it into King's Bench upon Sureties found. Vid. Washington's Abridgment of Statutes, 152. Justices of Peace shall deliver their In∣dictments to the Justices of Goal-Deli∣very; And Justices of Goal-Delivery may take a Pannel of a Jury returned
by the Sheriff, without making any Precept, which Justices of Oyer and Terminer ought to make. Coke's 4 Inst. 168. For the Institution of Justices of the Peace, and their Duty and Authority, and of what they may inquire, See the Stat. 4 H. 7. and Coke's 4 Inst. 170 to 183. Justices of Peace, Sheriffs in their Tourns, and Lords in their Leets, may enquire of false Weights and Mea∣sures, &c. Coke's 4 Inst. 273. If the Commission of Sewers deter∣mine, the Justices of Peace have Power to execute for one year. Coke's 4. Inst. 276. By Stat. 2 & 3 P. & M. 18. a new Commission of the Peace, or Goal-De∣livery for the whole County, shall not be a Supersedeas, to a former like Com∣mission granted to a City or Town-Corporate, being no County. Those who desire to see more of their Institution, Jurisdiction and Authority, may read thereof more at large in Dalt. Just. Coke's 4 Inst. and other Authors who treat thereof, and in the Statutes at large. See before in Court of the Sessions of the Peace, Page 210.
To the Court of the Tourne. THIS Court of the Tourne is the King's Leet through all the Coun∣ty, and the Sheriff is Judge. And whosoever hath a Leet, hath the same Authority within the Precinct, as the Sheriff hath within the Tourne. From this Court are exempted only Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, all Religious Men and Women, and all such as have Hundreds of their own to be kept, who are not bound to appear, except for some other Cause, but only in the Bailywicks where they dwell. Stat. Marleb. 10.25 H. 3. By Stat. 31 Ed. 3. Sess. 1.15. Every Sheriff shall hold his Tourne yearly, one time within the Month after Ea∣ster, and another time, within the Month after Michaelmas, on Pain to lose his Tourne for the Time. This Court is appertaining and inci∣dent to the Office of the Sheriff, and ought not to be reserved therefrom, and the Sheriff is to appoint Clerks under him, in his Court, such as he will at his Peril answer for; but he cannot pre∣scribe to take any thing for the keeping
of his Tourne, because he is an Officer removeable. And by Magna Charta Chap. 35. he is to keep his Tourne in the Hundred at the usual Place. It was Enacted by Stat. 1 Ed. 4. That all Indictments and Presentments taken before the Sheriff in his Tourne, or County, shall be delivered to the Justi∣ces of the Peace at the next Sessions, in Pain of 40 l. who shall Arraign, De∣liver, make Process, and proceed there∣upon, as if they were taken before themselves, and shall deliver indented Estreats of the Fines to the Sheriff, to be levied to his own use. And here, if the Sheriff levy any Fine, or commit any to Prison, by colour of any such Indictment or Presentment, or other∣wise than by Warrant from the Justices aforesaid, he shall forfeit 100 l. How∣beit Sheriffs of London shall not be re∣strained by this Act, nor such as have had Fines formerly granted unto them. Coke's 5 Rep. 112. Mallorie's Case. But this extendeth only to Proceed∣ings upon lawful and sufficient Indict∣ments, and doth not make any insuffici∣ent Indictment good, Coke's 9 Rep. 26. Case of the Abbot of Strata Marcella. See more in Court-Leet, County-Court, and Hundred-Court. See before in The Court of the Tourne. Page 223.
To the Court-Leet, or View of Frankpledge. BY Stat. de Visu Franc. 18 Ed. 2. be∣fore mentioned, and divers other Statutes, the Court of the Leet may en∣quire of several Offences; and amongst the things whereof the Steward of the Leet hath Cognizance, and wherewith the Jury is to be charged, some are such as may be there enquired of, as High-Treason, Petit Treason, Felonies, Burg∣laries, Wilful Burners of Houses or Barns adjoyning thereunto, by Night; or Stacks of Corn, Robbers of Chur∣ches and Chappels, Takers of Doves out of Dovehouses or young Pigeons, or Hawks out of their Nest in the Night, or Fishes out of Ponds, Stews or Trunks, in the Night, Stealers of Tame Deer, marked Swans, or Peacocks; Breaking of Prison by Felons, Rescuers of Felons, and the like; and their Ac∣cessaries before and after the Felony done. Of all which the Jury must make Presentment, and this Present∣ment is to be transmitted to Superior Courts, as to the Justices of Goal-Deli∣very, or Justices of Peace in their Ses∣sions.
And other things whereof this Court hath perfect Cognizance, and that may be enquired of, and punished here in this Court, are, 1. By Common Law, as the Defaults of Officers and Suitors in doing their Suit to this Court; as if any living within the Precinct of the Law∣day, be not returned of the Decenary, or being returned, does not appear: Or, if any above Twelve years of Age have lived within the Leet, and had not ta∣ken the Oath of Allegiance, he was to have been presented here. And if any such Person had come to this Court, the Steward ought to have given him this Oath. If any Customs or Profits, as Treasure Trove, Waif, Estray, or Wreck be withheld from the Lord of the Leet; or if any claim any Royal Franchise, or levy any new Franchise, or abuse any old Franchise within the Leet. All common and popular Nu∣sances or Grievances done to the Kings Subjects, by Purprestures made in any Land, Wood or Water, by Walls, Hedges, Ditches, or Houses, made up or broken down, by straightning, turn∣ing, stopping, surrounding, or other∣wise hurting the common Ways, Brid∣ges or Waters; by poisoning or corrupt∣ing the Air by laying of any Carrion or Filth, by selling of corrupt and un∣wholsom
Provision, or by the breaking of the due Assize of Bread, Beer, &c. By Erecting Cottages, and suffering In∣mates, by not scowring Ditches, or not repairing Highways and Bridges, and the like. And for all these, be the Of∣fend or one Man, or a whole Parish, he or they may be Amerced; and the Jury may order the Reforming of them under a Pain. And all great Affrays, Outcries and Bloodsheds, and such like popular Trespasses, which are Trespas∣ses by the Common Law. Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies at the Com∣mon Law, are punishable in this Court; and for this the Offendors are to be Amerced according to Discretion; but this must be reasonable, and the reason∣ableness tryable and avoidable by Plea or Judgment of the Court in which the Suit depends. Evil Members, and persons of ill Behaviour that are dangerous to the Neighbours, as Malefactors in Parks, such as take Doves by Engines, such as are common suspected Thieves, or that are the common Messengers of Thieves, the common Drunkards, the common Haunters of Alehouses or Taverns, not having whereon to live; Nightwalkers and Day-sleepers, that live idlely, that have no Estate, yet fare well; Eves-droppers, common Hedge-breakers,
common Peace breakers, Railers and Sowers of Discord between Neighbours, Keepers or Haunters of Bawdy-houses, common Scolds, common Barretors, common Usurers, Innkeepers, who do commonly entertain Thieves and suspi∣cious Persons, knowing or suspecting them to be so; and such as do remove Bounds or Landmarks between Parishes, Hundreds or Counties, but not such as remove Bounds between Persons only. These last the Steward of this Court heretofore might have bound to the Peace or Good Behaviour, but at this day he can only by the Presentment of the Jury Amerce them, or make way to have them bound to their Good Be∣haviour by a Justice of Peace. Con∣stables, Tythingmen, Haywards, Ale∣conners, Bailiffs, and such like Officers, which are chosen and sworn in this Court, if any such being chosen, refuse the Office, and to take the Oath, or accepting, doth not execute his Office duly, or misbehave himself therein, as if Constables and Tythingmen do not take care of Watch and Ward, keeping the Peace, raise Hue and Cry, and pur∣sue it for the apprehending Felons, when any Felony is done, or raise Hue and Cry when none is done; or do not punish Rogues and the like, or Tything∣men,
Chief Pledges, Surveyors of High∣ways, Searchers and Sealers of Leather, and such like Officers as do not their Duty. All that Rescue Persons or Things, taken in a course of Law; as Rescuers of Persons Arrested; or Goods or Cattel Distreined; Pound-breakers and the like. The lack of Stocks, Pil∣lory and Tumbrel, Cucking-stool, or Common Pound. All that use Deceit in Buying and Selling, that Sell false Wares for good, especially if it be that which is to be Eaten or Drunk; That Sell by false Weights and Measures, Inn-keepers, Victuallers, Brewers, Ba∣kers, Fishers, Poulterers, or Fishmon∣gers, that Sell that which is unwhol∣some for Food, or Sell at unreasonable Prices; Bakers and Brewers that do not keep the Assize of Bread and Beer, and Millers that take excessive Toll. Fore∣stallers, Regrators and Ingrossers, may be punished in this Court by the Com∣mon Law. And Usurers as Enemies to Trading. But in these and such like Cases, the Penalty of the Statute can∣not be Imposed; for Stewards have no Power by the Statutes, but it is punished here as an Offence at the Com∣mon Law, before the Statute which doth remain still, and for these the Offender is to be amerced.
2. By Statute Law are punishable Tanners, Curriers, Shoomakers, Search∣ers and Sealers of Leather; such as offend about Fish, Malt, Archery, Guns, Unlawful Games, Artificers and Labourers, Musters, Highways, Horses, Hostlers and Victuallers, about the price of Wine, Pheasants, Partridges, Tra∣cers of Hares, Hunting in Corn, about Cottages and Inmates, about Drinking and Drunkenness, Watering of Hemp where Cattle Drink, about Rogues, Crows, &c. Of all these and some others, this Court may Inquire by Au∣thority of divers Acts of Parliament; for all which see Shepheard's Court-keep∣ers Guide, Coke's 4 Inst. and other Au∣thors, and the Statutes at large. The Articles to be enquired of by the Leet, by 18 Ed. 2. were inquirable therein by the Common Law. This Court cannot take Indictments of any Felony, for the death of a Man, or in any other case where it hath not Cognizance; And if it do it is void, and it seems the Judge may be punished for it; Neither can it take a Presentment of an offence done against a Parish, or against a Man. The like of Presentments of any thing, which is not within the Jurisdiction of the Court.
The Jury in this Court may make By-Laws, and enquire of the breach of them, as they have been used to do. And for Cawseys, High-ways and Bridges, the greater part may bind the rest without consent, 44 Ed. 3.19. But no By-Law can be made to Im∣prison Refusers; but Distress, and Acti∣on of Debt in this Case, is the proper Remedy for a Penalty Imposed, or Breach of a By-Law, Coke's 5 Rep. 64. Shepheard's Court-keepers Guide, cap. 39. The manner of Summoning this Court, Proceeding therein, and Ad∣journment, and Discharging thereof, you may see in Kitchins Court Leet, Shep∣heard's Court-keepers Guide and other Authors. Visus Franc' Pleg' i. e. Libere Fide jus∣sores, was instituted for the keeping of the King's Peace, that every Freeman at his Age of 12 years, should in the Leet (if he were in any) or in the Tourn take the Oath of Allegiance to the King, and that Pledges or Sureties should be found, for his Truth to the King, and to all his People, or else to be kept in Prison: This Frank-pledge consisted most commonly of ten Hous∣holds, which the Saxons called Theo∣thung; in the North parts they call him
Tenementale, in other places of England Tything, whereof the Masters of the Nine Families who were bound, were of the Saxons called Freeborgh, which in some places is to this day called Freebarow, i. e. Free Surety, or Frank-pledge. And the Master of the 10th Houshold, was by the Saxons called by divers Names, viz. Theothungmon, to this day in the West called Tythingman and Tihenheofod, and Freoborher i. e. Ca∣pitalis plegius, chief Pledge; and these▪ Ten Masters of Families, were bound one for anothers Family, that each Man of their several Families should stand to the Law, or if he were not forth coming, that they should answer for the Injury or Offence by him Committed, De eo autem qui fugam ce∣perit, Diligenter inquirend' si fuerit in Franco Plegio, & Decenna, tunc erit De∣cenna in misericordia coram Justiciarijs nostris, quia non habent ipsum Malefa∣ctorem ad rectum, Bracton Lib. 3. Fo. 124. Hereby it appeareth, That the Pre∣cinct of this Frank-pledge was called Decenna, because it consisted most com∣monly (as hath been said) of Ten Housholds, and every Man of these several Housholds, for whom the Pledge or Surety are taken were called De∣cennarij,
because every particular Per∣son in the Kingdom was of one De∣cenna or other, which names are con∣tinued as Shadows of Antiquity to this day; Ordeine fuit ancientment, que nul ne demurrast en le Realm, sil ne fuit en dizein & plevy de Frank hommes, ap∣pent aux vise de viewer un fois per an' Frank Pledges & les Plevys, &c. By the due Execution of this Law, such Peace was Universally holden within this Realm, as no Injuries, Ho∣micides, Robberies, Thefts, Riots, Tu∣muls, or other Offences were Com∣mitted; so as a Man with a White Wand, might before the Conquest safely have Ridden with much Money about him, throughout England with∣out any Weapon, Coke's 2 Inst. 73. In the Leet or Tourn, the Suitors might be compelled to be Sworn as well for the King, as between Party and Party; for they are not Liberae tenentes in respect of Tenure, but do their Suit in respect of Resiance; Also the Leets and Tourns are the Courts of the King, and of Record, and the Court Baron, and Hundred Court of other Lords, are not Courts of Record, Coke's 2 Inst. 143.
The Oath of Allegiance then and there taken to the King is thus expres∣sed by Britton cap. 12. Voillons nous que trestouts ceux de 12 ans, desouth nous fa∣cent le serement que ils serr' Foial & Loial, & que ils ne serr' Felons ne aux felonies assentaunts. And in cap. 24. to this effect; You shall Swear, That from this day forward you shall be True and Faithful to our Sovereign Lord King E. and his Heirs, and Truth and Faith shall bear of Life and Member, and Terrene Honour, and you shall neither know nor hear of any Ill or Damage intended unto him, that you shall not Defend. So help you Almighty God, Et les Seints. But this is now obsolete, being al∣tered by several Statutes. See Coke's Rep. Calvin's Case. The Court of the Tourn of the County, and of the Leet or View of Frankpledge are very Ancient; for of the Tourn you may Read among the Laws of King Ed. Statutum est quod ibi (scil' apud le Folkmote) debent populi omnes, &c. convenire, & se Fide & Sa∣cramento non fracto ibi in unum, & simul confederare, &c. ad defendendum Reg∣num, &c. Una cum Domino suo Rege, & Terras suas, & honores illius omni fideli∣tate cum eo servare & quod illi, ut Domi∣no suo Regi intra, & extra Regnum vni∣versum
Britanniae fideles esse velint, &c. Hanc Legem invenit Arthurus (qui quon∣dam fuit inclytissimus Rex Britonum) & ita consolidavit & confederavit Regnum Britanniae universum semper in unum: Hujus Legis Authoritate, expulit Arthurus praed' Saracenos & inimicos à Regno; Lex enim ista diu sopita fuit, donec Edgarus Rex Anglorum, qui fuit avus Edwardi Regis, illam excitavit, & erexit in Lucem & per totum Regnum firmiter observari prae∣cepit: Et hujus Legis Authoritate Rex Etheldred' subito uno & eodem die per universum Regnum Danos occidit. And because this Court, or View of Frankpledge or Leet, was by the King divided and derived from the Tourn, and granted to the Lords to have the view of the Tenants, and Resiants within their Manor, &c. so as they should have the same Justice, as they had before in the Tourn, without any charge or loss of Time; from thence came the Duty in many Leets to the Lord de Certo Lete, towards the charge of obtaining the Grant of the said Leet. So likewise, and for the same Reason were Hundreds, and Hundred Courts divided and derived from the County Courts; and this the King might do, for the Tourn and Leet, are both the King's Courts of Record: And as the
King may Grant a Man to have Power Tenere placita, within a certain Precinct, and before certain Judges, and in a manner Exempt it from the Jurisdicti∣on of his Higher Courts of Justice, so might he do in Case of the Tourn, and Hundred Courts; So as the Courts and Judges may be changed, but the Laws and Customs, whereby the Courts proceed, cannot be altered. And as the County Court, and Hundred Court are of one Jurisdiction; so the Tourn, and Leet be also of one and the same Jurisdiction: For Derivativa potestas est ejusdem jurisdictionis cum Primitiva. But both of the Tourn and the Leet this may be truly said, Tempora mutantur, & nos mutamur in illis. Quodque vera institutio istius Curiae eva∣nuit, & velut umbra ejusdem adhuc re∣manet: Habemus quidem Senatus consultum, sed in Tabulis repositum, & tanquam Gladium in Vagina reconditum, Coke's 2 Inst. cap. 35. Of Hue and Cry, One being an Ex∣pression of the other, for Huer in French (unde Hutesium) is to Hoot or Shout, in English to Cry: There be two kinds,
one by Common Law, or for the King, as when any Felony is Committed, or any Person Dangerously Wounded or Assaulted, and offered to be robbed either in Day or Night; The Party grieved, or any other may resort to the Constable of the Town, and ac∣quaint him with the Causes describing the Party, and telling him which way the Offendor is gone, and require him to raise Hue and Cry; And the Duty of the Constable is to raise the Power of the Town, as well in the Night as in the Day, for the Prosecution of the Offendor; and if he be not found there, to give the next Constable warning, and he the next until the Offendor be found, and this was the Law before the Conquest. The Life of Hue and Cry is fresh Suit. Thamar, The Daughter of King Da∣vid being violenty Ravished by her Brother Amon, The Text saith of her, Quae aspergens cinerem capiti suo, Scissa talari tunica, impositisque manibus super caput suum, ibat ingrediens, & clamans. 2 Regum, cap. 13. Vers. 19. Hue and Cry by force of Acts of Parliament is in divers Cases; As if a Watchman doth Arrest a Night-walker, and he disobey and fly, the Watchman
may make Hue and Cry. 2. Si quis. Forestarius, Parcarius, aut Warrenarius in balliva sua Malefactores aliquos invenerit vagrantes ad damnum ibidem facien∣dum, &c. 3. If Welshmen Outlawed or Indicted of Treason or Felony, fly into Herefordshire, they shall be appre∣hended, &c. or else pursued by Hue and Cry, and Forfeiture upon those that do not pursue. 4. Hue and Cry shall be levied upon takers of Carriage within the Verge of the Staple, of that which pertaineth to the Staple. 5. Where a Man is Robbed; Upon Hue and Cry, &c. What remedy he shall have against the Hundred, &c. And how, and in what manner the Hue and Cry shall be made in that Case, See the Statutes and Coke's 7 Rep. fol. 6 & 7. And this Robbery must be done in the Day time, and not in the Night; otherwise, the Party grieved shall not have his Action: So note, a diversity between a Hue and Cry at Common Law, or for the King; And a Hue and Cry by Statute, where the Party grieved is to have his remedy by private Action. Note, Also a Diversi∣ty in the Prosecution at the Common Law, or for the King, and by the Sta∣tutes which give the Party remedy; for a Prosecution to the next Consta∣ble
is good by the Common Law; but so it is not by the said Statutes, which give the Party grieved his Action, Coke's 7 Report, fo. 7 & 8. Milbourn's Case. So the Prosecution at the Common Law, is a good excuse upon an Indict∣ment at the King's Suit; But note, That it is no Bar to the Parties Action. Where Hue and Cry either by the Common Law, or by force of any Statute, is Levied upon any Person, the Arrest of such Person is lawful, altho' the Cause of the Hue and Cry be feign'd, and if the Cause be feign'd, he that Le∣vied the same shall also be Arrested, and shall be Fined and Imprisoned. But common Fame and Voice is not suf∣ficient to Arrest a Man in Case of Felony, unless a Felony be done in∣deed. Mandatum est Gulielmo de Haverbul Thesaurario Regis, quod Civitatem Lond' capiat in manum Regis, eo quod Cives ejus∣dem Civitatis non levaverunt Hutesium & Clamorem pro morte Magistri Guidonis de Arterio & aliorum inter fectorum se∣cundum legem & consuetudinem Regni. Teste Rege apud Woodstock, 22 die Augusti, 30 Hen. 3. Coke's 3 Inst. cap. 52▪
Hue and Cry hath been used in some Cases by the Ancient Laws of this Realm: For the Author of the Mirror Writing of the Ancient Laws before the Conquest, under the Title Des Articles des viels Roys ordeins, saith, Ordeine fuit que chescun del Age de xiv. ans, & oustre de mortels pecheors ensuivre de Ville, & Ville a Hue & Cry. Et inter Leges Regis Canuti; Si quit Latroni obviam dederit, eumque nullo edito clamore abire permiserit, quanticùnque fuerit Latronis vita aestimata, extremum solvat denariolum, aut pleno & perfecto jurejurando de facinore nihil habuisse cog∣niti confirmato. Sin quis proclamantem audierit, neque vero fuerit insecutus, suae in Regem contumaciae, (ni omnem criminis suspicionem diluerit) poenas dato. Bracton, of Hue and Cry, saith, Sta∣tim & recenter investiganda sunt vesti∣gia Malefactorum, & sequenda per du∣ctum carectae, passus equorum & vestigia hominum, & alio modo, secundum quod consultius & melius fieri possit. And in legal understanding Hue and Cry is all one. In Ancient Records they are called Hutesium & Clamor, and may be by Horn, and by Voice, Avec Hue & Cry de Corne & de Bouche. And by Stat. Westm. 1. Cap. 9. it is called Crie de pais, or Cry of the Countrey. And
he that goeth not at the Commandment of the Sheriff or Constable at the Cry of the Countrey, shall be grievously fined and imprisoned. And divers Acts of Parliament have been since made concerning▪ Hue and Cry, as the Stat. De Officio Coronatoris, where it is said, Et omnes sequantur Hutesium & vestigium, si fieri potest; & qui non fecerit, & super hoc convictus fuerit, attachietur, quod sit coram Justiciariis de Gaola, &c. 28 Ed. 3. & 27 Eliz. Coke's 2 Inst. fol. 172, 173. By Stat. Westm. 2. Cap. 13. Indict∣ments in Tourns ought to be found by Twelve at the least, and the Jurors to put their Seals to the Inquisitions or Indictments. And by Stat. 1 Ed. 3. these Indict∣ments are to be by a Roll indented, whereof one part is to remain with the Indictors, and the other part with him that takes the Inquest. And this Act doth extend to Present∣ments of Indictments, not only in Tourns, but in Leets also, and the like, of what Quality, Ability and Livelihood Indictors in Tourns and Leets ought to be, See the Statute of 1 R. 3. Cap. 4. But now by Stat. 1 E. 4. the Power of Sheriffs is taken away, save only to
take Presentments and Indictments, and deliver the same to the Justices of the Peace at the next Sessions, as before is mentioned, Coke's 2 Inst. 387, 388. In ancient time the King's Courts, and especially the Leets, had power to inquire of, and punish Fornication and Adultery, by the Name of Letherwite, and it appeareth often in the Book of Doomsday, That the King had the Fines assessed for those Offences, which were assessed in the King's Courts, and could not be inflicted in Curia Christianita∣tis. Concerning Letters Patent granted for Searching or Surveying of Wine, Ale, Beer, or other Victual, and con∣cerning the well making of Malt, pack∣ing of Hops, garbling of Spices, Drugs, &c. you may read more at large in Coke's 4th. Inst. Cap. 54. and Statutes there mentioned. The Constables or Petti constables are chosen by the Common Law at the Leet or Tourn, and are by the Com∣mon Law Conservators of the Peace, and may take Surety of the Peace by Obli∣gation, and are as ancient as Tourns or Leets be. Coke's 4 Inst. Cap. 54. It appeareth by Stat. 18 Ed. 2. before mentioned, That it ought to be enqui∣red at the Leet, if all the Chief Pledges
with their Decenners (that is, the other Nine) appear; by which it appears, That the tenth Principal Man was the Chief Pledge. And the Word Decenners is the same with the Ancient Doziniers, as you may see more fully in Coke's 6 Rep. 77, 78. Bullen's Case. See more in the Court of the Tourn, and after in the County Court and Hun∣dred Court. See before in the Court Leet. Page 224. To the County Court. AMong the Laws of St. Edward the Confessor, it is thus recorded, Verum quod modo vocatur Comitatus olim apud Britones temporibus Romanorum in Regno isto Britanniae vocabatur Consulatus, & qui modo vocantur Vicecomites tunc temporis, Vice-consules vocabantur; ille vero dicebatur Vice-consul, qui Consule absente, ipsius vice supplebat in Jure & in Foro. Wherein may be observed, That the Romans called Consulatum, which we now call Comitatum, and Con∣sul, what the Saxons afterwards called Shireve, a Word compounded of two
Saxon Words, viz. Shire and Reve, Shire, Satrapia or Comitatus, coming of the Saxon Verb Siram, i. e. partiri, for that the whole Realm is parted, and divided into Shires. And this Shireve being Deputy of the Consul or Earl, was therefore by the Romans called Vice-Consul, as we at this day call him Vice-comes, i. e. Vice-comitis, that is, instead of the Earl of that County, who in ancient time had the Regiment of the County under the King. For it is said in the Mirror Cap. 1. Sect. 3. That the Earls of the Counties had the Custody and Guard of the Counties; and when the Earls left their Custodies or Guards, then was the Custody of Counties com∣mitted to Viscounts, who therefore are called Vicecomites. And whom the Ro∣mans called Senatores, the Saxons some∣times, and we now call Aeldermen, or Earls; Non proper aetatem, sed propter sapientiam & dignitatem, cum quidam adolescentes essent, jurisperiti tamen, & super hoc experti. The Shireve is called Praefectus, be∣cause he is the Chief Officer to the King within the Shire; for the Words of his Patent be, Comisimus vobis custo∣diam Comitatus nostri de, &c. And he hath triplicem Custodiam, viz. 1. Vitae Justitiae, for no Suit begins, and no
Process is served but by the Sheriff. Also he is to return indifferent Juries for the Tryal of Mens Lives, Liberties, Lands, Goods, &c. 2. Vitae Legis, he is, after long Suits and chargeable, to make Execution, which is the Life and Fruit of the Law. 3. Vitae Reipublicae, he is Principalis Conservator pacis, with∣in the County. Marculphus saith, This Office is Ju∣diciaria dignitas; Lampridius, That it is Officium digniatatis. And Fortescue, Cap. 24. saith, Quod Vicecomes est nobilis Offi∣ciarius, and is thus chosen: Every year the Morrow after All Souls Day, all the King's Councellors meet together in the King's Exchequer, as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as all other Justices, all the Barons of the Exchequer, the Master of the Rolls, and certain other Officers, where all these with one common Assent do name of every County Three Knights or Esquires, whom among other of the same Coun∣ty they take to be of good Disposition and Fame, and best disposed to the Of∣fice of Sheriff of that County: Of the which Three the King chuseth one, whom by his Letters Patent he appoint∣eth Sheriff of the County that he is chosen of, for the year then following; but he, before he receive his Patent,
shall swear upon the Holy Gospel, a∣mong other Articles, That he shall well and faithfully and indifferently exercise and do his Office all that year; and that he shall receive or take nothing of any other Man than the King, by colour, or mean of his Office. In the Romans time, and before, he was a Minister to the King's Courts of Law and Justice, and had then a Court of his own, which was the County Court, then called Curia Consulatus, as ap∣pears by these Words, Ipsius vices sup∣plebat in Jure & in Foro. This Realm being divided into Shires and Counties, and those Shires into Ci∣ties, Boroughs and Towns, by the Bri∣tons; King Alfred's Division of Shires and Counties, being but a Reno∣vation, or more exact Description of the same. The Sheriff is Balivus, and his Coun∣ty called Baliva, which is thus de∣rived: Bailiff is a French word, and signifies an Officer concerning the Administra∣tion of Justice of a certain Province; and because a Sheriff hath an Office concerning the Administration of Justice within his County or Bailywick, there∣fore he calleth his County Baliva sua. For Example, When he cannot find
the Defendant, &c. he returneth, Non est inventus in Baliva mea. In the Statute of Magna Charta, Cap. 8. some hold, that Balivus signifieth any Judge. And in 10th. of Hen. 4. it is holden, That Bailie le Roy is understood Justice le Roy: And in the Mirror it is holden, That the Stature doth extend to every Justice, Minister of the King, Steward, &c. and all comprehended under this Word Bailiff, Coke's 1▪ Inst. 168. a. b. Curia Comitatus, in Saxon, Scypege∣moce, i. e. Comitatus Conventus, ejus duo sunt genera, quorum alterum hodie le Countie Court, alterum le Tourn del Viscount, olim Folkmore vulgo nuncupa∣tur: So as many times Turn' Vicecomit is is expressed under the name of Curia Comitatus, because it extended through the whole County; and therefore in the Red Book of the Exchequer, amongst the Laws of King H. 1. Cap. 8. De Ge∣neralibus Placitis Comitatuum, it is thus contained, viz. Sicut antiqua fuerat institutione forma∣tum, salutari Regis Imperio vera est re∣cordatione firmatum Generalia Comita∣tuum Placita certis locis & vicibus, & definito tempore per singulas anni provin∣cias convenire debere, nec ullis ultra fa∣tigationibus agitari, nisi propria Legis ne∣cessitas,
vel commune Regni commodum saepius adjiciant. Intersint autem Episcopi, Comites, Vicedomini, Vicarii, Centenarii, Aldermanni, Praefecti, Praepositi, Barones, Vavassores, Tingrevii, & caeteri terrarum Domini diligenter intendentes, ne malorum impunitas, aut gravionum pravitas, vel judicum subversio solita miseros laceratione confiniant: Agantur itaque primo, debita verae Christianitatis jura; secundo, Regis placita, postremo, causae singulorum, &c. Debet enim Sherysmote (i.e. The Sheriff's Tourn) bis; Hundreda & Wapentachia, (i.e. The County Courts) duodecies in anno congregari. By the Laws of King Edward before the Conquest, the first which succeeded King Alured, it is thus Enacted, Praeposi∣tus quisque, 1. Vicecomes, Saxonice Ge∣resa, Anglice Sheriff, ad quartam circiter septimanam frequentem populi concionem celebrato, cuique jus dicito aequabile, lites{que} singulas cum dies condicti adveniant diri∣mito. Hereby it appeareth, that common Pleas between Party and Party were holden in the County Court every Month, which agreeth with Magna Charta and other Statutes, and continu∣eth at this day.
And by Stat. 2 E. 6. Cap. 25. It is provided that no County Court shall be longer deferred than one Month from Court to Court, Coke's 2 Inst. 69, 70, 71. In the County Court, though the Plea be holden therein by a Justicies, the King's Writ, yet it is no Court of Re∣cord, for of a Judgment therein, there lieth a Writ of false Judgment, and not a Writ of Error, Coke's 2 Inst. 140. By Stat. Gloucester, cap. 8. Purview est ensement, que les Visconts pled' en Counties les Plees de Trespasse, auxy come ils soi∣lent estre Pledes. Et que nul neit de∣sormes Briefs de Trespass devant Justices, sil ne affirm per foy, que le biens emportes vailent 40 s. al meins, &c. En Countie Courts is there put for an Example, for the Hundred Court and the Court Baron being no Courts of Record, are also within this Law. Writs of Trespass are there put also for an Example, for Debt, Detinue, Cove∣nant, and the like. But if the Trespass be Vi & Armis, where the King upon the Conviction of the Defendant, shall have a Fine, there the Sheriff in his County cannot hold Plea of it; for no Court can assess a Fine, but a Court of Record, because a Capias to take the Body is incident to it: For it
is a Rule in Law, Quod placita de trans∣gressione contra pacem Regis in Regno An∣gliae vi & armis factis secundum legem & consuetudinem Angliae, sine Brevi Regis placitari non debent. Neither shall he hold Plea of Tres∣pass for taking away of Charters con∣cerning Inheritance or Freehold; for it is a Maxim in Law, Quod Placita con∣cernent' Chart', seu script' liberum tene∣mentum tangentia in aliquibus Curiis quae recordum non habent secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni Angliae sine Brevi Re∣gis placitari non debent. And as inferiour Courts which are not of Record regularly cannot hold Plea of Debt, &c. or Damages but under 40 s. so the Superiour Courts that are of or Damages regularly, unless the Sum amount to 40 s. or above. Ne dignitas Curiarum illarum vilesceret, & ne mate∣riam superaret opus. Now as the Superiour Courts ought not to incroach upon the Inferiour, so the Inferiour Courts ought not to de∣fraud the Superiour Courts of those Causes that belong to them. For Ex∣ample, If in the County Court, or other Inferiour Courts they shall divide a Debt of 20 l. into several Pleints under 40 s. in this case the Defendant may
plead the same to the Jurisdiction of the Court, or may have a prohibition to stay that indirect Suit; for as an ancient Record saith, Contra jus com∣mune est, petere integrum Debitum exce∣dens summam 40 s. per diversas querelas, per parcellas, scilicet 39 s. 11 d. ob. q. The Maxim of the Common Law is, Quod placita de catallis, debitis, &c. quae summam 40 s. attingunt, vel eam exce∣dunt, secundum legem & consuctudinem Angliae sine Brevi Regis placitari nondebent: And these Words, sine Brevi Regis, are material Words; for by the King's Writ, the Sheriff in the Country Court may hold Plea of Goods, debt, &c. above the Value of 40 s. and by force of the King's Writ of Justicies, he may hold Plea of an Obligation of what Sum soever; For Example, of 1000 Marks, the which Writ is in the na∣ture of a Commission to the Sheriff to hold Plea of Debt above 40 s. The words of which Writ are, Rex Vicecom', salutem: Praecipimus tibi quod Justicies, A. quod juste & sine dilatione reddat B. mille Marcas, quas ei debet, ut dicit, &c. ne amplius inde clamorem audiamus pro defectu Justiciae. By force of which Writ he may hold Plea of the same, and the Process therein is Attachment by his Goods, &c. but no Capias, and
altho' the Power of the Court by this Writ is in this particular inlarged, and the Words of the Writ to the She∣riff are quod Justicies, &c. Yet is not the Jurisdiction of the Court as con∣cerning the Judicature thereof altered, for those Words of the Writ do not, nor can make the Sheriff Judge of that Court, in that particular Case, for that were to alter the Juristiction and Judicature of the Court, whereof by the Common Law the Suitors be Judges, which cannot be altered but by Act of Parliament: The Plaintiff may remove this Plea without Cause shewed, but the Defendant cannot without shewing of Cause. Also by force of a Justicies to the Sheriff, he may hold Plea of a Tres∣pass Vi & Armis. See the Register and F. N. B. divers forms of Writs of Justicies in many Actions. The Sheriff may also hold Plea in a Replevin of Goods and Chattels, above the value of 40 s. For if it be by Writ the Words of the Writ be Rex Vice∣com' &c. Praecipimus tibi quod juste, & sine dilatione replegiari facias B. averi sua, Or Bona & Catalla sua, quae D. cepit & injuste detinet, ut dicit, &c. ne am∣plius inde clamorem audiamus pro defect Justiciae. By force of which Writ
which is in nature of a Commission, the Sheriff may deliver the Beasts, or Goods and Chattels of what Value so∣ever. And if the Replevin be by Plaint in the County Court, the Sheriff by the Statute of Marlebridge, may hold Plea of what Value soever. The like Writs in the nature of a Commission directed to Sheriffs, are the Admeasurement of Pasture, Recaption, Nativo habendo, and many others. The said Words Vailent 40 s. al meins, have received this Construction, that the same must so appear to be of Value in the Plaintiffs Count; for it is not suf∣ficient that it appears by Verdict the Sum is under 40 s. For Example, if the Plaintiff count in Trespass, Debt, De∣tinue, Covenant, &c. to the damage of 40 s. and the Jury find the Damages under 40 s. yet the Plaintiff shall have no Judgment, albeit in truth the Case de jure belong'd to the Inferior Courts. And it appeareth by this Act, that the County Court hath no Jurisdiction to hold Plea de Plagis & Maihemiis, of Wounds and Maihems; but those Pleas must be determined in the King's Higher Courts; but of Battery (with∣out wounding or maihming) this Act proveth that the Country Court hath Jurisdiction.
Albeit this Statute speaketh only of the Execution of the Body, yet might he have had at the making of this Act a Fieri Fac', and afterwards by the Stat. W. cap. 45. he may have an Elegit, for this Branch being in the Affirmative, doth not restrain the Plaintiff to take any other Remedy, Coke's 2 Inst. 311, 312, and 313. In all Writs directed to Sheriffs con∣cerning the County Court, the King saith, In Comitatu suo; and in all Re∣turns of Exigents made by him, he saith, Ad Comitatum meum tentum, &c. and the Stile of the Court proveth the same also. And by Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 13. it is provided, That the Sheriff of Denbigh shall keep his Shire-Court at the Shire-Hall in the said County, &c. by which (as by many other Parliaments it appeareth) That the County or Shire Court, is the Court of the She∣riff, altho' the Suitors be there Judges in some Cases. And as the Custody of the Entries and Rolls thereof do belong to the Of∣fice of the Sheriff, he shall answer for them as immediate Officer to the Court. And therefore the Sheriff shall appoint Clerks under him in his County Court, for whom he shall answer at his Peril. The same Law is of the Sheriffs Tourne,
Coke's 4 Rep. 191. Mitton's Case. Resolved, That if the Plea be holden by Writ or without Writ, the Suitors are Judges. The Reason why the Writ is directed to the Lord or Sheriff, is because the Court Baron is the Lord's Court, and the County Court is the Sheriff's Court. And in case they hold Plea by force of the King's Writ, it doth not change the Nature and Juris∣diction of the Court. For as these without Writs are not Courts of Re∣cord, so when the Plea is holden by Writ, the Courts are of the same Nature. For upon a Judgment given in both Cases, a VVrit of false Judgment lieth, and not a Writ of Error. But it is true the King may create a new Court, and appoint new Judges in it; but after the Court is established and created, the Judges of the Court ought to determine Matters in the Court. And therefore neither the Lords of Ancient Demesne, nor the Court Baron, nor the Sheriff in the County Court, when the Plea is holden by Writ of Right, Justicies, Ad∣measurement, &c. are Judges; but the Suitors, who by the Common Law are the Judges of the Court. But in some Cases the Sheriff is made Judge by Par∣liament, as in the Redisseisin by the Stat.
of Merton, cap. 3. And all his proceeding by force of that Act, is of Record; and a Writ of Error doth lie of a Judg∣ment given against him, Coke's 6 Rep. 11, 12. Jentleman's Case. In some Actions the Defendant shall be fined in one Court, and but amer∣ced in another, and yet the Offence shall be all one, as in a Writ of Re∣caption, if it be brought in the Com∣mon Pleas, and Judgment be there given, the Defendant shall be fined and imprisoned. But if the Writ be brought in the County Court, and the Defen∣dant be convict before the Sheriff in the County, the Judgment shall not be, Quod capiatur, quia nulla Curia, quae Re∣cordum non habet, potest imponere finem, neque aliquem mandare carceri, quia ista spectant tantummodo ad Curias de Recordo; and therefore in such cases he shall be only amerced, Coke's 8 Rep. 60. Beecher's Case. By Stat. W. 1.33. 3 E. 1. No She∣riff shall suffer Barretors, or Maintain∣ers of Quarrels, or Stewards of great Lords, or other (unless Attorney for his Lord) to make Suit, or to give Judgment in the Counties, or to pro∣nounce them, if he be not required so to do by all the Suitors, and Attorneys
of the Suitors there present, in Pain that both the Sheriff and they shall be grievously punished by the King. By Stat. 19 H. 7.24. the Shire Court for Sussex shall be holden, one time at Chichester, and the next at Lewis, alter∣nis vicibus, in pain, that the Court otherwise kept, and the things therein transacted, shall be void. By Stat. 2, 3 E. 6.25. County Courts shall be adjourned from Month to Month and no longer. The Sheriff of Northumberland shall keep his County Court at Alnwicke, and not elsewhere, Stat. 2, 3 E. 6.25. This Court is incident to the Office of Sheriff, and cannot be divided from it by Letters Patent, or otherwise, but by Act of Parliament, Coke's 4 Rep. 33. Mitton's Case. See the Court of the Tourn, and the Court Leet, and after in the Court of the Hundred, and Court Baron. See before in The County Court, Page 228.
To the Court of the Hundred. AFter King Alfred had divided the Realm into Shires, called so from the Saxon Scyran, signifying to cut, he divided the Shires into smaller Parts called Lathes, of the Word Ge∣lathian, which is to Assemble together; Others, Tythings, because there were in each of them Ten Persons, whereof each one was Surety or Pledge for the others good a bearing; Others, Hundreds, because they contained Ju∣risdiction over one Hundred Men or Pledges dwelling in Two, Three or more Parishes, Boroughs or Towns, in which he appointed Administration of Justice severally among them of the same Hundred. In Stat. of Marlebridge cap. 11. hun∣dredum is taken pro Visu Franci Plegii, so as the Sense is, That he who hath Tenements in the Town, and in some other View of Frankpledge of some other Lord, or in divers Views of Frankpledge he shall not need to come to any other, but where he is conver∣sant, and Hundreds there are named, because Sheriffs keep their Tourns in every Hundred.
If a Man hath a House and Family in two Leets, he shall be taken to be conversant where his Bed is. If a man hath a House and Family in Two Hundreds, yet he shall do his Suit to the Tourn or Leet where his Person is commorant, Coke's 2. Inst. 122. A Man may have a Writ to the Sheriff for discharging him from com∣ing to the Sheriff's Tourn, or Hun∣dred, or Leet, or other Place, than in the Leet or Precinct of the Hundred where he dwelleth; and if the Sheriff distrain him to come contrary to the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 10. and a Writ be delivered to him, he shall have an Attachment against the Sheriff. All the Tenants in Ancient De∣mesne may have this Writ: And if a Man be distrained to do Suit twice in the Year appertaining to the Leet, he shall have a Writ upon Magna Char∣ta, but it is otherwise of the Hundred, because Suit is there from There Weeks to Three Weeks, Vide F. N. B. 356, to 360. Articuli super Chartas, 28 E. 1. Baily∣wicks and Hundreds shall not be let to Farm at over-great Sums whereby the People may be over-charged to make Contributions to such Farms.
See the Statute, and in Court of the Leet and County Court. See before in The Court of the Hun∣dred, Pag. 233. To Court Baron. THE Court Baron is so called be∣cause amongst the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, it is said, Ba∣rones vero qui suam habent Curiam de suis hominibus, &c. taking his Name of the baron who was Lord of the Ma∣nor, or for that properly in the Eye of the Law, it hath relation to the Freeholders, who are Judges of the Court. And in Ancient Charters and Records the Barons of London, and the Barons of the Cinque-Ports signi∣fie the Freemen of London, and of the Cinque-Ports, Coke's 1 Inst. 58. a. The Lord of a Manor that hath a Court Baron of common Right, and by Course of Law, all Pleas therein are determinable by Wager of Law, and yet by Prescription the Lord may prescribe to determine them by Jury.
In a Writ of Right Patent directed to the Lord of the Manor, Plea shall be holden of Freehold, and the Court in that Case may give an Oath; for there is the King's Writ of Praecipe quod reddat, Coke's 2 Inst. 143. Before the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 22. Lords would distrain their Free Tenants to come and shew their Deeds, especially the Original Deed whereby they might know, by what Rent and Services the Tenancy was held of them, and obliquely many times perusing the Deeds (which are the Secrets and Sinews of a Man's Land) brought in question the Title of the Freehold it self. Another Mis∣chief was, That the Lords of Court Barons, Hundreds, &c. where the Sui∣tors were Judges, would constrain them to swear between Party and Party; both which Mischiefs are taken away by the said Statute, Coke's 2 Inst. 142. Fines for Beaupleader are yet paid in some Court Barons, Coke's 2 Inst. 123. Copyhold Lands cannot be trans∣ferred but by Surrender into the Hands of the Lord, according to the Custom of the Manor, Coke's 4 Rep. 25. Copy∣hold Cases.
Severance by the Lord; shall not destroy the Estate of the Freeholder, ibidem. The Grantee having but one single Copyhold, cannot hold Court, Coke's 5▪ Rep. 27. Copyhold Cases. Underwood and Herbage may by Custom be granted by Copy. And when a Copyholder shall alledge Custom, and when and how he ought to prescribe, See Coke's 4 Rep. 31, 32. Copyhold Cases. The Attorney in surrendring a Co∣pyhold, ought to pursue the Custom strictly, Coke's 4 Rep. 76. Comb's Case. No Steward or Deputy-Steward of any Leet or Court Baron shall make Benefit to the Value of 12 d. or more, by colour of any Grant made of the Profits of such Court, in Pain to be dis∣abled to be Steward in any Court, and to forfeit 40 l. between King and Prosecutor, Stat. 1 Jac. 1.5. Of the Diversity of Customs of Ma∣nors, and other Matters concerning this Court, you may read at large in Coke's 4 Rep. Copyhold Cases, Shepherd's Court-keeper's Guide, and others. If a customary Tenant, who is out of the Realm, shall not be bound by Nonclaim upon a Fine which is a matter of Record, à fortiori, he shall not be
bound by Nonclaim upon a Descent, which is a Matter in Fact, Coke's 8 Rep. Sir Richard Letchford's Case. See before in The Court Baron, Page 235. To the Court of the Coroner. STat. 3 H. 7. gives the Coroner a Fee of Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence super visum corporis of the Goods of the Murderer, Coke's 2 Inst. 176. See in County Court. See before in Court of the Coroner, Page 237. To the Court of Escheator. BY Stat. W. 1. cap. 24. No Seisure can be made of Lands or Tene∣ments into the King's Hands, before Office found; But if the Sheriff seise Lands by Commandment of the Justi∣ces, then is the Sheriff excused, tho' the Justices therein did Err; and if he did of his own Head, then had the Par∣ty Remedy by Assize against the She∣riff, and therefore the Party was re∣quired
to sue out a Writ to the Justices to certifie if the Seisure were by their Commandment. If the Escheator taketh an Office vir∣tute Officii, he may seise the Land; but if of his own Head he seise the Land without Office, that Seisure is colore Officii, and an Assise is maintain∣able against him; & sic de caeteris, Coke's 2 Inst. 206, 207. Upon the Assise the Party shall re∣cover the Land and double Damages, and the Escheator shall be in the grie∣vous Mercy of the King, ibid. Where before Stat. 34. E. 3.36 E. 3. and 8 H. 6. the Party grieved by any Office, might have had his Travers, or Monstrans de droit by Common Law, and where he was driven to his Peti∣tion, and how relieved by those Statutes, See Coke's 2 Inst. 688. Coke's 4 Rep. 54, 55. A Termer could not traverse an Of∣fice by the Common Law; but if it were found in the Office, he might have a Monstrans de droit; and so of o∣thers that had but Chattels Real. Where there is double matter of Re∣cord to intitle the King to a Chattel Personal, as an Attainder, and an Office that the Person attainted was possessed of a House, the Office may be Tra∣versed,
because Chattels Personal are Bona peritura, and cannot abide the de∣lay of a Petition, Coke's 2 Inst. 689. By Stat. Lincoln de Escheatoribus, the Escheator cannot seise before Office, ibidem. Houses and Lands which lie in Live∣ry, and whereof there is Profit present∣ly taken, the Party by finding the Of∣fice, is out of Possession. But of Rents, Commons, Advowsons, and other In∣heritances incorporeal, which lie in Grant, it is otherwise, Coke's 2 Inst. 694. Upon Attainder of Felony the King cannot be Entitled without Office; but if a special Office were found that the Husband had nothing but in Right of his Wife, there the Heir was not put to his Petition, Coke's 1 Rep. 50. Alton Wood's Case. Tenant for Life or Years of a Manor, shall have an Escheat, Coke's 2 Inst. 146. See before in The Court of Escheator Page 239.
To the Court of Admiralty. THERE is a Felony punishable by the Civil Law, because it is done upon the High Sea, as Pyracy, Robbery or Murder, whereof the Com∣mon Law did take no notice, because it could not be tryed by twelve Men. If this Piracy be tryed before the Lord Admiral in the Court of Admiralty ac∣cording to the Civil Law, and the Di∣linquent there attainted, yet shall it work no Corruption of Blood, nor For∣feiture of his Lands; otherwise it is if he be Attainted before Commissioners by force of the Stat. 28 Hen. 8. And Pi∣rate cometh from the Greek, , which signifieth a Rover at Sea. Vide Coke's 1 Inst. 391. a. If any Injury, Robbery, Felony, or other Offence be done upon the high Sea, Lex terrae extendeth not to it, therefore the Admiral hath Conusance thereof; and may proceed according to the Marine Law by Imprisonment of the Body, and other Proceedings as have been allowed by the Laws of the Realm, Coke's 2 Inst. 51.
The like of things done in a Foreign Kingdom, which shall be tryed before the Constable and Marshal, ibid. Wreck, are such Goods only which are cast and left upon the Land by the Sea. Flotsam is when a Ship is sunk, or otherwise perished, and the Goods float upon the Sea. Jetsam is when a Ship is in danger to sink, and for lightning the Ship the Goods are cast into the Sea, and afterwards, not∣withstanding the Ship perisheth. La∣gan, or rather Ligan, is when the Goods so cast into the Sea, and afterwards the Ship perisheth, and such Goods so cast, are so heavy that they sink to the bot∣tom, and the Mariners, to the intent to have them again, tie to them a Buoy or Cork, or such thing which will not sink. And none of these are called Wrecks, unless by the Sea put upon Land. And so Flotsam, Jetsam and Lagan being cast upon the Land, shall pass by the Grant of Wreck, Coke, Part 5.106. Vid. Termes del Ley. Wreck of Sea therefore is when the Goods are by the Sea cast upon the Land, and so infra Comitatum, whereof the Common Law taketh Conusance; but the other three are all upon the Sea, and therefore of them the Admi∣ral hath Jurisdiction, Bracton lib. 3. cap. 3.
When Wreck is claimed by Prescri∣ption (as by Law it may be) the Plead∣ing is Bona Wreccata super mare & ad ter∣ram project'. The Soil upon which the Sea flow∣eth and ebbeth, scil. between the high Water and low-Water-Mark, may be Parcel of the Manor belonging to a Subject; and yet resolved in Lacy's Case, Trin. 25 Eliz. That when the Sea floweth, and hath plenitudinem maris, the Admiral shall have Jurisdiction of every thing done upon the Sea be∣tween the High-Water-Mark and Low-Water-Mark, by the ordinary Course of the Sea, as of Felony, &c. Yet when the Sea doth ebb, the Land may be∣long to a Subject. The King shall have Flotsam, Jet∣sam and Lagan, when the Ship perish∣eth, or the Owners of the Goods are unknown. A Man may have Flotsam and Jet∣sam by the King's Grant, and Flotsam by Prescription, as before is said. Resolved that the Stat. of Westminst. 1. cap. 4. by which it is Enacted, That of Wreck of the Sea it is agreed, That where a Man, Dog or Cat escape alive out of the Ship or Vessel, not any thing within them shall be accounted Wreck; but the Goods shall be saved and kept by the View of the
Sheriff, Coroner, or King's Bailiff, &c. So that if any sue for those Goods, and can prove that they belonged to him, or that they perished in his keeping within a year and a day; they shall be restored to him without delay, &c. was but a Declarati∣on of the Common Law. And there∣fore all that which is provided as to Wreck, extendeth also to Flotsam, Jet∣sam and Lagan. The Common Law gave all these three, as also Estray, Treasure-Trove, and the like, to the King; for when no Man can claim Property in Goods, the King shall have them by his Prero∣gative: But Wreck may belong to the Subject by Grant from the King, or by Prescription. Flotsam, Jetsam and Lagan, so long as upon the Sea, do not belong to the King, but occupanti conceduntur, eo quod constare non possit ad quam regionem essent applicanda. And Wreck as well as Estrays of an Infant, Feme-Covert, Executrix, a Man in Prison, or beyond Sea, if proclaimed, and none claim them within a Year and a Day, are bounden by the Law, Coke's Rep. lib. 5.106, 108. Sir Henry Constable's Case.
Rex pro salute animae suae, & ad malas consuetudines abolendas concessit, quod bona in mari periclitata, non perdantur nomine Wrecci, quando aliquis homo aut bestia vi∣vus de navi evaserit. Veies le Stat. W. Primer Cap. 4. And Coke's 2 Inst. 167, 168. The Sheriff ought to sell bona peritu∣ra within the Year. And the Subject must prove his Property in them with∣in the Year and Day: But the King may claim when he will, and make proof. If Treasure be found in the Sea, the Finder shall have it at this day. But otherwise it is now of Treasure. Trove upon Land. See Coke's 2 Inst. 168. If Wreck be not rightfully seized, but taken by wrong-doers, the Party may have a Commission of Oyer and Terminer to enquire of them. Wreck shall be tried before the King's Justices at Common Law, Coke's 2 Inst. 168. Coke's 4. Inst. 134, 154. The Coroner is to enquire of Wreck, Coke's 4 Inst. 271. and 3 Inst. Title Ap∣peals. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. A ARchbishops and Bishops Consistory Courts, Page 42 Archdeacons Court, Page 44 Aulnager, Page 205 Admiralty Court, Page 292, 638 Aldermen and Mayors Court, Page 356 Anglesey Isle, Page 436 Anguila, Page 520 Antegoa, Page 524 B. BArons Court, Page 235 Band of Pensioners, Page 339 Bridge, Page 378 Bantam or Banda, Page 491
Bombaine, Page 491 Bermudas Islands, Page 515 Barbudas I. Page 519 Barbadoes I. Page 527 C. Convocation, Page 32 Court of Arches, Page 39 Court of Audience, Page 39 Court of the Faculties, Page 40 Court of Peculiars, Page 41 Consistory Courts of Archbishops & Bishops, Page 42 Court of the Archdeacon or his Commissa∣ry, Page 44 Court of Delegates, Page 44 Civil Government of England, Page 51 Court of the High Steward, Page 81, 539 Chancery High Court, Page 90 Court of extraordinary Jurisdiction, Page 93 Court of the Star-Chamber, Page 104 Court for Redness of Delays, Page 108 Court of Kings Bench, Page 113 Common Pleas Court, Page 121 Court of Exchequer, Page 127 Court of Inquiry to certifie untrue Accompts in the Exchequer. Page 140 Court of Equity in the Exchequer, Page 141, 544 Court of Justices of Assize & Nisi prius, Page 144 Court of Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Page 153
Court of special Justices of Oyer and Ter∣miner, Page 166 Colledges, Hospitals, &c. for charitable and lawful Purposes and Uses, Page 167 Court of Justices of Goal-delivery, Page 169 Court of Justices of the Forrest, Page 175 Court of Justices in Eyre, Page 193 Court of Justices of Trailbaston, Page 195 Court of Wards and Liveries, Page 196 Court of Ancient Demesne, Page 196, 559 Court of Commissioners of Sewers, Page 198, 569 Court of Commissioners upon the Statute of Bankrupts, Page 201, 573 Commissioners for Examination of Witnes∣ses, Page 203, 578 Court of the Sessions of the Peace, Page 210, 591 Court of Inquiry of the Defaults of the Justices of the Peace, Page 222 Court of the Tourn, Page 223, 595 Court Leet or View of Frankpledge, Page 224, 597 County Court, Page 228, 615 Court of the Hundred, Page 233, 630 Court Baron, Page 235, 632 Coroners Court, Page 237, 635 Court of Escheators and Commissioners for finding of Offices, Page 239, 635 Court of the Clerk of the Market, Page 241 Court of Pipowders, Page 246 Court of the Dutchy-chamber of Lanca∣ster at Westminster, Page 247 Courts of the County Palatin of Chester, Page 251
Court of the County Palatin of Durham, Page 252 Court of the County Palat. of Pembroke, Page 255 Courts of the Cinque▪ Ports, Page 256 Court of Stannaries in the County of De∣von and Cornwall, Page 261 Court of the Mayor of the Staple, Page 263 Court of the President and Council of Wales, Page 269 Court of Chivalry before the Constable and Marshal, Page 279 Colledge of Heralds, Page 283 Court of Admiralty, Page 292, 638 Court of Commission by force of the Statute 28 H. 8. Cap. 5. Page 298 Commissioners and others for Beacons, Signs of the Sea, Light houses, &c. Page 299 Court of the King of England, Page 308 Civil Government of the King's Court, Page 312 Compting-House, Page 314 Court of Green-Cloth, Page 315 Court of the Marshalsea, Page 321 Court of the Pallace, Page 322 Court of the Lord Steward, Treasurer and Comptroller of the King's House concern∣ing Felony, Page 324 Court of the Lord Steward of the King's House, or in his Absence, of the Treasurer, Comptroller and Steward of the Mar∣shalsea, Page 325 Court of the Queen of England, Page 341 Civil Government of the Queens Court, Page 342
Civil Government of Cities, Page 345 Civil Government of London, Page 348 Court of Hustings, Page 351 Court of Conscience, Page 354 Court of the Mayor and Aldermen, Page 356 Court of Orphans, Page 356 Court of Common Council, Page 357 Court of Wardmote Inquest, Page 358 Court of Halmote, Page 358 Chamberlain's Court for Apprentices, Page 359 Court of the Conservators of the Water and River of Thames, Page 360 Court of the Coroner in London, Page 360 Court of the Escheator in London, Page 360 Court of Policies and Assurances, Page 361 Custom-House, Page 379 Call or Creation of Serjeants, Page 393 Colledge of Civilians in London, Page 396 Colledge of Physicians in London, Page 400 Chartereux in London, Page 404 Cambridge City, Page 426 Civil Government of Villages, Page 431 Carolina, Page 512 Caribee Islands, Page 519 St. Christophers, Page 526 Court of First-fruits and Tenths, &c. Page 548 D. DIvine Law, Page 6 Delegates Court, Page 44 Durham County Palatine Court, Page 252
De Conservatore Treugarum, i. e. Indu∣ciarum, &c. Page 302 Dominica Island, Page 522 E. ENgland's Government, Page 22 Ecclesiastical Government of Eng∣land, Page 28 Executive power in Causes Ecclesiastical, Page 36 Executive power in Temporal Affairs, Page 80 Exchequer Court, Page 127 Eyre Justices Court, Page 193 Execution of Laws in each County, Page 222 Escheator's Court, Page 239 Ely's Royal Franchise, Page 254 Ecclesiastical Government of the King's Court, Page 308 Ecclesiastical Government of the Queen's Court, Page 341 Ecclesiastical Government of Cities, Page 344 Ecclesiastical Government of London, Page 347 Ecclesiastical Government of Villages, Page 431 English Plantations in Asia, Page 491 English Colonies in Africa, Page 492 English Plantations in America, Page 492 F. FUndamentals of the Laws, Page 8 Forrest Justices Court, Page 175 Franchise of Ely, Page 254
Franchise of Hexam and Hexamshire, Page 255 First-fruits and Tenths Ecclesiastical, Page 548 G. GOvernments in General, Page 1 Government of England, Page 22 Government Ecclesiastical of England, Page 28 Government civil of England, Page 51 Gaol-Delivery Justices Court, Page 169 Government of Counties in England, Page 207 Great Sessions in Wales, Page 270 Government Military of England, Page 275 Government Ecclesiastical of the King's Court, Page 308 Government civil of the King's Court, Page 312 Green-cloth Court, Page 315 Government Military of the King's Court, Page 338 Government of the Queen's Court, Page 341 Government Ecclesiastical of the Queen's Court, Page 341 Goveonment civil of the Queens Court, Page 342 Government of Cities, Page 344 Government Ecclesiastical of Cities, Page 344 Government civil of Cities, Page 345 Government Ecclesiastical of London, Page 347 Government civil of London, Page 348 Government Military of London, Page 363 General Post-Office, Page 381 Gresham Colledge in London, Page 402
Government of the two Universities, Page 415 Government of Boroughts in England, Page 430 Government of Villages in England, Page 430 Government Ecclesiastical of Villages, Page 431 Government civil of Villages, Page 431 Guernsey olim Servia, Page 437 Government of Scotland, Page 445 Government of Ireland, Page 463 Guinea, Page 492 Guardian of England, Page 540 H. HUmane Law what, Page 7 High Commission Court, Page 36 High Court of Parliament, Page 51, 535 High Stewards Court, Page 81, 539 High Court of Chancery, Page 90 Hundred Court, Page 233, 630 Heralds Colledge, Page 283 Hustings Court, Page 351 Halmote Court, Page 358 Hebrides Islands, Page 460 I. JUstices of Assize & Nisi-prius Court, Page 144 Justices of Oyer & Terminer Court, Page 153 Justices of Gaol-delivery Court, Page 169 Justices of the Forrest Court, Page 175 Justices in Eyre's Court, Page 193
Justices of Trailbastons Court, Page 195 Inns of Chancery, Page 383 Inns of Court, Page 384 Inns of Court manner of keeping Christ∣mas, Page 390 Judges, Page 394 Islands adjacent unto England, Page 433 Jersey olim Caesarea, Page 437 Insula Vectis or Vectae, Page 439 Ireland, Page 463 Jamaica, Page 530 K. KING, Page 22 King's Bench Court, Page 113 King's Swanherd, Page 204, 587 King's Aulnager, Page 205, 590 King of England's Court, Page 308 Knight Marshal, Page 320 King's great Wardrobe, Page 332 St. Katherine's, Page 378 Keeping Christmas in the Inns of Court, Page 390 L. LAws in General, Page 4 Law Eternal, Page 4 Law of Reason, Page 5 Law Divine, Page 6 Law Humane, Page 7
Law fundamentals, Page 8 Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, Page 45 Leet Court, Page 224 Law study, Page 383 London, Page 346 Lindisfarne, Page 441 M. MOney collected for Houses of Corre∣ction or for the Poor, Page 166 Mayor of the Staple's Court, Page 263 Military Government of England, Page 275 Maritime Power of England, Page 287 Marshalsea Court, Page 321 Military Government of the King's Court, Page 338 Mayor and Aldermens Court, Page 356 Military Government in London, Page 363 Mootings in the Inns of Court, Page 388 Mootings in the Inns of Chancery, Page 390 Manner of holding Parliaments in the Inns of Court, Page 392 Man Isle, Page 433 Mariland, Page 507 Montserrat, Page 521 Mevis or Nevis, Page 524 N. NAvy Office, Page 295 Norwich City, Page 411 Newfoundland, Page 494
New England, Page 496 New York, Page 500 New Jersey, Page 504 Nevis or Mevis, Page 524 O. OFfice of Pleas in the Exchequer, Page 142 Office of Tents, Page 335 Office of the Robes to the King, Page 335 Officers of the Robes to the Queen, Page 342 Orphans Court. Page 356 Office of the Ordnance, Page 368 Office of the Warden of the Mint, Page 373 Office of Records in the Tower, Page 375 Oxford, Page 415 Orcades, Page 459 P. PRivy Council, Page 22 Prerogative Court of Canterbury, Page 40 Punishments by Ecclesiastical Courts, Page 47 Punishments Ecclesiastical peculiar to the Clergy, Page 49 Parliament High Court, Page 51, 535 Pipowders Court, Page 246 Pembroke Palatine's Cuort, Page 255 President and Council in the North, Page 258 Principality of Wales, Page 266 President and Council of Wales Court, ibid.
Port Courts, Page 298 Parliament-holding in the Inns of Court, Page 322 The Palace, ibid. Post-Office General, Page 381 Physicians Colledge in London, Page 400 Plantations in Asia, Page 491 Plantations in Africa, Page 492 Plantations in America, ibid. Pensylvania, Page 505 Protector of England, Page 540 Q. QUeen of England's Court, Page 341 R. ROyal Franchise of Ely, Page 254 River of Thames Conservator's Court, Page 360 S. STar-chamber Court, Page 104 Swanherd, Page 204, 587 Sessions of the Peace Court, Page 210 Stannaries Court in the County of Devon and Cornwall, Page 261 Lord Steward's Court, Page 324, 325 Sheriffs Court in London, Page 352 Serjeants Inns Page 392
Serjeants Call or Creation, Page 393 Sion Colledge, Page 403 Schools in London, Page 405 Southwark, ibid. Sorlings, Page 440 Scotland, Page 445 Scottish Isles or the Lesser-Islands near Scotland, Page 459 Schetland I. ibid. T. TRyals Ecclesiastical in civil Cau∣ses, Page 46 Tryals Ecclesiastical in criminal Cau∣ses, ibid. The Tourn, Page 223 Tower of London, Page 365 Tangier, Page 492 V. UNiversities, Page 415 Virginia, Page 510 St. Vincent, Page 523, 260 W. WItnesses Examination by Commis∣sioners, Page 203 Wardens Courts, &c. Page 260
Wales, 266 Wardrobe of the King, 332 Wardmote Inquest, 358 Westminster City, 406 Wight Island, 439 Y. YEomen of the Guard, 340 FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 14. line 11. read Escheators. p. 17. l. 31. r. the. p. 21. l ult for of the Laws of England, r. of the Jame. p 25. l. 11. the Comma at without Warrant. p. 57. l. 4. r. Roy. p. 69. l. 4. r. Martial. p. 74. l. 23. r. The Stat of. p. 78. l. 1. r. Sess. 2. cap. 4. p. 102. l. 20. r. by a Deputy. p 114. l. 12. r. Westminster. p. 133. l. 4. r. Auditeth. p. 136. l. 13. r. 2d. p. 141. l ult. r. 4. Instit. p. 171. l. 10. r. plevisable. p. 182. l. 7. r. circa. l. 3. for nolucrint r. vlrint. p. 185. l. 22. r: belong. p. 190. l. 15. r. nor. p. 193. l. 19. r. of a Commission. p. 201. l. 24. r. Banque. p. 307. l. 15. dele in. p. 209. l. 18. dele and. p. 225. l. 27. r. Easter. p. 243. l. 10. r. Drachme. l. 17. r. Avoir. p. 275. l. 15. r. Pay. p. 276. l. 21. r. were heretofore. p. 279. l. 13. r. scale. p. 280. l. 5. r. seale. l. 7. r. surcease. l. 13. surcease. 281. l. 4. r. fact', l. 16. r. Foy, p. 291. l. 3. r. 62432. pounds. p. 298. l. 19. r. 4 Instit. 147. p. 301. r. Lynne. p. 302. l. 6. r. Raised. p. 303. l. 24. the Comma at concitat. p. 304. l. 27. r. Foreign p. 306. l. 23. r. to that Sin. p. 307. the Com∣ma at Tacitus. p. 327. l. 26. r. stick. p. 350. l. 21. r. Camera Regis, Reipublicae Cor, totius Angliae Epitome p. 353. l. 6. dele and if they be not Inrolled. p. 407. l. 13 r. secular. p. 411. l. 17. for ortam r. ortum. p. 463. l. ult. r. called. p. 464. l. 24. r. Belfast. p. 468. l. 8. r. Universities one. p. 476. l. 27. r. Ego. p. 486. l. 6. r. Alienigena. l. 19. r. 25. p. 510. l. 27. r. as. p. 564 r. Plea. p. 565. l. 4. r. F. N. B. 27, 28, l. 7. r. 100. p. 570. l. 29. r. new framed. p 579. l. 15. r. Testmoignes l. ult. r. Bokland. p. 607. l. 25. r. Letae.
