D1855 R229803 99895701 153177
POSTSCRIPT TO HUSBANDRY Anatomiz'd OR, An Addition to the Enquiry into the present Manner of Order∣ing, Dressing, and Manur∣ing the GROUND in SCOTLAND For most Part; Whereby it is further Explained and Applyed, and several good Effects that may follow thereupon hinted at. By the Author of the first. Edinburgh, Printed by John Reid, at his Printing-house in Bell's-Wynd 1698.
Courteous READER, NOthing under the Sun is more the De∣sire of my Soul, than the Universal Good of all Men living, and for those of this Kingdom in particular, being fully perswaded of the Truth of that Maxime, No Man is born for himself; But the Sense of my own Weakness, has long ob∣structed my undertaking any thing in a Publick Manner, pursuant to my Inclina∣tions: But of late having maturely consi∣dered the many mistakes this Kingdom doth generally ly under, both in Relation to Husbandry, and several other Things, I have adventured to make an Enquiry into the Manner of Ordering and Dressing the Ground in Scotland, and has Essayed to give some Directions, for further Im∣provement thereof, and further to ex∣plain and apply what is said, I have now added these following Sheets. The Summ
of all that I have both first and last said, doth terminat in this, That if every one would take such Measures as easily they may, the Honour, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may in a short time be ad∣vanced to double of what it is at present; This may seem a very incredible Asserti∣on, but at prosent I shall no further insist in proving thereof. The Calcula∣tion being made already, & a brief Hint given of the Means and Ways how it may be Effected: But in the mean time, (I say) if it be True, it is worth the noticeing, and if it be false, it may easily be demonstrated to be so, Such as have any thing to object against what is said, or would have it farther explained, I shall endeavour to satisfie. So long as I abide in Town, I shall attend at the Flanders Coffee-house for that end, betwixt the hours of 10 and 12 in the Forenoon, and 5 and 6 at Night. I could gladly wish every Propriator and Possessor of Lands
in Scotland, had Copies of this Treatise, which you may have at the foresaid Coffee∣house, at a reasonable Price, but to give all of you Copies gratis, my Circumstance do not allow, neither know I any Obli∣gation on me so to do. But that I may go as great a length this way as possible, without manifest prejudice to my self, I shall leave two or three Copies of this Postscript, for Publick Use, at every Coffee house in Town; And in what you can further desire of me in Reason, your Commands shall be willingly obeyed. Farewell.
Postscript SINCE I published these foregoing Sheets, I had occasion to discourse with severals on that Subject, and partly have learned what Entertain∣ment they are like to meet with: Some indeed seem to favour my Opi∣nion beyond my Expectation, and none that I have yet met with, do disprove of any thing I have therein proposed, except that concerning Housing of Sheep; And to tell the truth, any Arguments they have yet adduc∣ed to prove their Point, are so far from making me alter my Opinion, that I am rather thereby confirmed in the Truth of what I have said: Ne∣vertheless I find I am not fully under∣stood by any, nor the Project receiv∣ed with that Applause I humbly con∣ceive it deserveth. This may seem a
great peice of Vanity in me to assert, however I hope to make it manifest beyond Contraversie: For I doubt not to assert by following the Measures, I have proposed, the Honour, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may be thereby doubled at least. Perhaps it may be asked, why I did not assert as much in the preceed∣ing Sheets? My Reason was, I know Landlords are generally too severe upon their Tenents, and if they see them in a thriving Condition, they either heighten their-Rent, or oblige them to remove, so that Farmers are altogether discouraged to make any Improvement whatsoever; Wherefore I thought it needless for me to menti∣on the Landlords profit by this pro∣ject, that being a thing that he would see to of his own accord; And I endevoured only to shew in general, what benefite may be made by this Project, leaving the Landlord and
Tenent to share it betwixt themselves. Yet in the 43 page, I gave an oblique hint at the Landlords profit, but I find General Doctrine is not the best; I humbly conceive, it may contribute more to the propagating of this Pro∣ject, to speak a little more particu∣larly to the point, and that not only by improving of Ground, but also the Effects that may follow thereupon, this being a feasible Way for making a Stock, its certain that Stock may be improven also. But I say, seeing Landlord and Te∣nent must concur in the prosecution of what is here proposed, both must share of the benefite, otherwayes it cannot be expected they will unani∣mously push it on; Therefore in the first place, I would advise the Land∣lord to give the Tenent good security, that he nor his shall not be obliged to remove for some three, four or five score years, if not to all Generations,
hereby the Tenent has Encourage∣ment, to make what Improvement he pleaseth, the benefite is his own: On the other hand, I would have the Te∣nent obliging himself, and his Heirs and Successors, to pay at the end of every seven years, one years Rent be way of Entry or Fine, over and above the yearly Rent he now payeth. I fancy at this the Tenent maketh an∣swer for himself, protesting this is too hard for him to do; But I'm afraid the Landlord be of another Mind a∣none: However good Tenent, I would advise you to give the Landlord no less, providing you get security for continuing as above said, (on other Terms I will not desire you) And I promise, if you follow my Direction, you shall not repent it. When I desire you to give out a Sixpence, if it bring in half a Crown, you sustain no loss: But so it is, every Sixpence you give out this way, shall profit you no less, after the first seven years are over.
In the 27 page, I suppose a Farmer possessing a Room of sixty Aikers, to have alwise fourty of it in Corn, on half Croft, the other half Out-field and other 20 Aikers in Grass. By the Corn he must pay his Rent, for according to the common way of keeping Cattle on Dale Ground, little or no profit is had of them, as is shewed page 29; Now if by the profit of fourty Aikers of Corn, you are able to pay 300 Merks of Rent, then by the profit of 26 or 27, you may pay 200 Merks: Therefore leave one third of your Corn-Land Grass, and you shall pay no [more but 200 Merks for the said two thirds you have in Corn, unless I let you see a Visible Way how you may get the o∣ther third hundred Merk payed, by and attour the Increase you formerly had upon the same quantity of ground. The first year you leave the third of your Corn-Land Grass, you save
13 or 14 Bolls of Grain, wherewith you used to sow it; You also save the Labour of as many Aikers, which with the price of the Seed, may be reckoned as many pounds Sterling; With this Money I would have you to make an Orchyeard, as page 34: Then take the whole Dung you used to lay upon 6 or 7 Aikers of your Croft, and lay it upon 3 Aikers only, this three Aikers I think may be supposed to produce two Bolls more a peece, than what they did formerly, and in respect you are at no more Expence of Seed and Labour of an Aiker that produceth ten Bells, than if it produ∣ced three, except Threshing, and the Straw will do more than pay that Cost, wherefore I reckon you save 6 Boils free profit on this three Aikers, this six Bolls 5 pound per Boll, pays 30 lib of your third hunder Merks, so 36 lib. 13 ss. 4 d. remains unpayed for that year, which the Landlord shall spare
till you can pay it with the product of the Ground. The second year dung other three Aikers, on which you may also have two Bolls profit a peece, the first three Aikers continue to have two Bolls more than ordinar for four years. so you have twelve Bolls profit this year; which pays your third hunder Merks, except 6 lib. 13 ss. 4 d. this added to what remained unpayed last year, makes in all 43 lib.6 ss. 8 d. The third year you take in other three Aikers after the same manner, on which ye have the like product, which makes eighteen Bolls this year, which payes the third hunder Merks, and 23 lib. 6 ss. 8 d. more, so nothbing remains of your by gone Rent, except 20 lib. The fourth year you take in other three Aikers, on which with these nine already mentioned, you have 24 Bolls profit, which pays your third hunder Merks, which the 20 lib. of by gone Rent, and 50 Merks more;
Let this be laid by towards paying your Fine. The fifth year dung that which you dunged the first year, and so continue to go over the four parts of your Croft Successively. The three years that are yet to expire before the end of the seventh year, you have 24 Bolls profit per annum on yar 12 Aikers of Croft, whic yeeldeth 80 Merks a year more than your third hunder Merks, three time 80 and the 50 Merks laid by the fourth year, is 290 Merks, which payeth your fine all to 10 Merks, and to pay this 10 Merks with, you have all the profit of your Orchyeard, the Roots and Kail you have in it, may be more profitable than ten Bolls of Grain for your Fa∣mily, which may be reckoned fiftie pounds; The Flay of an Aiker and half, may be worth eighteen poiunds. A Crown a peece of twelve Sheep keeped on the Stuble of your Orch∣yeard, is 36 pounds. Honey worth
24 lib. this in all makes 123 lib. And when your Fruit-trees grow up, you may have as much profit of them, be∣side the Out-field all this while will be growing better by degrees, as well as your Croft, so that by this time you may have a Boll per Aiker more on it than ordinar: And your Grafs being both better, and much more of it, pro∣viding you observe the Direction given page 38, You may make 200 Merks profit of your Cattle. Moreover, your Ground is but begin∣ing to be brought to a good Conditi∣on, you can not expect it will be as good with once or twice Dunging, as afterwards it may be: Will either Man or Beast that is lean, be made fat by a Meal or two. I do not think in less than 24 or 30 Years, the Ground can be brought to so good a Condition as afterwards it will be; And Tenents get not long Tacks, never think they will Improve it for other Men: But even
from the beginning, you see there can be profit made abudance, to encour∣age any body to let about it. To be Brief, I desire not to reckon every thing narrowly that may be made of it, least the Landlords grudge; But I offer to make it evident, to the Con∣viction of any Reasonable Man, That Farmers following this Method, shall be inabled to pay their Landlords all that I have spoken off, and shall have more profit by farr, than they can have by following the present way. Tho they did not pay one Sixpence, for when all the above mentioned pro∣fits may be made without Hedging or Inclosures, what profit may be ex∣pected when that pains is taken, and Manure extraordinar provided, as pag. 72, beside many other peeces of Im∣provement. Now if this be true, as I am perswaded it is, then has the Te∣nent as much Gain, as if he had his Room for nothing at all; And it is
not one Tenent, or ten or hundered, that receiveth this Benefit, but all and every one through out the whole Kingdom may have this profit; I do not mean every indevidual Farmer may make a like Advancement in their profits, for in some places the Ground may be so much improven, that triple ptofit may be thereof made at least; Other places cannot so well be advanced above one third part, but complextlie considered, I am per∣swaded that the whole of it may be doubled. Therefore I conclude, Far∣mers in prosecution of this Project, shall be as great Profiters, as if they had another Kingdom equal to this bestowed them Gratis, providing they changed not their Ancient Cus∣tom; And the Heritors or Propriators of Lands, are so farr from being at any loss, that they reap a seventh part more Benefit than at present they do, beside their present Rent is secured,
so that it is most visible, that the He∣ritable Stock of the Kingdom, may be more than doubled. Now If a poor Man that cannot guide himself, may be permitted to direct othets, I'le shew you how the Moveable Stock, may be as much in∣creasced, and then I hope my assertion is proven. Landlords to you now I direct my Discourse, Perhaps ye may grudge, I allow nothing but a seventh part, where the Tenent has so much; The Truth is, Tenents have but a sorrie Life of it, as Matters go at pre∣sent, and they had need of the greatest share of the profit, beside, they are at all the pains, & run all the Risque, for tho they should not make all the bene∣fit I propose, still are they obliged to pay you; But I say more, You may accept of Little, where you could ex∣pect nothing at all: I suppose your Predecessors and your Selves, have taken the best Measures you can to
advance your Rent, and more than it is at present you could never make it. Now if I shall lay down a way, how ye may advance it a seventh part, (which I dare almost promise in name of all the Farmers in Scotland, provid∣ing you gave them long Tacks) then have you so much Gain ye could never expect, and seeing their profit is not your Loss, you have no Cause to en∣vy them; But what if I make it appear this Fine, atithe end of every seven years, shall be more beneficial to you, than one third part more every year: Tis like ye may call this a Maggot, but let me be heard before I be con∣demned. Commonly all People live according to their Rent, whether it be little or much, he that has 5000 Merks per annum, may have as much free Monie at the Years end, as he that hath ten or twentie: So I say tho you had a third mote Rent, ye would perhaps find
way to get it disposed of, as well as what you have; Yea, but say ye, then we would live so much the better or more splendid: 'Tis a Question if ye would, for ye had better have an hundred Pounds well payed, as an hundred and twentie promised, when the Tenents are not able to pay it punctually at the Term. but this one running on in Arrier half a Years Rent, the other a whole year, and a third two Years, and some breaking now and then amongst hands, and Factors Accompts running on in Con∣fusion, so that its very hard to redd Marches with them: And in the mean time; when you might have your Monie, to bestaw to the best Advan∣tage ye could, you are obliged to run in Merchants Accompts, with many other disadvantages: I doubt not but an hundred Pounds punctually payed, is better than an hundred and thirty pay'd after this fashion. Beside all this
a Gentleman getting the name of so much Rent, he must keep a Table and Retinue, answerable thereunto. From all which Disadvantages he is obliged to burden the Heir, for the providing Portions to the rest of his Children, and that lyeth on his Shoulders from Father to Son, till taht Familie be extinct, or else the rest of his Children are so meanly Pro∣vided for, that they cannot live any way suteable to their Station, and they being too gentle to learn, or fol∣low anie honest Imployment, must ei∣ther go abroad to push their For∣tunes, or go up and down the Coun∣rrey like Vagabonds, this is the Case with many: But if it be said, this is not the Case with all, I shall readily confess that, but that needs not hin∣der me to give my Advice to others, neither can they be the worse to hear it: But I say by this Project, even theso that are in the worst Circumstances,
shall have the Rent that now they have the Name of, well payed, tho at pre∣sent it be otherwise, and shall have all their Children honestly provided for, without burdening the Heir a sixpence, and to make this the more plain, I shall meke a Supposition, thus. I suppose a Young Gentleman suc∣ceeding to his Fathers Estate, in the twentie or twentie first Year of his Age, the Tacks of his Tenents are half run, so in the twentie fourth year of his age, the Entery Money and Gras∣sum due be his Tenents, is payed to him, I suppose his Yearly Rent to be 5000 Mer, the Fine he now receiv∣eth is just so much, this is all ftee profit, for if his Tenents had followed their old way fo Labour, this he could not expect, and now his Yearly Rent is entire beside this; Wherefore I would have him lay this 5000 Merks by for his eldest Child, except the Heir, which perhaps is not born for half a dozen Years to come; I would
have him count it Sacriledge to medle with it, but let the Interest thereof be gathered for the Child's Use, and before the Child be Marriageable, it may be doubled if not tripled. In the 31 Year of his Age, he hath another Fine payed him, which may be laid up for another Child; In the 38 Year of his Age, another Fine falleth due, lay this by for a third Child; In the 45 Year of his Age, as much for a fourth Child, in the 52 Year, as much for a fifth Child, and in the 59, a Portion for a sixt Child: This before he be six∣tie Years of Age, he has Reasonable Portions provided for six Children, be∣side the Heir, if he have fewer, he may give each of them a Fine as is shewed and divide the Superplus a∣mongst them; If he have more, (as very few hath,) then he may get the rest more easily portioned, that these are provided for already. But say ye, Perhaps before the Father exceed fifty Years, his Eldest Son may be married,
and so long as the Father applyeth this fine, for the Use of his own Chil∣dren, the Son cannot have it for the Use of his; Such a thing may fall our, but its as probable, the Father will not have so many Children, as what I have supposed, and if he have not a∣bove 5, that which is appointed for his sixth Child, may be settled on his Oey, but make it as ye will, 'tis better to have so many provided for, as none at all. But say ye, all this is not so good as another third more Rent, for we can be our own Stewards, and live more splendid, and tho we lay but one half of that third part more additional Rent by every Year, we may there∣with provide our Children more plen∣tifully, than what is proposed. But ye would consider, if ye had a third more Rent than what ye have, it would be expected you should live accordingly, and if ye do it not, ye
will be reckoned Misers; And beside when your Rents are screwed to the highest. you cannot have them punc∣tually payed, and so run in all the In∣conveniences above said: Wherefore I'm of Opinion, tho you had 10000 lib: a year, you cannot so easily lay 500 up for your Childrens Use every Year, as you may lay this fine by, every se∣ven Years once. But say ye one Te∣nent payeth his fine this Year, another the next, so we get not all in one Year. therefore we are at the same pains in gathering of it, as if we had only so much more Yearly Rent. To which I say, I would have you order it so, that you may have it all to come in at oncs, and tho some of your Tenents should begin to set about this New Method at one time, and others at an∣other, when the time comes that the first are to pay their fines, rather tako from these that have begun last, pro∣portionable to the Years they have
followed this Method, and enter them altogether, as take it in by parsells, for I am apt to believe it will not do so well, to come in at several times. Perhaps some may object, if every Landlord follow. this Method, all will have Money. to lend, and none will need to borrow, therefore it will be impossible to get all this great Stock; put to any profitable Use. I wish it were come that length, to have more Stock than we know how to dispose of, but since ye have had patience to hear me hitherto, be pleas∣ed to hear my Answer to this also. By the Prosecution of this Project; I shewed page 32 and 33, a great dale of people may be spared, that are now imployed in Tieling and Dtessing the Ground, except they be imployed in making Inclosures, and even tho ma∣ny be set to that kind of Work, there will be abundance notwithstanding to labour in Manufactures; There is no
doubt, if people apply themselves, in good earnest that way, Manufactures of all kinds may be much propagated in a short space: For want of Stock, that great obsticle, being removed, all o∣ther Letts may be easily overcome: Now, if every individual Propriator of Lands throughout the whole King∣dom, may have a Years Rent everie seventh Year, beside his ordinar Rent, What vast Stock will this make in all? Four hundered thousand pounds Star∣ting, and even but a part of that is thought sufficient to advance our A∣frican Trade: And I suppose one Years Rent of all the Lands in Scotland, may be four or five times as much: What great Trade of Fishing and Land Ma∣nufactures may be thereby carried on? And how much the more, considering 'tis not only so much Stock advanced at first; But infallibly this may be renew∣ed everie seven Years; And how much this may promot the Honour, Powet,
and Wealth of the Kingdom, according to my weak Judgement, may be more than can be easily credited, untill the event prove it; I doubt not but with∣in 24 or 30 Years, the Moveable Stock of the Kingdom may be tripled, with∣out going to Forraign Plantations to seek Wealth, or digging in Mines for Ore. By this project everie Man may digg. Treasure out of his own Field, for by observing the Measures propos∣ed, both Cattle and Grain may be greatly increased, so that we may both live more plentitullie, and have much thereof to export, beside the uspeak∣able Advantage of Manufactures: And that which makes this project the most feasible of all others, is, That one needs no Dependance on another; ex∣cept betwixt Landlord and Tenent, and there is more Hopes to bring two to one mind than a great Society of people. I may take my own Measures in Ordering and Dressing my own
Ground, whither others do the like or not. But in many other projects, there must be a concurence of a Mul∣titude, and perhaps the Managers sometimes prove not so faithful to all concerned as could be wished, but in this it is otherwayes. And another ad∣vantage in this project. there is no Risque to run, the worst that can befal, no loss can be sustained by the Undertakers, wherefore I conclude, if this be not set about, we need to try none other whatsomever. To answer all Queries and Objecti∣ons that may occur, about this project would take more Room than can con∣veniently be allowed here, therefore I refer that work to another place. But in the mean time, I shall answer some few, which I judge may be most material; Perhaps it may demanded, What kind of Manufactures can be pro∣pagated in this Kingdom: To which I say; All sorts whatsoever:
For I know no Reason why that can not be wrought here, that can be fa∣shioned or performed with Mens Hands in any place of the World, pro∣viding we have the same Materials, and were bred too, and taught in these several Arts and imployments, and in no place without both of these, can any thing be performed, and even tho we stand want Materials, of the things we stand in need of, ought to be made or composed; We may get these things unprepared, much cheaper than the made Work. We have two universal Objections against everything that can be said in perswadidg us to any thing we have not been accustomed to. If it be said our Ground may be improven, and the more to convince us of this, In∣stance the Example of others. It is an∣swered, our Ground is naturally more barren than other Kingdoms; If we be desired to set about any Handy
Labour, then our Water is so bad; that therewith we can neither Dye, Bleach, make Hats, nor Mill Cloath, To the first I say, if our Ground be bad, we take the wrong way to make it better, for the best Ground in Europ, being used as commonly ours is, shall in a short time grow little better than our own, for so long as it will bear Corn, we plough it over and over, till the product can scarce desray the Ex∣pence of Seed and Labouring, and then we give it a smell of Manure only, or else leaves it Grass a Year or two, and as soon as it begins to gather a Soard, up the red side of it again, so that in ef∣fect they will neither let it bear Grass nor Corn. Now say I, behold how much our next Neighbours in England manage their Ground to advantage more than we do? Your Answer is, Their Soil is Naturally better, and their Climat
warmer. What is your inferrence? For notwithstanding the Fertillity of their Soil, and warmness of Climat, they think it necessarie to plant Hed∣ges to keep it warmer, as page 64. And also they find it for their Ad∣vantage, to make but a fourth or fifth part of their Ground Corn at once, because they cannot get all of it suffi∣ciently keeped in Manure. But be∣cause our Ground is more barren, and Climat colder, therefore we need not use Means to restrain External Cold, and may alwayes have one half, or two third parts of it in Corn. Is this your inference? Well, good enough, I think it needs no Answer. To that Objection anent the bad∣ness of our Water, I would fain ask a Question, which may serve for an An∣swer to to this, Do ye think the bad∣ness of our Water has any Influence upon a Man working in Iron or Wood, that his Workmanship is not so good
perhaps as else where it may be had? Then say ye the people in this King∣dom must be much duller than others, and therefore they can never attain to the like Dexterity in any Curious Art, or Mechanick Operation, with these of other places. This I will be very loath to grant, for the contrar I firmlie believe, but indeed I will confess, That commonly our Mechanicks are not so Dexterous or Expert as others; But the Causes may be one or all of these. First, We have not the Instruction or Edu∣cation of several others, and can it be expected a Man that has not been Taught or Instrusted in such or such an Art, can be an equal Proficient to him that has had that Help, providing they are of equal parts, take a Man of any of these Nations you pretend are most Expert and capable of Instructi∣on, and put him to do a peece of Work he never did or saw done, can be per∣form
it as one that is experienced with that sort of Labour? Secondly, It is the Vulgar Opinion, Nothing that is made within the Kingdom, can be so good as that which is brought from Abroad, Nor will they give so much for it, altho it be really better, so the Seller know∣ing he cannot have a price for it, if he should bestow Labour upon it, makes it his Study how to affoord his Ware cheap, seing the Buyers will not be∣stow a price upon good Ware, and that only because it is our own Home ward Making. Another Cause why our Mechanicks are not so Dexterous as per∣haps others are, is, They abide not closs at one kind of Work, but from one thing to another, so that they can't be so expert in several things as they might, and undoubtedly would be in one thing: But in may other places, Mechanicks abid closs at one sort of Work, so that they become not only expert as to the making of the Work
good, but also a far greater quantity of it; I remember I heard a Nailer, that's a Nail-maker tell. He knew a Man that was accustomed to work in nothing but Sparrowbills, a sort of short Nails wanting heads, he used to make a very considerable number of them, he said to the number of 7 or 8 thousand a day. and yet if he had been set to make common Nails, he neither could make them good, or any consi∣derable number of them: I doubt not but a Man abiding still at one kind of Work, may both attain to a greater Dexterity in making of it fine, and do much more of it, than another that from one thing to another, is continu∣allie turning. But sayes some, We have had Me∣chanicks from abroad, and we have tryed to make several things, and par∣ticularly Hats, and Broad Cloath in this Kingdom, and yet we cannot make our Ware so good, as what we can have from abroad.
Who knows whether these Forraign∣ers be the most expert of their Imploy∣ments, in these places from whence they came, or perhaps they may be subborned to conceal the Art of their Calling, or perhaps their Masters find it not for their Advantage, to bestow the Expense that is required in making the finest Ware, because we have suck'd in that Tenet, It cannot be fine enough, if it be our own homeward making. Moreover tho there be some few skil'd in these Imployments to direct, yet they cannot do all the Work with their own hands, and till these that assist them, come to some measure of Dexterity, it cannot be expected their Ware can be so good, as otherwise it may be. These that would propogat any new Manufacture, must lay their Accompt to labour under several Dis∣advantages at first; For instance, when Sope Manufactures were first set up in this Kingdom, their Sope was not so good as what we had from abroad by
far; These at Glasgow gave it over, as a thing they could not accomplish, these at Leith continued to work on, and now have acquired so much know∣ledge in that Art, that their Sope is better than that we have brought from abroad; From whence I conclude, if these in Leith had given over, as these at Glasgow did, it had been thought our Water in this Kingdom was so bad, that Sope could not be therewith made, whereas we see the Falshood of that Conjecture: My Opinion is, that what ever any may object against Water in other Cases, its altogether groundless. I should think if Strangers were en∣couraged to set up here for themselves, or some of our own Countrey Men sent abroad, to be instructed in the knowledge of these Arts, wherein we have least Knowledge, it might be a Mean to propagat Manufactures; And espe∣cially Fishing and Woolen Manufac∣tures, might prove to the Kingdoms Unspeakable Profit, if they were pro∣moted:
Yea there is no kind of Art or Imployment, but what we might ac∣quire Knowledge in, if we had Means of Instruction; And because formerly the great Cause of our living at home in Penurie, was Povertie and Want of a Stock, once to set about any Fru ga litie (for a poor Man is still keeped poor, because he has nothing once to put him in Capacitie to do for himself) I say by this Project that Maladie is removed, and we are put in a Capaci∣tie to propagat Manufactures, build or buy Ships, and do many other things that may advance the Honour, Pouer and Wealth of the Kingdom. But sayes some, Fine Cloath cannot be made here, because our Wool is course; Grant it is, We may buy as much Wool, as may be sour Ells of Cloath, for the price of one Ell, and beside if our Sheep were keeped, as is proposed Chapter 5, our own Wool may be much improven, then we save the other three parts of the Expence, it
would cost ns. I know it will not be for a fourth part of the price to the Wearer, but I mean the fourth part of the Money or Ware, that is exported furth of the Kingdom, to bring home Cloath may be saved, and a great dale of People, that are at present imploy'd in Tovling their Lives out, working in the most industrious Way that can be invented to run out the Ground, may be imployed in making the said Cloath, and other profitable Imploy∣ments; And because I told you, I had met with some Opposition, con∣cerning the way of Stock keeping I have proposed, I shall let you hear the most material Arguments, any have yet adduced to prove the contrar. Some acknowledge Housing of Sheep, may be practicable in a few, but not in great numbers, others foresecing, grant∣ing the first, is the high way to over∣turn the latter, manfully dispute against both, the strength of their Arguments are these, viz: To put Sheep in houses,
makes them scab, and the great diffi∣culty of getting Litter or Bedding to them, and also the Expence of build-Hutts will be great. To the first I say, if it be true, then I confess its a very pungent Objection, and because some bring in matter of Fact as a proof, I shall show what I know of Matter of Fact to the contrar, I have known 5 or six score sheep, for a dozen or sixteen Years together, put in Hutts every Night, and not one of them was scabbed, during that time; Now if a hundred can be lodged so con∣veniently, as may prevent this bad ef∣fect, then a hundred thousand may al∣so be preserved the same way, provid∣ing the like Care and pains be taken on every hundred of them. But I'll tell you where the Mistake lyeth. Some Stock-keepers that have tryed the Ex∣periment, to save a little Expense in building Hutts, have crammed them so throng, that one could not conveni∣ently ly beside another, neither
did they take Care to have them lying clean and dry, from whence this bad Effect followed: When I desire a Man to hold out of a Mire on his Right hand, I bid him not leap into a Ditch on his Left, when I complain of letting Sheep ly out wanting Food, amongst Frost and Snow, page 94, I do not de∣sire they should be used after this fashi∣on, but page 97, I recommend build∣ing of Hutts so large, that the Sheep may ly at ease, and have free Air, and page 99, by all means to lay them clean and dry. Others say, when they buy Cattle to put in their Parks, for fatning these that are accustomed to ly without, take on flesh much sooner than these that have been housed. To Answer this distinctly, I will give you this Similitude; Let a High∣land Man that is accustomed to go through Bogs and Glens, with only a loose Plaid about his Body, his But∣tocks altogether bare, and his Brogues
that defend him not from one drop of Water. Now I shall readily believe, this Man in the beginning of a Cam∣pine, shall endure more Hardship than another that has been accustomed to good Keeping and warm Cloathing; Yet I shall scarce be perswaded to fol∣low his Example. No doubt Cattle that accustomed to ly in a warm house, will not at first agree so well to ly without in a Park, as other accustom∣ed thereunto; But let them be put in a house all night, and feed with the other all day, I doubt not but they may be as soon fat as the other. Now to the building of Sheep Cots, I say, if Stones can be easily had, you may make the walls of stone, if not, Sods or Turffs may serve, the form I judge most convenient, and least ex∣pensive, is a square of 50 foot each way, 4 foots in hight will be enough, then within this build another wall ten foot from the other, the inner square is 30 foot in length each quar∣ter,
but in stead of this inner wall, let there be only pillars made for the support of your Roof: The Reason why I recommend leaving one side of the House open, is to let the Sheep have Air, but if the side of a single house were left open in all Weather, it could not defend from Storm and Snow; The breadth of your House being only the distance betwixt the inner and outer wall, viz: ten foot, Cuples of 7 or 8 foot length may serve, and in re∣gard they are short, they will not need to be very thick, about the thick∣ness of good Care polls may serve, which being placed at 6 or 7 foot dis∣tance, about 30 Cuples will serve the whole Square. The outer wall of 50 foot each side, being builded of Sods, or with some few Stones mixed with the Sods, will not cost above ten Shil∣lings of Expence, the Cuples may be had I suppose for ten pence a pair, which is 15 pounds, small Sticks will serve for Cabers or Ribbs: But geant
they are as dear as the Cuples, both make but 30 pounds, say the Thatch cost as much as the walls, all make but 42 pounds, and this Square will contain 12 or 15 scores of Sheep with ease: But call them but 12 score only, the Expence is but 3 ss. 6 d. for every Sheep, not the price of two years smear∣ing; This House keeped in Thatch, may last 30 Years, and the Thatch I reckon nothing at all, for grant you put Divets on it every two Years once, they are worth all your pains for Ma∣nure. As to the beding of your Sheep, I say, if ye have Corn, as is supposed page 100, ye have Straw enough for that use, if not, Rushes, Bent, dry Sand, or any thing that may keep them dry and clean will serve; But if none of these things can be had, then can you not want Divets; And because this is the most expensive, I shall reck∣on how farr your profit may go be∣yond your Cost in this. A Man may
cut or cast ten Cart load of Divets in a day, that is six pence, say the drying and bringing of them home cost twice as much, you have them cheaper than two pence a Cart, every Cart of Di∣vets, will be 2 or 3 of Dung, because the Piss and Dung, add both to the weight and bulk, the Cart of Dung is worth 14 pence, as was shewed Chap. 5. When your Sheep begin to ly any thing wet, lay a new course of Divets over the whole floor, with the green side up, or if you have Straw or Rush∣es, ye may bed them whiles with the one, and whiles with the other; The profit you have by this Labour, is more than ye readily can believe, for your Sheep being provided in Food, and preserved from cold and wet, they are in a much better Condition, Espe∣cially that time of the year, when they are with Young; And I am of Opinion, that any Creature receiving wholesome and plentiful Nourishment,
when it is in the womb, is thereby more strengthened, and brought to a wholesome Constitution, than by any so long time feeding, during the time of its Life; And tho severals of our Stock-keepers may feed their Cattle prettie well in Summer yet very few provide for them in Winter, as the Schamles can bear Witness. Perhaps it may be said, these Di∣vats being cut upon the Pasture, will spoil a great dale of Ground. To which I say, you cannot in Reason expect much Benefit, but you must be at some loss; I do not propose this as a thing that may be done without any Cost at all, but I endeavour to make it evident, that your Profit shall be more than your loss; And if you will consider the Benefit your other Ground receiveth by the Sheep Dung, you'll find all the prejudice ye sustain by the loss of so much of your Pasture fully repayed with Interest.
To insist in speaking to every thing that may be for the further explaining and applying of the whole Project, and touching of many things concern∣ing Husbandry, I have not yet spoken to all, would take up thrice as much as all I have yet done: And to be plain, I have no great inclination to engage my self in the Expence that will be re∣quired to finish such a Work, until I see further what Entertainment that which I have done already meets with. I have said as much as I can in few words, and for ought I know, am the first in this Kingdom that has essayed any thing on this Subject. But I'm of Opinion, there may be several Di∣rections given, concerning the Order∣ing and Dressing the Ground, more useful to the Inhabitants of Scotland, than what has yet been proposed by any that ever wrote upon Husbandry. I know severals have written per∣haps as well as any Man can in general
But none of these being particularly acquainted with the Nature and Con∣stitution of Ground in this Kingdom, nor with the particular mistakes the people generally ly under, their Di∣rections cannot so exactly answer our Case. A skilful Physician may prepare Physick or Medicine, very good for ma∣ny Diseases; And yet a farr less ac∣complished Physician, may prepare Physick that is fitter for the parti∣cular use of one whose Constitution and Disease he knoweth: I doubt not but particular Directions may be given in Relation to Husbandry, more exact to our Case than any yet proposed by Strangers. Ploughing too much of the Ground, Leaving it without Fence, And overlaying their Pastures: These three being the grand Mistakes Peo∣ple ly most under, I have endeavour∣ed to perswade them to Reformation therein, which is a quite other Theam, than is usually insisted on by others.
But before I close, I shall take notice to one Objection, that perhaps may seem of great Moment to many, and yet in Reality is of no force at all; The thing here proposed is very great, viz: That if every one would take such Meas∣ures, as easily they may, the Honour, Wealth and Power of the Kingdom, may soon be advanced to the double of what it is at Present; The Means by which so great a Matter is to be accomplished, being so easie and very common, (whereas the Means for prosecuting so great a Work, would be expected to be very wonderfull and extraordinar) therefore no such Effect can follow the prosecution of this Project. How weak so ever the Means are, to me they seem to prove effectual if followed, and if the Calculation made already, serve not to perswade you to the like thoughts, I must know your Objections before I can satisfie you: But it is not the first time great Things have been accomplished by weak Means,
and the less that can be expected from the instrument or Means, there seems to be the more of an Overruling Pro∣vidence in it; And to tell you my own thoughts, several Providences seem to concurr in the prosecution of this Pro∣ject, viz: The long continuance of the Frost, which doth oblige People to a Complyance (for this year) to one spe∣cial Point I have proposed: To witt, To take less Ground into Tillage, and keep'd in better Condition. And then again by this, a great dale of Seed may be saved, which will come very seasonably this Year: In respect of our-present Scar∣city of Grain. And now beside, upon the Conclusion of a Peace, People may apply themselves thereto the more ef∣fectually, together with several other Things that I have not Room here to insert. FINIS.
