D2140 E350_22 99861630 113769
A Plain AND FAITHFVLL DISCOVERY OF A BEAME In Master EDWARDS his Eye. OR A MODERATE ANSVVER to the substance of the first and second part of Gangrena. Especially to his Prophesie; Where∣in some of his stories are refuted; The manner of his comming by them questioned. His double dealing detected. Capt. Paul Hobson with some others, Vin∣dicated. Mr. Josiah Rycraft Examined. Mr. Edwards unparraleld partiallity is impartially declared, And his Prophesie truly reflected By EDWARD DRAPES. JER. 5.30, 31, A wonderfull and horrible thing is committed in the land. The Prophets prophesie falsely, and the Priests beare rule by their meanes, and my People love to have it so: And what will ye doe in the end thereof? Matth. 7.3, 4, 5, And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thy eye, and behold, a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hipocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye: And then shalt thou see clearely to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Printed. And are to be sold by William Larner, at his shop, at the signe of the Blackmore in Bishops-gate-streete 1646.
To the Impartiall Reader. HAD not truth been more engaged in this following discourse then my selfe, I should have rejoyced in the continuing of my ac∣customed silence. But seeing Master Ed∣wards Goliah like, comming forth, de∣fying the Hoasts of the living God, li∣centiously assuming to stamp the Super∣scription of truth upon those many Apocryphall stories, faign∣ed tales, and forged relations, contained in his Gangrena strengthning the hands of the wicked, and sadning the hearts of the Godly, and yet notwithstanding crying out with great zeale the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. For Sions sake, I could o longer hold my peace, but was constrained within me, to present this insuing search, of a Pharisaical spirit, and an infectious Gangrena, that is so much justified by her Children, to thy serious perusall, and judicious consideration; that if thy judgement hath been captivated, to give credit to it, it may at length be rectified. Or if thou art yet in doubt, not da∣ring like a wise man) to passe censre, before thou hast heard what the accused can say for thmsevles I hope (through the bles∣sing of God) what I have written, will prove satisfactory to thee, and be a light to regulate thy judgement, by whose information (according to my own knowledge is my endevour which I have prosecuted, not with words to delight thy eare, but to profit thy inward man: I love to please no man beyond, and yet all so farre as may tend to their edification. Plain dealing without the least flattery, is the true language
of a faithfull friend, that is like the oyle, that doth not make, but heale wounds. The derision and reproaches of unreasonable men, is my expectation: However I doubt not, but that truth which commands me to write, will secure me, and cause thee to accept it, though rejected by others, and me patiently to under∣goe any thing for it, and learne me to blesse them that curse me, and pray for them that dispitefully use me. It was not my thoughts to answer all his stories, being a work impossible for any one man, except he had the knowledge of the whole proceedings of every one of them, from the beginning to the ending of them, but rather to shew the untruth of those stories I had knowledge of, and the strange pharasaical oversight of Mr. Edwards, his dwelling so much a broad, and so litle at home that so by some fruits, thou maiest the better judge of the whole Tree. Some things M. Edwards chargeth Captain Hobson with concerning his doctrine, which I have not particularly replyed to, because I heare it will be abroad before long, to speake for it selfe. Reader, one thing I crave at thy hands, that thou wilt reade seriously, judge faithfully, not with a criticall eye, but with a ju∣dicious heart, and reprove me, wherein I doe a misse charitably, so shalt thou truly engage him to thee, that loves thee in the truth, and the truth as it is in Jesus. Edward Drapes
A Plain and faithfull discovery of A BEAM IN Master Edwards his Eye. IT is very remarkeable, that whē the woman was in the wil∣dernes, the Serpent cast out of his mouthwater, as a floud after the woman, that he might cause her to be carryed a∣way of the floud, Rev. 12.14, 15. The condition of the Saints in this world, is most commonly very low: for while they are here, they are not at home, but wandring up and down seeking an honourable Country, dignifyed with immutable glory; but in the time of hi their voyage to that eternall Canaan, Sathan through his inveterate hatred, casts out of his mouth flouds of water, viz. re∣viling accusations, oprobious scandals, horrid reproaches, and scorching persecutions that (if possible) he may destroy them. For the end of all his motions, whether secret or more open, is, the Saints ruine; For the effecting of which Design, he hath many in∣struments, great Pollititians, instilling into them Lessons full of blood, that when they seem most to smile, then is the greatest mischiefe by them intended, when Sathan transformes himselfe into an Angell of Light, then is most danger; when he intended to deceive our first Parents, he told them that they should be wise, even like unto God, when he perswades men to kill the Saints, he tels them they shall doe God good ser∣vice, he suits his actions to the Saints conditions; if they appeare to be but few, weake, or fearefull, he sets upon them in the open field, withall his might and power, to sup∣presse them; if he findes them too strong for him in the mountaines, he will assault them in the valleys; if open force prevaile not. he will take another course, he will disguise himelfe; The Woolfe doth most harm when in sheepes cloathing, Sathan hurts most, when he comes under the veile of piety, Learning and rich rewards to ensnare pore men; the Snake lyes hid oft-times in the grasse, Sathan, Antichrist, that man of si, oftenlye lurking many in Books, Pulpits, Sermons, Fasts, legall conformityes, and so are onveyed into the hearts and spirits of men, like poyson in a Cup of wine, since my
eyes was through the power of God, a little opened, I have discerned something of the Mystery of iniquity yet working, and that in many mens writings; but I can trul say, I never saw more in any one, then in M. Edwards his Gangren, both first and second part, the Streames of which are surely Wormewood, all the waters thereof bitter, and the Fountain I feare Gall; The whole Discourse foames forth big swelling words, and proud waves, threatning the suddaine and inevitable ruine of many Saints, veil'd with the name of Schismat qu s, Sectaryes, H retiques, and Blasphemers, (reproachfull tearms as old as Antichrist, wo was the first author and inventer of them, and is the conti∣nuer of them against those that have seen his nakednes, and departed from him) There are two things endeavoured to be effected by those Book; The one, to ren∣der all those whom M. Edwards stiles Independants, Anabaptists, Separatists, odious in the eyes of the Magistate and People. The other, to exlt himselfe, and his Presbyterian Bretheren; in which he so inordi∣nately gryes That this Design of his may be effected the stronger, and hastened the sooner, he prophesies the certain downfall, ruin, and destruction, of all those, he calles, Independants, Anabaptists, Separatists, . lust like the Prophets that endea∣voured to detere N hmiah, from the worke of the Lord in his hands, Nehemiah 6.12, 13.14. Are not all the Letters in his Gangrenous Bookes. written by the Copy of Re∣bum's the Chancellour, and Sh shs the Sribe, to the King to hinder the advance∣ment of the Temple of the Lord, Ezzra 4.12. to the end of the 6 verse; saying, Be it known unto thee O Kings unto you O Parliament,, that thse People have been a rebell∣ous People, if you suffer them to increse, or to l ve at peace amongst you, they will be Kings themselve, rebell, pay you no Toll nor Tribute, for they are a heady People, nemyes to Go∣vernment, to Magistracy▪ therefore suppresse them, command them to desist and to preach no more, lest England be filled with their Doctrines, and wee lose our Names, our Livings, our Tythes, and Offerings, and then what will become of us, for no man will buy our Merchandise any more, Rev, 18.11. I earnestly desire, that no man whom God hath called to worke▪ may be discouraged by this Prophesie, and that the Magistrates might not so listen to those stories, letters, and bloody accusations, preferred against a generation of just men, as to command them to forbeare the building, repayring and adorning the Temple of God, with new and living Stones, built upon a sure foundation, b lieving all things which their ene∣mies accuse them of, so as to slight, disregard, discountenance, and destroy them as enemyes, who have hitherto approved themselves, in all their Straits, their closest friends; But that they, and all people, would seriously weigh▪ from whence this pro∣phesie came, whether from a vision or divine revelation, or whether the ground of it is not An I would have  so, I desire it may be so, and long till it is so, I shall never be con∣tented til then, thy stand in my light, and keepe the Sunne of preferment from shining on me. As for the eight Symptoms layd own by him, and applyed to those that in his dialect are Independnts, Anabaptists, Sectaryes, &c. They are to me the clearest dis∣covery of his, and his Bretherens nakednes, that can be, and were they impartially re∣flected, they would confsse it, and if they are infallible signes of ruin, they would ac∣knowledge their own at hand; I shall briefly rehearse the substance of them all in or∣der as they are set down, and faithfully reflect them, that M. Edwards and his Bre∣theren may see, and be ashamed. 1. The first Symptom (as M. Edwards saith, of the Independants ruine) is their
horrible pride, insolency, and arrogancy, extolling themselves to the heavens, despising all others, trampling upon them, yea, upon Kings, and Parliaments, the Kingdome of Scotland, Assembly of Divines, and the Common Councell of he City of London, which pa of theirs appeares in their writing, Speeches, gestures and actions, in endeavouring to breake all, that will not dace after thei Ppe; from which he conclude this, their Prid having gone before, their destruction will follow suddenly after. Here is a high accusation, foule crimes layd to the charge of all those whom he stils Independants, had he as truly proved them as boldly affimed them, I had never dared to have appared for them, neither do I seeke the vindication of any mans pride or arrogancie, though he may be vaed with the name of an Independant, &c. But that M. Edwards should charge the crimes of one or two, upon all that are cal∣led Independants, seemes to me to be both uncharitable and unrsonable: did I not kow that envy makes wise men to forget themselves, to doe they kno not what, and runne they know not whether, from one extream into another: I should scarcely have bn nduced to believe, that M. Edwards had forgotten the old rule, ex particulari non est concludendum, as I now see and know he hath if himselfe knoweth what his Pen hath written. If one be proud, insolent and arrogant, must all be so too? If one be a Heretique must all be Heretiques? If Iudas one of the twelve, veil'd with the name of a Disciple, be a Devill, must all the eleven be Devils too? I one Professor be a Si∣mon Magus, a Dmas Hymeneus or Philetus, must all the Professors of Christ be such? If one that is stiled by M Edwards or himsele, to be an Independant, Anabap∣tist, or the lke? should be in the gll of bitternesse, must all be so too, that go under that name? I desire M Edwards would tell me what consequence this is, whether it be good reasoning, whether the grounds of it flowes from Religion or reason, from a plain demonstration, or from a reasonable supposition: surely all these reject and ab∣horre it as spurious, contradicting the lawes of God and man. I am very confident if one should scape off the filth, soil, and dirt, that is to be found amidst the refuse of their Congregations, and throw it in his own face▪ and the face of the rest of his Bre∣theren that abhorrs their Egyptian darknes; he would be very angry, cry out of perse∣cution: I he shall hereafter say, he accused not all but some: then surely he hath dealt very maliciously and hipocritically, to make the world believe one thing in his Books, and himelfe to intend another▪ Is not this equivocation? & Mentall reservation? But if he stik to his principles, to conemn all he had done well to have named more, for as yet he hath named but few, and some of them are never the worse, for being named b him, their holynesse, integrity and honesty, standing still unshaken and unmoveable; some of them being so farre from pride, arrogancy, and seeking his or hi bretherens ruine, desolation and destruction, tht I know would rejoyce to become his and their srvants in the Lord Christ, though not in Antichrist. Had but M. Edwards taken such a strict survey, and made such a through inquisition into the Parochiall assemblyes, yea, into the very Angels and Mnister o tem as it seemes by hs Epistle to his Gngrena he hath done into the INDEPENDENTS & their Assembles, he would have found a taske hard enough, an inconter sharpe e∣nough to have rooted out the pride, arrogancy, and insolency that is between the Presbyterian Church walles, before he had so desperately adventured to charge the guiltless in the open field, had he lookt well before he had leapt he had saved him∣selfe much labour; my soule desires his instruction, not his destruction; Therefore I
desire he would sit down a little while, and consider, what the Words of our Saviour meaneth, and faithfully apply the same, Math 7. ver. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. and see whether there is not spirituall abominations set up in high places amongst them? Whether there is not darknes that may be felt amongst them? Whether a spirit of Pride and Prelacy, rules not even in them, who love the name, (oh that they had the nature) of Diines; Who extols themselves more then the Presbyterians? Who makes so much oast of their wit, wisdome, pyety, learning, reading, writing, reasoning, as they, esteeming all Ideots, Dunces and Fooles but themselves, as if, with, and in them, and not in Iesus, was the treasures of wisdome and knowledge centred. If this be not true, let some man (if he can) tell me what the meaning is, of their strange Petitions, invective Sermons, rancorus Discourses, malciou Tretises, bitter threats, and endeavours to silence the mouthes of Lay men (as they term them) from declaring the sweet injoyments of the transcendant excellencies of their beloved, of their God, of their King and of their Iesus, communicated to them, rayling against them, with reviling, villifying speeches, calling them disgracefully illiterate, mecha∣nicke, Taylors, Pedlers, Tinkers Coblers, and the like, carnally supposing (so far as I am able to spell their meaning) the gifts of the spirit to be centred in, and confined to the members of an Vnversity, to humane learning, naturall education, acquired parts, & the like, forgetting that it is the usuall method of God, to invite the simple into Wis∣domes Palaces, and to cause the weake and despised things of this world, to confound the wise, even shutting it out of their thoughts, or at least out of their mouthes, that God hath chosen the weake things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things whch are dspised, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: that no flesh should glory in his presence; 1. Cor. 1.25, 26, 27, 28 29. Surely did they consider it, they would not so glory in the flesh as they do, in their parts, learning, & abilities, but rather in the Lord. Who can see their spirits, and not see arrogancy in its heigth? Who endeavours, plots, & studies, to be reverenced of all, to have the chiefe place at Feasts, the highest place in their Churches, and to be called Rabbies, Doctors, Divines, like unto them? If a spirit of pride may be seen, in endeavouring to bing all People, high and low, rich and pore, Rulers and ruled, under the yokes of their own opinions, in pain of Anathe∣ma Maranatha, savours of Pride, how will they free themselves from such a spirit? If they imagine they can, let them tell me what they mean by prescribing Lawes, Ordi∣nances, Censures, for them, over whom Christ hath given them no power? What do they intend by their pronouncing judgement and vengeance upon those that dissent from them? By their exclaiming upon the Parliament, for not heatig a furnace seven times with hot scorching persecution, to destroy many of Christs tender Lmbes? For not being their executioners? If to incense a Parliament against an honest Peo∣ple, their tryed Servants, if to be jealous of, speake against, and cunningly insinuate a disaffection in many against a Parliament, and the faithfull instruments of Englands present deliverance. If to sit down in the throne of Christ, if to take his Scepter out out of his hands, his Crown off his head: If to despise, trample upon, and abase his membes, savours of pride and arroggancy, (and pride and arrogancy is a certaine symptom of present distinction) as M. Edwards sayth, Oh then what a condition are he Prebyerians in! But I passe to his second Symptome. 2. The second Symp ome of the Sectaryes ruin and destruction, (for so he feares
not to call the wor shippers of the living od) is their v olent presecution of their wayes and causes. What he may meane by their wayes and causes, it is very ambiguous. If by wayes and causes, he mean their constant endeavours of subduing the Kingdoms Enemies, (In which Cause he makes the world believe so many of them are in∣terested,) then I confesse they have made haste, though not more haste then good speed, & through the power of God, have done that in a few Monthes, which others have not done in yeares: Now if their violence in promoting the Kingdomes peace, in purchasing the liberty of free born Subjects, in hasting an end to the warres, and heavy taxes, that for the present are necessarily imposed upon the Kingdome, be the violence he meanes, which portends their destruction; then am I verily perswaded, there is some cunning underhand plotting, contriving, and conspiring, their speedy ruin, which himselfe is an agent or factor in, which he assumes to himselfe as the ground of his Prophesy. But is there no remedy but they must dye, who, under God, have been the instruments, that he and his bretheren live? Pore souldiers! that have adventured their lives, lest their e∣states, hazarded their utter ruin for them, even to the expence of much treasure and the losse of much precious bloud; when they might justly expect to be re∣ceived and entertained in great triumph, M. Edwards himselfe singing before them, and blessing God for them, they can hope for little else, then a bloudy re∣ward of all their labours. Or if he mean their Cause to be, their contending for the speedy solemnization of a happy marriage between Truth and Peace, that these Kingdomes may be blessed in their sweet embraceings each of other, & their praying for it, their preach ng, writing, and contending for it, by no other Sword, then that of the Spirit, to be their violence; I acknowledge such a cause, and such a violence, I am willing to own, who ever condemnes me for it▪ But if he meane by their wayes, error, Heresie, schisme, as it is probable, and by their violence, their constant endeavours to prosecte their errors, &c. I will not deny, but some may stand up for errour, in stead of truth, but that he should charge all thus, is unreasonable; I wish he would deale ingeniously, and tell me, whether he believeth they know those things to be error, heresie, and schisme which they prosecute, or not; if they doe not, will nothing expiate a crime of ignorance, but by the absolute ruine of the offender? If it be so, who could re∣main alive? If the Independants are guilty of their thousand errors, sure I am the Presbyters are guilty of their ten thousands; and for the manner of he prose∣cution of these wayes, if the Independants use Wh ps, I am sure the Pr sbyterians use Scorpions▪ I could tell the world of many wayes and designes of heirs, of their great huge, vast endeavours to set themselves on high; I could tell how l ke Diotrephes, they seeke preheminence above their Bretheren; I could als decla e how violently they carry on this their Design, like Iehu they d vf riosly, wi h a seeming shew of great zeal, trampling upon all that stand in their wa gnash∣ing their teeth, to thinke a pore Mordecai will not bowe to t m, and endea∣vouring to hang him on a Gallwes fifty Cubits high O the olce of these men! O the uncharitablne! O the had heartednes! O the cruelty f these men! How many Sermons have they preached? How many Papers ha they
presented? How many Petitions, Epistles have they written and preferred, to the Parliament, stufft full with accusation, against a company of pore men, that stand in their light; desiring the Parliament may be the executioners, to cut the Independants off, in the mean while, I challenge all the world to name any In∣dependants that have preferred one Petition to the Parliament, for th rin of the Presbyterians: Have they not rather sate still, and in all their Petitions desi∣red to be ruled by the Parliament in all civill things, then to rule ovr them, at the other have done? How violent is M Edwards and his Bretheren against all those that submit not to uniformity, which few knowes, (scarce themselves, that a e the greatest sticklers for it) what it is, and none knowes what it may be▪ If to dsire the Timber that is in the houses of those that wake not as they do, may be pul'd down, that Gallows may be made of it, at their own des, to hng them on; if to say, they hte the Independants as Toads, yea with a deadly hatred, and the l k, savurs of violence? Two great Champions of the rs, Mr. Byfield and Mr. Ryrat, to name no more, will evidently prove their violence to be of a scarlet die, and if violence presage ruin to the violent, let M Edwards and his eth ten looke about them. Violence was the practize and the ruin of their Fathers the B shos, and whn the Fathers have eaten sowre Grapes, it is no wonder if the childrens teeth beset on edge. I come to the third Symptome, which M. Edwards sayth; is, the Independants great prosperity, strange successe in their wayes, and opinions, every wind fa∣vouring them If by their prosperity in their ways, he meanes the great suc∣cesses God hath given them, in manageing any trust reposed in them? I am so∣ry he should so farre maligne the Kingdomes happin sse▪ but if he meanes their prosperity in their wayes, to be their encrease in number? M e think he should not thinke that strange successe, since in another place he sayth, they are bu an it considerable Party. If he intends by their successe, the toleration of them in this Kingdom, let him consider, whether he & his bretheren are not tollerated al∣so, was there ever any Ordinance passed for the establishment of Independency, is there hath been for Presbytery, their number is greater, a nationall Church s of them, every Parish Church is frequented by them; who are esteemed like them? the Church Dores, the Pulpit dores are open for them, 200 l. or 300 l. or 400 l. and more, per annum attends them, large benefices, g e store; what (if they were contented) could they desire, that they have not?) Will nothing satisfy them till they have Naboths Vineyard, untill they have taken away the Independants Inheritances from them? It seemes all their successes are nothing, so long as Mordecay doth not homage to them. But he saith Scotland hath been afflicted with Sword and pestilence, If so, I desire M Edwards would cease to judge of persons and thing, by common e∣vent, for his own words confesse his bretheren, the Presbyterians, even the Scots themselves, may be subject to the Pestilence; and would not wonder that two of M Goodwins children dyed of the plague; thus, if success s and prosperity fore tell ruin, it is high time for him and his bretheren to repent, for they sit as Queens, & the world wonders after them; But I come to the fourth Symptome of ruin Which M. Edwards saith, is the great plotting of the Sectaryes, (forsomust
all Independants in Mr. EDWARDS Dialect be called, though let me tell him, it had been much better for him solidly to have (if he could) first proved them so, and not so unadvisedly to have cryed out, VENI, VIDI▪ VICI, but this is a cunning plot, whose foundation is layd in the bottomlesse Pit, to render many Saints odious) He tels us in the generall of plotting, but what those plots are, he knowes not how to describe: like some of his bretheren, that in the frontispiece of their Bookes, write a confutation of divers errors, and in the body of their discourse, scarce lay open what the errors are, they would (if they could) confute. But if he meanes the Independants rising up early, sitting up late, riding, running, fighting, studying, by all honest wayes, just endeavours, to make thes Kingdoms exceed their former beauty, in the injoyment of Peace and pyety, this is a matter of thanks and joy, not of murmring, repining, and sorrow; Oh that he would cease to blame that generation of men, upon whose reputation he cannot fasten one stain▪ It remaines for him; or any else, when they can, to prove that ever any of those that are stiled Independants, were guilty of one plot against this Kingdom, or that they ever falsified any trust repo∣sed in them; if be or any of his brethren can shew it, let them bring forth their e∣vidences, let them declare the time when the Plot was, the place where, the man∣ner how: and when they haue proved them guilty, I believe none will refuse to suffer; & till then, let them cease to make the world believe so. But if plot∣ting, contriving, Machiavilian, Jesuiticall courses and wayes prognosticates de∣solation, I should rejoyce if they could exempt themselves from it. If they say they can, I demand of them, what meanes their Syon Colledge Plots, their mul∣tiplyed Petitions and Papers, their Remonstrances, their subtill insinuations into Magistrates, and People, against the Independants, poss ssing them that they are an heriticall, schismaticall People, a People enemies to government, to Caesar, that would live under no Lawes, crying out crucify them, crucify them, away with them, away with them, they are unfit to live. D d Machiavill ever more cunningly seeke to intrap and destroy his opposers, then M Edwards as his Gangreous Epistle testifyes, by his Going, Writing, Eaves dropping, his sending his Spyes, Emisaries, Agents and factors abroad, to pry into the halt∣ings, failings, infirmityes, and nakednes of his bretheren, and having dis∣covered any, exposing them to a publique sale, to the view of all men, even to his own shme. Thus may M. Edwards if his eyes be opened, see his own Picture, lively delineated by his own Pen, even to be such a Picture, that I thinke will not esily be found among them he intended it for. But I proceed to examine his fift Symptome of the ruine of those he calles In∣dependents, Annabaptists, &c. Whih he saith is this, that Independency is a fa∣ction, which he assyes to prove thus▪ as: 1. It is not carried on in Gods way, as a matter of Religion, but with policy, tricks and the like. If o plead Christ, the Apostles, and the Scriptures for their practise, be to manage it with tricks; he sayes true, else how he will vindi∣cate the truth of that which he hath said, as yet appeares not unto m▪ but I de∣s he and his bretheren would look at home, and consider what way of God it is for poor decevable men, to make Canons, Lawes & Ordinances, as Iron bonds, to bind the consciences of those that differ from there in, what is their Ordinati∣on
by Bishops, is that the way of God? They will tell us their Ordination is good, because they received it not from the Bishops as Bishops, but as Presbyters, who shifts now? What mental reservation, evasion, and equivocation is this? Is not this a trick of tricks? The Ordination by the Pope, by the same argument may be pleaded for, he is a Presbyter too. What is their maintenance by Tythes, Oblations, and Obventions, forced from all sorts of men, the way of God? Is this Jure divino? If they say so, I desire they would prove it; if they plead Ju∣re humano, as that seemes to be their strongest staffe, then it is but mans way. What say they to their Parochiall, Classicall, Provinciall, and Nationall Assem∣blies, be those Jure divino? Is thus to manage their presbytery mans way, or Gods way? Surely these are not the waies of God, but of man, like Nebuchad∣nezzas lovely Image, excellent for brightnesse, terible for forme, whose head is gold, whose brest and armes Silver, his belly and thighs of brasse, his legs of Iron, his feet, part of Iron, and part of clay, is not their government a meere com∣position, of gold, silver, brasse, Iron and clay? But see the event of the Image, Dan. 2.35, 39. When will the Assembly answer the Questions propounded by the Parliament? I feare some tricks, and shifts now. 2. He saith many that know not what Independency is▪ are sticklers for it, and would not be tyed to it. Oh when will he see the beame in Presbyteries eye? Let him but reflect, look back, and seriously ask his owne soule the question, whether Presbytery is not guilty, and that in a higher degree, of that which he chargeth Independency? Let him look into his large Church, I meane the Na∣tionall, the Mother, or into the Parochiall, her Daughters, and see whether he will not find ignorance, darknesse, grosse ignorance, darknesse that may be felt, among many of their assemblies; doe they all know what Presbytery is? (if they doe, I think they know more then their teachers) how often have many of them complined of the ignorance of their parishioners? But to dishonour the Independents, they are made Saints, wise men in a moment; how many amongst them have their Religion yet to choose, waiting for the knowledge of what Re∣ligion the Assembly hath, or wil set up. Which when they shall do if they adheare to their principles, and excommunicate all the profane, and grosse ignorant a∣mong them, they will fill the Kingdome with combustion, and people will shortly as ill indure their Tyranicall Judictures and sensures, as they did the High Commission and Sar-chamber of late. 3. He affirmeth Independency to be a faction, in that all other errors and Sectaries are suffered, pleaded for, dealt gently with, are freely suffered to grow & increase, no way taken to suppresse them, their Books. Licensed▪ I am sorry to see so much envy, hatred & mallice, appeare against the Parliament, as doth in this and many other passages, of the Gangrena, and all because they cannot fulfill a ma∣lignant humour, that is so much predominate in his Spirit, even to the distru∣ction of those whose conversations, parts, piety, and sound judgments, are not in∣ferior to any. He that runs may read envy in his spirit, how angry is he that any are Licensed to speaketh their owne defence, to wipe of that dirt, he hath indeavou∣red to besmear their faces withall (a priviledge that Heathens allow) as the Priests would not let the Scriptures be in English, lest the people sh uld understand their wickednesse, so many Presbyterians, now are extreame unwilling that the
presse should be open for all, let their folly should be laid open, and their mouths stopped, and so not only their craft should be in danger to be set at nought, but also that their Temple of the great goddesse Diana, should be d sised, and her magnifence be distroyed, whom the world wonders after, and worships. If M. Edwards or his brethren could once monopolize Printing and Licensing into their owne hands, that nothing might be Licensed, nor Printed, but that which may tend to the advancement of their pompe; then might all those tales and stories, lyes and libells, forgeries, quaint fictions, and bold malitious inven∣tions, of which the Gangrena is compounded, passe for currant coyne in the Presbyterian judgment, and that by the Authority of Imprimatur James Cran∣ford. will they never be contented that others should have the same priviledge as they themselves have? Are not the Presbyterians suffered? Erastians, Ridged Presbyterians and the like? When will they be contented to obey and be Subjects will nothing content them but Rule, Dominion and Lord ship? Had the Pre∣laticall nature as well as name been suppressed, wee had not had this day any such spirit in the Kingdome. 4 He saith that it appeares to be a faction, in that these sorts of men come into it. 1 Needy and broken men. 2. Guilty and suspitious men. 3. Some who have businesse depending, that they may be sooner dispatched. 4. Ambitious, proud, co∣vetous men. 5. Libertines, loose persons. 6. All wanton, wicked, unstable Heretiques and 7. Such as would not have peace; loose Offi es &c. 8. And Many discontented in their Churches. If the confluence of all these will prove Independency a faction, much more will it prove Presbyterie one, for first it appeares, their Church is compounded of such, and that by his owne words, that say they come from them. 2. All these sorts of persons are yet with them; how many men broken and needy are with them? and it may be honest men too for all that. How many guil∣ty amongst them, witnesse. Hunscot and others. Is there none in their third place, that hath businesse depending, who are with them? Even those that one while was for Prelaticall, are they not now for Presbyteriall government? Surely they they cannot yet forget, who had, and hath a fine designe, that went from Ox∣ford to them, 4. I have already shewed there are ambitious proud men amongst them; and who more covetous then they? Doe they not make it an ordinary thing to forsake one, a second, yea a third, leaving two for a greater? Doe they not preach for lucre sake? what savour hath ten shillings, twenty shillings, for a Wedding, Christning, Funerall Sermon? surely covetousnesse in a high degree. Have they not heard of the great Presbyterian Minister, at Rihmond that when a dead corps was buried in his parish, because the man that had formerly relation to it, gave the Clerk but five shillings, the Minister said it should be taken up againe, and so accordingly it was; if Mr. Edwards can paralell this amongst all his stories of the Independents, them let him brand them with abominable covetous∣nesse. Is their no Libertines amongst them? and, 6. Whereas he saith all wanton witted persons, come to the Independents. I de∣sire his pen may not here after, so hastily out run the truth: Have they not one wanton witted man, unstable man amongst them? If so why doe any come from
them, but contradictions in his discourse is so common, that he scarce thinks of them. Is there n loose persons, no libertines among them, not one heretique, that is strange? But surely if lacivious, effeminate, scurrilous passages, carriages, deportments, and expressions, will manifest they have; I am confident hundreds of instances would soone be produced for the proofe of it, and not one of them of the Independents. 7. This he saith, Such as have no mind to peace, and are affraid to loose offi∣ces and places, come to the Independents. This charge is bitter; doth, he not insinuate into the Kingdome, that the Independents, in the Army, doe inde∣vour to prorogue the warre, being afraid to loose their places; Whether this be true or no, let their worke, hast, successe, endevours, winter and summer en∣gagements, all crowned from Heaven with unparaleld successe, speake; there is a cloud of witnesses; I will hold my peace. But that these sorts of persons are among them, let the former delayes of the Armie, witnesse, that cruell and inveterate Spirit, among Ministers, Officers, and people, at the reduced Army, that God hath made famous by not doing their work negligently, calling them the new Noddle, greene headed boyes and the like; if they be not enemies to peace, why are they so violent for the Magistrate to sheath his sword in the blood of the Independents? 8. He saith the Independents are discontented persons; but are they so? I pray at what? it is because they find nothing among or in their Churches fit subjects, or objects for divine contentments, but certainly there is few others among them, from the talest Cedar in the Assembly, to the lowest sh ub in their parish-churches: I will declare what they are discontented at very briefly, that Mr. Edwards if possible, might see by his owne candle, 1 At God, that fire comes not downe from Heaven, to distroy a generation of men that deserve better things at their hands, like Jonah, peevishly disconten∣ted, not only that the Ninevites, an ignorant heathenish people, but that the In∣dependents, whom I believe their conscience tels them are many of them honest, perish not. 2 They are discontented at the Parliament; let their expressions, papers, peti∣tions, secret charges, open accusations against them, because their hands are not embrued in the blood of their friends and servants, that God hath honoured, even in their blood, who have been at all times willing to sacrifice it freely for them, witnesse this truth, 3. At the people that heare them, entertaine them, or give them any lodging, house or harbour, witnesse Mr Prinnes late Chatechisme, Mr. Edwards Gangre∣na, such uncharitable men, are they even so far void of good nature, as to suffer those to famish for want, that under God, have been instruments to keep them alive. 4. At the Independents, to see them prosper, encrease, to be intrusted in any place military or civill, to heare any speak for them, or see any to smile upon them, Oh how it grieves, vexes, discontents, and troubles them! as their late Remon∣strance declares: is it possible for them to sleep for anger? 5. At themselves, that their owne lusts, inordinate desires are not satisfied; that they have not been industrious enough, that they have not sate up longer, and risen earlyer, to have invented some meanes to roote out the Independents &c.
If such a society and combination of persons make up a faction, and are sufficient alone, how Mr. Edwards can cleare Presbytery from being a faction I know not: What will any one say, if I shew them many more and many worse in their Presbyterian Assemblyes, I shall name but two more. 1. They are a bloody people, who thirst after blood, who have bound themselves with an oath, yea they have made the Protestation and Covenant to become bloo∣dy unto them, through their strained and forced sence of it, falsely surmising, it binds them to endevour the taking away of liberties, estates, and lives, of all that are in their judgements heretiques, &c. But surely this was not the true intent of it, thus to set the Kingdome by the eares, for there is the same parity of reason, that the Independents should endevour the Presbyterians destructions as on the contrary, judgeing them erronious; but if Mr. Edwards tels me they have cove∣nanted to extirpate errour, heresie and schisme, I demand whether there is no way to banish errour and heresie out of the Church, except the persons of them that hold it be banished out of the world? though he cānot let them live in the Church with him, cānot he be contented to let them alone in the world? O that he would tel me what meanes the Parable of suffering the tares & wheat to grow together in the field till harvest? he must either say the tares be hipocrites as some, or pro∣fane persons as others, but he cannot say they are hipocrites, for these are such as may be knowne to be tares, therefore they must be persons knowne to be contrary to sound godlinesse, either in judgement or practise. Now the question is, where these persons are to be suffered, and what is meant by the field, which is either the Church or the world;Because Col. Washington after M. Edwards had en∣ded his Sermon in Christ-Church, opposed his expo∣sition of this Parable, a warrant was sent for him from the Lord Major, and he bound to aswer this (marvelous contempt) at the Sessions. but not the Church, for the mouthes of of heretiques must be stopped, and heresie and pro∣phanesse cast forth, therefore it must be in the world, if so, let not Mr. Edwards deceive himselfe and o∣thers any longer, by telling them they must be cast out of all the christian world; except he think there is none of the world in England, Scotland, France, Ire∣land, Spaine, Germany, Italy, and the like: Had he had but so much patience, a to have given the Par∣liament leave to have given their own interpretation of their owne words, he and his brethren would not so rashly have accused them for breach of Covenant. But it is apparent their own words being the interpretation, they have taken an oath, and made it bloody unto them And, 2. They are a prophane people What is the matter of their National Church, li∣ving stones, or dead rubbish? Or is it not a strange composition of dea h & life, hell and Heaven, light and darknesse, Christ and Beliall, good and evill? How are their Nationall, how are their parochiall Churches constituted, but by being borne in such a Kingdome, or such a peice of ground which wee know naturally brings forth nothing but thistes and evill weeds? I confesse could I see a King∣dome or a parish so cleane as to bring forth nothing but holy fruit, could I see men borne Saints, and the Kingdome of Earth convert men as soone as they are in it, or could I heare a voyce from Heaven saying, Oh England, or the like, I take thee and all persons in theeto be a peculiar nation to my self, above all peo∣ple,
all that are borne in thee shal be holy, I would plead for a National Church too, but in the mean time they cannot excuse their Temples from being founded up∣on an ill foundation, built up with rotten timber, and adorned with a fading glory; their garden from being sowne with il seed, and bringing forth evill fruit, if all these sorts of people can but prove a faction, sure I am they are the greatest in England; and let them not cry out the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, while their hands are full of blood, let them not proclaim a feast to take away Naboths Vinyard. But if he & his bretheren shal say I wrong them, by laying this to their charge, that their Church is a meere compo∣sition of light and darknesse, of bloody and prophane men and the like, let them but answer me in these things. 1. Whether or no, all that live in their parish, and frequent their assemblies, having been christned (as they terme it) when they were infants, be not mem∣bers of their Church? If he say not, I demand when they were excluded? if he saith they were never of it, I desire he would not plead for a Nationall Church, nor power to suspend and excommunicate, for the Church hath nothing to doe to judge those that are without, seing there is so many in the Kingdome that were never of it. 2. Whether or no all that are of their assemblyes, are such that in their con∣sciences they can believe all pertake of the divine nature, that they are all Saints? Or whether or no there are not among them prophane, grosse, Ignorant, cove∣tous, superstitious, and blood-thirsty people, yea even Athests, men of no Reli∣gion at all, Caviliers, murderers &c? 3. Whether or no I have said truth or not, in saying the matter of their Church is not purely christian, but antichristian? Of these Questions I expect an answer from Mr. Edwards. Thus it appeares clearely if these sorts of people prove a faction, and a faction preceds sudden desolation; then it is high time for the Presbyterians to repent, weepe and lament, for their destruction is at hand: But I come to his 6. Symtome that preaches ruine to them he stiles Independets, Anababtists &c. which he saith is. 6. There reaching after, and medling with all kind of persons and things, grasping of all at once, labouring to engrosse all offices, and places of power into their hands, slighting and abusing all that stand in their way: Wil Mr. Edwards never cease thus subtilly to incense the Magistrate against faithful subjects, ende∣vouring to make them believe, they would wrest the sword out of their hands, & set up another King, Oh what a bitter incendiary appears here! even ready if he can to set the world on fire. But I to hasten, must turne the glasse to himselfe, and his bretheren, that by a direct reflection they may know themselves in their proper colours. Who meddles with all kind of persons and things like them? With Kings and Parliaments like them? With Townes, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms like them? Who endevours to get more power into their hands then they? Who complains so much for want of power as they? All their bookes, petitions, pam∣phlets, and Remonstrances, declare them to be the most impatient people under the sunne, till they have a sword put into their hands, till the Parliament become their servants (I had almost said their vassals) thy care not who they discontent
so they please themselves, whether it be Parliament, Army, or Kingdoms; M. Ed∣wards hath given the world a full accompt of such a spirit, in that infectious Ma∣chiavilian Epistle to his Vlcerous Treatise, where he incites them to petition and petition againe, never to lye from the Parliament dores petitioning, what ever comes of it. If this be a Symtome of destruction I feare it will be woe daies with them. But I come to the 7. Symtome of their ruine which; M Edwards saith is the Sectaries great sins and wickednesse &c. That there are great sins among Sectaries I deny not, but that he hath proved all those he stiles Independents Anabaptists &c. to be Heretiques, & Schismatiques, I deny it, and it remaines for him to prove, when he knowes how, which I am confident will not be in this age. But he goes on largely to innumerate severall, filthy and abo∣minable practises, and many untruthes, and fathers them upon the Independents, without any distinction. I shall chiefly speak to two, the first is blood guiltinesse in destroying, the lives of many by dipping, weakly and antient persons in Ri∣vers in cold seasons. If Mr. Edwards can prove what he sayes, it will save him from being reputed the father of this untruth, surely if he had knowne the per∣sons that had killed any, or the persons that was killed, the world should have heard of it long before now, he wants neither wil nor malice to declare any thing that may render them odious. To prove his generall conclusion he produces a particular of a story of one Oates, that dipped a young woman who swelled with the water, shee received into her, which water some report was found in her after shee was dead, others say Oates drowned her: O miracle! O wonder! O prodi∣gie! A woman drowned, living twenty dayes after shee came forth of the water. If M. Edwards saith shee, came by her death by it, that is as monstrus to me as the other, shee was as well nine dayes after shee had been in the water, as shee had been a great while before. But he saith it is reported, shee confessed it to be the cause of her death. O, what wil not envie say, if her cleering the man & the wa¦ter from being the cause of her death, can by any Logick or Sophistrie be said to accuse them, then the report is true, otherwise it is but a winter storie, and false report, besides the young womans own mother came to London to cleare the man; for the truth is, the woman dyed of a Dropsie, the water of which was found within her after her death▪ But if any shall conceive this to be water shee received into her when shee was in the water, it being twenty dayes after, I can∣not chuse, but judge such a mans intellectualls scarce sound, and whereas he re∣ports the Justices sent him to the Gaole, the truth is (as I am informed) the Iu∣stices would not medle with it, But the Coroner sent him thither by his owne warrant, if Mr. Edwards sayes he doth not affirme it to be a truth, that either Oates or the water killed her, which is his best course, since they cannot prove Oates baptized her, but is only a report and cannot prove such a thing, ever let him repent of his untruths and possitive affirmations of some to be so killed, for page 188. of the second part of Gangrena, he boldly charges them with bloody guil∣tinesse in that particular, let him not vent hearesayes for oracles any more. But suppose one that had been dipped should have dyed, soone after in much lesse space then twenty dayes, must the water necessarily have killed her. For my part I can conceive no reason for it, but let him and his brethren of the Tribe of Levi looke back and consider how many poore Infants without there consent they have sprinkled being sick and wel nigh halfe dead in peoples estimation, but
would they take it well, if any should endict them for killing their infants? Sure∣ly they would be esteemed ridiculous, yet for such a practise is there as much ground to frame an ndictment, and more then for the other; Let M. Edwards bring better proofes hereafter for his accusations, or else let all his friend that love him, perswade him to leave glorying in his shame for the future. 2. The second Article materiall is [he saith] they use all wayes and meanes in their power, to engage the two Natons in a Warre, one against the other; Let M. Edwards now bring forth his witnesses, and make good his Charge if he know how: Had he but halfe so much colour to charge the Independants, &c. to be incndiaries between the two Kingdomes, as I have against him, he had some proofe for what he hath written. Hs second part of his Gangrena tels me, that he hath either received infor∣mation, that the Scots are resolved to engage themselves against a party at least of this Kgdome, and that a considerable one, or he would have it so, else what meanes that expression of his page 193. viz. God will honour our bretheren of Scotland, to make them a great meanes of their failing, [speaking of the In∣dependants] and they shall fal before the Scots, as the Prelatical & Popish party did, marke, how did they fall before the Scots; they came in a hostile manner, & was so psed. See if all you that take notice of his expressions, cannot easily view his spirit, painted in great red letters; he saith further, page 194 God will make th come (v z.) the Sectaries, Anabaptists, Independants, that whole Faction, and woshp before their feet (viz) the Scots, that is, they shall over∣cm, and triumph over these Sectaryes; a little after in the same page, speaking still of the Scots, he sayth, thou shalt have victory over thy enemies, and thou shalt enrich thy selfe with their spoiles, he tels the world that the Scots shll be notable Plunderers, and have the Pillage of the field: will the Scots thank him for this? To all which I shall only reply thus much; He may be deceived, for God frustrateth the token of the Lyars, and maketh Diviners mad, and turneth wisemen backward, Esay 44.25. But he goeth on and saith, they are guilty of prophanesse, loosenes of life, carnall confidence, and the lke; I have already de∣clar d what prophanesse is amongst the Presbyterian-Churh members, not with∣standing J have not yet heard of one excommunicated since the Bishops times, but wheras he blames for carnall confidence, J wonder he blushes not to say so, let me tell him of their carnall confidence, it is so great, that for ought J can see most of them have no other; how do they cry out for a sword of Steel to be their helpe) they call upon Prisons, Fines, Banishments, Confiscation, of Goods, Fire and Faggot to helpe them, or they are undone, when these that he termes Independants, having Truth on their side, they knowing truth defends them, dare appeare in the middest of Wolves, Lyons and Beares, without an arme of flesh; and the other shrouds themselves under Monarchy, secular Authority, and will go no further then they will accompany them. If great sins and wickednes is a forerunner of sudden destruction, it is time for the Presbyterians to looke about them; but I come to his eighth and last symptom. 8. Which he sayth is, their not being moved to repentance, when God hath testifyed against them, and spit in their faces, as by laying open their nakednes, and fully discovering their wayes, by some Bookes written, by stirring up the
City of LONDON against them, but rather blaspheme the more, and not beene humbled. Hath God dealt thus with them, and they made these returnes to him? J can∣not believe it, but I see the main thing is, when God hath discovered any infir∣mity to them, they have not testifyed their humility and repentance to him and his bretheren; is there no confession but auricular? Is there no humiliation but in their presence? But this is an usuall thing in his dialect to speak what comes uppermost; I advise him seriously to examine his own heart, and the truth of what I have declared and manifested, and let him tell me whether their naked∣nes is not great, and the covering of it but Figge leaves; it may be he will once speake truth, and confesse their sinnes and evill wayes, appeares as Sodom and Gomorah; but yet he hath a salve to apply to his sore, a hole to creep out at, he may perhaps say, they keep dayes for fasting and humiliation for their sinfull nakednes, and spirituall and carnall abominations: But if he can thus blind the eyes of men, yet the Al-seeing God, sees that great hypocrisie that lurkes under their Fasts, are they the more humble because they abstain from bread? Doe they thinke that God is well pleased with their fasting, when they fast for strife and debate, and their hearts and hands are full of bloud? Is this their humiliation, is this Evangellicall Repentance? Is this the Fast that God hath chosen; The proclayming of a Fast will not excuse Ahabs taking away Naboths Vineyard, and his life too. He saith God hath discovered the Independents nakednes, surely, M. Edwards much forgot himselfe when he wrote this, God hath discovered their Co∣vering rather, hath not God made it manifest in the eyes of all People, that they are cloathed with so much honesty, inocency, integrity, pyety, and courage, in all their undertakings, that it is impossible for him to uncover them, though he endeavours it all he can. Surely, Gods dealing hath been so plain, that if their eyes were not shut, they would see God going before them, by a cloud by day, and a pillar by night, ho∣nouring them before the People, giving them favour, notwithstanding his and his brethrens constant endeavours to destroy them, the more they have eneavour∣ed to destroy them, the more they have encreased, though they, like cruell taske-masters have endavoured to make their worke, their bondage and misery great∣er, and their strength and helpe lesse, yet God hath the more multiplyed them, crowning their enterprizes with successe, and that great and wonderfull. Mee thinks M. Edwards should do well seriously to consider, how God hath made his and his bretherens wrath to praise him, and the remainder of their wrath he hath restrained; while they have endeavoured to swallow them up all greedily, with a Petition, a Remonstrance, gangrenous Discourse, and virulent Sermon, God hath turned all into good for them, and they are yet delivered: And M. Edwards is angry▪ peevish, and much discontented; thus, though God hath discovered them∣selves to themselves, and shewed them their vanity in fighting against God, they shut their eyes and will not see: have they been humbled? have they repented for this evill, of persecuting amd cursing whom God blesseth, even of their fighting against God? Surely no: but they blaspheme the more, their throats are even scorched with great heat, thirsting after the bloud of the Saints, and the Prophets, but they repent not, to give God the glory, though the Kingdome is full of darknes, yet
they repent not of their evill deeds. Rev. 16.9, 10, 11. They are envious at the prosperity of the Righteous, there is not one victory, one mercy, one priveledge bestowed upon the Independants, but they murmur at it and seek to turne it about to their destruction, and this is tho fruit of Gods dispensation. Tell me, after their fastings thus many yeares, which of them is more meeke and humble then they were before they began? Oh ow many of them fast for strife and debate, and smite with the Fist of wickednes! Thus now, if continuing in sin, not repent¦ting at the discovery of their nakednes, be a sign of ruine, or if any other of all his Symptomes, have prophesied desolation, all wise men may see to what passe they are brought, in what a sad, wofull deplorable, and lamentable condition the Presbyterians are in. But least M. Edwards Prophesy should fayle him, he hath discovered a sound reserve, when he was in the Front of his Prophesy, not infallibly knowing whe∣ther the words he had spoke would come to passe, he saith his Prophesie is true, if ever God spake by him; The great question being yet unresolved to me, and I believe many more, whether evre God spake by him or not? Thus he thinks to excuse himselfe from being esteemed as, and adjudged for,, (whether he hath uttered a truth or a lye) a false Prophet; but I shall follow him a little further, and consider something of his other Corallaryes. In the third Corallary, he proceeds thus, Hence then from all these error, here∣sies, blasphemyes, and practises of the Sectaryes, we may see what a great evill and sin Separation is, from the communion of the Reformed Churches, and how highly dis∣pleasing to God, for men to make a schisme and rent in the Churches of God, in a time of Reformation, God punishing the schisme and separation of our times, with so many Heresyes, Blasphemyes, and wicked practises, &c. It pityes me to see how the man through a mistake, or something worse, hath wound himselfe into a labyrinth; how he builds upon a rotten and slippery foundation; he charges the Independents with the guilt of schisme, when it is yet to prove, that thirs is a true Church; could he prove their Nationall or Parrochiall Churches, Gospell Temples, true spiritu∣all houses, built upon a right foundation, in a right Gospell forme, by a Gospell Ministrie, then had he a ground for his charge, but if he cannot prove them such, (Jure d vino) by the ballance of the Sanctuary, and yet can prove them true Churches, and the Independents guilty of schisme erit mihi magnus Apollo; If they cannot prove themselves true Churches, will not their leaving of them be a plain discovery of their true obedience in hearkning to the Spirits call, to come forth of Babylon? If he sayes, though for the present they are not as they desire, and as they hope they shall be, but they are now reforming, I answer, tis true, he speakt much, and writes much, of Reformation of their Church, and the like; ô how it grieves my heart to see his Head full of gray haires, and yet he knowes it not, they have more need to looke to their foundation, then to talke of Reformation, for if that be not firm, the building connot be right; the truth is, it is the heigth, depth, breadth, and length of folly, to be at much paines and cost, to beautify the out side, when the inn-side is full of corruption of dead mens bones; this is but healing a wound at the top, when it is festered and full of corruption within, all the Reformation of their Church, without a sequestration, without a new undation, is but as if a man that was sick at heart ready to dye, should
send for a Chirurgeon to take away some Warts from his hands: or like an un∣wise man that layes a foundation of glasse, hay or stubble, and erects a very faire specious, and beautifull pallace upon it, which presently falls down for want of a good foundation, and the builders labour, care and treasure is but lost; such a foundation every one hath just cause to feare theirs is, and like to it will be their Reformation. How long therefore will it be before Mr. Edwards and his bre∣thren cease to call evill good and good evill, light darknesse and darknesse light; O the consideration of the former Symptoms, as they are faithfully applyed, clear the Independents from the guilt which M. Edwards r pen casts upon them, & ads a luster to their practise, it commends it, it proclaimes them most happy that are come forth from their confused assemblyes, as being come into a City of refuge. Al the dirt that he throwes in the faces of them whom he accuseth of Schisme, will never stick, but be like a drop of cold water powred on a straw, that falls from it without leaving the least impression behind it: If he and all his Brethren sever∣ally or assembled together, should plot, study, conspire, and endeavour to prove them guilty of Schisme from a true Church, because from them, though they should fill the world with Tractate after Tractate, Sermon after Sermon Petition after Petition, Gangrena after Gangrena▪ & Volume after Volvme, they would never be able to doe it; a third, nay a fourth Gangrena wil not effect it. Thus may those who through the Spirit discerne the deepe things of God, see how dangerous it is to abide with them, where there is such a stupidity, such an unity, & such a harmony, in darknesse, that it may be justly suspected truth is fallen in, or excomunicated out of their Churches. But he further tells us of many judgments of God against those whom in his mouth are Schismatiques &c. as separation from God; his words need explanation, or it may be well judged he is Armin us his friend: But my thinks he should have been silent in this, that a little before said their Brethren even their Brethren of Scotland have been afflicted with sword and pestilence, Thus Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdin. For feare of comming nigh the Independents, he stumbles so often being out of his way, that it is to be feared he wil fal suddenly. I could tel of many heavy judg∣ments in their Congregations. A horrible & wicked thing, the Priests prophesie lyes, and the people love to have it so, go into their Congregations, from person to per∣son, and see whether a worse then Egyptian darknesse, hath not covered many nay most of their faces, enquire of them whether they have left their former Su∣perstition? Have they forgotten their bowing at the Altars, at the name of Jesus, Their hoods and Surplices, their crosses in their Christenings, the common-pray∣er and the like? Oh the unbeliefe! Oh the stupidity that hath seised upon them▪ He saith Schisme fom them hath Cains marke upon it, of a Fugitive and a Va∣gabond; But I am sure the very character of Ephraim is stamped upon them, they are full of gray haires, and know it not, or like Isachar, couch downe under the burden of ignorance, pride and prophannesse, being Brethen neerly allyed to Simeon and Levie. But I passe to his. 4. Coroll. Which is full of high accusations against the Parliament in gene∣rall▪ and many worthy members in particular, for sleeping while the Devill sowes heresie; surely never was there more subtilty used, to incense an Honourable
Parliament against a loyall and honest people, and the people against the Par∣liament then in his books, or else what meanes his publishing them to the world, even to their friends and enemyes, to be carelesse dreamers, sleepers, that while they should like Mastives, have given warning of Theeves approaching, they have been dumbe, drunk, of fast a sleepe. Taxing many of them, for endevou∣ring all they can to hinder the establishment of Religion, threatning them with heavy judgements. Will he and his Brethren never be contented till the Parliament become their servants, and slaves, to execute their Mandates, to propagate their designes, their private interests, though the Kingdome perishes? God hath hitherto blessed his people under them; I hope he will doe so still, by filling them with the spirit of wisdome, counsell, understanding, and the feare of the Lord, that they may judge not according to Mr. Edwards, but according to truth. He saith their Ministers have been asleepe, I think now he speakes the truth, he might have added, and are a sleepe still, else they could not chuse but see whence their pedegree is derived, even as farre as Rome, where their plots are laid, even in the botomlesse pit of darknesse, and thither they all tend, even in the end to their owne ruine; and tbat their parochiall Churches have lineally descended not from Christ, but from Antichrist, and their maintenance by Tythes to be an ap∣pendix to the Leviticall Priest-hood, abolished by the death of Ghrist. He saith the people have been a sleepe too, it seemes even so; or why are they still deluded with their specious pretences of piety, learning and the like, when others can discern wolues under sheepes clothing? or why do they take their words for oracls, their examples for presidents, their canons & lawes for Scripture? but that their eyes are closed, they are even fast a sleepe, but I proceed to his 5. Corollary. 5. He ascend, to a strong exhortation, to all those that have separated from them to returne to them, with two subtle insinuations. 1. saith he, some have been only deceived, but are honest, and for-sook us for more pure preaching; one while he sayes Independency is a faction, and makes them all seem to appeare to be Schismatiques, and Heretiques, but lo, to advance his owne end▪ they are honest men, I suppose he remembred his expressions in the sixt Reason of his book against toleration page 29. where he saith, In many if not in most Townes and Parishes it cannot be helped, but that there are and will be for many yeares men of no great popular gifts for preaching; who also according to their prin∣ciples, not having been brought up to it, cannot so comply with their people, Now ma∣ny that live in these parishes (seing they may keepe ther houses and places of abode) up∣on the newes af a toleration, will for the benefit of more powerfull, practicall and zea∣lous preaching, betake themselves to go to their Churches, and so will fall to their principles, and so we shall have upon this ground swarmes of them. He confesseth, for more pure preaching they forsooke them, and yet blushes not to exhort them to returne back again Be these your Gospell exhortations, O it, much pities me to see how people are deluded by them, have they all been at Vniversityes? are great schollers, Orthodox▪ Divines, and good church-men? now therefore they think the world must needs wonder after them, and then in the next place, he insinuates that divers have been regained, as Johannes Denkins, Obbo. Philppus &c, us. If this may be a ground to believe more wil returne to them,
it may more strongly be turned upon them, as aground to believe more will come from them, that have been long deluded by them, because some eminent a∣mong them, are come from them, and cannot by any meanes be deluded to re∣turne to them, yea some of the Priests are become obedient to the faith, which is a wonder; but he inforces his exhortations yet more violently, and saith. 1. Stay no longer in the way of Schisme, lest God let thee goe further, thus he takes that for granted (viz) that the Independents are in the Schisme, though as it is apparent before, he cannot prove it, so that the strength of this exhortation falls with his former discourse; But seeing they cannot acquit themselves from Schisme from Christ, from the Gospell and Ordinances of Chtist, I desire all may see whether they are going, and into what they are falen, and repent and come forth of Babylon. 2. He saith the Independent Church way, is a way of error & confusion that God never blessed with edification, onenesse of heart. The falshood af this is truly and of∣ten declared by many members of separated Churches, who blesse God for their edification by and in the communion each with other, in the Father and the Sonne. But are they all of one mind amongst them? thats strange if they be, is it not the combynation of Ephrim and Manassah, to be both against Iudah? To Scanda∣lize Justones? But what edification is there amongst them? Doe they build up one another in faith, love, meknesse, gentlenesse, long-suffering forgiving and forbearing? If they did, heir spirit would not be so violent, they build; its true, but what? A bloo∣dy superstructure, under the name of zeale upon a slippery foundation. 3. He advances yet further saying, Come out of her, lest you partake of their sins and plagues. It is concluded by him, that the Independents must be banished the Christian world (I would he would tell me what he meanes by it) The greatest sin, and the greatest plague, that I can or may desire any to come forth from, is darknesse, which darknesse walkes round about their high places at noone day, O therefore I say now to them all that shall come forth, come forth stay no long∣er hoodwinked, let no man beguile you and deceive you, what though you loose credit and esteeme in the world and the like, care not: God is all things in one, and one thing in all things, yea he is that one that is all things; I long till you be made partakers of the glorious light of the Lord Jesus, that in his light, and not in another you may see light. I now come to his. 6. And last Coroll. where he tels us there is a great difference betweene his Bre∣theren the Scots and the Independents, I could tell of much difference betweene them indeed, but I forbeare, because I love peace. He saith, the Scots have been trve to their principles, wherein he accuseth the Independents that they have not been true to this; But let Mr. Edwads tell me, have not the Independents been true to their principles? Speakes he in earnest? In what have the Independents been false to their principles in all the engagements of their dearest lives, their principles being the Kingdoms peace, knowing that Salus Populi is SUPREMA LEX, they have adhered to them, as their actions and successe declares. They are a people that in despite of envy, have and will appeare, (I am confident) in faithfulnesse, integrity, courage and constan∣cy
to the Parliament to have exceeded many, but come behind none. 1. he saith, the Scots have improved and made use of all victories, successes, and advantages, for the good of both Kingdomes, but he saith (in a passion surely) that the Independents have not, but have spoken against the Scots: Oh that he did but remember that saying, Qui alterum incusat furti ipsum se intueri oportet. He condemnes the Independents for speaking against the Scots; but when will he condemne himselfe, and his Bretheren for speaking against the Independents▪ I could tell what use some have made of thir victories when they have had any, but I had rather heale then make differencs: But have not the Independents made use of their victories for the good of the State? the good use they have made of their victories, appeares. 1. In that they have improved every victory, not delaying but prosecuting it to the utmost, they were not like Pompey that knew how only to conquer, but not to make use of a victory, but as God hath made them famous in conquering, so in pursuing every victory; I might evidence this from the battle at Nasby to this day, had all done so it had been well; and I am confident many groanes, sighs and teares had been spared. 2. In their mercifulnesse and kindnesse to the Country, being victoris in that they did not pillage, plnder and destroy, and would lye no longer in any place then necessity constrayned them, and all because they would not be bur∣thensome. 3. They have made this use of their victories, to say in seeing, and see in sai∣ing God hath gone out before them, crowning their indevours, a his instruments, with continued successe, as many victories testifie▪ and in all these, they have de∣sired God might be gloryfied, whose glory will shine in and by them, when M. Edwards honour is buried in the grave. 2. He saith our Brethren the Scots have borne with much patience, infinite re∣proaches in City and in Country: If so, let M Edwards examine the reason, let him lend an eare as farre as Yorkshire; loosers will oft times speake: But have not the Independents (whether his Bretheren or not it matters not much) under∣gone more reproaches, & with much more patience? Have they not been called by the Presbyterians▪ yea by the leading men of them, Villains, Heretiques, Schisma∣tiques, Blasphemers and the like? Have they not cryed out to the Magistrate to suppresse them, and in the meanetime I know them whom he calls Independents, Anabaptists, Heretiques and the like, have been praying for them, and have never yet put up one Petition to the Parliament to ruine them. But, 3. He saith, the Scots have been forward moving for peace and settlement for the Chuch: Whenzeale and knowledge walke hand in hand, and ttuth leads them in the straight path of love, we shall be free from jealousies. Mr. Edwards and his Bretheren, have condemned the Independents for being forward to settle the Church, and commends the Scots for it: I hope guiles, daw∣bing and dissembling, will not thus alwaies passe for currant coyne; certainly the superscription of dissimulation, is stamped upon these expressions: But have not the Independents been forward to settle the Church? certainly then they doe ill to rayle against them for making too much hast. Have they not been for∣ward for peace? Oh strange! When Envie, Pride, Avarice, malice and discontent
drive men they must need run: Why have the Independents fought thus long made such hast, sacrificed so much blood, exposed themselves to so much hard∣ship, if not for peace? Let the effect of their worke, let that peace the Kingdome enjoyes within little more then twelve moneths last past, more then in many yeares before, speake for them, for I may well hold my peace: These strange ex∣pressions make me much incline to believe one blood runs in his and his Bre∣therens vaines, that run in theirs who said of the victory at Marston Moore, ber∣ter wee had had no victory, then the Independents should have obtained it, and the glory of it, Thus having in generall examined and impartially reflected his prophecy wherein is the substance of both books contained, I shall proceed a little further to examine somthing more paricularly. As, 1. The story of Captaine Hobson, wherin is many charges drawne up against him, especially concerning his preaching at Newport-Paganell▪ In the second e∣dition of th first part of Gangrena Mr. Edwards saith; Paul Hobson Preached in Newport-Paganell and thereabouts, in contempt of the Ordinance of Parliament made last April, after he was once taken and que∣stioned for it, and let go, be comes againe and does it the second time, in con∣tempt of the Governour of Newport Paganell that then was, and misbehaved himselfe. If one may judge of the rest of his stories by this one passage, I possi∣tively affirme them all false, for to my owne knowledge, after he was questioned for Preaching, when he returned he did not Preach againe, neither did he come back in contempt of the Governour, but for some armes taken from a Gentle∣man with him, and left at Newport, where he stayed but a litle while; therefore when Mr. Edwards affirmes this for truth; it is no wonder though he is not a∣shamed to call light darknes, and darknesse light, he Quotes M. Pryns fresh disco∣very of new lights to prove his story, I have searched that, & find no such expressi∣on in it: Surely Mr. Edwards hath a quick invention: But it may be he will think to put off this well enough (as he hath done many things else) by saying thats but circumstantiall, if he saith so, let me tell him, he that feares not to vent Circumstances out of a malicious braine, which are evidently false, will not stick at telling substantiall untruthes: But▪ for my part what ever he thinkes, I know it to be as substantiall an untruth as ever was declared, and many more know it as well as I: But Mr. Edwards further (speaking still of Captaine Paul Hobson and some with him, saith, Also when apprehended, uttering many bold and seditious speeches, that they would acquaint their friends in the House of Commons, of their bad usage: That they were resolved to make this businesse, the leading case of the Kingdome, for all the godly party; adding, that if the godly and wel affected party, were thus persecuted, they should be forced to make a worse breach then was yet, when they had done with the Kings party, and saying when they had made an end with the Caviliers, they should be forced to raise a new warre, to fight with them Oh, what will not the Father of lyes perswade some men to utter, and others to believe! the whole charge is compbonded of most notorious unjust, injurious and malitious flanders: But for the Readers further satisfaction▪ I shall give the world a full account of the story, not varying a haires breadth from the truth.
Captaine Hobson, with another Captaine going to Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army; through Newport-Paganell, being in their way, they called there to see some of their former acquaintance, who earnestly solicited them to stay a while with them, and desired Captaine Hobson to declare what God had caused him to enjoy of himselfe (a harmlesse pactice, not long since commended by the Pres∣byterians) which he accordingly did, and that without any molestation, or tu∣mult; none opposing or questioning him, for what he had done. His exercise being finished, the Captaine peaceably departed out of the Towne, and went to the Army; having dispatched their businesse there, they returned, and called at New∣port, as they came back; where Captaine Hobson was importuned to stay awhile, and accordingly he did, where some of his friends came to him, and desired that they might spend some time together, in blessing God for that great victory God had given to Sir Thomas at Nasbye: This was on the Saterday, the next day (being the first day of the weeke) they were unwilling to meet in the Town, for feare of disturbance, so they went to Lathbury, where they de both ci∣vily and religiously. In the after-noone come some scattering Souldiers and o∣thers, that made a great disturbance, by their fearefull swearing, horrid blasphe∣mies, horrible cursing, holding up a hound by the ears, to the window of the house, where the people met, & bringing a pack of hounds full cry about the house, e∣ven in so much that Captaine Hobson and some others went out to them, & asked them by what warrant they made that disturbance, they said they had none, but would go fetch one from the then Governour of Newport, to that Captain Hob∣son replyed, he would be ready to obey any order from him, and told him where he should be in the evening, ready to answer any thing that should be objected against him, the Souldiers were somthing pacified to heare him say so, but pre∣sently after comes one Ensigne Fish with aguard of Musquetieres to apprehend them all, and carry them to the mayne Guard, saying the Governour sent him, the Captaine desired to see his warrant, the Ensigne told him, twas not the Go∣vernour himselfe but the Major that sent him. But the Captaine and the rest of the company, went peaceably along with the Guard, to the maine Guard, being shamefully abused by the way, yet reviling none, when they came to the mayne Guard, they abode there peaceably, A while after a Lieutenant came and told the company they might depart, but the Captaine desired a warrant from the Gover∣ner, for their peaceable departure, that they might not be molested by the rude multitude, but presently came Lieutenant Colonell Cockaine, and Mr. Baber, one of the Committee, and said they came from the Governour, to testifie they had liberty to depart, saying they were sorry that such Gentlemen should be so abu∣sed, being contrary to the Governors knowledge; so the prisoners were set at liber∣ty & departed from the maine Guard: But a while after the Captaines being with the Governour, they humbly desired his honour to certifie them whether he gave any warrant for the practise of them that had so abused them, for if they did it contrary to his knowledge, they desired Justice, He returned them this answer, he would doe them Justice, for he would send them with his Marshall to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for he told them, they had run from their Colours, upon that, one of the Captaines produced his discharge, under Sir Thomas his owne hand, which though the Governour would not read, yet Lieutenant Colonll Cockaine
did and said it was very authentirk, but Sir Samuel Luke the Governour said they were lying fellowes, and he would not believe them whatsoever they said, so he sent them to the Army, by the Marshall, Ensigne Fish and two Souldiers, and a friend of theirs, one that had been an eye and eare witnesse to the whole pro∣ceedings, accompanying them, and when they came thither, the Noble Generall examined the businesse by a Councell of Warre, and it being faithfully reported to him, He wrot to Sir Samuel Luke to this effect; SIR, I Have had the businesse concerning those Gentlemen you sent to me, (Captain Hob∣son and Captaine B.) examined, and I find that they have been discharged of their Commands, at their owne importunity; the one by my selfe, and the other by the Colonell of that Regiment, the which if it had appeared to you (as they informed me they desired to doe) I conceive it might have prevented any further trouble, either to you, or to my selfe in that businesse. It seemes their usage, by those who come a long withthem, hath been very uncivill, and dishonorable unto Gentlemen, that have carried themselves with fid lity and courage in this cause, and have been members of this Army, And tru∣ly I can do no lesse (without encouragement to such ill carriages for the future, and for the satisfaction of those Gentlemen) then desire you to see full reparations made them by the Marshall and the Ensigne, and that you c sre them from their imployments. Your assured friend and Servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX. Presently after, the Captaines returned to Newport againe for their armes, which the Marshall most abusively had taken away (not in contempt, as Master Edwards would have it) imediatly after their comming, Sir Samuel Lk sent for them, & when they came to him, he told them if he could not have Justice in the Army he would have it else where; & asked them how long they intended to stay in Towne, they replyed, they would be gon presently; he tould them he would send one along with them; they desired to know whether he would send them as prisoners or not, he said, not as prisoners; so they departed from him to a private house in Towne, where Captaine Oxford came to them to know if they were ready to go, they told him yes, only desired so much liberty as to have the com∣pany of one with them to London, who might if there should be occasion (from his owne knowledge) witnesse the truth of things; but this being denyed them by the Governour, Captaine Hobson said, it seemed strange to him, that their witnesses might not be permitted to bear them company, saying these doings might possibly hinder a design that he had undertaken for the good of the State; But least any should wrest his words, he desired speciall notice might be taken of his expressions, which was so done, so Captaine Oxford departed, saying God blesse you Gentlemen; and the Captaines presently departed; not staying to Preach, as Mr Edwards untruly, groundlesly, and unjustly affirmeth; Neither did they ut∣ter
any such mutinous, and seditious words, as are charged upon them. The truth of all which I have declared, is beyond and above all contradiction. Their Christian meeknesse and peaceable carriage, when they were first distur∣bed by the rude multitude, like them that compassed Jasons house; by their hor∣rid, hellish bloody, and insolent, rayling, swearing and cursing, with the abomi∣nable practices of them that apprehended them at Lathbury is attested by Seventeene witnesses, subscribed with their owne hands. The certainty of their peaceable behaviour and demeanour at Newport, when, Captaine Oxford was with them, the vnjustnesse, untrunesse, and abominable falsity, of those mutinous, seditious expressions Registred by Mr. Edwards and M. Pryn is attested by divers that were eare witnesses to the whole discourse, that past between Captaine Hobson and Captain Oxford (at that time, when those ex∣pressions were falsly fathered on him) even by just persons, fearing God, and of good report, and that under their owne hands. To ad one word more, there came nine witnesses to London, to have attested the truth of the premisses, who earnestly desired that they might have been heard, but through some extraordinary occasion could not. All those writings subscribed with their owne hands, I had published at large, but that I would not be too tedious: Thus have I impartially related the story. But lest Mr. Edwards should think to creep out of this hole, by saying Captaine Oxford and Robert Ratford witnessed it before the Parliament, and therefore should stamp the superscription of truth upon it, because out of the mouth of those two men, I shal present a brief, yet ful and true discovery of what the witnesses are, and then let all honest men judge, whether they are persons sit to be believed. First for Captaine Oxford, he is, 1. One that is eminently knowne and noted, for his great ability to invent and publish untruths, among all that know him, and have the face of honesty; his ingenuity and audacity, appeares in this, more then in any thing else, two or three untruthes at one time, were most boldly, and malitiously vented by him, before a cloud of witnesses, in a Captaines house at Newport; So that through his custome in this trade, e was at length famous (or rather imfamous) through his proverbe (when a thing sounded void of sence, reason, truth and equity) This is one of Oxfords lyes. 2. He is one that then neither feared God nor man (it would be the joy of my soule to heare he doth now) It is well known, he was not only drinking, but fighting at a Taverne, after nine a cock at night, and was not long since put out of his Place to the joy of all there, that are faithfull friends to the King∣dome. 3- He is one very malicious, envious, and full of hatred; Who reported spea∣king of Captaine Hobson, and another, that he could as willingly sheath his sword in their guts, as in the Cavaliers: Much more could I say, but I forbeare. If any one notwithstanding, thinks I speake as one possest with prejudice a∣gainst him, and so wrong him; Let him goe to Newport-Paganell, and inquire of all the Presbyterians, that have but the face of godlynesse; And of all the Independents, whether I have wronged him or no? If Mr. Edwards faith be so large as to believe him; I am confident he may believe any thing.
2 As for Robert Ratford, that he is a common notorious lyar, swearer, curser and prophane fellow, is attested by good hands; The testimony of a woman that was then, and is for ought I know still a hearer in the Publique Assemblies of England; I will relate, who affirmes that this Robert Ratford came to the house of T. R. cursing, swearing, jeering, scoffing, villifying all that was there (viz.) in that house, where the Captain with some others were ap∣prehended) like a mad man, running up and down the house, into the severall roomes, pushing under the beds, yet he was not satisfied, but his rage was so great, that when all the Souldiers and prisoners were gon, for the space of one hour, he came back againe, and said to her, You base whore, I could find in my heart, to pull your bastard out of your armes, and kick it to peeces, swearing he could find in his heart to kick her, which he did, shee having her little child suck∣ing at her brest: All this is attested under her hand: And this that he did and sayd at his returne, the Lady A. living in the same towne, being by, can witnesse it. A little while after, the same Robert Ratford, speaking of one that was with Captain Hobson when they were at Lathbury, said, If ever I catch him Preaching, this sword of myne shall cut him in peeces, and further said, now the round-heads shall be hanged without any Law. There is a cloud of witnesses, to prove the abo∣minable blasphemie and prophanesse of him: Let Mr. Edwards send, write, or go to Newport-Paganell, and fift out the truth of what I have said, and print what he heares and no more; and I am confident in this, he and I shall agree. There was one other witnesse that appeared at London against the Captaines who in my hearing, affirmed he never saw men carry themselves more civilly, discreetly and orderly, in his life, and further affirmed to me in the Country, that he could witnesse nothing against them, but blessed God he was with them, and when some broched most notorious untruths, he himselfe said they were lyes; this man was a Presbyterian. Another witnes one Andrewes of Olney was summoned up to be one of Sir Samuell Lukes witnesse, but he having declared he could not speak any thing, but to cleare them, was sent out of the towne, without giving any evidence at all This particuler, is worth serious consideration. Having sufficiently cleared this businesse; I shall proceed to examine some par∣ticulers in Mr, Josiah Rycrafts letter to Mr. Edwards; And concerning Mr. Edwards testimony of him. 1. For the letter it selfe, it saith; 1. Mr. Kiffen, and some other, upon their dispute with Dr. Féatly, Mr Ca∣lamy and some others, gave out to their members that they had the better, and Mr. Calamy durst not dispute with them. This Mr. Kiffen denyes: Till Mr. Rycraft, hath proved it, it will be judged but his say▪ so. 2. That Kiffen was left out of that Disputation, which was held, and to be held with Mr. Calamy. Mr. Rycrafts head is got in, needs must his body fol∣low after; This is manifestly false: I call upon him to prove it: Mr. Kiffen desi∣red exemption, but it was not assented to, 3. That Mr. Kiffen was put to doe the drudgery, to fetch up members scat∣tered to and fro the Country. This is allyed to the former relations▪ Mr. Kiffen went not into the Country at all to fetch up any.
4. He saith that not only Kiffen, but others also did the like good service (as Hobson the Taylor) in their places) This to my knowledge is an untruth. For Captain Hobson stayed in the Town, to attend the dispute. 5. He saith. That one Palmer, should report Phisitians left her, as they found her. An emphaticall untruth, For shee used no Phisitian at all. 6. He tells a story of a woman to be rebaptized: Surely he that durst to affirm that, durst affirme any thing, even the most horrible untruth in the world. But will any be so unwise to believe it, because Mr. Edwards saith it? His say-so, is no oracle to me; If it be, it is a false one, that speakes seldome any thing but is either doubtfull, or an indubitable untruth. That which confimes my thoughts, and causes me to judge the man is not only guilty of those untruths, but that his conscience tells him so; is because in his late Nosegay, he doth not so much as offer to prove one of these perticulers, which were all denyed before, by Mr. John Goodwin, Surely it argues fainthar∣tednesse, and a bad cause: What that valiant Mr. Rycraft, that threatens to o∣pen the workes of darknesse, should be found bound in darknesse; bound with such chaines, that neither wit, nor honesty can break! Is it possible? who would have thought it? Instead of answering them, behold a man-like spirit! he falls a rayling against Mr. Goodwin, in a strange distempered method; One would have thought the unhappinesse of the man in stumbling so often before, in so few lines, should have made him more cautious for the time to come, lest in his next writing, he should have quite fallen. But tis true, Naturam expellas surca tamen usque recurrit. Convince him of one, he will presently tell two more. Mr. Edwards great boasts of M. Rycrafts, is come to just nothing. Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus. But to come to Mr. Edwards testimony of the man to be Religious and cor∣dially affected to the Paliament. If I knew what Mr. Edwards meant by Religi∣on, I should be able to say the more: But if he be Religious, light and love must declare it. But how that light or love may be seen in his spirit, that wrot that false, ma∣licious dark Letter, I cannot possibly see; its true (as I heare) the man hath some formality, a certaine kind of profession (which is but very little) so hath the Kingdome, but they are never the more Christians for that. Profession is not possession, formality is not Religion. Hken to the testimony of Saint James, chap. 1. ver. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart; this mans Religion is in vaine. It hath been Mr. Josiah Ricrafts unhappinesse in a superlative degree, to have an unbridled tongue, and to be trading in the works of darknesse. He theatens a discovery of more deeds of darknesse; I confesse that he may soone doe, for yet I never saw any thing come under his hand, but had the impression of darknesse upon it; and if he goes on in this ill course, the further the worse. As for his cordiall affection to the Parliament, when he hath disproved the Letter printed in Mr. Goodwins books, he may probably appear so. But if any man thinks he hath, in his Nosegay, I assure them, I can smell no such savour in it. To speake the best of his Nosegay, its but a vaine glorious glosse put upon
a foule matter, but a sheeps skin drawne upon a Wolves back. But to discover tis no other, let all men consider with me a little what his Nosegay saith. Speaking of Mr. John Goodwin, he saith. 1. The man sets his w t; on the tenter-hookes, how to be spatter Mr. Edwards or my selfe, with his tainted lyes, And to that end hath got a letter written to him, by an Anabaptisticall Apprentice. Had Mr. Rycraft walked by the can∣dle of truth when he wrot this, he had never thus desperately stumbled; certainly this beginning, presages a bad cause, and as little strength; The thing he speaks is diametrically opposite to truth. The Letter was written to Mr. Kiffen, not to Mr. Goodwin, except Mr. Rycraft or Mr. Edwards, have so much Sophistry as to prove Mr. Kiffen to be Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Rycrafts story will fall for want of of a prop. Neither did Mr. Goodwin get it written, but it came accidentally to him. 2. He saith (speaking of the Author of the Letter to Mr. Kiffen) he profes∣seth in the said Letter, to have more then ordinary acquaintance with me, which is well known to be as false as the Author of falshood can invent. To whom is it well known that he hath not more then ordinary acquaintance with him? Is it to them in the same Family? Doe they know it is false? They know no such thing; Who are the persons that know it so well, I cannot imagine. Is it possible that he could live nigh four yeares together in one family with him, and not have more then ordinary acquaintance with him? Believe it who can; I have not faith to doe i. 3. He saith, I will not deny, but that many times he hath intruded himselfe into my company, my selfe knowing well enough, he was an abusive fellow. It is no great matter to be called abusive fellow, by him that cares not who he abu∣seth, neither feares whom he slanders. But I am sory to see so much pride, in so few expressions. 4. Hee further proceedeth to manifest his insolency, and arrogancy, as if he scorned any should exceed or equalize him, saying; I have declared by my carriage, that I cared not for his company. Was this carri∣age, this declaration, sutable to a Gospell Spirit, let wise men judge. Haman scorned a poore Mordecay, by his lofty proud carriage; Yet was Mordecay not the worse, nor Haman the better. 5. He goeth on saying, He saith in the said lying Letter, that I concealed a Colonell that came from the Kings Army, wich Colonell would have taken away the life of one Mr. Roberts, a worthy Minister, and saith if Mr. Roberts had known where he had been, he would endeavoured the hanging of him. Is not this true? No, saith Mr. Rycraft, he asked Mr. Roberts, whether he knew of any such Colonell, who answered him he knew no such, neither did he know what the fellow meanes by naming such a man as he never knew nor saw, Sure∣ly Mr. Rycraft knew not what he wrot, when he wrot this. aske Mr. Rycraft whether he did not use to call him Colonell? Whether he did not receive the Kings P ctre from him, & said it would secure him when the King came to Lon∣don. But the man thinks to evade it; for he saith he knew no such man. Though he knew not such a man as Colonell, yet he called him so. But the truth is (as I am credibly informed) he is a Lieutenant Colonell, his name is Anthony Diet:
Can he deny this? Is he not his cozen? Surely tis true, it will be proved to his face. And for Mr. Roberts his testimony; such equivocation will not serve him, he knew him by the name of Lieutenant Colonel Anthony Diet at Brummingham. And can he deny but that this Anthony Diet sought his life? Surely not without blushing. This vapouring will not excuse Mr. Rycraft. Neither can Mr. Rycrafts letter to Mr. Edwards, be any plea for him. None accused Mr. Roberts, of know∣ing he was in Towne. And let Mr. Roberts if he can, deny that e would have endevoured the hanging of him? But to proceed, Mr. Rycraft advanceth yet fur∣ther saying. 6. And for his third lye, where he saith. I sent money to one, to go to Oxford, the said party nominated came lately to▪ London, who affirmed to the lyeing Author his face, that I never lent him money for such end, or at any such time. I am sorry to see mens writings composed with such un-tempred morter. Let Mr. Rycraft deny if he can, that he knew he intended to go to Oxford, and that he lent him money, and desired to be remembred to some in Oxford. These things considered, see whether it amounts not to as much as was written of him. As for the other things he chargeth the Author of that Letter, with as the distemper of his head, I leave that and his owne distemper of head, heart and hand, to wise men that know them both, to judge of. And for the particular abuses he saith was offered to him, and proved by oath, he had done well to have printed them, but it may be the man was ashamed, The truth is, I have the Articles that he was accused of by Mr. Rycraft, One, is for kicking a stoole from under him, as he sat by the fire, the other for mo∣lesting him when he was cutting his beard, to the indangering his throat, which was never proved, but denied to his face: And others are so frivolous, and so old. that they are not worth the recitall. As for his two warrants they adde just as much to his fidelity, as the picture before his book, to his piety. Thus may all men see what Mr Rycraft is, how religious, how wel-affected to the Parliament; what credit may be given to his testimony and to his stories? I shall only say thus much more of him. His malice against those he calls In∣dependents (if there were no more) might be a sufficient ground to suspect all the accusations he brings against them: He blushes not to say he hates the Inde∣pendents, worse then he hates toades, and values them no more, then the dirt under his feet. Rogue and Rascall, Brazen-face, and Billings-gate slut, being as good languge as he can afford them. Thus having impartially declared (being constrayned there to) what some of the witnesses are of Mr. Edwards stories (not questioning but that others can doe as much of many others) I shall consider some few of his expressions, and see whether these his witnesses, and his expressions run parrallell. For he fearing his witnesses might be suspected, if not himselfe, to have given in false evidence, thinks to remove all cause of jealousies; and to prove the truth of all that is contained in his Gangrena, page 5. 6, by saying as followeth. For divers of the errours and practices related, they are notoriously knowne to thousands, I demand of Mr. Edwards whether thousands, nay tens, nay any one man can witnesse the accusations against Captain Hobson, and the truth of Josiah Rycrafts Letter?
2. He saith, many errours and blasphemies contained in his books, have been complained off, by sufficient persons to the Parliament, and Committees of Par∣liament. I desire him to tell me whether or no, he thinks those witnesses I have examined, sufficient persons to be credited, and whether he meanes not by suffi∣cient persons, the aforesaid Captain Oxford and Robert Ratford, that complain∣ed against Captain Hobson, for the unjust things laid to his charge, or who else? 3. He affirmes▪ some of the errours, blasphemies are proved in the narration of the stories I desire to know what story hath proved the truth of those parti∣culers I have examined. 4. He saith, He himselfe and some other persons, of good note and quality, have been eye & eare witnesses of the errours, blasphemies, & practices he relates. I intreat him to declare to all the world, whether he, or any person of good qua∣lity, was an eare witnesse to what Captain Hobson is charged of, and whether any of these good persons saw the woman Mr. Rycraft tels a tale of, and if they did, let them name the persons, and conceale them no longer. 5. Hee saith, others of these errours and opinions, are in divers printed books either of the Sectaries themselves, or of persons of note for their learning and piety. I desire to know what bookes of the Sectaries or others upon their owne certaine knowledge, say that either Captain Hobson, or his confederates, boasted of working miracles, and casting devills out of men possessed with them. 6. Hee proceedeth saying, For any of the errours, balsphemies, put in this following Catalogue, which have come to my knowledge, by none of the former five waies above specified (which yet are not many) I have had the relation of them from godly Ministers, and understanding conscientious Christians, with many circumstances of names, places, conditions, time and confident observati∣ons of the certainty of them, and so delivered as there can be no reason in the world to think they should be false, but much every way to believe them true. And he further declareth (that the reader may the more build upon the truth of all things delivered in this booke. (to his shame) how he went and sent, and enquired by himselfe and others, prompting them lessons beforehand, that they might get w them ithout booke &c. Now I desire he solution of these questions. 1. Whether or no, the story of Captain Hobson, afore related; and Mr. Rycrafts stories came to him any of these waies? And if of any, then of which? If none of these waies, as I am confident they did not. Then secondly. 2. Whether Mr. Edwards is not guilty of apparent false-hood in saying all his relations came thus to him, when I have discovered two or three that did not? And, 3. Whether it may not easily be suspected Mr. Edwards came as ill by many of the other stories, as these. And whether these may not be a president to judge of the rest? 4. Whether Mr. Edwards, hath not dealt very uncharitably (to say no worse of it) in taking such a Machivillian course, to screw out the failings of his Brethren, and to put them to sale. 5. If one should take the same course as he hath done, whether he might not find farre greater, and more abominations among the Presbyterans, then is con∣tained in his Gangrena.
6. Thus having spoken to the most materiall substantiall things in his books and hoping I have sufficiently cleared the guitlesse; I shall a little reason with Mr; Edwards, and speak mildly to him. Master Edwards, how long will you give up your selfe to scandalize the Saints, and to fight against the members of Christ? When will you cease to reprove pas∣sion with passion? Doe you think the Lord Christ takes it well at your hands, that you should slander just ones, that you should print the testimonies of vaine men against the Saints of the most high God, and so boldly stamp the super∣scription of truth, upon their forged relations? Did not you think it unjust, that the testimony of a prophane lying Apparator should be received against you, and yet will you receive the testimony of as bad against your Brethren? When will you learne to doe as you would be done by? How long will you dote on your p ivate interest? Will you never cease the adventuring the ruine of the whole, to set up your selfe? will nothing but Naboths Vinyard, his inheritance and life sa∣tisfie you? When will you cease to incense the Magistrate against a faithfull peo∣ple? Think not on Sacrifice, while you neglect Mercy. Good Sir. what is the reason you are so violent against those you call Independents? are you a fraid you shall loose your credit, livings, Tythes, Offerings, honour and respect? If these come falsely to you, they are better lost then found. When will you be contented that others shall injoy the same liberty as your selfe? The Parliament hath e∣stablished Presbyterie by an Ordinance, you like it not, would you be contented to be forced to it? Doe you not expect a Toleration your selfe? And shall not your Brethen be suffered as well as you? When will you cease to cry up the Magi∣strates power in Religion, so long as you think they will establish your desires no longer? Why doe some of your Brethren, strict Presbyterians, say the Parliament is a swarme of Sectaries, & not the Parliament that was first chosen? Why doe any of you give out such threatning speaches what the Common-councell will doe before long? When will you be contented with the assistance of the truth of the most high to declare it selfe by? Is there never a wise man among you? never a good Souldier that can indure hardnesse, that can fight the good fight of faith, which is only able to root out errour, even by the sword of the Spirit. I desire you may see, you are not at Dothan, but at Samariah. When wil you cease Nero like to kindle a fire in the Kingdome, and say the Independents have done it? when will you cease like Ahab, to say Elijah is the troubler of Israel, when it is your selfe and your Fathers house. All your bitter threats, accusations, slanders, imprecations, nicknames, unjust dealing, Machivillian plotting, moves me not: I desire your happinesse; and that you may acknowledge your evill doing, and be ashamed, & do no more so wicked∣ly. I desi e with all my heart, that you may speedily unwrite that which you have either falsely or malitiously written in your bookes, and write so no more, then am I perswaded your volumnes will be much lesse, a great deale cheaper and a∣bundance better, Yo tell us your books will be believed in after ages; If you prevail according to your prophesie, it is probable. So would Oxford Au cusses had the Kings prevailed but they will be never the ter, because believed by your owne party. That you may testifie unto all the world your desi es that nothing but truth may be credi∣ted.
Bind up this with all the other answers to your bookes, that you intend to re∣cord for posterity. Triumph not because al your stories be not suddenly answered: Cōsider you have agents al over the Kingdom, many may not hear of your stories, others may not have leasure at present; others thinke it not worth the while, be∣ing perswaded you are resolved to have the last word, right or wrong, and so they envy you it not. What I have written, is in vindication of truth, in discovery of errours, of your partiallity which if you shall see, and acknowledge, that God may be gloryfied, I have gained my end. You that are the free-borne People of England, take heed whom yee believe, and what you believe, you see your Ministers themselves are subject to errours, listen not to them, neither to opose the Parliament, or those that God hath made famous; in suffering so much opposition and contradiction for you, lest you bring your selves into that lamentable slavery, as you had like to have done, by hearkning to the Bishops: Sacrifice not your liberties, lively-hoods, servants and Brethen, which have sacrificed their estates and blood for you, upon the lust, fury, pride, avarice, or ambition of any whatsoever. You that are called to be Saints, be not dismayed nor discouraged, think it not strange to be reviled slandered and persecuted, for this hath been the portion of the Saints in all ages: Elijah was slandered by Ahab, to be the troubler of Israel. Amos by Amaziah. The Priest of Bethel was accused for conspiring against the King of Israel, Amos 7.10. Thus did Haman slander the Iewes, saying they did not observe the Kings Lawes. Hester 3.8. Thus did false witnesses rise up against David, laying things to his charge that he knew not of. Psalm, 27, 12. Psalm, 35.11. Thus was two men, sons of Belial, set before honest Naboth, ecase he would not part with his birth-right, to beare false witnesse against him, sying thou diddest blaspheme God & the King. Thus was Stephen by suborned men, char∣ged and accused falsly, & suffered Martyrdome. Thus were the Apostles called se∣ducers, heretiques, deceivers, enemies to Caesar and the like. Oh be not you troubled, for your Lord & Master the great Lord Iesus, sffered the contradicti n of sinners; The Iewes accused him falsly, and put him to death, through the false suggestion, and slanderous accusation of Caiaphas the high Priest, for blasphemy. Follow your Master, blesse them that curse you, doe good to them that hate you, pray for them that dispighfully use you, and persecute you; Render not Jeere for Jeere, taunt for taunt, answer not folly with folly, passion with p ssion; But as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men▪ and the God of Peace shall be with you, and Sathan the Prince of darknes, shal shortly be trampled under your feet And the Lord Jesus shall be advanced, and you though despised here, shall at his com∣ming, apeare with him in glory. FINIS.
