d746 e811_6 99866648 167927
A DECLARATION OF The Proceedings of His Highness the Lord Pro∣tector; And His Reason Touching the late Change and Revo∣lution in Parliament; With the true and perfect Copy of the new TEST and Engagement, tendered to each Member, in order to the Government of the Church, the Liberties of the People, and the Laws of the Nation. With the Parliaments Declaration thereupon; portrait of Oliver Cromwell framed by laurels London, printed by R. WOOD, 1654.
A Declaration of the proceedings of his Highness the Lord Protector; with His Reasons touching the late Change and Revolution in Parliament; and the true and perfect Copy of the Engagement: with the Parliaments Declaration ther∣upon. HIs Highnesse the Lord Protector having taken into serious consideration the Results and proceedings of the Parlia∣ment, and their insisting upon four days debate about the Government, without coming to any Question thereupon, was pleased (to prevent the Evils that might ensue through delay) to send notice, That he intended in person to meet them in the Painted-Chamber; where divers Members re∣paired; and his Highnesse coming from White-Hall by water, entred the Room, and declared him∣self as followeth:
THat when he met them, and delivered his mind to them, in the same place the other day, he did it with much more hopes and comfort then now, That he was very sorry to find them fal∣ling into heats and divisions; opened to them at large the miscarriages of the former longParlia∣ment, and by what meanes he came to the Govern∣ment, and that the people had many wayes given consent thereunto. That when in his speech the o∣ther day, he told them they were a free Parliament, he did also consider there was a Reciprocation, for that the same Government that made them a Par∣liament, made him Protector; and as they were in∣trusted with some things, so is he with other things. And that there were some things in the Govern∣ment Fundamental, and could not be altered: As 1 That the Government should be in one per∣son and a Parliament. 2 That Parliaments should not be made perpe∣tual; which would deprive the People of their Suc∣cessions: Nor that Parliaments should be alwayes sitting; that is, as soon as one Parliament is up, that another should come and sit in their places the very next day, and that this could not be, without subje∣cting the Nation to an Arbytrary power in gover∣ning, because Parliaments, as long as they sit, are ab∣solute
and unlimited. 3 That the third Funda∣mental was in the matter of the Militia; and there∣fore, that for preventing the two afore-mentioned Inconveniences, The Militia was not to be trusted in any one Hand or Power; but so to be disposed, that as the Parliament ought to have a check upon the Protector, to prevent excesses in him; so on the other hand, the Protector ought to have a check up∣on the Parliament in the business of the Militia, to prevent excesses in them; because if it were wholly in the Parliament, They m ght (when they would) perpetuate themselves, but now the Militia being disposed as it is, the one stands as a Counter-poize to the other, and renders the Balance of Govern∣ment the more even, and the Government it self the more firm and stable. 4. The last was about a due Liberty of Conscience in matter of Religion, wherein Bonuds and Limits ought to be set, so as to prevent persecution. To this his Highness added, that the rest of the things in the Government were ex∣aminable and alterable, as the occasion and the state of affairs should require. And as
for a Negative voice, he claimed in not, save onely in the aforesaid particulars, That in all other things he had onely a deliberative Power, and if he did not pass such Lawes as were presented to him, within 20 dayes after their Presentmena, they were to be Laws without his consent. And therefore his Highness further declared, that things being thus, he was sorry to understand, That any of them should go about to overthrow what was so setled, contrary to their Trusts received from the People; which could not but bring on very great Inconveniences. To prevent which, he told them, he was necessitated to appoint a Test or Recognition of the Government, which was to be signed by Them, before they went any more into the House. And so his Highness dismissed Them. The TEST. I AB. do hereby promise and engage my self to be true and faithful to the Lord Protector, and the Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland; and that according to the tenor of the Indenture,
whereby I am returned to serve in this pre∣sent Parliament, I will not propose or give my consent, to alter the Government, as it is settled in one single Person and a Parlia∣ment. This engrossed in Parchment, was pla∣ced on a Table near the door of the House to be perused by the Members, & subscri∣bed before they went in. Above 140 of the Members forth with signed it and took their places, and many more are hourly signing.
The Parliaments Declaration. THe Parliament doth Declare, that the Recognition of the Government by the Members of this Parlia∣ment in the words following; viz. I do heaeby freely promise and Engage, to be true and Faith∣full to the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth of England. Scotland and Ireland, and shall not (according to the Tenour of the Indenture, whereby I am returned to serve in this present parliament) propose, or give my consent to altor the Government as it is setled in one person, and a parliament. Doth not comprehend, or shall be construed to com∣prehend therein the whole Government, consisting of Fourty two Articles; but that the same doth only include what concerns the Government of the Common-wealth by a single person, and successive parliaments ORdered by the Parliament that this Declara∣tion be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the parliament.
