G607 E1667_1 99867349 119656
THE Golden Mean: BEING Some serious Considerations, together with some Cases of Con∣science resolved; for a more full, and frequent Administration of, yet not free Admission unto, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By Stephen Geree, Minister of God's Word, and Pastor of the Church of Abinger in the County of Surrey. Toleramus quae nolumus, ut perveniamus quò volumus. August. contra Donatistas, Cap. 20. Minister Ecclesiae, ubi non viget excommunicatio, excusatus est, modo non volens det coenam abutentibus, sed instet mo∣nendo, & cpiat cavere abusus. Ursinus. ut est apud Magist. Bowles in Patore Evang: lib. 3. Cap. 5. pag. 193. If thou warn the wicked of his way, to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul, Ezek. 33.9. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at the Kings head in St Pauls Church yard, 1656.
TO THE READER. WHen I consider that most pathetical Praier of our dear Saviour for all his Disciples, not long before his death; Joh. 17.20, 21. That they all might be one, as the Father was in him, & he in the Father; that they also might be one in them, (and for this canse) that the world might believe, that the Father had sent him; Intima∣ting that the unity of Christians is an especiall means, to convince the world, that Jesus was the Messias; and consequently to convert them unto Christ; It troubles me not a little, to see such strange differen∣ces and divisions among true Chri∣stians, whereby the world, that
should be won by our singular love and unity, is utterly distasted, and so disaffected to the true Religion of Christ. Little do som of the separation consider, how dishonourable, and disadvantagious it is to Christ, and his Spouse the Church, to be guil∣ty of such a great sin, as schisme is; otherways, I am perswaded, they would with both hands indeavour to make up the breaches that they have made in our Churches, and that especially in regard of the Lord's Supper, a Sacrament of our Spiritual Union and Communi∣on with Christ, our blessed Sa∣viour. O! that they would at length sadly consider, how little good that reformation is like to work, which only reforms such, as they suppose already reformed; accepting none into visible Church-fellowship in
this Ordinance, but those whom they judge really gracious (con∣trary to the practise of all other re∣formed Churches); mean while neglecting, if not despising all the rest, whom they should rather pity, and not thus provoke; whereby they do either exasperate, or dis∣courage them, although they judg them to stand in most need of their help. Neither is the injury small, which in this case some Ministers suffer, in that they are robbed of some of their choicest children; begotten by their faithfull, 1 Cor. 4.15 1 Thes, 2.19, 20. and painful Ministery, who were the crown and comfort of their Spiri∣tual fathers, while they remained with them, and were as stakes in the hedges of their severall Churches, and might still have been lively patterns to their other people, had they not been (as the
Apostle saith) bewitched, with specious pretences of a more pure and primitive Communion. And verily had it been for their own advantage, and spirituall gain, as is imagined, it would not so much aflict us, and we would have held our peace, although it would not have countervailed our dam∣mage, but when we sadly see, how by this means many of them get such an itch after novelties, and an humour of changing, that they are ready to receive any up start opi∣nions, or old rotten heresie, newly revived, so that they gad from Church to Church, till no Church is thought good enough for them, and till at last some of them utterly lose all that Religion that they seemed to have; being elevated, not only above Ordinances, and Scripture, but above God himself (horresco referens) holding that
there is neither Heaven nor Hell, neither God nor Devill; and so are become two-fold more the chil∣dren of Hell than those they for∣merly separated from. This must needs be a most sad and soul∣breaking spectacle! And whence is the root and rise of all this? chiefly from that licen∣tious principle, that men have li∣berty to be of what Congregation they will; and so after that they have made a rent in their own Church, they think, when they please, or are displeased, they may make another, and so another, as long as they list, Mat. 23.15 if their wandring spirit shal but move them; which I wonder some of the wiser sort of them do not see, and if they see it, do not seek to prevent it; and cease to gather Churches out of church∣es. Surely there's far more need to gain men really unto Christ, than
to gather Churches out of Churches, to the great grief of godly Church-membets; who are not a little troubled at such in∣ordinate courses. And whereas some of them questions the truth of our Churches, and thereupon may presume they do us no wrong. I answer, that some of the most sober and learned Independents do ingenuously confess, See, jus di∣vini Mini∣sterii. Aug, p. 47.48. that we have true Churches; and there∣fore some that deny it, do shame∣fully defile their own nests; by this means making their Mother an whore, and themselvs base-be∣gotten; being first bred and born Christians in our Congregations. And if we have true Churches, how can they make such rents a∣mong us? and not be guilty of that great sin of Schisme, which now cries lowder in God's ears than for∣merly,
because multiplied beyond measure. And as for my brethren that suf∣fer with me in this case, and that for fear of offending them, and o∣thers, have abstained from admini∣string the Lord's Supper; which is acknowledged to be an Ordinance of excellent use; and therefore not only the abuse, but also the dis∣use is no small sin; I have with all tenderness, avoiding all bitterness, indeavoured to incourage them, to a more full and frequent celebrati∣on of this holy Supper; having, as I hope, clearly demonstrated, that there is no such danger in de∣livering this Sacrament, to most of our Church-members that are of age and understanding, as many do imagine; Always provided, that the Ministers instruct and catechize them in the grounds of Religion, and particularly about the nature
of the Sacraments, as seals of the Covenant of grace, teaching them how to receive worthily, and tel∣ling them the danger of unworthy receiving, perswading them care∣fully to renew their Covenant with God, which they made in Ba∣ptisme, by repenting truly of their sins; and stirring up their faith to lay faster-hold on Jesus Christ for the remission of sins; thankfully acknowledging the love of the Lord Jesus in shedding his blood for the pardon of sin; he likewise consecrating the elements with ho∣ly reverence, and godly simplicity, abandoning all suspitious ceremo∣nies, and humane inventions. And if after all this they will come in their sins; and so eat and drink judgment to themselvs, their blood shal be upon their own heads; the Minister hath given them sufficient warning, and so hath delivered his
own soul. But in case any grosly ignorant, or scandalous, should (to the offence of others) presume to come to this holy Communion, I have delivered my opinion to this purpose; That seeing the Word of God is silent in this particular of the Sacrament, and only speaks of Excommunication, which is a cast∣ing out of all Communion, and not from the Sacrament only; & we have no settled Church-go∣vernment, at least owned; and back'd by publick authority, to ex∣ercise such a severe sentence a, Excommunication is: M. .3.4. therefore if but two or three sufficient per∣sons of the Congregation, will te∣stify the scandall or ignorance, the Minister in such a case may openly examine the ignorant: and if the ignorance appear grosse and child∣ish; he is as well to be refused as one under age. And for the
grosly scandalous, they are openly to be admonished; and if for the pre∣sent they professe hearty sorrow, and promise amendment, they may be admitted; and if they do this in hypocrisie, it is at their own perill onely. But if they prove obstinate, and for want of power cannot be legally excom∣municated, Mat. 5.23.24. the Minister may charge them to forbear; telling them what they deserve, 1 Cor. 5.11.13. 2 Thes. 3.6.14. and warne o∣thers to with-draw from them; as the Apostle doth concerning such, all which must be done with much meeknesse of wisdom, and charitie. If any think, that notwithstanding these cautions, too much liberty is given, to let in so many. I shall answer with these words of Reverend and learned Master Baxter. I never found (saith he) one word in Scripture, where Christ and his Apostles,
denied admittance to any man that desired to be a member of the Church, though not onely pro∣fessing to repent, and believe; Saints rest part 4 § 3. page 104. nei∣ther did I ever there sinde, that a∣ny but convicted hereticks, or scandalous ones (and that for the most part after due admonition) were to be avoyded, or debarred, our fellowship. And again a little after, he saith; Their being bap∣tized persons (if at age) is suffici∣ent evidence of their interest to the Supper, till they do by heresie or scandall blot that evidence. Thus M. Baxter. And indeed it were a sad thing, vide Blake Cov. sealed page 130. for Ministers (as M. Hudson hath wel observed) if they were bound to admit none, or administer the Lord's Supper to none, but such as were truly godly; or that they judged in their consciences to be so; or were bound to eject all,
that they judged were not so. Hudson of the univers. visib. Church page 249. And there is great reason for this that he saith, first, because God ne∣ver puts us upon the scearching of other mens hearts, but our own; in this particular: Secondly, be∣cause 'tis more than probable, that this Ordinance doth much conduce to conversion, or regeneration; as is proved in the ensuing discourse, and more at large by learned M. Blake; which though it seem con∣trary to the opinion of many of our orthodox Divines, who speak of this Ordinance, as being meat to seed, and not seed to beget new life; yet shall we finde, that generally in their practise, they made no scruple to deliver this Sacrament to all knowing persons, that were not scandalous, nei∣ther did they turn any away,
meerly because they judged them unregenerate. If it be further objected, that our Divines require Repentance and Faith in all that come to this holy Table, therefore they do not count it a converting Ordinance. I answer, that the same graces are required to the perfor∣mance of those Ordinances, which all confesse to be con∣verting, viz. Prayer and hearing Gods Word, for the Scripture saith that unlesse men pray and hear with Faith, repenting &c. they pray and hear in vain, see James 1.5, 6, 7. Heb. 4.2. and yet these two Ordinances are chief meanes to beget Faith and Re∣pentance, Romans 10.14, 17. Psal. 66.18. Luk. 24.47. Acts 2.37, 38. But thne you will say, why should any at all, being of years,
be kept back from this Ordinance, if it be such an help to con∣version? I answer with learned M. Blake: Every Ordinance that is for conversion, is not meet to be appli∣ed to every one in an unconverted condition; he instanceth in re∣proof, which is a means to convert; because it is called the reproof of life, Prov. 6 23. yet reprove not a scorner, saith Solomon, least he hate thee, Prov. 9.8. So we may forbid this Sacrament; to some obstinate sinners, that declare their sins like Sodome, because some other more severe cours is best for them, that may make them ashamed, as I shewed before; seeing fair means will not work on such, but onely foul, they must have some corra∣sives to eat out the proud flesh. To conclude, I hope, my long-known
practise, and principles, against profanenesse, will apologize for me in this particular; that I have not done any thing (in allowing this liberty) to patronize any sin in the least, seeing I judge this the most profitable cours to keep som more within compasse, and also to keep up Religion, which hath much decayed since this Sacrament hath been so much disused. I say no more but commend that which is done to the blessing of God, whose power is made perfect in mans weaknesse, 2 Cor. 12.9 Eph. 3.20. and who is able to do exceeding abundantly even a∣bove all we can ask, or think. From my Study July 30. 1656. Stephen Geree.
AN Advertisement to the READER. READER, WHile this smal ensuing Discourse was at the Press, there came hap∣pily to my hands, that learned and elaborate Treatise of the rarely accomplisht and eminent Divine, Mr Richard Vines, concerning the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, wherin amongst other Questions, he handles this also; Whether the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper be a converting Ordinance? which he determines on the nega∣tive. Now least some should think that this is flat contrary to what I
have wriiten, and so be stumbled at the same. I would have it well con∣sidered, that M. Vines doth labour onely to prove that this Sacrament is no Converting Ordinance in the (primary) intent of it, & perse which I do not deny, affirming onely that it doth much conduce to the con∣version of a knowing baptised per∣son, that is not scandalous; as it is considered with all necessary circum∣stances; being always adjoined, or added unto the Word, according to that old saying of Austine. Accedat verbum ad elementum & fit Sa∣cramentum; Hence I conclude that the Word barely preach'd, without the Sacrament, as a seal to confirme it; cannot ordinarily be so effectu∣all to beget Faith and Repentance: as when both are conjoined, as a Bond sealed is of more force, to make a man believe, he shall have a promised debt, than one that is
unsealed, and therefore I suppose the Sacrament doth further conver∣sion, not meeerly ex accedenti; but rather ex consequenti; and though not directly, yet indirectly; which is sufficient to my purpose. The primary intent of this Sacra∣ment, is to keep a memoriall of Christ's death, and seal or confirme the Covenant of Grace; and it doth but secondarily confirme our Faith and strenthen other graces, and why it may not have other secondary ef∣fects in some, (who have but com∣mon grace, and yet are bound in con∣science to use this Ordinance, hav∣ing a legall right unto it) I see not. Seeing it lays an ingagement upon all receivers, to renew their Cove∣nant with God, and labour for those true graces, whereby they may receive the full benefit of this Ordinance. Especially considering that this
Sacrament teacheth the eye, as the Word doth the ear; and is confessed also to be an heart-breaking and heart-melting Ordinance; when they shall see Christ, as it were, cru∣cified before their eyes, for the re∣mission of sins. Besides, it's worthy to be consi∣dered, that this learned M. Vines, not long before his death, and since he preached these Sermons, now newly published, did prefix an Epistle to Reverend M. Blake his Book, of the Covenant sealed, with high praises, both of the Author and the Book; commending it to many Ministers, as a thred to direct them, out of those Labyrinths and perplexities, about administration of this Sacrament; which have vexed very many. Blakes Co∣venant seal page. 189 § 11. propos. 9. Now in that Book M. Blake proves & holdes, that this Sa∣crament (no more than other Ordi∣nances) is not limited to those
that have received a new life in Christ by the Spirit; and that others as they may be admitted without sin, so they are in a capacity and possibi∣lity to receive benefit from it. And again, he hath another Assertion; That the Lord's Supper, with the Word as an appendant to it, may be serviceable to bring a man of Cove∣nant-interest up to the termes of the Covenant, page 200. Sect. 13. Propos. 11. Besides, M. Vines himself pag. 252. hath these very words: If one be a baptized person, a knowing professor of the Gospel, against whom there lies no bar of notorious ignorance, or scan∣dall; though it appear not that he is truly regenerate, yet he hath admittance; he claims upon such a right, as the Church cannot justly disal∣low, no more than an Isra∣elite
circumcised, and clean, could be debarred the Passeover; and pag, 254. unto admittance to the outward Ordinance Regenera∣ted is not necessary. And yet more plainly to this purpose pag. 350. If it was known to me (saith he) that a man was not regenerate, I durst give him the Sacrament, yea I must, untill he be orderly convict of sin that may debar him, for the Rule of Gods Word is best reason; and the Rule establishes an order, If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee a Heathen and a Publican, un∣till then; and not upon my private knowledg, he is not to be an Hea∣then to me. Thus he, Now seeing Christ himself hath not injoined his Church to prehibit all unregenerate persons, yea hath injoined her to ex∣hibit to such, and such, though un∣regenerate; as this most learned and
holy man holds; hence I gather, that this Sacrament must needs be of som special use to som such, else God would certainly have prohibited it; especially if it had been so dangerous to administer it to such, as some sup∣pose it; whereas on the other side it is very dangerous for any such to neglect this Sacrament; as it was to them that neglected the Passeover. See Numbers 9.13. The man that (is clean viz. legally which was spo∣ken of before) and is not in a jour∣ney and forbeareth to keep the Passeover; even the same soul shall be cut off from his people; and mark the reason, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, That man shall bear his sin. What sin then are they like to bear, that care not to bring this offering of Lord, in
that holy Supper in any sea∣son, but neglect it for a long season? And I leave the Treatise to thy candid conside∣ration, and rest. Thine in the Lord, Stephen Geree.
SOME Serious Considerations, Together with some Cases of Conscience. RESOLVED: For a more full and frequent Ad∣ministration of, yet not free Admis∣sion unto the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. HAving for a long time sad∣ly and seriously consider∣ed the almost-insupporta∣ble burthen that lies upon the backs of Ministers, Onus ipsis Angelis formidandum, as one hath long since termed it; and weighing withall the dangerous distractions and divisions in our Churches, which are the mystical body of Christ, and should be like his Garment, seamlesse, and without rent; alwaies indeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace; I have esteemed it a most happy and heavenly work, (though hard and difficult,) to have an hand in composing these controversies, or con∣tributing any thing, whereby peace & unity may be in some measure procu∣red, and true piety restored and advanc∣ed; which hath been so much hinder∣ed, and almost utterly exstinguish'd, in many places and persons, by reason of our scandalous & distracting differences; and that especially about Discipline. For hereupon, many not able or not willing, to distinguish between Do∣ctrine and Discipline, (the former, to wit, Doctrine remaining still the same, sound and saving; notwithstanding the variety, and seeming contrariety of Discipline) hereupon I say some are deterred from Religion it self, and o∣thers so offended and stagger'd, that be∣ing in a maze they scarce know which way to steer their course, so that they becom altogether unsettled & irresolute in their Religion to the great dishonor of God, the disgrace of their religion & their own dammage; as also to the hard∣ning of unholy ones in their wicked ways,
and carnal courses, who hence take oc∣casion to sooth themselvs in their sup∣posed constancie, though indeed it be no better than contumacie, or meer obsti∣nacie against the clear light of the Go∣spel of Christ. For say they, to what end should we be so scrupulous, and precise in matters of Religion; seeing few or none of the most zealous are well agreed amongst themselvs; one holding forth one way, others another way, and a third differ∣ing from both of them, (to name no more) and all with a great deal of ea∣gernesse and confidence. For these men have forgotten, or rather do not regard to know, that even in the Apo∣stles daies there were the like factions and differences, when one said, 1 Cor. 15.12. I am of Paul; another said, I am of Apollo; and a third said, I am of Cephas; and a fourth renounced all the rest, as it seems, and pre∣tended to be onely for Christ, as some do now amongst us, decrying all Ministers and Ministry of men, and seem to bee onely for Christ's immediate teaching by his Spirit; who though they think they have the fairest pretence, yet I am
afraid they will fall upon the foulest conclusions in the end, as we see by sad experience in some such already. Likewise those formerly mentioned, that are so much offended at our pre∣sent Divilions (which we see the very Apostles could not prevent) do not consider, that our main Differences are not so much about the fundamental points and substantials of Religion; (which are especially Repentance to∣wards God, and Faith in the Lord Je∣sus Christ, which the Apostle makes the summe of all Religion, Act. 20.20, 21, with ver. 27.) but onely about the su∣perstructures & circumstantials, which do not conduce to the Being, but only to the Well-being of the Church, and therefore are not absolutely necessary, though very profitable for the peace and welfare of the same. Hence I hold it a work well worthy a Consistorie, or College of Divines, to finde out some expedient for an hap∣pie Union among our selves in these particulars, that might further the pra∣ctice of true Piety in these declining, as well as dividing-times.
And first of all, if we could find out the Basis, or bottom of our Divisions; I think it would be some good degree to the healing of our Breaches. Est gra∣dus ad sanitatem novisse morbum, vel mor∣bi causam, It's one degree to health to know our disease, and especially the cause of it; and so in this we may happily see the saying verified; Dimidium facti, qui bene coepit habet. He that hath well begun, hath half his businesse done. Now amongst many other causes and occasions of our Divisions and Dissentions we clearly find, that those very things, which were ordained for an holy Union and Communion, to knit Christians together in an inviola∣ble bond of Brother-hood, have proved by the subtilty of Satan, and policie or perversnesse of men, the greatest Ap∣ples of strise, and bones of contention, as M. Calemie in his com∣mendatory Epist. be∣fore M. Hudson's learned book of the universal visible Church. one very justly complains; To wit, the two Sacraments of Baptisme, & the Lord's Supper, which are the very badges and cognizances of Christians, whereby they are differenced and di∣stir guished from Jews, and Barbarians,
Turks, and all other Infidels in the world. Baptisme is that sacred Cere∣mony, whereby we are admitted mem∣bers into the Universal Visible Church, as being all members of the same mystical bodie, whereof Christ is the Head; bap∣tized therefore into the Name of the undivided Trinitie, or Trinitie in Uni∣tie. And who can be ignorant, what Differences and Divisions have former∣ly, and of late, arisen about this holy Sacrament? which of it self is not one∣ly a great blessing of God to us, and our children, but should be a firm bond of brotherly love and concord among all Christians. And as for the other Sacrament of the Lords supper, That hath been the occasion of greater Discord and Division. how many dear, and preci∣ous servants of God have suffered bands, & imprisonment, yea and have lost, not only their liberty, but their lives, in fiery flames, and otherwayes, and onely be∣cause they would not acknoledg the carnall presence of Christ in the Sacra∣ment of the Alter, as the Apostles call their Lords Supper.
And Divisions about this Sacrament have not onely risen between Papists and Protestants, and Lutherans, as they are called; but even amongst Protestants themselvs, as well as a∣mongst the other two; and that of late especially: to the great prejudice of true piety, and the power of godliness, and that in the most eminent places of this Land: insomuch as some have been ready, in this respect, to unchurch, and undo one another; so that a great part of that time which should have been spent in God's service, Jud. Epist. verse 20. in morti∣fying sin, and building up one another in our most holy Faith: hath been mostly wasted on fruitlesse controversies in this kind; to the great detriment and dam∣mage of all sides: the scandal of weak brethren, and the strengthening and stiffening of the hearts and hands of the wicked in their evill ways; who otherwise might have been reclaimed; but by this means blesse themselvs in their cursed confederacy, whereby they are like Simeon and Levi, brethren in evill, Gen. 49. Wherefore, seeing the main diffe∣rence
amongst us hath been, and still is concerning the Administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. For which, as for the divisions of Reuben, there are great thoughts, and swellings of heart: After long and serious Delibe∣ration, and confideration with my self and others; and after much wait∣ing and wrestling with God in praier and supplication, I have resolved to cast my two mites into the Common Treasury of the Church, if happily they may conduce, or confer any thing to a comfortable composure of this great controversie, that so much concerns the Churches among us. And herein I must confesse, I have been much encouraged, by the indea∣vors of some faithfull fellow-laborers, as learned M. Jeanes, judicious M. Blake and others; who have not onely con∣firmed me in many things, but added much to my clearer understanding of other particulars; so that standing up∣on their, and other mens shoulders, I may happily discover somthing, for the common good of these our distracted and distressed Churches, which, next
to Gods glory, is the onely aim of these indeavours. Now concerning this Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, some administer it not at all, least for want of power to keep off the unworthy, they should pro∣phane this holy Ordinance: and give offence to others. Some on the other side administer to all that come, and are of years and un∣derstanding, without any Scruple, or Scruteny; not caring to catechise and instruct them for that holy Supper. O∣thers there be that administer, These are Anabap∣tists. but ex∣clude all that were baptized one∣ly in their infancy, as if they were without the pale of the Church. Some again allowing Infant-Baptisme, ad∣mit only those that renounce Com∣munion with our Churches and Mini∣stery, as Antichristian, and these are rigid Separatists. Others, though they do not altogether condemn our Churches and Ministry, yet refuse to administer to any, save such as enter into an explicit Church-Covenant, as they call it; and that are able to give such evidences of grace, as to satisfie the whole Con∣gregation,
or at least the Elders; These go under the name of Independents. There is also another sort that do administer, who will allow none to receive this Sacrament; but such as will give an account of their knowledg and faith to the Elders, and are not proved scandalous, who though they give a greater latitude than most of the former, and accept of persons upon far easier terms; yet in most places, few will come under their Test or Tryall; so that very few are admitted in many Congregations. Hence some have de∣vised a new way, whereby they cull out those few of severall Congregations or Parishes, and so imbody them together, to join in Communion and breaking of bread, and many are as much, or more offended with this way, than the former, and so grow to distast and dis∣relish their Ministers, that thus com∣bine, because so very many are left out of Communion, though I fear, that many of them are accessary to their own exclusion, who either out of pride, or ignorance, or prophanesse, refuse to give an accompt of that faith and hope that is in them.
Wherefore let me tell such (by the way), that though there be neither precept nor practise in the holy Scrip∣tures for examination of others; as precedaneous to the receiving of the Sacrament; yet doubtlesse it must needs be a pious and profitable course for most Christians, to be catechised & examined for their better instruction in the ground of Religion; & consequently for their more profitable partaking at the Lords Table: the neglect whereof is, and hath been, a main cause of much prophanenesse, irreligion, and atheism in most parts of the Nation. And there∣fore without all question they are guil∣ty of a very great sin, and have much to answer for, that shall either despise, or refuse their Pastours pains in this par∣ticular, and deny to give him an ac∣compt, if he think fit to demand it. The reason is, because Heb. 13.17. they are bound to submit to them, that watch for their soules, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for the people, as the Apostle there tels them.
Wherefore to com now to the main mat∣ter intended, I cannot but commend the great care and pains, that some of my faithfull brethren have taken in several Counties in this Common-wealth; to reform those committed to their charge, and yet notwithstanding peo∣ple for the most part wax worse and worse, for want of an uniform esta∣blish'd Government, back'd and coun∣tenanced with publick Authority; for those that have most need of reforma∣tion, will hardly hearken to any plat∣form that is of private or particular mens managing; that wants the afore∣said Authority, in these days especially: Wherefore in the mean time, untill the Lord be pleased to stir up the hearts of those in highest places over us, to settle and promote some godly frame of Church-government among us, give me leave in all humility to commend a few things unto consideration, in this present exigent wherein we are. 1 Consid. First of all, let it be considered, whe∣ther the case of many of our Churches be not such, and so generally corrup∣ted, & distracted, that severe Discipline
upon all sorts of scandalous sinners will not be the way rather to ruine than reform them, I mean principally in regard of admistring the Lords Sup∣pen, which is the great stumbling-stone and rock of offence. Even judicious Calvin himself, who was strict enough in admission to the Lord's Table, and professed that he would rather suffer his blood to be shed, than willingly partake in the pol∣lution of Christ blood in the Sacra∣ment; and thought, that in the delivery thereof; magnoperè delectus requiritur, great choice is required; yet addes, Qui tamen haberi nequit, nisi per Ecclesiae ju∣risdictionem, which choice notwith∣standing cannot be had, without the Churches Jurisdiction: Then after∣ward, in the same Chapter, he censures immodicam veterum austeritatem, the austerity or rigor of the Antient Fa∣thers; Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 12. but withall excuses some of them whom he thought were necessitated to use such severity, and therefore brings in Cyprian to this purpose, saying, Cer∣tè Cyprianus declarat quam non sponte fuerit tam rigidus. Patientia inquit, &
facilitas, & humanitas nostra venienti∣bus praestò est, opto omnes in Ecclesiam redi∣gi, opto commilitones nostros intra Christi Castra & dei Patris Domicilia concludi. Mark this. Remitto omnia, multa dissimnlo, studio & voto colligendae fraternitatis, etiam quae in Deum commissa sunt non pleno udicio ex∣amino, I hide many things with desire of gathering together the fraternity, e∣ven those things that are committed a∣gainst God himself; I do not examine with strict judgment. Delictis plus quam oportet remittendis pe nè ipse delinquo, I almost offend, in pardoning offences more than is meet. Thus much out of Cyprian, that worthy man and holy Martyr. Then again, the same Calvin, in the same section, brings in Chrysostom, Chrysostomus (saith he) aliquanto du∣rior, sic tamen loquitur, si Deus tam be∣nignus est, ut quid Sacerdos ejus austerus vult videri? Chrysostom who was som∣thing harsher than ordinary, speaks not∣withstanding on this manner, if God himself be so favourable, why should his servant seem so austere? And after these he also brings in
learned Augustine, Scimus praeterea qua facilitate usus est Augustinus erga Dona∣tistas, ut non dubitaverit in Episcopatum recipere, qui aschismate redierant, idque statim post resipiscentiam. Then Calvin adde. verum quia contrariaratio invalu∣erat, coacti sunt proprio judicio cedere, ut eam sequerentur, but because a contrary course prevailed, they were forced to forsake their own judgment to follow that, whereby we may plainly perceiy, how wise men were compelled, in some cases, for peace sake, to yield to the current of the times, See learned D. Field of the Church l. 1. c. 6.18. p. 36. ap∣proving the same. against their own judgment. And moreover in the same Chapter he cites Saint Austine bring∣ing in an usefull saying out of Cyprian, Miserecorditer igitur corripiat homo, quod potest, quod autem non potest patienter se∣rat, & cum dilectione gemat, ac lugeat. Words worthy to be written with let∣ters of gold! approved as you may see both by Austine and Calvin, two men most famous in their generations. Cy∣prians words are in English thus. Therefore let man mercisully convert what he can, and what he cannot a∣mend, let him patiently bear, and
with love lament and bewail with sighs and groans. And furthermore Calvin declares, how the Donatists in S. Austines time, were like Anabaptists in his age (even as they are in outs) making a rent and schisme in the Church, because the Bishops would not use such severity in Discipline, as they desired; herereupon he relates another notable piece out of the same labori∣ous Austine: Unumistud praecipue com∣mendat (scilicet Augustinus) si conta∣gio peccandi multitudinem invaserit, Con∣silia separationis mania sunt, ac pernici∣osa, ac sacrilega, quia impia at que superba fiunt: & plus perturbant infirmos bonos, quam corrigant aninosos malos. i. e. This one thing he especially commends. If contagion of sinning have invaded the multitude, Counsels of Separation are vain & pernicious, & sacrilegiou, be∣cause impious & proud, and do more disturbe the good ones that are weak, See much more to this pur∣pose in Master Balls triall of the grounds tending to Separation. Chap. 10. pag. 2.13. and 204. who hath after the words (Malitiudinem-invaserit) non est illa excommuni∣canda, sed Dei correctio expect ari debet: l. 3, contra parm c 12. than reform the bad ones that are sto∣macky and stubborn.
Hence the aforesaid Austine, writing to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, thus complains. Ebrietatem impunè grassari in Affrica quae adeò graviter in Scripturis damnatur, suadetque ut coacto Episcopo∣rum concilio remedium adhibeatur; yet subjoins withall, Non asperè, quantum existimo, non duriter, non modo imperioso ist a tolluntur, magis docendo quam juben∣do; magis monendo quam minendo. Sic enim agendum est cum multitudine peccantium, Severitas aute exercenda est in peccata paucorum. That is, that drunkenness did rage in Affrica without controll, which is so much condemned in the Scriptures, and he counsells him to use some remedy, by calling of a council of Bishops; yet saith he, these things are not taken away, as I suppose, by harsh∣nesse, or by imperious means, rather by teaching than commanding, rather by admonishing than by threatning; For so must we deal with a multitude of offenders, and use severity only a∣gainst the offences of a fow. This is our very case in England, as it was in Affrica; the multitude for the most part is grievously infected with
drunkenesse, & other damnable sin, & therefore seeing it would be pernicious & impious to separate; (a remedy worse than the disease) to leave them in such a desperate and deplored condition, See Doctor Field of the Church Book. 1 c. 17 p. 33. so can it not be safe to exercise severe Dis∣cipline upon them. The reason is, be∣cause that would not bring them to shame, being so many that are guilty; for they will harden one another. But some more milde and gentle course must be considered of, to win and work upon them by love, rather than seek to force them by fear, using all kind in∣structions, and loving admonitions, rather than rigid rebukes, and harsh threatings, which will but exasperate, and make them more obstinate, perti∣nacious, and peremptory. And thus you see the concurrent judgment of these three most worthy men, whose praise is glorious, both for piety and parts, which may be the more easily assented unto; if we well consi∣der the Lenity, long-suffering, and pa∣tience of our Lord and Saviour in the like cases; who when his Disciples in their rash zeal, would have command∣ed
fire to come down from heaven, Luk. 9.53.54.55.56. to consume the Samaritans, because they would not receive him, he rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what man∣ner of spirit ye are of; for saith he, The Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. Christ, you see, was not so harsh, and hard in censuring and judging, as the Disciples were, but reproved for their rashnesse, though they pretended the example of Elias. It is also generally confessed by all sober men, that the Antient Fathers were too rigid in their Discipline; & too severe in their censures; and yet their case did more require Austerity, as may seem, than ours doth. Because they lived among Heathens, who de∣nied the Lord Jesus Christ: and there∣fore least Christianity it self should com into more contempt, and be scandalized by the bad conversation of professed Christians, the Officers and Gover∣nours of the Church, were forced to use more rigour, for the avoiding of offen∣ces, that so they might win the Gen∣tiles to the love of the truth.
Wherefore we must consider the na∣ture of the times wherein we live, and like wise Physicians temper our medi∣cines so, as that they may be most ta∣king; bitter Pills will not down with some queasie stomacks; we must in most things observe the temper of our distempered people; and sometimes humour them, as we do our froward children, lest they should fret them∣selvs too much. Christianity is now the common profession, and in credit; therefore our chief indeavour must be to work men to a reall practise according to their profession; and because strict Disci∣pline will not now be indured, as sad experience tels us, especially in this jun∣cture of time, when every one may be of what Congregation he will, or of none at all, and of what Religion he will, that is called Christian, so it be neither Popish, nor Prelaticall, or of no Religion at all, so that he keep it to himself, and disturb not others. Consid. 2. Therefore in the next place I desire, that it may be well considered, whether it were not necessary, to give some in∣dulgence,
at least for a time, because of the hardnesse of mens hearts, as Mo∣ses did in the matter of divorce, and that by Gods own permission and ap∣pointment, Deut. 24.1. And this so much the rather, because nothing is positively determined in Scripture concerning this particular, to wit; who those are that are to be kept back from the Lords Supper; but it is left to the wisdom and prudence of those in authority, both in regard of this, and diverse other parts of Disci∣pline, to vary according to circum∣stances of time, place, and person; see∣ing Christianity is not now confirm∣ed, (as formerly) to one Nation. Act. 10.34.35. and country only; but is free for all Nati∣ons, Mat. 28.19. Now disserent countries have differ∣ent dispositions, and customs; there∣fore there could not be the same Disci∣pline in every particular for every people. Withall let it be observed (which som do not impertinently urge), that the Apostle never blames the Ministers, or any others, for admitting those Corin∣thians
to this Sacrament of the Sup∣per, whom he so much condemns for their unworthy receiving, and upon whom God himself had inflicted such visible judgments, as weaknesse, sicknesse, and death it self; for that very sin of un∣worthy receiving: charging them only that were guilty, to examine them∣selvs, and not the Ministers, either there, or any other where. Case 1. But here coms a case of conscience to be resolved: Should all, good and bad be admitted to this holy Sacra∣ment of the Supper. I answer, No, if we can chuse; but when we cannot do what we would, Blake Cov. sealed page. 274.275. we must do what we can, as reverend M. Blake hath well determined, adding a little after; That the Churches edifi∣cation is first to be considered; but the peace of the Church by no means neg∣lected. Case. 2. But should not people be examined, (by the Minister at least) before they be admitted to the holy Supper; or should all that are baptized, and of years, come that will, without any more a do, as some do plead?
I answer, though there be no parti∣cular precept for such examination, as there is for self-examination, 1 Cor. 11.28. yet I think that it is necessarily deducible, from that which is generally granted on all sides. All take for granted, that Children, Fools, and Mad-men are to be prohi∣bited this Sacrament of the Supper, and yet there is no syllable for this direct∣ly in the Word of God, but onely by natural reason, to be deduced thence, because such are altogether unable to examine themselvs, and so to improve this Sacrament for their spiritual ad∣vantage, &c. by reason of their invin∣cible ignorance. Now there must be therefore of necessity some appointed to judge, who are fools and mad-men, and who are past children, and of years; which cannot be known with∣out examination; and none so fit to e∣xamine ordinarily as Ministers, who are, or should be, men approved for knowledge, judgment, and holinesse. And hereupon I argue further thus, If invincible ignorance doth make children and fooles unfit to be admit∣ted
to this holy Supper, much more will affected ignorance, which makes them not onely incapable but unwor∣thy of admittance, because by their negligence they are disabled from dis∣cerning the Lord's body, and so must neede at and drink unworthily 1 Cor. 11.29. Add hereunto, that the Prelaticall party, who have been most backward in this businesse of examination, can∣not deny but that confirmation was appointed by our first reformers, and that none should be confirmed by the Byshop, See the Rubrick a∣bout con∣firmation, and before the com∣munion. but such as could say the Catechisme; and that none should be admitted to the Communion, untill such time as they could say the Cate∣chisme, and be confirmed; and there∣fore the Minister was appointed to Catechize such as were to be confir∣med; and all Fathers, Mothers, Ma∣sters and Dames, should cause their Children, Servants and Apprentices (which had not learned their Cate∣chisme) to come to the Church, at the time appointed, and obediently to hear and be ordered by the Curate,
until such time as they have learned all that was appointed for them to learn. Now this being in many places neg∣lected on all sides, Ministers not Cate∣chizing, or very few of them, and like∣wise Parents and Masters, &c. being backward to bring their Children and Servants to learn the Catechisme; and Bishops as carelesse as any t see it done, and so in a great measure the cause of the neglect of the other, whom they had power by their Courts to compell, had they not wanted care and conscience; hence most sorts of people did still remain very ignorant of the grounds of Religion, being altogether uncatechised. Wherefore let any man judge, what need there is now of more then ordinary examination, or catechi∣zing almost of all sorts, in regard of knowledge; so that a great many that mutter, and make much ado against e∣xamination, as if it were so tyrannical, and much worse than Episcopal Go∣vernment, do say they know not what. For though Episcopal Government, in regard of the execution of that office,
fell short in this particular; yet in re∣gard of the right constitution thereof; the Bishops should have caused as much to have been done, as is of late requi∣red by moderate Presbyterians; and it was their sin and shame, that they did it not. See the Rubrick about confirmation, and before the Commu∣nion. Case: 3. But shall the scandalous be admitted to this holy Communion? what shall be done with them? I think they should indeed be excom∣municated from all publick Communi∣on in holy Ordinances, those I mean, that are proved scandalous, and wil not be admonished, nor submit and ac∣knowledge their crimes and hainous offences. Secondly, seeing that in most con∣gregations there wants sufficient pow∣er for authoritative excommunicati∣on; I think it very difficult, what to determine in this business; and that be∣cause it is hard to judge what is scand∣al, and also who are scandalous, learned men being much divided in this par∣ticular: Therefore I conceive it too
great a burden to be put upon the Mi∣nister alone, unlesse he were more in∣fallible than most can possibly be ima∣gined; or unlesse there were publick Lawes to regulate and determine, what shall bee accounted a scandall, and who, and when scanda∣lous. Thirdly I add, where no Govern∣ment is set up, as in most places there neither is, nor well can be as yet (rebus sic stantibus) for want of fit Officers. If there be any so grossly scandalous, that there need no examination, or o∣ther proof; as in case of Bastardy, Common-drunkennesse, or the like; if any such should offer to come to the holy Communion, he is to be admoni∣shed; & if hee do openly confesse his sin, and professe his hearty sorrow for the same, & promise by the grace of God to indeavor amendment, I know no reason in all the Word of God, why he should be put by. But if he will not be admo∣nished, but seek to justifie himself, or ex∣cuse the matter, and remain obstinate, hee deserves to bee excommunicated, and cast out of the Congregation.
But for want of Discipline whereby this might be legally done, I suppose the Minister (if there be any that will join with him, to testifie the scandal and obstinacie) may in such a case passe hm by, 1 Cor. 5.11 2 Thes. 3.14. . Vid. Pastor. Evangel. l. 3. c. 5. p. 188. 189. ad 195. Ezek. 3.4. and 9. charging him not to presume to partake at his own peril; warning also the rest of the Congregation to withdraw from familiar conversing with such an one, more then natural or necessary civil bonds do tie them, to the intent that he may be ashamed, as if he were juridically excommunicate. But now if none will join with the Minister in this case, but leav the bu∣sinesse wholly upon him; I do not think it can be safe for him alone to put him away, onely he may charge him to abstain, till he have given some fatisfaction to the Congregation, and not to offer the consecrated elements unto him, and if he will take them of himself, he hath had sufficient warning, his blood shall be upon his own head, and shall not be required at the Mini∣ster's hands. And as for others that are onely suspected, the Minister may not meddle
with them; no, nor a Presbytery; be∣cause, De occultis non judicat Ecclesia, onely they may admonish such in pri∣vate, to carry themselves so, as to take off all suspition. Now though this may seem to some very strange, as favouring of loosnesse and remissnesse, yet let me tell you, that it is no more in effect, than what some of the chief and choice Independents allow, upon the like occasion. For Mr Thomas Hooker, a man very eminent while he was in Old, Ʋid. M. Cawdryes Review of M. Hookers Survey cap. 2. pag. 94. and afterwards in New-England, yet in his Survey of Dis∣cipline yields as much. In declining times (saith he) a Church being cor∣rupted, when diseases grow deadly, there is allowed, and a toleration of necessity must be so far granted, M. Blake on the Co∣venant Ch. 47. page 437. See also Mr Gilla∣spy's his Aarons Rod book 3. ch. 15. p. 541. until juridicè the evil be examined, the parties convinced, censures applied for reformation. See M. Cawdrey's Review, p. 94. M. Blake also quotes another passage to this pur∣pose, out of the same M. Hooker. We see (saith he) how much reverend M. Hooker, speaking the opinion of his party, gives to the Churches conivence or indulgence. If the Church (saith he) either through
connivence, negligence, or indulgence sha tolerate such evills, and evill persons in the state of Church-membership, they cannot then deny them the priviledge of members; thus far he. Now this is one speciall priviledge of Church-members, that are of years, to receive this Sacrament, or to be admitted to this holy Table, therefore he yields full as much, if not more than I have yielded. Case. 4. But whether may Ministers lawfully administer this Sacrament to those, in whom they can see no signes of sound and saving grace? I answer, yes un∣doubedly, and that for these follow∣ing reasons. First, because the Apostles in the purest primitives times, never required any more to admission than outward profession, refusing none that were willing to give their names unto Christ; never once questioning the sin∣cerity of their affections, for ought we read, witness those three thousand soules admitted presently both to Bap∣tisme, and the Lord's Supper, upon their willing assent. Act. 2.41. &c. and that breaking of bread. ver. 42. is
ment of Sacramentall breaking, may appear more plainly, if we well observe, what learned Master Mede saith, con∣cerning the words. They were saith he, , which the vulgar Latine turns, Erant autem perseveran∣tes in doctrina Apostolorum, & commu∣nicatione fractionis, panis & orationibus; but the Syriack, Perseverantes erant in doctrina Apostolorum, & Communicabant in precatione, & fractione Eucharistiae, hoc est, assidui erant in audiendis Apostolis, & Sacrificio Christiano celebrando, and withal he adds, who knows no that the Synaxis, of the ancient Christians con∣sisted of these three parts, of hearing the Word of God, of prayers, and commemoration of Christ in the Eu∣christ? And therefore he saith, our translation is not here so right, which refers  to  and trans∣lates it the fellowship of the Apostles, whereas it is to be referred to  Vide Mede vol. 1. page, 493. 494. And to proceed, we do not read of
any admitted to baptisme, but were also admitted to the Lord's Supper. Hence Act. 20.7. It is said, that up∣on the first day of the week the Disci∣ples came together to break bread, and Paul preached unto them; Mark, he speaks of Disciples in generall, with∣out any exception, that they came to∣gether of purpose, to break bread; as a speciall Sabbath-duty, as wel as hear∣ing the Word &c. My second reason is, because all cir∣cumcised were strictly in joined to eat the Passeover, Exod. 12.44. and 47. Every mans servant that is bought with money, when thou hast circumcised him shall eat thereof; all the Congregation of Israel shall keep it, amongst whom, without question there were many, if not most of them, uncircumcised in heart, and unregenerate, uncircumci∣sion in heart, orunregeneracy; was ne∣ver made a bar to exclude any from the outward Ordinance (though it may from the blessing of it) because no man can judge the heart. As for these Numb. 9.6, 7. &c. that were forbidden to keep the Passeover, by reason of uncleanness, being defiled by
a dead body of a man, it was such an uncleanness, as might befall the holyest man among them; besides it was such as kept them out of the Congregation, and so from other Ordinances as well as that. Numb. 5.2. Command the Children of Israel, that they put out of the Camp every Leper, and every one that hath an Issue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead, both male and female, shall ye put out, without the Camp: That they defile not the Camp. ver. 3. Now out of the Camp, then out of the Congregation, but marke what followed. Numb. 9.13. The man that is clean, (to wit, legally) And is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the Passeover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his people, because he brought not the Offering of the Lord, in his ap∣pointed season, that man shall bear his sin: You see therefore there was great sin, in refusing to keep the Passeover, if le∣gally cleane, though unregenerate; for that uncleannes there, cannot be ex∣tended to inward uncleannesse, which man cannot possibly know. Thirdly, because the use of this Or∣dinance doth much conduce to a
through conversion. For here thou must take notice of a two-fold conversi¦on, one is unto the Faith, another is to the Truth of the Gospell; the for∣mer is onely outward, consisting in profession and outward practise onely; the other is inward, when the heart receiveth the love of the truth, and of this letter wee here speak, which is holpen by this holy Sacrament, reve∣rently and devoutly administred, for we suppose all that can lay any claym to the Sacrament have the former. Now to prove that the use of this Ordinance doth much conduce to this conversion,to prove that the use of this Sacrament conduceth to conver∣sion that is reall. my first Argument is this: Because it is a means to convince men of sinfullnesse, which is the first work of the spirit in true conversion, Joh 16.8 Now in this Sacrament Christ, is as it were, Crucifyed before our eyes, and that for the remission of sinnes, which could not otherwise be expiated, but by the shedding of his blood; likewise it serves to convince us of the hay∣nousnesse, and hatefullnesse of our sin, which could not be done away by any other meanes, but by the Blood of
the Son of God, as also to convince us of monstrous ingratitud, if we should presume to come to the Sacra∣ment of Christ body and blood, and yet to follow flesh and blood, and not labour to be cleansed by the blood of that Lamb that takes away the sinnes of the World. Besides the very break∣ing of the bread, understandingly looked upon, is a forcible argument to break our hearts, London Min. vindic of the Pres∣byteriall Govern∣ment, page, 104. (as the London Ministers have excellently and feeling∣ly observed) Was Jesus Christ rent and torn for you, and shall it not break your hearts, that you should sin against him? Was he crucified for you, saith they, and will you crucifie him by your sinnes? And besides, say they, the breaking of the bread is not onely ordained to be a motive unto brokennes of heart for sin, but also in the right use to effect that which it moves unto. Secondly the Sacrament is a compound Ordinance, consisting of the word, praier, and elements of bread and wine, and therefore must needs be more forcible then the single word, or both word and prayer without it, when ver∣bum visible is joyned both with prayer,
and verbum audibile, a three-fold cord is not soon broken. And the aforesaid London Ministers call it, ubi Supra page 110. a Visible Sermon; that as Christ in the ministry of the Word preacheth to the ear, and by the ear conveyeth him∣self into the heart: so in the Sacra∣ment he preacheth to the eie, and by the eie conveieth himself into the heart. There∣fore as the Apostle Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2 That the Wives good conversation may win the Husband, whom the Word will not win, to wit alone, because deeds are often more forcible then words: So I may say, that the Sacrament join∣ed with the Word, validior est vox operis quam oris. may work that, which the Word alone will not ef∣fect. For though the word preached be of greatest weight for Conversion, The Sacra∣ment is a sign and a seal; as a sign it vi∣sibly tea∣cheth, & as a seal it confirm∣eth, both which help to beget faith wch is saving. yet the Sacrament being added as a seal to the Word, to confirme the same, must needs help to work sound and saving faith, and so turre the scale. For as the Apostle saith, Heb. 6.17, 18. God willing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutabi∣lity of his counsell confirmed it by an
oath, that by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong confirma∣tion: So I may well say, that these two immutable things, God's Word and Seale, must needs make stronger impression upon our hearts, to work faith, and consequently conversion. Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. In the third place, doth not experi∣ance tell us, that, since the administra∣tion of this Sacrament hath been so much neglected, fewer by far have been converted, than in former times; be∣cause this holy Sacrament kept men more in awe, partly by reason of the solemnesse of this Sacred Ordinance, for which men have been pressed to more serious preparation, &c. partly by reason of the Apostles pressing to examination, by expressing the hai∣nousnesse of the sin, and greatnesse of the danger of unworthy receiving, that it makes them guilty of the body, and blood of Christ, and to eat and drink
their owne damnation. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29. Lastly another thing which I con∣ceive of no small consequence, is this; In administring and partaking of this Ordinance there is a more particular application of the Elements by every one that receives, whereas the word preached, being delivered to all at once, is applyed but by a few, men being loath, if they can choose, to take that to themselves, which goes against the hair, as most duties do, especially Repentance, or true conversion. But now when the Sacrament of the Sup∣per is administred, they must needs act that do receive, because they must eat and drink, whereby a nearer ingage∣ment comes upon them, which makes them look better about them. Hence many never begin to think seriously of Religion, and a religious, course, untill they are to come to the Sacrament, and then they begin to be∣think themselues, and to turne over a new leafe, and so fall close to savour and relish Religion, which before they
regarded not, Cov. se a∣led, p. 216. &c. or at most very slightly considered. Expertus loquor, See more concerning this matter in M. Blakes Covenant sealed. But here it will be Objected, that should we admit those that are unrege∣nerate, being dead in trespasses and sinns, it would do them no good at all; but a great deal of hurt, yea prove very poison to them, because they will eat and drink damnation to themselves; for they cannot but eat and drink un∣worthily, taking God's name in vain. I answer, by the same reason you must keep them from every Ordinance, be∣because, while unregenerate, they take Gods name in vain, and hurt them∣selves as well as in this. Besides, none eat and drink damnation, but those that are in a damnable estate al∣ready; For he that believs not, is con∣demned already, Joh. 3.18. As for poi∣soning them by this, how can a dead man be poisoned? And besides, Vid. Blake Cov. sea∣led, ch. 17. sect. 11. pag. 190. I hold it a dangerous errour to think, that this Sacrament will prove poison to all that partake of it, being unregenerate; for had it been so, surely the Lord
would not have appointed the same meat and drink to have been both Sa∣cramental and necessary food, without which the Israelites had been starved in the wildernesse; and with which most of them, being unregenerate, must have been poisoned, if that position were true, for they all ate the same spi∣ritual meat, and all drank the same spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. whence I argue thus; Seeing the Lord appoint∣ed the ordinary food of the Israelites to be sacramental, and the very same spiritual meat and drink with ours; and seeing they were all bound to eat, or else they had been self-murtherers; Therefore there can be no such danger of soul-murthering to all unregenerate, that eat in obedience to God's Com∣mandement, which must of necessity follow, if the Sacrament should be poi∣son to all such as were unconver∣ted. I deny not but there was something extraordinary in that sacramental meat and drink, in regard that the mixt multitude did both eat and drink of the same; yet still the argument
holds good, in regard of the sacramen∣tality of it, (as I may say) and that we may rather conclude thence, that those that are no members of the Church may eat at the Sacrament, than exclude those from it that are visible members, though unregenerate. Doubtlesse the unregenerate sin no otherwise in this, than they do in other commanded du∣ties, which they cannot possibly perform aright in that condition, and which notwithstanding they cannot neglect without greater sin; Bowles his Past. E∣vang. lib. 3. pag. 193. Minorem contra∣hit reatum (saith reverend Bowles) qui in officio, quod praecipitur, deficit in modo praestandi, quàm qui prorsus negligit. Pec∣cat ille ex accidenti, scil. ex defectu fu∣perveniente; hic verò in substantiam prae∣cepti, que jubemur Domini mortem us{que} dum advenerit annunciare. Peccat ille in unum duntaxat praeceptum; hic in duo, quae prudens sciens{que} omittit. And after this manner we were wont to comfort wounded consciences, who were afraid to performe holy duties, because they found such failings and faithlesse di∣stractions in the performance of them, that they thought they sinned more in
doing them, than in leaving them un∣done; For this we told them, that there was lesse sin in the willing per∣formance, though with much weak∣nesse, than in the wilful neglect of them. But here some think to evade, by distinguishing between duties natural∣ly moral, and those of meer positive institution. Moral duties, as praier, thanksgiving, &c. are confest to belong in general unto all; but it is not so in duties of positive institution; they are given with limit to some, and are not of universal obligation. To this Mr. Blake hath sufficiently answered; M. Blak Cov. sealed c 7. sect. 11. p. 195. 1. By way of Concession: Positive precepts bind not at all, because they are not given to all; the Gentil nati∣ons were not tied to the Law of Ceremo∣nies given to the Jews, and meer Hea∣thens are not now tied to our Sacraments. 2. For a positive answer he saith; Positive precepts were never given in charge with any such distinction, as to bind the regene∣rate, and to exclude men in unregenerati∣on, Men under sin, and in nature, are bound to the affirmative part of the second
Commandement, to observe every way of worship that shall be instituted by God, all of which are onely of positive right. All Is∣rael were tied to sacrifice, as well as to hear, and pray; and all Christians are now under an obligation to the Law of the Sacraments, as they are to other du∣ties. And a little after he adds; There are texts indeed produced, seemingly ta∣king off men under sin, from the perfor∣mance of positive duties, as Mat. 5.23.24. and as much may be said concerning those that are moral, Ezek. 14.2, 3. & 20.23. thus far Mr. Blake. If here it should be objected concer∣ning the former Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. &c. that presently after, God was said not to be well pleased with many of them that are that spiritual meat, &c. but overthrew them in the wildernesse, ver. 5. I answer; 'tis true, and this makes much against them, that rest in the deed done, and think Sacra∣ments will save by the bare outward act, sine bono motu utentis; but this makes nothing against what I have said; for the Apostle saith not, that God was displeased with them for eat∣ing
that Spirituall meat, &c. but for lusting after evill thinges, as appeares ver. 6, 7. &c. In all which, and that which followes in the next Chap. where he speakes of the Lord's Supper, he saith not one word, against their coming to the Sacrament, which was their duty, but onely against their misbehaviour at it, which was very grosse; whereby it may appear, that many of them were unregenerate, for some of them were drunke, either at or presently after that Ordinance, which is little better, they came to it, not as a sacred, but as a civil, or rather uncivil feast; hence those judgments seized upon them, to wit weaknesse, sicknesse, & death ver. 30. & yet not a word of excluding the parties, but only condemning their miscarriages. Case. 5. But is not administring the Sacra∣ment to such as be unregenerate, Mat. 7.6. a giving holy things to Dogs, &c. Con∣trary to Christ's flat command? No at all in our Saviours sence; This place I know is much urged, and that by many learned and godly men, and I know it is sufficiently answer'd, by many no lesse learned and godly, espe∣cially
by M. Jeanes, and also by M. Blake: yet give me leave to fay some∣thing in this particular, because it works much with a great many. I confesse I cannot chuse but wonder to see this place so wrested by wise and worthy men, as if it afforded Argumentum palmarium, not consider∣ing either the absurdity, or inconse∣quence of their arguing. First, the absurdity is evident, be∣cause taking it for a general propositi∣on, as they do, and so including the holy things of the Sacrament among the rest, it makes full as much, if not more, a∣gainst preaching to such as they call Doggs, and Swine, and whom they would exclude, eo nomine, from the Sa∣crament, when notwithstanding they preach the holy things of the Gospel to the self-same Doggs, yea and cast those pearls before those same Swine; espe∣cially when they contend for excom∣municate persons, not to be excluded the Congregation. Therefore the Pro∣position cannot bee general, in their sense of Doggs, but so as to make flat against themselves. The truth is, prea∣ching,
reproving and admonishing are mostly meant by those holy things and pearls, which our Saviour speaks of; as M. Perkins and many others give the sense of the place. But now, if you take Doggs and Swine in Christ's own sense (who must needs be the best expositor of his own meaning) for such as will rent you, and trample upon those pearls which you give them; see then the inconse∣quence of their inference: Those whom they would exclude from these holy things and precious pearls in this Sa∣crament, never offer to rent or tear those that administer them; but the contrary, they are ready to rent those that refuse administring to them, though not with their teeth, yet with their tongues, as many can testifie. And as for trampling these pearls under their feet, they are so far from it, as that they prize this above most other Ordi∣nances, and have used to come more re∣verently to it, than to any Ordinance whatsoever; carrying themselvs worse by far towards the Word preached, which as yet they are allowed to enjoy.
Moreover, let them take Doggs for whomsoever they will, provided they have this quality here mentioned by our Saviour, to be ready to rent those that would give them this holy Supper, and there need be no controversie in this case; for if they should but offer such an affront for administring these things unto them, we would not offer to give them; indeed we should not need to trouble our selvs about them in this respect, because they would not come to this Ordinance at all, as many now sinfully refuse, who hold us and our Ministrie Antichristian, and surely we are not so Popishly affected, as to carry it to their houses, or carry it a∣bout, and call upon them to adore it; as the Papists do their Host, or Breaden god, which they call the Sacrament of the Altar. But some will say, Is not this Chil∣drens bread, and therefore not to be given to Doggs, according to the saying of our Saviour, Mat. 15.26. 'Tis most true, it is indeed Childrens bread, and therefore not to be given unto Doggs: But who are Children in
that speech of our Saviour? Even all those that are of the Visible Church, in opposition to those that were not; for this Woman of whom he spake was a Gentile, and not a Proselite; and the Jews in those daies were onely of the Church, and so Children, how wicked soever; which is likewise manifest by Christ's foregoing words, ver. 24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: mark, even the lost sheep of the house of Israel, as well as those that were already found, are rec∣koned there to be the same with the Children: And consequently Doggs, according to Christs meaning, must needs signifie there, such as were not of the Visible Church, or uncircumcised; and so likewise those are children a∣mong us, who are received into the Vi∣sible Church, and Baptized, and have right unto Childrens bread, and can∣not be counted Doggs in our Saviours sense there, but onely Infidels and un∣baptized are to be accounted such, and not to receive this Sacrament in statu quo. Case. 6. But will not this largenesse in Ad∣mission
give offence to many of God's people, and cause them to separate from us, and speak evil of us, as if we were no true Churches. I answer; It is too common, even for holy ones, to take offence where none is given; and therefore we need to be as cautelous as we can, that we may give none occasion in this censo∣rious age; and I am confident if the cause be well examined, they that take offence at mixt Communions, as they call them, & so separate, have given far greater offence by the rents & divisions that they have made in our Churches, and yet count it their glory; though it be to the great grief of many godly ones, as well as ungodly; hindering their conversion; and opening the mouths both of Popish and prophane adversaries; causing them to blaspheme profession, and Religion it self. And as for the truth of our Churches, I verily believe most of them are as pure and free from corruptions, as most of those Churches of Asia, to whom our Saviour sent several Epistles, and called them all golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20.
The Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1. had a name to live, and was dead; and the Church of Laodicea was neither cold, nor hot, but luke-warm, the worst tem∣per that could be in a Church, which made Christ so sick of them, that hee was ready to spue them out of his mouth, Rev. 3.15, 16. There was nothing it seems commendable in them, else sure∣ly our Saviour would have taken no∣tice of it, as he did in that of Sardis, saying, That they had a few names, that had not defiled their garments, Rev. 3.4. But it seems there were none among the Laodiceans, for if there had, why should not Christ have incouraged them, as well as others? seeing he pas∣sed an impartial censure, doubtlesse, up∣on them all. And withall let it be observed, that Christ himselfe doth not there make so much adoabout polluting of the sacra∣ment of the Lords Supper, more than about other Ordinances, which is now so much insisted on, and was then no doubt, as much defiled, if not more than among us, considering what grosse corruptions some of them had, and
Christ set himselfe of purpose to cor∣rect whatsoever was most amiss among them, and therein set us a perfect copy, how to reforme deformed Churches, commending the good, and condem∣ing the bad; But we hear never a word, that they should make a separation, be∣cause of the bad; but rather to rebuke, and so to reforme them. Rev. 2.14. He condemneth the Church of Pergamos, because she had them that held the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balaack to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and commit for∣nication, and the like, and thereupon bids them Repent, or else he will fight against them, with the sword of his mouth, But never commands the good to separate, although such foul evils were tolerated amongst them. He also sharply reproves the Church of Thyatyra, for suffering the Woman Jeza∣bell, who called her selfe a prophetesse, to teach and seduce his servants, to commit fornication, &c. threatning her heavily. Rev. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Yet not a word,
to the well affected of separation, or any such thing. Lastly we see plainly, that two many have fallen off to separation, even where none have been admitted at all, & that partly for fear, least some should take offence, and so separate. And as for those that have separated, because they could not injoy such pure and unmix't Communions among us, as they supposed, how fearesully have some of them fallen from one degree of separation to another, till at last they have separated not onely from all Churches, but from all Ordinances, and consequently from all Religion also: Such is the giddinesse of this age, by reason of the subtilty of some seducers, especially Priests, and Jesuites, that go under the name of gift∣ed brethren, and teach them to blast all our Ministers, and Ministry, as usu∣ally they do; That being the first thing they commonly teach! Now when they have once begun to separate from our Churches, and cen∣sure us and our Ministry, as Antichristi∣an,
some of them grow so selfe-con∣ceited, and censorious, that no Church will hold them; but they soar alost a∣bove all Ordinances, as carnall and low thinges: Yea the Scripture it selfe is counted but a dead letter, whereby some of them at last become worse, than the worst of those they have so rashly separated from. Quis talia fando temperet a lacrymis! My very heart doth sometimes bleed, to confider, how our fair hopes, which we had of many, have been by this meanes blasted, and poor soules utterly undon, who (I am perswaded) were well-meaning men and women: and with good intent entered upon that way of separation, But we may see how dangerous it is, to be wise above that which is written, and more strict then God's Word will warrant us, which I wish were well considered of all well-minded Christians, least they rush upon the same Rock. For the Divell is never more dange∣rous, Mark this. 2 Cor. 11. than when he transformes him∣self
into an Angell of light, as he hath usually done in our dayes, and hath gotten great advantage against us by over-doing, as well as formerly by un∣der-doing, as learned and zealous M. Baxter hath well observed. This is as cleer as the Sun to those that do not willfully wink, and shut their eyes. For when Satan saw, that the grosse Superstition and Idolatry in Altar-worship, and the like, brought in by some of the Bishops, was quite quash't, and become odious, by the late Parliament, about the begining, and that a reformation was intended, and indeavoured, he than cuningly turned hands, and would turne Reformer al∣so; But with full intent to deforme and overturne all, for whatsoever the Parliament began to do, he would be sure to over-doe, that so he might undo whatsoever they had done. 1. As for example, when the Parlia∣ment went about to reforme our Churches, and repair the breacher, he'l have them utterly raced down to the ground, as Antichristian; and rebuilt
from the bottom, as if they were no true Churches at all. 2. And when they sought to reform the Ministry, and cast out those that were corrudted, being either ignorant or scandalous, he goes higher, and will have all pull'd down, Root & Branch. Not onely Archbyshops and Byshops, but all Ministers made by them whom∣sover. And when the Parlament pro∣posed, to mend the Ministers mainte∣nance, least scandalous means should make scandalous Ministers; he would have them preach gratis, as the Apostls did, and stand to the peoples curtesie, and worke for their living, as the Ap∣ostle Paul and some others had done, and for this purpose raised up Preach∣ers, of his own inspiring end Ordain∣ing; just as Jerobeam did, of the lowest of the people, which were not of the suns of Levi. 1 Kings. 12.31. Who∣soever would he consecrated hlm, and he became one of the Priests of the high places. 1 Kings. 13.33. so he resused no Methanicks, but incouraged them, and cryed them up, and not onely cryed down all other Preachers, but to this
end cryed down Tithes also, as Anti∣christian, and unjust. Though in the Scriptures the godliest men did first give them, to wit Abraham the Father of the faithfull, and Jacob, of whom came the twelve Tribes of Israel, Abraham gave Melchize∣deck tithes of all, Gen. 14.20. even of the spoiles, Heb. 7 2. & 4. how unlike are those Souldiers unto Abraham that would spoyle us of our Tithes, God al∣lowed them not onely Tithes; but Offerings, and some of the sacrifices, be∣side 48 Cities, with their Suburbs. and God himselfe did afterwards in his wisdom settle them, as his own portion upon his own tribe of Levi, which he chose instead of the first-born, to do his speciall service. By these meanes the Divell hath done more mischief, then most can imagine; for he very wel knows, that take away main∣tenance, and you take away Ministery. No man (saith the Apostle) goeth to warfare any time at his owne charges. 1 Cor. 9.7. Speaking of maintenance for Ministers; Hence our gracious Lord and Master, gave his own Tribe of Levi very liberall allowance, even under the Law, for that administration, which was farre inferiour to ours under the Gospell.
Again the Divel further knows, that take away Ministers, and you ruine the Churches; as you do an Army by ta∣king away their Commanders: because Ministers are the Churches , Guides or rulers, Captains or Leaders, Heb. 13.7. & 17. the Watchmen and Shepherds that must feed and defend the flock of Christ from Wolvs, which the Apostle fore-told would enter a∣mong them, Act. 20.28, 29, 30, 31. And if we have neither Churches, nor Ministers, we shall have in a while no Ordinances; and hence many came to be above Ordinances, (a most trans∣cendent evil!) when once they had rejected our Ministry, and our Chur∣ches. For I conceive, that if Satan's young Chaplains could have preached and praied as well as other Ministers, they would not for shame have left off Ordinances, which they kept up for a time, usurping the office of the Ministry, but at length left that, when they saw their own inabilities that way, and fell to ascribe all to inward Revelations, and took those Revela∣tions, (which were doubtlesse from
the Divel) to be divine dictates from the Holy Ghost, and as good, or ra∣ther better than the holy Scriptures, which they found did not make for them, but rather flat against them; though sometimes they would pretend Scripture to deceive silly souls. 4. Again, when the Parlament would reform somthing about the Sa∣crament of Baptisme, Satan would still go beyond them, and taught by his E∣missaries, that all must be re-baptized that were baptized in their Infancie; neither should that be administred to any, till they should renounce our Churches and Ministry, and give a rea∣son of their faith. By this means con∣cluding our poor Infants to be in a far worse condition, than the Infants of the Israelites, who were received into the Church by Circumcision, and ours must be left without for lack of Bap∣tisme. And yet he stopped not here neither; but went yet higher with some, that they should decry all water∣baptisme, that was but a carnal Ordi∣nance; he will have them have none but spiritual-baptisme, rejecting wa∣ter-baptisme
as need lesse for them that had the Holy Ghost, when as the Apo∣stle Peter, after he saw that the Gen∣tiles had received the Holy Ghost, did thereupon baptize them, Acts 10.47. Can any man (saith he) forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we? Do not they then absurdly forbid water-Baptisme? 5, Lastly, when the Parlament in∣tended to reform somthing in the Ad∣ministration of the Lord's Supper, and to keep back the grosly ignorant and scandalous, that either could not, or would not improve that holy Sacra∣ment to their spiritual advantage, he laboured to go still beyond them, hee will have none admitted, but those that may be judged truly gracious; and herein he seemed something modest, and therefore he goes a little further, and would not admit of some, unlesse they were first dip't, or rather duck'c over head and ears, as if it had been possible for John Bartist thus to have dealt with Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,
who came to his Baptisme, Mat. 3.5, 6. which had been more then an Hercule∣an labour. Cons. 3 In the next place I desire, that it may be impartially considered, whether or no the Sacarment of the Lord's Supper, be not in some sense, over highly estee∣med amongst many; I mean, especial∣ly in comparison of other Ordinances, whether there be not a sin on the right band, as well as on the left; that as some do under-value it, so others do over-value it. Indeed I have been long mistaken, if some holy men have not (in a kind) idolized this holy Sacrament. I suppose that Popish Transubstantia∣tion, or at least their idolatrous ado∣ring of their Sacrament of the Altar, and also the very Altar whereon it is offered, did arise from some such over∣weening conceit, that some of the An∣tients, or others had of this Sacrament. And what a world of wrangling, and sea of blood hath been spent, in our own and other Nations, by reason of these errors that seem so plausible, and to be done in honour to our Lord Jesus Christ! In like manner the over high
conceit of the other Sacrament of Bap∣tisme begat great inconveniences a∣mong the Antients; who judging that Baptisme did actually wash away all their sins; and if they sinned hainous∣ly after Baptism, they could not so ea∣sily obtain remission; and because Baptisme was not to be iterated, but onely once to be administred, there∣fore they staied from receiving Baptisme a long time, that they might have the brunt of sin over before it, by which it would be the better taken away, than by any other means. Now this too high conceit of Baptism, caused some dangerously to defer it, so that some Christians (of good age) died unbapti∣zed, and either never received the Lords Supper, or else received it disorderly; for as no uncircumcised person was to eat the Passeover, Exod. 12.48. so by consequence none unbaptized should receive the Supper. I have not written this, as if I would that men should have a mean esteem of this holy Ordinance of the Lord's Sup∣per; for I hold it very precious and so∣veraign, and to be used with much re∣verence,
Devotion, and thankfulnesse; and therefore am very much grieved, that it hath been so much disused in many Congregations; but I conceive, that so highly to prise it above other Ordinances is very dangerous, produc∣ing sad effects, as we have seen. And I verely be ieve, that this preferring of it so much, as if it were of all others such a Noli-me-tangere, and as if no other Ordinance could so defile, or be de filed, hath been on maine case of most of our late breaches amongst bretheren in our Churches, when as the Word of God speakes as much, if not more, against the profaning of other Ordinances∣See, Prov. 28.9. He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination. and Isa. 1.11, 12. &c. And what reason can any man give, why a wicked man should more defile another at this Sacrament then at other parts of God's worship? It is objected that at this Sacrament we propfesse our selves on body with them, which some dare not do with the wicked.
And do we not so, when we pray to the same God, our Common Father, in the same congregation with them? See M. Balls Tryall of the grounds tending 10 sepa∣ration, page 200. 201. In∣ternall and essensuall com∣munion we have with Christ and the faithfull onely externall with he wicked. Were not all the Coogregation of Israel members of the same visible Church, and called God's people by God himselfe, though many among them noto∣riously wicked? Psal. 50.7. Heare O my people and I will speake, O Israel, and I will testifie against thee I am God even thy God, and yet see what some of them were v. is 16. &c. who then are we, that we should utter∣ly disclaim them, before they utterly disclaim him, and he hath given them a bill of Divorce? Hath it not been sufficiently manifested, that the King∣dom of Heaven. i.e. Christs visible Church, is like a Field wherein tares must grow together with the Wheat, untill the harvest, which is the end of the World? Mat. 13.24, 23. &c. And also, that in the visible Church many are called; But few chosen. Mat. 20.16.22.14.
But doth not the Apostle say, that a little leaven leaveneth the whose lump? and therefore bids purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, speaking of the incestuous person. 1 Cor. 5.6.7. True; he would have such notori∣ous, scandalous persons, as the incestu∣ous Corinthian was, to be purged out by excommunication, that yee may be a new lump, and because Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us, but never bids you put out your selves from the Sacrament, more than from other Ordinances, if such be not put out. But doth he not say expresly. v. 11. With such a one, no not to eate. This must needs be meant of familiar eating, because it is spoken by way of dimi∣nution, and wherein one is more likely to be infected, than at the Sacramentall Supper. And whereas it is urged hereupon with much confidence, That if we may not eat with them at our own table, much lesse at Gods. It is a meer inconsequence, how strong soever it may seem to weak Di∣sputants;
for I may and must do many things with wicked men in God's house, which I need not do with them in mine own. The Adversaries will grant that I may, yea and must pray, and hear, and sing with them in God's house, which I am not bound to do with them in mine own; I am left at li∣berty in the one, but not in the o∣ther. Case. 7. But will not this gratifie the wicked, who are so much for this liberty, to come to the Sacrament of the Sup∣per? It will not gratifie them at all in their wicked waies, but in a comman∣ded duty, which is incumbent upon them, as well as any other duty; for the sinfulnesse of man doth not dis-ob∣lige him from any duty, especially be∣ing part of God's worship, as this is. And by receiving them to the Sacra∣ment, we more oblige and ingage them to other duties also; as to mortifie sin, pressing them to renew their repen∣tance, because by receiving this Sacra∣ment, a Seal of the Covenant, we are to renew our Covenant with God, as
we desire he should renew it with us, by renewing his grace and blessings upon us; otherwise we tell them this Sacra∣ment will but aggravate their sins, and also their judgments, 1 Cor. 11.30. And therefore as those whom John Bap∣tist called, generation of vipers, Luk. 3.7. he notwitstanding badtized them unto repentance, Mat. 3.11. i.e. to in∣gage them more thereunto; for hee told them withall, That then the ax was laid to the root of the trees, to hew down every tree that brought not forth good fruit, and cast it into the fire, ver. 10. so may wee administer the Lord's Supper to men unto repentance, to perswade them to bring forth fruit accordingly. Hence I suppose, that those Ministers who neglect to administer this Sacra∣ment, deprive themselves of a very for∣cible argument, whereby they might perswade men and women to sound repentance; least going on in their sin after this Sacrament, they should cru∣cifie Christ afresh, and put him to an open shame, as those, Heb. 6.6. In the next place I shall humbly de∣sire
my godly & reverend Breathren of the Ministry, who have a long time desisted from celebrating this holy Supper, sadly to consider how unjustifiable their pra∣ctiseis in this particular, especially if they should still persist in such a course. Many have hinted much in this particu∣lar already, especially learned & labori∣ous M. Blake, whose bookes of the Co∣venant, and also of the Covenant seal'd, are of singular use for most Ministers, that are at a losse in this regard, and the latter book especially, being as a word spoken on the wheels to such, as ju∣dicious M. Vines hath it, in his Epistle before that book. I wish withall, they would consider, how unlike they are unto the Primi∣tive practise, which celebrated this Supper every week, and for some time every day in the week, being so in love with the Lord Jesus, whom they knew in the flesh, and who had lately laid down his life for them; and because they conceived that this would be, not onely profitable to themselves; but pleasing unto God, to keep such an holy memoriall of Christ's death, and
passion, certainly they were not so scrupulous as many are in these days, about admission. And if you consult learned and laborious M. Mede. M. Mede vol. 1. pag 495. &c. as also p. 500. &c. he will assure you, that the ancient Churches in their publick meet∣ings, did so commemorate the sacrifice of Christ in celebrating this Supper, as that they thought it an especiall means to make all other services accepted; and to that purpose alledgeth divers testimonies, of Tertullian, and others, and among the rest Origen. Hom. 3. on Levit. where treating of the shew-bread, which was con∣tinually set before the LORD with in∣cense, for a memoriall; that is to put GOD in mind of them, he makes it in this respect to have been a lively figure of the Christi∣ans Eucharist, for saith he, Ista est com∣memoratio sola, quae propitium facit Deum hominibus. Thus far, and much more to this purpose, saith M. Mede. Sit fides penes Authorem. If this be true, as his Authors seem to prove, then judge you what we our selves, and our Churches have lost, for lack of this Ordinance; and you may well conceive, that it is no marvail, if
God forget to do us so much good for Christ's sake, as otherwise he would do, and hath formerly done, when we for∣get, or neglect to put him in mind of that propitiatory sacrifice of his dear Son, by celebrating his sacred Supper, Ordained for this very end to be a speciall memoriall of his meritorious death, that he himselfe might be mindfull of us, and mercifull unto us. Consid. 5. Furthermore let it be considered, that the main business of the work of the Ministery, should be the conversion of souls, to bring them from darkness to light, & from the power of Satan unto God. Acts. 26.18. Now by non-admini∣stration of this Sacrament, we greatly distaste a great many, if not most that are not really converted, whereby our Ministry is made more contemptible, & odious, than otherwise it would be, and so lesse effectuall, especially to such as stand in most need of it. And those that administer, and admit only a few, refusing a great many, they give farr greater distaste, and cause them to harden their hearts against them and
their doctrin, and make them harken to any hedg-priest, that will sow pil∣lows under their armeholes, and sooth them in their sinnes, rather then seek to convert them, to the great prejudice of their poor soules. And whereas some suppose, that staying for a while may increase their appetite, and make them more hunger after it. I answer, that fasting indeed a little while may do so, but long fasting quite loseth on's stomack, and wee see by sad experience that it hath done so in this very thing, for a great many, who were earnest for it formerly, are now grown cold, and care not for it, being either sullen, or senslesse of their owne my∣sery. Again, Thas is wel known to all anci∣ent, and conscienti∣ous Mini∣sters. by hindering so many from comming to this sacrament, we deprive our selves of a great advantage, that formerly we had of the yonger sort, by way of Chatechizing them befose they come to the Communion. For where Ministers were consciencious and la∣borious, the Younger sort especially did usually resort unto them (not only
to pay their Offerings as some object) but chiefly to be examined and in∣structed in the grounds of Religion, at least once a year, which made them more mind their Catechismes, that now are wholly laid aside, by most of them, so that they know nothing in matters of Salvation, but are like Hea∣thens. Moreover by this meanes we had a fair oportunity to fasten so wholesom exhortations upon them, for their soules health; to make them consider their waies, and walke worthy of this holy Sacrament: and therefore to a∣void the common corruptions of the times, as drunkennesse, swearing, pro∣faning the Sabbath: and the like evill courses, and also evill Company, the bane of thousands. All which oportunities are now lost, in regard of most, who will not come to be catechized, because they cannot come to the Sacrament: And we have no power to compell them. Case. 8 But will not this harden them in their sinnes, to receive so many to this Sacrament; as som imagine?
I judge it rather a meanes to make them consider their waies, and con∣vince them of their sins, and so con∣vert them, and bring them home unto God, as I have formerly proved. Secondly, I suppose this will no more harden them in sin, than their admission to all other Ordinances, un∣lesse it be because some erroneously conceive, that this Sacrament belongs onely to those that have true grace, which fancy hath been fully con∣futed. Thirdly, we see too palpably, that men are more hardened in sin, since this Sacrament hath been so sequestred, (as I may say) than formerly, when they were more generally admitted. And I verely believe, that the generall exclusi∣on of so many from this holy Supper, doth, and will, much more harden their hearts, than generall admission of all Church-members, in the greatest latitude. Lastly, Add hereunto, that we see by experience, in the Countrey, that those who are kept from this Sacrament wax wild; and grow more carelesse of all
Religion; and on the other side, those few that are by som admitted, when o∣thers are excluded, wax wanton, & som of them so swel with self-conceit, that they presume to teach their Teachers, and lead their leaders: Thinking themselves too good, to be under any Officers, and so have forsaken their own, and all other Churches, and their Teachers, and turned Mountebanks: and set up themselves above all others whatso∣ever, which is two apparent, both in Old and New England; Witnesse the Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, and other Rebells against God and man. Case 9. But is not this Sacrament (as some say) a priviledg that belongs not to Babes, but to strong men, that are able to digest strong meat, such as this Sacrament is. It is indeed a priviledg of the Church, and belongs only to Church-members, no unbaptised may eat there∣of, as no uncirumcised might eat of the Passeover. Exod. 12.48. It is also a duty as well as a priviledg, which all of yeares are bound to performe, that
are baptized, as M. Perkins saith in his Cases of Conscience. And that it is not strong meat, Perk. Ca∣ses of Con∣science lib. 2. page 95. fol. but even milk for Babes in Religion, I shall easily evince. My reason is, because it is one of the most sensible Ordinances which Christians have, as Baptisme is the other; because, (as all Authen∣tick Authors grant) in these outward visible Ceremonies, God is said more to stoup to our capacityes, and to help our infirmityes; seeing hereby he teacheth us, not onely by the ear, but by other senses; as by seeing, and Tast∣ing; Senses that farr more affect the ignorant, than hearing. Segnius irritant amimos dimissa per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus. Things slower move the mind sent by the ear, Than those made to the faithful eyes appear. Case. 6. In the last place let it be well weigh∣ed, how those Ministers can answer it
to God and their owne Consciences, for neglecting such an especiall part of their Ministeriall Office, as the admi∣nistration of the Eucharist is, and was ever held to be. If they shall still reply, It is because they fear they shal do more hurt than good to many soules, offend∣ing tender consciences, and the like; I answer, if that which I have said cannot give satisfaction, yet let me per∣swade them, to be restlesse, till they be more fully resolved; I am very sensible of your sad condition, as having been in the same perplexity my selfe, but I have now by God's gracious assistance arrived to such a plerophory in most of these things, that I find abundance of satisfaction in mine own Spirit; and therefore I do the more pity my bre∣then, that want satisfaction in this par∣ticular, which is one of the main rea∣sons, that hath moved me to take this matter in hand. Now whereas I know, you are afraid of offending others by your administring, I know also, that it is unavoidable in any duty almost, that we do in this cryticall age,
therefore I pray you consider, how great offence on the other side, is given by your non-administration, and justly taken, whereas the former Offence is likely to be taken where none is justly given, and we are charged to give no offence to any, neither to the Jewes, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; 1 Cor. 10.32. But for more full satisfaction in this case, what a sin it is, and how much offence it gives, to neglect this administration, I refer it to M. See his Book in 8. v. pag. 11.12. &c. Jeanes, who hath both largely, and learnedly handled this particular. And thus much shall suffice concerning the considerations, and cases of Consci∣ence. I will conclude with a few mo∣tives, to stir up my self and others to a more frequent and conscionable cele∣bration of this holy Supper. First, because the keeping of the Passe∣over solemnly, though but outwardly of many, was a meanes to free all the Families of the Israelites from having their first borne destroyed from the E∣gyptians: So may the keeping of this Supper, that succeeds the Passeover, be
a means to preserv us from common ca∣lamities, seeing our Sacraments are not lesse; but rather more effectuall than theirs, and withal considering that this is an approved way of renewing our Covenant with God, and God's renew∣ing his Covenant with us, when we keep this, Epulum Foederale: This feast of the Covenant, or Covenant-feast; where God seales his covenant to us, to be our God, and to take care of us, as Confederates do one for another. Secondly, if many were sick, and weak, and some dyed; because of the sin of unworthy receiving, as we see, 1 Cor. 11.30. Their sin and judgments cannot be small, that altogether omit this holy duty. For it is a ruled case, that the willing neglect of good duties is a greater sin, than the weak performance of them. I do verily believe, that many abstain out of meer conscience, fearing that they should do more hurt than good, but Conscientia erronea non obli gat. Thirdly it is without question; and
granted on all sides, that it is a duty necessarily incumbent upon a Minister of the Gospel, to administer this Sacrament, being a speciall part of GOD's publick worship; but it is questi∣oned by most, and flatly de∣nyed by many, both learned and godly men; that a single Minister hath power of himselfe to suspend a scandalous person from the Sacrament. Therefore it must needs be safer for a Minister to do that, which is his certain duty, than neglect it wholly, and so in a kind suspend all, good and bad, worthy as well as un∣worthy. Lastly, the often Celebration of this sacred Supper, tends much to the glory of GOD, and the Churches good; because here∣in is a thankful acknowledgment of CHRST crucified for us, and also a putting GOD the Father in mind of CHRIST'S Death (as some suppose) and
of his Covenant of grace, sealed with his Sons blood, and also a renewing our Covenant with GOD, as was formerly said, that he may renew his grace and mercy upon us: Which things are of singular use. Wherefore let us lament, and lay to heart our former great neglect, and labour for time to come to be more faithfull and frequent in administration of this holy Supper, as without all Popish superstiti∣on, so with all reverence, and godly simplicity; which I take to be the main defect in those Corinthians, that received so un∣worthily. And as for those that are so apt to Censure in this case, let mee commend to them the A∣postles practise, in that 1 Cor. 11. When they had much transgressed in unworthy receiving, and for which GOD had grievously judged them, he never blames the Minister for admitting them,
but biddeth every one Examine himselfe, and so eat, verse, 28. and tell's them. ver. 31. If they would judg themselves, they should not be judged of the LORD. This, this is the right way to refor∣mation, To cease judging o∣thers, and fall more closely to judging of our selves. There was never more judging of o∣thers, and lesse judging of men's selves. If men would more judge themselves, they would certain∣ly judge others lesse, and so sooner escape the just judgments of GOD. Matthew, 7.1. See Romans, 14.10. Why doest thou judge thy brother? Wee must all stand before the judg∣ment seat of CHRIST: And verse. 13. Let us not there∣fore judg one another any more, but judg this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his bro∣thers way: Romans. 15.5.6. Now the GOD of patience
and consolation, grant us to be like minded one towards another, according to CHRIST Jesus, that we may with one mind, and one mouth glorify GOD, even the Father of our LORD Jesus CHRIST, Amen. FINIS. printer's device(?)
ERRATA. In the Title Page, line 17. read. Pastore for Patore, in the Epistle to the Reader, pag. 8. line, 17. for Suspicious, r. superstitious, p. 10. l 20. for these, r. the, p. 11. l. 3. for not, r. but, in the Advertisement, p. 6, l. 4. and 5. for rege∣nerated, r. regeneration, p. last. l. 3. r. and so I leave. In the Book it selfe, page, 2. line, 26. put our there, p. 15. l. 26. for convert, r. correct. p. 19. l. 10. after reproved, add the word, them. p. 33 l. 12. after now, add if. p. 34. l. 1. for thou r. jou, p. 35. l. 16. for saith, r. say, p. 4. l. 28. put out, at, p. 46. l. last, put out, as.
BOOKS Printed for Joseph Cran∣ford, at the Kings Head in St. Paules Church Yard ΠΑΝΘΕΟΛΟΓΙΑ or the Sume of Practical DIVINITY, Practi∣sed in the Wilderness, and Deliver∣ed by our Saviour in his Sermon on the Mount, being Observations on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and se∣venth Chapters of S. Matthew: to which is prefixed PROLEGO∣MENA, or Preface, by way of Dialogue: wherein the perfection and Perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the Calumnies of Anabaptists and Papists: By Tho∣mas White, Minister of Gods Word at Anne Aldersgate. London.
ANIMADVERSIONS, or the Rabinical Talmud of RABBI John Rogers: Wherein is Exami∣ned his Doctrine, as of the. Matter of a Church The duty of Se∣paration. Form of a Church The subjects of Church power. &c. By Zach. Crofton, Minister of God's Word at James Garlick Hythe, London. A VINDICATION of the Answer to M. Brabourn concern∣ing the Civil Magistrates Power, as to changing Church-Govern∣ment: Wherein the Reverend M. Perkins, and some Truthes of God, are vindicated from the Lyes and scurrilcus expressions cast upon them. By John Collings Minister of Gods Word in Norwich. The Patterne of Patience, in the Example of Holy Job; a Para∣phrase, upon the whole Book, be∣ing
an expedient to sweeten the miseries of these (never enough to be lamented) times. The Husbands Authority Ʋnvailed, wherein is moderately discussed, whether it be fit, or lawfull, for a goodman to beat his bad Wife. A Method and instructions for the Art of Divine meditation, with instances of the severall kindes of solemne Meditation. By Thomas White Minister of God's Word in London. Enchiridion Medicum: Containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those dis∣eases, that do chiefly affect the body of man: divided into three Books. With Alphabetical Tables of such matters as are therein contained. Whereunto is ad∣ded a Treatise, De facultatibus medi∣camentorum compositorum, & do∣sibus. By Robert Bayfield, Doctor of Physick in the City of Norwich. The Crown of Righteousnesse, by Tho. Watson Minister of Stephen Walbrook London. FINIS.
