H1295 E397_11 99862169 160364
THE HEADS Of the great CHARGE PRESENTED To the Honourable House of Commons, against the eleven impeached Members, BY Colonel Scroope. Colonel Okey. Colonel Hewson. Colonel Pride. Lievt. Col. Bowen. Lievt. Col. Goffe Major Raynbow. Capt. Berry. Capt. Glarke. Capt. Carter. Capt. Roase. Master Sexby Master Gettings. AS ALSO, Certain Papers from the Army, setting forth the gallant proceedings of the Commissioners, in their present Treaty at Wickham. London, Printed for R. Walton, July 8. 1647.
The proceedings of the late Treaty, betwixt the Parliaments Commissioners, and the Army. THere came Letters also to the House, from the Commissioners with the Army, and tharein in∣closed two letters from the Generall dated Iuly first at Wickam, whereof one of them gave to understand that the Generall had that day appointed Lievtenant Generall Crumwell, Commissary Gen. Ireton, Col. Fleetwood, Col. Rainsborow, Col. Harrison, Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Col. Rich, Col. Lambert, Col. Hammond, and Major Rainsborow; these or any five of them, of which the Major part to be of the five last to treate and debate with the Commissioners of Parliament upon the papers, and desires sent from the army to the Parliament, and the Votes sent to the army according to the Order of both Houses of the 26 of Iune, 1647. And the other letter was in answer to the Vote of the House on Tuesday last, that a par∣ticular charge should be delivered into the House a∣gainst the 11 Members by this day, the Generall re∣turning this answer thereunto, That as he finds a great willingnesse in his councell of war, to answer the ex∣pectation of the house in all things so in this particu∣lar but the things being of that importance to the Kingdome and the persons charged so many in num∣ber
taken up more time then was expected, and therefore desire that it may be respited until Tuesday next, at which time they will not faile to bring it in, and that the Kingdome shall then see they have not impeached the Gentlmen out of any private respects but in affection, and duty to the publique. There was further also a Proclamation from the Generall, forbiding any abuse or obstruction to be offered to any Officers of Parliament in levying the Excise or other assessements. From the army came further this evening, that His Majesty one Thursday from Hatfield toward winsor where he expected to see his children, of which he was very desierous, but intended not to stay there above a day or tsio, but remove some further distance from London. The treaty with the Parliaments Commi∣ssioners, and Commissioners from the Army began this morning, as was appointed, the head quarters of the army it is supposed will be removed Saturday to Reading. The house had some debate of the Prince Electors desires, and ordered to leave it to his own pleasure. A letter was read in the house from the Commissi∣oners with the army, giving to understand their enter∣ing upon treaty with the army, & the manner of their proceedings. The house upon debate approve of the Commissioners proceedings therein. The head quarters of the army it is certified were removed this day to Reading and his Majesty was gon back from Winsor to the Lord Cravens house neer Causum.
Fryday Iuly 2. His Excellency appointed, these Of∣ficers of the Army to treate with the Commissio∣ners from the Parliament in these words: I Do hereby appoint Lieutenant Generall Cromwell. Com∣missary Generall Ireton, Colonell Fleetwood, Colonel Rainsborough, and Colonell Harrison, Colonel Sir Hardres Waller, Colonel Rich, Colonel Lambert Colonel Hammond and Major Disborough; These ten or any five of them (of which the major part to be of the five last) to Treate and Debate with the Right Honourable, The Commissioners of Parliament residing with the Army, upon the Papers and Desires sent from the Army to both Houses, and the Votes sent to the Army, according to the effect of the Order of both Houses, dated the 26 of June, 1647. And for that purpose to attend the Comissioner; at their lodging at the Katherine wheel to-morrow morning by eight, of the clock and so from time to time, and place to place as shall be mu∣tually agreed on. Given under my Hand and Seale at Wick∣ham, the first day of July, 1647. His Excellency having also received certain votes of the house touching the eleven members impeached, sent this ensuing letter in answer thereto. To the Right Honourable the Commissioners of Parlia¦ment now residing with the Army. My Lords and Gentlemen, HAving with my Councel of Warre considered of the Votes of the House of Commons, Iune 29. which you sent me, for the bringing in the parti∣clar charg and proofes against the Members charg∣ed by the Army, by Fryday next at farthest: As I find a great willingnesse in them to answer the expecta∣tions of the House in all things, so in particular, but
the things being of that importance to the Kingdom, and the persons charged so many in number, hath ta∣ken up more time then was expected; Wee desire therfore, That it may be respited untill Tuesday next at which time we shall not faile to bring it in; al∣though we could wish that no time might bee lost therein which might be improved for the present settlement of the affaires of this Kingdome, and that the Kingdome shall then see, we have not impeached the Gentlemen out of any private respects, but in af∣fection and duty to the Publique. I remaine Wickham, Iuly 1. 1647. Your very affectionate. Friend and Servant, Tho: Fairfax. At a councell of of war at the Generals quarters at Read∣ing yesterday being the 5 day of Iuly, 1647. It was ordered as followeth. Ordered by his Excellency and the Councell of war, that the Officers and Souldiers under mentioned, doe re-repaire to London, for presenting of the Charge against the 11 members to the house of his Excellency and the whole Army. At the making of this order, was a very great Councell of war, consisting of eleven Col. seven Lievtenants Col. and Majors, with a great number of Captaines. The names of the officers aforesaid mentioned, appointed to present the charge against the eleven members are as fol∣loweth. Col. Scroope, Col. Okey, Col. Hewsou, Col. Pride, Lieut. Col. Bowyer, Lieut. Col. Goffe. Maj. Raignbow, Cap. Berry, Cap. Clarke, Cap. Roafe, Mr. Sexby, and Mr. Getting. According to the Order of the Councel of Warre before reci∣ted, the Commanders thereby nominated, for presenting the Charge against the eleven Members, came to London to deliver the particular Charge to the House. The Charge it selfe con∣taines, more then one sheete; therefore of necessity must here be o∣mitted.
Thursday Iuly 1. SIR, The Generall advanced this day to Wickham, and the Kings Majesty came from Hatfield, dined at Moore-Park neere Watford, and thence rode to Windsor; but his Majesty finding his desires not answered, so as to have the opportunity of rejoycing in the society of his Children there, he left the place the next day, and went to Winchomb house, neere Reading. In this his Majesties progresse, the Country flockt together to see him; before him rode a Trumpeter, then some Persons of Honour bare headed; after this came his Majesty attended by the Commissioners, and about a mile behind them marched a Regiment of Horse. The last Lords day, Master Crofts preached before the King in the presence chamber, at the Lord Cravens house neare Causum bridge, in the fornoone, and Master Peters below in the Hall, and in the afternoone the King heard di∣vine service onely. The Head-quarters continue at Reading; some com∣plaints have beene made to the Generall, of abuses committed by divers Souldiers; and for prevention thereof for the future, his Excellency set forth a Pro∣clamation, charging and requiring all Soldiers what∣soever, to forbear taking of horses from any person whatsoever, without sufficient Warrant or to com∣pell any Person where they quarter to give them a∣ny money, and in further pursuance thereof, his Ex∣cellency granted Commission to the Colonell, Lieu∣tenant Colonell, or Major of every Regiment, for pu∣nishing of offences by a Councell of Warre in each Regiment, a copy whereof followeth:
The heads of the Charge preserted to the House of Commons, July 6. FIrst, that they have endeavoured to over∣throw the Rights and Liberties of the Sub∣iect, and to stand in opposition against the true course of Justice, &c. 2. That by false informations, and evill sug∣gestions, they have used their utmost endeavours to raise a mis-understanding betwixt the Parlia∣ment, and Army. 3. That they have been obstructive instru∣ments in the service of Ireland, and hath shew∣ed themselves very forward for the obstructing of that Designe. 4. That they have endeavoured to set an Ar∣my on foot within this Kingdome, and have also endeavoured to carry on many desperate designes within this Realm. It is said, that the Army doth intend to pro∣ceed against some of the impeached Members first, and so to the next by degrees. The Charge was read in the Honourable House of Commons upon Tuesday last, and after some debate there∣upon, the further result thereof was put off till Fryday following. FINIS.
