h3734 e132_21 99871728 156366
THE SERMON and Prophesie of JAMES HƲNT: Concerning the Marriage of the Lambe, and of the confounding of the Whore of Babylon, and to shew by what means she shall be brought to confusion. Wherefore I James Hunt humbly beseech the Honourable House of PARLIAMENT, for the mer∣cies of God, that you will read this book with ob∣servation, for to see and prove whether it be agree∣able to the honour and glory of God, and the confounding of the Devill. LONDON, Printed in the yeer 1642.
THE SERMON AND Prophesie of James Hunt, concern∣ing the marriage of the Lambe, and of the confounding of the Whore of Babylon. CHristian brethren and sisters, it is written in the 21. Chapter of the Revelation, vers. 6. Christ Jesus who is the perfect God, he saith plainly, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, I will give to him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of life freely. Which water of life I shall plainly prove signifieth the spirituall Word of God in the do∣ctrine of the new Testament, which proceedeth from the holy Unity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Goost, and these three are one. In 1. Joh. Chap. 5. ver. 7. the Word signifieth Christ Jesus, who is the second person in unity, and I shall plainly prove that those people that shall be reconciled to Christ by drinking freely of the wa∣ter of life, they shall be joyned to the holy Unity. My first proofe is in 2. Corit. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith. Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? How is Christ in his people, I say, by the venue and divine power of his Word, which is revealed in his glorious Gospel. Again in 1. Cor. 6.19. What know you not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God: and ye are not your own, for you
are all bought with a price, even with the precious wa∣ter and blood of Jesus Christ, for this is he which came by water and blood, not by water onely, but by water and blood: 1. Joh. 5.6. Therefore I say again, we are all bought with the precious water and bloud of Jesus Christ, therefore glorifie God in your bodies and in your spirits which are Gods. Again Ephes. 4. v. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one God and Father of all: who is above all, and in you all. These phrases of Scripture do plainly prove, that all those people which are and shall be reconciled unto Christ, and to his glorious Gospel, they shall be joyned to the glorious unity, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Again I can prove that Christ and his Church is as man and wife; Christ is the Bridegroome, and the Church they are the Bride, so they shall be in number thousands of thousands: For a man shall leave fa∣ther and mother and be joyned to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church, for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephes. 5. Therefore let us be glad and rejoyce, and give honour to God, for the marri∣age of the Lambe is come, and his wife hath made her self ready; his Minister hath made her self ready, Revel. 9. v. 7. And to her was granted that she should be arayed in fine linen clean and white, for the fine linen is the righteousnesse of the Saints, which have their robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lambe. Revel. 7.14. Their robes signifieth the inward man of the hearts of the people which is washed and made white in the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; for if we walk in the light, as God our glorious Father is in the light, We have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. 1. Joh. 7. Thus I have shewed you in brief the true signification of the marriage of the Lambe. Now I come to my Text again, Christ saith, I will give to him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely, Joh. 4.13. Christ said unto the woman which came to draw water out of Jacobs Well.
He that drinketh of this water shall thirst again, but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst for the water that I shall give him will be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life. Which water of life plainly signifieth for to be the spirituall word of God. In the Go∣spel of Christ which shall spring and multiply in the hearts of the faithfull, that they shall be thorowly filled and sa∣tisfied therewith. Again Ephes. 5.15. Christ so loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of the water by the word, which is by the powerfull preaching of the Word. Again Hebr. 10.21. And having a high Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Our bodies signifieth the inward man of the hearts of the people, which is washed, justified, and glorified by the divine power of the Word of God: for whom he cals, them he justifies; and whom he justi∣fies, them he also glorifieth. Rom. 8.30. And the Spirit and the Bride say come: Christ and his Ministery say come, and let him that is athirst come, and take the water of life freely. Freely I have received, and freely I declare it unto all the people that they may drink freely thereof, for to rain with Christ in glory for ever, Revel. 22. Now on the other side, I will shew you in brief the true signification of the great Whore that sitteth upon so many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inha∣bitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. Revel. 17. Now I shall prove these ma∣ny waters must not be taken for temporall waters, which is to be disdained with the bodily eye, for he saith plain∣ly in the 15. verse of the same chap. The waters which thou sawest where the Whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations and tongues. Hereby I understand and prove, that this great Whore that sits upon so many waters, signifi∣eth the Devill, and all his carnall Ministers, which have gathered to themselves so many false and corruptible
doctrines. And as they have corrupted their own minds, so in like manner, they have blinded and corrupted the minds of the people, which are as yet held under their power. For upon her forehead was her name written, Mystery, Babylon, the great Mother of Harlots, and all abo∣minations of the earth, Vers. 5. Now I say againe, this Ba∣bylon must not be taken for atemporall building, for he saith plainly in the last verse of the same chap. The woman which thou sawest, the great whore which thou sawest, is that great Citie, which raigneth over the Kings of the earth, for their Merchants were the great men of the earth, Revel. 18.23. which signifieth the carnall Ministers of the earth; for by their falsiry all Nations were deceived, and by whom I my selfe once was deceived. This word sawse∣ry, signifieth so many false and corruptible doctrines, whereby the Devill and all his carnall Ministers have blinded, and as it were bewitched the minds of the people, which are as yet held under their power. And a mightie Angel tooke up a stone like a great Milstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great Citie Ba∣bylon be throwne downe, Revel. 18.21. For by faith the walls of Jericho fell downe, Heb. 11.30. So by the sound of the Trumpet, which is by the powerfull preaching of the Word of God in the doctrine of the New Testa∣ment, which is the lively and justifying faith, shall sound so powerfully against all false doctrine and false worship, which belongeth to the Devill and his Kingdome of darknesse, that the spirituall buildings of Babylon shall fall downe to the ground. Thus I have shewed you the signification of the water of life: againe, I have shewed you the signification of the great Whore that sits upon so many waters, which I have proved doth signifie the Devill and all his carnall Ministers, which have gathered to themselves so many false and corruptible doctrines, which proceedeth from the wisdome of the flesh. But now I trust in God, the waters of life, I meane the children of God, which shall
have a delight to drinke freely thereof, they will fight so powerfully against the devill and all his carnall Ministers, that their hellish power will be broken quite downe; for now I make no doubt but that saying will be brought to passe that is written in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the 15. chap, vers. 54. Death shall be swallowed up into vi∣ctory, death shall be swallowed up of life; O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory, so thou, where now is thy victory; the sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the Law, but thankes be unto God, who giveth us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So I thanke God, he hath given me the victory through the vertue and di∣vine power of his Word in his glorious Gospell, for the strength of sinne is the Law; Wherefore as by one man sinne en∣tred into the world; sinne entred into Adam, and death by sinne, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Rom. 5.12. Againe, By the offence of one, Judgement came upon all men to condemnation. Moreover, the Law entred that the offence might abound, vers. 20. This word Moreover, sig∣nifieth moreover and above the fall of Adam, the Law en∣tred that the offence might abound, but where sinne a∣bounded, grace did much more abound by one Jesus Christ; for he was delivered for our offences, and was raised againe for our Justification, Rom. 4.25. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, thorow our Lord Jesus Christ. But the enemies and people say, that Christ hath redee∣med us from the Ceremoniall Law: some againe say from the Judiciall Law; others say from the Leviticall Law; so they have divided the old Testament into two or three parts: but if I aske any of them, if there be any more then two Testaments, they will say no; then my answer to them againe is in the ninth Chapter to the Hebrewes, vers. 15. For this cause Christ is the Me∣diatour of the New Testament, that by meanes of death, for the redemption of the transgression that were under the first Testament. This verse of Scripture doth plainly prove of
two Testaments. The first signifieth the old Law and Testament, which Christ hath redeemed us from, which I have proved to be unto death and condemnation. The second is the ministration of the bloud of the New Te∣stament, which is the power of God to everlasting life and justification; therefore being saved and justified freely by grace, we all have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle exhorteth saying, Let there be supplicati∣ons and prayers for Kings and for all that are in authoritie, 1 Tim. 2. chap. Againe, he saith, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalmes and spirituall songs. Hereby I plainly prove that godly prayers according to the true worship and honour of God, and David Psalmes shall abide in the Church of Christ for ever. But for the old Law and Testament, which Christ hath redeemed us from, and the Common Service-Book, they must be laid aside, for they doe not belong to the glorious body of Christ, which I can prove to be the glorious and triumphing Church. Now the God of peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the bloud of the everlasting Covenant, make you all perfect to doe his will. He saith, the Great Shepheard of the sheepe, where∣fore I acknowledge there is but one God, and there must and shall be but one Religion, one Shepheard, one Sheep-fold, and the meanes which God hath ordained to ga∣ther the Sheep into one fold, is by the powerfull preach∣ing of his Word, which is revealed in his Gospell. And we know that the Sonne of God is come, and hath given us understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Sonne Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternall life, to whom be all praise, honour, glory, power, might, dominion and majestie, both now and evermore, world without end, Amen. FINIS.
