l791a 99899616 154251
THE Wars of David, AND THE PEACEABLE Reign of Solomon, Symbolizing the TIMES Of Warfare and Refreshment of the Saints of the Most High GOD, To whom a Priestly Kingdom is shortly to be given, after the Order of MELCHISEDECK. Set forth in Two Treatises Written by J. LEAD: and according to Divine Ordination Publish'd in this present Year of JUBILEE. For the Service of all the Children of the Captivity, now Watching and Praying in many Countries, for the Great Jubilee of the LORD to begin, and follow upon This very Speedily. CONTAINING I. An Alarm to the Holy Warriours to Fight the Battels of the LAMB. II. The Glory of Sharon, in the Renovation of Nature, introducing the Kingdom of Christ in his Sealed Virgins, Redeemed from the Earth. Dan. vii. 28. —Hitherto is the End of the Matter. LONDON, Printed by J. Bradford, in Little Britain, 1700.
The PREFACE Of the Publisher. THE Treatment which the former Books of this Author, for the space now of about Twenty Years since they began here to Appear, have met with from her own Native Country, is such; as might be enough indeed to discourage any New Attempt of this Nature, and might have prevented the sending abroad in these Kingdoms, the two following Divine and Mystical Treatises; so that they were like to have been the Portion only of those Foreign Nations, that desire them not a little, and know how to value them: had there not been the Interven∣tion of the Hand of Providence, in a manner very Extraordinary to command them forth at this Time, with a special Excitement of the Holy Spirit, to blow the Trumpet yet louder and louder, and to try this Adulterous Nation once more, whether they will hear, or whether they will refuse. Whatever Sinister Suspicions we may before have of any one, when they lie upon their Death-Bed, we are willing to hear what they have to say for or against themselves. The Wills not only of the Good, but even of Flagitions Livers are regarded, and thought to have somewhat Sacred: And the Dying Speeches of the Worst of Criminals, such as have utterly Shipwreck'd their Credit, are not altogether slighted, but are looked into, and search'd after. How much more then ought we to look into, and search after, and have an esteem for the Dying Declarati∣ons (and especially if they be more than ordinary) of Persons that have been any whit Singular and Eminent in their Lives, by having made a good Profession before God and Man, against the general Stream and Torrent of the World? But if moreover the Finger of GOD shall shew it self, to give an Honour to what is by them Declared, will it not still be the more reasonable for us to make a Sober and Impartial Inquiry into the Subject of it? Now upon these Considerations What is here presented to the Publick, may justly claim a serious Scrutiny, and a fair Examination from all manner of Persons: who cannot but have their Interest herein,
if what is said be true; and if it be false, to detect it. For though the Author (Blessed be God) be yet living, (being now Aged Seventy Seven Years) this will not in the least derogate from the Authority of what is here Delivered from her Mouth, and Written down with all Faithfulness; as if the same were not to have the value of a Dying De∣claration to all intents and purposes. Nay it ought to be greater; for as much as it has pleased the Mighty Conquerer over Death, whose Name is called THE WORD OF GOD, to exert his Power upon this occasion, in restoring and reviving That which drew near to Corruption, and in bringing up from the Gates of the Grave: that it might be for a Memorial of his Glory and Praise, and for an Encouragement to many, unto whom this shall come, that they may Believe, and be Obedient to the Call that is now sounding in many (yea Most) parts of Europe, and is not heard only in a Corner. Now whereas there are several Things in the Journals, and in Other Writings of this Author, before Published, that have given Offence to some Persons of Sincere Intentions, and Lovers of the Truth, yet not set quite free from the Traditions of Men; She was pleased to De∣clare to them that were about her in the time of her Sickness, and in the greatest Extremity of it, that though she knew her self to be an unworthy Instrument, taken up by GOD out of his free and abound∣ing Grace, yet she had endeavour'd (to her utmost,) to be faithful to the Gift committed to her, and to discharge her Trust, in delivering what she had received; which she did not doubt but he would Vindicate, and go on to Bless, as he had begun to Bless already in several Na∣tions: And that she was certainly assured, by the Testimony of JESƲS her Lord, that the Work which was in this Kingdom begun (howsoever contemptible it did generally appear) should never be stop'd, but should prevail against all manner of Oppositions, till his Holy and Peaceable Reign should be Here fully Established, according to all what she had had a Prospect of in the Spirit, and what had been set forth for a publick Good, if not in this, yet in the approaching Age. Many sweet Admo∣nitions at the same Time, and Encouragements to Perseverance, without shewing the least Hesitation or Doubt all the while, came from her with much Power: And she expressed the greatest Satisfaction to put off her Vile Tabernacle, and to be with the Lord; desiring to be dissolved for this End, and so to go to her Predecessors in the Faith, unless he had some further Work to ill and command her. In consideration of which, there can be no Legitimate Prejudice against
the Sincerity of the Witness, or the Validity of the Testimony laid down in the following Papers: And all the Esteem that is usually pay'd to the most Solemn and ev'n Dying Words of Persons of the strictest Pro∣bity, is due to these. The Books of this Writer are (for the most part) to be simply look'd on as Narrations, and the value of them doth not depend upon any other Qualifications, but upon the Credibility of the Relator. Now greater Proofs cannot be given of the Integrity of a Per∣son, than what is here to be found; there being so little Artifice us'd to Put upon the World, as all her Methods have been most strangely con∣trary to those of the World: of which numerous Instances of her Life might be given. Neither as to the Ability or Capacity of any Person, in or∣der to be a Witness in such Cases, are there more favourable Presump∣tions to be found. She has had a long Experience; has seen the Mis∣carriages of many; has liv'd in much Watchfulness and Prayer Day and Night, all the Years of her Widdow-hood, since the Year 1671; has had a longer Course of Observations, than would be enough to make one Excellent in the most dfficult and crabbed Sciences, where there is but a Disposition in Nature; has kept as it were a Calendar of these Obser∣servations, and from Year to Year did make her Calculations from the same, at the beginning of every New Year, so long as she had her Eye∣sight; has been almost continually exercis'd under great Temptations and Oppositions, and been Fighting the Good Fight of Faith from her youth upwards; has been above Threescore Years call'd by GOD, after a manner more than ordinary, and to her self exceeding Strange, as well as to others, unto a Life which the World knows not, and cannot Judge of; and has been above half the time under the more immediate and constant Visitations of the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, as what hath been already Publish'd doth Testifie. And 'tis to be observ'd that though she was Baptized, and Educated in the Church of England, in which all the Extraordinary Stirrings of the Divine Spirit are too generally Slighted, and by some Blasphemed, it pleased the Wisdom of GOD more Illustriously to break forth in the manner of her Conver∣sion, in the Sixteenth Year of her Age: and so to give an Evidence that the Voice of the Eternal Wod of God, speaking to Souls in a distinct and sensible manner, is Real and Substantial, not Imaginary; being to be distinguished by such, who can't be suppos'd to have had any pre-con∣ceived Notions about it, but must have the Prejudices of Education di∣rectly against it, and all External Motives not to attend to it. The Sober and Moral Conversation in which she was Nurtur'd, was not sufficient to give her any Rest, when this Voice first spake to her: which was very
suddenly and surprizingly. For it was in a time of great Festivity, at the Celebration of the Nativity of CHRIST (according to custom) with Musick and Dancing, in the House of her Father, where was a Concourse for that end of the Gentry; when of a sudden grievious Sor∣row was darted as Fire into her Bowels, and she was made to consider that this was not the way to be Comform'd to CHRIST, or to re∣member his Birth aright; And a soft Whisper gently entred into her, saying, Cease from this, I have another Dance to lead thee in; for this is Vanity. Ʋpon which she was as constrain'd to give over abruptly her Dancing, and so presently withdrew her self from the Company, retiring to consider of this Immediate Call. Which the Divine Spirit pursued so very hard, as after this she had no liberty to Converse, as formerly in the Family, or to mind any concern of it: but was so wholly taken up in the consi∣deration of her Interiour State, and of the One Thing necessary, as to desert all things besides. Yet though her Relations and Acquaintance took great notice, and marvelled much at what had happen'd, she dili∣gently conceal'd the true Cause from them all; excepting only a Chap∣lain in the House, who having some time afterward surpriz'd her read∣ing in his Study, inquired into the matter, bad her be of good Courage, and believe that God had some great Good to bring about, by all this Conflict of Soul she was in. Which was so terrible indeed, as nothing was able to give her any Satisfaction or Rest, or to ease her Wounded Spirit, that was struck through and through, for having once persisted in a falsehood about a Triffle: The Sense of which continued upon her for the space of Three Years, with very great Anguish and Trouble; these Words being frequently brought before her, Whoever loveth and mak∣eth a Lye cannot enter into the New Jerusalem. The Dreadfulness and Horrour of Sin carried her down to the Gates of Hell: and every little Circumstance of its Evil, was continually presented to her Mind, with all the possible Agnravations thereof. And if this were but her be∣ginning, what may we expect of her latter End? And if in the first Conversion only of a Soul to GOD, so great a Dread there be, for having offended against the Truth in but a Trivial matter, how great of necessity must it be in the Progress of that Soul (if it should fall again so strangely) to offend against the Truth more Highly, more Solemnly, and in matters of the very greatest Importance? Surely this is no flight Presumption for the Vadility of a Testimony, which is given after∣ward in the most Sacred Form, and persisted in with the greatest constancy and chearfulness, notwithstanding all kind of Oppositions from the World
and the Devil, as well as the Flesh. Now it was in the Nineteenth Year of her Age, when the Light of the Divine Countenance, which had been hither to hid, begun to shine upon her, and to bring her Soul out of this State of Obscurity and Darkness, and out of the Pains of Hell, that had taken hold upon her, feeling the Arrows of the Wrath of the Almighty: And she was Comforted with the sweet Message of the Free and Super∣abounding Love and Grace of the most Tender and Merciful Father; and was so richly favoured by her dear and blessed Mediator, as to receive at that time the Seal of her Absolution and Assurance, in a manner very special, there being presented to her in a Vision, the form of a Pardon, with a Seal to it; signifying that her Transgressions were blotted out, and that she was Sealed by the Spirit, for the Promise of the Father; as a Witness whereof a mighty Gust and Power of Prayer was then given to her. And ever since she has been a trained Soldier, under the Disci∣pline of the Blessed JESƲS, and the leadings of his Spirit: which is a Spirit trying the Reins and the Marrow, and that will not abide but with simplicity of Heart, and Truth in the inward Parts. Let this suf∣fice for the Credibility of the Evidence: for the present at least. Now as for the Subject Matter both of the one and the other Treatise, it is a Divine Call to prepare and fit our selves against the greatest Re∣volution to come upon the World, that ever has been, with Directions how we ought to behave our selves in this wonderful Crisis, and what shall be the Success if we abide Faithful and Stedfast? The stile and manner, in which they are written, is not suitable to the Genius of this Polite Age, and especially of this Nation: It is Parabolical and Emblema∣tical, full of Figurative Speeches, and Abrupt Transitions, and so utter∣ly strange to the Mordern Reformation of Language from the Stage, as it is not to be wondred at that it pleases so few; but withal such as it is the Power of God is the more manifested through it, and it wants not also a Beauty and Strength which is peculiar to it, and which would be very hard (if possible) to imitate. In the first Treatise there are these Things Remarkable, viz the Gene∣ral of the Army appearing upon a White Horse, in a Triumphant Man∣ner; the Trials, Excuses, Expostulations, and Discipline of the Person to whom he so appears; the Parable of the Mill, which is to supply the Army; the Decree of the Heavenly Council, and Proclamation of War; the Alarm for the Gathering of a Priestly Host: How they are to be Admitted into the Military Roll; that this is already open'd in Heaven; the Time, Place, and Persons for the Rendezvous; an Observation upon the Continuance and Success of this War; all the Soldiers enter into pre∣sent
Pay; all that Conquer are to win a Crown; how they are dispos'd of that Dye in Battel, before their Warfare is accomplish'd; the Resur∣rection of the Spirit of Deborah, and Prophecying in the Army; the Dis∣covery of Paradise, for the Recovery of which the War is undertaken; the Heavenly Auxiliaries; the Assurance of Victory; the Interest of all Parties to join thomselves with this Army, a Description of the Au∣xiliaries riding on White Mules, with Censersin their Hands: and the effect of their Appearance; being the first Pitched Battel. After this follows another Alarm to Battel; a Prospect and Promise of greater Conquests; the Discovery of the New Jerusalem, and repeated Encouragements to Fight for it; a Letter from the King of this City to the Army; the Counter-plotting of the Enemy; the Communication of the Two Jerusalems; the Allegory of Esther and Mordecai, and the wonderful success of the Children of Wisdom; how they are assisted by the Four and Twenty Throne-Elders; a Gracious Encouragement to Perseverance; how they are visited by an Heavenly Host, and from then receive Anointed Shields; the Three Watches, and the great Power that is given in the Third; some particular Instructions to the Soldiers and Watchmen; the Miraculous manner of the Increase of this Holy Army; the Spies to this Army, the Seven Spirits of the Lamb; his Mark and Seal; the Proclamation of the Jubilee; the Watch-word; Counsels and Cautions to them that would ob∣tain the Benefit of it; the Magical Rod of Moses, needful to the great approaching Deliverance of the Captives; the due Preparation of the Cap∣tives, in order to partake of the Promised Jubilee; the Blessing upon them; a Threefold Appeal, concerning the Premises, to Ʋnbelievers, to Half-Be∣lievers, and to Believers. In the other Treatise are to be observ'd the many and wonderful Rewards of the Conquerors; the Mighty Powers of Faith; the Blessed Fruits of Love; the Magnificent Conversation of distant Spirits; the Angelical Generation and Multiplication; the Manner and Progress of the Replant∣ing Paradise; the Separation from the Earth; the Divine Cup which is the Spring of Ʋnderstanding, the Fountain of Wisdom, and the Light of Knowledge; the Communication of the Priestly, Prophetical, and Royal Spirit; with an Account of the Court of the Prince of Peace, and some Observations on his Ministers. All is Calculated with a special regard to the New Century now upon its entring: And indeed all the Writings of this Author do point at some great Reformation of the Church, as very near at the Door; but carried on by an Invisible Power, and not by the Wisdom or Arm of Flesh. And the substance of them all, as well as of these two, may be reduced to the following plain Propositions, viz.
1. That God is no Regarder of persons, but that whosoever truly fears him, and seeks to do his Will in any Tribe, Profession, or Religion, is accepted by him: and that out of all the Tribes, Professions, and Religions that are at this Day over the whole World, he will gather to himself an Holy and Peculiar People, to be as the first Fruits of the Kingdom of his SON. 2. That the Promise of the Father concerning the Gift of the Holy Spirit was never determin'd to Place or Time: But that it was extended Univer∣fally to as many as should Believe throughout all the Ages of the Church. 3. That this Spirit Blows where it lists, and is not controlable by the Wisdom or Power of Man. 4. That Regeneration in Man is the Work of the Spirit, and that Man ought only to cease from the Activity of his own Will therein, and to seek to become wholly Passive to the Divine Operation. 5. That in the process of Regeneration, there is a Conformity to the Blessed JESUS, as to the great Exemplar: and that the several Degrees hereof are as so many Steps to the Kingdom of GOD. 6. That this Kingdom consists in perfect Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: and in the Renovation of the whole Man, Spirit, Soul and Body. 7. That this Kingdom shall comprehend the utmost Ends of the Earth, by Virtue of an Everlasting Decree: and that Christ as he is the second Adam, is the Head and Representative of the whole Humane Nature. 8. That not only the Justice, but also the Mercy of GOD is over all his Works: and that as the one is not confin'd to this short Life, so also not the other; but that they may both endure for Ever. 9. That CHRIST, as he is Heir of all Things, will lose nothing that is his Right, or that the Father hath given him: And that therefore of his Kingdom there shall be no End, but all Creatures whether in Heaven, or in Earth, or under the Earth, shall be made to submit themselves to him, and to bow the Knee. 10. That the Times of Restitution are Now about beginning: and that there is a Voice at present in the Wilderness, Crying, That the Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth is at hand. And moreover it is to be remark'd, in order to a right understanding both of These and of all such Books, that they do generally turn upon these Sup∣positions: 1. That beside the Literal Sense of the Scriptures, there is frequent∣ly a Mystical one also. 2. That it is not enough to Believe the Death or Re∣surrection of Christ, without bearing the Marks of them in our selves; And 3. That the Operations of the Divine Spirit, and the Openings of the Kingdom of Christ, are successive and gradual. Which being well understood, there will be no great difficulty found in the Reading of these, or any other Treatises of the same Author. This was thought necessary to premise for Caution to the Readers, that so they may Apply what they Read to some of those General Pro∣positions, or Interpret her by one or other of these Principles, and be careful
not to wrest the same to their own Condemnation. For as it is very dangerous to be impos'd upon in matters of this nature, so is it no less dangerous to im∣pose on our selves, by perverting any thing from and against the original De∣sign: and more dangerous to judge Definitively in a Case that doth not proper∣ly fall under our Judicature and Cognisance; lest haply we may be found Figh∣ters against the Spirit of God, when we think it not. All that is here presen∣ted, is virtually an Appeal to the Soveraign Judge; to whom it belongs to Autho∣rize, or Condemn that which is sent forth as in his Name: And he will not suffer Judgment to be wrested out of his Hands. For the Work of every Per∣son shall shortly be made manifest: And the Day is at hand which shall declare it by the Revelation of Fire; wherein the Children of the King∣dom shall be Purified in the first place. And tho' there will be found among all of these some Hay and Stuble to be burnt up; yet the pretious Materials will hereby suffer no loss, but will appear so much the more radiant; and all that is Establish'd upon the Foundation of the Rock Christ (who ceases not still to follow his true Israel in the Wilderness) shall abide in the Furnace, and over∣come the Flames. The Consideration of S. Ambrose may be enough, I think, to strike Terrour into us, and to teach us to be sober in Judging: Who after ha∣ving spoken of that Fiery Baptism, whereby all Iniquity shall be consum'd, and the Righ∣teous shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, saith, Omnes oportet pro∣bari, &c. All must be tried by the Fire, whoever desires to return to Paradise: All must pass through the Flames, whether it be that John the Evangelist, whom the Lord so loved, as to say concerning him to Peter, If I will that he tarry till he come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Concerning his Death some have doubted, concerning his Passage through the Fire we cannot doubt. Whether it be that Pe∣ter who receiveth the Keys of the Kingdom, he must also say, we have passed through the Fire. He is tried as Silver; I shall be tried as Lead: till all the Lead do vanish I shall burn. And again he saith: 'With Fire shall all the Children of Levi be Purified, with Fire shall Ezekiel, with Fire shall Daniel, &c be Purified. Wo is me if my Work burn, and I suffer the loss of my Labour: And if the Lord save his Servants, they shall be saved by Faith, yet so saved as by Fire; and if we shall not be burnt up, yet we shall be burnt. Also he saith farther: 'There is onely one, who could not feel this Fire, even he who is the Righteousness of God,Christ. Wherefore for as much as the Day of this fiery Trial is at hand, which hath been spoken of both by This, and by many others of the Antient Holy Fathers, and has been also mentioned in many places of the Writings of this our Author, let us every one seek to prepare our selves according to the Word of our Lord, to watch that this Day over∣take us not unawares, and to hold out in the Warfare of Faith and Love without waver∣ing: And especially to take heed that we judge not, that we may not be judged; but that we leave judgment to whom judgment belongs, who in Righteousness doth Judge and make War, and out of whose Mouth goeth a sharp Sword, with which he will smite the Nations, and rule them with a Rod of Iron, who refuse to submit to his Golden Scepter. And it is hoped, that what is here Deliver'd, may be an excitement to some, yea to many, to prepare themselves accordingly, to love the Lord Iesus, and to believe the Promise of his coming; to live the Life of Faith, according to the Pattern in the Mount; and to love one another even as he hath loved us: that so the Beauty of the Primitive Philadelphia may break forth, and the Glory of the Apostolical Jerusalem may shine out, in the Spirit and Name of the everlasting Father; that all Nations may go up together to the House of the Lord, and that this Nation in particular may be as the Garden of Sha∣ron. Amen, Amen.
A Short Exercise of the Spiritual Warriours, Recommended by an Old Experienc'd Soldier in the Faith, who Ended lately the Days of his Warfare in France Here inserted for Direction and Caution to as many as would understand, and Read with Profit, these ensuing Tracts. 1. THat which is the most Holy, the most Common, and the most Ne∣cessary Exercise in the Spiritual Life, or Warfare, is the Pre∣sence of GOD: It is to be pleas'd with, and to accustom our selves to his Divine Company, speaking Humbly, and Lovingly Communing with HIM at all Times, in every Moment; without Rule or Measure; espe∣cially in the time of Temptations, of Sufferings, of Aridities, of Dis∣pleasures; and even of Unfaithfulnesses and Falsehod, that so we may immediately recover our selves. 2. We must continually endeavour that all our Actions, indifferently of what sort soever, be a kind of little Conferences and Conversations with GOD; yet without Study, only as they proceed from the Purity and Singleness of Heart. 3. We must perform all our Actions with Weight and Measure; with∣out Impetuosity or Precipitation, which denote a Wandring Spirit: We must Labour gently, quietly, and love-fully with GOD; must pray him to accept our Labour. And by this continual Attention to GOD we shall bruise the Head of the Devil, and shall make him to let fall his Arms. 4. We ought, during our Labour and other Actions, yea even in the midst of our Reading and Writing, however Spiritual they may be; nay, moreover while we are at our Outward Devotions, and Vocal Prayers; to cease and give over for a little Moment, and as frequently too as we can, to Worship GOD in the Center of our Heart, and to get a tast of him, tho' by the By, and as it were by stealth. Since you are not igno∣rant how GOD is present before you during your Actions, how he is in the Ground and Center of your Soul: Wherefore then it behoves you from time to time to retire and pause in the midst of your Outward Occu∣pations, and also of your Vocal Prayers, to adore him inwardly, Praise him, Pray to him, offer him your Heart, and give him thanks. 5. All these Adorations are to be done through Faith, we believing of a Truth that GOD is in our Hearts; that he must be Worshipped, Loved and Served in Spirit and Truth; that he seeth whatever cometh to pass,
and shall come to pass in us, and in all the Creatures; that he is Independent from all, and that upon which all Created Beings depend; that he is In∣finite in all kind of Perfections, so as by his Infinite Excellency, and Soveraign Right of Dominion to deserve all that we are, and all that is in Heaven and in Earth, whereof he may dispose according to his Good Pleasure both in Time and Eternity: And that consequently we owe him in Justice all our Thoughts, Words, and Deeds. 6. We must carefully examine which are the Virtues that are most necessary for us; those which are the most difficult to obtain; the Sins into which we are most apt to fall, and the most frequent and unavoidable Occasions of our falling: We ought to have recourse to GGD with an entire Faith and Confidence, while we are engag'd in the Combat, to a∣bide resolute in the presence of his Divine Majesty, to Adore him in Hu∣mility, to Represent to him our Miseries and Weaknesses, and to Beg affectionately the Assistance of his Grace, according to the several Cir∣cumstances we are then under, and the stress of the Battel. This Con∣versation with GOD is in the Center of the Soul, where the Soul speaks to GOD Heart to Heart, and always in a great and profound Peace, which it enjoys in GOD: And now all what passeth without is to the Soul no more than as a Fire of Straw, which is extinguish'd according to the Measure that the Holy Fire from Heaven is there enkindled; and cannot at all (or but very little) disturb its Internal Peace. This is what was found Written by a Person, who had Practis'd for above Forty Years continually this Holy Exercise of the presence of GOD, and of Communion with CHRIST in silence, by having his Conversa∣tion in the Heavens, even amidst all his External Employments: And who during Ten of these was Trained in the Battels of the Lamb, after such a manner as is almost incredible; specially to any that have not been in like manner Exercis'd, under the Fiery Proba (or Fire-Ordeal) that every true Christian Soldier must pass through of necessity. And they that will obtain the Garland of Roses, in the Garden of Sharon, must (as he did) hold out in Fighting under the Banner of the Blessed Cross of JESUS; till the Victory, preceeding the First (and Spiritual) Resurrection be obtain'd, and they can say that the LORD is risen in them, by the Demonstration of his (late) hidden Life, and that being in the Hands of GOD, they matter not what they do or suffer for him, and in Union with his Will: For this is to be their whole Business and Engagement. They must not be terrified at the Fire of the Cherub which guards the Passage, but must Valiantly break through the same in the Victorious Name of JESUS: whereby the Pretious Door of Pearl will be made to fly open, and a free entrance given into this Divine Plan∣tation, whither their Beloved is gone down to see the Fruits of the Valley, who will there eat his Honey-Comb with his Spouse and Sister: and will drink his Wine and his Milk with the Virgins of the Bride-Chamber, that shall have follow'd him fully in the process of their Regeneration, and
have trimmed their Lamps, filling them from the Seven Fountain-Lamps that burn perpetually before the Throne of the Majesty, in the Light of which the Majesty may be beheld in the Center and Ground of the Soul, as in its proper Mirrour and Reflection. And thus is that True and Spiritual Worship attained to, which this Holy Man did under many Outward and Heavy Burdens practise: and which he has thus, with all plainness and simplicity, express'd in Declaring, 1st. How that to Worship God in Spirit, is to Worship him by an humble real Adoration of Spirit in the Center of our Souls: and that there is none but God who can see this Ado∣ration, which we may reiterate so often, till in the end it become as it were Na∣tural; and as if God were One with our Soul, and our Soul were One with God. Experience demonstrates this. 2dly, How to Worship God in Truth, is to acknow∣ledge him for what HE is, and to acknowledge our selves for what we are: How it is to own truly, actually, and in Spirit that God is That which HE IS, that is, infinitely Perfect, infinitely Adorable, infinitely remov'd from Evil, &c; and to behave our selves suitably to such an acknowledgement, under the Conduct of his Spirit. 3dly, How to Worship God in Truth, and under the Leading of the Spirit of Truth, is also to confess that we are entirely contrary to him, and that he is willing to make us Like unto himself: and how therefore it is a very great Folly for us to turn aside but for one Moment from that Respect that Love, that Service, and those continual Adorations which we owe to him. And there are not wanting at this Day many Worshippers in the Spiritual Temple, who have well learnt these Divine Maxims, and have sounded thereby a Mighty Alarm in a Neighbouring Kingdom: which may cause yet a greater Shaking than the Politi∣cians are aware of, who will then be convinced too late (if they Repent not) no less of the Imprudence, than of the Injustice of those Violent Measures which for some few Years past they have taken, in order to suppress the growth of this knd of Worship, (whose manifest Crime is that it is of no profit to the Merchants of Souls;) and will experiment the vain Attempt of thinking to Dam up a River that runs under Ground, and that may easily break forth in Seven Streams, while resist∣ed in One. The Interest and Multitude that are engag'd on both sides, are indeed most considerable: And the War that has been Proclaimed against these Spiritual Worshippers in the inward Court is like to be yet of some Continuance, tho' pro∣secuted never so Vigorously. But these hear the Word of the LORD by his Prophets, saying unto them, Be not afraid, nor dismayed by reason of this great Multitude; for the Battel is not Yours, but Gods: Ye shall not need to Fight in it your selves; only set your selves, stand still, and see the Salvation of the LORD with (and in) you: And thus Believing in the LORD their God, by a continued Introversion into the Divine Presence, and a standing still in the Center and Fund of their Hearts, from all the Activity of their Corrupt Imaginations and Wills, that so the Pure Magia of the Holy Spirit may bring forth its Wonders; they shall surely be Establish'd. But as for their Enemies, every one shall help to destroy ano∣ther: Even as it was in the Great Day of the Valley of Berachah, so shall it be again. Wherefore every one that is of the House of Judah (that is, they that are called to make a confession of Spiritual Praise to the Divine Being as he is LOVE, and to acknowledge the Eternal duration of his Mercies;) and all the In∣habitants of Jerusalem (that is, they that press after the Internal Quiet, and Rest of the Soul;) and every one that is Listed in the Military Roll of the Lamb of Mount-Sion (that is, they that are in the Election of God to the First Resurrecti∣on, being Separated and Sanctified from the World to that end;) must above
all things study this short and easie Exercise of the Heavenly Militia, to stand in the presence of God, and to stand still: That so they may behold that great Salvation and Glory, which is now about to be revealed in these latter Ages of the World. But to be Masters of this Holy Exercise, we are taught that there is required (1.) a Purity of Life very great: (2.) a Faithfulness to the Practise of this Presence, and to the Internal Beholding of God in the Light of Faith: (3.) a particular Care that this Internal Beholding (tho' but for a Moment) may prevent, accompany, and end every Action that we undertake: And (4.) O Obedience to the Spirit of Christ, to follow him whithersoever he goeth, and to rest where he resteth; and especially to observe this in the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, or other Books that are Written with any Degree of the Unction of this Blessed Spirit. And if These, or any other Spiritual Treatises shall thus be begun to be Read by any, a proportionable Success may thence be expected: and they will have no reason to complain of their Labour being lost. There∣fore seek to learn this Holy Exercise here Describ'd; then Read: So shall ye Understand, and so shall ye Profit. Otherwise there is nothing but may be con∣verted into Venom. Even the very Love of God it self is at this Day become a Stumbling Block to many, as is well known: And if it be Pure from all Self-Interest, not seeking its Own but Gods, this alone we find is enough to raise the Jealousie of the highest Ecclesiastical Princes and Courts. Whence as if there were danger of Loving God too much, or of seeking his Glory two Generously, the Passions of Men have been carried on against it to that Exorbitant Height (though still under the fairest Pretexts) as even to Decry it for turning Chri∣stianity upside down, as well as the World. Such is the blindness of Humane Nature, even in Good Men, as coming without that Preparation of Holy Silence which is requisite, and without the Practise of that Exercise here recom∣mended, we run into the grossest mistakes of Things and Persons that are Spiri∣tual. But if any one shall faithfully practise this Holy Exercise, and attend to the Presence of God in his Soul, he shall be sure to hear and understand that Heavenly Call, and Angelical Summons that is now beginning to go forth over the whole Earth, by Witnesses raised up in all Parts, to Proclaim the Entrance of the Kingdom of Christ, in the Restitution of the Evangelical Spirit, and in the Renovation of Nature. And Thrice Blessed is he that shall be Obedient to this Call: For he shall have a Name Written upon the Foundations of the New Jerusalem, and shall be made a Pillar in that Temple which descends from Heaven. Fountain of Gardens, Vol. III. Part I. p. 151. These are those that shall Fight the Battels of the LAMB, and bring him to Reign on (and over) the Earth: So that all Kingdoms and Nations may serve him as appearing in his Saints. Isa. 59.17, 19, 20. He put on Righteousness as a Breast-plate, and an Hel∣met of Salvation upon his Head, and he put on the Garments of Vengeance for Cloathing, and was clad with Zeal as a Cloak. When the Enemy shall come in like a Flood, the SPIRIT of the LORD shall lift up a Standard against him: And the Redeemer shall come to Zion. Eph. 6.12, 13, 14. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Prin∣cipalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places; wherefore take unto you the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the Evil Day, & having done all to stand. Stand therefore having your Loins girt about with Truth.
The CONTENTS of the First Treatise. §. I. to V. A Signal Deliverance from the Angel of Death, being the Preparati∣on and Occasion for the ensuing Divine Manifestation and Alarm; with what thereupon did follow, both for the Exercise and Encouragement of the Author's Faith. V. The ALARM. VI. The Manner of the Listing, and Calling forth the Soldiers. VII. The Time of this Call. VIII. The Persons made choice of. IX. The Kingdoms of David and Solomon Typical. X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI. Motives for entring upon the Holy War. XVII. The First En∣gagement of the Holy Army. [Part. II.] XVIII, XIX. The General's Speech, and his Instructions to the Soldiers. XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII. The Alliance and Joining of the two Armies Superiour and Inferiour. XXIV. A Description of the Descent of the Heavenly Watchers. XXV. The Third Watch set. XXVI. Rules prescribed to the Watchers of the Inferiour Army. XXVII to XXXIV. Motives and Encouragements propos'd to them. XXXIV. An Universal Call to every one under Heaven, to prepare themselves for the Kingdom of Christ, which is at hand. The Three Orders of them that are call'd. XXXV, XXXVI. The Se∣ven Spirits, and Seven Rewards confer'd on those of the Third Order. The Conclusion. Of the Second Treatise. I. II. THE Manifestation of the Rose of Sharon. III. The Multiplication of this Rose: Or, the Garden of Sharon. IV. The Threefold Circle and Fence, about this Garden described. V. The Approach of this Beautiful and Bles∣sed State. VI. The Manner and Means of its Introduction. VII. The Paucity of its Number in which it will begin. VIII. IX. The Interpretation of the Twelve Leaves of this Rose. X. The present Budding of this New Plantation. XI. The Glory and Excellency of Christ's Kingdom hence arising. XII. An Order to some Elect Persons to Build the Walls of this Glorious Garden, with its Palace. XIII. A Description of the Twelve Foundations thereof. XIV. The Qualifications of the Builders. XV. The Manner of their Incorporation. XVI. The Wonderful way of Communion betwixt all the Members of this Royal Corporation. XVII. Their Assemblies and Colledges, by a Personal gathering of the dispersed Members. XVIII. Their manner of Life here, and their Redemption from the Earth. XIX. The Disciplehood of Abraham Planted in this New Plantation. XX. The Renovation of the Paradisical Life: And the Hidden Fraternity of the Rose of Sharon. XXI. The Admission of the Inhabitants to the Kings Presence and Fa∣vour. XXII. The Separation required in all, to obtain this High Honour. XXIII. A needful Caution to all the Candidates that would be admitted into this New Sharon. XXIV. A General Invitation to all Persons to accept and press after the same. [Part. II.] XXV. The Manifestation of Wisdoms Cup. XXVI. A Particu∣lar Invitation to all the Inhabitants of this New Plantation, to drink of it. XXVII. An Interpretation of the Three several sorts of Wine drunk out of it. And first of that which appertains to the Priestly Spirit. XXVIII. Of that which is appropriated to the Prophetical Spirit. XXIX. Of that which confers the Royal Spirit. XXX. The New Sharon further Described, its Seven Pools, and the Royal Honours and Prerogatives therein to be enjoyed. XXXI. The Ministers of State that attend the Prince: their singular Wisdom, and great Power. XXXII. Their Commission to Proclaim the Time of the Lily. XXXIII. The Union of the Lily and the Rose: and their Royal Generation thence produced. XXXIV. The Variety in Unity, and Unity in Variety within this Blessed Plantation. XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII. The Conclusion, being an Ad∣dress to all sorts of Persons. The PRIZE. p. 19. A Considerable Relation sent the Author, p. 22.
