P3783 E701_4 R207052 99866128 166567
PROPOSITIONS FOR PEACE, Presented To the high and mighty States of Hol∣land, by the Subjects of the Netherlands, for a Cessation of all Hostility, and an Accommoda∣tion with his Excellency the Lord Gen. Crom∣wel, and the present Power in ENGLAND. Together with a Diurnal of the present Affaires, and Designes, now on foot, in Den∣mark, Sweden, and the United Provinces, con∣cerning the Soveraignty of the Com∣mon wealth of England, both by Sea and Land. Translated out of Dutch into English. London, Printed for G. Horton, 1653.
SIR, HEre is great expectation every mo∣ment of Newes from Admiral Tromp, and so much the more, because the Wind is Westerly, and an en∣gagement very probable; it being Tromps Resolution to fight, as he sent word hither, and to the Hague, when he made sail for the Coast of England. The Eastland Fleet of merchants, being near 500 in number, were so frighted upon the Return of the Eng∣lish out of the North sea, that they durst not stir out of the Uly, but kept in, and perhaps they may not stir out, til they hear what news from the men of war.
There is now a very strong Rumor of an Engagement at sea; for divers who are newly arrived from Zealand say, they heard terrible shooting in their passage. And news comes from Goree that several Ves∣sels who came in there, affirm, that they also heard the reports of innumerable shot at sea; and if an en∣gagement be, great will be the consequences, be∣cause the All of this State lies at Stake. The people here are exceeding confident of Victory, and are up again with their old Rant; that nothing shall satisfie them but to be Masters of the Seas, and Harbours of England, and to have a surrender of such and such Towns for security, and to make amends for all their losses. Some wiser, as they think, then the rest, are so bold as to reckon up old stories and ex∣amples of such States as in times past have been vi∣ctorious at sea, what conditions those States have imposed upon them that they have subdued, not permitting them to put any men of war more out to sea, but constraining them to sail under the pro∣tection of the Conquering party. And this they say was but Reason and Wisdom to be imitated upon the like occasion: So that you see these Low Countries have high imaginations, and as highly
they may carry it, if they get the better. What then might England do, if it prove victorious, and im∣prove its own right at sea, since these who never had any right nor liberty, but by courtesie or en∣couragement, are so violent in their premeditated Resolves how to prosecute an Usurpation? If men dare to talk thus before the Victory, what wil they not do if they prove victorious? But per∣haps England may remember, after all the sore knocks for the recovery of her Soveraignty, there can be neither safety, nor reputation to the Island, unless (as of old) it remain absolute at sea. And surely, this will be remembred now, and a requital returned for their most horrid insolencie, and unparallel'd ingratitude. They are once more raising all the strength they can, and endeavour a conjunction with those ships at the Weilings; but there is little possibili∣ty, by reason that the English Fleet hath blocked up the Texel, and likewise lie with another Squa∣dron before Goree-Island and the Brill. As for the Relation of the landing of some English, the take∣ing of some Forts, and the burning of some Dorps and Villages, we have it not confirm'd by any let∣ters of credence; but the Report here carries a quite contrary Eccho.
Now though the people, and those out of doors do rant it thus high, yet those within doors, the Councellors and Steers∣men at the Hague, carry things more de∣murely and closely; who knowing they can retract when they please, if they win the day, have therefore resolved beforehand (for fear of the worst) that they will send an Embassie to the present power in Eng∣land; and this resolution is published every where, that the news of it may fly over sea; and the English believe their intent was to send Ambassadors, whether the successe should prove good or bad at sea; and for the more effectual perswasion, it is given out, that nothing shall alter this determi∣nation of sending The persons agreed on to be sent are said to be four, viz. one out of Zealand, one out of Friezland, and the L. Newport and Beverning for Holland. As concerning the Affaires of these
Provinces abroad, the state of them is very uncertain at present, most Nations being at a stand to see the event of this expected engagement: among others, the King of Denmark hangs off stil, being very anxious and suspicious of the Swedish Queen, her fleet and forces being ready, and very solli∣citous about the success of the Dutch a∣gainst the English, fearing if England pro∣sper, the Flemmins may leave him in the lurch, as he hath done formerly. Yet notwithstanding these seeming O∣vertures for peace, they go on vigorously with their preparations for war, and seve∣ral Orders, Edicts, and Proclamations, has been printed and published, inciting all per∣sons in general, of what Nation soever, to come in to their assistance, proffering dou∣ble pay, that is, to every sea-man 10 s. per week, and to every land-man 9 s. 4 d. per week. In pursuance whereof, the Golden
Bank is broke open, as well in this City, as in o∣ther places, and now the lofty Cedars, and others, begin to dispute the lawfulness of the War, and the great Change and Revolutions that are like to occur thereupon. And indeed great are the distractions of the poor people, insomuch, that they have presented sundry Petitions to the Councel at the Hague, for an ac∣commodation with England, which have proved so effectual, by working upon the present temper and spirits of the States General, that they have agreed upon ten Propositions to be sent to the present Power in England, viz. 1 For the making up of the great breach be∣tween the two Republicks. 2 For the rendring due satisfaction towards the vast expence of men and money in this late unhap∣py war. 3 For entring into a League offensive and de∣fensive. 4 For the restitution of all ships taken. 5 Concerning Caution and Security, &c. Amsterdam June 14. 1653. FINIS.
