R1222 E337_1 99861452 113588
ORDERS FROM THE LORD OF HOSTES, FOR Regulating the Hostes of the LORD. Set down in a SERMON Preached at the LEAGUER before NEWARK, on Friday the 27th of March, 1646. By order from, and at the desire of the Com∣mittee of Lords and Commons, Commissioners from the Parliament of England. Upon occasion of a publick Fast and solemn Humiliation, appointed to be kept that day throughout the English and Scotish Armies before Newark, to seek a blessing from Heaven upon the proceedings of the said Forces in the present Siege of that Garrison. By Edward Reyner Preacher of the Gospel in the City of Lincoln. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread Eagle at the West end of Pauls, 1646.
I have perused this Sermon tending much to the advancement of Military Holinesse, and Order, and (with these) the successe of this present Warre; and do therefore conceive it very usefull for the publick, especiall the Armies. IOSEPH CARYL. April 16th 1646.
To the Right Honourable, IOHN Earl of Rutland, EDWARD Lord Montague, M. WIL. PIERREPONT Esq Sir WILL. ARMYNE Baronet, Sir EDWARD AYSCOUGH Knight, and THOMAS HATCHER Esq Com∣missioners from the Parliament of England, residing with the For∣ces before Newarke. Right Honourable, THis Sermon, for the substance of it, was preached by your appointment, and is drawn forth to publick view by your importunity. I have been oft assayled by friends to publish some pieces, which cost me more pains, but could never be overcome till now. I am sensible of the curiosity and critical∣nesse of the Times, and of my own tenuity and insuffi∣ciency. I am able to bring nothing out of my poor Treasury which may seem new. Those small abili∣ties God hath given me to profit others, lye another way, rather through the Pulpit then the Presse; there∣fore durst I never yet appear in the one, though often in the other.
Concerning this Copy I may say, here is not all, and yet more then was there delivered. Not all, because my time for preparation was very small, and my Notes so short, that they cannot possi∣bly give an account of my Sermon; and my memo∣ry not so good as to recollect all that God was graci∣ously pleased then to suggest. Yet is here more, because I have now added some things for amplification of particulars, which God brought to my hand while I was writing, as he did many things before to my minde, while I was speaking. Such were my straits of time for preparation to that exercise, as one part of this Sermon was, subitane thoughts in the morning of that day they were prea∣ched: which I did not intend should have seen more light, then came in at the chamber window, where I quartered that night. The Notes are not so warm to me now in writing, as they were then in speaking; nor will they, I fear, be to any in reading, as they were, I hope, to some in hearing. Speaking and Writing have their severall graces and glosses; and take, as God is pleased to set them on by his presence and influence, which he usu∣ally sheds abroad more abundantly in the publick Or∣dinance. The same things (experience shews) which while spoken, seemed stirring passages, afterwards when read, move little. Besides, the subject of this discourse is now become very trite, and worn I suppose almost out of request; of which so much hath been already said, as nothing can be added. But your Honours acceptance of my poor pains then,
and earnest desire since, to have a Copy thereof, have forced me to put this into your hands; do with it whatsoever God shall put into your hearts: either to bury it in silence (which would please me best) or to give breath and life to it by the birth of the Presse, if your wisdome judge it worthy, and that it may be for publike use. The Lord guide you with his councell, that the publike affairs may still prosper in your hands, and bring you to his glory when you have served your ge∣neration, according to the will of God. So prayes Your Honours humble servant in the Gospell of Christ, EDW. REYNER.
TO THE Honourable, Col. EDW. ROSSETER, Commander in chief of the PARLIAMENTS Forces of the City and County of LINCOLN. Noble Sir, THe next interest to that, the Committee of Lords and Commons now with us, may challenge in this Sermon, is deservedly yours, because preached in your Quarters, to you and your Souldiers, and for your sakes especially; to bring God and you near together, even God into your Camp, and your Camp unto God; to direct and excite your duty to God, to draw down and ingage Gods presence with you, and that the Countries Cause and Cure (in the great work you are now about) may prosper in your hands. For if you can say to our enemies as Abijah did to his: 2 Chro. 13 12. Behold God himself is with us, for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry Alarm against you, you may say on (as he did) O enemy fight not against the Lord, for you shall not prosper. If your Camp be reformed, and you cannot bear them that are evill in it, surely the Lord will pitch his Tents in the midst of yours, and make you glorious by successes. When poor Lincolnshire was in a low and sad condition, making approaches daily nearer desolation, God raised you up as Gideon a mighty man of valour to save us; giving
you not only Decertandi fortitudinem, but Decernendi rationem, Valour to fight, and prudence to advise. For courage without counsell, is like a Hand drawing a Bow, without an eye to set the Arrow right. Sir, the mixture of amiable clemency, and insuperable valour, of modesty and magnanimity, of piety and souldiery, of courteous condescentions and sublime resolutions, which God hath made and tempered in you, is very remarkable. Me thinks I see those vertues which the Orator prescribes in an Emperour, worn as Gold-rings on all your fingers, Scil. Haesunt vit∣tute Impe∣ratoria, la∣bor in neg∣tin, forticuo in pericul, industria in agendo, ce∣leritas in conficiende, consiltum in previdende. Cicero pro lege Manil. Diligence in businesse, courage in perils, industry in acting, celerity in effecting, counsell in foreseeing. This I speak, not to flatter you in print (for I remember Elihu's speech, Job 32.21, 22.) but to give you (as I ap∣prehend) your due; and to provoke you to give God the glo∣ry of all you are, have, or do; and to adde to all your excel∣lencies habituall and practicall, Humility and Self-deniall, as the grace and ornament of them all. Be often thinking that the Holy Ghost is putting these Queries to you, which Paul did to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? what hast thou that thou didst not receive? God is the author of all dis∣criminating gifts, Graces, States, Successes. Let the high praises of God be in your mouth, because the high acts of God have been in your hand. Go on, worthy Leader; in this your might; Scil. in ha∣ving God for your wisdome, courage, and strength. Ride on prosperously because of the greatnesse of your trust, and the goodnesse of your cause. Perfect what you have begun. Your business which before lay scattered all this Countrey over, & over divers other Countries also, you have now brought into a small compasse. (having driven your Antagonists as it were into a fold) The good Lord perfect the work for you and us,
and stablish peace againe upon our borders. Blessed be God for the marvellous things done for this sinking (well-nigh ruined) Kingdome, and for our poor spoi∣led Countries by the Heads of our Worthies, the sonnes of Honour that have sate in counsell: and by the hands of you and others, the sonsof Valour, that have been imployed in action; by whom (as choice instruments in Gods hand) mighty things are brought to passe, even as it were a new Resurrection of our Kingdome (and poor countrey in speciall) out of the dust of ruine and trampling upon, and a reduction of enemies into our room. My feeble prayers are Militant for you and all yours, daily that you may triumph; and want no counsell, nor strength, nor successe which Heaven can af∣ford you. The Lord recompence into your bosome sevenfold, all your diligence and faithfulnesse; your indefatigable pains night and day; extream hazards, looking death oft in the face; and your sore hardship, serving the necessities of war: He continue to blesse you and all under your com∣mand, and make you still a blessing to your native Countrey, and give you for your reward what he hath promised, to him that overcommeth. Rev. 2 17. Even the White stone, and new name written, which no man knowes save he that re∣ceiveth it, and hidden Manna to eat. So prayes he who is affectionately yours to serve you in the Gospel, EDW. REYNER.
Orders from the LORD of Hostes, FOR Regulating the Hostes of the LORD. Deut. 23.14. For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. GOD requires his Israel should be a holy people, as at home, so abroad: not in times of Peace only, but of War also. Because then, humane laws are silent — Silent loges inter arma; and things are carried usually by force and vio∣lence, not by reason or right. Men take li∣berty to commit outrages greedily and shamelesly. Wherefore
God gave this command for the purity and sanctity of Israels army or souldiery, for the decent and well-ordering of Israels Camp, to prevent all pollution and exorbitancy therein.—Thy Camp shall be holy, &c. In the Text you may discern. 1. A doctrine delivered. 2. Reasons added to confirme and enforce it. The Doctrine is this. The Camp of Israel must be holy. The Camp.] The originall word  signifies both Castra and Acies, or Turba: That is Tents where the souldiers lay. And an Army, a Camp is an Hoast or Army of souldiers, which is as it were a walking Town, City, or Countrey: it doth further sig∣nifie Tents pitcht for them, or an army lodged. The people of Israel were the Hosts of the Lord, Gods Armies; and this is the precept of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, that their Camp shall be holy, that is, both the place and the persons. Shall be holy,]  that is, set apart for an holy use, and se∣parated or preserved pure from all pollution of flesh and spirit. Holinesse is either Morall or Ceremoniall. Morall, is twofold 1. Privative, that is, Immunity, or purity from sin. 2. Positive holinesse is 1. Grace, in Habit. 2. Obedience in Act. When God is known, feared, served, obeyed trusted, and sin is hated and eschewed; when there is the root of grace in the heart, and the fruit of righteousnesse in the life, then is a person or people holy.
Ceremoniall holinesse was a freedome or purification from Uncleannesses 1. Legall, as Nocturnall pollutions, ver. 10.11. or contracted by leprosie, or having an issue, or touching the dead, Numb. 5.2. Lev. 21.1. 2. Civill, as mans excrements, which was legall also to the Jewes. For God made a law against it, that uncleannesse by it should be avoided in the Host, ver. 12, 13. My Text comes in as a Reason to presse and perswade purity, from that (as from all all other defilements) in the Camp and Host of Israel. Thou shalt have a place without the camp, &c. v. 12. Thou shalt have a paddle.] that is, an iron instrument to dig an hole in the earth to bury their excrements in, v. 13. Why so? For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, &c. Mans dung by the law was counted unclean, and it defiled not only the place where it was laid uncovered, but whatsoever thing it was used about, as to bake Cakes therewith through want of other fewell, Ezek. 4.12, 13, 14. All these kindes of Ceremoniall uncleannesses figured spirituall or morall pollutions by sin, of our natures and actions. The camp of Israel was to be holy both Morally, no wickednesse might be committed in it. Ceremonially, all legall uncleannesse must be excluded out of it. Hereby God taught Israel holinesse both of disposition and conversation, to keep both their bodies and soules pure from all their iniquities. God begins his charge (or to give orders) to the army of Isra∣el at the 9. vers. When the Host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing: that is, from all unclean∣nesse morall or ceremoniall. Therefore God gave command to the children of Israel,
That 1. The whole Camp of Israel should be purged of all Lea∣pers and any other way unclean persons, both Male and female, Numb. 5.2, 3, 4. Ainsworth. There were three Camps (as one observes) 1. The Sanctuary call'd the Camp or Tents of the Lord, 2 Chron. 31.2. 2. The Camp of the Levites, Num. 3. 3. The Camp of Israel, the 12 Tribes, Num. 2. No unclean person might enter into the Camp of the Lords Sanctuary, that being most holy, 2 Chro. 23.19. Nor stay in (but was to be put out of both) the Camp which Pitcht about the Sanctuary. And which went to war against their enemies. 2. A place should be designed without the Camp wherein to bury their excrements, vers. 12. Thus have I laid out the Doctrine, vid. The camp of Israel must be holy; and the sense of the tearms, scil. what is qant by Camp, and what by Holy. Quest. But, why should Israels Camp be holy? Answ. Take a short view, I pray you, of the reasons laid down in my text to prove the point, and prosse the dty. The reasons are five. Reason 1. Because God is present in the camp of Israel; the Lord of Hosts is with his Hosts, even with the armies of Israel, where ever they go; therefore shall their camp be holy, because He is a God of purer eyes then to behold evill, Hab. 1.13. and he cannot look on iniquity. He is not a God that hath pleasure in wickednesse, wither shall evill dwell with him. Psal. 5.14. Mark the phrase—The Lord walks in the midst of thy camp,  it imports both the matter and manner of Gods presence. —The matter of it, That he is there present in the Camp. —The manner thereof, How he is God there? 1. He walks, not stands, is not idle there. God neither stands still in the Camp, nor stayes behinde, but goes along with them. The Originall word is very emphaticall  in Hithpael.
Verbs in that Conjugation (as the studious in that tongue ob∣serve) do connocate a reciprocation or reiteration of action, and intimate a frequency thereof. Tremellius translates the word, indefinenter ambulare, to walk assiduously, continually, without ceasing (to expresse the emphasis of the conjugation) so walks God in Israels Campe. But whereabout, or in what part thereof? 2. He walks in the midst of their camp, not in the Front only, as not knowing what is behinde; nor in the Rear only, as not knowing what is before; but  in the midst; the word sig∣nifies also the most inward parts of intrals, as belly, heart, bow∣els, reins. God walks in the midst, that is, in the bosome, heart, bowels, reins, of Israels army. He walks in and through all these. Therefore the Camp of Israel had need be holy, even in∣tus, & in cute, & in corde, at the heart, to the bottome, and throughout. Object. Did not God walk all over Israels Camp? was not be in every part, as Van, and Rear, and midst, or heart, which is the Head Quarters: Totus in toto all in all throughout the Camp? He fils Heaven and Earth, and not Israels Camp only? Why then is God said to walk in the midst thereof? Answ. For two reasons as I conceive. 1. To declare his perfect knowledge of, and acquaintance with all Israels affairs, and behaviour: what be their councels and acti∣ons, purposes and projects, ends and aims, God is in the heart of them all: and privie to all, even what they either do in the dark, or speak in their Tents, or think in their hearts, Psal. 139.1. to 6. 2. Because the Ark, which was the signe and pledge of Gods speciall presence with Israel was placed in the midst of the Camp of Israel, Num. 2.2.17. and 10. ch. 14.21. All the Tribes were as a great army round about the Tabernacle The order of Israels Camp is de∣scribed in Numb 2. thus, Iudah, Issachar, & Zabulon, encamped on the East of the Tabernacle, v. 3.10. Ephim, , on the West, v. 18 to , on the North, v 23, to 32. The Levites encamped next unto the Tabernacle between it and the , in 4 quarters, . 3. thus. Moses, Aaron, and the Priests encamped before the Tabernacle eastward, v. 38. The Gorrores behinde it westward, v. 23. The Rothites on the Southside, v. 29. The Levites of Merari on the north side, vers. 35. (which marched and incamped in the midst) for the defence thereof.
Object. But the Ark of the Covenant is said in Numb. 10.33. to go before Israel to search out a resting place for them, if before them, then not in the midst. Answ. Not as if the Ark went in the head of the army, for the Levites carried it in the midst of the Tribes, Numb. 10.14, 21. But its said to journey before them, because Israels journeyes were guided by the Ark and the cloud that rested upon it, when to move, and when to rest. Whether to set forward, or to pitch their tents. From the Ark God gave orders for all their mar∣ches or motions, & rests in the Wildernesse. So much of the first Reason, Israels camp must be holy, because, the Lord walks in the midst of it. Reas. 2. (Which should have been the first) because God ow∣ned Israel for his Ammi or peculiar people, and acknowledged himself to be their God by Covenant or speciall right and rela∣tion. Hos. 2.1.  Jehovah, thy Elohim, thy Almighties. The Trinity of persons is thine, O Israel. Now the Lord is a holy God, and a holy God desires after, and delights in a holy peo∣ple, therefore shall thy camp be holy. Reas. 3. Because of Gods protection of Israel from their ene∣mies, and conquest over their enemies for them. God walked not in the midst of Israels camp, tanquam otiosus spectator, as an idle looker on, but 1. As a Saviour to deliver them from the hands of their enemies. 2. As a conquerour to deliver up their ene∣mies before their face, or into their hands. Are not these ingagements to holinesse and obedience through∣out the camp of Israel? Reas. 4. Because any wickednesse in the camp is nakednesse. Compare v. 9 with 14. When the Host goes forth, keep thee frō eve∣ry wicked thing—and here, that he see no unclean thing in thee.
, that is, the nakednesse of any thing. Nakednesse is uncomely, filthy, reproachfull, shamefull, exposed to all danger. Every wicked thing suffered in Israels camp did defile it, & devest it, or make it unclean and naked to its shame and ruine. Reas. 5. Because if there be any uncleannes or wicked thing in an army God will see it, though never so secret: as he did Achans plundered stuffe, though hid in the earth in the midst of his tent.— Therefore shall thy camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee. Iosh. 7.21.  that he do not see in thee the nakeednesse or fil∣thinesse of any thing:  signifies not simply to see, but curio∣se inspicere, to look very diligently. So doth God for sin, even in an army. What evill is there, is commited in the very sight and presence of God, (a great aggravation thereof) for he hath an All-seeing eye. Reas. 6. Lastly, because sin in the camp will drive God out of the camp; the sight of unclean things in Israel will make him turn away from Israel,  from after thee, i.e. from following, accompanying, watching, keeping, benefiting, magnifying thee, therefore shall thy camp be holy. So much for the Analysis and explication of the Text. From the words we may gather. 1. One generall doctrine as the sum and scope of the text. 2. Some particular instructions, as inferences from the text. The generall Doctrine is this: It is the duty and glory of an army to be holy, that is, to keep themselves from every wicked thing, to suffer no uncleannesse, fil∣thinesse, or prophanenesse to come or stay among them. There∣fore this was given as a law to the Camp of Israel, to be holy; which stands still in force for the morall-regulating of all armies, especially those which fight the Lords battels, or under his ban∣ner; and go forth in his Name against their enemies. God re∣quires they should have a care of Holinesse, not only in their per∣sons, and domesticall, politicall, or Ecclesiasticall relations and
societies, but in their martiall combinations also: they should be holy not only as Masters and Servants, as Ministers, and People, as Magistrates and Subjects, but as Commanders and Souldiers; they should be not only a holy Family, or a holy Church or Com∣mon wealth, but a holy Army also. To this end God appointed the Priests to go along with Israels army, Deut. 20.1, 2, 3. 2 Chra. 13, 10, 11, 12. with the holy Trum∣pets. Numb. 10.9. & 31.6. as well to instruct and excite them to their duty towards God, as to encourage them to fight the Lords battels against his and their enemies. Iohn Baptist teach∣eth souldiers their duties, Luke 3.14. which are branches of ho∣linesse and obedience, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly, be content with your wages. Quest. Why should our Armies be holy? Answ. The same Reasons conclude the necessity of Holi∣nesse for ours, that did for Israels. I will not repeat them, only the first, and adde some more. Reas. 1. Because of Gods speciall presence in an Army that fights under his banner, the name of it may be Jehovah Sham∣mah, The Lord is there. Look upon the Ark in the midst of the Camp of Israel. Now God will be sanctified in all that draw near him, Lev. 10.3. Be sanctified, scil. by holy, upright, reveren∣tiall carriage, in all that approach his presence, as well Souldiers as Ministers, in times of war, as of peace. He is the holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty; therefore where ever he comes, sin must be gone or he will not stay. God delights to manifest his presence where he sees holinesse promoted. Gods goings are glorious; as in the Sanctuary when it is purged and kept clean; Christ walks in the midst of the Churches when those Candle∣sticks are of pure gold, Rev. 1.12, 13. So in the Army, when it is well ordered, God walks in the midst of it: when the Camp is holy, then God doth wondrous things, and puts forth the ex∣cellency of his power, wisdome, and goodnesse for his people: out-witting their enemies, wherein they do craftily, and over∣powring them wherein they deal proudly and cruelly.
Because holines becomes every Person, and thing, that is Gods, Reas. 2. that bears the stamp or character of God upon them, or that relate to God, as Gods Church and Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17. Gods House, Ps. 93.5. Gods Ministers, 2 Tim. 2.21, 22. and Gods Magistrate, 2 Sam. 23.5. and all Gods people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Titus 2.11, 12. So Gods Hosts, Camps, Armies; his Warriours, and Souldiers. Holinesse is an or∣nament as proper and comely for Souldiers and Armies, as for any other of Gods Servants or Societies. They that fight the Lords battle ought to be holy, as well as they that bear the Lords vessels. Compare Esay 52.11. with 1 Sam. 25.28. Its prophecied concern∣ing the latter times in Zach. 14.20, 21. That there shall be upon the Horses bridles, HOLINES UNTO THE LORD, in great Letters; much more upon the Riders hearts; and that e∣very pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holinesse unto the Lord: much more should the drinkers be holy. Holinesse is a Characteri∣sticall distinguishing Mark of those that are the Lords in all the premised Relations, from all others. Besides, God will see and own, commend and reward Holinesse in an Army, in any corner of it, or person in it, as soon as he wil spy any uncleannesse there, to de∣test it and punish it. God is as ready to observe what is good in his people, as to mark what is amisse among them. Yea, hee will over∣look many infirmities, where he sees some sanctity and syncerity. 3 Because though mens lawes be then silent, Reas. 3. yet Gods Law which commands Holinesse, stands in force in time of war, as full as in time of peace; and in Armies as well as any where else. God will not hold souldiers guiltesse, if they take his Name in vain, if they swear, curse, blaspheme, oppresse, rob, be drunk, commit uncleannesse, no more then any others that offend. Though the Laws of the Kingdome be then laid aside, and the Laws of Military Discipline be not set up; yet even then Gods Law hath a strong Tye upon all the Consciences of Commanders and Souldiers, to obliege them unto holinesse and obedience, under the penalty of eternall perdition. Let such as think themselves law∣lesse, or at liberty to live as they list now, because they are Souldiers, and this is a Time of War; I say let such prove, if they can, out of Gods Word (by which they shall all be judged another day) that God ever gave a Dispensation or Toleration to an Army or any in it, whether Officers or common Souldiers to be disordered, loose,
base, outragious or injurious in their Courses; or to be in any kinde or degree more vile and sinfull then other men; or to be lesse care∣full to feare God and keep his Commandements, to seek after and set up Jesus Christ, to eschew evill and do good in times of Warre, then of Peace. Because there is death in the Campe. Reas. 4. Souldiers Carry their lives in their hands, and look death in the face daily; they had need be holy, if they would be happy, For without Holinesse no man (not a Souldier no more then any other man) shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Souldiers stand in most need to be very Holy Men, because they may be taken away very Suddainly; and to have assurance of a better life because their present life hangs in suspence night and day. They cannot be in a Capacity of happinesse or in preparation for death, untill they bee in a Posture of Holinesse. Because a holy Army is victorious and succesfull. Reas. 5. I do not mean when all and every one in an army is truly Godly, for the best Ar∣mies that ever were, were never so good; but, Denominatio est à Potiori: when the Commanders (Some of them at least) and a Con∣siderable part among the Souldiers are holy; Such as can pray as well as fight, and doe take Care to maintain Peace with God, while they are in warre with Men; to decline Tentations to sin, as they would doe bullets or Thrusts that Come from their Ene∣mies. That a Holy army is victorions see the Experiment hereof—in Israel, in the dayes of Ioshua 23.8, 9, 10.—They did cleave unto the Lord their God to this day, (sayth Joshua) therefore God drave out from before them great and strong Nations, and as for them no man hath been able to stand before them unto this day.—See the like in Iudah, in the days of the Pious Kings, as David, Asa, Ieho∣saphat, Hezekiah. What glorious successes hath God given when Commanders have been Vertuous? — in Marcus Aurelius his Army which had a Legion of Christians in it, who by their prayer to God (at the Emperours intreaty, when the whole Army was in danger to perish through drought) obtained from Heaven both Lightning upon their Enemies, which put them to rout and ruine, and plenty of rain upon themselves. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap 5. A remarkable preservation and victory. From that Time, as Eusebius reports, they had a peculiar appellation from the Emperour, and were called, Legio fulminea, The thundring Legion.
Yea, is not this to be cleerly seen, as truly verified in our New-Modell wherein are so many reall godly Men, Commanders in chief, officers and souldiers: how happy hath God made them (and us by them) through many great and glorious Deliverances, Suc∣cesses & Victories, given them by the good hand of our great God; such as the world can scarce parallel, and deserve to be sacred to all Posterity. Though this New-Modell hath been much despised by Men (chiefly, I suspect for their piety,) yet highly advanced by the Lord as his Hoste; chosen to fight his battles with prosperous and blessed successe; to be Humane-Saviours unto this sinking King∣dome. God crowns Piety with victory where ever he finds it, espe∣cially in an Army. 6 Lastly, Reas. 6. because there should be a suitablenesse betweene the Cause and the Manners of the Persons which have the Managing of it. Great pitty a good Cause should be transacted by bad persons. The Cause our Army hath in hand is holy, just and good; what manner of persons ought all those to be in holy Conversation and Godlinesse, who have undertaken it. Now have I done with the Generall Doctrine of the Text. It is the Duty and Glory of an Army to be holy. In the next place, let us consider what particular Instructions may be gathered from the Text. We may refer them to two Heads 1 for informing Iudgment. 2 for regulating Practice. 1 For information of Our Judgements, the Text furnisheth us with these Particulars. 1 That it is an Errour to thinke, Instruct. 1. it matters not what mens manners be, or how an Army is ordered, if they be but good Soul∣diers, which they can scarce be in Gods sense, unlesse they be good men. If the Camp should be holy, must not the Men in it be holy? What makes a holy Camp, but holy Commanders, Officers and Souldiers? How can a Fabrick be good if the Materials be bad? You may as well say it is no Matter whether God own an Army or dis∣claim it; be with them or against them; deliver them or destroy them: be amongst them or depart from them; give Enemies up to them, or give them up to their Enemy; whether an Army be clean and clothed, or be naked & unclean, and the filthy Nakednes there∣of appear, even in the sight of God: or whether it prosper or perish.
2 Instruct. 2. It informs us what is the one thing needfull in an Army, for the defence and successe thereof; or what is the principall cause of all preservations and victories in it, namely, Gods presence. God is in the midst of the Campe, how? as the Sun is in the midst of the Planets, as the Heart in the midst of the body. An Army without God amongst them, is but a dark dead Company, such as the world would be, if it wanted the Sun, or a body without a heart. As 1 The shield of their help for defence against their Enemies, to save his people from them. 2 The sword of their Excellency for offence of their Enemies, to assault and overcome them, Deut. 33.29. 3 The Captain of their Host, to lead them on, and fight for them, Josh. 5.14. 2 Chron. 13.12. 3 Instruct. 3. It lets us see, on the contrary, what is the cause of ruine to an Army, of Surprizals, Blows, Foils, Defeats, Routs; Wickednesse in it, is the Cause of all disasters that befall it, of bad successe to it. For sin in the Campe produceth 3 bad and sad effects. It 1 Makes an Army naked to their shame and reproach, As Aaron made Israel naked to their shame amongst their Enemies, by making the molten Calf. Exod. 32.25. And as King Abaz made Judah naked, 2 Chron. 28.19. So doth Uncleannes and Unholines make an Army Naked, that is 1 Unarmed men among their Enemies, ready to be devoured by them. 2 Deformed in themselves, like a naked man, whose deformity is great, for want of clothes to cover his nakednesse, Revel. 3.18. & 16, 17. 2 Makes God depart from an Army; deprives it of his counsel and strength, rescue and protection. When Israel had sinned, and taken off the accursed thing, I well not be with you any more, sayth God to them, except yee destroy the accursed from amongst you. Josh. 7.11, 12. The abomination which the house of Israel committed, made God go far from his Sanctuary, Ezek. 8.6. and as farre from his Army. Ponder well the wofull effects of Gods departure from an Army. When God is gone, our defence and strength is gone; then welye open to the Enemy, we become bread for them. If God cast us off, and go not forth with our Armies, then hee puts us to
shame, makes us to turn back from the enemy, Ps. 44.9. to 14. and they which hate us spotle for themselves, he makes us a reproch to our neighbour, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. Look upon the sad condition of the Hoste of Israel, when smitten at A, because God (provoked by Achans plundered stuff) withdrew his presence a little from them, therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, Iosh. 7.12. This made the hearts of the people to melt, and become as water, Verse 5. And Joshua with the Elders to fall to the earth upon their faces, and to put dust upon their heads untill the eventyde, Verse 6. 3 Yea, sin in the Camp sets God against his own people, Esay 63.10. Lament. 2.5. and makes him become their enemies, as sayth the Prophet, Israelre∣belled, and vexed Gods holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. Iudg. 2 14. Sin moves God to sell them into their enemies hands, as he did Israel, into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. 4 Instruct. 4. Out of this Text we may gather and learn the lawfulnesse of war. It's lawfull for Gods people to make war upon enemies in a just cause. 1 Else God would not own Souldiers or a fighting people for his people (as he did Israel when they were an Armie) nor intle lumselfe to them as theirs by speciall right. So he doth here, The Lord thy God. 2 Else would not God honour the Camp with his speciall pro∣sence, as to walke assiduously and continually in the midst of it. 3 Else God would not doe such great things for his people in a Martiall way (or in and by an Armie) as to deliver them, and subdue their enemies for them and to them.—God would not have walked in the midst of Israels Camp to have done this for them. God hath done wonderous things by Armies for us of late, even miraculous deliverances, defeats, discoveries, victories, immuni∣ties, as he did for his ancient Hoste the Israelites in the dayes of old. Are not these cleer evidences and pledges of Gods approbation of the thing? Would God so blesse the designes of War, if he did not allow the way of War. 4 Else God would have prohibited it, or disswaded from it, and
not have given Laws and Orders for it (as he doth here.—there∣fore shall thy Camp be holy, and verse 9. When the Hosts goe forth, keep thee from every wicked thing.) but against it. God would not have said,—When the Host goeth forth against thine Enemies then keep thee from every thing,—but rather disband the Host, dissolve the knot of Souldiery, go not forth in bands and arms against your enemies. This word had bin as easily spoken as the other, had it bin Gods mind, Do not so wicked a thing as to wage war with thine Enemy? God would not have said,—therefore shall thy Camp be ho∣ly that he see no unclean thing in thee, &c. but rather break up the Camp, let there be none, take other courses for your defence and right, do not such an unlawfull act as to take up arms. Did God e∣ver give Rules for regulating sin or any wicked thing? 5 Else, how can the Camp be holy in it self (which that of Is∣rael is required to be) if Warre be unlawfull? If the ground of a Fabrick be bad, how can the superstructure be good? If a thing be nought in the matter of it, can the dresse or manner thereof ever make it good? 6 Else. God may see uncleannesse enough in the Camp, in the unlawfulnesse of the action (though there be no Leprosie, nor Is∣sue, nor Excrements, &c. there) 7 Else God would not be unwilling to depart the Camp, which he seems to be, and as it were thrust out before he will go, not by the unlawfulnesse of the businesse of Warre, in the substance of it, but by accidentall uncleannesse in the Camp. God would have been glad to have gone from them, had their Militia been a bad busi∣nesse simply in it self. These Arguments, the Text affords us to prove Warre lawfull. Let me adde. 8 Else God would not command it, as he did to Moses, Ioshua, and others (his Worthies) to avenge Israel of their Enemies, Num. 31.2, 3. and to fight his battels. It is his Precept, 1 Sam. 15.3, 4. 9 Else, God would not teach it, as hee did Davids hans to warre, and fingers to fight: Psal. 144.1. It is his Art. Is God a Teacher of evill? how then can he excuse himselfe from being th Author of sin? 10 Exod. 15.3. Ier. 48 10. 2 Chron. 13.12 Deut. 20.4. Else, God would not professe and practise it. It is his Pro∣fession to be a Souldier.—The Lord is a man of warre, saith Moses to be a Captaine, to lead his people, and to fight for them.
Would Godset up a bad Trade? Yea, God chuseth warre as a way to declare his excellent power, wisdome goodnesse, greatnesse; wherein to manifest himselfe both to his people, and to their Ene∣mies, to execute judgment on Enemies, to beautifie his meek Ones with deliverances and victories. 11 Else, God would not prayse and reward others for it, who did worthily in Military service, as David, 1 Sam. 25.28. 12 Else God would not own it nor manage the Affairs of it, if it was evill, 1 Sam. 17.47. The Battle is the Lords, saith David, 2 Chron 20.15 and he will give you (Philistims) into our hands. The Battle is not yours (said Iehoshaphat to his people) but Gods. 5 From hence we all may receive Direction, Instruct. 5. touching prayer for our Armies; what to confesse, what to petition, and what to give thanks for, principally in regard of them. 1 What to confesse; what we should bewaile and mourn; for even the Nakednesse of our Army, the wickednesse that abounds there; wherein wee equall the Enemy. Oh! what horrible blas∣phemies, execrable oaths, base drunkennesse, swinish filthines, and what not, that any souldiers are addicted to, may be found among some of ours. Let us lay these things to heart; the disorders of all ranks, Commanders, Officers, and Souldiers in our Campe. For as the Sins of the Countrey may prejudice the successe of the Army; so the sin of the Army may hinder the Peace of the Country. And for the sins, both of Country and Army, if some do not mourn, Ier. 12.11. all may sinart. God hath opened to us a doore of hope, in that sweet re∣freshing, reviving Word of promise, 2 Chron. 7.13, 14. and 20 9. If my people humble them∣selves, and pray, and seek my face, &c. I will heare their prayer, forgive their sins, and heale their land. This is the work of the day, Ezra 3.4. & therfore a word in season. It was the praise of the Priests after the Captivity, that they did opus suum in die suo; they offered the daily burnt Offerings by Number according to the Custome, as the duty of every day required. We are call'd together this day, to seek God by fasting and prayer, for a blessing upon the Designe in hand; scil. the reducing of this strong Garison of Newarke; a businesse that hath bin oft attempted, but formerly without successe and not with∣out losse. The Lord seemed then to cast us off, and not to goe forth with our Armies. Did we in either of our former Expeditions (for this is the third) first seek God by solemne Humiliation, to aske Counsell of him, and beg his presence, to make our peace with
him, and call him in to our Help, to go along with us, guide us and blesse us? or solemnly to interesse him in the businesse? If wee did then go forth without God, no wonder if wee returned without victory. Blessed be God, who hath put it into the hearts of our Worthies, to put an opportunity into our hands, of humbling our selves, and seeking the face of God this day, that he would be plea∣sed to shine upon our Councels and actions in this Siege-affairs, that the result of all may be an end according to expectation. If humiliation be the main work of this day, is not confession of sin a great part of the work, or duty of the day? as at the solemne Nehem. 9.2, 3. fast and repentance of the people in Nehemiahs time—the chil∣dren of Israel stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their Fathers—they read in the Booke of the Law one fourth part of the day, and another fourth part they confessed. And whose sins should we confesse in particular this day, if not theirs, especi∣ally in whose hands lies the work that is now in agitation? If we by our prayers this day, through the merits and mediation of Je∣sus Christ, could make atonement for them, God would make a good end of this tedious, costly, painfull siege for us, if we could make peace with God for them, God would make war against our Enemies, and fight our battails for them and us. Thus the Text directs us what to confesse this prayer day be∣fore the Lord, scil. the sins of our Army, what wicked thing or uncleannesse we know to be there. Disorders are the cause of all disasters there. 2 What to petition God for on behalfe of our Armies, namely, 1 For holinesse from God for them, that the Poet Lucans say∣ing may be falsified in them: Nulla fides piet asque viris, qui castrasequuntur. Let us improve our interest in Heaven, for the purging and refor∣ming of our Camp, that vertue may be brought into request and fashion, and vice into dislike and detestation, both with Comman∣ders and common Souldiers, that thre may be no abominations a∣mong them, which might be provocations unto God (to depart in displeasure from them) and procure desolations both to them and us. Let us petition the Lord for a good choise both of officers and souldiers, scil. such as will fight for conscience sake, —and
for good Discipline, that sin may be severely punished in the Camp: and for good Ministers to go along with the Army, and sound their Trumpets. Oh! that we could pray our Army into a posture of Reformation. 2 For Gods presence to be with them, both in contriving and in acting; in counselling and in effecting: in the whole worke from beginning to the end. Let us all beg this of God for them (as they shall be exhorted afterwards to seek it for themselves) let us enquire of the Lord for them in this Designe, as the children of Israel the when they went the third time in battle against the Benjites, Idg. 20 2. Shall we yet again go out to battle against the childr of Benjamin, or shall we cease? Oh! that God would give us their Answer, as the Return of our prayers.—Goup, for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand. 3 Here we are directed what to give thanks for chiefly, on the behalf of an Army, namely: 1 For any Holinesse, Reformation or good Orders in the Army, or in any Company, or Officers, or Souldiers in it Espi∣ally when the Chief in Command are chief in Godlinesse also. 2 For any deliverence granted to the Army om Enemies, or victories over Enemies; Give God the prayle and glory of all, who is the giver of all. Now I have done with the Instructions, which serve for infor∣mation of Judgment. Those are behind, which conduccspecially to reulating of pra∣ctice; They may be directed and applyed. 1 To all and every one here present, in regard of his personall Affairs. 2 To two sorts principally, in respect of their publike Im∣ployments. 1 To all and every one. Here we may learn two lessons. 1 Get God to be with us, if we would prosper, The first Practicall Instruction. with us in every Condition, Relation, Undertaking; in every creature we en∣joy▪ or businesse we go about. e sure we beg Gods presence, and take him along with us, for the presence of God is a Principall Gause, 2 Of Direction in our course. If the Lord bewith us, we shall
hit ou wy and not go wrong: he will guide u by his counsell. When Moses sought of God his way, he begd his presence for Guidance, Exod. 33.13, 15. If thy presence goe not with us, carry us not up hence. 2 Acts 18.10. Ps. 105 13, 14. Of Protection, For God (where he manifests his prefer e) is, as a Sun to guide, so a Shield to defend. I am with thee said the Lord to Paul, and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee. When Israel went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdome to another people (and God walked in the midst of their Camp) He suffered no man to do them wrong yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes. 3 Of Provision. Nh. 9.20, 21. Gods presence is the best security for Provi∣dentiall Supplyes, against all wants. When God was with Israel in the Wildernesse, which could not afford them any thing forty yeers did he sustain them in it, so that they acked nothing. 4 Of Consolation in the absence of Geathe-owforts, Acts 16.25. as Li∣berty, friends, goods, &c. Gods presence made Paul and Sas sing in prison at midnight. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. It makes a man say with Paul, I have all, I abound, even at what time he is poore. What is wanting when God is present. 5 Of prosperity, how doe all things prosper take in hand, so long as God is with them. 1 Chron. 11.9. The Lord was with Joseph and he was a prosperous man, Gen. 39.2. It is said of David, that the Lord of Hostes was with him, so he waxed greater and greater. This being discerned by others (sil. that God is with a man) protues him Favour and Trust from others, Gen. 39.3, 4. When, Potiphar, Joseph Master, saw that the Lord was with him, and made all that he did to prosper in his hand, he made Joseph Over fear of his se, and all that he had, he put into his hand. It is said in Verse 21, 22, 23. The Lord was with Jseph and gve him favour in the sight of  of the Prison, who committed all the prisoners to Josephs hand, &. whatso they did there, he was the door of it: God i with thee in all that thou doest, Gen. 21, 22, 23. Said Abimilech to Abraham, Now therefore et us make a Cavenant. Gen. 26.28, 29. Afterwards Abiilch and Phie the chiefe Captain of his Armi said to Isaack, we saw certainly that the Lord was with thee, and we said, let there be now an Oath  Why doe relations and conditions prove so uncomfortable, journeyes, businesse so unsuccesfull, but because we , Gods presence,
nor care to take God along with us. Hence it is wee doe not prosper. Quest. How may we obtain Gods presence with us in all our affairs? Ans. Briefly thus. 1 Get into Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. in whom God is reconciledly present with his people, God out of Christ is a consuming fire. 2 Humble your selves for former provocations, as Israel did before God renewed to them the promise of his presence, when he had said to them. I will not goe up in the midst of thee, Exod. 33.3, 4, 6, 14. for thou art astif-necked people, the people mourned, and put off their orna∣ments; Then saith God, Mypresence shall goe with you, and I will give you rest. 3 Pray carnestly for it, as Moses did, If thy presence goe not, Exod. 33 15. carry us not up hence. 4 Believe in Gods promise, for he hath said, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. 5 Set your selves continually as in Gods sight and presence, walke as under his eye, keepe him in your mindes and hearts, for The Lord is with you; whise you be with him, 2 Chron. 16.2. carry him in your hearts, and he will bear you in his hands. And now I have done with the first Practical Instruction, which concerncall▪ Get Gods prefce if you would prosper. The second follows, He boly if you would kp it, The second Practicall In∣struction to all. be godly if you would enjoy God, when you  journey, or negotiate, then keep your selv  every  hing, espe∣cially from those vils to which you  most inclin,  may be most tempted, Remember David, Psal. 18.23. It  upright before  nd I kept my selfe from wine iniqty  God walk in the midst of thy house, and  and nalling,  (as he  in the midst of Israels camp), to  and prosper thee: Therefore should thy heam, nd house, and family, and all thou hast be holy: Then God will  mongst you, his  noun∣clean thing  clean actions, speeche looks  thoughts of mi  health reeding within thee, ∣cleanness either in thy flesh or spiri esply that he see,
of uncleannesse in thee; which loves and likes filthinesse, and takes liberty, yea, delight to lye in the dung of sin and wickednesse, If there be iniquity in thy hand, Iob 11.14. and cap. 22.23. heart, or house put it farre away, else God will turn away from thee. For God will be gone, if thou wouldst have sin to stay. Thou must either leave thy fins, or lose thy God. Let your principall study and endevour be to please God in all things, and to be holy in all manner of conversation; then Gods presence shall be with you, where ever you goe, as it was with our blessed Saviour, Iohn 8.29. who said, — He that sent e is with me, the Fa∣ther hath not left me alone, for I doe always those things that please him. So much of the second Practicall Instruction, which respects all, Be holy, keep your selves pure, if you would keep God with you. I come in the next place to apply these two Instructions to two sorts, especially in regard of their publike Imployments, which heare me this day, To wit, our Senatours, and Souldiers. 1 A Particular Application. To our Senatours, the Heads of our Tribes and the Men of our Counsel. The Right Honourable, The Committee of Lords and Commons here present, who consult the Peace and Safety of these poore ruined Countries; and carry on our great affaires with them advice. Would you have your Counsels wholsome and saving, profitable and effectuall? then 1 Interesse and ingage Gods presence with you in all your con∣sultations and debates. Consist with God, severally, what shal, I and I, propound or offer, that may mainly conduce to the Con wel, which is committed to our Custody; as he Counsell of God joyntly, what shall wee conclude and resolve? Make God your wisdome; eveoe set God at Board-end, as present, yea, Pres∣dent in all your Counsels. For God stands in the Congregation of Privees, and he judgth among the Gods. 2 Te heed God see no  in you or among you, least he depart from you, then wisdome will perish from the wise, and understanding cease from the prudent. Counsels are blasted by men, when Counsellours are described by God. Oh, be carefull to keep both your heads and hearts pure, and God will delight to
breath sound wisdom, and the knowledge of witty inventions into you, Prov. 8 12. Eccles. 9.15, 16, 17, 18 Prov. 0.18. how to save your spoyled, undone Countreys. Wisdome (saith the Preacher) is better then strength, then weapons of warre. No State∣counsell stands more need to be good, then that which manageth the Affairs of Wars. With good advice make warre, saith Solomon. If War be a building, then forces and weapons are the Walls. But Counsell is the foundation. Happy be the Designes, which are car∣ried on the Wings of wholsome Counsell. Now I have spoken to our Counsellours, let mee direct the same word of Instruction. 1 To our Souldiers, to teach them these two Principall Lessons. 1 Be earnest with God for his presence with you. 2 Advance holmesse in your Campe, First Lesson. Be very earnest with God for his speciall presence with you in your Camp, in all your Military Motions, Postures and Designes; to have God stay with you in your Quarters, and goe with you, when you ch, and when you engage. Renew Moses his request to God very often; upon every fresh occasion, If thy presence go not not with us, let us not goe forth against the Enemy; either in a party, or in a body. When Israel were going to march on in the Wildernesse towards Canaan, they begd Gods presence for the whole Host, For when the Arke set forward, and the Host rose up to march, Num. 10.35, 36 Moses said, seil. in the Name, and on the behalf of them all, Rise up, Lord, and et thine Enemies be saered—and when the Arke rested, he said, Return, ô Lord, unto the Ten thousand-thousands of Israel: as if he had said, Let God go along with us, and dectare his presence among us. Whether we mach or nampe. This should be the earnest desire of good Commanders for themselves and their Souldiers; as it was of Moses, Exod. 33.15. that Gods presents may go forth and come in with them. of Souldiers not only for themselves, but for their , as  was of Is for Joshua. Ioshua 1.17. As we have barkned unto Moses in all things (say they) so will wee harken unto thee, only the Lord thy God , a hee was with Moses. Let me inlarge this Lesson by two Particulars.
1 The Manner of his presence in the Camp. 2 Motives to seek it. As for the Meanes to obtain it, The Manner of Gods pre∣sence in the Camp. As a God of Counsell. Iudg. 7.16. that is, the Purport of the se∣cond Lesson; 1 The Manner, How is God in an Army, or how should you desire him to be with you? Answ. 1 As a God of Counsell to advise you what to do; to teach you the Policies of War, as he did Gedeon his stratagem of Trumpets Lamps, and Pitchers; Ioshua his ambushment at Ai, Io∣shua 7. And David which way to set upon the Philistines with most advantage, 2 Sam. 5.22, 23 scil, to fetch a compasse behind them, and come upon them over against the Mulbery Trees. 2 As a man of War, As a Man of War. or Captain for, the Scripture sets forth the 1 Father, as Generall, Exod. 15.3. 2 Son, as Captaine, Io∣shua 5.14. 3 Holy Ghost, as Ensigne, Esy 59.19. 1 To exercise you, Psal. 18.4. Psal. 18.32, 39. or teach you the Art of War (as he did Da∣vid) your hands to fight and fingers to war. 2 To strengthen you, for, It is God, saith David, that girdeth me with strength unto the battle. 3 To incourage you, Chron. 12.8. hee infuseth undauntednesse of spirit and heroick valour. God can make you swift as Roes; bold as Lions like the Gadites, and put mettle and courage into you, when you are exanimate. 4 To lead you forth and fight for you, as Moses told Israel. Deut. 1.29, 30. 2 Chron. 13.12 Isa. 58.8. & 52.12. Numb. 10.25. The Lord your God, which goeth before you, he shall, fight for you. 5. To gather you up, or be your Reye-ward as the Tribe of Dan was the Gathering Hoste, that came last, and gathered up the weak ones and hindmost, and such as were left behind. So God not only leads the Van, but brings up the ere the weak and feeble ones, God bears in his arms. 6. Isaiah 59.19. To lift up a Standard against your Enemies. Gods Spirit is Ensigns. As a God of power. 7. As a God of power.
To Protect you, that the Enemies weapons, those Instruments of of death, may not, either hit or hurt you. For bullets fly by his Commission: and whoever draws the bew, 1 King 22.34. 2 Psl. 7. he directs the arrow. God gave David the shield of his salvation, Ps. .35 and delivered him from the hurtfull sword. Prosp you, and  your enemies to you, and cast victo∣ries upon you, as hee gave David thoeks of his Enemies, Psal. 18 40. that he might destroy them that hated him. You see the manner of God presence in an Armie. Let mee presse upon you. 2 Metives to seek it, drown from the effects thereof. Motive to seek Gods pre∣sence. Psal. 144.2. Gods pre∣sence in an Army is a ground to the Souldiers. 1 Of Safety, That God will cover their heads in the day of bat∣tell; and if they fight, God  shield to them, if forced to fly, God will be their Fortresse old high Tower. In grettest perihere is safety where God is, or o where. Its good for Souldiers to draw neer to God, because danger (and death it selfe, for ought they know) are neer to them. 2 Of Courage, for this was sed as the great encouraging ar∣gument to the Hoste of Israel, some time to time, to bee both and very valiant, scil. That God was with them, as by Moses, Deut. 1.29, Deut 20.2, 3, 4. Iosh 14.12. 30. by the Priests by Hezekiah, 2. Cl. 32.7;  This will mettle and edge mens spirits to difficult designes, even to grapple with Gyants as Caleb  bold to do. 3 Of Victory, for  two God is. o mar∣vel, For if God be with us who can be against us? or, they that  with us, are more then they  (sayth Hezekiah) is but an rme of flesh () but  Lord our God, as they that have God  all-times in thee of the Lord, gs David did against Goliah, 1 Sam. 17.45, 46. 1 Chron. 13.12. they are sure to prevail. Gods presence was the ground of Abijahs confidence against Jeroboam and his , as if that was all in all. 4 Not onely of victory and successe, but of accesse o increase, that many other will  when they perceive that God is with them, 2 Chron. 15.9. as they did o As out of  abundance.
5 Deut. 11.25. Of Terrour to their Enemies, the feare and dread of an Army fals upon the Spirits of their Enemies, and shakes, yea, mks them, when God manifests, his presence to be with them. See it in the Cananites and Philistines, Iosh. 2.9, 10, 11 1 Sam. 4.7.8. who said, We unto us, we unto us for God is come into Israels Campe, Who shall deliver ut &c. 6 Of Glory and Honour, for hereby Gods puts a difference be∣tween his people, and all the world besides, As Moses said to God. If thy presence go not with us, Exo. 13.15, 16. carry us not up hence. For wherein shall it be known heer, that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Expd. 8.22. is it not in that thou goest with us, so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the Earth Its a gallant Army when God goes Generall. Souldiers, get and keep God amongst you, so shall you be safe, couragious, victorious, increasing, dreadfull, lorious. Its dange∣rous to go upon any Designe and not to take God along with you, Numb. 14.44 45. The Israelites were smittem, when they prefummed to go without the Ark. So much of the first Lesson. The second Lesson follows. Advance holinesse in your Camsp. Consider what be the sins of an Army, and be carefull to keep your selves from them as 1 Covetousnesse, to be Greedy of Pay and Prey. 2 Injustice, to oppresse, plunder, pillage, doe violence to others. Unlawfull Spoyls are plain robbery. 3 Pride and Emulations which have bred Great Contenons among Commanders and Officers, Divisions, Factions, Sidings in an Army, and many private quarrels besides. Pride and vanity in apparell and fashion, too common among Souldiers, 4 Prophanesse, as Swearing, Cursing, Blasphemy, Scossing at goodnesse and good men, A theasme, to live as without God in the Camp, void of the knowledge, sense or feae of God, New-coin'd Oaths, Sabbath breaking. 5 Filthinsse in word or deed, as corrupt Communications, Drunkennesse, Adultery, 6 Cowardise, Pusillanimity, or basenesse of spirit. 7 Treachery and Unfaithfulnesse, which discovers it selfe in
1 Betraying Trusts. 2 Communicating Intelligence to the enemy. 3 Neglecting or not taking advantages, when put into their hands. 4 Falling off to the enemies party. 8 Discontents, Mutinies. 9 Confidence in an arme of flesh, as multitude of men and horses, fortifications which are but the works of our hands, un∣worthy to be our Gods. 10 Neglect of Piety, and exercises of it, as praying, hearing, reading, conferring of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of heaven. 11 Want of Discipline, and execution of it in the Campe. Especially in punishing offenders this may be a cause of all the rest. If God see any such unclean thing among you, hee will depart from you, and give you up into the hands of your enemies. God will not owne you for his Hoste, if while you fight, preten∣dedly for him with your hands, you fight palpably against him by your sins. God ordinarily accepts the person, before he delights to use him, or doth blesse the action. As in every Nation so in every Campe or Armie, he that feareth God, and worketh righte∣ousnesse is accepted with God, whether Commander or Common Souldier, very likely God will use such a one as an Instrument of speciall service. When the Campe is holy, then designes are hap∣py, If the persons be pious, their procedings are prospeous, be∣cause the Lord their God walkes in the midst of them, to deliver them, and to give up their enemies before them. Quest. What be the meanes of purging and reforming an Arme? Ans. Get good Ministers to got along with the Armie, as the Priests did with Israels Hosto, Dt. 20.2, 3. to discipline the soul∣diers souls, and to Surgeon their diseases in manners, Luke 3.14. John aptist to teach Souldiers their duties, as to doe violence to no man o ac∣cuse no man falsely, to be content with their wages How can Sonldiers grow better, that have not means to ? As for us (saith Abia to Jerohn, in compasse of his Army,
when they had on both sides set the Battle in aray) The Lord is our God, 2 Chron. 13.10 11, 12. and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests which mi∣mister unto the Lod, are the sonnes of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their businesse, and they burne unto the Lord every morning and evening burnt Sacrifices, and sweet incense, &c. 2 Have daily exercises of piety in the Camp, prayer at least, and reading of Scriptures also (if it may be) evening and morning, as both the motions or journeyings, and rest of the Arke, and cloud, and Hoste of Israel were sanctified by prayer, before the people might either set forward or pitch their Tents. Numb. 10.35, 36. When the Arke set forth, Moses said, rese up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, for prayer will raise God, and move him to goe with his people a∣gainst their enemies, if he late before; and awaken him, if he was asleepe before; and stir him up to scatter enemies, if hee permitted them to gather before. Prayer in an Armie awakens and raiseth God to the preseruation of the Arme, and destruction of the Enemies. So when the Ake rested, Moses prayed to God to returne, and remain among them, for in his presence is joy and safety, rest and security. 3 Let it be the care of the Commanders in chiefe, to chuse both good Officers and good Souldiers, for good Materians will make a good Bunding: How can an Armiebe good if the Soul∣derie be bad? Holinesse is the Head-prece both of Commandere and Souldrers: Piety is the chiefest praise of born, as of Moses the great Commander in Israel, That he was the servant of God: And the Centurion in the Gospel, Luke 7.9. that Christ found not so great saith (as in him) no, not in Israel, and the Centurion in the Act. 10.1, 2. Cornelius, who was a devout man, and one that feared God with a his house, — and of them that wyted on him conlimally, one was adevout Souldier, ver. 7. here note. Devotion is the Commenda∣tion of a Souldier: Religion shipires the principles and Spirit of true Valour; they raise an  report of it, and slander it exceding∣ly, they say, Religion makes men Cowards. 4. Set up strict discipline in the Carsiple, Pumsh such us Trans∣tesse, and make some exemplary, that the rest may see or heart,
and feare, and not dare to doe any such wickednesse: Many Soul∣diers are no better then Discipline makes them, Camp-discipline is (as one saith) the Soule of an Armie, which organizeth the whole body, and keeps all within due limits and compasse, as well for Carriage and Manners, as for Postures and Quarters. The very name of a Campe implies Discipline, as one saith a Dista  eastra quasi ca∣sta eo quòd ibi castraretur li∣bide. Discipline is a fruit of Necessity, bred up by the exorbitancie of mans Nature, and the evils incident to a Military life. It was exactly exercised in Israels Campe, as appears in the censure of Achan and others. Give me leave to distribute what remains of these reforming directions to the Officers and Souldiers feverally 1 To the Commanders and Officers. You, our Worthy Leaders, who have shewed your selves the Sonnes of Valour, and beene a wall unto us, both by night and day, and adventured your lives to save ours. The Lord fasten these two things upon your hearts, for promoting holinesse in your Armie. 1 Be Zealous for God, his Name and Glory, Numb. 25.11. as Phinchas was with the zeale of God, who thrust Zimri and Cozbi through in the Tent, for their fornication, God hath made some of you a great Name, like unto the Name of the great Men that are in the Earth, 2 Sam. 7 9. and honoured you to bee Field-Saviours to Us; On shew your selves tender of his glory, that his Name may not be dishonoured, nor Mercies abused, nor Sabbaths prophaned, nor his Laws viola∣ted, by any under your Command, so fat as it is in your power any way to prevent or redresse the same. Commanders in the Campe should be a Terror to evill-doers, and a Praise to them that coe well there, as Rulers are in the Common-wealth, Rom. 13 3. that Souldiers may be afraid of the power of Martiall Discipline, as Subjects are (or ought to be) of Magistraticall. Imitate Job, Iob 29.25. who when he sate chiese, and drest as a King in the Armi (over his people for he was a great Eastern Prince) as one hal comforteth the Mourners, he chose out their way for them, that is, . 11.  hee not onely had them at Command, but regulated their course, tempering severity with elemencie, comands with comforts and  you doe, who sit chiefe in the  way for them, as Job did for  would have them cy well this is the way to be both beloved and feared by them.
2 Be exemplary for piety and vertue, as devotion, temperance, righteousnesse moderation, as well as for valour, vigilance, diligence to your Souldiers saying to them, as Gideon did to his, in another case, Iudges 7.17. Look on us, & do likewise, carry your selves as we do. If Officers be bad, it is rare to finde the Common Souldiers good, for very ex∣ample will spoil them. 1 Sam. 25.28. Remember Abigals speech to David, The Lord will certainly make my Lord asure house, because my Lord fighteth the battels of the Lord, and evill hath not been in thee all thy dayes. Gods Military servants shall finde a good reward at Gods hands, if in them God hath not found evill: This is the easiest and honourablest way of Reformation to take vice away out of the Campe, scil. rather by example then by punishment: It is a great dishonour to you that are Commanders over others, and Conquerors over enemies, to be servants to sin, yea, slaves to your lusts, and to rule your selves by your own wills, while you order your Souldiers by Martiall Laws, as it was for Alexander not to be able to conquer himselfe, when hee had conquered a world. I have done with the Commanders and Officers, The Lord do them good by what hath been said. Let me speake a few words of advice. 2 To the Common Souldiers, to further holinesse among you, I commend unto you two things. 1 Mutuall watchfulnesse and admonitions, that you would observe and consider one another, to provoke one another to feare God, and depart from iniquity, to mourne for sin, and close with a Saviour, to tell one another of what you see amisse, saying, as Lot did to the Sodomites, when any of your fellow-souldiers sweare or drink immoderately, or doe violence or mutiny, and the like.—I pray you brethren doe not so wickedly. Why was all Israel involved in the guilt of one mans sin scil. Achans) but because they did not warch over one another, and over him in speciall. He was a Cain that said, Am I my brothers keeper? Gen. 19.7. 2 Fellowship in soule-edifying duties: Your heart will cleave closer to Jesus Christ in faith, and each to other in love, and bee more deare and intimate mutually, if you be Comrades in exercises as well of piety, as of military postures, and of Armes, in praying, reading, conferring together, as in quartering, watching, march∣ing, or in going upon any designe together. Holy duties, and com∣munion
in them, are the meanes to make you holy men, a godly Souldier, a praying, fighting Armie, a thundering Legion so that the campe be holy. When other Souldiers that are rude, and have no savour of the things of God nor care of their own souls, will goe drinke till drenke, or sing foolish songs, talke ribaldry, or play at Cards, and so game away their time and money: Oh goe you and pray together, seeke God together, edifie one another in faith pa∣tience, courage, godlinesse, helpe one another heaven-wards, strengthen your selves mutually against corruptions, tentations, and discouragements, to which you are subject as men as Christians, and as Souldiers. The fruit and comfort hereof will remin with you, when all vain delights and sports are vanished, and leave a sting behinde them in the conscience. I thinke Souldiers of all other men should be good Husbands, both with their Money and Time to spend it well. 1 With their Money, not to shufle and cut it away at Cards, nor cast it away at Dice, seeing they get it with the hazard of their lives, it is the price of bloud. 2 Sam. 23.15, 16, 17. David would not drinke of the water of the well of Bethlehem (though he longed for it) because his men got it with so much hazard, Is not this, said be, the bloud of the men that went in jeopardie of their lives? therefore he would not drinke thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord, as an offering of Thanksgiving unto God, for delivering them out of that danger: If David would not drinke the water that was drawn with the hazard of his mens lives, vvill you game away the money you carn vvith the hazard of your vn lives every day. 2 With your Time, because yours is most uncertain and may be very short. That which is past, cannot be recal'd, and that which is future cannot be assured; only the present Time is yours improve it, I beseech you, to better purpose then drinking or playing, you may be cut off before to morrow. Oh! Remember you carry your lives in your hands continually. Should not a Souldier be a Saint, because he is in danger of death and damnation every houre, if he continue in sin un-repented and un-reformed. Such as spend their Time in play or idlely, can be in no good posture for death and judgement;  they make a course to lye down in sorrow, and to be buried in a field of shame. Souldiers, consider, is there not as good fellowship in praying as in playing together; in singing Psalms as base Ballads, in talk∣ing
of spirituall matters for the benefit of your souls; as in opening your mouth, and in multiplying words without knowledge, say to one another, Come fellow-souldiers, let us go pray or seeke God, or instruct, incourage, admonish, warme the heats of one another by sweet-breathing of holy Counfail and bosom-experience. What? shall we march and watch and fight and lye and dye together (for so we may, for ought we know) and shall wee not pray together, nor serve God together, that if we go out of the world together, we may go to Heaven together. Should we not be holy together in our militant state here, that we may be happy together triumphantly to eternity hereafter? Shall we do duties together for man in the field, and not for God, and for our own souls in our Quarters? Accustome your selves to such spirituall exercises Now, as will be your delight when you go hence and shall be no more. There is neither drinking nor gaming, much lesse swearing and revelling in the grave whither your bodies are going, or in Heaven whither you desire your souls may go. What will it profit you to win the Field and get spoyls, and lose your precious souls. I will conclude this Application of my Text to our Commanders, Officers and Souldiers, in a few brief Cautions and Mementoe's to them all, as an abridgment of all. —Cautions three. 1 Take heed of sin, for God will not go among a Company of base, debauched, disordered fellows: such are most obnoxious to a fatall stroak. Ier. 25.31. Amos 9.10. God will give them that are wicked to the sword. And the sinners of the people shall dye by the sword, though they be such as use the sword. One such person sometimes brings Gods judgements on a whole Army, as Achan did on the Hoste of Israel, by plundering the goodly Habylonish garment & 200 shekels of silver & wedge of gold, Iosh. 6.18. & 7.12. Eccles. 9.18. Non prospere pugnant adver∣sus malos, qui psi sunt mali. which made the Camp of Israel a Curse, . One sinner destroys much good. You that fight for God against Enemies, should keep your selves free from the sine of Enemies; else the successe will be doubtfull. They that go against Babylon should first go out of Babylon. 2 Take heed of self-confidence, trusting in your own strength skill, valour, or weapons of War. This will blast all your designes and hopes. See the effect of it in thee Champion Goliah. 3 Take heed of by ends or self-respects in the service, as paper
praise, booty, plunder, preferment. Its true, a souldier deserves his pay, as the labourer doth his wages; but to make this your sole or chiefe End, of Ingaging in so good a Cause as you have in hand; is to be very mercinary; even to make a Trade of killing men for money; when you have gotten your salary, I feare it will be said, Verely you have your Reward. Brave Gallant-spirits should scorn poore low ends. Let the ends and aymes you set up in your hearts, of all the service you performe in this Cause, be pure and high, as Gods glory, publike good, and discharge of your duties for con∣science sake in what you have undertaken. —The Mementoe's are three also. 1 Remember (I beseech you all) to make your peace vvith God by faith & repentance for your sins, before ye go forth to fight vvith the Enemy. Its not sufficient to die in a good Cause, except you be in a good estate for your souls, if you vvould avoid the second death. 2 Remember to commit your life, soule, and whole selfe and all you have into Gods hands, when you goe to charge the Enemy. Psal. 31.13. Trust God with all, & look at God as grasping you and yours in his hands, that you may wholy attend the businesse in hand, and cast the care of all other things wholy upon God. What quiet and comfort is this to a Souldier, to be able to say when he goes to looke his enemie (and for any thing he knows, even death that King of ter∣rour also) in the fate, as Paul did, I know in whom I have believed, 2 Tim. 1.12. and I am perswaded he is able to keepe that which I have commit∣ted to him, , my pledge, or what I have deposited with him untill the day of Christ. If you will confidingly carry your lives in your own hands, & not put them seriously by faith into Gods hands and custody, as Paul did earnestly his soul in times of suffering, you may soone lose and scatter them, or have them taken from you. 3 Remember, when you got to fight in this present war, you car∣ry foure precious Jewels in your hands committed to you. 1 The Cause of God or his Truth, 2 The Peace of the Kingdom, 3 Your present lives, 4 Your future hopes even for eternity. What manner of persons ought you to be, in point of godlinesse and boldnesse, diligence and faithfulnesse, to discharge so great a Trust, and be able to give a good account of them all. Oh be vigilant and valiant, , quit your selves like man, be strong. The Lord of Hosts be with you, and the God of Jacob be your refuge and your recompence. FINIS.
