S6091 E402_5 R201814 99862307 114461
Study to be quiet: Or, a short VIEVV Of the Miseries of WARRE, With the Necessity of PEACE. ALSO, The Character of a Peaceable Man: whose Motto is, I am for Peace, Psal. 120. vers. 7. By a DYER. LONDON: Printed for B. Als, 1647.
A short view of the Miseries of Warre, and the necessity of Peace. O England! thou hast need to study to be quiet; truly this work is a very seasonable worke, especiall in these times of distraction; but if not considered it will prove thy utter ruine, whereof in some part thou hast already felt: Let all therefore as one man, from the greatest from the greatest to the least, both Prince and Subiects, Noble and simple, Church, and State, Iudges and Councel∣lors, Lawyers and Clients, City and Country. Ministers, and people, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants Rich and poor, (let all I say) learne this lesson, to study to be quiet; and not onely learne it, but put it in practice, Nature teacheth us, especially holy writ commands us this duty: of studyng to be quiet: in which there are such infi∣nite Exhortations, and Incitations, to this worke, of quiet∣nesse. Peace, Loue, Unitie, that had I the tongue of men and Angels, it were imposible for me to declare or set forth the worth of it: and that I may spur you on to this duty; of studying to be quiet: let me give you a little instance of the miseries of Warre; that you may with a more ready and willing minde, sue for Peace and study to be quiet. What desolations hath Warre brought in other places, Countryes & Kingdomes: we our selves are sensible in some measure of it, for have we not heard the murthering Cannons about our eares, haue not our houses bin burnt, and Churches spoyled, the worship of God neglected, have there not bin
Rapes and outrageous violences committed upon our Wives and Daughters; and had we not need to study to be quiet; have we not seene our goods taken from us and our houses ryfled by unruly souldiers? Have we not heard the cryes of the wounded, the fields and the high wayes scat∣red dead carkasies, have we not heard despeiate souldiers cry kill, kill; was not the young inant snatcht from the Mothers brest and throne against the stones, or tossed on the top of pikes? have we not seene men and horses wallow in their bloud: and had not we need study to be pet: could the Country man follow the plow where an Army was, did they not leave soing; was not the standing corne burnt downe, or troden under feet, or eaten up by horses, was not the cattell destroyed, and wast made of that which was kild and of all other things, a way to bring in a famine; and had we not need to study to be quiet: what profit is got by Warres, the Lawes are silent, outrages are committed, trading ceaceth, want increaseth, learning abolished and almost all manner of sin perpetrated; the son feares not his Faher, nor the servant his Master and should we not study to be quiet againe? here cryes the Wife for her dead husband, here a child laments for his Father, and a Father for his child, for how many are the Fatherlesse and the widowes: heres one lyeth kild, another hath his braines shot out, a third lost his arme, a fourth hath lost a leg and a fift hath a bullet shot in his body and cannot be got out and indures a world of misery; some can neither dy nor live, with an infinite other calamities that follow, and whose heart would not lament and mourne to see and heare these things, and to behold such sad spectacles: and had we not need to study to be quiet: and finde out a way that our miseries may be put to a period, that every one may sit under his own Vine, and eat of the labour of his hands in peace and quiet, with giving thankes to God: for which peace and quietnes let us all pray: In the meane time, although I cannot finde out a way to end our troubles, yet I will describe to you the character of a quiet man, by whose example every man may study to be quiet.
The Character of a peaceable and quiet man. THis Study to be quiet, is a theame That all should learne, it is so sweet a streame, And where this peace and love goes hand in hand, All thing are there, and what you can dmand: But where ruffe waters, troubled Seas do rore, There quietnesse is shut cleane out of dore: Then study to be quiet, I you wsh Or else twill prove a vety unkind dish; And that I may describe to you the man That studies to be quiet, loe here than He is portrayed to you here in briefe Of mortall men we may esteeme him chiefe, First, it is he that twixt God and his soule, Hath made his peace, and doth upon hm roule, That hates all sinne, and wickednesse, and why? Because that God is much displeasd thereby. Next loves his Neighbour even as himselfe, And cares not for the world, and all its pelfe, That at Gods glory chiefly he doth ayme, Thats no self-seeker, such let no man blame, That is content with rayment or with diet, That is that man, that studies to be quier, That speaketh truth, and of a christian temper, Thats slow to wrath, and is eadem semper, Whose eyes not wanton, nor whose eares are itching For novelties, whose heart is never wishing For others wealth; nor yet is ever idle, But well employed, and doth alwayes bridle His mouth and tongue, that they do not offend, That never sweareth, though it were for his end.
That beareth all things with great patience, Within whose breast remaineth innocence; That gives no eare to every idle talke, And in his Calling consciously doth walke, Whose Natures mild, and loveth no division, That s no scoffer, hateth all ambition, That puts up wrongs, and gives to all men right, Seekes no revenge, though others seek to fight, That doth not covet, is no Hypocrite, That beares no malice, anger, nor yet spite, That is not curious, jealous, or unkind, That is not proud, but of a loving mind, That is no Swearer, nor no drunken man, Nor uncleane person, say the worst who can, That feareth God, and doth obey the King, Loves truth, and peace, more then an Earthly thing; At such a man I never will invie at That dayly thus doth study to be quiet. Marke the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.
The peaceable mans Motto. I am for peace. WElcome sweet peace, our second sister, that Hath nourisht us with her sweets and her fat, Her plenty and prosperity, and wealth, Her choycest riches, to preserve our health, By whose blest meanes, each one so fruitfull growes, What tis to want (where peace is) none scarce knowes. Why should we kick at her whose breasts we suckt, Why shoud we fight 'gainst her, who hath us pluckt From violence, and us preserv'd from Fees, From the rage and malice of all those That seekes our ruine; oh let love increase, For where tis wanting no man is at ease: Come peace, let us embrace thee in our armes, Where thou dost dwell, there is no thought of harmes, For love is with thee, thou to all good-will Dost beare, and thou to no man thinkest ill: Why shouldst thou be a stranger to us now, Of stay we pray, and we will make a vow To be at one with thee, weel have no thought Of rancker, hate, or any thing thats naught: Well! she will stay, I'm glad we shall have peace, Make much on  now, tis time that warres should cease, We have enough on't; peace is earthly blisse, For truth and peace shall one another kisse: Loe then heres peace, the mistris with her maiden, Love, Unity, and Concord richly laden, With all good things, behold the Earth is full, And we our laps full here and there may cull, Of her attendants, that peace with her brings In such abundance, as is fit for Kings. Thrice blessed art thou, peace, that sweetly crownes Our Land, our Cities, Villages and townes, That fil'st our barnes with corn, our stalls with hay. Our Orehards, Gardens, Cloathes with flowers gay, Our sheep with wooll, our Oxen stout and strong, Our Ponds, our Rivers, sweetly rune along
Where Fishes sport themselves, yea in the fields, The Birds do sing and pleasure much it yeelds: There be trees laden with all manner of fruit, There is no person that hath any suit At Law, but all desire to live at ease, Our Corn and Cattell brings us great increase, A hundred fold, for here is no complaining We are all in love, not one sinne now is reigning: With these, and thousands more, men may delight Themselves, and sollace with the eare and sight: Here the brave Courtier, and the mighty men For recreation may come now and then, And take their fill of what sweet peace doth yeeld Ith Ayre, ith waters, or within the field; The meaner sort with those of low degree, May come and share with these we dayly see, They have as great an intetest as any, Provided alwayes that they have but money. Peace is not partiall freely she imparts Of her abundance, comforting mens hearts: Where peace doth dwell, and where the land hath rest, There is no fear or sorrow to molest, Or vexe or fright us, there's no hideous cryes Of wounded men, or dead before our eyes, Where peace is queen, no Drums nor Canons rore, No sword is drawn, that kills both rich and poore, Here's no destroying corn, or grasse, or hay, Here is no firing houses all the way, But all is quiet, each man in his calling Doth follow closely, neighbours are not brawling With one another, but do live in love, This is that blessing that comes from above, And that we may thus live in joy and peace, Pray ur Peace-maker that our wars may cease: But f that any herein I displease, Le whose will be for warre, I am for peace. FINIS.
