T2883A E104_12 R20867 99867598 155932
A TRAVE RELATION OF A great Victory obtained by the Parliament forces in Lincolnshire, under the Command of the Lord Willoughby, Colonel Hobart, Colonel Cromwell, Liv∣tenant Generall Hotham. Declared in severall Letters, One from Colonel Cromwell, to Colonel Hobart, Dated from Shasten. And another from Master Bridge a Minister, to a Friend in London. TOGETHER With Colonel Hobart his Answer to a Letter sent him from some Gentlemen, who were imprisoned in CROWLAND. LONDON, Printed for Benjamen Allen, in Popes Head Alley. MAY 27, 1643.
A Letter from Collonell Cromwell to Collonell Hobart from Shasten. Noble Sir, THe god of glory hath given us this evening a glorious victory over our enemies, they were as we are enformed one and twentie Co∣lours of horse troopes, and three or foure of dragoones: it was late in the evening when we drew out, they came and faced us within two miles of the town, so soon as we had the alarum we drew out our forces, consisting of about twelve troops, whereof some of them so poore and broken that you shall seldome see worse; with this handfull it pleased God to cast the scale, for after we had stood a little above musket shot the one body from the other, and the Dragooners having fired on both sides for the space of halfe an houre or more, they not advan∣cig
towards us we agreed (being thereunto en∣abled by the great God of heaven) to charge them, and advancing the body after many shootes on both sides, came with our troopes a pretty round trot, they standing firme to receive us, and our men chargeing feircely upon them, they were imediately rowted and rann all away, and wee had the execution of them two or three miles; I beleive some of our souldiers did kill two or three men a pece, my youngest corporall killed foure with his owne hand give glory to God, give glory, let all that know God, say, the Lord be pravsed; we have gotten some of their officers, and some of their Colors, but what the number of dead is, or what the pri∣soners, wee know not, but great is the goodnes of God to us. Shasten, &c.
Good Friend. SInce my last to you Gods providence hath led mee into the feil, I shall there∣fore give you an account of such passa∣ges as I met there: on satterday last I came to Sleveford in Lincolneshire where Colonell Sir Miles Hobart was quartered with his Norfolk forces to miles from Grantham where Leivtenant Generall Hotham, the Lord Willoughby, and Col∣lonell Cromwell lay with divers troopes of horse. And on Satterday, it was noysed that the enemy was upon his march towards us with some thousands of horse and foot. Our men therefore did provide for them, and expecting that they should have fallen upon our quarter, the Col. and Captains went their rounds all the night; but the enemy gave his Alarum to Grantham, where they were bravely encountred, they drew towards Grantham about 8 a clock in the evening our men all mounted in a short time & drew out into the feild, the commander in cheife com∣manded our men that they should not give fire till they came within halfe pistoll shot of the ene∣my, which being done, it was so dreadfull a charge, that the enemy were immediately rou∣ted
and fled for their lives; as you may read in this letter which was sent from Collonell Cromwell to Collonell Hobart thus. Noble Sir the God of glory hath given us &c. Whereby you see how God hath blessed this our association for there went into Lincolnshire but two Regiments at first (though more are going dayly) Col. Cromwells of horse, and Col. Hobarts of foot and both of them severally, the great God hath done great things by Crowland beeing taken in by Col. Hobart, and this victory attayned through Gods blessing by Col. Cromwells troops, Whose men fought like dragons, you have heard of the goodnesse and valor of Col. Cromwell, Col. Hobart also is a brave gallant gentleman, whose resolution you may read in these few lines of his, which he sent in answer to some Gentlemen that were imprisoned in Crowland and were en∣forced by the Cavaliers there to write thus to him. Honour'd Sir, the lamentable cryes of the wo∣men and children in this miserable town of Crow∣land, moves our heart with much compassion to∣wards them, in regard whereof wee are humbly bold to intreat that a Parley may be admitted, and
that you will be pleased to cause a Cessation of Arms til Propositions shal be presented unto you, and to grant a safe conduct to the Messenger. Thus beseeching the God of Peace, to give his blessing we rest Two a clock this Friday morning. Your humble Servants, John Harrington. Robert Ram. William Slater. Colonel Hobarts Answer follows. Gentlemen, IT is one of our principall ends to relieve you, and, by Gods assistance wee will do it or die; But ile make your Captain speake your language, and deliver you whom he basely surprized, and if he forthwith doe it not, ile spare neither man, woman nor child: the un∣worthy detection of Captain Dodsons Drummer, con∣trary to the Law of Arms deserves no mercy but if you will refer your selues to me, Ile doe that which befits a Christian and a Gentleman, otherwise there is nothing to be expected but the totall ruine of Town and people. So Irest, Your affectionate friend, Miles Hobart.
BOth these bave Colonels are now met, I hope at Lincoln; for on Tuesday last Colonel Hobart ws to march thither, & if the Enemy (who for this service had drawn out all his spe∣ciall Forces from Gainsborough and Newark) were not able to stand before part, I hope h shall ne∣ver be able to stand before all: its thought our men are 6000 or 7000 by this time at Lincolne. In the Army there is good Discipline, men pu∣nished for sweaing, drunkennesse, and stealing: I was many meals with them, and never heard an oath sworn by any of the Captains or Officers. I saw one souldier whipt most severely for thie∣ving. Boston was very loving to our souldiers, sending in much provision, the train Bands of the County came in from al parts, so that through the prayers of good people, I hope, that County will be soon setled in peace, which the Lord grant unto all other Counties in his due time. I rest, Yours William Bridge.
