T3463 E412_6 R203849 99863651 115861
TVVO LETTERS From the Agents of the five Regi∣ments of Horse, the one to the whole souldiery of the Army, the other to some who sent unto them, to receive further Information and satisfaction. Gentlemen and fellow Souldiers, VVEE doubt not but our late endeavours to represent your condition to you, and in yours the dolefull condition of the distres∣sed Nation, have come to your view, and we question not but some envious, some self-seeking, and some prejudicate or deluding persons are attempting, not onely to make evill constructions of the matter of that paper which we have offered, and to misrepresent our intentions, on purpose, to preposses your spirits with prejudice, as to prevent the impartiall view of your Case truly stated, but also by as∣persions and calumnies to alienate yours and the peoples af∣fections from us, and render us odious to you and them; but we are much confident that its still so fresh in your memories, that the fowlest reproaches were most unworthily cast upon the Army, by some that were then Members thereof, and by the Parliament it selfe, for our most harmlesse and most just Petition, that you cannot be diverted by scandalls, or ground∣lesse reports, from the most impartiall enquiry after the rea∣son and justice that's propounded to you; its probable, your eares will be filled with objections, and cavills against that paper that contains your Case; but we desire you would observe or whether such cavils be against the substance or matter joyn¦tly, or any thing material, & not rather against circumstances,
manner of expression, and whether the whole intent of the objectors be not onely to cover the neglects and declensions from our first principles with some plausible pretences, there∣by to feede you still with vaine elusive hopes of obtaining your own rights, and the peoples freedoms, without your appearing as formerly for their recovery; but we know your own most sad experience beares such cleare witnesse to the truth of the most materiall things related, that you cannot be deceived; the Countries pittifull cries tell you there hath been no pay procured, and their mournfull complaints and bitter groanes, yea their loud-outcries against you (as those who have cozened them with fayre promises of reliefe and freedome) witnesse to purpose, that the Countries rights are not setled, nor their grievances redressed; the Parliaments in∣ability to procure any good for you or the people testifie, that the faith of the Army (passed in our Declarations, & pro∣tests, for purging the House) is broken; your backs and purses tell you, there are no Arrears procured, &c. but if in any thing be doubtfull, we question not to satisfie you, and we hope you are so sensible, that your deare native Countrey, and your selves have pined away and consumed so long by feeding up∣on empty words and fayre promises, that you cannot be in∣duced to sit still any longer to hazard the ruine of your selves and the people; but we professe our Consciences witnesse, that we have dealt so plainly and candidly, out of the inte∣grity of our hearts, without any selfe-interests or by-ends, that we judge it vaine and useles to compose arguments inducing any to concurr with us, but we are confident that the effectuall meanes offered in our paper for speedy security to the Army and people, their rights and freedoms will plead sufficiently with every Heroick publick spirit to joyne heart and hand in so just an undertaking as is offered. But it may be some would affright you from owning your Gase, as its now offered, by suggesting that its irregular and disorderly for the Souldiers to joyne in any thing before thir Officers, or that its contrary to Law for you to de∣mand your rights, or that its a resisting of Authority, but we desire that our Declaration of Iu. 14 p. 4.5. might be review∣ed, wherein it appears that the Parliament hath declared that
the equitable sense of the Law is supreame to the Letter, and doth dispense with it, when a peoples safety is concerned; & that all Au∣thority is fundamentally seated in the office, and but ministerially in the persons; and that therefore its no resisting of Authori y, or Magistracy, to side with the just principles and Law of Nature and Nations, to preserve a people from perishing; and let it be remem∣bred, that if you had not joyned together at first, & chose your A∣gents to act for you when your Officers thought it not safe for them to appeare, you had beene now in no capacity to plead for your own or the peoples freedomes; and let it be considered, that Scotland associated in Covenant, and so by consent composed an ar∣my to stand upon principles of right and freedome, when they had no visible forme either of Parliament or King to countenance them, and they were therein justified & protected by their owne & this Nation, & may not this Army expect justly to be in like manner protected and justified in their joyning together, to insist upon the settlement of those freedomes, which they have purchased with their bloud out of the hands of the Common-Enemy which God hath subdued by them. But if any envious tongues shall bee blasting us with Anarchy, clamouring that we intend to destroy Government in the Kingdom and Army, and bring all into confusion: we suppose the aspersion it selfe is so irrationall, that it will rather give you the true Character of every such Aspersor, then reflect upon us to our prejudice. Let it be observed, that the chiefe foundation for all our rights and free∣domes, which we are resolved most absolutely to insist upon, is, a certainty of a constant Parliament every two yeares, and a certaine time for their sitting & ending; and a sure establishment of the just power that the people betrust to those their Representatives in their Election, that they may make Lawes and repeale Lawes, place and displace all Magistrates, and exercise all other power according to their trust, without the consent or concurrence of any other per∣son or persons whatsoever; and we appeale to all rational men, whe∣ther in this we strive not for the freedome that we first engaged to maintaine. But we hope we shal speedily give such clear evidence to the whole world of our resolutions to joyn with you, and all the free-born people of this Nation, to establish immediatly the undoubted prin∣ciples and rules of equall and just Government, that the mouth of malice it selfe shall be for ever stopped.
Now it may be when the Justice of our endeavours shall shine through all other reproaches; some will be muttering, that wee have designed to divide the Army, or the Souldiers from the Offi∣cers; but we appeale to your own consciences, whether perswasions to be faithfull in observing our Declarations, Promises, and En∣gagement, wherein we joyned unanimously, tend to division? is not this the summe of all that we have offered, viz. That your own and the peoples necessities, and the imminent danger of ruine, or at least slavery to you and them, calls you to renew your union in the for∣mer desires, and in insisting upon sutable answers speedily, lest you & the people be confounded and perish by delayes? and is this to divide? and as for rending from Officers, let it be remembred, that though the souldiers acted without them at first, yet those who were faithfull, did afterward concur with them. Gentlemen, We doubt not but the hazarding of our lives toge∣ther for our Countries freedome, have so endeared us each to other, and so imprinted the principles of common freedome in our hearts, that its impossible to divide us each from other, whilest wee insist upon the same principles; and therefore wee presume to send, that you might speeeily manifest your concurrence with us in a firme re∣solution, to insist speedily upon the souldiers Rights, Englands free∣domes, to be secured and setled, that so neither the distressed Com∣mons might any longer languish under oppression, and their eyes fayle with expecting deliverance, nor the Army be the object of pverty, contempt, scorne, and hatred; But through the assistance of the Almighty God (who we doubt not will beare witnesse to the Justice of the Case) wee may proceed to procure redresse for these Grievances throughly and effectually, and security for their native freedomes, that so they may be in a capacity to raise our arreares for us chearfully and readily; and by this meanes, just peace & com∣mon right and freedome might be firmely and securely established, We shall adde no more, but that the answer is much longed for, by Yours &c. For our honoured friends and fellow-souldiers of the severall Regiments, under command of his Ex∣cellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, these.
Honoured Gentlemen and fellow souldiers. WEe salute you with all due respects: we received your Mess∣age, and rejoyce much to see you inquiring after Justice, Common rights, and freedomes, though we are much troubled to heare, that many should endeavour to hide the truth of yours and the Kingdomes Case, and to induce you still to suffer the delatory proceedings, that threatens destruction to the Army and whole Nation: you desire satisfaction from us, concerning the truth of the matters of fact related in our papers (entituled, The Case of the Army, &c.) and we professe, all that there is related hath been so publike, that we wonder at the audacity of any to de∣nye them, we can appeale to your own experience for the truth of the most of those things mentioned; is it not too too evident, the neither we nor our Officers have been vindicated in point of ho∣nour or right concerning that Order and Declaration published a∣gainst us, for though by publike Declaration to the whole world we were aspersed and branded to posterity for enemies and tray∣tors to the publike peace in print, yet we have not as to the equity or right of our Petition; or to our honour or fidelity to the state been vindicated (answerable to the ignominy cast upon us) to the world by a Declaration from the House. Do not the poor Countries pittifull cryes, and your non-pay∣ment of quarters; witnesse that you have had no pay, much lesse your Arreares? Do not the manifest vexatious Suites at Law (now depending a∣gainst many that have engaged in the late warre) testifie that there is no sufficient Indempnity? Do not the dishonourable, uncertaine provision for Widdowes, maimed Souldiers, &c. manifest, that no such provision is made for them as is answerable to our desires? And for the common freedoms we are confident none will pre∣sume to averr, that there are any setled: And we desire you to con∣sider, that delayes have made the Kingdome almost sink already under their burdens, and in a few weekes the Countrey (for ought we know or can secure our selves of) may serve us as once the Danes were served. viz. cut our throates. Now by this it is apparent, that the first principles have been declined or neglected at least. Touching the breach of the Engagement in dividing the Army to so great a distance each from other, this is known to all. And as for the breach of the engagement in respect of disband∣ment of the Trayne is it not evident?
1. In regard the Muster-Master of the Traine, hath Order to Muster no more in the capacity of a Traine. 2. That the two Agitators of the Trame, Mr. Tomins & Mr. Ro∣binson are appointed to be Captaines over two Companies, to be raysed and placed in the Tower. 3. That the two Companies of Fire-lockes for the Guard of that marching Trayne, part of which is in Wallingford, and part in Wi∣, have orders to march to the Tower, and one that had little or no relation to the Army, is to receive Adjutant Generall Deans Com∣pany to be Captaine over it. 4. That four Quartermasters of Draught-horses have already li∣sted themselves Officers in severall Companies, and are providing to leave their charges in the Traine. 5. That of eight Quartermasters of Draught-horses but one con∣tinues, who will have the charge of some 60. horses, to draw the Carriages of the Generall and Generall Officers only. 6. That all the other Quartermasters that do not list themselves in Foot Companies, or other plices, are to be quite put off; as also neere 200. Wagons that belong to the Quartermasters, unlesse they will be private souldiers, 7. That all the Pioneers and their Officers; as also the Artificers, viz. the Wheelers, Carpenters, Farriers, Black-smiths, Gun-smiths, Fasket makers, Rope makers, Coller makers, and ladle makers, & others, are to be put off forthwith. 8. That those Gentlemen of the Ordinance, and Gunners, and Matrosses that stand, but not in the capacity of a Trayne, are to be sent with severall Regiments, having no particular Commanders appointed over them, as Lieutenant Generall, or Comptrolers, to hear their severall addresses. That Mr. Peters who belonging to the Trayn, and is one of the most knowing men, from whom intelligence could be expected, informed all, who enquired, that the Trayne were to receive onely this moneths pay, and to be disbanded: so likewise Comproller Deane, and every Colonell that was asked cencerning it. As for refusing to stand as Englishmen for our Nations freedom, and perswading the Souldiers and Agitators, that they stood as Souldiers onely: we suppose such arguings have been too publike at the head Quarters, for any to have the face to denye it. As for that unworthy scandall, that we intend to divide the Ar∣my, we do not onely professe, that we abhorr thoughts of any such
designe, but we wonder that envy it selfe hath the face to cast this aspersion upon us. We beseech you, consider, Is it to divide the Army, to perswade them all, and use our utmost endeavours to unite them in insisting upon the first principles, whereupon we all engaged each to o∣ther, that we would not divide each from other, untill the common rights of the souldiery & people were setled? shall it be counted a designe to devide, to endeavour such a speedy settlement of what we have declared, that the designes of the common Enemy to divide us, and perswade us to desert the Publique interest, might be prevented? believe it (Gentlemen) to perswade you to sit still while you want pay, and the people their rights, is to nourish discon∣tentments in the Army and the people, and to divide betwixt the people and the Army, & one part of the army from another. Dth not experience witnesse, that while you sit still, distractiens increase dayly some blame one, some another, there are the seeds of division dayly sowne; and hath not the King his Agents in all our Quar∣ters, o kindle and blow up the coales of heart-burnings & divisions? We question no, but the all seeing God will beare witnesse to the simplicity of our intentions. We have now only one thing to desire of you, that in what particulars soever you are unsatisfied, you would acquaint us with them distinctly, and that whatsoever may be suggested to you against us, or whatsoever pretences shall bee, that we represent your states falsly, that in all such matters, you would hear our answer, before you passe judgment upon us. And we are confident, we shall make the uprightnesse of our hearts and actions in this case, to appear beyond the contradiction of Envy it selfe. Thus from former experience of your fidelity to the common Case of the Army, & the whole Nation, promising to our selves, that your exquiting into the bottome of our present Case is on purpose to sele your resolutions to concur with us upon such sure foundations, that you may stand against all opposition; we shall only add a desire of your acceptance of the most cordiall affections of Your and all the Peoples faithfull servants, Robert Everard, George Sadler, John Taylor. George Garrer, Tho. Beverley. William Prior. William Bryan. Matthew Wealy. William Russell. Richard Seale. John Dober. William Hudson. Agents to the five Regiments.
GENTLEMEN. WE mention not in this our Answer the publique and known de∣clining of the Declaration of the 17. of Iune, for purging the house; nor that Remonstrance of Iune the 23. for paying the Army equall to those that deserted it; nor the falling off from the Remonstrance on August the 18. wherein we protested, that we would not suffer those that were guilty of such treasonable breaches of their trust, in usurping the name and power of a Parliament, and voting for a warre to destroy us, and for the Kings coming to London upon his own tearmes, to sit in Parliament, and yet between 60. and 70. of those sit there, and nothing is visibly intended to be done, for their removeall. These and many such we mention not, as too palpable to be hidden, and in this our Postscript, we cannot but adde one desire more, that you would consider the case of the Army stated joyntly, and not judge according to cavils & objecti∣ons, that may be made against words and clauses, but to make a candid construction of every clause or sentence, alwayes ayming to find out our sense and meaning. FINIS.
