W1543 E365_21 E374_9 99859926 159928
Bellum Hybernicale: OR, IRELAND'S VVARRE Astrologically demonstrated, from the late Celestiall-congresse of the two Ma∣levolent Planets, Saturne and Mars, in Taurus, the Ascendent of that KINGDOME. VVherein likewise, their future opposition in the Signs Sagittary and Gemini, (most ominous to London, and many other of the South and West parts of England) is Mathematically handled. The Jgnorance, Malice, Mistakes, Errors, Insolencies, and Impertinencies, of John Booker, (in his Astrologicall Observations upon the said Con∣junction, in a late Pamphlet of his, styled, A Bloody Irish Almanack, &c.) discovered, corrected, refuted, and retorted: AND The Author further vindicated, from his, and Master Lilly's former frivolous, false, and malicious Aspersions, throughout the whole Discourse. By Capt. GEO: WHARTON, Student in Astronomy. —Ego  tumultum, Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente Caesare terras. Printed in the Yeere▪ 1647.
TO THE IMPARTIALL, AND Juditious Reader. IT is high time, now, after so many affronts, and such multiplicity of ray∣ling, and scornfull Language, uttered against me, in severall silly Pam∣phlets, by that profest Mountebanke in Astrology, (John Bookes,) to vindicate my selfe from the Calumnies, Scandalls, and false Accusations, which his unsatiable Ambition, and implacable malice, hath most wick∣edly accused me of: And thereby I shall discover, how much his Envy, (to my Penne and Person) hath transported him beyond the bound of modesty, and rendered him incapable both of Reason and Knowledge, in the Art, whereof be professes himselfe to be a Master. I have in part answered M. Lilly, in my Prognostication for the ensuing yeare 1647. And here, (according to my pro∣mise) I shall Catechise John Booker, and both of them, as occasion serves. The subject or matter, here intended, is, the notable Conjunction of the 2. Malevo∣lent Planets in the Signe Taurus, upon the 12. of June this yeare, 1646. the effects whereby will be in great force, untill the 21. day of October 1647. Which Conjunction hath lately beene most ignorantly treated of, by John Boo∣ker in a certaine Pamphlet of his stiled A Bloody Irish Almanacke, &c. and many false observations he hath drawn thence, and published; not upon any reall grounds in Astrology, but merely out of his inveterate malice, and hatred to the Kingdome of Ireland; whereby both that and this Kingdome have beene deluded, and Astrology shamefully perverted and defamed. In which respect (as likewise (upon this occasion) to free my selfe, from his former Aspertions) I have published the following discourse, wherein the same Conjunction of Sa∣turne, and Mars, is more Artificially handled: and also their future Oppositi∣on; (with a touch concerning their next Conjunction, which will happen in the Signe Gemini, (the Ascendent of London) which will be farre more terrible, and of greater concernment to London, and other parts of this Kingdome; then the Conjunction in Taurus can be to Ireland: I have palpably unmasked his malice, discovered his ignorance, divulged and corrected his Errours, and misapplications of the Effects of this celestiall meeting: If his immodest Lan∣guage, hath any where incited me to too much freedome of speech; I shall crave his excuse, when he beggs my Pardon, for his former Insolencies: I hate
not his (or any mans) person, but his Sinne. The method is Rough cast, (like my selfe) if the matter be better polished, I care not: I know, I shall not please all (neither would I) some for want of judgement, and some for want of Love, and others for lack of Loyalty will condemne me; but none of these doe I regard: It is to the impartiall, and juditious I appeale, and to their judge∣ment (onely) will I submit. And if they please to adventure but their Pati∣ence, as I have done my Paines, (which is not a little) I doubt not of the issue: I have no ungodly ends, in this, or any other of my writings, my Wishes are full as good, as John Bookers: I wish all happynesse to the King and Queenes Majesty, and the Royall Progeny, and an end to the Miseries of this languishing Kingdome. I love, and wish for the Booke of Common-Prayer againe, that was Sealed with the Blood of so many Martyrs, till which be, I expect not to see Religion in its Pristine puritie. I delight not in War, not can I pray for an un∣just or Dishonourable Peace. From my Study in an honest Cava∣liers house in York-shire, the 10. of Septemb. 1646. So saith a true, and free-borne English-man, an abhorrer of all manner of Treasons, and Rebellions, one that loveth all manner of Christians, and us a great honourer of True and Lawfull Parliaments, Geo: Wharton.
Bellum Hybernicale, &c. NOt many dayes, before the famous and somtimes flourishing Vniversity, and City of Oxford was sacrificed as a Peace-offering (by some of the more Pacificall Lords) and accordingly surrendered (upon Articles) o∣therwise honourable) into the sacrilegious hands of the Sectaries and Schismatiques of this Kingdome: (viz.) in this yeare 1646. (which is from the Creation of the world, 5595. (to omit all other frivolous and fruitlesse computations and Chronologies, wherewith Booker hath foolishly stuffd, & crammed up a malitious lying Pamphlet, by him styled A Bloody Irish Almanack, &c.) upon Friday the twelfe day of Iune, there happened a notable Conjunction of the two malevolent Planets, Saturn and Mars: Which Conjunction, notwithstanding it did not manifest it selfe, with any stormes, thunder or lightning, as Iohn Booker prog∣nosticated in his un-sainted state-lying-Kalender: nor hath been the Prodromus of such losse, ruine, destruction, and desolation to the Kingdome of Ireland, as is mentioned in the said Pamphlet; yet questionlesse the effects of that malicious meeting, have already been notably shewed both in Ireland, and in many other Kingdome and Countries, Cities, and Townes, and upon particular Persons who had any congruencie therewith in the Radix or Revolution of their Nativities: But to the intent that this barking mungrell may not delude the ignorant with his pedling trash, nor detract from, or otherwise abuse a whole Nation, with his nauceous, and menacing expressions: I have assumed a liberty of publishing this following Discourse, which is void of all envy, malice, or partiali∣ty, but freely, modestly, and sincerely, relating whatsoever con∣cernes this Coelestiall meeting, according to the rules of Art, and the judgement of the most approved Astrologers, ancient, and mo∣dern: wherein the judicious and indifferent Readers may plainly
and orderly perceive the ignorance and malice of this trifling para∣site: and rightly understand, the nature and quality of the effects of this coelestiall congresse, when they shall begin to operate, how long continue, what Nations, or Countries are therein principally concerned, and how far the Kingdome of Ireland in particular; concluding, whether or no, that (so long) oppressed Kingdome, be ordained for the stage, whereon such bloudy-minded hel-hounds (as himselfe) are to perpetrate their cruelty. I will not trouble the judicious Reader with any examples of such events, as have formerly happened in England or elswhere, upon the like Conjunctions: For that I acknowledge him to have collectd in part. But I will first examine the foundation, whereupon he hath rai∣sed this so deformed a structure, and accordingly proceed, either by adhering to him where he hath stumbled on any truth, or in dissent∣ing from, and correcting him, where I meet with his mistakes, ig∣norance and malice. And first, I will artificially erect the Figure of heaven, according to the doctrine of Regio montanus, to the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction, and afterwards compare it with that, which Boo∣ker hath published (for I dare not take this (or any other) upon trust either from him or M. Lillie) whereby, I shall presume, not not only to discover his want of skill, in this ordinary piece of A∣stronomy, but likewise to benefit some others as ignorant as him∣selfe, (if any such can be) who desire to learn the exact manner of erecting the Figure of heaven (by this one example) for any mo∣ment of time, out of the Tables of Directions. First then, wee are to enquire, at what time these two Planets are conjoyned. I perceive that Booker hath endeavoured to follow Eichstadius, and so shall I do (his tables being the most exact of any extant.)       deg. min. Iune the 12 Saturne is direct in Taurus 14. 25. 13 14. 31. The difference, which is Saturns diurn. motion, is 00. 06. Iune the 12 Mars is direct in Taurus 14. 11. 13 14. 54. The difference which is Mars his dium. motion, is 00. 43. The excesse, or difference of their diurn. motion, is 00. 37.
The intervall, or distance in long 'twixt Sat. and Mars, is 00. 14. Then I say, If the excesse 37. min. give 24. houres, what shall 14. min. the intervall? Facit her. 9. min. 5 which is the mean, or equall time of this Conjunction in the Me∣ridian of Vraniburge, for which Eich∣stadius hath calculated his Ephimerides. At which time, the Planets are thus in longitude and latitude.     deg. min. Long. Sol in Canc. 01. 16. Lun. in Scor. 03. 12. Sat. in Tau. 14. 27. Mar. Iup. in Canc. 13. 38. Ven. in Tau. 16. 27. Mer. in Gem. 14. 47. Drag. in Leo. 04. 0.     deg. min.   Lat. Lun. 5. 11. MD. Sat. 2. 15. M. A. Iup. 0. 12. S. A. Mar. 0. 46. M. D. Ven. 2. 17. M. A. Mer. 3. 28. M. A. Now to know the difference of Meridians betwixt the City of Vraniburge and Dublin (in Ireland, for which place Booker pre∣tendeth to have erected his Scheme) I seeke out the longitude of Vraniburge, which (according to the observation of Longmnta∣nm) was found to be 36. deg. 45. min. as may be seen, in his Astro∣nomia Danica. The longitude of Dublin (as our Countryman (M. Hues) hath it, (in his treatise of Globes, most excellently translated out of La∣tine into English, by M. Iohn Chilmead of Christ-Church in Ox∣ford) is 16. deg. 40. min. But I shall take it as Booker hath done, 17. degrees and a halfe, because it is not much above 3. min. difference in time:) And I find 19. deg. 15. min. difference in longitude, an∣swering, to one houre and 17. min. of time; which being substracted from 9. houres and 5. min. (because Vraniburge lyeth so much more Eastward then Dublin) there remaineth 7. ho. 48. min. for the mean, or equall time of this Conjunction in the Meridian of Dublin. The  or equation of time, (to be added) is 6. min. 41. sec. So, the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, in the Meridian of Dublin, is 7. ho. 54. min. and 41. seconds. And to this moment of time, wee are to erect the Figure of hea∣ven,
according to the doctrine of Regiomontanus; which is done as followeth: viz.   deg. min. The true place of the Sun is, in Cancer 001. 16. His right ascention, is, 091. 24. The right ascention of time, is, 118. 41. The right ascention of the Mid-heaven, is, 210. 04.       deg. min. The Oblique ascention of the 11. House is 240. 04. 12 270. 04. 1. 300. 04. 2. 330. 04. 3. 000. 04. The Elevation of the Pole at Dublin, according to M. Hues, is 53. deg. 10. min. but I shall take it as Booker hath done 53. deg. and a halfe, (for he does all by halves) and according to this latitude, wee must find out the elevation of the 11. 3. 12. and 2d. Houses, by the rationall table of Houses, in Regiomontanus.     deg. deg. min. The elevation of the Pole of the 11. and 3. houses Lat. 53. is 33. 34. 54. is 34. 32. 12. and 2. houses, Lat. 53. is 48. 59. 54. is 50. 01. The First Difference, is, 00. 58. min. Second 01. 02. min. 1. Then I say, (by the rule of Proportion) If 1. deg. (or 60. min of Latitude) give 58. min. difference, what shall 30. minutes? Facit 29. min. which being added to 33. deg. 34. min. gi∣veth 34. deg. 3. min. for the elevation of the 11. and 3. houses. 2. Again, I say, If 1. deg. of latitude, give 1. deg. 2. min. diffe∣rence, what shall 30. minutes? Facit 31. min. which being added to 48. deg. 59. min. ma∣keth 59. deg. 30. min. for the elevatton of the 12. and 2. houses. So that now wee have the Elevation of       deg. min. The 11. and 3. Houses 34. 03. 12. and 2. 49. 30. whereby wee
shall quickly find the deg. and min. of the Ecliptique, answerable to the ascentions of the respective houses, before mentioned; in this following manner. Pro cuspide X.   deg. min. Ascentio recta M. C. est 210. 04.   deg. min. Scorp. deg. min. Proxime major 210. 46. 3 210. 04. Proxime minor 209. 49. 2 209. 49. Different. 0. 57. 1. 0. 15. 57. 60.   15. 900. (1.       60. 57.         900. 330. (5. Gradus Zodiaci est 2. Scorp.     57.   P. P. est 16. min. ferè A. 285     45.   Vera cuspis X. M 2. 2. 16. ferè Pro cuspide XI. Ascens. 240. 4. Lat. 34. 3.
Vora Cuspis XI. est Scorp. 19. 59. Pro Cuspide XII. Ascen. 270. 4. Lat. 49. 30.
Vera Cuspis XII. est Sagit. 5. 1. Prosp. 1. Ascon. 300. 4. Lat. 53. 30.
Vera Cupis I. est Sagit. 24. 45. Pro Cuspis II. Ascen. 330. 4. Lat. 49. 30.
Vera Cuspis II. est Aquar. 3. 17. Pro cusp. III. Ascen. 0. 4. Lat. 34. 3.
Collectio Cuspidum.   deg. min.     deg. min   X. 2. 16. Scorp. Taur. 2. 16. IV. XI. 19. 59. Scorp. Taur. 19. 59. .V XII. 5. 1. Sagit. Gem. 5. 1. VI. I. 24. 45. Sagit. Gem. 24. 45. VII. II. 3. 37. Aquar. Leon. 3. 37. VIII. III. 0. 6. Ariet Libr. 0. 6. IX. Thoema coeleste, ex tabulis Directionum Regiomontani ad tempas Apparens Con∣junctionis Saturni et Martis; Anno Domini 1646 What thinke you now (M. Booker) have I not just cause to di∣strust, and diligently to examine your worke: and to call
call your judgement in question, which is grounded upon a wrong Basis? Do you not blush to see your ignorance, your errours, your impudence, your malice, thus palpbly discovered? Have you not most grossely mistaken 2. deg 25. min. in the twelfe and sixth Houses; 2. deg. 35. min. in the Ascend. and seventh house; 2. deg. 59. min. in the eleventh and fi houses; 3. deg. 46. min. in the tenth and fourth; foure degrees 47. min. in the eighth and second: and no lesse then 6. dee. and 10. mm. in the third and ninth houses? Is any ma, so much beside himselfe, as to give credit to any of your Prognoques, when not one scruple of certainty, can be found in your Calculations? And are not you and M. Lillis alike ashamed, to account your selves Masters in Astrology; when I have made it appeare, that neither of you have yet attained so much skill, as to set a Figure of Heaven exactly? Will any man of understan∣ding thinke you fit to Prognosticate the effects of the Planets and Starres, who are not of your selves able to calculate their true pla∣ces, motions, and aspects; but are forced to take them upon trust from others? For so M. Lilly himselfe confesseth, in his Englands Propheticall Merline, pag. 23. in these words: viz. Having intreated my loving friend M. Mathew Fiske, to give me the true Scheme, of the great conjunction of Saturn and Iu∣piter in 1603. (for it was so) he gave me the positure aforesaid (exactly done) by the Rodolphine Tables, &c. And Page 76. of the same Booke; I conceive it possible, and do believe, I have the conjunction of Saturn and Iupiter in 164. exquisitely done by the same lear∣ned hand; and that either he, or any as able as himselfe, may compasse the true moment of any Conjunction. This is a modest and ingenous acknowledgement of M. Lillies want of skill in Astronomy, for you see, he was fain to be beholden to M. Fiske for calculating the Conjunctions of Saturn and Iupiter, in 1603. and 164. or else he knew not where to have had them: And he confesses that he doth but believe the last of them to be ex∣quisitely done: he cannot tell how to determine whether it be so, or not, of his own knowledge. And by this I see, tis no wonder, that M. Lilly should mistake so grossely of late, in all the Schemes which he hath published; having lost no lesse then his right hand with the death of M. Fiske: Since which, he hath done all things sinisterly, and Annually perplext us
with a hotch-potch of his own left-handed-worke, to his perpe∣tuall shame, and the discredit of better-handed Arists, in this curious knowledge. For be it from me to conceive otherwise, but that M. Mathew Fske (whose memory I honour) was a most excellent Artist, (for the Gen. I have been with severall times, and conversed with him before these unhppy differences were) and I am ble (though M. Lilly be not) to calculate the Motions of the Rudolphine (or any other) Tables, and therefore am confident (I had said sure if I would have taken the paines) that he hath calculated the places of the Planets truly, (if M. Lilly have so printed them:) but I beleeve M. Fiske left the setting of the Figure to M. Lilly: For I am very sure the latter of them, is very erroneous, as will appeare to every man, that will take the paines to examine the Cuspes of each house according to the time set down: For examine i but thus farre.   deg. min. The place of the Sun there, is in Sagittary. 26. 2. (For the seconds can make no sensible difference.)     His right ascention, is 265. 40. The right ascen. of the time there posited, is, 290. 15. which being added to the right Ascention of the Sun, and the whole Circle deducted, leaveth the right ascention of the tenth house, 195. 55. To which agreeth the 17. deg. and 17. min. of Libra, for the Cuspe of the tenth house: whereby it appeareth that M. Lillie hath erred 13. minutes in the Cuspes of the tenth and fourth houses.   deg. min Now adde 9. deg. to the right ascention of the tenth house, and you have the Oblique Ascention of the Horoscope 285. 55. To which agreeth in the Latitude of 51. deg. 32. min. which is generally received for the Latitude of London libr. 15. 24. Which is the true degree and minute, ascending at that time, so that M. Lilly hath likewise mistaken eight minutes in the Cuspes of the first and fourth houses. And yet for all this, I will not blame M. Lilly, so much as this ignornt Puppy Booker: becuse he freely  his own insuffi∣ciency, and to whom he was beholden for his helpes: whereas this impudent Clown, will neither acknowledge, nor amend his errors, nor make use of any learned Artist to rectifie and assist him. And
this is the right way, to continue in the wrong,—march on Jacke— But why do I discourage the poore Snap, for alas! If he should not be doing something (though to never so little purpose) he would quickly be undone; for, writing of un-Sainted Almanacks, and Figur-casting, for stoln goods, and such like Qestions, is all the trade he hath to live by; wherein commonly his judgement, is as certain, as his Figures are true: yet thus much I could willingly allow the sillie fellow, would he but forbeare thus frequently, and ridiculously to befool himselfe in Print: I will not deny, but that many things of that nature, may be performed by Astrology, with an able Artist: but farre be it from me to be so idle, as to thinke such things can be possibly done by lack Booker. I my selfe have had ex∣perience of many Queries of this nture, which I have answered (at the request of some particular friends) to my own, and the Querents admiration: but I evr abhorred (like him) to make a profession and living of it: indeed for Nativities (wherein I have been most conversant) I commonly followed Cardanu his rule; I never wrought without a reward, Non sine pretio, nec cum xguo pretio: And I condemne any knowing man that  otherwise; for he that truly labours in the tediousnes of a Nativity, dsves no small reward: and whosoever bargaines with the Artist, (like a nigard) defaces his own stamps: It is none of the least blessings bestowed upon man (by the Providence of God) that he may be forewarned of a mischiefe impending: in that he hath the benefit of time offered him, wherein he may possibly divers, or at leastwise mitigate any evill, or otherwise with joy and thankefullnes expect and receive any blessing portended by the Planets and Starres. But it is a curse to runne blind-sold, and headlong into any mis∣chance or misery, being neither sensible or mindfull thereof. I pitty those Cowards, who (like some that use to wink, when they fight) are affraid to foresee any evill of themselves, as though their nesci∣ence (or non-visibility) of the evill, were sufficient to divert, or se∣cure them from the danger. But I have deviated to far fom the matter I intend, being fist to handle the effects of this Conjunction, and therein to shew Iohn Booker his errours, and the world his (nd M. Lillies) unparlleld malic: to which limit, I shall now confine my selfe, with all can∣dor and impartiality.
This Conjunction (whereof wee are now to treat) falls out in the 14. deg. and 27. min. of Taurus (as you may see by the Scheme) the first Sign of the second Quadrangle of the Zodiaque; a Cold and Dry, Melancholly, Feminine and Meridional Sign: which is with∣in 5. degrees opposite to that point of Scorpio, wherein the Come that appeared Anno 1618. was first observed. The Ascendent is the 24 degree 45. min. of Sagitary, the 2. deg. and 16. min. of Scorpio colminates, and the whole Scheme not much diffring from that of the last great Conjunction of Saturn & Jupiter, Anno 164. And in the sign which beholds the Dodeca∣temorie of that great Conjunction, with a Sextile Aspect. Messahalah (the Arabian) to whom wee are much beholden for this kind of learning) a most excellent and ancient Astrologer) in the eleventh Chapter of his Booke, intituled, De ratione circuli, ot stellarum, et qualiter operantur in hoc seculo; delivers us this ge∣nerall rule: Conjunctio (saith he) Saturni et Martis, significat ac∣cidentia Bellorum, atque guerrarum contrarietates: cum{que} volueris scire eadem accidentia, scit dominantem in figura corum Conjunctio∣nis, qui si fuerit fortuna, significabit bonum, et aptationem esse, Et si fuerit malus, significat malum, et ejus impedimentum. Scias etiam, quod Conjunctio eorum in signis hominum, significat multitudinem infirmit atum eorum et conjunctio eorum in alique angulorum anni, significet contrarietatem divitum, vel regum, et guerrarum multitu∣dinem, et durabit res, donec jungantur alia vice, et conjunctio eorum in igneis significat siccitatem, et terrae sterilitatem, et in aereis ventos, in aquaticis vero multitudinem pluviarum, et in terreis gelu et ui∣vem, et frigoris multitudinem. Scias etiam quod fortunae cum aspexe∣rint, minuent malum, et mali angebunt. Proba, quemadmodum nar∣ravi tibi: et invenies, si Deus voluerit. To which purpose (if wee follow this approved rule) it will be necessary, that wee first collect the particular Fortitudes, and debi∣lities of the Planets, according to their scituation and places in the Figure: whereby wee may know, which of them is strongest, and which wakest, and accordingly pronounce judgement, good or bad, as the Rule enjoyne.
The dignities and debilities of the Planets, in the Figure of this Conjunction. Saturnes Fortitudes. Being in the fourth house 4. Free from combustion 5. Direct in motion 4 Swift 2. Orientall 2 Conjunction with Venus 5. Sextile with Iupiter 3. 25. Saturnes Debilities. Peregrine 5. Conjunction with Mars 5. 10. Iupiters Fortitudes. Exaltation 5. Being in the 7. house 4. In Sextile with Venus 3. Swift in motion 2. Direction motion 4. 18. Iupiters Debilities. Subradiis 4. Occidentall 2. 6. Mars his Fortitudes. Being in the 4. house 4 Free from Combustion 5 Direct in motion 4 Swift in motion 2. Orientall 2. Conjunction with Venus 5. Sextile with Iupiter 3. 25 Mars his Debilities. Peregrine 5. In his detriment 5. Conjunction with Saturn 5. 15.
Sun's Fortitude. Being in the 7. House 4 Sun's Debilities. Peregrin 5. Slow motion 2. Termes of Mars. 2. 9. Venus her Fortitudes. Being in the 5. house 3. Triplicitie 3. Free from Combustion 5. Direct in motion 4. Sextile with Jupiter 3. In her house 5. In Gaudio 1. In termes of Jupiter 2. 26. Venus her Debilities. Orientality 2. Conjunction with Saturn. & Mars. 5. Slow in motion. 2. 9. Mercuries Fortitudes. Being in his House 5. Triplicitie 3. Free from combustion 5. Direct in motion 4. In termes of Venus 2. 19. Mercuries Debilities. Being in the 6. House 4. Slow in motion 2. Orientall 2. 8. The Moone her Fortitudes. Being in the tenth house 5. Free from Combustion 5. Increasing in light 2. 12. The Moon her Debilities. Peregrine 5. In her fall 4. Slow motion . In the termes of Mars 2. 13.
Saturne hath Fortitudes 15 Iupiter hath Fortitudes 12 Mars hath Fortitudes 10 Sol hath Debilities 5 Venus hath Fortitudes 17 Mercury hath Fortitudes 11 Luna hath Debilities 1 By which it appeareth, that the benigne and bountifull Planet Venus, is Almuten, or chiefe dominatrix in this Conjunction; in that shee excedeth all the rest of the Planets, in number of Forti∣tudes: Saturne is next, as having 15. testimonies of strength: Iupiter, Mars, and Mercury, are likewise all very powerfull. The Moone is very infortunate, and the Sun is the weakest in the Fi∣gure, being out of all his essentiall dignities, slow in motion, and in the termes of Mars, having no other considerable testimony of strength, but onely his accidentall position, in the West Angle. Thus much being rightly known, and understood, it will be no difficult matter to fore-see, what (in all probability) may be the naturall quality of the effects of this Conjunction, if wee stick but close to the known rules of Art, (whence both M. Lilly and Booker doe ordinarily deviate) and avoid the vaine and tedious loquacity, wherewith they so often, and much torment us: you see (M. Lilly) I have followed Origanus in not making Venus and Mercury fortifyed by their Orientality; (as I did, Anno 1645. up∣on my Astrologicall judgement, 7. May, according to Pezlius, (who maketh no distinction, as you may see, Pag. 47.) because I would avoid all future cavills upon this occasion: But (by the way) I shall exhort you and Iohn Booker to suspend your usuall snarling, touching the fallibility of that Discourse; for your opprobrious spee∣ches cannot injure me with men of moderate judgement; nor can the frequent and eager reiterating thereof, cloake or excuse your ig∣norance in point of Art: what I then writ, was according to a supposed time taken, and delivered me (by aCapt. E. A; Gentleman of quali∣ty.) And you know, in this case, the Tempus aestimatum is not to be rectified as in Nativities: I know no true Trutina for that (Sirs.) And a few minutes error in time, will alter the whole face of heaven; which must needs vary the judgement, being de∣rived from a different position; I was requested to deliver my o∣pinion according to the time given me, which was as you saw: yet I never intended it for the Presse, had not the importunity of some friends prevailed with me. And I am able to maintaine the same opinion (in point of Art) according to the time supposed, against
the proudest State-pleaser that date oppose me. But admit what what you would have the world to beleeve, That it had been an error of judgement, without relation had to any mistake in time; why (I pray Sirs) is not an error in the Astrologer, as tolerable as in the Divine, Physitian, or Lawyer, or in men of any other professi∣on? Is the Divines judgment alwayes Gospel? Does the Physitian alwayes cure? Is the Lawyers opinion ever infallible? Does the L∣gician still prove? O the Rhetorician alwayes perswade? So long as we are men, we must be subject to infirmities, over-sights, and errors; Humanum est errare. And (which is more) it is the plea∣sure of God, many times, to frustrate the portents of heaven, for the sins of the people; who otherwise might partake of their na∣turall sweetnesse and benignity. It was a wise saying of a learned Divine, yet living, That When God will have a people beaten, he ties their hands behind them. And this (I am sure) hath been the un∣happinesse of the Loyall partie: But shall therefore the Astrologer be blamed for adhering to the Rules and Principles of his Art? I wonder with what truth M. Lilly in Iuly last, prognosticated of losse to the Parliament, and of any Motion of their Army West∣ward; and of so much action there, when all men know their party prevailed in every place of the Kingdome by one meanes or other; and that they had no need of sending any Forces into the West. And in the same month of Iuly, what intended he, thinke you, where he tatled of an Army wandring neere Oxford? You see by the course of Heaven, he conceived Oxford should have been holden still by the Kings Forces, when (notwithstanding) it was surren∣dred in Iune before. I could instance many hundreds more of his errors in the rest of his foolish Pamphlets, as his Merlinus Augli∣us Iunior, the Starry Messenger, and especially in his fabulous, and most ridiculous Prophecy of the White King and Dreadfull Dead∣man; which me thinke he should not think of without a blush, there being not so much as one sentence in it, derived from lawfull Art; nor which hath answered one jot of his expectation: I shall passe by his Supernaturall sights and Apparitins, (so much laughed at) because it hath Imprimatur Iohn Booker in the front of it: I shall not meddle with his Mother Shipton, nor his story of the dumbe woman, because they are all of them foolish, frivolous, and false, and cannot become a Scholar. Doe but compare Bookers bloody Prognostiques against the Kingdome of Ireland upon this
Conjunction of Saturne and Mars in Taurus, with the wonderfull successe the Irish have had against their enemies (whether English or Scots) ever since; and you shall find, that Iohn Booker hath been grosly mistaken in his Astrologie: But this his error, is, meerly in the rules of Art, which is no way excusable: for whatsoever I de∣livered, was rightly grounded upon Art: and I duly cited my Au∣thors for it, for the Readers better satisfaction, which I conceive sufficient for any Artist, whether the event be answerable or not: For as it is not enough for an Artist to content himselfe alone with the Rules and Observations of his Predecessors, but that he ought to adde something of his owne, whereby to propagate the Lear∣ning which he studies: No more is it lawfull for any man to de∣lude the world with the foolishnesse of his owne deluded fancy, and idle conceptions alone, as both Master Lilly and Booker have frequently done, without any Reason given, or Authority quoted for their Opinions. As for the mistake (I will not say malice) of that Practicioner in the Mathematiques, M. Henry Harflete, in his Vox coelorum, or Predictions defended, &c. who in the 49. page of that Booke, doth wrongfully intimate (to my disparagement) as if I should say, that a Fixed Star might properly be said to be Aspected with any Pla∣net: I must tell him, that accusation of his is very untrue: and whether it proceeded from his misguided and inconiderate zeale to Master Lilly, or out of any disaffection to me, deserves a gentle lash, in that I am most certaine, he cannot produce any such assertion of mine, either in word or writing. It is true, that Master Lilly taxed me for saying that Mars was in a Sextile Aspect with Caput Draconis, in my Almanack 1645. which was an error of the Presse: (the Character of Caput Draconis being mistaken for the Character of Leo, as I have sufficiently proved in my Answer to M. Lilly, printed with my Prognostication for 1647.) but that I ever mentioned any Fixed Star to be aspected by any Planet, in that, or any other of my Writings, (unlesse M. Harflete will say that the Dragons head is a fixed star) is both frivolous and false: And therefore I shall desire that Criticall Gentleman to examine the words of my Prognostication for that yeere, and my aforesaid Answers to M. Lilly's Objections, and I presume he will shew me so much civility as to revoke that his unadvised censure, and excuse me of ignorance in that particular: And yet I could have stopped
Master Lilly's mouth with these words of Leapoldus, Tract. 5. de annorum revolutionibus, viz. Mali aspectus ad Caud. Drac. signi∣ficant famem, frigus, & pestilentiam. Nor is this Author an Ʋto∣pian, or single in that expression: But I am of a different opinion, and therefore shall not insist longer on these trivialties, which are fitter for M. Booker to instruct his daughterA child of his so named in memory of the victory neare Yorke. Victoria in, then to be thought on by men of riper judgements. But to returne to the matter in hand: I shall requite John Booker with a more honest & accurate examination of some speciall passages in his Bloody Irish Almanack, whereupon he raises this fond and false judgement of his, and so proceed. The first I meete with, is, the first of his Observations, Pag. 36. where he saith, That Saturne and Mars are Culminating with that Fatall Starre Caput Algol, or the head of Medusa, &c. This (Jack) is both an improper, and a False expression of yours. For any man may see, that (in the precedent Scheme) the Con∣junction of Saturne and Mars happens neare the end of the 4. House of the Heavens, from the Ascendent; In imo coeli, the lowest part, or bottome of Heaven: Now (Sir) how any Planet or Star in this part of the Heavens, can be said properly to be in Culmine coeli, in the top, or highest part of Heaven in respect of Dublin in Ireland, is farre beyound my reading, and requires Iohn Bookers further explication: For my part, I cannot devise, how he can avoid or excuse this improper Phrase of his, unlesse he tell me, The Worlds turned up-side-downe, and in that sense he chokes me, and I am bound to credit him, and cry him mercy. It is most false, contradicting a Generall received Rule of Astro∣logers, because you instance the proximitie of Saturne and Mars to Caput Algol (in the word With) to annexe a Debilitie more, to each of them, then really they have: For, and so farre are they from that Fixed and violent Starre, that it is not to be accompted for any Dbilitie by the opinion of any Astrologer that ever I read, they being above 7. degrees distant from it: for Saturn and Mars (as before we noted) are in 14. degrees 27. min. And (according to Copernicus) Caput Algol is in 21. degr. 39. m. of Taurus, which is 7. degr. and 13. min. difference: And according to Origanus, Pag. 540. Garcaeus Pag. 249. Pezelius Pag. 48. And all other Astrologers both antient and Moderne, the Planets are never truly said to be debilitated by Caput Algol, unlesse they be Intra
distantiam quinque graduum A. vel P. which you see these planets are not. The next thing I shall desire the indifferent Reader to take no∣tice of, is, his owne Scheme of this Conjunction, and in it the Cuspe of the 5. house, as he hath made it; and you may observe that Sa∣turne and Mars, are but 2. degrees 33. min. distant from the same: Yet yeverthelesse in the 37. page of his Pamphlet, he taketh his judgement from the 4. House, which is contrary to Origanus, and divers other Authors, and to M. Lilly likewise, who allow 5. deg. preceding, and 5. deg. subsequent for the Cuspe of each House: ac∣cording to which Rule, he ought to have given judgement from the 5. House, and not from the 4. You remember (Jack) how M. Lilly spit his venome at me, in the 35. page of his Anglicus for 1645. for giving judgement of Iupiters being in the 4. and Mars in the 6. (according to the opinion of Rhemetius) when they were within lesse then 5. deg. of the Cuspes of the 5. and 7. House. Now, I wonder much, how you dare dissent from your loving friend M. Lilly, especially in this particular, consider∣ing what you said in your last page of your Epistle to the Reader, viz. That M. Lilly and you have the same principles in Art, and that your judgements in the generall will have answerable successe. And, that M. Lilly may see, it is no mistake in you, but meere opi∣nion, let him peruse your Prog. for this yeere 1646. and in the Spring-Quarter he shall find you giving judgement upon Mer∣cury's being in the 10. House; when in M. Lilly's owne Scheme (erected for the same Latitude, Meridian, and moment of time) he wanteth but 2. deg. and 9. min. of the 11. House. And now (lack) doe you think M. Lilly will not shake his head at you, for this grosse contradiction? would he have thought it possible that his fellow-champion (in State-Astrologie) Iohn Booker, would have contradicted him, and joyned in opinion with those two Malignants, Naworth and Wharton at Oxford? O tempora, O mores! I cannot pretermit another of his errors in the same Quar∣ter and page of his Prog. where he sayes that Iupiter is free from all impediments, save onely his Detriment: And yet Iupiter is there both Pergrine, and Occidentall of the Sunne. I wonder (M. Lilly) that you will suffer this Ideot in Astrologie, to professe himselfe joynt-purchaser with you, in your Principles, that hath not yet lear∣ned the A. B. C. of Astronomy.
But have your judgements answerable successe? I will examine that also. If M. Lilly had handled the Scheme of this Conjunction, or if you (Iack) had followed his Principles, it is evident by what I have said, that the judgement should have been deduced from the 5. house and not from the 4. which (according to Haly, Part. 8. c. 7.) would have afforded thus much for the Irish. viz. Si quando Saturnus fuerit in domo quinta fortunatus significat quod homines gaudebunt suis filiis, & quod senes multoum dierum, & praepositi villarum habebunt bonum & utilitatem, ex parte altertus gentis, & ex parte filiorum. Which is (in effect) That when Saturne shall be fortunate in the 5. house, he signifieth, that men shall rejoyce in their Children; And that Aged men, and Head-Officers (or Ma∣gistrates) of Townes shall reap much good and commoditie by the helpe of another nation, and by meanes of their Children. And this is the judgement which should have beene given upon that position, if you had followed M. Lilly's Principles. Here (by the way) I beseech the indifferent Reader to take no∣tice of Bookers inveterate hatred and malice to the distressed King∣dome of Ireland: For, as he neither will, nor dare speak or write one jot of truth, which may seeme any whit fatall to the States: so he is fully resolved to smother all things that tend to the good and safety of Ireland. For, if he had taken his judgement from the 5. House (as Master Lilly will acknowledge he ought to have done) he must of neces∣sity have delivered us the precedent judgement; but that, he con∣ceived to be too good for that Kingdome: For (thought Iohn Booker) that Aphorisme sayes, they shal take pleasure in their chil∣dren, and intimates much joy and assistance to them: as though some Nation were resolved to come in to their help, and engage in the War against the States: which I must not mention; for by that meanes, I may disanimate the States-Soldiers, which are to be sent thither, if they should perceive Ireland to be so powerfull: And on the other side, I should encourage Ireland to pursue their designe with greater Policy, Courage and Resolution. No, No, the thing which I am to endeavour, is to tumble out Victory upon Victory to the States, and make mention of nothing but utter ru∣ine, desolation, and confusion to that barbarous Nation, And as∣sure such of the Brethren as have contributed towards the maa∣gerie
of the Godly and blessed Warre against Ireland, shall have Land by the Belly: And therefore, though it be never so repugnant to my Rules, He rather take my judgement from the unfortunate position of Saturne in the fourth house; and so I shall have matter enough, and meet for the purpose: For, Saturnus in quarta demo, & ibi malificus significat quodres, & adificia cadent, minuentur plantati∣ones, & abscindentur aquae, &c. He there signifieth, that Houses and Buildings shall fall, come to decay and perish, planting or set∣ting shall be diminished, waters cut off, the people shall be lessen∣ed, or abated, there shall be poverty to them, and the people of that Country shall be obsessed, or besieged, they shall not dare to goe out of their Towne, (Cities, Castles, or Countries) by reason of the fear they shall have of their enemies: and this shall be more certaine, if the 4. house shall be a fixed signe, and the hurt (dammage) or losse shall be more strong or durable. And this is the scope of Bookers businesse, and agrees verbatim with the sense of the House. And he further saith, this (last) Aphorisme agrees exactly with the position of the Maglignant Planet Saturne in every respect: Which is an apparent falsehood: For the Aphorisme takes no place, unlesse Saturne were virtually in the Fourth house, which he is not according to M. Lillys principles in this figure of his; Or if he were, yet is it not in force, except (likewise) that Saturne were found infortunate in the fourth house: Neither of which he is, by his Position in Bookers figure, for (as I have formerly demonstrated) Saturne is the strongest save one, of all the Planets in the figure, having fifteene testimonies of strength, whereby he is very much fortified and powerfull. Now the genuine signification of Saturnes being Locally, virtu∣ally and fortunately placed in the 4. house, (as he now is in the Fi∣gure, which I have exactly corrected) according to the opinion of Haly Part. 8. c. 7. is this, Si quando Saturnus fuerit quarta dmo, & fuerit potens, significat aedificare, et propagare agriculturam, & quod homines hoc diligent, & de eo multm erunt soliciti: that is, when Saturn shall be in the fourth House, and strong, (or powerfull) he signifieth that men shall betake themselves to building of houses, & tillge, (or husbandry) and that they shall be much in love there∣with, and very carefull thereof: And moreover Haly tells us, Part. 8. Cap 25. Quando Mars junctus fuerit cum Saturn, struet quili∣bet
alteri fraudes, & deceptiones, & erunt inter homines percussiones, & vulnera, maxime si fuerit in signo humaeno, &c. In briefe, both Haly, Guido, Messahalah, and all other sound Astrologers tell us, that this meeting of the two Malevolents, hath signification of Warres, Contentions, and strifes, fraudulent dealing, &c. And that there shall be much banging and slashing amongst men, espe∣cially if the Conjunction happen in a humane sign (humane signes Gemini, Libra, Virgo, Aquarius, and the first halfe of Sagittari) that the King shall receive hinderance and trouble, by meanes of some person, that is of the Country, or Nation subject to the sign, wherein the Conjunction happeneth. This I say, and no other, is the true signification of this Conjun∣ction in the fourth house, and all men know, that a great part there∣of hath already been fulfilled in that oppressed Kingdome of Ire∣land, since the Conjunction happened: and much more will be there yet manifested: But what, shall it therefore follow, that the Wars there, must inevitably ruine and destroy that bleeding Nation? That they (of all People) must become a prey, and prize to the Blood-thirsty, and be utterly extirpated? Truly, and verily, and sincerely, and forsooth Iack, I speak like a Brother, Sir, the Heavens display no such Banner: For I beseech you recollect your selfe but a little, and upon examination you shall find, that the benigne Planet, Venus, disposth of this Conjunction; that she is Lady of the Figure, and likewise corporally there present: Vincunt enim semper plura testimonia, sive boni venturi, sive maliilla fuerint in Predictionibus Astrologicis. Moreover Mars, who is Lord of the tenth House, (which is the house that hath signification of Kings, Emperors, Princes, Generals of Armies, Governours of Cities, Castles, and Townes, and all other Commanders, &c.) is exceeding strong, and powerfull, being very much assisted by the comfortable Beames of the benigne and bountifull Planets Iupiter, and Venus; and the Moon, (who naturally hath signification of the Commonalty) is in mutuall reception with Mars: But the As∣cendent and his Lord have principall signification of the People: Nota, quod ascndens, & Luna, & domini eorum sunt significatores Populi. Haly, Pag. 380. The Sign Sagittary ascends, and Iupi∣ter Lord thereof, is in Cancer, the place of his Exaltation, very strong, beholding the Conjunctionall Degree, with a Sextile Aspect: Mars likewise disposeth of the place of the Moon, and a great part
of the Ascendant, having there the dignities of Exaltation and terme, in the intercepted Sign Capricorn. These severall Positions and configurations, being carefully weighed, induce me to believe, that the Kingdome of Ireland, shall never suffer that misery and ruine, which Booker (out of his gall) doth threaten them with: It is very true, that much strife, cotten∣tion, quarrelling, and bloud-shed is portended unto them by this meeting of Saturn and Mars, and wee know they have tasted of it already, and some body else have been sharers with them: But I tell you (Jack) it hath been, and is still likely (for the most part) to be with much advantage to the Catholique party: they will gain, and then you know (Jack) who must lose: The Figure tels me, that their Nobility, and prime Commanders, shall be very pru∣dent, powerfull, and prosperous in their actions: That they shall u∣nanimously accord to repell the enemy, and worke their own Freedom: That the People, (signified by the Ascendent (which is here free and safe from the Malevolents) and Iupiter Lord thereof, and the Moon) shall voluntarily, and freely assist, and contribute to the main∣tenance of the War: That thereby they shall be much impoverished in their estates, for the Dragons taile afflicts the house of Substance, & the Moon is approaching (though slowly) to opposition with the Conjunctionall-degree: Yet there is a Prohibition, for shee comes first to the Trine of Iupiter, which will abate much of the evill threatned by her infortunate Positure: And it is evident, that they shall have liberty and leisure to raise themselves Houses, to till their ground, sow and reape, maugre all their enemies malice, power, and Plots: in truth, (if any thing may be termed good that is gotten by the Sword) this Conjunction hath signification of much good general∣ly to befall that Kingdome by meanes of this Warre: I confesse it would have been more terrible to them, if it had been in a humane Sign, which now it is not: For Taurus is a Bestiall-Sign, it may do harme to their Oxen and Sheep. Et multiplicatur mors in muli∣ribus, & vincet cholera super eas: There shall be many falshoods and terrible rumours spread abroad; the waters shall be increased, but not cut off, as Booker tells us: It fore-shewes the death of ma∣ny excellent and eminent persons; that the inferior sort shall be somewhat oppressed and undervalued: That Women shall wax impudent and alacious: That Horses shall be deare: And there shall be a great destruction of Fruits and Trees, through the abundance
of hete: This is the  Albumasar: But I see not any rea∣son why they should  much pestered, either with Famine, or the Plague, only  & Mars in Turo, infirmabuntur mu∣lieres in , & viri in testiculis, & vesica. Aid they have  in abundance from Forraign parts, whereby their  not been frustrated, as Iohn Booker divineth, pag. interposition of those friendly beames of the Sun, and , doth promise much more unto them; You see Jack, they in Cancer, the Ascendant of Scotland: You would think strange, if Ireland should have cause to thanke Scotland for some such thing: And I dare averre upon good grounds of Art, that there is some such thing intended by the Heavens: I have some reasons for this my conjecture, which you M. Iohn Booker, cannot apprehend, or judge of. But I know no reason why you should subject the Kingdome of Ireland, to the ill influence of Saturn, more then any other Nation that is under the division of Taurus, Scorpio, Aquarius, and Lev: for we know, Helvetia, Cyclades Islands, Russia, Asia, Cyprus the lesser, Media, Parthia, a great part of Sweadland, Lorign, Cam∣pania, Rhetia, Franconia, Persia, and many more Kingdomes, and particular townes and Cities are in the same division, and as much, or rather more concerned then Ireland: All that can be truly said, is only, that Ireland is like to participate with the rest of the King∣domes, &c. before mentioned, in the influence of this Conjucti∣on, whether it be for good or evill. For you to say, that in regard of the horrid murthers that have been there committed upon the Protestants of that Kingdome, it is likelyest to undergo the divine justice of God, more then the rest; it is no Astrologicall reason, nor (for ought you know) may some of the other Kingdomes before named, be lesse guilty of the same sinnes then Ireland: or deserve a lesse share of the ill influence of this Conjunction: I pray Iack, let you and I suspend our judge∣ments from intermedling, much more determining, things of that nature. It is more proper for Divines then Astrologers. That which we ought to doe,  to containe our selves within the limits of nature: and it is questionable whether the English, Irish or Scots, have been the Authors of that Barbarisme, and bloud-shed you mention: For he that will lay aside passion, and private inte∣rest, and rightly consider the reall and radicall causes of the Irish in∣surrection,
may find others besides the Irish, as much, if not more guilty of the bloud of those many thousands of Christians, which hath been shed since the beginning of that bloody Warre. But this is Wormwood to an Orange Scarfs and Feather: Yet for their better satisfaction, I would advise them to peruse that mo∣derate and judicious Philaerenus, Mercurius Hybernicale, and there they shall have the naked truth clearely and impartially related: I have been intimate with many of that Nation of severall qualities, yet could I never discover any more inherent cruelty or Barbarisme in them, then in our selves, but for the most part,  them to be men of singular good education, and naturally averse to all inhu∣manity. The truth is, they hate to live in bondage, or to have their consciences enforced: and indeed, the setling religion by bloodshed, is none of the best State-policies: Such Divines as have tongues to their consciences will tell you so: or ought I know, every mans Re∣ligion ought to be dearer to him then his life, & I know no reason why the Irish may not challenge as much freedome and priviledge in the enjoyment of their Religion, as is allowed the Independants, Anabaptists, Brownists, and at the least a hundred more Sects, and Schismes, within the Lines of Communication: who have liberty without any restraint or limitation, to exercise their Gifts, (as they terme it) both publiquely and privately: To preach and write what they please, and even to cloy the Presse with their Heresies, and Schismes. And if wee looke back upon the originall ground of the Irish in∣surrection; was it not high time (thinke you) for the Irish (after they were denyed any reasonable answer to their Propositions, which were sent and delivered in an humble and peaceable manner to the Parliament, by Commissioners of that Kingdome, who were dismissed hence without any hopes of having their grievances redressed, which (notwithstanding) were farre greater, and more intollerable, then those which the Scots pretended: when they clearely perceived so many pernicious Plots, & damnable designes dayly inventing against them, and with what Acrimony the Roman Catholiques here were proceeded against after the third of Novem∣ber 1640. After so much swearing and forswearing to take off the Earle of Strafords head: And the Parliament electing a new Deputy of their own mould, & mettal, to be sent over in his stead: And his Majesties Person in continuall hazard, by the frequent tu∣mults
of the Sectarists, and Schismatiques: was it not time (I say) their Nation being thus neglected, and threatned, (his Majesties Person being not exempt from danger) and all this occasioned by their own fellow Subjects) to associate and unite themselves: and to stand upon their guard, for the preservation of their Religion, Lives and liberties? And was it more Rebellion in them, by the known Lawes of this or that Land, to raise Forces for the necessary defence of their Kingdome: then in the English, or Scots, to raise so many great Armies, that have fought against his Majesty under the pretence of fighting for him: whilst yet there hath been no body to oppose him, but themselves? I remember a few verses that were written (by some body) Anno 1641. they resemble the forme of a Petition, directed to his Majesty, by the considerate Catholiques of Ireland: they are pretty ones, and therefore I will here give you them, as I had them from a friend. MOst gracious Soveraigne, grant that we may have Our ancient Land and Faith: 'tis all we crave. Your English, and your Scots, (not so content) Claime all that's Yours, by Act of Parliament. Their Tyrannie we hate: confesse your right: 'Tis not 'gainst you, 'tis against them we fight. Whilst you were King, we were your Subjects: scorne, To be their Slaves: we're Fellow-Subjects borne. Heavens blesse your Majestie, encrease your Powers: You being your Selfe againe, we still are Yours. But to returne againe to John Booker, (for I will not lose him yet) I would gladly demand a Reason from him in Art, for his menacing of France, or Spaine, with vengeance for assisting the Irish: or why the Pope should come in any danger of hazarding his Triple-Crowne in the Quarrell: unlesse the States intend to advance for Italy: If they doe, they may doe well to transmit the Directory to Rome, as the pre-cursor of a new Reformation there: but I am afraid Sir Thomas his courage will coole at the conceipt. Nor is it pertinent to the handling of this Conjunction, for Booker to tell us an old story of the Spanish Armade in 88. or of the Gun∣powder Treason 1605. The wickednesse of those Devilish at∣tempts
are both thought on, and abhorred by every true English Christian. Or of what concernment is the Decollation of Mary, Queene of Scots, Anno 1587. to the Kingdome of Ireland, because that when she was beheaded, Saturne was in Taurus, as now he is? Or of Saturne and Mars their being conjoyned in the yeere 1588. a little before the Spanish Armado appeared upon the En∣glish Coast? Does not John Booker here most wretchedly con∣found himselfe? Instead of going about to prove Saturnes pro∣gresse through Taurus ominous to Ireland, he contrarily produces examples, which prove that Position dangerous to England and Scotland. For (what ever his meaning be) he instances not any one thing hurtfull to Ireland in either of those yeeres: And then he robs Sir Christopher Heydon of more then a whole Page, con∣cerning the generall Occurrences in the world, which happened in 88. without any mention made of that most learned and judicious Knight. And so he proceeds (to fill up the remainder of his mali∣cious Pamphlet) with railing at the Irish, telling them, how they have ever been most rebellious and treacherous to the English Na∣tion, and have most barbarously and inhumanely murthered many thousand soules, &c. But we know of another Kingdome that hath sometimes been more rebellious and treacherous then they, for lesse cause. But I never heard of any Soules that ever either of them murthered. I speak not this to justifie or maintaine any in∣humane action in Ireland, or elsewhere, (for my nature abhors all manner of cruelty to the worst of men; I think I could not harme either M. Lilly or Iohn Booker in word or deed, if I had them in my power, but rather use them with all civill respect and curtesie, if they were worse then they be) nor to countenance Treason and Rebellion: that I need not, it hath been sufficiently done by a far greater power. But the thing I aime at, is, to unmaske Bookers in∣veterate hatred to that distressed Nation; who if he were but halfe so charitable, as he is either unreasonable, or ignorant, he would not attempt to Assassine the Honour of a whole Nation, with his invectives, but rather suspend these his rash censures, and wish a happy union, then the confusion of so many Christians. The remainder of his Pamphlet tends to the defence of Astro∣logis, (wherein he still playes the thiefe with Sir Chr: Heydon) and of the Planet Venus her appearance in the day time, at the birth
of our most hopefull Prince Charles, which he saith (if she presig∣nifieth any thing) was the miseries of this Kingdome: Because (saith he) it is usuall, and an ordinary thing, for Venus to be seene in the day time. I grant him, that it is both usuall, and ordinary; but not alwayes at the birth of Princes. It is both usuall and ordi∣nary for Saturne and Mars to be in Conjunction, and shall wee therefore say it presignifies nothing? I confesse I have not seene any Authors that handle such Appearances, nor hath Booker any o∣ther Authority, then his foolish Phancy, for saying she was the Prodromus of these unhappy differences in England: But he that shall make inspection into the Positure of the Heavens, when Ve∣nus was in Apog. Eccentrici, or in her greatest distance from the Sun, shall finde matter more then ordinary, whereon to fixe his Contemplations. And I am of opinion, that her glorious appea∣rance at the Nativity of our hopefull Prince Charles, did presigni∣fie things (not yet thought upon) that may ere long amaze the un∣just usurpers of his Royall Fathers Birth-right. But no more of that, this yere. I will not trouble my selfe much longer with this malicious fellowes errors and impertinencies, nor with his scurrilous lan∣guage belch'd out against an Irish Gentleman, who writ an Alma∣nack Printed at Waterford in Ireland. I never saw the Book, and therefore I cannot judge of any thing in it, nor admit of any such thing as Booker pretends to have corrected him in. For I have it from good hands, that the Gentleman is so knowing a Scholar, that it is incredible he should be guilty of such grosse errors, as Boo∣ker hath charged him with. And you have seen how able a man Booker is to correct any body: But were I that Manapian he speaks of, I would reward him with another Scheme for the future Oppo∣sition of the same Planets, which happens upon the 21. day of October 1647. at halfe an houre past 6. a clock in the morning, Saturne being then in 0. deg. 27. min. of Gemini, (the Ascendent of London) and Mars in 0. deg. 27. min. of Sagit▪ as appeareth by the Figure, which I have calculated exactly for the Meridian of Lon∣don, because it will much concerne the South and West parts of England, and that in a higher measure then the Conjunction (be∣fore treated of) doth the Kingdome of Ireland.
See the Scheme▪ et abente Anno. 1647. Octobr. 20 Hor. min. sec. 18 4 18 Post meridiem. Latitud. 51. 32 And untill the time of this Opposition, doe the effects of the Conjunction vigorously extend themselves, and then they have lasted 496. dayes, which wants but 8. dayes of a yeare and an half, ater which time the effects of this Opposition shall begin and force∣ably operate, untill their next Conjunction, which will happen a∣gaine upon the 28. day of June, 1643. in the 11. deg. of Gemini, which will be very ominous to some parts of England, and espe∣cially the City of London: for I cannot say, the effects of the Oppo∣sition
shall cease, when the Mathematicall circuit of their Conjun∣ction finishes, because that next Conjunction doth likewise happen in the Signe Gemini, wherein Saturne is at the time of his Opposition to Mars, which will not much differ in signification: Although it be a received Truth, that the effects of the Opposition of these two Planets doe commonly work more violently and quick. Nam dia∣metrae radiationes (quemadmodum & Tetragonismi) mortes repen∣tinas, & violentas mutationes faciunt, congressus vero generalia ac∣cidentia. And Haly (the Arabian) in his 8. Part. Cap. 6. saith, Quod Oppositio Saturni & Martis, est deterior eorum conjuncti∣one, & deteriores, ac maligniores significationes demonstrant: And indeed this is very malitious, in that they are both unhappily affect∣ted and afflicted, Saturne being infortunate, and Mars out of all his Essentiall-Dignities, and otherwise but meanely fortified: Haec oppositio significat quod homines in se invicem discordabunt, & prosequentur se mutuo odio; & cessabunt se familiariter invisere, & detrahet quilibet alteri. Haly Part. 8. cap. 25. This Opposition signifieth that Men shall wrangle one with another, and shall prose∣quute themselves mutually with hatred: And they shall forbeare to visite one another familiarly: And every one shall back-bite, or speak evill of another. It further praemonstrates great Pestilence and Mortalitie, especi∣ally amongst Old men: many Thefts and Roberies, much deceitfull dealing: and that (generally) men shall betray their Trust. That many unjust and unreasonable Taxes shall be imposed, under severall specious pretences, to the undoing of many: Farre worse then that of Shippe-money: I have taken the paines to set Booker the Scheme rightly for London: and if he doe not too much play the Foole, or the Knave, he needs must exceedingly terrifie the people, subject to the Signe Gemini: wherein Saturne is at the time of this Op∣position, in the 8. House, (the House of Death) and Venus who is Lady of the 8. House, is with the Moone in the latter end of the 2. House, where likewise Mars afflicteth. The 4. deg. of Leo cul∣minates: Jupiter is in the latter end of the 10. House: But Saturn and Mars doe strongly besiege him: he is miserably afflicted by their hatefull square: and is also in his Detriment. Looke now to your selves you of the Presbyterian-Cut: the people are weary of your extemporary non-sence: You Iudges, Officers, and Magi∣strates, who have betrayed or forsaken your Master, and perver∣ted
the Law to serve your owne wills, expect to render an accompt of your actions. I unfainedly protest, you are all strongly threat∣ned. From the Sunne and Mercury expect your comfort, or none: They cast a friendly Sextile to Iupiter, and they are free from the Malevolents, though in the most viperous Signe of the Zodiaque. The Sunne nere represents his Majesty of England as being both Lord of the 10. house, and naturall Significator of Kings. Mer∣cury, as he is with the Sun, hath signification of the Masters of the Houses of Princes, and great Lords, and their Secretaries and Ste∣wards. And they are both (if not only) Angular in the Figure. This promises well to His Majesty and his Servants▪ and not one jot of ill to Ireland. By this time a Man may call a Spade, a Spade. Let me see the face of him dare call the Queenes Majesty a Trai∣tor. But the States have voted her so, for her Love so exemplarily shewed to the King her Husband: Is there not one Lord, nor Ten Commoners yet ashamed of it? Yes, some Blush, others are bold, and impudent, some stupidly Senselesse, others wrangling away their lives by strange and Noisome diseases, some are threatned by Prodigious Births, (and those too of their owne begetting:) And what not to render a People palpably accursed, miserably and fully wretched? Ireland now demands a reason for the—Ordnance of the 24 of October 1644. And askes if you'll buy any Land there? Scot∣land tells you, they have as great an Interest in the King as Eng∣land, and will in some of the Lands, too if you will needs.— In a word, wee all looke back, and say, Lord▪ what have wee done, and been a doing, for 7. yeares? Some make question, whe∣ther they be awake, or in a dreame: All men are at a stand, yet still in Action▪ The besotted Crew do quake and murmure, say little, but think mischievously. Furorna , an rapit vis acrior? An culpa? Responsum . Tacent: & or a pallor albus infcit: Mentes{que} perculsa stupent. Doth fury blind? or greater power command? Is sin the cause? Oh let me understand. They silent are: their checkes are paler made, And feares their horror-strucken minds invade. But it is the Conjunction of Saturne and Mars upon the 28. of
Iune, 1648. (before mentioned) will be assuredly fatall to Lon∣don, and many other places of England: I pray God avert the judgements thereby threatned, and incline the hearts of his Maje∣sties Subjects; that as they are (or ought to be) all Christians, so to be of one mind, and cordially to unite in obedience to God, and loyalty to him, their Pious Soveraign. I have set the Scheme here that (in case Iohn Booker have occasion to write of it) he may have it exactly done, ready to his hand, for the Meridian of London, and publish it, without feare of further correction. Thema Coelicum eoc tabulis Directionum. Regiomontani ad tempus. Apparens ☌ ♄ et ♂ die Mercurij, Junij 28 1648 Hor. min. Sec▪ 1 58 7 Latitud. P. M 51 32.
You see Sir, the Regall Signe Leo culminates, the Sun, who is Lord thereof, and Venus and Mercury are in the ninth house of the Figure, and Iupiter possesseth the mid-heaven. The Conjunction happens in the eleventh deg. and eight min. of Gemini, (the As∣cen. of London) and in the eight house, which is the house of death, labours, sadnes, and heritage of dead men: and Mars is Lord of the Ascend. for the 3. deg. and 29. min. of Scorpio ascends at the time of this meeting: And he likewise disposeth of the second House, where the Dragons taile also miserably afflicteth: I shall leave the judgement to Iohn Booker: only I shall tell him thus much, that I thinke the Cavaliers will (by this time) challenge a better e∣steem from the City of London, then now they dare, and perhaps enjoy their own without Composition. I shall say no more, but conclude with an Application of that pertinent and pious complaint of the Acquitaines, (occasioned upon the Deposing of King Richard the second) to the present condition of this wretched Kingdome. O good God! Where is the world become? Saints are turned to Serpents, and Doves into Devils: The English Nation which hath been accompted fierce, only against their Foes, and alwaies faithfull to their Friends, are now become both fierce and faithlesse against their lawfull and loving Prince, and have most barbarously betrayed him. Who would ever have thought that Christians, that civill People, that any men would thus have violated all Religion, all Lawes, and all honest and civill demeanor? And although the Heavens blush at the view, and the earth sweats at the burthen of so vile a villany, and all men proclaime, and exclaime upon shame and confusion against them; yet they neither feel the horror, nor shrinke at the shame, nor feare the revenge; but stand upon termes, some of defence for the lawfulnes of their dealing, and some of excuse for the necessity. Well, let them be able to blind the world, and to resist mans revenge; yet shal they never be able to escape either the fight, or vengeance of Almighty God, which wee dayly expect, and earnestly desire to be powred upon them: Alas good King Charles, thy nature was too gentle, and thy government too mild for so stiffe and stubborne a People: what King will ever repose any trust in such unnaturall-Subjects, but fetter them with Lawes, as Theeves are with Irons? What carriage hereafter
can recover their credit? What time will be sufficient to blot out this blemish? What other action could they have done, more joyfull to their enemies, more wofull to their friends, and more shamefull to themselves? O corruption of times▪ O conditions of men! Hor. lib. 1. Ode 3▪ 5. Eheu, cicatricum, & sceleri pudet, Fratrum{que} Quid nos dura refugimus Aetas? quid itactum nefasti Linquimus? unde manus juventus Metu Deorum continuit? quibus Pepercit ar?— FINIS.
