E3620 99886875 181381
An Exact and True RELATION OF The Landing of Her MAJESTIE at Portsmouth, after many high Tempests, and a long Distresse at Sea; and how She was diligently and magnifi∣cently met with in the way by His Highness the Duke of York, the Duke of Ormond, the Earl of Suffolk, the Earl of Chesterfield, and many other Personages of Honour: As also, the most pom∣pous and solemn Joys expressed at Her Landing at Portsmouth, by a great confluence of the Flower of the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, in which (on the first Report of Her Arrival) the City of London sympathized on Thursday May 15.  TOGETHER WITH A perfect Account of Her Happy and most Auspicious MARIAGE to His most Sacred MAJESTY, on Wednesday May 21. by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London; As also of their Removal from thence to His Majesties Royal Mannor of Hampton Court, on Thursday May 29. which Day, was the Star-crown'd Birth-day of His MAJESTY. THE Queens Approach no sooner fill'd our Ears, But we were all strait turn'd Geographers; We vex'd the Maps to give us an Account Of Scillyes Island, and Saint Michael's Mount; We every Inch examin'd, every Joynt, Searching from Dartmouth to Saint Ellen's Poynt; And all the Coasts of th' Isle of Wight being seen, We look'd for Portsmouth, and there found our QƲEEN. See where She rides, Her Beauties do adorn, The Light, which from then uncontrolled flyes, Dazles the Sun to look upon Her Eyes; There need no Knots of Ribbons in Her Hair, The laughing Stars in knots are radiant there. No sooner shipp'd for ENGLAND She set saile, But Neptune sent forth a Tempestuous Gale, When loe Her Beauties charm'd the Winds loud rage, Calm'd the Wilde Waves, and did the Sea asswage; At which loud Triton did his suit prefer To entertain him for Her Trumpeter, And many a Meremaid did attend upon Her, And humbly begg'd to be Her Mayds of Honour; The Dolphins neer Her shoal'd, and with their Train Swept the Salt Deep, and cut the Foaming Main; So great the Tumult, one might well suppose From Love, not Rage the late great Tempest rose; The Waves t' enjoy Her sight could not forbear To leap into the Element of Air, The Air, to bear so fair a Burden, fain Would change its place and nature with the Main, Whilst Winds (that struggled who should most have crown'd Her. So sinn'd by Zeal, that they almost had drown'd Her. Landed at last; Saint Michael's Mount must be The onely place, where happy Destinie Decreed, that first this Princesse should be found To plant Her foot upon the English Ground; here of Time some respite being spent In Gratulation, and in Complement, To give a short Refreshment, and to ease Her Body, weary of the churlish Seas, The Frigots put to Sea, and did convey This Matchless Princess unto Portsmouth Bay; Here as along the English Coasts they work, She was incountred by the Duke of York, And Chesterfields, and Suffolks Earls, with whom A gallant Train of Gentlemen did come: Heere the Sea grew more milde, and all the way Now seem'd as gentle, and as smooth as they, The Winds so friendly, and the Seas so tame, From th' Isle of Wight She unto Portsmouth came; Now Bonsires warm the Air, Healths drench the Earth, Portsmouth the Center, and the Stage of Mirth; Some use their Tongues, and speak their Mirth in Fancies, Others their Feet, and tread their Joys in Dances; All things do smile, and do conspire outright To mingle Royal Greatnesse with Delight: The Moneth is May, and the dress'd Spring doth stand In all her Pride to welcome Her to Land; Heere Youth and Love do Pomp and Honour greet, And Peace and Safety walk in every Street; And Heav'n, the more his Blessings to unfold, Doth haile down Pearls, and rains down riguous Gold. This was the Place where first His MAIESTIE His Matchlesse Spouse Queen KATHARINE did see; For though 'twas Cornwall to the QƲEEN did bring The happy sight of ENGLAND, yet the KING (But when Her Picture did present the same) Ne'r saw His QƲEEN till She to Portsmouth came. T' express the State and Glory of this Day, When eyes did eyes, and souls did souls survey, When Nobles strove who should exceed each other, And Pomp, and Joy, to conquer one another, Would be too large a Subject to ingage The narrow Compass of so short a Page. From hence these Royal Consorts did transfer Their Sacred Persons unto Winchester; Here they are are new united, by a blest And solemn Marriage; here the KING possest Earth pure as Heav'n, and stain'd with no Alloy, Braganzaes Glory, and Terrezaes Joy. From these United Loves, may the Flames rise Pure, and Unwaving, till they touch the Skies: May they new Blessings to this Land invite, And fill the World with their Ʋnited Light; May their Loves be a Sacrifice t'attone Their Peoples Rage, and make their Hearts but one; May the Church flourish in her Truth and Train, And be as White as Innocence again; May those who scorn'd us in our late Distresse, Now fear, and wonder at our Happiness; Whiles every Street resounds, and every Green, GOD Save the KING, GOD long preserve our QUEEN. London, Printed for C. Wildeberh at the Globe in St. Katharines, and John Ruddiard at the Unicorn in Cornhill, under the Royal Exchange. 1662.
