I116 52612180 179474
IN MEMORY OF That Faithful DISCIPLE OF THE LORD WILLIAM MECHO, OR, the substance of his Legacy to his Friends the Lord's Day before he sickned Who fell asleep in the Lord the 13 of the 8th Month 1676. Printed, Anno Domini 1677.
In memory of that faithful Disciple of the Lord, WILLIAM MECHO, Or, the substance of his Legacy to his Friends, &c. ALL Sions Members should be friends in trustPs. 30.4. To keep up some remembrance of the Just, The Lord so order, and direct my heart, That in his Wisdom I may have a part. This gracious Soul that now attends upon the King of Kings in his Imperial Throne:Jam. 1.17. As if he knew his Travels here to be Near their full period, left this Legacie, To his surviving friends, which here I do Impart (though weakly) Reader, unto you. Upon the Lords day ere he sickned,2 Pet. 3.18. he Pres'd that our graces should enliv'ned be;Rev. 3.2. And those things strengthened,Num. 25.4 that are like to die, That Gods just anger might be turned away. To Watchfulness he strongly did exhort,Mat. 24.44. Least by surprize the Lord should cut us short; And then to such as have Backsliders been,Rev. 16.15 Shew'd their damn'd state,Pro. 14.4. if grace steps not between To work Repentance,Hos. 14.4. that sin-healing Grace That in the Gospel has so high a place2 Cor. 7.9.10. Then as that one thing needful,Luke 10.42. did discry A Walk well pleasing to th' All seeing eye,Hab. 2.4.
In Faith, Sincerity and Holyness,Rom. 3.28. The threefold Path that leads to happiness:Rom. 14.23. Without the first, no man can please the Lord As he hath told us in his Holy Word;Josh. 24.14. And holiness bespeaks a reall Saint, Whose high profession's substance, and not paint;1 Cor. 1.12 Sincerity, a pleasing lustre casts,Psal. 93.5. Its sweet unblemish'd beauty never wasts;Heb. 12.14 It seasons duty, and supplys the wantsHeb. 11.6. Of many taking outward Ornaments:Mat. 6.30. Then on the other side he did express, The dread of being contrary to these, As, Faithless, Formal, Hypocritical, Which from the Lord for heavy Vengeance call; For Ʋnbelief's the great condemning SinHeb. 3.19. That barrs a soul from Heaven, and tumbles in Millions of Spirits to a Hell of horror To feel the Wrath of God in endless terror: Therefore he that in Christ will have a share, Must of that dreadful sin have special care, Hypocrisy, though of a specious hew, Yet tis as plain, and naked to the view,Pro. 15.3 And notice of the highest Majesty As are the Sunbeams to a seeing eye, Therefore though some dissemble to their cost, Yet all their labour to deceive is lost: How then are we concern'd to try our hearts, Least this sad plague infect our better parts! Formality's the Alamode in fashion; The Lord assist us to make preparation To 'scape the Judgments that the Lord will reach To such prosaners of his name; that teach Men empty forms of Godlyness, but want The power of Faith, the blessed'st Ornament.2 Tim. 3.15. About an hour before he yielded up His breath, and longing with his Christ to sup; He with great Courage striv'd to enter at The narrow Portals of the straiter Gate; Courting th' attention of his Auditory To sing forth Praises to their Makers glory;Psal. 10.4.
That when Rebellious,1 Cor. 15.22. Sinful Man had lost His Makers Image, and no other Cost Could re-instamp it, but the bloud o' th' Lamb; He in the form of a poor Sinner came,Phil. 2.7. To clear Believers from that horrid guilt, And cleanse his Creatures from a Sink of filth; The glorious working of Regeneration,Tit. 3.5. He told us must be th' only preparation To fit us Mortals for Divine Communion, With God in Christ through the blest Spirits Ʋnion, He told us that for blessed ends our GodIsa. 48.10. Makes us acquainted with afflictions Rod; The Staff of his support he found alwaysPsal. 23.4. Afforded matter for his Saviours praise. For his Relations both in flesh and spirit, He pray'd that they those graces should inherit, Which Christ bestows upon the faithful soul That leaves himself, and will on Mercy role. He saw his Sins before him largely spread,Isai 55.7. Yet all in Christ bloud freely pardoned.Micah 7.18. He with great fervour did beholders call, To be joyn'd to the Body mystical; For though some bones seem to be out of Joynt, Christ has a saving vertue to anoynt,1 John 2.27. Till they are sound. He said none could endure Unto the end,Jer. 8.22. unless their standing's sure Upon the Rock of Ages,Mat. 7.24, 25, 26, 27. Winds will toss All other bottoms with a dismal loss. Nothing but that, (and that) will surely save, If we an Interest int's Attonement have; He did exhort us to amend our pace, And not to loyter in our Christian race;Heb. 12.1. For times a sliding Talent,Eph. 5.16. and grim Death, We know not when will take away this breath That's now so lavisht.1 Cor. 15.55, 56. O the sting of horror! That doth attend this mighty King of terror But if it once be took away, the same Is onely sleeping by another name. Now you that hear these weighty dying words And savour what this Legacy affords, That shape your Journey through the path of grace, Till you converse with Jesus face to face.
In real hearty sense with me lament The mis-improvement of a talent lent; O that our hearts were seasoned, that we may Do all our work whilst it is call'd to day. His love was universal, could he find The smallest symptons of an honest mind; He truly follows in his steps, that hath His love in special for the house of faith; And makes Relation unto Christ the rule Of his affection unto every soul; And not the sameness of Opinion, He was for healing, not division: A pow'rful Wrestler Jacob-like in prayer,Gen. 32.26 For Sions breaches, and its quick repair: A divine savour did adorn his speech,Eph. 4.29. Ministring grace unto the persons, which Took councel with him. Oh how few are found Like him! But Christ is healing for the wound: He is the great repairer of our breaches, And Soul-Physitian, that can healing teach us. EPITAPH. Here lyes a holy man intomb'd in dust, Ʋntil the Resurrection of the Just. His love was dear to Christ, and's Interest; His soul's gone hence, but to be further blest.
A DIALOGUE Ʋpon this Occasion BETWIXT SENSE and FAITH. Sense. O That my head were waters, and mine eyesJer. 9.1. A Well of tears to weep his Obsequies;Pao. 10.7. His dear remembrance calls for some arrears,2 Sam. 6.26. Which must be paid him in a flood of tears; Where love is mutual and of equal force, 'Tis cutting grief to 'feel a quick Divorce. Faith. Forbear mistaken Sense,Mat. 10.28. thy fruitless crys Bespeak impatience; 'tis but Flesh that dyes His active Spirit is advanc'd, you know He is but gone where you must quickly goe.2 Sam. 12.23. Pale death's the portal, that lets into Glory, Our Writ of Ease from all things transitory. Sense. He is but gone; that soul dividing word Begets more terror then the sharpest sword, I dy by halves, why did not deaths arrest As well as his, reach my tormented brest? 'Tis but the rage of unappeased Hosts, To tear insunder our expiring Ghosts. Faith. These exclamations, this thy fond desire, Is passion drest in passionate attire! His work was done; thou art not ripe for Heaven, Thy longer space is for Repentance given,Rev. 2.21. Thou may'st be quickly lifeless, 'tis Gods grace To take the fit, and leave th' unfit a space.
Sense. If gasping Sion must endure such rubs, When Cedars fall, what will become of Shrubs? Or if successive blows our strength must break, How shall our walls be manned by the weak? If men of prayers must thus cut off be, Sion will loose its best Artillery, Faith. Can Sion fear, or overthrow, or harm,Psal. 136.12. When great Jehovahs strong out-streched Arm Becomes its Bulwark? can we fear a wantDeut. 4.34 Of leaders, when Gods so by Covenant?Deut. 11.2 Although our Lord doth home some servants call,Exod. 6.7. He still supplys us, and is All in All.Ex. 19.5. Sense. Ah! but how often do our sins provoke The Lord in judgment to repeat his stroke! Who can but shake in storms? can it be hop'd The Church can stand, when it is thus unpropt? Ah how my troubled Soul's amaz'd to think That fainting Sion will like Peter, sink.Mat. 14.30. Faith. All must once die, the Prophets have you seeHeb. 9.27. No pattent for their immortality;Zach. 1.5. When they've done that for which they hither came,Mat. 3.9. God can of stones raise sons for Abraham;Mat. 14.31. When Peter sinks, Christ is at hand to heave him And by his promise he will never leave him.Luke 22.32. Sense. Gods hand is heavy, and his Anger's sore. His frowns are deadly, and his strokes much more, Such mortal visitations have a voice, To make friends mourn, and enemies rejoyce, What temper's so well set, but will be soon (As broken strings make musick) out of tune? Faith. As tender parents exercise the rod,Heb. 12.6. Not to destroy, but to reform, so God1 John 3.1. Is pleased to manage his rebukes, he hath1 John 4.8. Full show'rs of love, as well as drops of wrath▪Rev. 3.9. Gracious effects he gives of seeming crosses,Mat. 10.39. A future purchase by our present losses,
Sense. Mine eyes must vent my grief upon his Herse, He weeps in earnest, that does weep in verse: When Jonathan was slain,2 Sam. 6.26. a Royal eye In doleful accents wept his Elegy. So must I take like priviledge to mourn In Ink, as well as Tears, upon his Urn. Faith. The time consum'd in fruitless crys was lent Not for such wast, but to be better spent. If thou wilt murmur' when the Lord do's strike, The Rod provok'd may treat thee with the like. In Faith and Patience wait, times almost come T' Exchange this frail, for an eternal home. What needs this grief? if God will take his due, I will not murmur, as some mourners do. Lord he was thine, and to the earth but lent, Let none repine, if for your own you sent; If't be severe t'extinguish such a light, Ah! 'twas our sin procur'd it, for we might Make more of mercies which are sent for gain. Men when full fed have little sence of pain: Eternal Parent, mollifie our doom, Correct thy Children, but do not consume: How blacks the cloud that menaces a shower! O shelter Sion by thy mighty power. That so protected we may sing always David-like Hallelujahs to thy praise. FINIS.
