H675 99887402 182111
The Happy Shepheard: OR; The Young Gallants Courtship to his Coy Lady: To a pleasant New Tune, Sung in the last New OPERA. Licensed according  Order. HOw blest are Shepherds, how happy their Lasses, while Drums and Trumpets are sounding Allarms; Over our lowly Sheds all the storm passes, and when we dye, 'tis in each others Arms: All the Day on our Herds and Flocks employing, All the Night on our Flutes, and in enjoying. (2) Bright Nymphs of Brittain, with graces attended, let not your Days without pleasure expire; Honour's but empty, when your youth is ended, all Men will praise you, but none will desire: Let not Youth flie away without contenting, Age will come time enough for your repenting. (3) In shady Bowers and tender Embraces, fairest Aurelia her Swain does enjoy; Although with Beauty the Valleys she graces, yet she disdains to be froward and coy: Thus they the heighth of all Joys are possessing, Neither denying each other the blessing. (4) This is no more than a true Lovers duty, to quench those passionate flames when they burn, Both Kings and Princes are Conquer'd by Beauty, no private Armour Love's Arrows can turn: Since Charms has such irresistable power, Ladies, O do not your true Loves devour. (5) Tho' Youth and Beauty like Blossoms are blooming, and Goddess-like you appear on the Stage; Like fading-Flowers those Charms are consuming, which hastens on the cold Winter of Age: In time admire Loves innocent pleasure, Lest at the length you repent it at leisure. (6) Are not young Ladies for Men to admire, and that they freely are to be enjoy'd? Then be not cruel, but grant my desire, let not thy languishing Love be destroy'd: Like a true Lover I dearly adore thee, And for one smile could here fall down before thee. (7) oth State and Triumph sweet Saint, shall attend thee, like a Court-Lady of Fame and Renown; And while rich Presents, as Tokens, I send thee, thy head young Cupid with Garlands shall Crown: No kind of sorrow or grief shall annoy thee, Both Crowns and Scepters I'd leave to enjoy thee. Printed for C. Bates, at the White Hart in West-Smitfield.
royal blazon or coat of arms W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT The Powder of Simpathy, Prepared at Florence by Dominico Gratiano, Grician. THIS most excellent Powder stancheth all manner of Bleeding, present, and at a distance, by applying the least Grain of it upon the Blood, taken in a clean Handkerchief or Rag, it stops it immediately, though it bleeds never so fast, let the Accident be what it will, a Vein cut, or a cut with a Sword, Knife. Axe, thrust with a Rapier, Bleeding at the Nose, Bloody-Flux, or bleeding in∣wardly, and Women after Child bearing, or any other excess of Bleeding whatsoever: Take five or six drops of the Blood in a piece of clean Cloth, put a little of the Powder on it, then put up the Cloth in a warm decent place, it stops it to Admiration; and if the Blood is brought a far off, and it is dried up coming so far, warm a little Water, and moisten the Blood on the Cloth, then apply the Powder, it stops it, if it comes 40, or 50, or 100 Miles off; and not only stops Bleeding, but also, if it be a Wound, or Cut, it takes away the Pain, and cures the Wound without Plai∣ster. Them that are troubled with the Tooth-ch, bleed your Gums two or three drops in a clean Rag, and apply the Powder, it takes away the Pain immediately. He has also another most Admirable Powder for Women in La∣bour, that causeth a speedy and safe Delivery. The Powder of Simpathy is Sealed up in Boxes, and Papers, with the Eagle and Child. 2. s. 6 d. the Box, and 1 s. the Paper. He has also all sorts of Medicines for all Curable Diseases, if you please to come to his Chamber. He Lodges at the Sign of the  in  street.
