j1115 99893562 182241
The Jovial Companions, OR, THE Three Merry TRAVELLORS, Who paid their shot where ever they came without ever a Stiver of Money. To an Excellent North-Country-Tune. THere was three Travellers, Travellers three, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, And they wou'd go Travel the North Country, without ever a stiver of Mony. They Travelled East, and they Travelled West, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, Where ever they came still they drank of the best, without ever a stiver of Mony. At length by good fortune they came to an Inn; with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, And they were as Merry as e're they had been, Without ever a stiver of Mony. A Jolly young Widdow did smilling appear, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, who drest them a Banquet of delicate cheer, without ever a stiver of Mony. Both Chickens and sparrow grass she did provide, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, You'r Welcome kind Gentlemen, welcome (she cry'd) without ever a stiver of Mony. They called for liquor, both Beer, Ale, and Wine, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derrie, And every thing that was curious and fine, without ever a stiver of Mony. They drank to their Hostess a merry full bowl, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, she pledg'd them in love like a generous Soul, Without ever a stiver of Mony. The Hostess, her Maid, and Cousin all three, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, They Kist and was merry, as merry cou'd be, Without ever a stiver of Mony. full Bottles and Glasses replenisht the Board with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, No Liquors was wanting the house cou'd afford without ever a stiver of Mony. When they had been Merry good part of the day, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, They called their Hostess to know what's to pay, without ever a stiver of Mony. There's Thirty good shilling, and Six pence, (she cry'd) with a hye down, ho down lanktre down derry, They told her that she should be soon satisfy'd, Without ever a Stiver of Mony. The Handsomest Man of the three up he got, With a hye down, ho down, lanktre down derry, He laid her on her Back, and paid her the shot, without ever a stiver of Mony. The middlemost Man to her Cousin he went, with a hye down, ho down lanktre down derry, She being handsome, he gave her Content, without ever a stiver of Mony. The last Man of all he took up with the Maid, with a hye down, ho down, lanktre down derry, And thus the whole shot it was Lovingly paid, without ever a stiver of Mony. The Hostess, the Cousin, and Servant, we find, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, made Courchies, and thankt them for being so kind, Without ever a stiver of Mony. The Hostess said, welcome kind Gentlemen all, with a hye down, ho down, lanktre down derry, If you chance to come this way be pleased to Call, Without ever a stiver of Mony Then taking their Leaves they went merrily out, with a hye down, ho down, Lanktre down derry, And they'r gone for to Travel the Nation about, without ever a stiver of Mony. FINIS. Licensed according to Order. Printed for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible in Pye-Corner.
