j674 99887720 183379
Ienny, Ienny; Or, The false-hearted Knight, And Kind-hearted Lass. e wooed fair Jenny, but he would not be wed, He only sued to get her Maiden-head, Which having got, he did poor Jenny slight, And left her like a false disloyal Knight, Now she that was in hopes to be a Lady, Hath time enough to sing ba low my baby. To a New Scotch Tune: Or; Jenny, Jenny, &c. THere was a Lass in our Town, and she was wondrous fair, There was a Knight of high renown, and he was wondrous rare; 'Tis for the love of thee I dye, Jenny, Jenny, 'Tis for the love of thee I dye Jenny, Jenny. 'Tis pitty that a Knight so gay, should dy for the love of me, I had rather lose my life to day, then such a thing should be. Then gang along with me, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny, Then gang along with me, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny. What would my Daddy and Mammy say if I with thee should ben, That sure I was run away with whom I did not ken. Pish, lay all shè blame upon my back, Jenny, Jenny, Lig all the blame upon my back, Jenny, Jenny. But what if I should prove with Child, as it perhaps may be, Then you must provide a Nursing bower, for your young son and me. Then down to yonder Green-wood go, Jenny, quoth he, Then down to yonder Green-wood go, Jenny, Jenny. ANd down in yonder green-wood, I ken it well of old, Where I shall sustain enough of both hunger and of cold. Then lig the Trees upon the fire, Jenny, quoth he, Then lig the Trees upon the fire. Jenny, Jenny. Now you have had your will of me, and brought me unto shame, If I do beg some boons of ye, say not I am too blame: Well fare thy bonny brow, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny, Now tell what thou wouldst have of me: Jenny, Jenny. May't please your kind courtesie to gang under yonders town, May't please your kind courtesie to buy me a Silken Gown. Mend the old one for a new, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny, Mend the old for a new, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny. May't please you of, kind courtesie to gang into yonder Fare, May't please your kind courtesie, to buy me an ambling Mare. Ride on thy Spinning-wheel, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny, Ride on thy Spinning-wheel, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny. I pray you will not angry be whilst I beg one small Boon, May't please your kind courtesie to buy me a pair of Shoon. Let him that rides thee next, shooe thee qd. he. Jenny, Jenny, For thou shalt ne'r be shod by me, Jenny, Jenny. Once more I beg your kind courtesie, to gang to yonders Leek, And there do so much for me as buy me a seeing Kit. Kit even in the Well, quoth he, Jenny, Jenny, For there thy beauty thou mayst see, Jenny, Jenny. By this young Lasses all may learn how they do yield to love, And not to trust deluding men, that will false hearted prove. Had Jenny kept her Maiden-head, she might a liv'd free, But now I do lament the case of Jenny, Jenny.
