L1971A 99885037 182877
SPectators, make a Ring, that you may see The fatal Battle which is like to be Fought by two pow'rfull Combatants: One's nam'd GALLU for Courage generally fam'd; Yet not so Valiant as he'ld have men think, But has (what makes men Valiant) store of Chinck. T' other is CAPO call'd, who doth supply His want of Courage by his Policy: By plotting and contriving he subsists, And does with Brains what tother would with Fists; Works under-hand, and goes to undermine: Both in their several wayes in Battle joyn. GALLUS doth strut, and clap his wings and crow, While CAPO laughs at that vain noise and show: What the great Quarrel is, must not be known, But is reserv'd till one be overthrown: Both make great preparations for a Fight, nd he that Conquers, all believe has Right. APO has been well cram'd, and liv'd in State, nd was become a mighty Potentate; wo Keyes to open and to shut he bears, nd no his head a Triple Crown he wears; nd had a mind to Rule the World, as though ll men were govern'd by meer pomp and show. GALLUS repines at this; Must I (sayes he) ear but one Crown, while he droops under three? is Keyes may make a noise, and keep a stir ong easie souls, but he has ne're a Spur: le spoile his Pageantry, and make him know, hat since he cannot Fight, he shall not Crow. But now GERMANUS comes to interpose, Thinking the Quarrel would prove dangerous; And while those two do to Contention fall, Their strife might prove the ruine of them all; Both being so powerfull, 'tis hardly known Which side may prove most safe for him to own; Mean time the MAHUMETAN Cook stands by With sharpned Semiter, and watchfull eye; Let them fight on (sayes he) so both will be, By their intestine War a Feast for me: This is my time to feed and thrive, when they Contend so fiercely which shall be my prey. This makes good Gelly, t' other's tender meat; When both drop in one dish, who would not eat? Their Quarrel is for Humour and Opinion, But my design is Riches and Dominion; While both to be Victorions do aspire, I use their sparks to set the World on fire. The CONCLƲSION. WHen Peace and Plenty make men proud, and they Aspire to Rule, whose part is to Obey: When each man has a Heresie of's own, And most pretend Religion, but use none: When Laws are boldly broke, and Love that binds Men more then Laws, is fled from peoples minds: Then must destruction on that Nation come, And MAHUMET give Laws to CHRISTENDOME. l' Autheur. CHers spectateurs approchez Et ce combat regardez: Ou le cocq saute de furie De quoi le chapon se rie; C' est pourquoi il vaudra mieux, De les accorder tous deux. A Le Chapon Romain. Le chapon Romain voyant, Le cocq ainsi l'estancant. Au combat pour resister Hardise va preparer, Et excite sa chaleur Pour demonstrer sa valeur. Mais ie crains que son effort Ne le gradera de mort, Car le cocq de grand rudesse, e pourchassera sans cesse, De ses ailles le frappant Et de son bec tres picquant. B Le Cocq Francoys. Le cocq fort animé d'ire, Contre le chapon se vire, Pour lui fair sentir a Pheur Les effects de sa fureur: Et ses ergots il aiguise Pour finit son entreprise. Car il fait tout son effort, Pour bien tost le metree a mort. Deses ailles il debat, Pour l'eschauffer au combat, Et levant sa crest' il lance Ses ergots dedans sa Panse. C Le Mediateur. Messieurs qui de vous Poura, Die ce qu'il en adviendra Veu qu'ils sont si eschauffez, Entierement animez: Ils se perdroyent bien tout deux, C'est pourquoi il vaudra mieux Que tost y remediant, On aille les accordant. Ce coup nous seroit fatal; Et nous touche en general, Car leur perte accablera Tout, & a rien nous rendra. D Le cuisinier. Mais voici le cuisinier, Regardant ce combat fier, Qui met la main aux cousteaux, Pour leur faire sentier des maux, Car si le cocq vehement, Suit le chapon ardement, Bien tost il l'aterrera, Ou en suite le mettra, Puis ce cuisinier rusé, Le voyant si bien graislé De ses mains le ravira Si le bon Dieu n'empeschera: Les Poets ont beau de feindre Des trois Furies, & les depeindre Ayants les cheveux de vipere, Et allumants le feu de guerre; Voicy la Megere veritable, Un boute feu plus effroyable, Ce Turc vray Prince des Tenebres Jettant sur nous flames funebres, S'en va offrir a Mahomet Son Dieu d' Enfer & faux Prophet Un holocaust de Germanie Et puis de toute la Chrestienté. O la chose digne de pitié Qu'il Pere d' Eglise & Fils aisneé, En fin tous deux, le Pape & Roy, A l'Infidel viendront en proy! Gentle Readers and Spectators of this Combat, MY design is not to amuse my self, or be so bold at to tax the Actions of these two Great Perso∣nages, but only by this Emblem to let you see what that Learned Carthusian Fryer JOHN LICH TEN∣BERG, in his Magical predicti∣on, hath left in writing above two hundred years agoe, wherein be speaks of a certain Prince in the Field of the Flower de Luce, that be should be the Greatest Monarch in EUROPE. LONDON Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Henry Brome at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1663. Imprimatur, Jan. 21. 1663. Roger L'estrange.
