M2990 99884363 183066
The Mournful SUBJECTS OR, The whole Nations Lamentation, from the Highest to the Lowest: Who did, with brinish Tears, (the true signs of Sorrow) bewail the Death of their most Graci∣ous Soveraign King, Charles the Second; who departed this Life Feb. 6th. 1684. And was interr'd in Westminster-Abby, in King Henry the Seventh's Chappel, on Saturday Night last, be∣ing the 14th. day of the said Month; To the sollid grief and sorrow of all his loving Sub∣jects. To the Tune of, Troy Town; Or, The Dutchess of Suffolk. TRrue Subjects mourn, & well they may, of each degree, both Lords and Earls; Which did behold that Dismal Day, the Death of Princely Pious Charles: Some thousand weeping Tears did fall, At his most sollid FUNERAL. He was a Prince of Clemency, whose Love and Mercy did abound, His Death may well lamented be, through all the Nations Aeurope round: Unto the Ears of Christian Kings, His Death unwelcome Tydings brings. All those that ever thought him ill, and did disturb hi in his Reign, Let Horrour now their Conscience fill, and strive such actions to refrain: For sure they know not what they do, The time will come when they shall rue. Now often Villains did design by Cruelty, his Blood to spill, Yet by the Providence Divine, God would not let them have their will; But did preserve our Gracious King, Under the shaddow of his Wing. He griev'd his Soul while he was here, when we wou'd not his Laws obey, Therefore the Lord he was severe, and took our Gracious Prince away: We was not worthy to enjoy The Prince whom Subjects would annoy. In peace he did lay down his Head, the Scepter and the Royal Crown, His Soul is now to Heaven fled, above the reach of Mortal frown: Where joy and Glory will not cease, In presence with the King of Peace. Alas! we had our Liberty, he never sought for to devour, By a Vsurping Tyranny, to Rule up Arbitrary Power: No, no, in all his blessed Reign, We had no cause for to Complain. Let Mourners now lament the loss of him that did the Scepter sway, And look upon it as a Cross, that he from us is snatcht away: Though he is free from Care and Woe, Yet we cannot forget him so. But since it was thy blessed Will, to call him from a sinful Land, O let us all be thankful still, that it was done by thine own hand: No pitch of Honour can be free From Death's Usurping Tyranny. The Fourteen day of February, they did Interr our Gracious Charles His Funeral Solemnity, accompanied with Lords and Earls: Four Dukes, I, and Prince George by Name, VVent next the KING, with all his Train. And thus they to the Abby went, to lay him in his silent Tomb, Where many inward Sighs was spent, to think upon their dismal Doom: VVhole showers of Tears afresh there fell, VVhen they beheld his last farewel. Since it is so that all must dye, and must before our God appear, O let us have a watchful eye, over our Conversation here: That like Great Charles our King and Friend, VVe all may have a happy end. Let England by their Loyalty, repair the Breach which they did make And let us all Vnited be, to Gracious lames, for Charles his sake: And let there be no more Discord, But Love the King, and fear the Lord. FINIS. Printed for J. Deacon, in Guilt-spur-street.
