N486B R3622 52614802 175987
THE Letters Patents OF THE States-General, (Translated out of DUTCH) GRANTED TO William Walcot, Esq Upon their Seeing the Demonstrations of his ART of Making Sea-Water Fresh, &c. And Putrified-Water Wholesome. THE States General of the United Netherlands, To all that shall see these Presents, or hear the same to be read, Greeting. We do make known, That we Received the Humble Petition to us presented, in the Name, and on the behalf of William Walcot; purporting that he the Petitioner, by the Use of his own Industry had found out a New Invention, not only to make Foul Stinking Water useful to be Drank, but also and principally Salt or Brackish Water come∣ing out of the Sea, to make Sweet and Fresh in a short time, in great quantities, for all Ships, in long Voyages at Sea; upon Reasonable Termes; and to Make and Use the same as occasion shall be in Cities, Legers and Ships, or elsewhere, where no Fresh Water is to be had, and where Annoyed with Brackish or Stinking Water, for the Ease and Sustenance of all Men, as well by Land, as upon the Water, upon any occasion whatsoever: For the finding out of which Invention, the Petitioner had been at great Expence, and that therefore he ought to en∣joy he Benefit thereof: And that he the Petitioner was informed that
some Ill Designing Persons were endeavouring to Imitate his said Inven∣tion, and so to draw the Benefit from him. He thereupon desiring our Octroy or Patent, and we having taken the same into our Consideration, and finding our selves inclined to the Prayer of the Petitioner, Have Consented, Agreed, and Granted unto him; and by these Presents do Consent, Agree, and Grant unto him, that he only,  of all ers, Make, Practise, let at Work, and Use, and also Sell the said New Invention for the Term of Fifteen Years now next Ensuing, in these Ʋnited Netherlands, Associated Countreys, Cities, and Mem∣bers thereof, for making Stinking Waters useful to be Drank, and Salt, or Brackish Water Sweet and Fresh: And we therefore Prohibit all, and every the Inhabitants of the aforesaid Ʋnited Netherlands, Asso∣ciated Countreys, Cities, and Members thereof, within the said Space of Fifteen Years next Ensuing, the said New Invention in part, or in whole, either great or small, to Imitate, or cause to be Imitated; or being Imitated, to Import, Sell, or Use the same, under forfeiture of all the Imitated Works and Instruments: And moreover, of the Sum of Three Thousand Carolus Gilders; One Third Part thereof to go to the Officer who shall Inform, another Third Part to the Use of the Poor, and the remaining Third Part to the Use of the Petitioner; Ordering and Commanding all Officers, Justices, Magistrates, and Inhabitants of the aforesaid Countreys, and all others whom it may Concern: that they permit and suffer the said Petitioner to Enjoy and have the full Effect of this our Octroy, Consent, and Priviledge, any Let or Oppo∣sition to the contrary, notwithstanding. He the Petitioner being never∣theless bound by this our Octroy, to Desire, and also Obtain an Octroy from such Province or Provinces, where he shall Practice, and set at Work his aforesaid New Invention. Given at the Hague under the Seal of the State, and the Firm of the Lord presiding in our Assembly, and the Hand of our Secre∣tary, the 16th. of Septemb. 1684. By the Command of the aforesaid Lords States General. L. S. Francis Verbolt. H. Fagell. This Agrees in Substance with the Original, London, the 17th. of January, 1692. WILLIAM SCOREY, Not.
THE Letters Patents OF THE States of Holland, (Translated out of DUTCH) GRANTED TO William Walcot, Esq Upon their Seeing the Demonstrations of his ART of Making Sea-Water Fresh, &c. And Putrified-Water Wholesome. THE States of Holland and West-Friezeland do make known, That Whereas William Walcot, Esq hath shewed unto Us, That he, Petitioner, by Long Study, and Unwearied Labour, and very great Charge in making Instruments for Tryal of Experiments, hath perfectly Attained the so long sought for Art of Making of all Impure, Stinking, as also Salt and Brackish Water, Sweet, Fresh, and Wholesome for the Service and Support of all Men, by great Quantities in a Short Time, and with small Charge; the Clear Proof whereof the Petitioner had shewn in part to the Lords Deputies out of the Assembly of Their High and Mightinesses, and likewise to seve∣ral of Our Assembly: But the further Serviceableness and Benefit, he will make more clearly appear, when the same shall be brought under the Protection of our Grant (with Exclusion of all other Gain-seeking Men) for a General Use both by Sea and Land. The Petitioner humbly requests that We would please to take into Consideration the Resolution of
their High and Mightinesses, Dated the 11th of March, 1684. Exhibi∣ted unto us, taken upon a Request of the Petitioner delivered to their High and Mightinesses, therein Offering, That if his Adversary Mr. Fitz-Gerald, with his Adherents, could in all things Out-do, and better Manage and Work the Petitioners Invention than the Petitioner, they might then obtain a Free Grant; and the Petitioner, notwithstanding the Great Charges he hath been at, would be content to depart without Speaking of a Conjunction, or Asking a Grant. And forasmuch as it did very Clearly Appear to their High and Mightinesses, and to di∣vers of Our Assembly, by the Petitioners Grant from the King of England, Dated the 28th. of October, 1675, That the Petitioner was the True In∣ventor, and the first who had given Right Demonstration thereof; and that his Opponents could as yet do no otherwise, than what in times of Necessity many Years past had been done in Ships, but was never Approved for Good or Wholesome Water; In pursuance whereof, the Petitioner desires the Benefit of the above-mentioned Resolution: Also the Allowing of Two Grants for one and the same Invention, was a thing contrary to the General Custom of Nations, and would hinder the Practice of Art, as appear'd in England, and at once discourage the Petitioner to put forward in the same; for then his Opponents making themselves Masters thereof, would quickly Vaunt it over all the World, (of which the Petitioner hath already had some effect) and thrust the Petitioner thereout; they as is now clearly manifest had not the Art to make Salt-Water, standing, Foul and Stinking Water Wholesome, or to do more or otherwise than any Ordinary Distiller, who might altoge∣ther pretend to as much Right to a Grant as his Opponents: The Peti∣tioner most humbly Requested, that we would please to observe that the whole Regard and Design of his Opponents appears here to be as they have done in England, to hinder the Petitioners pat Design of putting in Practice his Laudable Invention, (a Matter of so great Esteem and Ser∣viceableness for the Whole World) and to force him to a Complyance, whereby the Fruits of the Petitioners Study, Cost, and Labour might be brought to them, as they had Endeavoured to do in England, by Great Expences of Money, and Powerful Interest of Friends; against which the Petitioner did not use such Means, but submitted his Case to the Justice and High Wisdom of Our Famous Assembly, on which it now depends to keep alive this Serviceable Secret, that it may be made Pra∣cticable in the World. The Premisses being considered, the Petitioner most humbly prayed, That We would please to bestow on him a Grant, Prohibiting all others directly or indirectly, by Sea or by Land, to Serve themselves therewith, and that for so many Years as has been Granted by Us to other Finders out of Inventions of great Weight. Now, So it is, That We having Consider'd the aforesaid Case and Request; and being Inclined at the Petitioners Prayers, (after having taken the Judg∣ment and Advice of the Lords Deputies of the City of Dort, and others by Us Appointed for Sea-Affairs and Manufactures) Have of Our Right Knowledge, Soveraign Power and Authority, Consented, Agreed and Granted, We do Consent, Agree, and Grant unto the Pe∣titioner by these presents, That he, during the Time of Fifteen Years next following, with his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, his said Inven∣tion of making Foul, Stinking, and Salt-Water Sweet and Good, as well by Sea as on Land, within our said Countreys, Only shall and may Make and Use, and Cause to be Made, Used, and Practised. Forbid∣ding therefore all and every Person to make Use of his said Invention, and Works, Directly or Indirectly, at Sea or on Land, or to Imitate the
same, or the same being Counterfeited, to bring or Sell the same in Our said Countreys, upon Forfeiture of the Imitated Works, and a Fine of Fifteen Hundred Gilders to be Forfeited over and above, to be Ap∣plyed, One Third Part to the Informer, One Third Part to the Poor of the Place where it shall happen, and the Remaining Third Part to the Petitioner, his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns. And to the End, the Petitioner may Enjoy this Our Consent and Grant, as he ought; We Charge all and every, Whom it may Concern, that they may Permit and Suffer the Petitioner peaceably, quietly, and fully to Use and Enjoy what is here contained, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Done at the Hague under Our Great Seal here Appending, the Fourteenth of September, in the Year of Our Lord and Saviour, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Eighty Four. Gasp. Fagel. By Ordinance of the States, Simon Van Beaumont. It Agreeth in Substance with the Original: Which I Testifie, London, 16th. January, 1692. WILLIAM WIGHTMAN, Not.
THE Letters Patents OF THE States of Zeeland, (Translated out of DUTCH) GRANTED TO William Walcot, Esq For the Encouragement of his ART of Making Sea-Water Fresh, &c. And Putrified-Water Wholesome. THE States of the Land and Earldom of Zeeland, do make known, That we having seen the Octroy Granted by the High and Mighty Lords, States General of the Ʋnited Netherlands, and of the Lords States of Holland and Frieze∣land, to William Walcot, Esq for the Space of Fifteen Years, all Salt, Brackish, and Stinking Water, Fresh, Clear, Sweet, and Sound, to make; but chiefly Salt and Brackish Water coming out of the Sea, in a short Time, and great Quantities, for all Ships in long Voyages at Sea, upon Reasonable Terms, to make Sweet and Fresh Water; and as occasion shall serve to cause the same to be made for, and used in Cities, Legers, and Ships, or elsewhere, where no Fresh-Water can be obtained, and where Annoyed with Salt, Brackish, or Stinking Water, for the Ease and Support of all Persons, as well by Land, as upon the Water, upon any Occasion whatsoever; for the finding out of which Invention, great Charges had been Expended, so that of Right he ought to Enjoy the Benefit thereof; but the Petitioner being Informed that
some Ill Designing Persons Endeavoured to Imitate his aforesaid Inven∣tion, and so to deprive him of the Benefit of the same; He therefore desired Our Octroy: Which having consider'd, So it is, That we finding our selves inclinable to the Prayer of the aforesaid Petitioner, have Con∣sented, Agreed, and Granted unto him; and do Consent, Agree, and Grant, by these Presents, That he Only, with Exclusion of all others, for the Space of Fifteen Years next Ensuing, in this Province, the afore∣said New Invention of Making Stincking-Water fit to be Drank, and Salt or Brackish, Sweet and Fresh Water, may Make, Exercise, Set at Work, and Use; also Sell, and Dispose of the same. Forbidding all and every the Inhabitants within the aforesaid time of Fifteen Years, next Ensuing, the said New Invention, in Whole, or in Part, Great, or Small, to Imitate, or cause to be Imitated, or Used; or Imitated else∣where; to be Brought, Sold, or Used in this Province, under Forfeiture of all the Imitated Works and Instruments. And moreover, the Sum of Fifteen Hundred Gilders; One Third to go to the Officer who shall Inform, One Third to the Poor of the Place where the Matter shall hap∣pen, and the remaining Third Part to the Petitioner. We Charging and Commanding all, and every one, whom it may Concern, That they Permit and Suffer the Petitioner, Peaceably, Quietly, and Entirely, to Enjoy and Use the Contents of this Our Octroy, all Impediments to the contrary notwithstanding. With a Hanging Seal. Thus done at the Court of Zeeland, at Middlebrough, the 30th. of April, 1685. By Command of the aforesaid Lords States. V. Verheye. This Agrees in Substance with the Original, London, the 17th. of January, 1692/3. WILLIAM SCOREY, Not.
