p3666c 99887979 183653
A PROPER NEW BALLAD, Being the Regrate of a true Lover, for his Mistriss Unkindnesse. To a new Tune, I'le ever love the more. I WIsh I were those Groves, dear heart. which could thy hands inshrine; Then should no sorrow grief nor smart, molest this heart of mine: But since the Fates doth this deny, which leaves me to deplore, My dribling eyes shall never dry, until thou love me more. But O that I might shrouded be within  armis or thine, And that my soul might say of thee, that thou were freely mine: I would, then doubtlesse still ade, And so in spight of Fate I should, essay to love thee more. I shall defy that mortal Wight, enjoy thee woe will, Then I to soar an hger flight in love, or mount me till: But since to one I must resigne, thee quite and give thee o're, I'le love him, for that face of thine, which made me love thee more, Nay sure same sacred Angel haunts, within that heart of thine, Whose secret power any soul enchants, which from thy eyes do shine: But O that I could thee inflame, I  him implore, That so by reason of the same, thou yet might love me more. But happie is thy servent sure, that sure a love enjoies, Whose smiles does all disasters cure, whose frowns breeds all annoies: As Phebus breaking through the cloud, gives heat and light in store, So when thou doth thine eyes unshrude, they make me love thee more. I wish were a Hauk to sour within the skie of love, And that thou metamorphos'd were into a turtle Dove: There would I catch thee with delight, with pleasure plum ther o're, And , should n eath our flight, attempt to love thee more. Thy face is as a heaven which holds two shining suns of love, The which thine eye-lids clouds infold, in ivorie Orbs they move: Their absence makes me like to die, their presence burns me sore, So still in these extreams I lie, and yet must love thee more. To longe betwixt these ivorie hills, which in thy bosom dwells, From whence the sugred nectar trils in sweetness that excels: There would I surfeit with delight, my self, and ne're give o're, Till love should so our sauls unite, as ay to love thee more. I like the Salamander am, that in the fire remains, And not consumed with the flame, I live in pleasant pains: O that these bodies were to act, as free as minds to soare, Then surelie I at length would make my Lasse to love me more. Since of the days desires our dreams, the true ideas are, I wish that of mine eyes the beams in sleep inclosed were: That slumbring I might thee possess, whom daylie I adore, For waking I scare scarce transgress, and yet must love thee more. But yet if thou would condescend unto my dear request. And suffer me my health to spend, upon thy candid breast; Then surelie I▪ or ever let, imperiouslie would soare, s praising thee at highest rate, and so would love thee more. Some comfort unto those belong, who common lovers be, Since they upon surmise of wrong, can set their fancie free: But should I die by thy disdain, which others would abhore, My pure affection shall unstain'd, aspire to love thee more. Then let not black ingratitude, so dear a Saint disgrace, For it would taint the finest blood, and stain the fairest face: Since thou mayest love, and yet be chast, and still behind have store, Then slight not him, who doth attest the gods, he'l love thee more. FINIS. DIAPHANTAS Words to CARIDORA upon a Disaster. THe swettest saint incenc'd may be. and for a moment mov'd, To wrath by some disaster hie, against her best belov'd: But let it be, I were thy foe; as first I'le lose this breath, Thou shouldst not suffer down to go, the Sun upon thy wrath. I'le only curse the sulten Star, reveal'd th'unhappie hour, Which did me from thy presence bar, by his malignant power. That Planet I shall still allow, while as I here remain, Whose bless'd aspect shall bring me to, my first estate again. But yet these strains which I to thee, in favour did impart, Thou slighted them, which threw on me a deadlie wounding dart: And yet I shall be loath to grieve thee in the least degree, For thou shalt Charidora lve, I Diaphantas . In holie writs heavens pardons such, as true as infants be, But I could wish to weep as much for sins, I mourn for thee: Resemble then these heavenlie powers, and grant him thy good will, Who wishes all to you and yours. that heaven can bring you till. How like am I unto an night? that dwells beneath the Pole, Who entertains a six months night before their sun doth role: Since in thy absence night doth lie, thy presence shineth clear, Lend but the twilight of thine eye, to make my day appear. So shall my leaden spirits rise, from out this bed of care, To welcome thee into our skies, which now in darkness are: But if my suit thou shalt denie, and render frowns for love, Then shall that stain upon thee lie, while I shall constant prove. The ship that cuts the aisure tide, and from her course is driven By tempest, the magnettick guide, yet brings her to the haven; So we in midst of Natures main▪ when passions storms do blow, Are driven averse, yet back again▪ by love are led also. Since grace and natu doth agree, things striving to restore, Shall such a stain be found in thee? the saint whom I adore, As to denie for to be led by grace, and stay thine ears, O do not, lest for thee I shed my sanguine drops in tears, FINIS.
