P3625 52614853 176039
THE PROCEEDINGS To EXECUTION of the Sentence awarded against Capt. Thomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse. FOR High Treason. Who were on Friday the 20th. of this Instant July Drawn, Hanged and Quar∣tered at Tyburn, for conspiring against the Life of the KING, and to raise War and Rebellion, in order to Subvert the Government, &c. Con∣taining a Relation of what happened during their Imprisonment, and at the place of Execution. With their Confessions at Tyburn. THomas Walcot, William Hone, and John Rouse, having been Accused to the Kings most Honourable Council, by the Discoverers of the Plot against the Life of His Majesty, of many Treasonable purposes and intentions, and up∣on Warrant Issued out for that purpose. Apprehended, they were on the 12th. of this instant July brought to the Sessions house in the Old-Bayly, and there Arraigned upon the Indictments of High Treason found against them by the Grand Jury, for Conspiring the Death of the King, and designing to raise War and Rebellion, and in order thereto procuring Arms, as Blunderbusses, Musquets, Pistols and the like, to which Indictments they Pleading not Guilty; whereupon Thomas Walcot be∣ing ordered to look to his Challenges, in order to accepting against the Preemptory number, which is 35. of the Jurors, he made exceptions against all such as be∣longed to the Lieutenancy, but in the end a Jury of 12. Men being Sworn, they were charged with, to try the Issue between the King and him, in case of his Life and Death: Whereupon Colonel Rumsie, Mr. Well, Mr. Keeling, Mr. Bourn and others, swore him present at divers Treasonable Conspiracies, Consults, and Traiterous Contrivancies, that he was to Command a Party to destroy the Kings Guards, whilst others Assassinated the King and Duke, &c. in February last, at what time they were to return from New-Market, and that a Consult was held to enquire into the day of their return, and that they differed about the particular time, though afterwards they came to a Result, but that the Fire that happened at Newmarket frustrated the Intention &c. On the Friday following being the 13th. instant, William Hone, and John Rouse were tryed for the like Treason in Conspiring against his Majestie, him to Death, and final Destruction to put, &c. against whom the Kings Evidence deposed, first, that Hone had agreed to be one of the Assassinates, and was to have a Sum of Money to buy him Furniture for that purpose, as Horse and Arms, &c. and that he had declared he was to be one that should seize the Captain and Lieutenant, and that at another time he de∣clared it would never be well till the Blackbird and Goldfinch were knocked on the Head, and that both those Mysterious Expressions, be explained himself to mean the King and Duke of York; these and many more were the circumstances that
occurred upon this and the former Tryal, under the like circumstances was John Rouse Indicted for High Treason and Conspiracy against the Life of the King, tending to the subversion of the Government, so that in the end after divers Ar∣guments they were found Guiltie, and the day following received Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, as the Law in case of Conviction for High Treason requires, when desiring their Friends might visit them, and time for Re∣pentance allowed, they were remanded to Prison, where as Men sensible of the near approach of their dissolution they continued, being often visited by their Friends and Relations who came to condole their misfortunes, and to comfort them with sea∣sonable admonitions to prepare for a future state, seing their Lives were forfeited by the Law, and that Execution of the Sentence passed upon them would not be long deferred forasmuch as all hopes of pardon was vanished, and whether a Reprieve for longer Lase would be granted to them remained doubtful; the former and the latter being at the pleasure of His Majestie, whom they had so highly offended; where∣upon they taking the cordial advice of those that regarded their happinesse as to the Life to come, seriouslie considering in what estate they remain, and what a large account they were short lie to give before the Dreadful Tribunal of all their Acti∣ons, insomuch that at times they were not interrupted by Visitants, their serious thoughts were for the most part imploied in Confessing their Sins, and begging pardon of God for their Offences, during their abode in Newgate, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex came to visit them, in order to perswade them to an ingenious Confession, as far as they were conscious of the Conspiracie of which they stood Convicted, the same Arguments used divers other Loyal Persons, but they seemed much reserved, saying, they had been brought to disgrace, and consequent lie to an untimelie end, by their too much credulitie, and that it was now too late to retrive what was past, but ear∣nestlie begged pardon of those they had Offended. Captain Walcot seldom appeared publicklie, but kept himself to his retirement, either Reading or Conversing with particular Friends that came to take their last farewel of him. John Rouse was often observed busie as is supposed writing for the most part, but to what effect remains yet uncertain, unlesse a Petition humbly to beseech His Majestie to bestow his dead Body on his Wife. William Hone was most dejected of the three, the fear of death having in a manner stupifyed him, insomuch that he was hardlie induced to answer to the questions demanded of him by such as came to Examine or Discourse him. This and such like was their be∣havior, till they had notice that the Warrant was Signed for their Execution, and that they must prepare to die as this day, which heavie tho expected news they re∣ceived with different passions, continuing as men that devoted to the Grave till this Morning, at what time being put into a Sledg, they were drawn to the place of Execution, attended by a strong Guard of the Sheriffs Men, and Hamblet Warders. About 10. in the Morning, Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone were brought to Tayburn, the former in a Sledge by himself, and the 2 latter in another Sledge, when being unbound, they were helped into the Cart prepared for that purpose, and there for a while Conversed with the Ministers, whe were Dr. Crtwrite, and Mr. Ordinarie, both of them perswading them to make an inge∣nious Confession, according to the best of their Knowledge: Whereupon Captain Walcot drew out two Papers, and shewed them to the Ministers, and those that were in the Cast, saying, that he had Written them to Read publicklie, which when he was ordered to do, he vvith a composed Countenance did it Audiblie, the first was in Nature of a Confession of his Enormities to God, wherein he desired for∣giveness, declaring that he had been a great sinner, and for that cause, God had
suffered him to perpetrate those Crimes, that had rendered him worthy of Death; desiring God of his Mercy to forgive him his manifold Offences, and that all the World would forgive him, whom he had offended, putting up divers Ejaculations, desiring that he might be an Example to warn others from daring to attempt any Treasonable Design or Conspiracy against the Life of the King, after which ano∣ther Paper he held in his hand, sometimes looking on it, and other times not while he was speaking or making his Confession to the People, declaring, that he was guilty of the Conspiracy, as to the knowledge thereof, and that he was drawn into the said Conspiracy by People that promised him great things, but that now he plainly perceived there was no Faith in Man, as to the matter of the Assassi∣nation, he confessed to have knowledge of it, and that he had been Incited there∣to by Evil-affected Persons, whom he desired God to forgive, Praying that his, and his Fellows present, might be the last Blood that might be shed upon the oc∣casion of the Conspiracy, he confessed he had been at divers Consults, and that once and no more to his remembrance, he had been in the Company of two Lords, nam∣ing divers of the Persons fled upon the Discovery of the Plot, and Conspiracy, say∣ing, they had drawn him unexpectedly into the mischief, he having not long before arrived in England, and that too late, he was conscious of his too much credulity, which had brought him to his deserved, though shameful and unexpected End, de∣siring of God to prosper, and preserve the King, or to this purpose, he also said, that when the Conspiracy was discovered, he was promised by some who had drawn him into it, to be safely conveyed into Holland, and that when they had decoyed him, and were conveying him to Prison-ward, they told him they designed to Ship him, &c. and so continued with penitential Tears, to bewail his Crimes and unhappy End, but would not own, that he was actually to kill the King. tho he was to be assisting therein, desiring the People to obey, and in all Cordial sincerity endeared them∣selves to His Majesty, who well deserved the love and tenderest respect of His Sub∣jects, this being the Substance of Walcots Speech. John Rouse began to make his Confession, when having desired God to forgive him his Sins, he confessed that he had been at divers Consults, and that he was to have Acted, but as to each particular he was Ignorant, but that he had been privy to many Treasonable Discourses, tending to an Insurrection or the like, desir∣ing God to forgive him his many sins, which he said had been multiplied, but that he was above all sorrowfull for offending against such great Light, saying, the cryes of a Wife and Children, were the chiefest Instigations to make him Ingage in the Wicked Design of which he heartily repented, and for which he had justly deserved to die, declaring, that he had been drawn into it by the Earl of Shaftesbury and others, who were now fled, and that he did not, when first he entered into it, think the design had any wayes tended to the touching the Life of His Majesty, or that the Conspiracy would have arrived to the height it at last did, and continued to express his Sorrow and Repentance for his being so long conscious of so Notorious a Wicked∣ness, and not revealing it, which he attributed to the fear of his own Safety, by rea∣son he had for some time past, been under Evil Circumstances, and been rendered obnoxious to many Persons of known Loyalty: and in Fine, he confessed most of the Charge Evidenced against him, at his Tryal in the Old-Bayly, on the 13. Instant, grievously complaining against those that had drawn him into the mischievous Con∣spiracy, begging forgiveness of all he had offended in thought or deed, desiring God to continue the Kings Life and long Reign, &c.
Hone spoke little as to particulars, but in all general confessed that he was G∣ty of the Conspiracy, and was to have been one of the number that was to have ∣sasinated the King, in his return from New-mercat, and that Goodenough a others had by many Perswasions prevailed with him, to undertake what he did;  likewise confessed he had told Mr. West, he had spoke with Goodenough, and ∣lated to him the measures that he was to take, saying, that he had agreed to be o in the Assassination with divers other Circumstances, of which these are the most m∣terial, tho indeed his Discourse was but short in respect to the two former. The Confessions thus made, or as near as could be taken, thus, or to this effect the Ministers Prayed with them, and Sung a Psalm, after which, they severally desired to say a Prayer of themselves, which was granted, Captain Walcot begin∣ing first, who Prayed fervently, as being throughly sensible of his Offence, desiring the Prayers of all good Men, next Hone made a Prayer, and afterwards Rouse: Each of them conducing greatly to bewail the greatness of their Offences, asking for∣giveness, especially of His Majesty, against whom they had so highly offended, when being asked what further they had to say, they only desired, that God would forgive them, and that all People would take Example by them, and not be enticed or per∣swaded to enterprize so great a Wickedness as had brought them to ruine, though as they hoped God would accept of their late Repentance, and those that heard them, and beheld their untimelie End would take warning thereby, and avoid the like Temptations. These, or to this effect, they having confessed and declared, the Cart was drawn away, and after they had hung 3. quarters of an hour, they were cut down and Quartered one by one, their Bowels burnt, &c. according to the Sentence pronunc∣ed against them. Printed for Langley Curtis, at the sign of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's Head, near Fleet-Bridge, the Phanatick Printer. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty. 1683.
