s1041 52529190 178879
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ACT Anent Presentation of MINISTERS. At Edinburgh, 18. June, 1661. FOrasmuch as the Kings most excellent Majesty, considering how necessar it is for the right and orderly administration of Gods Worship, and the exer∣cises of Religion, and for keeping of His good Subjects ithin their duties they owe to God, to His Majesty, to their native Countrey and fellow Subjects, especially at this time, after so many confusions and distractions, both among Church-men and others; That more then ordinary care be had in presenting of Ministers to all such Kirks as are, or shall be vacand within this Kingdom; hath given particular Commission under His great Seal, as to all Presentations, to all Personages, Vicarags and other Be∣nefices, and Kirks at His Majesties presentation. And a to all other Be∣nefices and Kirks, whereof the presentation belongs to any other Patron or Patrons whatsoever, His Majesty, with advice and consent of His estates of Parliament, statutes and orains, That all Patrons or Persons whatsoever, who hath, or pretends any right to the Presentatios, to any Patro∣nages, Vicarages or other Benefices of cure, Kirks, or modified Stipends, be carefll in all time com∣ing, that Presentations to these Benefices, Kirks or Stipends, be granted by the to such persons only, as shall give sufficient evidence of their Piety, Loyalty, Literature and peaceble Disposition; And shall, in presence of the Patron or his Atturney, and of the Sheriff of the Shir, Stewart of the Stewartrie, or heretable Baily or Commissar of the bounds, if it be in the Countrey nd of the Magi∣strates of the Burroughs within the Burgh, before the granting and their acceptng the Presenta∣tion, take and subscribe the Oath of Alleagiance, the said Sheriff, Stewart, Baily, Commissar and Magistrates having first taken the Oath themselves. And it is hereby declared, That if any person who hath not so taken the Oath of Alleagiance, shall be presented by any Patron, not only shall the Presentation be void and null of it self, but the right of the Patronage, as to that vacancy, shall belong to the Kings Majesty, and the Patrons be repute dis-affected to His Majesties Government, and con∣temners of His Royal Authority. And ordains thir presents to be printed and published at the Mercat Crosses, that none pretend ignorance. A. Primerose, Cls. Reg. The OATH of ALLEAGIANCE. for testification of my faithfull obedience to my most Gracious and re-doubted Sove∣raign, CHARLES King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. Affirm, testifie, and declare by his my solemn Oath, That I acknowledge my said Soveraign only Supream Governour of this Kingdom, over all persons, and in all causes; and that no Forreign Prince, Power, State or Person, Civil or Ecclesiastick, hath any Juris∣diction, Power or Superiority over the same; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Forreign Power, Juris∣ictions and Authorities, and shall at my utmost power, defend, assist and maintain His MAJESTIES Jurisdiction oresaid, against all deadlie, and shall never decline His MAJESTIES Power and Jurisdiction, as I shall answer to GOD. Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1661.
