s1311 52529205 178900
A PROCLAMATION, Against Papists. Edinburgh, the Twentieth day of March, 1689. THE Meeting of Estates of this Kingdom, Considering the Danger and Hazard the Religion, Peace, and Quiet of the Kingdom is in, by the Growth, and Increase of Popery, and Papists of late, Occasioned by the Imploying them in Places of greatest Trust within the Kingdom; And continuing them in Places, and Offices Civil and Military, and allowing them to Exercise the same als freely in all respects, as Protestants, against the standing Laws of the Kingdom. Have thought fit to Discharge, and hereby Discharges, all Papists from Exerci∣sing any Civil or Military Offices within this Kingdom, and from Exercising as Sheriffs of Shires, Stewarts of Stewartries, Bailies of Regalities, Magistrats of Burghs, Justices of Pece, Collonels, Lieutenant-Collonels, Captains of Horse, and all other Officers in the Militia, or carrying Arms therein, under the Pains and Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament. And for the further Security of the Publict Peace and Quiet, they Require and Command all Papists within the Kingdom, of whatsoever Rank or Condition, to deliver up their Arms (excepting Gentlemen, their ordinary wearing Swords) to the Sheriffs, Stewarts, Lords, or Bailies of Regalities, and Magistrats of Burghs, within whose Ju∣risdiction they live, viz. Those on the South side of the Water of Esk, within six days after Publication hereof, at the Mercat Cross of the Head-Burgh of the Shire: And these on the North-side of the said Water, within ten days after the same. Certifying such as shall be found to have any Arms after the days foresaid respectivè, They shall be proceeded against with all rigour, for their Contempt and Disobedience: And Ordains and Requires the saids Sheriffs, and othe Magisirats forsaid, or in case of their negligence, the Collonels or Lieutenant-Collonels of the Militia Foot, or Captains of Horse, to search for, and seize upon any Arms which they shall be Informed to be kept up undelivered, belonging to Papists, in any Houses or Places suspected, and to secure the same, and to return an exact Account of their diligence, betwixt and the dayes following, viz. These on this side of Esk, betwixt and the tenth day of April next, and these be-north the same, betwixt and the twentieth day of the same Moneth of April, as they will be answerable on their highest Peril. And the said Estates do Command and Charge all Papists, not being Inhabitants of the Town of Edinburgh, or any place adjacent thereto, to remove ten Miles from the said Town, or at least, to their respective Dwelling-Houses, within fourty eight hours after publication hereof, under all highest pains; And Grants Order and Warrand to Heraulds, Macers, or Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, to pass to the Mercat-Cross of Ediburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the several Head-Burghs of the Shires, and make publica∣tion hereof in the usual manner, that none may pretend ignorance. Extracted out of the Records of the Meeting of Estates, by me RO. MACKENƷIE, Cls. EDINBURGH, Printed in the Year 1689.
