S1569 52529242 178968
A PROCLAMATION, Adjourning the Parliament to the twelfth Day of July, 1698. WILLIAM by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Ly∣on King at Arms, and his Brethren, Heraulds, Macers of Our Privy-Council, Pursevants Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, Conjunctly. and Severally, Speci∣ally constitute Greeting; Forasmuch as We by Our Proclamation of the Date, the third Day of March last by-past Did Adjourn this Our current Parlia∣ment, to the twenty eight Day of June Instant: And whereas the present state of Our Affairs does not require the meeting of Our said Parliament so soon, as the said Day to which it was adjourned: Therefore We with advic of the Lords of Our Privy-Council, are resolved to continue the said Adjourn∣ment, from the said twenty eight Day of June Instant, to the twelfth Day of July next to come, at which time, We are fully resolved Our said Parlia∣ment shal meet; And that the Members of Our said current Parliament be not put to unnecessar Trouble and Charges, We do hereby with Advice fore∣said, continue the Adjournment of Our said Parliament, from the said twen∣ty eight Day of June instant, to the said twelfth Day of July next to come: And We do hereby order and require all the Members of Our said Parliament, to attend the said twelfth Day of July next to come, at Edinburgh in the usual way, and under the Certifications, contained in the several Acts of Parliament made thereanent, OUR WILL IS HEREFORE, and We charge you strict∣ly, and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and to the Mercat-Crosses of the remanent Head-Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Our antient Kingdom, and there by open Proclamation make intimation, that Our said Parliament is ad∣journed to the said twelfth Day of July next to come, And ordains these pre∣sents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet, at Edinburgh, the seventh Day of June, and of Our Reign the tenth Year, 1698. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the King. Edinburgh, printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1698.
