s3224 52614934 176174
REASONS FOR CONFORMITY TO THE Church of England, AS BY LAW ESTABLISHD. 19. Aug. 1699. By R. SHERDLEY, who was formerly a Presbyterian Minister in the City of Kilkeny, in Ireland. THE Actions and Designs of all Men have their Ulti∣mates: So has the Author in this small Tract: It is not to be accounted Famous or Learned; neither does he hope to banish Schism, (that cursed Title which all Men hate, yet nourishd by many) out of a Kingdom where the Church of God is so eminently Glorified; but he is a Stranger here, and all Men that see him have their private Sen∣timents of him; some by Information, believe him a Cheat, and an Impostor; others, one of the Regular Priests crept out of Ireland, pursuant to a late Act of Parliament made there; but tis commonly reported of him thus, especially by such who have some Knowledge of him: That he did really conform to the Establishd Church at Kilkeny, in Ireland, by reason of his irregular and immoral Life: For had he not left the Presbyterian Party when he did, he woud have been Excluded their Societies in an open Synod or Convention of Presbyters. To this the Author Answers, That this Opinion is false and groundless; for he has it under the Hands of the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and Protestant-Inhabitants of the City of Kil∣keny, affirming him to be a Man of a sober Conversation; nay, he is not only thus fortified against malevolent Censure, but he has the
Hands of the very Presbyterians themselves (who are still Inhabi∣tants in Kilkeny) declaring him to be a Man of an honest and regular Life: And further, the Provost and Senior Fellows of Trinity-Col∣lege, near Dublin, in Ireland, have given him their own Hands to the like Truth. Object. Now it may be objected, why the Author did not stay in a Kingdom where he was so well known for a Sober and Pious Man? Answ. Ireland was a Country very pernicious to the Author, as the Eminent Dr. Gwither of the College of Dublin can justine, he never enjoyd Six Weeks of Health successively in Five Years Time: Moreover, England is the Land of his Nativity, and a Place where he enjoys a considerable Measure of Health, which Argument is suffi∣cient: But now tis reported, that he chiefly converses with Dissen∣ters; and since the Church of England takes not that Care of him he expected, he is endeavouring to sement himself with those of his former Factious Acquaintance. Now he does hereby endeavour to satisfie the World, that notwithstanding all disrespect whatsoever shown him by the Establish'd Church; yet, as he has never done any Thing to cast him beyond the Pale of that Church, he is, and hopes always to remain a Member and Well-wisher of the Churches of England and Ireland, as by Law Establishd. Now to conclude he only mentions Two or Three of the Reasons which induced him to Conformity. I. Because the lawful Commands, of a lawful Authority, are and ought to be obeyd in Things lawful. II. The Commands and Injunctions of the Establishd Church are grounded upon a lawful Authority and enjoyns nothing sinful, or in themselves unlawful. III. If so (granting Validity of the former Positions) to dissent from this Authority, were to draw a Church out of a Church, which is positive Schism. Now the Author desires the Reader to take Notice, that he does not pinch or squeeze too narrowly on the Term lawful, but freely al∣lows the full Sence the Term will bear. FINIS.
