S994E 53981567 180323
BY THE COMMISSIONERS Appointed for Administration of Justice to the People in SCOTLAND. FOrasmuch as there be many laudable Laws and Acts of Parliament of this Nation made for suppressing of Sorners, broken Highlanders, Borderers, and such as have disquieted the peace of the Nation in former times: And in particular the 93, 94, 97, 98, 101, 103, and 109 Acts of the Eleventh Par∣liament of King James the Sixth, besides many other Acts and Statutes of Parliament and Privy Councell, tending to the prevention and remedy thereof, which by reason of the late Troubles of the Countrey, have not been put in execution, whereby many loose and turbulent persons, such as against whom these Acts and Statutes were made and provided, do now take occasion to trouble the Peace of the Countrey, and commit Out-rages, Insolencies and Depredations against the well-affected, and those who love the Peace of the Nation. For remedy whereof, and for preven∣tion of any such disorders hereafter, and for the better keeping of the Peace and quiet of the Nation, It is hereby Ordained, That the Marquess of Huntly. Laird of Park. Laird of Haddo. Laird of Newton. Laird of Rothomay. Laird of Arradowdle. Marquess of Argyle. Lord Lorne. Laird of Auchinbreck. Laird of Glenurchey. Laird of Arkindlesse. Laird of Glenlyone. Laird of Invera. Tutor of Calder. Laird of Macfarlan. Lord Duffus. Laird of Assen. Laird Pluskarden. Laird Kilcowie. Laird Cowle. Laird Tarbet. Scatwell. Laird of Garloch. Simon Mackinʒie of Louchlin. Lord Lovat. Tutor of Lover. Laird Foyer. Laird Kilbokie. Laird Belladrum. Lord Rea. Hugh Mackey of Scower. Hugh Macky of Dilrede. William Macky of Bighous. Earle Cathnes. Laird of Brims. Laird of Borlinu, Sinclair. Francis Sinclair his Uncle, Master of Cathnes. Laird of Murkle. Laird of Maye. James and William Innisse. Innis of Coxton. Earle Arley. Lord Bamph. Earl of Marre. Lord Erskin. Laird Dun. Laird of Lude. Tutor of Strowon. Cap. Dunc. Robertson. Earle of Glencairn. Laird of Fasse. Laird of Rothemirchus. Laird Inchynachan. John Stuart, Bailiffe of Athol. Mr. Gilbert Stuart, somtime Com∣missary of Dunkel. Sir James Mackdonald. John Macdonald of Shian. John Macdonald of Invergarrie. Alexander Macdonald of Bohintin. Mackdonald of Kylchonet. Macrannold of Keppoch. John Macdonald of Shean his bro∣ther. Captains of Clanrannold Senior. Captains of Clanrannold Junior. Mack-Cloud. Colonell Rora Mackcloud and his three Brothers. Mackolduie. Daniel Camron his Uncle. Laird of Mackmartin. Laird Glenavis. Donald Camron, alias Mackevin vic conil. Camron of Caldort. Alister Mackonil of Strone. Makconchy vik evin of Achnasavil. Mackenviconel. Laird Macklean. Laird of Lochbewie. Laird of Ardgower. Laird of Kingarloch. Hector Macklaine. Laird of Appen. Laird Glencoe. Macgreger of Renough. Macgreger of Rorow. Duncan Macgregor. Laird of Buchanan. The Laird of Laweris. Baron of Comrie. Laird Rothmell. Col. Minʒis. Laird Invercald. Will. Forquerson of Inveray. Al. Forquerson of Finnion. Laird Grant. Laird Balendolach. Laird Glenmariston. Laird Carron. Lieu. Col. Grant in Vrquhat. John Grant of Garton, Bailiff of Straspay. Mackferson of Cluny. Dougal Mackferson, Bailiff of Badgenoth. John Macferson Tutor of Enveressie. Laird of Struie. The Bailiff of Stracharrich younger. The Laird of Redcastle. Donald Camron Tutor of Lochield. Norman Mackleud. Laird Mackentosh. William Mackentosh of Keylachie. Angus Mackquen of Correbrock. Cap. Donald and Angus Makqueens Lieu. Col. James Stuart. Laughlan Mackferson. Mackentosh Brother. Borlum. Strohan. Robert Auchnesse &c. and all others not afore-named, Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen and others yet on life, and the Heritors of, and Successors to the Lands and Estates of such as are deceased, and the Tutors and Curators of so many as are Minors deceased, particularly expressed in the Roll remaining in Print, joyned to the Acts of Parliament of King James the Sixth, Parliament the Eleventh, 1587. whose names or Titles are as followeth: The Laird of Makfarlane of the Ar∣roquhair. The Laird of Lusse. The Laird Makaula of Ardincaple. The Laird of Merchinston. The Laird of Glennegyis. The Laird of Drumquhassil. The Laird of Kilcreuch. The Laird of Knokhil. Henry Shaw of Cambusmoir. The Laird of Kippenrosse. The Lord of Burley. The Laird of Keir. The Earle of Lithgow. The Lord of Down. The Earle of Pearth. The Earle of Murrey. The Earle of Tullibardin. The Laird Weyme. The Abbot of Inchchaffray. Colin Cambel of Ardbeith. The Earle of Athole. The Laird of Garntullie. The Laird Strowane, Robertson. The Laird Strowane, Murray. The Laird of Wester-wemes. The Laird of Abbots-hal. The Laird of Teling. The Laird of Inchmartin. The Laird of Pury-Fothringhame. The Laird of Moncreif. The Laird of Balleachen. The Baron of Fandowie. The Earle of Errol. The Laird of Cultiebragan. The Lord Ogilvie. The Laird of Clouay. The Laird of Fintrie. Laird of Mackinvon. Tutor of Glenmariston. James Mackintosh of Strone. Commissary Gray of Arbo in Ros. The Laird of Edʒel. The Lord of Elphinstoun. The Lord of Forbes. Laird Makintosh. The Lord and Tutour of Lovat. Chisholme of Cummer. The Laird of Balnagoun. Major William Ros of Gunnort. Ros of Pitcalny. John Ros of Achnacloich. John Ros of Little Tarrell. James Innis of Touchis. The Earle Marshal. The Lord Oliphant. The Laird of Bowquholly. The Laird of Dunnybeith. The Laird of Garloch. Makgilliechallum of Raarsay. Macklewid of the Harrich. Mackinnoun of Strathodel. Makneil of Bara. John Mackdonald of Iland Terim. Mackclean of Dowart. John Stuart of the Appin Mackoul of Lorne. Mackoul of Roray. The Laird of Lochinnel. The Laird of Caddel. The Laird of Skelmurly for Rauckry. Mackondachy of Inneraw. The Sheriff of Bute. The Laird of Camys. Maknauchtane. Maklauchlane. The Laird of Lawmount. The Laird of Parbrek. The Laird of Duntrune. Viscount of Dudop, L. of Glastry. The Laird of Elenegreg. The Laird of Otter. The Laird of Coll. Macklene of Lockbuie. And all other Land-Lords, Bailiffs of the Lands, Captains, Cheiftains, and Chief of Clans, and Principals of the Branches of Clans whomsoever in the Highlands, are to find Caution Landed men in the Countrey, to conform themselves unto the said Laws, Acts and Statutes of Parliament and Privie Councel above written, and to all other Laws Statutes and Acts of Parliament made thereanent, & relating thereunto; and particularly ordaining all Chiefs of Clans, and others afore-named, specified, mentioned, & hereby intended, to come and find sufficient Caution, acted in the Books of the High Court of Justice at Edinburgh, for Causes Criminal, or elsewhere, where the Court of Justice shall happen for the time being, to be held, for them and their friends, followers, and dependants peaceable carriage, according as they, or their Ancestors and Predecessors have been formerly Ordained as aforesaid, and under the pains therein contained, betwixt the Proclamation hereof, and the first day of October next ensuing: with certification if they fail, they shall be holden as contraveeners of the said Acts of Parliament, and prosecuted accordingly with all rigour. And forasmuch as the premisses are of Publick concernment, It is hereby provided and Declared, That no person whomsoever hereby intended for finding Caution as aforesaid, coming into the Lowland, to provide and give in the same, shall any wayes in his person be molested or troubled by Caption, Arresting, or other Imprisonment, for any Civill Cause whatsoever, untill the said first day of October, and ten dayes after for their returns home be expired. And all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Messengers of Arms, and all others whom it doth concern, are to take notice hereof, and give due obedience thereunto. And it is hereby Ordained, That these presents shall be as sufficient, as if every particular person hereby intended for giving Caution as aforesaid, were herein specially inserted and named. This Proclamation to be published at the Mercat Crosse of Edinburgh, and the Mercat Crosses of the Head Burrowes of all other Shires next adjacent to those parts where their Lands lye, where free accesse cannot be had. Given under our Hands at Edinburgh, July the 27. 1653. Hen. Whalley Advoc. Gen. Geo. Smyth. And. Owen. Jo. March. Ed. Mosley. Printed at Leith, 1653.
