R453 [ocm]80923455 191976
A Speech made before the King's most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second, on the Shore where he Landed at Dover. By Mr. John Reading B. D. who presented his Majesty with a Bible, the Gift of the Inhabitants there, May 25th. 1660. Dread Soveraign! 1. BE pleased to know that your Majesties loyal Subjects, the Mayor, Jurates, and Commons of this your Town and Port of Dover, seriously minding the admirable work of God's Mercy in your Majesties Deliverances, Preservations and restitution unto your long afflicted People, cannot but enquire for some Remonstrance of their due thankfulnesse to God, and Declaration of their Joy of your Majesties peaceable, and safe Return into your Kingdomes. 2. Nor can they find any means in their power here so to accommodate, As the presentation of your Majesty with this holy Book, commanding our Allegiance and faithful Obedience to our Soveraigne Lord, God's immediate Vice-gerent over us on Earth. 3. And if we may light our Taper to this Sun, we must say it is God's eternal will, in the fulnesse of time revealed for Mans salvation: The golden Pot of Heavenly Manna fitting every age, and palate, wherewith God having fed his Israell for a time, said of this selected Homer, of the same (sufficient for every man to salvation) recondatur posteris. 4. Nor may we be diffident of your Majesties gracious acceptance hereof, considering your invincible love of truth (according to the estimate thereof, by the Prince after God's own heart) better then thousands of gold and silver; 'tis the Treasure hid in the Lord's field, the inestimable riches of his mercy in Christ our Life, and that through which we shall prolong our dayes in the Land; the royal Ornament of holy Princes, which they carry as the Symbolum of God's presence with them and blessing on them. 5. No more shall we add concerning this tabernacle of God's testimony, whose beauty, and riches are within, but our hearty prayer to the Almighty, that it may be our happy auspicium Regni to your sacred Majesty, and as the Arke at Obed Edom's house, a blessing, causing all to prosper, and the good Lord God say Amen, and let all God's people present say Amen, Amen. In reditum exoptatissimum Regiae Majestatis Sacratissimae apud Dubrenses. Votum pro Rege, Lege, & Grege. Vocat Aristoteles. Carolus secundus Vivat Rex; Rediviva jam tandem currat Lex. Exultent verè Protestantes, Exulent nec non veri Recusantes. Exurgat Deus, & dissipentur inimici Regis. . Rex viva Lex. Vivida Lex noster Rex, nostri Spiritus oris, Luminibus lux, cujus & est absentia morte, Pejor. Juda Leo juvenis sit, simus & Agni; Dum{que} lupi, & Vulpes stupidi metuunt, fugiunt{que} Pastor adest noster: Deus en mirand peregit, Fit caput Angelli summum lapis ipse rctus: Nam sua sceptra tenet Rex noster, legifer Ille, Cujus & Herculei scymni ira rebellibus est par: Sed sua conspicuum comitas sibi ducet honorem; Ʋnde timete Deum verum Regem{que} coletis. VIVAT REX. Sic obtestatur Majestatis vestrae perenni. servorum humilimus, R. B. Regis ad exemplum totis componitur orbis. Qualis Rex, talis Grex. Englished. Upon the most desired return of the Kings most Sacred Majesty at Dover. An humble Sute, or Supplication, For King, and Law, and the whole Nation. The King is Law's life Aristotle cries. Stopt be that mouth which Royal Law defies. May Charles the second King, live long and Raign; The Lawes concur at length reviv'd again: Let Protestants rejoyce from bondage free, Let non-conformists each Exiled be. Let God Arise, and the King's Enemies Scatter'd shall be with their Hyprocrisies. The King is a living Law. Our King's a lively Law, our Nostrils breath, Light of our Eyes, whose absence worse then death. Judah's a Lyons Whelp, let us Lambes be; Since Wolves, and Foxes shamed, Fear, and Flee; Our Shepheard's come, great wonders God hath done, What was dispis'd is now th'head Corner stone: For He the Scepter beareth our Law-giver, Whose wrath's a Lyon fell to the bad liver: Yet his free Mercy will Him Glory bring, Hence fear ye God, and honour ye the King. GOD SAVE THE KING. So prayeth the most humble of your Majesties continual Subjects, Rich. Bradshaw. Printed in the year 1660.
