W60F R186099 [ocm]80925137 192152
A Particular and Impartial ACCOUNT OF A Great Fight in Ireland: AND OF THE Raising the SIEGE OF LONDON-DERRY, By the Protestants, ALSO A True Relation of the Malice and Cruelty of the Irish Papists, in their burning Coleraine, Carrick∣fergus, and several other Places of Note, in their FLIGHT. Licens'd and Entred according to Order. SIR, ON Saturday last the Dartmouth Frigate left the Lough before London-Derry, being sent by Major-General Kirk, and Yesterday Morning she came into Hylake, and confirm'd the happy News of the Relief of London-Derry, that Day she came away. The Circumstances were, That Major-General Kirk having an Account sent him out, that the Town was in most miserable Distress, and by no means capable of holding out above one Week longer, and that they had for some considerable time before, fed up∣on Cats, Dogs, Raw-Hides, and the like; and of that sort of Provision very scarce: And that there had already perished in the Town for want, and Sickness occasioned thereby, several hundreds of Souls: And that there was not in the Town then well, above three Thousand fighting Men. The Major-General resolved to hazard the loss of all for its Relief, sent three Ships with Provision, Ammunition, and four hundred Men to break the Boom, and on that side relieve it by Water, which God was pleased to bless with desired Success; for one of them fitted for that purpose running upon
the Boome, at one Streak made entrance for the rest to follow; however not without annoyance from the Forts, who destroyed some of their Men. In the mean time the Major-General resolved to try his Fortune by Land, and in order thereunto, at low Water, in three distinct Battalions, marched all the Forces he had got together in the Isle of Inch, into the Isle of Ennis∣killing, wherein Derry stands; which the Papists perceiving, did not think fit to try Kirk's Kindness, but forthwith set all they were possessed of (which they could not carry with them) on Fire, and run away by the light of it, over Claudiford, to the rest of their Party on the other side, and left Kirk way clear, without Resistance, to march into Derry. But those brave Soules, tho almost famished, perceiving their Intent and Motion, resol∣ved to pay their way, to those Cowardly and Bloody Men, and upon their Retreate Issued out of the Town, and with that Force and Bravery fell up∣on them, that they Kil'd more then their own Number, and put them into such Consternation that many of their Enemies were drowned by their hast to get over the River. While these were in this Flight, their other Party, on the otherside of the River, blew up the Fort, and as the others had done before, set all on fire and so marched thence with the loss of 20000 Men, (as is believed) since their first sitting down before that Invincible place; which must needs be conceived purely to be preserved by Divine Providence only; when in kil∣ling so many of their Enemy, they had not kill'd of the Town above 50 Persons; but all the loss they have had, has been for want, and by Sick∣ness: But the greatest Providence was, that when all Relief had failed them, and those poor Souls reduced to the brink of Extremity, that God was pleased to make, even their very Enemies most mischeivous Designs produce Food, out of their fiery Engines, to feed those poor Distressed and Starving Persons; thus when they were even just ready to fall upon and Eat one another rather than fall into their Enemies Hands; A Bomb, shot by the Enemy into the Town, fell into the house of a Papist, and, as if designed by Heaven, tore with that Violence that none before ever had done there, till it at length found out and made way into a larg Vault, long before fill'd, and made privately up, with Provision, by (as its thought) their late Governour Lundee; wherein they thus found (before they got any other in their greatest Extremity) Provision enough to enable them to hold out a Month longer, than through Mercy they found occasion for. It is worthy Observation, that by the account they had in Dublin of the Raising the Siege of Derry 2 Days before it was done, which I before sent you that it was Intended, tho not then done, for fear of an Invasion from England. There hath been 5 or 6 other Acts past in Ireland, besides what I sent you last; of which these are Part, 1st. To take away the be∣nefit of the Clergy from Thieves and Robbers. 2d. To seize the effects of all Absentees. 3d. To take away St. Andrews Church in Dublin, as being built upon Absentees Land. So well doth King James keep his Word in preserving the Church of England. The Papists that were prison'd in this Town, in the Castle, upon some new ploting found among them, are sent from thence to a other Prison in the City. And the Mayor of Liverpool with 3 or 4 others in that place are suspected, and some say Apprehended and taken into Custody, for some undue practices and Contrivances against the Government. Food was so scarce at London-Derry, that a Dogs-head was sold for seven Shillings. I am Yours, J. W. London; Printed for W. Lee, near Charing-Cross, 1689.
