1030.5 S119200 99854407 177241
A MOST VVICKED worke of a wretched Witch, (the like whereof none can record these ma∣nie yeeres in England.) Wrought on the Person of one Richard Burt, Seruant to Maister Edling of Woodhall in the Parrish of Pinner in the Coun∣tie of Myddlesex, a myle be∣yond Harrow. Latelie committed in March last, An. 1592 and newly recognised according to the truth▪ by G. B. maister of Arts. depiction of a jester (?) Printed by R. B. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in Gratious streat.
Hexasticon. Of wrathfull witches this same pāphlet tels, How most of all on simple folke they worke. What woonders to they may atchiue by spels, God weede them out in euery cell they lurke, God weeds them out, but satan stil doth hatch, fresh Impes, whereby of al sorts he may catch. Leuit. 20.6. If any turne after such as worke vvith spirits, and after soothsaiers, to goe a whoring after them, then will I set my face against that person, and will cutte him off from among his people.
A most wicked worke of a wret∣ched Witch, wrought on the Per∣son of one Richard Burt. SO long (righte Gentle and cour∣teous Reader) as wee liue heere in this wretched vale of miserie, and myserable estate of our Pro∣bationership, we are all euen the best of vs all, to account no better of our selues, then that we liue in a perpetuall warrefare, and most dangerous and deadlie com∣bat. Our Enimies that we are to fight against are in num∣ber three: The world, the Flesh, and the Dyuell:The three dedlie eni∣mies of mā∣kind. two wherof notwithstanding (such is our blinde perseuerance) the moste parte esteeme their entire friends, whereas in∣deed they are the hande-mynisters of our Archenimie, all vnder colourable frendship deceiuing their familiars, and seeking their death both of bodie and soule. Our graund foeman Sathan Architect of all mischiefe, in scripture hath many proper names,Reuel. 9.11. to explaine his ma∣litious nature: Of his crueltie hee is called Abaddon, a Destroier, bicause that not like a common enimie hee is contented with the death and downefall of our bodies, but imagineth vtter destruction of the soule also, and intol∣lerable tormentes ioyntlie to them both:Iohn. 12.6. Of his crafte hee is tearmed a Theefe, bicause he inuenteth by what mea∣nes he may slilie and vnwittinglie set vpon the godlie.Iob. 1.10. and 2.5. Of his malice he is called Diabolus, an accuser, bicause euer∣more day and night he is busie, accusing the consciences of the righteous. He is named a Dragon of his pollicie, bicause that since
the time of Adam, among so many thousands, in so many yeares, there hath beene founde none so wise or warie, that could withstand his stratagems, but he hath wounded and poisoned them well nighe vnto death. He hight a Lion also of his power, bicause that as the so∣lide bodie of the Lion is powerfull: so especiallie consisteth great strengthe and power in his taile. We doubt not but this aduersarie, or Apollyon of ours of himselfe is mightie, puissant, & strong enough againste such faintie cowards, and wilfull slo-backs as we are, yet to make his victorie more sure, and not to faile of his pur∣pose, he vseth also the force of his tayle: that is, his in∣thraled bondslaues, whom he hath sealed to execute his wil and pleasure vppon the harmelesse, which is perfourmed many times diuers and sundry waies: neyther dooth he so vsually shew his pollicie, puissance and power by anye his oficers, as he dooth by subtle seedemen of false doctrine, and inchanting sorcerers: the one in stead of instruments to inueigle the mind and soule, the other to assaile the mor∣tall bodie, and beguile and intrappe the sences. I speake nothing of those pseudosedmen, but I pur∣pose (God willing) to treat of damnable Wytches, of their spight and spelles, odious in the sight of God, detested of the good, and moste hurtfull to themselues, manifesting what power and preminence through Gods permission, that Father of sinne Sathan hath ouer sinfull worldlings. About Shrouetide last, one Richard Burt, seruant to a Gentleman, named M. Edling, dwelling at Woodhall in the parishe of Pinner in Middlesex, a myle beyond Har∣row on the Hill, going to his maysters Barne, standing at the Townes ende, accompanied with a great mastiue dogge, suddenly espied an Hare start before him, and thin∣king to haue set his dogge at her, missed of his purpose: for the dogge not onely refused to follow, but in stead of follo∣wing began to faint, and runne rounde about his maister,
and to whine pittifully, as who shoulde say that kinde of game was not for them: The man taking heartie grace himselfe, followed so nighe, that he saw her take in at one Mother Atkyns house, whome before that time he knew to be a notorious witch: Wherevpon blessing himselfe, & mindful of the name of God, he boldly said, auant witch. This was the first occasion (namely the tearming of hir a with) of al poore Richard Burts future tragedie:Vnspeaka∣ble is the malice of a wicked wo∣man. but to go forward. It hapned the said Richard Burt a month after, méeting hir néere to his maisters barne, and giuing hir the time of the daye, like a peruerse woman, like a perillous waspe, like a pestiferous witch, incensed with hate at the sight of him held downe hir head, not daigning to speake. The next day which was on wednesday the 8. of march going againe to his maisters barne to thrash, & serue cer∣taine beasts, bicause he would not trudge too and fro for letting his work, carried his dinner with him, which was bread, butter, cheese and applepy, & a bottle of the best béer: being come to the barne he laide his prouision, and setled close to his busines, labouring hard til twelue of the clock, at which time hunger assailing and custome preuailing, he went to dinner, wherin he had not long continued, but ther was opposite to his view a monstrous blacke Cat among the straw, which began to shake the strawe, and to make a wad thereof. The fellow being agast start vp with his ap∣plepie in his hande (for it had byn pittie a poore hungrie thresher should haue lost so good a repast) suddenly hearing a voice that commanded him, come away: Away quod he, whither shal I come? The spirit answering againe, sayde: Come and leaue thy vittels behind thée and thy knife also. Poore simplicity keeping his applepy stil in his hand, came to the barne dore, where suddenly hee was hoised vp into the aire, and carried ouer many fields, by the way espyeng his mai. plow a plowing, but not able to cal vnto them, al∣though he séemed to haue his memorie most perfect: thence passing ouer to Harrow, where on the side of the hill there
is a greate ponde was drawne thrugh it, & ther left his hat which was a token of that torture) because he could stay in no place, but was violentlie rapt vp the hiil, and ouer the tops of the trees at Harrow Church, so farre he absolutelie remembreth, but being haled further, he was taken (as he seemeth) into a place which was all fire, where was heard such lamentable howling and dolefull crieng, as if all the damned fiends of hell had béene tortured, and tormenten in that Limbo. You heare into how strange and passionate a place this Richard Burt was translated, now it remaineth to shewe with what Symtomes the place was furnished. First therefore (he affirmeth) it was exceeding hot, re∣plenished with more than Cymmerian darkenesse, plenti∣ful in filthy odors and stinches, ful of noise and clamours, insomuch that hee seemed to heare infinite millions of dis∣crepant noises, but saw nothing saue onelie the fire which caused such an vnquenchable drouth in his stomache, that presentlie minding a pennie hee had in his purse: looked round about for an Alehouse where he might spend it. Hearing therefore these foresaid voices, and thinking some of them had spake vnto him, he answerd sayeng, heer is no worke for me to doo: immediatlie it was reanswe∣red, coast away with him, but with this prouiso thou pas∣sest, that thou be secret, and say nothing when thou com∣most home: but he replied, and said, my maister will aske me where I haue beene: with that he was not suffered to speak any further, but his toong was doubled in his mouth, his legs burnt, hands and armes scorched, his coat pincht of his backe, and throwne into the fire, immediatly soring ouer hedges and ditches, sowsed in mire and durt, scratched with thornes and briers, so singed and disfigured, that it is both lamentable and terrible to behold him. Being brought againe to Pinner where his Mayster doth dwell, he first repaired to a ditch to drinke, and after∣wards
in this pickle visited one of his acquaintance, whoe sometime serued M. Edling also: but whether hee sorted thither for that his friends house was nighest, or would not go home for shame that hee had béene absent foure whole daies togither, I cannot shew you: Onlie this, being sun∣day morning his maister chanced (as his custome was to passe by that way to Church at the same instant, whoe not knowing poore Richard Burt his lost sheepe, demanded of his quondam seruant if he had gotten him a man: a man sir quod he, why it is your man Richard: my man quoth the Gentlenian, that cannot bee, and therewithall beeing halfe amazed made a pause and earnestlie bheld him, at length willing him in the name of God to tel where he had bin though he could not speake, yet hauing memory made signes and euermore pointed toward the house where mo∣ther Atkins did dwell, looking so grislie and fiercelie that waie, that he tore and rent al that came in his hands. In the meane while it was thought requisite,The dutie of a good minister. that the Parson of the towne named M. Smith, and mai. Burbridge of Pinner parke gentleman should be sent for, whoe com∣ming to the dumbe man and pittieng his plight, the Par∣son charitably and like himselfe laboured about him, wrin∣ched open his teeth got open his mouth, indented his fin∣ger vnder his toong, and with much adoo got it vnfoulded, the first wordes he spake were these: Woe worth mother Atkins, woe worth mother Atkins, for she hath bewitched me: whervpon he would not be quiet, but euer requested that he might speak with hir. Maister Burbidge and M. Smith caused hir to bee sent for, who being present, he neuer ceased til he had scratched and drawne bloud on hir, perswading himselfe that was a remedy sufficient vnder God, that would make him well: neither was it or is it any Capital error, experience testy∣fies: for since that he hath mended reasonablie, and nowe goeth to the Church.
Thus haue you heard briefly the cares and crosses, that poore Richard Burt sustained (as they say) in summo gra∣du, the eighth, the ninth, tenth and eleuenth daies of march last past, what time hee was absent from his maister the foresaid whole daies, and vsed (as ye haue heard) after the foresaid manner. Thus then leaue we Richard Burt, but with mother Atkins we must prosecute a little further. It is credibly reported in Pinner, that the saide mother Atkins on a time resorting to the house of M. Burbidge for milke (at what time the maids were busie at the dairy and not obtaining hir desire, immediatly vpon hir departure out of doores, the Creame beganne to swel and rise in the cherne,Witches ar the moste vnprofita¦ble erraturs in the world. that it burst open the top of the Cherne, and runne about the kitchen and forth at the sinke-hole, and all their huswiferie for that day went to wracke, that al was quite lost, and nothing could possiblie be well ordered. O rebels towards God: enemies to mankinde: catterpillers of a common wealth, the fire is too good to consume them. Many and sundry like actions of extreame rage and cru∣eltie are imputed to her, only we will conclude, and shut vp these clauses, with this that followeth. Not long since the forenamed witch entring the groūd of one Gregorie Coulson, to craue some releefe (for she ly∣ueth of almes, and good peoples charitie) she found him bu∣silie imploied about some countrie affaires, Radling hys lambs (I thinke it was) and framing hir petition to him, because he did not straight waie leaue al and accomplish it she flung forth in a fume: But it was not longe after her departure, but he had finished his labour also, and letting forth two Lambs into a yard, suddenly they began so nim∣bly to skip and friske to and fro, that they neuer ceased af∣ter til they died. FINIS.
