3568.5 S104640 99840373 178199
THE Good Wife: OR, A rare one amongst Women. Whereto is annexed an Exquisite Discourse of EPITAPHS: Including the choisest thereof, Ancient or Moderne. Vxor bona chara supellex. MVSOPHILVS. AT LONDON Printed for RICHARD REDMER, and are to be sold at his shop at the West end of St Pauls Church. 1618.
¶ The distinct Sections in this Booke contained. 1 The good Wife. 2 Obseruations vpon Epitaphs. 3 Epitaphs. 4 The Prodigals Glasse. 5. The Mourners Meane.
To the Reader. VNderstand (Gentle Reader) that this Treatise was long since intended for the Presse, but vpon the publishing of that iudicious and sententious Poem writ by the worthy decea∣sed knight Sir Thomas Ouerberie neerely con∣curring with this in Title, though in matter and manner different: It was thought meete to be re∣strained till better opportunitie (which is now afforded) might giue it liberty to be reuiued. Receiue it then as it was first intended, and so may the Authors labor to thee directed, be by thy prayers mutually requited.
The Argument. In pursuit of Loues enquest, Heauy-eyde Musophilus, Restlesse takes himselfe to rest, And desplaies his fortunes thus. Jn his sleepe (deaths shade) appeares Age, the honour of mans life, Old in houres as well as yeares, Who instructs him in a Wife, And in briefe assaies to show, Who is good, who is not so. Next his choice, he shewes his Sonne, (Lest he should his choice neglect) What by him ought to be done To his Wife in each respect, Who though shee should euer feare To giue cause of iust offence, Yet he ought not domineere 'Cause he has preheminence; For that conquest's worthy no man, Where they triumph o're a woman. Age retires, yet in retire, Wakes close-eyde Musophilus, Where he sees whom his desire Bids him wooe and wooing chuse: Woo'd and won, he doth inuite Such as aime at vertuous ends, To be present at the Rite Of two selfe-vnited friends. Who if they will, come they may, If they will not, they may stay.
A good VVife, Or A rare one amongst Women. DOwne by a vale a pleasant shade there was, By which a silent siluer streamling past, Where I retir'd and sate me on the grasse, Whilest my deiected eye with sleepe lockt fast, Presented thousand obiects where I was; 'Mongst which a grauer Module then the rest Appear'd to me, and made it thus exprest. A graue olde man of reuerend aspect, Whose yeeres imported somthing that was good, In sable habit, shewing his neglect "Of earthly Fortunes, as an obiect stood, To caution me (me thought) of that respect Which I should haue, and euer ought to haue Of my times Mansion, Frailty, and my Graue. A Sithe, an houre-glasse and a waterpot, A fatall Deaths-head, Shrowding-sheete and Bere, An vrne of mouldred ashes, which were got From some darke charnell house as 't did appeare, Where on was writ, This is our frailties lot, This's all we shall possesse of all our store, This beggers haue, and Princes haue no more.
These were the reliks which this old mā brought Which oft he mou'd and brandish'd ouer me, And still by teares he seem'd as if he sought To caution me of my mortalitie, But 'las his teares still drown'd his speech me thought, Till he at last by force did silence breake, And to me sleeping thus began to speake: Good rest my Sonne, yet (Sonne) retire from rest, And heare thy Father, pray thee then awake, For though I me deade, yet is my loue exprest Euen in my death; then for thy Fathers sake, Lay vp these last instructions in thy brest, Which with obseruance if thou keepe, they may Cheere thee both heere, and in the latter day. Thou knowest my Sonne, though thou wert last in birth, Thou wert not least in my affection too, Witnesse my care of thee, while I on earth, Soiorned there in that same vale of woe; Yea, I may say, euen in my comforts dearth, When grieues and sorrowes did enuiron me, Which frustrate hopes supplied their hope in thee. Nor could I thinke so many a widdows praier, Orphanes well wishes, and the poore-mans vow, Would turne my fruit of hope into despaire, Since vowes, praiers, wishes, did distinctly show Their loue to me for my deuoutest care, Which from my heart I euer aimed at, To right their wrongs, and setle their estate.
O let my hopes then now in my decease, Confirme my Blessing which I gaue to thee; So shall thy Soule enioy that soueraigne peace Which was prepar'd 'fore all eternitie, For such as made a prosperous encrease In euery vertuous action, which Ile show Succinctly to thee in a word or two. First then my Sonne, because I finde thee here In th'Ile Foolonia, where so many come, VVhose names & Natures with the Ile cohere, I must by way aduertise thee of some VVho (in disguise) not as themselues appeare Earths polititians, who'l not stand to staine Their soules pure lustre for a little gaine. These can dispēce with faith, & wil profes What they least thinke: to guild their guile they'l swear: Yet be their oathes shrowdes to licentiousnesse, (Which thogh they seem a faire pretēce to beare,) Take but their vizard off, they're nothing lesse, Then what they did protest: Beware of them, For these be dangerous Hollow harted men. Yet these be fooles, though they be politike, In that they aime more at a priuate good, A sensuall pleasure, honour, or such like, Then at that supreame end, which vnderstood, VVould their conceits to admiration strike; For weak's their iudgement, and eletion rash, That poize souls treasure lesse thē worlds trash.
Next vnto these, be such as doe aspire Aboue their pitch, and with ambitious wings So are far aboue their sphere: these do desire Nought more then to be popular, which brings A timelesse merited end, for they conspire Their owne subuersion: for few euer haue Ambition sene graye-headed to her graue. These reach at Scepters but do ofttimes fall Below their Center, and though they do make Their owne opinions Axioms, and will call Nought good, but what themselues do vndertake Yet by a publiqe verdit, when they shall Conuicted bee, then they'le confesse & say, Non (thogh more seemin-gwise,) more fools thē they. Next these be Prodigals, who spend their time Like Circes chanted guests: these are but men Onely in forme, for th' part which is diuine, Remaines obscure and darker shines in them Then a small star cloath'd in a cloud doth shine. These men we well may formal shadowes call, For saue meere shadowes, these are nought at all. Aleynous mates, such as were borne to bee But not to liue, pageants that goe and moue, And weare good cloath's, yet view thē inwardly, They are but Trunks at best, or Apes, that loue Or make a shew of loue, whose ends we see, When they haue run on shelfe their whole estate Their Brothell greeting's changd into a grate.
And are not these vaine fooles, that make a losse Of credit, bodie, state, to yeeld delight For one poor moment? ô when they shall tosse Those leaue of their account where appetite Made them insensate and that weeping crosse, Which their profuser follies brought them to, They'le style themselues then Fooles in folio. Next be these staines of honour, which defile Those Temples which ought to be dedicate To an Ethereall power: These though they'ue stile Of women are nought lesse, for why they hate What best beseemes that sex: & hence this Ile Deriues her Name (and aptly doth it take,) When th'stronger sexe is ruled by the weake. These are those lures of death which drawe men on Vnto perdition; These are they that show Like Flowers in May, but they are withered soon (Euen with one breth, for painting (if you blow) Makes the Complexion to be quite vndone: Vnhappie she that when she sees one breath Dissolues her varnish, will not think on death. Of these my sonne no more will I relate Then what I haue: now meane I to descend To teach thee somthing for thy own estate And how thou maist be to thy selfe a friend With a good Conscience, which to violate Were worst of euills: and to forme thy life Better, I'le tell thee how to chuse a wife.
Chuse thou thy wife (my Sonne) nor faire nor foule, Nor gay nor sluttish; silent, yet knowes when And where it's fit to speak, one whose chaste soule Shews modestie in blushes, and will len No eare to light affections, but can coole Heate of desire (for such desires may bee In purest loue) by her enioying thee. Chuse a fixt eye, for wandring lookes display A wauering disposition; let her cheeke Be without art: Chuse me a bashfull nay Before a quick assent; for such as seeke Husbands, for feare they should too long time stay, Resemble those who know their ware is worst, And therefore mean to sell't to whō comes first. Chuse one that's so discreet knows when to spare, VVhen to expresse herselfe in bountie, so As neither niggard-nature may haue share In her, nor lauishnes, when shees'd bestow What Reputation claimes, which speciall care Imports a soueraigne complement or end To such, know when & where to spare or spend. Chuse thee no gadder (for a wife should bee In this respect (I'me sure) like to a Snaile,) VVho (hous-wifelike) still in her house we see; For if her care or prouidence do faile, Her howse-affaires will go disorderlie, And hardlie can that VVife endure to stay In her owne house, whose minde's another way.
Chuse thee no liquorish Gossip, whose delight Is how to please her taste, for seldome can One that's exposed to her appetite Conforme her to the state of any man, VVhich to an honest minde would be a spite, That when thou wish's thy wife a competent Fitting her ranke, she will not be content. Chuse thee no coy precisian, she is too smooth To proue sincere, in simpringst looks we finde Oft most deceit, for these (as th'water doth Seeme calmest where thei're deepest) let thy minde Be so prepar'd, as thou wilt euer loath Such formalists, She-doctors, who haue sought To teach far more then euer they were taught. Chuse thee no wanton that will prostitute Her soule for sensuall pleasure, there attends Nought vpon such, but blasting of repute, Horrid diseases, miserable ends, With which their vicious liues doe euer sute, And worst of worsts, that issue which is got Of Such, may seeme thine owne, but it is not. Chuse thee no VVife that is selfe-singular She'le be her owne instructresse, and in that Shee (through presumption) will be bold to erre, Hating reproofe, which will orethrow thy state, Beware (my Sonne) thou shalt be tide to her, Which seruitude (though it be too to common) Disualues man that's subiect to a woman.
Chuse one for vertue (though a Portion's good) Yet deare's the Portion if thy wife be ill: Ranke not in mariage with too high a blood Lest with her birth she chance to twitt thee still, Equalitie hath euer firmest stoode, Where if descent of different order be It's seldome sene that th'parties do agree. Chuse one that's wise, yet to herselfe not so, Louing to all, familiar to few Inwardly faire, though meane in outward show, Seldom conuersing in a publique vew; Nor yong nor old, but has of yeares enow To know vvhat huswife meanes, & such an one As may supplie thy place whē th'art from home. Chuse one that like a Bosome-friend can keepe Th'imparting of a secret, yet before Thou dost commit to her matters more deepe And consequent, thy iudgement should explore And sound her disposition, so mai'st reape What thou expectst: for if thou find a power Apt to conceale, make her thy counsellour. Chuse one whose Spirit's ready to receaue Impression of remorce for others grieues, For such, best tempered natures euer haue (And kind is she that others vvoes relieues) Let her be open-hand'd to such as craue If they be needie, for thou neuer heard Almes (in charitie) lose her reward.
Chuse one whose Education is more good Then curious, whose life's more approu'd Then noted, chuse one vvhose Parentall blood Makes claime to vertue and is more belou'd For her more choicer parts, then to be wo'ed To an vnchaster motion, being inclin'd To prize her bodies Beautie by her mind. Chuse one vvhose knowing Parents can augment Their daughters portion by a firme aduise, One who will measure her's by thy content, Whose spotlesse thoghts be vvritten in her eyes, Whose Brest is thine clos'd in one Continent, Who know's yet seemes as if she did not know, Inwardly good vvithout an outward show. Chuse one who can play Mother, ere she haue The name of Mother, one that hates nought more Then not to learne, one that imprints her graue Still in her memory, addes to thy store With an aduised providence, nor doth craue More of internall knowledg then to try Her selfe on earth, and study how to die. Chuse one who makes it greatest of her feare T'incurre suspicion, that esteemes her name Before a world of Treasure, that can beare Affliction with indifference, and thinks shame A Matrons comliest habit, one that's deare In her Creators sight, and feares to do Ought that thy selfe will not assent vnto.
Chuse one who doth desire to make each day Her lifes Ephemeris, summing in th' euening tide VVith what respect she past her howres away; Chuse one that doates not on the name of Bride VVith a new fangle itching, but will stay To reason what it meanes, and is afraid (In modest shame) to loose the stile of Maid. Chuse one who's qualifide better in minde Then Bodie: yet if she affect the straine Of harmelesse chamber-musique, let her finde Thy minde in consort with her, (for thogh vaine) Yet 'tis an easie vanitie, and vnkinde Mightst thou be deemd to bar her that delight, Which may be shown euen in an Angels sight. Chuse one whose count'nance promiseth respect Vnto her honour: one that spends the morne In praying, not in painting, whose neglect Is in out-landish fashions, and doth scorne To fancie that which lightnesse doth affect: One whose liues pattern rests as vncontrold, And makes her Youth by imitation old. Chuse one whose house hath no affinitie With follie, lust, ambition, selfe-conceit, Prophanenesse, discord, prodigalitie, Schisme, Superstition, violence, deceit, Opression, srfets, damned vsurie, For where these raigne (my Son) we seldome see Descent of state vnto the third degree.
Chuse one whō thou canst loue, not for constraint Of fortune or of friends, for what are these That thou by them shouldst measure thy content? No, No, in mariage thou thy selfe must please, Or euery day will be an argument Of thy succeeding sorrow, then be wise, Carue for thy selfe, yet heare thy friends aduise. Chuse one whose free election can admit None saue thy selfe that she can dearely loue, Yet so discreet as she can silence it Till th'time her Parents shall her choice approue, (For that implies her modestie and wit) Where rash assents whens'euer they doe come, Are euer seene to bring Repentance home. Chuse one whose Conscience and religion meet In one set concord with thee, for it's this That cements minds together, and makes sweet Th' vnseasonedst passions, giuing way to blisse And future glory, where the peacefull seat Of two distinct mindes now reduc'd to one, Shews equall temper both in mirth and mone. Chuse amongst these thou canst not Chuse amisse, For here's a full variety of such Will fit thy mind as thou thy self wouldst wish, Yet (Sonne) attempt not with vnhalowed tutch To taint their honour with a wanton kisse, For that is but inducement vnto sin, Sith Kisses be the keieslet Treason in.
Therefore chuse one, and that but only one, One that may make two Bodies one-vnite, One that is essence-lesse if left alone VVithout her second; One whose sole delight Is vanisht when her second soule is gone: One that renewes her comfort in her make, And ioyes in her affliction for his sake. Yet know (my son) when thou this wife dost chuse, And (after sute) art master of thy choise, It's fit thou should this louely mirror vse VVith that respect as she may hence reioice To haue a mate so rightly generouse. As with a Wiues-choise therefore I begun, Il'e shew what by a Husband should be don. He may command, yet should not tyrannize, Shew himselfe head, yet not to make his wife His foot, esteeme her as his only prize, (All other Blanks) hate all intestine strife (Saue strife in loue,) he should not exercise The patience of his wife, for one may wrong Silence too much, and force her haue a tongue. He may expresse his loue with modestie, Yet neuer coll and kisse in open place, For I should deeme such loue hypocrisie Or some such thing, if I were in her case; And better is loue showne in priuacie Then 'fore the eies of men, for they will skan Fondnesse or indiscretion in the man.
He may be free in loue, for shee's his owne, Yet such a loue as is exempt from staine Of an insatiate lust: he should not frowne T'expresse his aw too much, his best of gaine Should be to make her vertues riper growne; He should dispence with lighter faults, not vex Himselfe for trifles, shee's the weaker sex: He may restraine her, but t'is not so good, Restraint giues women greater appetite; He may doe much, but who would wrong his blood, His flesh, himself? he may curb her delight, But who knows not whē women's most with stood Their wil's most forward & their wits most neere thē, And wil be frolike thogh their husbāds heare thē? He may haue care, but carking it is worse, He may be getting, yet he should not scrape; He should not slaue himselfe vnto his purse, But freely vse it for his credit sake: He shold not wean his wife from ought by force, But by perswasion: for deprau'd's her will, That's only forc'd by violence from ill. He may part stakes, or all, but it were better To ioine in purse as they doe ioine in care, Where each to other may remaine a debter, For where the man doth limit th'Wife a share, Oft turnes the Wife to be her husbands cheater, Which to preuent (if hee'le be sure of her) In stake, state, store, make her his Treasurer.
He may be Iealous; but't implies suspect That he misdoubts what he himself hath bene, Or that he's troubled with som weake defect His VVife perceaues, thogh to the world vnseene And that from hence proceedeth her neglect Of honour to his Bed: which (sure) would show Basenes in him, and force her to doe soe. He may picke cause and matter of offence (But that would much degenerate from man) He may heare such, as would sowe difference Twixt their vnited loues; but if he scan And rightly weigh mans natiue excellence, He will conclude with this, that there is no man So base, to vrge offence against a woman. He may be busie where h'as nought to doe, And intermedle in his wiues affayres, But fit it is not that he should doe soe For in employments ech haue distinct shares, Nor she to his, nor he to hers should goe: For so the Breeches she might seeme to weare, And he a Coate-queanes name as rightlie beare. He may thinke well on's wife, yet not commend (For he doth praise himself, doth praise his wife): He should in life prepare him for his end And mould his end by forming of his life: He should repose no trust in anie friend In or without him, saue in the firme defence Of a resolu'd and spotlesse Conscience.
Lastly he may (for it is in his power) Now in his Exit, when he turnes to earth To make his wife his sole Executour And by that meanes to begger all his birth, But I should rather limit her a dower Which might her ranke and order well befit, For then so soone she will not him forget. These are the Cautions (Sonne) I'd haue thee keep, Which well obseru'd wil crowne thy happy state, Folding thy dull eyes in a cherefull sleepe, Blessing thy fortune with a vertuous Mate; Storing thy states content with such a heape Of peacefull Treasure, as thou there shalt finde Enough of wealth in thy contented minde. Awake thee then, dull sleepe preuents thy Choice, Here comes she whom thy fancy may approue, Awake I say, and in thy Fate reioice That thou hast met with such a modest Loue: Come come, if thou in Reasons Scale wilt poize Thy selfe with her, thou wilt not curious be But take good Fortune while it's offerd thee Awake, I vade: I wak'd, he vanished, Where casting my amased eyes aside Sent from the Recluse of a troubled head, A modest bashfull virgin me espide, Whom I approachd, being emboldened By th'Apparition which assur'd no lesse Vnto my hopes then honour and successe.
This Virgins name Simpliciana hight, Daughter vnto Zelocto the precise, Who had me once before discarded quite, Because my weaker fortunes did not rise To the hight of her expectance, yet that night (So feruent is affection) did that Maide Trace me along to make her Loue displaide. Shame curb'd her tongue, yet fancy bad her speak, While I suppli'd her silence with my speach, And thus her passion for her selfe did break, Whilst shee stood by and seconded the breach With a teare-trickling eye and blushing cheeke, Where thus I woo'd my selfe, yet in her name, Shewing her loue, yet shadowing her shame. Sir I doe loue you (thus I did begin) I pray you make your selfe your Orator, And so I did, yet taxe me not of sin Or lightnesse, vnfain'd loue omits no houre Though't be distemper'd, but will let him in Whom shee affecteth, for when all's' asleepe, Loues eies are said continuall watch to keepe. I haue a Mother Sir (and then she smil'd) For well shee knew what I intend'd to speake, Whom to obey i'me bound because her child, Yet Reason tels me when we husbands seeke, The stile of Parents is in part exil'd, For we (by virgine-losse) lose our first name, And as our husband's stil'd, wee're stil'd the same.
What then though Riches please anothers eye, My reason tels me there is something more To consummate true ioy, then can relye On outward fortunes, therefore once I swore, And I will keepe my vow religiously, If e're I wed (as halfe resolu'd I am) It shall not be the substance but the Man. Yea, though I were oppos'd on either side, (My Father heere, my chiding Mother there) Yet neither of their humors should deuide My deerest Soule from her orbiculer, For I doe know, though that my Mother chide, My Father fret, and both stand chasing o're me, I did but that themselues haue done before me. With that she broke her speech, with, Sr. quoth she You wooe well for your selfe, but I approue What you haue spoke shall be confirm'd by me, Nor shall my silent passion shrowd my loue, For as thy shadow I will follow thee; Where I assenting to what both had said, Kist and clapt hands, & so the match was made. Now if you like our Match, giue vs our due And bid your selues vnto our Nuptiall day, Our best of welcome shall attend on you, Yea, th' Bride herselfe (all nicenesse lay'd away) Will meet you with a frollique game-some crue, Where to your choice contents, & Loues among, Wee'le be as merry as the day is long. But if (through some dogg'd humour) you'le not come, The Bride-groome saies, A Gods-name stay at home.
The Authors choice. FAire may shee be, but not opinion'd so, For that opinion euer lackies pride; Louing to all, yet so as Man may know She can reserue the proper name of Bride, For weake is that Fort and easie is't to win That makes a Breach for all to enter in. I'de haue her face and blush to be her owne, For th'Blush which Art makes is adulterate, Splene may she haue, yet wise to kepe it downe, Passion, yet Reason too to moderate: Comely not gaudy: she & none but shee Wears the best cloathes that wears to her degree. To his 5 equally-affectionate Sisters all vertuous content. TO you that are the chiefest of my care, Tyes of my loue and figures of my life, Send I this Character, where ech may share Her equall portion in my rare-good Wife, And be the Same, which I'me resolu'd you are: So shall your Husbands say (I doubt it not.) The Sisters liues prou'd what their Brother wrot. Yours iointly as his owne, MVSOPHILVS
Ʋpon the Married Life. HAppy state, yet'las how few Thinke them happy in their choice, When they shun whom they did sue, And in loath'd delights reioice; Loath'd though lou'd, since they are growne To loue others, loath their owne? But who marries to impart Selfe and substance to his wife, Ioining with his hand his hart, Onely gaines this blisse of life, Yea to him is solely giuen To thinke Earth a kinde of Heauen. Happy then or haplesse most, For of all, this hath no meane, Losing least or euer lost, Being still in her extreame; Good if vs'd; abused, ill, Onely well where there's one will.
Vpon the single Life. THis by times-distempers fed, Feeles vertigo in his head, Euer wooing, neuer sped; Lou'd he liues, if loathed, dead, So as nought but doubts and feares, Buz like hornets in his eares. Care he needs not, yet's his care More in that he needeth lesse, Ayming to haue one may share With him in his bale and blesse; Gad he would yet knowes not where, Wandring Starre-like heere and there. Care who loues then, let him liue Single; whereas such neede lesse, As themselues to marriage giue, For these want what they possesse: Care whereof breedes now and then Broken sleepes in many men. Thus choice breeds care, He only may reioice, Who ha's shak't hands with care and ta'ne his choice.
REMAINS after Death: Including by way of introdu∣ction diuers memorable obseruances occasioned vpon discourse of EPITAPHS and Epycedes; their distinction and definition seconded by appro∣ued Authors. ANNEXED THERE BE diuers select Epitaphs and Hearce-attending Epods worthie our obseruation: The one describing what they were which now are not: The other comparing such as now are with those that were. Dignum laude virum musa vetat mori. MVSOPHILVS. Imprinted at London by IOHN BEALE 1618.
TO THE READER. IT may be obiected (Reader) that small is the concurrence, lesse the coherence in the titles of these two Subiects, plea∣santly concluding that it were pittie; Death should so soone seaze on a good-wife by the course of nature, as shee is had heere in pursuit by Deaths remainder. But this obiection may be answered by a twofold solution: First, the Printers importunacie, whose desire was in regard of the breuitie of the former part, to haue it by the an∣nexion of some other proper Subiect enlarged; to whose reasonable demand I equally condescen∣ded. Secondly, the Subiects propriety, which, how∣soeuer by the iudgement of the Critik censurer traduced (the pitch of whose knowledge aimes rather at taxing then teaching) concurres as well with the precedent Title, as Man with mortalitie, Time with mutabilitie, Life with death. And as the more vertuous the neerer ofttimes their disso∣lution, which no doubt proceedes from Gods mercy
that they might haue of him a fuller contempla∣tion; so we commonly see the best Wiues limited to the shortest times, approued by that Maxime: For this each daies experience seemes to show Ill wiues liue longer farre then good ones doe. Let this suffice: if not, let the Subiect it selfe sleight his censure, whose singu∣laritie makes of each thing an error. MVSOPHILVS.
OBSERVATIONS VPON Epitaphs: their Antiquitie and vse; with Authoritie from approued Authors of their deriuations; with diuers other memorable oc∣currences. AS the memory of the dead consists vpon the life of the liuing: so their vertues or vices giue testimony of the dead, whether worthy the me∣mory of the liuing, or to be buried in eternall obliuion? For this cause are Epitaphs (and euer haue beene) engrauen vpon the Monu∣ments, Tombes and Sepulchers of the dead, either to expresse their fame, or by modest silencing what they were, to intimate how their actions li∣uing, deserued no great memory dying. Some I distinguish (Epitaphs I meane) of this nature, in to Morall, others into Diuine, and other is pr¦phane. Morall (to giue instances in each ki be such as include a morall or excellent vse Ma∣n
made by the liuing of the Actions of the dead, by recourse had to their Monuments, where mortalitie is not onely liuely expressed, but their conditions fully and amply charactred. Such were the Epitaphs of Cyrus, Semiramis, Laomedon. It is recordedVide Quin∣tum Curtium in Sup. & vit. Cyr. when Alexander that great Monarch of the World came into Persia, and there chanced to see the famous Tombe of Cyrus whereon was engrauen this Epitaph or inscripti∣on: Whosoeuer thou be, or whencesoeuer thou shalt come and beholdest this Tombe, know that I am Cy∣rus, who translated the Empire from the Medes to the Persians: pray thee do not enuie me, for this little clod of earth that doth couer me. Alexander (I say) see∣ing this inscription, could not containe himselfe from teares: making (without all question) this morall vse of it: That Princes (though neuer so potent or eminent, so victorious or puissant) but becomes subiect to the common doome and cen∣sure of Fate, and must of necessitie leaue all their conquests and victories (by a forced surrender) to the ineuitable command of death. So as Alex∣ander when he beheld the Tombe of Achilles, cri∣ed out, Felix es, qui talem laudum tuarum praeconem abuisti (nempe Homerum:) so heere he wept bit∣erly, saying, Infelix es Cyre qui tantis victorijs clytus extitisti, tamen à morte te vinci patieris.  reade (that I may goe forward in prosecution instances of this nature:) That Cyrus (also)
when he beheld the Tombe of that memorable Queene Semyramis, and saw this to be writ vpon it: Whosoeuer shall digge vp this stone which now doth couer me, shall finde an infinite masse of treasure vn∣der it, commanded the same to be taken vp; which being done (in stead of Treasure) he found this morall vnder it; None but misers (or godlesse persons) would digge vp the Graues of the dead. An excellent caution for the couetous wretch, who is euer catching by hooke or crooke, Quo iure, qua{que} iniuria, per fas nefasve; not regarding the meanes, so he may attaine the end; nor respecting pietie nor common humanitie, publique causes or Countries benefit, so he may please his vnsatis∣fied desires. But this violation of the dead, this in∣iury done against those who sleepe in peace, hath been euen by the Pagans themselues esteemed ex∣ecrable: so as theIn the dis∣course of Asia and Affr. vid. Egypt Solem. Funer. Aegyptians are interred with their best gems, or∣naments, and Iewels: which (so strickt be their Lawes in that re∣spect) are neuer embezeled, but remaine with them; hoping (saith the Historian) that their substance will deliuer them, if any punishment or vnworthy censure should be inflicted on them. The tombe and mo∣nument of that perfidious Prince (Vide Homer. eleg. sanè. Graecorum: Odyssea errorum, Ilias Ma∣lorum, &c. Laomedon) had this Epitaph:
Qui cum Hoste fidem fefellit Cum morte fidem seruauit. The morall thus expressed: When Hercules (in the deliuery of Troy from that deuouring mon∣ster, a Whale; and in the rescuing of Laomedons faire daughter Hesyone, should by couenant haue receiued two milk-white steeds: the king retiring to his (miserable Troy) commanded the gates of the Citie to be shut against him; infringing his faith and promise; which so incensed the ire and indignation of Hercules against him, as within few yeares his Citie was sacked and demolished, his Subiects captiued, his daughter to Telamon es∣poused; and himselfe (to extinguish the remain∣der of ingratitude, fully to appeale the enraged furie of Hercules, was slaughtered. Whose mo∣nument was reserued (as a perpetuall remem∣brance of perfidious dealing to his posterity, with the inscription aboue mentioned. TombesThe entiqui∣tie of Tombes. haue beene aunciently vsed; as wee may reade in sacred writ: where one Sepulcher was kept solemnly for a whole familie, euery one re∣turning in Sepulchra maiorum: but neuer so sump∣tuous before the erection of that memorable Tombe (or Shrine rather) of Prince Mausolus king of Caria: whose Queene Artemisia erected such a gorgeous Tombe in his memory, as all Se∣pulchers since (especially of Romane Empe∣rours
and Carian Princes) are called to this day Mausolea: the inscription this, Si te non teneat, tumulum struet ossa tenere, Quem tibi defuncto coniugis optat amor. Two monuments we reade of to be famous, in that their erection was the foundation of many potent and puissant people: some also were taken for preseruers of that Region wherein they were planted and seated: as theTwo aunci∣ent Monuments which were cal∣led Asyla pa∣triae &c. Tombe or Sepulcher of Aiax in the Re∣tian shore: and the Tombe of A∣chilles in Sygaeum: Which two, euen to this day continue memorable: so as in the greatest depopulations and sackings of Cities, the ruinating of their Forts and Castles of defence, they were euer kept vntouched (as shrines and monuments inuiolate, obelisks con∣secrate, or statues deified: supposing (in their owne blindnesse deceiued) that their preseruati∣on was deriued from them. But to proceed in Epitaphs (on which our dis∣course doth principally consist:) they are deriued from the Greeke & signifie as much as an inscriptiō, or any thing which is pla∣ced or fixed vpon the Tombe (Quae in scitis & scu∣tis quorundam Regum vidimus saith Lipsius:) as E∣pycedion (deriued from  or lugubria ca∣nere) are writ before or after the corps interred, but not vpon the Tombe: being more dilated
measures, either expressing the memorable acti∣ons of his life (or if nothing worthy in his life) at least modestly to shut vp his desertlesse life, with a commemoration of humane frailty: silen∣cing the person, lest his description should mini∣ster either matter of offence or assentation: of of∣fence, if truely expressed; of assentation, if aboue merit praised. Hee that neither benefited him∣selfe nor his Countrie; (but, vt Canis in presepi) was rightly demonstrated with this Impressa, Hic Vir diu fuit: This man was long, but liued not long: for life and being haue an essentiall diffe∣rence. We are said to liue when we expresse our life by externall effects, knowing for what wee were ordained; for what borne; not to retire our selues from publique affaires, for priuate ease: but to further our Countrie, and propagate her glory by serious and vigilant managements, both at home and abroad. This man is said to liue, that hath left some monument or testimonie behinde him that he liued. We are only said to be, when we only breathe, respectles of either publique or priuate: imitating those Flies Ephemerae, which flicker a little with their wings (limiting their life within one day) & presently die. These as the Philosopher saith, spirant tantùm non viuunt. But too much of them, both die: Yet this is the difference: the one dy∣ing, leaueth a testimony behinde him that hee once liued; The other being dead, hath no
hope that his memory shall euer bee reuiued. Many pretie Epitaphs the Romanes vsed; briefe, yet ample enough to describe the nature of the person whom they would haue memori∣zed. Virgil writing on one BalistaJn vit. Nar. & frag. (a great sword and buckler-man) as I may terme him, frequenting places of aduantage, to rob, and surprise passengers vn∣awares, cheeres the poore way-faring-man with this comfortable inscription on Balistas graue: Who ere he be that passeth by this way,Monte sub hoc laepidum teg. &c. May safely trauell both by night and day, And that he may confirme it with his eies, Vnder this heape of stones Balista lies, Or thus, Since the time Balista heere interred was, Or day or night the Traueller may passe. And that vpon his Flie or Gnat: Heere I expresse what thou once did to mee, Solemnizing thy death to honour thee. And that of Sylenus the drun∣ken Swaine: Vnder this tuft of wood lies there a Swaine, Came drunke to Earth, went drunke to Earth againe:
And that of Minos king of Crete Heere Minos lies who plai'd the Iudge so well On Earth, that now hee's made a Iudge in Hell. This Minos for his excellent iudgement and iustice in Crete, being seuere, and therefore his at∣tribute was rightly giuen him: he was said to be , ough and seuere, exact and austere in all his censures: for which cause he was trans∣lated from the principalitie of Crete, to the tribu∣nall of Hell: (as Poets faine.) In the discourse of arguments of this nature: as we haue many write Epitaphs (some panegyrick) in way of commendation and praise: others in∣uectiue to expresse the merite or defect of any person: we should be warie heerein, lest either by vaineSicut lingua loquen∣tis proficit in aur au∣dientis, ita calamus scribentis in oculo le gentis, & ad interiora cordis peruenit sensus dirigentis, sicut verba instruentis: Albin. in praefatio: comment in Iohan. & adulatorie praise, we giue error a warrant, or by too detractiue inuection, wee seeme (grauius in sepulchra mortuorum calcare, that I may vse the Philosophers saying. But to omit the vse of Epi∣taphs, which of themselues haue euer ministred occasion of imitation or detestation: I will proceede to the antiquitie of Epitaphs, and afterward descend to the seuerall branches which I haue before in my methode to my selfe pro∣pounded.
Epitaphs haue bene euer vsed vpon the Tombes of the deceased, to express their Vertues or vices. Of all the seuenVide La∣ert. de vit. philoso. Sages of Greece, not one there is, but charactred to the ful by their especiall appropriates: and though diuers (in contempt of vaine glory or ostentation) haue precisely commanded vpō their death-beds, that no statue, shrine, nor inscription should be erected or engrauen in their memories: yet so gratefull was posteritie to so noble pre∣decessors, as they would in no wise suffer so Va∣liant exploits either publique or priuate, to bee buried in silence and obliuion. Yea euer in those times, where fines imperij tueri magis, quàm pro∣ferre, mos erat: as in those Golden times, and empires of Vexores King of Aegypt, and Tanais King of Scythia which Historians take to be the first Monarchs and sole Gouernours in the world; euen thē (I say) were Epitaphs of this nature verie frequent, and common: and in Ninus time, who succeeded, or rather dissolued their gouernment, we reade Epitaphs euen written vpon his Tombe; describing his nature and disposition at large, the manner of his discipline in warre, the continu∣ance of his Empire or Gouernment, and the occa∣sion of his death. To speake of the effeminate Gouernment and principality of the Amazons (women of incom∣parable and incredible fortune, valour and re∣solution) wee haue yet those Tombes and Se∣pulchers
of theTumuli Amazo∣num. Amazons celebrated to this day amongst those Pagans, for the infinite numbers slaine by Hercules, in his inuasion of Amazon: where the worthie exploits of those (more then women) for their discipline and experience in warres, are in golden Characters registred and recor∣ded. We reade euen in those (who for their magna∣nimitie and resolution) were termed  or Heroes, men of heroicke dispositiō, to haue had in former times inscriptions vpon their Graues and Mo∣numents, to expresse what they were liuing, that deserued so exceeding commendation dying. Such were Alcides, Theseus, Hector, Perithous, and the renowne of Greece (the auncient Pa∣troclus,) vpon whose graue whilst Achilles lea∣ned, he imagined true valour to be charactred on his Graue, and a sufficient occasion of exciting and instigating the vnworthiest and vnresoluedst spirits to take in hand managements of greatest difficulty. We reade of Tarina Queene of Saca, that she was no lesse memorable for her sepulcher, (sur∣passing both in bountie & specious edifice, then the Pyramides of Aegipt; Labyrinth in Crete, cō¦triued and inuented by Dedalus, or that sumptu∣ous Monument erected by Artemisia in honour of her husband Mansolus. If we should descend to the Persian Princes
elected after the (premature death ofGladio sua sponte euaginato grauiter vulneratus occubuit Iust 1. lib: Cambyses) wee shall there more eminently surueigh the processe of their go∣vernment, and their ends (some with glorie and renowne) others with no lesse infamie and reproch attaind. Yet to vse decencie in the celebration of fune∣rall rites and solemnities: for I know (that I may vse the morallists opinion) there is a vaine-glorie euen in death; and as the pompe of death doth more terrifie then death it selfe, so doth the pompe of death more excite men to die willingly then their expectance after death. For this all the Romaine Emperours would haue their Tombes erected in their life time, with all externall osten∣tation, and popularitie: to intimate a kind of Empire euen in death: which may appeare by that (which Suetonius speakes in the life of Augustus) that before his death, the statue which was erected and set vp in his memorie be∣ing strucken with Thunder, lost the first letter of his Name (to wit C.) which signified as the Au∣gurs diuined, that within a hundred daies imme∣diatelie following, he should depart the world. Cato in dede (who tooke it nobile lethum to die for his countrie and the preseruation of her li∣bertie) would haue no shrine, statue, nor inscriptiō set vp in his memory; supposing his vertues to be sufficient annals and records to eternise his name. Of this minde was Phocion the Athenian (both
Stoicks for their discipline) seeming vnwilling to imitate the popular in exterior rites: being (as they deemed) able to expresse their owne liues by their deaths, their deaths by their liues. Which may be the cause which moued Flaccus to con∣temne all monuments, with this resolued securi∣ty: Vnde mihi lapidem &c. What auailes it to haue Monuments, Stones, Shrines or Statues to memo∣rise Vs? what skils it to haue labels hung vpon our Sepulchers (as those siluer swords of Greece ouer the Sepulcher of Philip; those golden Ar∣chers of Persia ouer the memorable tombe of Ar∣taxerxes? as the same Poet saith, —Non datur emis∣so reditus tibi— It is true: yet so respectiue should man be of the demerited & praise-worthy acts of his Ancestors (so superstitiously careful that their monuments be not in obliuion smothered) as no time should be omitted (wherein we may as the Orator saith, defunctorum memoriae seruire) but with all instance to perfect & accōplish the same. WeVid. descr. Af∣fric. Qui sepulcra maiorum vt pro∣pria domicilia la∣resque existima∣runt. reade that the Pagans haue been so respectiue hereof, that the monumēts of their parents & kins∣folkes haue been no lesse deare to them, then their own houses, their owne habitations and dwellings: Esteeming their reputation (to be purchased) by the purchase of their Auncestors glory, and aug∣mented by the preseruation of their memory. Agathocles Prince of Syracuse (willing to e∣rect
a Monument or Statue in his owne memory, to expresse humane frailtie) commanded that the head and vpper parts should be made of solid gold, but the feete of earth; with this Impresse: Sic omnia firma. An excellent obseruation and caution to put Man in minde of his substance and subsistence, constitution and dissolution: that standing on no firmer feete then earth, no stronger arches (then staies of mortality) he should euer feare lest so proud a building should fall, being supported by so vnstable and vnable props. But for Antiquitie (as shee is said to be the warrant of things done, the confirmer of things present, and president of things to come; so oft∣times vices haue beene bolstered by her, impieties authorized by her, and a direction to greater laid open by her. I will descend therefore briefely to particularize such Epitaphs (vsed by the Anci∣ents) which remained for caueats or obseruations in succeeding times. As others (likewise) that mo∣ued and excited men to vndertake valiant and couragious exploits in hand. We reade that Augustus (when he died at No∣la, being a Towne seated in the middle part of Campania) his souldiers to expresse and manifest their loue to him dying, as they had done their al∣legeance to him liuing, burst out in seuerall passi∣ons of sorrow, griefe, and pensiue distractions, with these speeches: O God, that he had either ne∣uer beene borne, or that he had neuer died: For the
oneAlterum e∣nim pessimi in∣cepti, exitus praeclari alterū &c. is an occasion of our misery, the other a president of his glory. For so great was his loue towards the Citi∣zens, that by his owne care and di∣ligence, he commanded great abun∣dance of graine to be brought out of Aegypt to sustaine his people welnie consumed with famine. Few of the twelue Romane Emperors reade we so excellent and exquisite commendations of: saue Titus, who receiued this Impresse euen vpon his hearse, to be Amor & deliciae generis humani: Mans darling, the Worlds mirror, and the flower of all Romane Emperors either before or since; being directed and enlightned no further then with the beameling of nature. For to recapitulate the natures of all those Princes, twixt Augustus the first of the twelue (saue one) to Titus, the last of the twelue, saue one, we shall see their dispo∣sitions variable, inconstant, dissolute, and gene∣rally vicious. Tiberius taxed for his subtiltie, Caligula for his insolencie, Claudus for his effeminacie, Nero for his cruelty, Galba for his intemperancie, OthVita omnis tur∣pis, maxime ado∣lescentia &c. vid. Sext. Aurel. de Oth. for his inhumanitie, Vitellius for his prodigalitie, Ʋespasian for his mi∣sery: These haue wee charactred (which the Romane Annals haue expressed to life) such as either merited eternall infamie by their vicious gouernment, or due commendation for
their many morall vertues wherewith they were endued and inuested. Vita mortuorum est in memo∣ria viuentium (saith one very well:) for it renues and reuiues the memory of the dead, and makes him liue in name, honour and reputation, when the sithe of Fate hath pruned him. For this all the Romane Emperors haue labou∣red, desiring to become memorable after death: Curtius throwing himselfe into the lake; Vtican purchasing his liberty by voluntary death; Hora∣tius Cocles throwing himselfe violently into Tyber to preserue his Countries libertie;In capite eius veluti cornua e∣merse runt &c. Valer. Max. lib. Genitius Cippus subiecting him∣selfe to death to propagate his Countries glory; P. Decius who rushed into the fore-front of the enemies (encountring a whole Armie) to make his owne memory more famous and illustrious: The like of Scipio Affricane, who to extinguish that menacing fire of Hannibal, deuoted himselfe to death for the safegard of his Country. These and many more, who illustrated their Names by atchieuements done liuing, expected (without question) no little celebration of their name and memory dying: and though their opinion rea∣ched not to the soules immortality; yet they could extend their imaginations thus farre, as a famous and memorable death surpassed an infa∣mous and ignominious life: wishing rather to die in fame, then liue in eternall obscurity. Which
caused some (of disposition vnequall to the for∣mer) to perpetrate some hainous and enormious crime, whereby they might purchase fame euen by infamie: Such was Herostratus who burned the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, to purchase him∣selfe a name. Such was Turulius who hewed downe the graue that was consecrate to the Tem∣ple of Aesculapius, to erect him a ship, that once Religion (as he himselfe auowed) might ride on the water: And such was Q. Fuluius who to en∣rich himselfe (by sinister meanes) tooke from the Temple dedicated to Iuno Lucinia, tegulas quas∣dam marmoreas, for which he sustained condigne punishment; amongst which we may insert that sacrilegious Prince or Tyrant rather (for his Em∣pire of Syracuse as it came vnto him by an vsur∣ped succession, so it was gouerned by as cruell and tyrannicall a disposition) bearding the Gods, and afterwards robbing the Altars and Temples (of their sacred ornaments.) For coming one day to the Temple of Iupiter Olympius, and seeing his I∣mage gloriously beautified with aQuo eum Ty∣rannus Hiero &c. manubijs Cartha∣giniens. ornauerat &c. vestment of gold (of an ex∣ceeding weight and inestimable price) commanded it to be taken from him, and a woollen garment to be giuen him in the stead of it: saying, A coate of gold was too heauy for him in Summer, too cold in Winter; but a woollen garment was fitter for both seasons. Many of these haue we
recorded by Historians, whose liues were no lesse prophane, then their ends miserable. Vpon all which (if we might insist vpon this argument) Epitaphs very answerable to their in∣famous and despicable liues might be produced. But we must proceed, because this summarie dis∣course, (which I haue heere placed and prefixed (as a preamble or fore-runner) to our Epitaphs following) is but intended onely to demonstrate the vse and effect of Epitaphs, with their first in∣stitution, & their distinct kinds arising from their primarie vses. It is true that there is no necessitie in Sepul∣chers, or specious monuments; for coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam: which moued Diogenes the Cynick to bid his friends cast his body vnto the dogges when he was dead: and being answered by them, that the dogges would teare and rent it: Set a staffe by e (quoth he) and I wil beate them from it. Yet in this seeming contempt of buriall, we shall reade in most of the liues of the Pagans, that they were respectiue where they should be interred, erecting (as in part hath beene mentio∣ned) very goodly and glorious Sepulchers in their life-times to eternise their memory after death: with whom (it fared many times) as it fared once withShebna sibi tumu∣la condit, quem fata negarunt. Shebna, who made him∣selfe a Sepulcher in one Coun∣trie, but was buried in ano∣ther.
The first that bu∣ried such as fell in warre.Hercules (we reade) to be the first that euer buried such as fell in warre. Many ancient Epitaphs we haue by transcription, engra∣uen vpon the monuments of the deceased: as in the Northerne parts especially, where in the very ruines of time, we may see some monumentall in∣scription inserted, to reuiue the memory of the dead. As in the warres of the Saxons, Picts, and Danes: no coast being more frequent then the North, to expresse the memorable acts done in former time, as also to set out the very places and circumstances of things atchieued, with the manuscripts traduced from former occurrents e∣uen to these present times: many curious and se∣rious Antiquaries hauing viewed and particularly set downe the especiallest records heereof with diuers memorable inscriptions happily occurring to their surueigh, I will ouerpasse the same, lest I should seeme to trifle out my time with an im∣pertinent discourse. It is true that a Souldiers resolution euer fixed on braue attempts, and the inlarging of his Coun∣tries glory, should rather aime at fame after death, then to erect for himselfe a curious monument in his death: which moued Caesar in the plaine of Pharsalie to sy, —Sep. li. Lucan. Capit omnia tellus Quae genuit: coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam.
And againe that martiall straine of valour: Nil agis hac ira, tabesne cadauera soluat, An rogus, hand spectat: placido natura receptat cuncta sinu. And so concludes the Declamour in Seneca: Na∣ture giues euery man a graue: seconded by old Anchises resolution: Nec tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos. Yet humanitie requires these finall obsequies, not onely in remembrance of our dead friends, but euen to manifest the sinceritie of our loues, in erecting monuments ouer them dead, which might preserue their memory, and confirme our affections in their deaths. The friends of Cleombrotus (surnamed Ambro∣ciat) seeing his much lamented end, desired much to expresse their loue vnto their dead friend; yet withall to conceale the infamie and reproach of his death: yet Callimachus plaied the Epigram∣matist vpon his graue, whilest his deare friends deplored his vntimely end. The Epigram (inscri∣bed after the forme of an Epitaph) being fixed on his Tombe, whence all Epitaphs haue their deno∣mination, was this, -Vita vale, muro praeceps delapsus ab alto Dixisti moriens, Ambrociata puer, -Nullū in morte malū credēs. sed scripta Platonis Non ita erant animo percitienda tuo.
In English thus, The yong Ambrociat, whilst himselfe he threw From off the wall, bad to his life adew, Deeming (as Plato wrote) in death's no woe, But he mistooke it: Plato meant not soe. This booke which mooued Ambrociat to this precipitate attempt, is imagined to be Platoes Phaedo of the immortalitie of the soule: which al∣so (by a misconstruction) Cato Vtican apprehen∣ding, laid violent hand vpon himselfe, to free him∣selfe from the tyranie and illimited soueraignty of the vsurping Caesar. But to our argument pro∣pounded. We haue shadowed briefely the first branch (or kinde which we proposed in the beginning) to wit, morall Epitaphs, being such as conduce to instruction either publike or priuate, wherein (by the very inscriptions or titles engrauen vpon the Tombes of the deceased) some haue beene moo∣ued to imitate their memorable liues in actions and attempts of like nature; as Caesar in the sur∣ueigh of Mithridates, Augustus in the surueigh of Caesar, Alexander by the monument of A∣chilles, Achilles by the fame-engrauen monument of Patroclus, Aenaeas by the renowned Tombe of the matchlesseAndromach in Hom. called He∣ctor Troiae . Hector, and Hector by the eternized memorie of Antenor: These were morall, in∣ducing or exciting Impresses, draw∣ing the mindes of the beholders
to the management of the like approued and re∣doubted acts. We will now proceede to Epitaphs (comming neerer a diuine composition) excellent for their graue and diuinely mouing sentences; pithy for their effect, and profitable for their vse. That is an excellent one of Scaligers: Scalige∣ri quod reliquum est: and that no lesse diuine of Caius: Fui Caius. Epitaphs of this kinde seeme little affectiue, yet include so exquisite a straine, as they may rightly be termed diuine: surpassing mortalitie in description of our mortality; they delineate the state of man, extenuate his pompe, and shew to what end man was created, not to be onely, but to liue: there being an essentiall difference (twixt being and liuing) as I haue before specifi∣ed. We haue some of these which set out vanity in her naturall colours: and imply diuinely, what they propound morally. Diuers we reade of, that fearefull (it seemes) to commend the writing of their Epitaphs to po∣steritie, would euer be prouided of one in their owne time: which (to expresse their worth bet∣ter) did not shew or character their worth, but in a modest silence describe their owne frailetie, shutting vp their fame and memory, with a fare∣well to Earth and Vanitie. These be soueraigne cordials to cheere the drouping and deiected spi∣rit: such as liue iniuried by time, oppressed by
greatnesse of enmity, and slaued to penurie: Such I say, as liue obscurely in the eye of the World, neither noted nor reputed. When the rich-man seeth nothing vpon Croesus graue, but a Fui Croesus: nor the poore-man vpon Irus then, Fui Irus: what difference at their dissolution? though in the eye of vaine and po∣pular accompts, there be a maine difference. These diuine Epitaphs moue the intellectual part to an apprehension of humane condition; to con∣sider that we are al made exHomo ex humo. Terra à terendo. Cadauer à cadendo. Vèrmis quia inermis. ea∣dem argilla: & as no difference in frame & module, so no differēce in the end and period; only that which was writ vpon the Bauarians graue shal ei∣ther confirme our hopes, or make vs eternally mi∣serable:—Sit comes intemerata fides: or that which was engrauen on the Tombe of a Venetian Lord: QuiQuod Seneca in Vatiae tumulum scripsit. Hic situs est Vatia: dormire e∣nim magis quam viuere videbatur. vixit, viuet, qui fuit, ille perit. One no lesse diuine then the o∣ther, distinguishing betwixt be∣ing and liuing: where our actions must be poised, our intentions dis∣cussed, and the vniuersalitie of nature discoue∣red We are drawne by these Epitaphs to disua∣lue the pompe and port of this World; lesse to pamper the inordinate and distempered affecti∣ons of the Flesh: holding as the Platonists held, onely the Soule to be Man, and the body to be a
case or couer to put it in: And as Seneca termes it, a rinde or barke: so to fixe onely the light and splendor of the internall part vpon that soueraign end, by which we may ende in glory, as we were borne in misery. And miserable did the Philosopher account that man, whose best of memories consisted in faire & eminent obsequies; vertue being the best shrine, the exquisitest monument which can be erected to honour man. How should we best de∣scribe our selues, and the excellencie of our owne natures, but by the contempt of death, expresse our owne affections euen vpon our graues, shew∣ing our selues to be Christians? The memorable inscriptions of the ancient Princes (who died in their Countries right) may excite vs to managements of no lesse cōsequence. The Inscription vponQui pannosus sar∣menta collo gerens, ca∣stra hostium ingreditur. Iust. secundo lib. Co∣drus Tombe, who was Prince of Athens, was — Haec mors mihi nomen ademit. The like we reade of Attilius Regulus, who rather then he would infringe his faith, willingly returned vnto his enemies the Carthaginians: where, after he had endured intollerable tor∣ments, and vnworthie of so great and equally dis∣posed minde, he commanded this Epitaph to be engrauen vpon his obscure Tombe, Nec sine spe perij. Many such may we reade in the memorable Annals of the Romanes, specially in the warre
be∣twixt Carthage and Rome: in which warres, no man of esteeme or ennobled ranke died, that was not graced with some inscription vpon his monu∣ment. Yet Pompey the Great, whose prudence in go∣uerning, sinceritie in disposing, promptnesse in attempting, and firme resolution in seconding, got him an eternal fame, both at home & abroad: abroad in following Scylla at home in bearing vp the main building of the State with his graue and discreete supportance: euen this Pompey had but a short Epitaph writ vpon him, Hîc situs est magnus. Heere lies the pompe of a puissant and potent Pompey: heere lies Romes Atlas, the Easterne terror, and his friends aduancer: one whom nei∣ther imminence of perill, nor mutation of state, nor occurrence in fate could alter or dismay: E∣uen that powerfull Columne is now ruined, his glory dazled, and the mansion which was made glorious by him in Rome, becomes reduced to a poore and homely Sepulcher in Aegypt. One chancing to come where king Dennis was buried: being depriued of crowne and dignity by reason of his tyrannicke gouernment, and be∣fore his death had retired himselfe to a simple Schoole, where he taught scholers; saying, Et re∣gam inuitis fatis: vnderstanding the course and processe of his gouernment, writ this short Epi∣taph vpon his Tombe:
Dennis eras, & Dennis eris, nec rege minorem Te tua fata vocant: Rexque Magister eris: Rex populi crudelis eras, puerisque Magister Saeuior, his celerem fata dedere finem. Nec regis inuitis fatis, è culmine regni, Vt cadis, admissum est deseruisse scholam. In English thus, Dennis thou was, and Dennis thou shalt be, For thy owne Fates bestow this stile on thee, King both to men and children, yet in them Thou was more fierce to children then to men: Which when the fates perceiu'd, they thoght t'extend Thy course continued il with swifter end. Spurne not against the fates, imperious foole, For as thou lost thy crown, thouse leaue thy scoole In Epitaphs of this nature, a more then morall instruction or institution is to be required: ex∣pressing onely the intellectuall part without any prophane or heathenish inuention, being tran∣scendent to the vulgar reach or apprehension of humane vnderstanding: many diuine and holy es∣cripts of the ancient Fathers may be comprehen∣ded heerein: being such as treated aswell of the life and discipline of the dead, as especiall mo∣tiues of imitation; or cautions of detestation to the liuing. Here Ambition pourtraied in her co∣lours, occasions her owne end by her owne vn∣bounded desires. There Couetousnesse (with the
misers Motto) is exemplified, and how many e∣uils are continually attending her, according to the definitiue censure of Flaccus, Semper aarus eget. Heere Sacriledge instanced in our ancient Albane Brennus; on whom we reade, that after his many conquests and victorious attempts in Gaule, and the sacking of Rome, with many rich booties and spoiles obtained in those warres; at last attempted the beautifull and rich Temple of Delphos consecrate to Apollo, being excited and instigated by Euridanus and Thessalonus to aduen∣ture so difficult a Prouince, onely in hope of ob∣taining inestimable treasures, reserued (say they) for such as would boldly attempt, and without feare of the gods, or prophanation of Religion, durst attempt the ransacking and rifling of such sacred treasures. But behold, the purposes of the wicked were confounded (and euer may Sacri∣ledge haue the like successe) for suddenly Brennus with all his populous Armie, were discomfited, their execrable deuices frustrated, and themselues (all or most) subiected to miserable ends: the par∣ticulars whereof are more fully and amply dila∣ted on by the Romane Historian Trog. Pompeius. Their Epitaph we finde thus, (being extracted out of ancient Annals) concording well with the na∣ture of their crime, and miserie of their end: Haec via Sacrilegis, haec regia porta sepultis, A Delphi laribus limen adire Ditis.
In English thus, This way Church-robbers go, who seek to fall From great Apolloes shrine to Plutoes Hall. These kind of Epitaphs may include or com∣prehend all such, as for any excellent part or ma∣nagement domestike or publique, haue beene ac∣counted worthy memory: or such, as for emi∣nence of place haue beene no lesse markeable, then singular in discharge of their authoritie: for acts of puissance & renowme that Epitaph engra∣uen on the Tombe of Willinam Marshall Earle of Pembroke, in the time of Henry the third: Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hybernia; Solem Anglia, Mercurum Normannia, Gallia Martem. And that Epitaph writ vpon Theobald Blois Earle of Champaine (too diuine for any mortall crea∣ture: Non hominem possum, non andeo dicere numen. And that of one Glare expressing (in one man) an Epitome of all vertues: Hic pudor Hippoliti, Paridis gena, sensus Vlyssis, Aeneae pietas, Hectoris ira iacet. That memorable one also vpon the Sepulcher of Maud mother to Henrie the second: descri∣bing the excellencie of her descent by her Father, the greatnesse of her selfe by her match, and her renowmed issue which (of all other) made her
most admired, and after death the especiallest motiue of her eternall memorie. Ortu magna, Viro maior, sed maxima partu, Hîc iacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens. Ancient times haue esteemed these Epitaphs suf∣ficient in themselues to perpetuate their names, being records euer true: for as the Orator saith, Quis tam infaelici genio, leuique ingenio qui mortuis assentari cupit? and as the Poet saith,Lucan. Quis Busta timebit? Herostratus was charactred aswell for his infamie, as Themisto∣cles for his renowme and chiualrie. Euen Metel∣lus modestie, Lentulus leuitie, Publicolas pietie, Cethegus crueltie, Appius affabilitie, and Ciceroes constancie had their true lineatures: euery one mouldned and moulded after their deserts: for these, as examples, be of more power and efficacie to the practise and prosecution of vertue, then a∣ny instructiō or document whatsoeuer; draw men more attentiuely to their imitation, whose ver∣tues they see merit admiration, as I haue in part before touched. It is the Historians obseruation, that such as had worthy and vertuous Parents, were wont to repaire vnto their Tombs (Quasi ad propria vitae documenta) and by their memory to be excited to the like meanes of atchieuing glo∣ry and renowme, that their ends might answere such exemplarie parents. Though it was Lycas conclusion in the Tragedie, to attribute all merit
to ones proper action, and not to the honour of their Auncestor. True it is indeed, that our pre∣decessors glory cannot properly be entitled ours, their actions being onely as monuments of their fame, presidents for vs to follow, and indeed pro∣claimers of our bastardy, if we chance to dege∣nerate from such rare and exquisite mirrors. Yet was Sextus Pompeius honoured for his Fathers worth: and such as descended from vertuous pa∣rents, were onely thought fit to match with Pa∣tricians. Those foureAureliae, Mu∣tiae, Laeliae, Cor∣neliae. ancient fa∣milies in Rome, whose vertuous and modest demeanures got them the name of chast matrons, were well portraied by proper Epitaphs, and in their memory were these sentences engrauen: Heere Romes honour lies buried: Heere lies the foundation of Auncient families: Heere modest Laelius from his Laelia, Pompey the yonger from Cornelia, From Mutia, came a Mutius Sceuola, And good Aurelius from Aurelia. By these memorable Impresses, were their suc∣cessors ennobled, and to their imitation more ar∣dently excited then by any precept or instruction whatsoeuer: the cause may be drawne from that affectation of honour naturally ingraffed in vs from our birth, whereby we vse to be spurred and instigated to the imitating of such as by any pro∣per
demerit either inherent in themselues, or tra∣duced from others to themselues, haue purchased renowme: whence it is, that the Poet saith: Im∣mensum calcar gloria habet: neither hath it beene accounted a little glory, or slender honour for the successors of so noble and famous Auncestors: whose monuments were as Annals of their worth and proclaimers of their glory; which that they might preserue the better, they vsed to solemnize their Funerals with exceeding honours, and to e∣rect their Sepulchers with all state and magnifi∣ficence, deputing Surueiours (which should look to the erection and preseruation thereof:) calling euer their graues Accommodatissima vitae specimina, Without which the memory of their vertues might seeme obscured, their glory darkened, and a great many of those excellent parts wherewith they were endued, buried in silence and obliuion. True it is, that gorgeous Sepulchers little auaile the dead: which moued the Philosopher to say, that they were not so much made for the dead, as for the liuing. The Orator termed them mirrors of humane frailtie, characters of our glory, and vndoubted Arguments of our mortalitie. Ano∣ther examplifying this more fully saith, They are Glasses wherein we may contemplate our selues and others, motiues of imitation wherein we may follow others, and images of affinitie being of the like nature and substance with others. No better or more per∣fect Resemblance can be made twixt man and his
creation, the image of his life, and necessitie of his dissolution; the state of his birth, and occasion of his death; the forme of his beginning, and fashi∣on of his end, then twixt a dead-mans Sepulcher, and the Worlds Theatre. Heere many Actors (some whereof like your Pantomimes in Rome, are generally approued in all parts) play on this terrestriall stage of humane frailtie. Some abso∣lute Machiauels (irreligious politicians) shrou∣ding vicious purposes vnder vertuous pretences: other simple-honest soules, who (like your ob∣scure Actor) stands either not at all obserued, or else so generally derided, as he wisheth rather to be a doore-keeper in the mansions of Heauen, then a disgraced Actor on this stage of Earth. There your light Curtizan (who like anotherSalust. Semphronia, tanta est libidine accensa vt viros saepius petet, quâm petetur, pro∣stitutes her body to ruinate her soule, exposing her selfe to all, that she might become hatefull to all: to be briefe, in the surueigh of all states and conditions (for euery particular vice incurres a peculiar shame) we may bring the Miser to his graue, who while he liued, was subiect to his vice: The Curtizan from her brothell of vanitie, to her fellow-pupils hearse, there to contemplate her owne frailty. The Ambitious skie-soaring thoughts, to Ambicions fall, reducing his aspy∣ring spirit, to a more retired centure, the period of a great mans hopes; which moued Praxatiles
Sceptrum pe∣tit, in centrum vergit. to limne an ambitious man rea∣ching at a Scepter, and rowling be∣low his Centre. Not a vice either occurrent to state publique or pri∣uate, obnoxious to themselues or others, but was expressed in that flourishing time, when Rome la∣bored of her owne greatnesse; so as Catilines Tombe became a caution for aspirers; Seianus a president for Flatterers; Vitellius an example for Rioters; Iulian for apostates and prophaners; Marke Antonie for adulterate meetings; Cali∣gula for tyrannike designements. Quod meruere tenent post funera: their liues being set out in liue∣ly colours, either in expression of their worth, or the description of their illimited gouernment. Many we reade (and those worthy memorie) who throgh want of these inscriptions had their liuing names shut vp in eternall silence, as thePlutarch. in vit. mothers of Demosthenes, of Ni∣cias, of Lamachus, of Phormion, of Thrasibulus, and of Theramenes which excelled in modestie, and well deserued to be mothers of such rare Captaines, eloquent Orators, and dis∣creete States-men as they were. We reade in Plu∣tarch, how Alcibiades assisted by Nicias, was to take his expedition into Sicilie, the very same day of the celebration of the feast Adonia, on which the custome was, that women should set vp in di∣uers parts of the Citie, in the midst of the streetes, Images like to dead coarses, which they caried to
buriall in remembrance of the lamentations and disconsolate passions which Venus expressed for the death of her Adonis: where in this solemnitie, their imaginarie hearses were set ful of Impresses, that their Funerall might be with more state and magnificence celebrated. But hauing discoursed before of the antiquitie of Epitaphs, with their e∣speciall vses appropriate, as well to ancient as fol∣lowing times, I will descend to the thirdDefinition of the third Branch. branch, which in my first diui∣sion I propounded my selfe; to wit, Epitaphs Prophane, being such as haue beene vsed to anatomise vice satyrically, (with an Inuection against the manners of the dead: which seemes different to the Philosophers instruction, aduising vs rather to treade lightly on the graues of the dead, and to passe ouer their obliquities with a modest pace, a conniuing eye, and a chari∣table iudgement; that our pace might not presse them, our eye pierce them, nor our iudgement poyze them, but in the skale of amitie, with the eye of pittie, and the feete of lenitie. But now to our discourse, and that briefely, whereby the shortnesse of our Volume may concord with our intention. Epitaphs of this sort we haue too frequent, be∣ing forged out of the braine of vnseasoned Saty∣rists, that without distinction bend their wits to aspers imputation vpon the deserued memorie of the dead: men of basest nature, defaming such
whose silence giues them freer scope and priui∣ledge of detraction: impious violaters of burials, commentors of imaginarie vices, wrongers of the dead, enuious libellers, who write either incen∣sed through spleene, or hired for price: drawne on by others, or voluntarily moued by their own depraued and distempered inclinations; of which kinde we may reade euery Nation (euen in their flourishingst and successiuest times) to haue had their part: Athens her Eupolis, Sparta her Alcae∣us,In Cyrus time. Persia her Aristeas, Rome her Che∣rilus. These trode not with easie pace on the graues of the dead, but mixing their inke with more gall then discretion, instiga∣ted more by splene then charitable affection, ran∣sacked the Sepulchers of their dead enemies, de∣blazoned their vices dying, which (through a slauish pusillanimitie, they durst not vnrip nor discouer liuing; these remorselesse censurers of Vices, these corrupters and stamers of well meri∣ted liues, these foes to vertue, and foments of vice, were well set out by the Tragike Poet: who brought in the Ghost of the wronged person, pursuing the detractour and menacing him with eternall reproach for his labour. Yet this digres∣sion may seeme not so much impertinent as di∣rectly repugnant to my first definition of Epitaphs and Epicedes, the natures of both which I haue in part described: where I defined Epitaphs to be nothing else then Testimonials of the Vertues or
Vices of the dead: how they were affected, or what especiall occurrents happened them in their life; it is true, but these Descriptions are to bee shadowed and suited with modest allusions, e∣qually disposed Allegories as their vices, though in part discouered, yet that discouery so intan∣gled as may minister matter of obseruation to the iudicious, and leaue the ignorant in a continuall suspence. And because we produced no authority before (touching the difference twixt an Epi∣taph and Epicede) wee will vse Seruius opinion heerein: the difference is betweene an Epicede and Epitaph, as Seruius teacheth, that the Epi∣cede is before the corps be interred, an Epitaph or inscription vpon the Tombe: the etymologie of the word,  —curare inferias, or funeris offi∣cia peragere. Scaliger in his authoritie of Poets, confirmes the deriuation as proper and genuine to the nature of funerall celebrities. This distin∣ction may (serue as a threed to guide the illiterate Poetaster (who perhaps otherwise would con∣found these two words) out of the labyrinth of error, in which more writers now adaies wander, then euer in any time before. So that it may seem the paradox of Erasmus in the praise of folly, and that booke which Agrippa writ De vanitate sci∣entiarum, are subiects onely in request; where e∣uery Mauius will write (and ofttimes be appro∣ued) aswell as Maro. Aiax in Euripides said: , To know nothing is the
sweetest life Which sweetnes this age hath attai∣ned, where it may be truely auerred, that Neuer Age had more writers, and fewer Authors: those onely being admitted of asDoctorum dicta indoctos doctiores reddunt. Au∣thors, whose workes merit ap∣probation and authoritie in them∣selues: experience being redu∣ced to ignorance, and a desire of knowledge to a fruitlesse desire of writing: Littora bobus arant, & arena semina mandant. But I omit them: these prophane Epitaphs sinisterly aiming at the detra∣ction of such who rest in peace, as they are vtter∣ly to be condemned, so their Authors as presi∣dents of such obliquities should be seuerely cen∣sured, whereby an example of punishment in one might minister cause of reformation in all: yet because sin should in some sort be vnmasked, lest vice sue out a priuiledge, and purchase her selfe a monopoly amongst our world-statists (whose best of traffique is to be the Diuels factors, whose emi∣nentst degree is to be Hels purueiors, and whose onely office in request is to be Mammons colle∣ctors) I haue instanced diuers Epitaphs, some in∣uented, others translated & traduced from others, which with a tollerable sharpnesse, and a well tempered bitternesse alluding to the persons on whose Tombes they were engrauen, modestly discouer vice in her natiuest colors. As, first in de∣scription of Auarice, a vice most incident to Age, and therefore most inherent to man. Hermon drea∣ming
he had disbursed money, died for woe, on which dreaming Miser we reade this written: Vnder heere old Hermon lies, Who sleeping liu'd, and dreaming dies. And that of Phedon who wept not for that he should die, but that the charge of his buriall should come to foure shillings. Heere Phedon lies, who weeps and cries, not that his life he lost, But that the charge of his Buriall should full foure shillings cost. And that of Hermocrates, who would not be at charge for a purgation: and dying made him∣selfe sole Executour: Hermocrates that catiffe wretch, who liuing had no power To vse his owne, did make himselfe his sole executour. And that of None, whose Name and nature had relation one to another, being only to himselfe without respect of publike good, or compassion to others want: Heere liethHic situs est Nullus, quia Nullo Nullior esto, Et quia Nullus erat, de Nullo Nil tibi Christe. None by name, by nature one, Yet was he one by Name, by nature None. Something of Nothing oft the poore did craue, Yet could the poore of Nothing, nothing haue.
And that of oneHic situs est si∣tiens atque Ebrius Eldertonus; quid dico hic situs est, hic potius sitis est? Elderton, (an inscription too bitter) yet to dis∣authorize that sin, (which like that powerfull ointment whereof Apu∣leius relates, amongst the Thessa∣lonians, transforming and meta∣morphosing men into bruite beasts) to wit drun∣kennesse, whereof he was taxed, nothing can be too vehement or violent: Camban Romain.Heere drunken Elderton in earth lies thrust, Lies thrust (say I) or rather heere lies thirst. I will end this last part of my diuision (fearing much I haue insisted too long vpon the preamble, and incurring the Mindian censure of making my gate so spacious, and the maine building so con∣tracted:) I will end (I say) with that vniuersall doome and home (with which mortalitie must of necessitie end) to wit, Dust: of which name we reade one to haue beene, and ceasing to be, had this inscription: Heere Dust lies dead, who that he might be iust In Name and Nature, while he liu'd lou'd dust, And being dust by Nature and by Name, Thought to returne to dust from whence he came. FINIS.
¶ A Description of Death. DEath is a raw bon'd shrimp, nor low nor hie, Yet haz he power to make the highest low, The Summon-maister of mortalitie, The Poore mans wished friend, the Rich-mans foe, The last Remaines of Times Anatomie, A Thiefe in pace, in pace more sure then slow; A Sleepe, a Dreame, whence we are said to haue In sleepe a Death, and in our Bed a graue. One who, how ere we seeme to haue the power To leaue our states, wherein we oft-times erre, To such an one as sole executour; Spite of our nose playes Executioner; And as the Leane Kine did the Fat deuoure, So does this meagre Slaue the mightier, Nor can we if we should be choaked for't, Remoue Deaths Action to another Court. Arts though He know, yet he professeth none, For little haz He, and as little needes, Yet haz he Trickes to catch the oldest one, That on this earthie Globe or centre treades, Nor will He leaue him till his Breath be gone, Cheering the wormes that on his Body feedes: Thus fearelesse He, as he haz euer beene, Makes his stroke to be felt, not to be seene.
His Signe's in Sagittary, and the But He shootes at is mans heart, He euer fits The shafts he shootes to th'Quiuer they are put; Won is He not to be by threats, intreats, Price, power or prayer: at whats'ere He shoote Or aimes to hit, He neuer failes but hits; Darted, He runnes as swift as euer ran, Shot-herring made, iust like an Irish-man. Nor differ they in habite; though He weares No Mantle, flanning trowses, being knowne By his Moath-eaten rayment, He appeares Right Irish, Doublet, Breeches, hose of one; He haz no shift, yet He no vermin feares, (For vermin, Death, nor th' Irish harbour none) Yea in their kinde of fight compar'd They are, For They inuade vs both at vnaware. Death is wormes-Caterer, who when He comes Will haue prouision though the Market starue, He will be seru'd before the mighty ones, And knows before where He intends to carue; Its He awakes the Sin-belulled Drones, And cuts Them short as rightly They deserue, Its He that all things to subiection brings, And plaies at foot-ball with the crowns of kings. Two empty Lodges haz He in his head, Which had two Lights, but now his Eies be gone, Cheekes had He once, but they be hollowed; Beauty He had, but now appeares there none:
For all those mouing parts be vanished, Presenting Horrour if but lookt vpon; His colour sable, and his visage grim, With gastly lookes that still attend on Him. Fleshie He was, but it is pickt away, Belike, for that He haz so much to doe, If cloath'd with Flesh, he should be forc'd to stay, And shew (perchance) too much of mercie to To some Yong wench, who on the holyday Might force Him loue, if she could tell him how; Which to preuent, and better to restraine him, He goes so vgly none should entertaine him. Yet entertain'd He will; for though He be Contemn'd by th' perfum'd Curtezan, whose form Seemes coy to giue Him hospitalitie; Yet when He comes Hee'l not one houre adiorne, To giue her Summons of mortalitie; Conuerting that same Beautie, did adorne Her Composition to corrupted earth, Whence she deriu'd both Period and Birth. Snaile-like He comes on vs with creeping pace, And takes vs napping whē we least think on him, In's hand an Houre-glasse, which inferres our race Is neare an end; and though we striue to shun him, He moues when we moue; and that very place Whereto we flie, and think we haue out-run him, There he appeares, and tells vs it's not good To striue 'gainst that which cannot be withstood.
If we shed teares, they're bootlesse, for his eyes In stead of sight are moulded vp with clay, If we assay to pierce his eares with cries, Vaine is our Labour, fruitlesse our assay; For his Remorcelesse eares all motions flies, Nor will He giue the Prince a longer day: His payment must be present, and his Doome, "Returne to earth thy Cradle and thy Tombe. Nor is his Summons onely when we're old, For Age and Youth He equally attends, Nor can we say that we haue firmer hold In Youth then Age or further from our ends, Saue that we are by Natures verdict told, With length of yeares our hope of life extends: Thus yong or old, if Death approach and say, Earth vnto Earth, He must perforce obay. A Breath-bereauing Breath, a vading shade, Euer in motion, so as it appeares He comes to tell vs whereto we were made, And like a friend to rid vs of our feares, So as if his approach were rightly weighed, He shold be welcom'd more with ioyes thē tears, Ioy to dissolue to earth from whence we came, That after Death, Ioy might receiue the same. Naked his scalpe, thrill-open is his Nose, His Mouth from eare to eare, his earthie Breath Corrupt and noysome. Which makes me suppose Some mouldie cell's the Mannor-house of Death:
His shapelesse legges bend backeward when he goes, His rake-leane body shrinking vnderneath, Feeble he seemes, rest both of heart and power, Yet dare he beard the mightiest Emperour. None He consorts with saue wormes and men Prepar'd for worms-meat, though he make resort To Country, City, Village now and then, Yea where hee's seldome welcome, to the Court, There will He enter, and will summon them; And goe they must, though they be sorie for't: Thus, Country, Citie, Village, Court and all, Must their appearāce make when Death doth call. Chop-falne, Crest-sunke, drie-bon'd Anatomie, Earth-turn'd, mole-ei'd, flesh-hook that puls vs hēce Night-crow, Fates-doome, that tells vs we must die, Pilgrim-remouer that depriues vs sence; Lifes-date, Soules-gate that leades from miserie, Mans sharp'st assault admitting no defence, Times Exit, or our Intrat to that Clime, Where there's no Time, nor Period of Time. Nor stands he much vpon our dangerous yeare, All are alike to Him, yea oft we see, When we are most secure, then Hee's most neare, Where th' yeare clymactericke is his Iubile: For as He can transpose Him euery where, East, West, North, South, with all facilitie, So can He come, so cunning is his stealth, And take vs hence when we are best in health.
Since Death is thus describ'd, (for this he is,) Be still prepar'd, lest vnprepar'd He come, And hale you hence, for spending Time amisse (For Death is Sins Reward, Transgressions Doome) So when thou dies thou shalt be sure of this, To haue accesse vnto the Marriage roome, And for thy Tombe, in steade of Iuorie, Marble, or Brasse, shall Ʋertue couer thee.
Epitaphs vpon sudden and pre∣mature deaths: occasioned vpon some occur∣rents lately and vnhappily arising. WHo walkes this way? what Charitie, ist thou? I need not feare thy doome: for thou'lt allow This Axiome for vndoubted: Once we must Returne vnto our mother earth: and dust Our first creation, challengeth the same: "Being the Mould from whence our bodies came. If Enuie passe this way and iudge amisse, "I rest secure what ere her censure is. Faith is my Anchor, Comfort is my Shield, "How should I doubt then but to win the field! For this is true (as I haue oft times heard) No death is sudden to a minde prepar'd. My Hope being thus erected; Enuie, cease "To wrong his soule that haz assured peace. Another Epitaph vpon the same subiect. Thou look'st vpon my Tombe, and wagg'st thy head, And with remorcefull teares weep'st ore me dead, As if past hope: thou seem'st to be my frend, In that thou grieu'st at my vntimely end: Vntimely dost thou call it? True: report Brutes my Repentance was but very short, Because cut off: I graunt it: for the space It was but short, yet was the course of grace Abundant, which confirmes my Pilgrims wish, "Where man's prepar'd, there no death sudden is.
An Epitaph of the same. Hopelesse thou weep'st, and com'st vnto my Tombe, Descanting on my death, with, oh too soone Dide this poore wretch: I pray thee ceasse to weepe, "I am not dead, but onely falne asleepe: A blessed sleepe, secure from Enuies sting, "Flying from earth to heauen with ayrie wing: Should'st thou then doubt my end? O do not doubt, "My virgin-lampe is in, 't shall nere goe out. Thou saist I dide too soone: thou saist amisse, "Can any die too soone to liue in Blisse? Wipe then thy Teares, I know thou wish me well, Heauen is my mansion, Earth I tooke for hell: And that was cause I went so soone from thence, To plant in Heauen my eternall residence: For men (how short their end) are neuer tride, "But how they learn'd to die before they dide. ¶ Vpon a vertuous young Lady dying in child-birth. Borne at the first to bring another forth, "She leaues the world, to leaue the world her birth: Thus Phoenix-like as she was borne to breed, "Dying herselfe renews it in her seed.
¶ Vpon a Souldier, for resolutiō worthily affected and aduanced by his Country, yet interred and by (vnworthy Fate) obscurely. Dead? Yes: Alas, is this the Souldiers tombe, A silly monument to them shall come To see it. True; what tho the body lie Interred low in her obscuritie? Thy vertue (honour'd Souldier) shall remaine Aboue the Boundiers of triumphing Spaine, France, or the Belgicke rampires: what Death may Sh' haz done already, turnd thy corpse to clay: But death (of Fames possession) may despaire, For she erects her Tombe within the Ayre, That whosoeuer this way chance to moue, "Shall see his corpse heere, but his fame aboue. Triumphant Souldiers, glorious by thy birth, Reign'st now in heauen, because thou wer'st in earth: Then such Professants euer blessed are, That raise their Peace by managements of warre. Vpon a Drunkard buried in a ruinous fort in Dunkerke, was this Inscription engrauen, which by the ancientnesse of Time was well neare defaced. In Dunkerke heere a Drunkard lies with mickle care ysought, "Drinke was the boone the lorden crau'd for rest he cared nought. Long may he wun in this large Tombe, and neuer henceforth sinke "To earth again: that while he liu'd caimd earth for wāt of drink: Heauen rest his soule, and others all, whosere the Lord will saue, "And grant Dunkerk (if't be thy wil) may nere such drūkards haue.
¶ An Epigram vpon Alphonso Prince of Naples, and vpon his Crest, whereon was engrauen a Pellican with this Impressa; Alios seruans meipsum perdo. The Crest I weare expresseth what I am, "A soft and tender-hearted Pellican, Who to recall life to her dying broode, Suckes from her owne heart life-renewing blood: Being the same, if I appeale to time, "Shee's not more deare to hers, then I to mine. ¶ An Epitaph vpon one who died confined. Report tells me that thou didst die confinde; Confinde! its true: in body, not in minde. Confinde the body was, where it had birth, But minde without confinement leaueth earth, To dwell in those refined Groues aboue, A Groue refin'd which yeelds eternall loue To the possessor; let thy minde appeare Free, though thy body was confined heere. This shall remaine engrauen vpon thy Tombe, To memorise thy fame in time to come. ¶ Vpon a Iustice worthily deseruing of his Countrey. The misse of thee, since thy decease, is knowne, "For whoso comes to Iustice, or her throne, Shall see her silent (and as one thats domb:) "Good reason why, with thee she lost her tongue.
¶ Vpon a Iustice of lesse demerite. Who comes this way? Let him looke downe and reade, "Here lies one, spake lesse liuing, then being dead: For heere in Rime Fame speakes of him in time, "Who whilst he liu'd spake Reason nor good Rime, This yet his comfort is, when time is spent, God will haue mercie on the innocent. ¶ Vpon a bragging Souldier. Heere lies a bragging Souldier that could lie With pompe and state, in face of maiestie; Yet he that lied' gainst heauen, in earth now lies, An open mirrour to all mortall eies: "For though he lied, yet could he not denie With all his lies, but man is prest to die. Vpon Peter see me Peter see me, thou canst not, for thy eies "Lie there interred, where thy body lies: How canst thou see me then? as Peters doe; "Not by my worth, but by my outward shew For Gallant-like by perfumes I transpose My knowledge from thy eies vnto thy nose. That though th'art dead, yet thou may well percee, "A Perfum'd gallant walk's vpon thy graue.
¶Vpon a Captaine which in the Low Coun∣tries was hanged, and afterwards taken vp againe. A Captaine hangd, and taken from his Graue, For what? a pardon came, and did him saue. Saue. what did it saue? his body: Yes. "From putrefaction? no, but from that peace All buried corps enioy: It was not done "With Iustice: Yes, she is a Saint diuine, And raisd him vp, because dead'fore his time. ¶ Vpon a Turner or Thrower that died in his throwing. Poore Thrower, art thou dead? Now do I feele "Euen by thy End, that Fortune haz a wheele, That spinnes and weaues, turnes and returnes againe; And in mens death esteemes the chiefest gaine: For this by thee may very well be knowne, That made their owne wheele ruinate thy owne. Thou wast a Thrower, Fate a Thrower too; After this cast thou'lt neere make such a throw: Rest then in peace, it's Fate tript vp thy heele, And bids thee yeeld vnto her Turning wheele.
¶ Vpon one Span. Rightly compared is the life of man, "For shortnesse of continuance, to a span, It is mans met-wand; euery one must haue "This span to end his life, and mete his graue. Then who dare say that he does liue secure, "Possessing that which cannot long endure. This is expressed by this man lies heere, "Whose name and nature in one span appeare. So lest the name should do the nature wrong, "Being short by nature, name would not be long. ¶ Vpon one Flower a hopefull yong Student. Mans life's a flower: how should it then but fade, "Since at the first for dying it was made? Yet if this Flower had beene exempted, then We might haue thought this Flower not for men To crop: no more it was: and therefore giuen "As one aboue desert of earth to Heauen. Once thou was planted in the Cambrian Groue, Where thou was watred with the Students loue. But now from thence I see thy glory rise, "From Cambrian Brakes, to Brookes in paradise.
¶ Vpon a Reuerend and honourable Iudge of this land, was this Epitaph inscribed. Who so would Honours frailetie pictur'd haue, Let him behold that picture in this graue: Where frailetie ne're was with more honours clad, Nor more deseru'd those honours which he had: Had? lasse that we should say, wee had thee; haue Would be a Tence, the state would rather craue. Small difference twixt the accents, Haue and Had, Yet th' one did cheare vs, th' other makes vs sad. But whence these teares? whence be they? to expresse His worth, our want, his peace, our pensiuenesse: For to discribe him in each liniment, He gaue his tongue vnto the Parlament: His hands to sacred writ, his eare to heare Iudgement pronounc'd, his eye to see more cleare In the surueigh of Iustice, and his feete To walke in paths, for Christian soules most meete. Thus his impartiall tongue, hand, eare, foote, eye, Show'd him a mirror in mortalitie. Yet in his age a Reuerence appeares, Many are yong in houres, are olde in yeares; But he was old in both; full seuentie sixe, Surpassing Dauids first Arithmeticke: Fift one yeares he with his Lady liu'd, That in himselfe his race, might be reuiu'd: For what was by the vertuous Father done, Seemes (by resemblance) shadowed in the Sonne.
Sergeant vnto the Queene, Iudge o'th kings Bench For twelue yeares space, wherein his eminence Did not transport his passions: For his thought Fixt on his end, esteem'd all honour nought. Thus liu'd he, thus he di'de; liu'd long, di'de wel, Heere Iudge on Earth, now Iudge in Israel. Terras Astraea reliquit. ¶ Distiction funebre in obit: princip. ob exi∣miam & corporis & mentis temperi∣em: qua licet, nos reliquit, altiora petit. Qui formam mirantur, ament Ʋestigia mentis, Illi forma perit, nescit at illa mori. ¶ An Epitaph vpon the Sonne buried in his Fathers graue. Stand, goe no further: looke but downe and reade, Youth fed that body, on which wormes doe feede. Looke lower downe, and thou portrai'd shalt haue Father and Sonne, both buried in one graue. And what does couer them? poore mother Earth, Which gaue to Sonne and Father both their birth: Thus one to three reduc'd, and three to one, Sonne, Mother, Father; Father, Mother, Sonne. Make then this vse on't wheresoe're thou come. Earth was thy cradle, Earth must be thy tombe.
¶ VponJn hunc fer∣me modum pro∣ponitur à Mart. Epigramma. one who louing ho∣nour, died ere hee possest it. Thus fadeth honour and returnes to nought, Which is not got by merit, but is bought: For it affoords th' aspiring minde small good, When wreaths of honour are not drawne from blood, Nor from desert: for honour cannot bide, "Being supported by the stayes of pride. ¶ Vpon Master Laurence Death, an Epicede ac∣commodate to his Name. Why should one feare to grapple with his Name, "Death thou wast liuing, and art now the same; No, I may say farre more: renewing breath "Tels me th' art liuing; for thou hast kil'd Death. Liue then victorious Saint: still may thou be Though dead by Name, yet fresh in memory. That who so passeth, or shall chance to come This way, may say: Here lies Deaths liuing Tomb. ¶ Vpon one Merie. Merie why liest thou like Heraclitus, That vs'd to laugh like blith Democritus? Thou seemes in discontent: pray thee tell why "Thou liest so sad? Thou art learning how to die. Learning to die? why th'art already dead: Ist possible that Peter Meries head
That was so full of wit, so stuft with sage, "As he appear'd the mirror of this age? Peter that knew much, and could speake much more Then ere he knew, should now fall to deaths store. Alas poore Merie, wormes begin to feast, Ʋpon that skonce, fed Gallants with fresh ieasts, Those saucer eyes plast in that witty skonse, Which vs'd to looke some twenty waies at once, For if they had matches beene, some might enquire, Whether they set thy sparkeling-nose a fire: Those hollow eyes (I say) or lamps of thine, "Are now like Hogs-heads emptied of their wine: For hollow Hogs-heads giue an empty sound, "And so does Merie being laide in ground. ¶ Vpon one Hogge. Hog by name and by condition, "Heere lies Hog that blunt Physition: Christian nor good moralist, But liu'd and dide an Atheist. Yet (after death) giue Hog his dew, He was a foe vnto the Iew. And that he might expresse the same▪ "He gloried euer in his name. He bad me write vpon him dead, "Heere lies Iohn Hog, or Iohn Hogs-head.
¶ Vpon a vaine-glorious Student that would needes be called Aristarchus. Fate last night hath beene i'th warke house Of our renowmed Aristarchus: Where fate no sooner entred in Then shee a starke-Asse made of him. For Aristarchus (Authors say) Inuited death, from day to day; But our last Aristarchus prai'd, (Seeing Death come) as one dismaied, That he his summons would delay, And come for him another day. Vpon two Twins that died together Heere lie two faithfull Brothers in one tombe, As they did lie together in one wombe; Heere they came hand in hand, and they do craue, That hand in hand they may goe to their Graue. In Monasterio septentrion: com pertum erat.¶ Vpon an ancient Tombe was this inscription found. Church-men that should be best of al, are (pardie) growne the worst, The Fox I ken (the Prouerb saies) fares best when he is curst: This Abbot heere that lies in ground proues this to be too true, Due would he giue to Priest nor Cleark, yet would he haue his due; But marke his end (who ere thou be) for 'twas a fearefull end, No friend he had (as he did thinke) to whom he might commend His Gold: therefore one day he went to finde out some darke caue, Where be might hoord his treasure vp where he this voice receau'd: The iudgement churlish Nabal had, fall presently on thee, Which voice being past, the Abbot droupt and died presently.
¶ Vpon my Lady Woodbee. What would my Lady be? lasse shee has sought To rise to something, and shee's falne to nought. Poore Lady, that so faire and sweete a face Should haue no other home or dwelling place, Then a poore Sepulcher; lasse its not meete So faire a Lady should shroud in one sheete: Who whilst shee liu'd, which was but very now, Did vse to lie perfum'd and chaf'd in two. ¶ Vpon the same Subiect extracted. Looke throgh & throgh, see Ladies with false formes, You deceiue men, but cannot deceiue wormes. ¶ Vpon an Adulterer extracted. Nay heauen is iust, scornes are the hire of scornes, I nere knew yet Adulterer without hornes. ¶ Vpon a Sexton an Epitaph. Rest thee well Sexton, since thou lost thy breath, I see no Man can be exempt from death: For what will Death doe to the simple Slaue, That durst assault him made for Death a Graue? In peace sleepe on: of thee we haue no neede, For we haue chosen a Sexton in thy steede: Thy sacring Bell has tinckled all it can, And now the Sexton showes he was a man.
¶ Vpon Kempe and his morice, with his Epitaph. Welcome from Norwich Kempe: all ioy to see Thy safe returne morisceed lustily. But out alasse how soone's thy morice done, When Pipe and Taber all thy friends be gone? And leaue thee now to dance the second part With feeble nature, not with nimble Art: Then all thy triumphs fraught with strains of mirth, "Shall be cag'd vp within a chest of earth: "Shall be? they are, th'ast danc'd thee out of breath, "And now must make thy parting dance with death. ¶ Vpon one Skelton. Here lies one Skelton, whom death seasing on, "Changeth this Skelton vntoSce∣leton, or an A∣naomy Sceleton Thogh little chang'd in name, in substāce more, "For now hee's rich that was but poore before. ¶ Vpon one Babylon. Of all the stones that rear'd vp Babylon, "There now remaines (of all that pile) but one, Which serues to couer both the corps and fame, Which he had purchas'd onely by his Name.
¶ Vpon a spare Patron.In patron egentem. This Man lies here, to say what name he had, Or to expresse't would make a Poet mad: For once a Poet offred him a labour, Which he would hardly reade, or vouchsafe fauour, To giue the Author one bare smile, or sooth The Poets good meaning: to be briefe, his tooth Was poysoned: for th' occasion of his death, It first proceeded from his stinking breath; Which did corrupt his lungs: this has beene tride To be the cause whereof this Patron dide. May he rest yet in peace the Poet prayes, Who though contemn'd, yet crownes his Tombe with bayes. ¶ Vpon a cashered Souldier.In Nether¦land. A Souldier not for his desert Cashered was of late, But for the Captaine by his pay, Ment to encrease his state; For which (in want the Souldier beg'd) But could not be relieu'd: As Charity (God knowes) is cold, Whereat the Souldier grieu'd; And swore since warre would doe no good, He now would change his sang, Either to raise his meanes (by stands) Or Souldier-like to hang.
Fate seldome fauours war like men, The case so altered was, As being tane for bidding stand To one that chanc'd to passe, The poore renowme this Souldier got, Downe to obliuion fell; And he for Gantlet (wrapt with Giues) Was brought to second Hell Captiuitie: what should he doe? appeale from Iustice Throne, That bootelesse were, for now his hopes Are fully razed downe. The time approach'd (sad time God wot) When brought vnto the Barre He gaue the Iudge blunt eloquence, Like to a Man of warre: But to be short accus'd he is, What he cannot denie, And therefore by a publike doome He censur'd was to die. But if the Iudge had rightly done, The Captaine (by the way) As he had tane his standing-wage, Should reape his hanging-pay.
¶ Vpon the death of oneVid. Martial: in nom. Thet. & Nympham, & pastorem hoc nomine inducit in Elegijs & E∣pigrammat. Thete who died, and was cast in a great tempest vpon the Sea, into a straite of that part of the Sea which diuides Msia from Hellespont. Here lies Thete pale and wan, Buried in the Ocean. More it seemes to augment her fame, Since from Sea shee tooke her Name. Thetis was Achilles mother, Yet of that name there's another To this day record'd by Tyme, That she was a Saint Diuine. Here her Image sleepes in peace, Promising this ile encrease Nere this Fount Of Hellespont. Where Hero and Leander amorous soules, In midst of her greene bosome daily roules; Which to Abydos (ancient towne) And to Cestos brought renowne, And that shrine So diuine.
Where Paphos was erected to expresse, There Hero was to Venus Ʋotaresse: Rest in honor, Thete rest By the Sea-Nymphs euer blest, for they loue to approue The rare condition of that diuine Creature, Where Art is far surpast by spotlesse Nature. ¶ Vpon Synon that villaine which sacked Troy. Ist possible that wormes dare once conspire "To tutch his shrowde that sackt all Troy with fire? O saies poore Hecuba, that thou hadst dide Before shee had such fatall obiects spide Of her dislaughter'd Sonnes, weeping to see Mother and issue slau'd to miserie. O saies (old Priam) and he teares his haire, Wishing thy Tombe had razed his despaire, When in the ruines of defaced Troy, And in the Gore of his beloued Boy His yongling Troylus, he wash'd his head In an eternall Concaue buried. Thus does Troy curse, yet may thou defend Thy Proiects, and the cause of Troyans end Proceeding from themselues, thou for the sake Of thy deare Country, and faire Hellens rape,
Became a villaine, and to keepe thy Name, Thou liu'd a villaine, and thou died the same. Then villanie is dead! in Synon true, But he haz left his trade vnto the Iew And English cormorant, who in one houre Desire both Name and Substance to deuoure, Then there's no diffrence: both bring like annoy, Saue th' one for England is, th' other for Troy. Sleepe then in silent slumber, for thy Race, In right of their succession take thy place. ¶ Vpon Argus. Argus with his hundred eies, Eie-lesse in this Coffin lies; While Wormes keepe their Sessions there, Where once Lamps of eye-sight were. Another. Earth feedes on me, that once fed me, Court begot me, Country bred me; Thus my death preuents my youth, Bastard slippes haue slowest growth. ¶ Vpon Gold a dissolute Hackster. Gold, th'art a knaue; and drainst thy golden showre, Not from the lap of Danaë, but thy whoore; Leaue thy base Panders trade, make speede, reuolt From so deform'd a standard; who would be boult
To his wifes lewdnesse, or expresse his shame, By vshering the ruine of his name For money? ceasse, ceasse to be impudent, Transplant thy selfe to some pure element More wholesome and lesse shamefull; liue enrold, And haue thy Name in characters of Gold, That whoso passeth may this Impresse reade: Thy age did end in Gold, begunne in lead. ¶ Vpon a Quackesaluer Doctors graue in Venice, by Transcription we reade this In∣scription as followeth. Heere lies a pound of Rheu-barbe (as't doth seeme) To purge the worms of Choler, Rheume and Fleame: A Dapper Doctor (ill may Fate befall) To take from vs Sir Ierome Vrinall; Yet this our comfort is; though he be dead, Haz left another sauce-fleam'd knaue in's stead. "That can call backe from deah a breathlesse corse, "And cure his griefe as he doth cure a horse Farewell Sir Ierome, thou with horse began, And Don begins with Horse, and ends with Man. ¶ Vpon Croesus and Irs. Twixt Croesus and Irus difference I know none, Saue Irus haz no Tombe, Croesus haz one. Nor skills is much what shrowding sheet they wore, "For I nere heardth as worm the shrowd forbore:
Because the pompe or state wherein they laide, Might by their terror make poore wormes afraide. But as on earth great ones did feed on small, "So worms do feed on great ones most of all. Do well then while we liue; for being dead, "Or Fame or Shame our Actions merit meade. ¶ Vpon Delia. Thou Delos-sacred-chaste inhabitant, For of thy followers Albion haz but scant; Plant (pray thee heere) some house religiously, Where we may reuerence spotlesse Chastitie: For since thy ship did from this Iland lance, "Best gifts we had were fireIn adagium habentur pyrobalae Galliae. balls sent from France. Coole vs this Climate that seemes to aspire, Not by her owne, but by a forraine fire, That now at last the Albionact may know, Th' Delian our friend, thogh th' Frenchmē be our foe: In Mydam. Miser nemini est bonus, sibi pessimus. Mydas would feed on gold (vnhappy wretch) That starues himselfe, to make himselfe more rich, 'Tis like a painted couer that conueies Each sparkeling obiect to our piersing eies, Which while the eies delight in, they grow dim, Euen so it fares (poore miser) still with him. "He feeds on gold, for there's his hearts delight: But that same obiect takes away his sight,
And makes him duskie eide, clouded and blinde, Though not in body, yet in th' eyes of minde: Then this shall stand fixt on the misers boure,His Epi∣taph. "He liued rich (to th' eye) but truly poore. Nec copia nec inopia minuitur. Salust. In Veprem Iuridicum. Heere lies Brier a Lawyer true, Yet no true Lawyer, giue him's due: His cause of sickenesse (as I heare) Was: There's but foure Terms in the yeare. But others thinke (and so they may) Because he could not long delay His Clients suite, yong Had-lands cause, Which hauing got into his clawes, He by renewing of their strife, Thought to keep't for terme of life. But AEacus that god of warre, Pitcht me this Lawyer ouer-barre. So in despaire (vnhappy elfe) The Lawyer went and hang'd himselfe. ¶ Vpon a Broaker. Heere lies a Broaker of Long-lane, Who by Pick-hatch & Hounsditch got infinit gaine: The Pyrats of Wapping were likewise his friends, Requeathing to him their clothes at their ends. "O hard-hearted death, more cruell then any, That would not be mou'd at the sutes of so many!
¶ Vpon Tacitus. Heere lies an old Concealer vnderneath, Who hardly could conceale himselfe from death. "Thus though man be disguis'd in varied formes, Conceal'd on earth, yet not conceal'd from worms, Thou then that passest by this seely wretch, "This morall may experience thee teach; There's nought so hid, which in Earths bosome lyes, "Put fate (with pierciue eyes) looks through & spies. ¶ Vpon one Holofornus an vnconscio∣nable Vsurer. Within this Grate lies one Holofernus, His bodie's in earth: but his soule in Auernus, "Vnder his head lies a bagge of red gold, Which both heart and conscience together enfold. See worm-holes are sprouting, which seems to expres, They loath to feede on an Ʋsurers flesh. ¶ Vpon one Gnat. Sleepe on poore Gnat, Gnat was thy proper name, "And thou as properly exprest the same; No difference 'twixt thee buried and before, "Saue that in death thou sleepes, in life didst snore.
¶ Vpon an Actor now of late deceased: and vpon his Action Tu quo{que}: and first vpon his Trauell. Hee whom this mouldered clod of earth doth hide, New come from Sea, made but one face and dide. Vpon his Creditors. His debters now, no fault with him can finde, Sith he has paid to nature, all's behinde. Vnto his fellow Actors. What can you craue of your poore fellow more? "He does but what Tu quoque did before: Then giue him dying, Actions second wreath, "That second'd him in Action and in death. ¶ Vpon Loues champion. Once did I liue and loue, not loue, but lust, And in loues turnament perform'd myMeerely resembling that wanton Amorist in Horace, Vixi puellis nuper idoneus, Et militaui non sine gloria. iust; But now return'd I am, whereto all must, Rendring my life, loue, lust and all to dust.
¶ AmorThis inscripti∣on writ vpon the tombe of a memo∣rable Patrician of Rome, and may be transcribed, vnto one of ours no lesse memorable for eminence of place, and since∣ritie of gouern∣ment. viuat & crescat honor, inuitis fatis resurgat virtus, au∣geatur pietas, & foueatur sancti∣tas: altera harum miserijs sub∣uenimus, altera Reip. saluti prouide∣mus. Corpus vt perijt, creuit virtus. Vertue that vs'd to sit enthron'd in state, "In purple cloathed, not in purple sin, Lies heere interr'd, for shee's enshrin'd in him, Not prun'd as vicious men, by common fate, For vertue is of higher estimate Then to subscribe to times abridged date; Nor can the clowde of Enuie, honour dim, For when shee seemes to die, shee does begin "To raise her glory higher then before, Immortaliz'd in Heauen, for euermore. An happy passage, happy pilgrimage, "Where our Earths conflict wins eternitie, Securest harbour of tranquilitie, To passe from Earth to Heauen, where mutually
The Saints of God reioice, free from the rage Of sinnes assaults, or of this fleshly cage, Wherein we are enthrald: distressed age Nihil turpius est quam grandis natu Senex, qui nullum aliud argumentum, quo se probat diu vixisse, quam aetatem habet. Senec. de Tranq. anim.That makes vs old in nought saue miserie: "But pilgrims, if for Christ perplexed be, Shall liue with him in ioy perpetually. Thrice blessed pilgrime, that hast spent thy daies In the promoting of thy Countries weale, Faithfull in all, wherein thou wast to deale, Shoaring vpon thy shoulders those decaies, Which seem'd to ruinate the state alwaies; These blessed actions do deserued due praise, Triumphant patron of the common-weale: Who (though she should) vnthankefully conceale "Those many vertues which thy minde possest, Thou needs not feare: in Heauen they are exprest. True Register, where all thy acts remaine In perfect colours liuely shadowed, The map of honour, well decyphered, Where innocence receiues immortall gaine For her pure life, polluted with no staine Of earths allurements: Earth cannot containe A vertuous minde, for it will still aspire To Syons hill, ascending euer higher, Till shee discerne the fruits of her pure loue, By leauing earth to liue in Courts aboue.
Thou that art here immur'd with barres of earth, "Returning to the place from whence thou came, Shall by thy death perpetuate thy Name: "Sith forraine Coasts haue much admir'd the same; And though thy foes, yet they extoll'd thy worth, "Being twice noble in thy selfe, thy birth, Which no succeeding times shall ere raze forth. "Honour will euer flourish, as it was Though not engrauen in faire leaues of brasse. For what is Brasse, Marble, or Iuorie? What will auaile the Monuments of time, When those they represent, seeme to decline In the Worlds eye? in whom our memorie Liues, or lies dead: O then liue vertuouslie, That winnes a Crowne here, and eternallie. Worlds respects a blast, a bud a flower, Now sprouting faire, & blasted in an houre; But who shall flourish in the Sacred Groue, "Shall ere stand firme, his Scyons cannot moue. Liue in this Hearse: Death to the good's no death, "But a transportance from a Sea of woes To future ioyes, from shipwracke to repose: For such as these, God for himselfe doth choose, Clipping their Temples with a golden wreath, Infusing in their soules eternall breath: Thrice blessed vine that in heau'ns Vineyard growes, Whose spreading branches farre more beauty showes Fulgebunt iusti vt stèllae. Quem autem putat in eorum mentibus si tantum in eorum corporibus splendorem illuxisse videris? Vid. August. in Man.Then Sun or Moone, or th' purest Element; Or any Starre within the Firmament.
Such trees we see bring forth the ripest fruit, As planted are vpon the waters side, Whose liquid streames their neighbour bankes diuide: Euen so where Springs of diuine grace doe glide, The seeds of Vertue take the deepest roote, Where euery sprig both bloome and fruit sends out A Glorious Haruest: which what ere betide, Is not by stormes dismaide, but fructifide. Such goodly trees are plants of Paradise, Which bring forth fruit in such varieties. And such a tree art thou, whose noble stem Did nourish Learning, & Mineruas friends: Thy flowrie blossome in their growth extends, And after death some fruitfull gleanings sends From Heauen aboue to Earths-suruiuing men, That seeing them, might seeke to follow them; But most to such as 'bout the Court attends, That vertuous liues may weaue their glorious ends. "For Ʋertue was as Ariadnes thread "That led the liuing, and empales the dead. What hissing Serpent with her venemous sting Can hurt thy vertues which be registred In Heauen aboue? where th'art canonized And with the fruits of vertue garnished; Shining for euer with the supreame King Of glorious Sion: where the Angels sing Hymns of delight: whose Quires are polished With Saphires, Emeralds: replenished With springs still flowing full of sweet delight,
Not cross'd by shadowes of a gloom ight. "If we be Pilgrims here (as sure we be) "Why should we loue to liue, and liue to die? "If Earthen Vessels, why should we relie "With such assurance on our frailtie? "Since greatest States doe perish soon'st we see, "And rich and poore haue one communitie "In th' eyes of Fate: nor could I ere espie "In humaine state, ought saue inconstancie. "Times follow Times, motion admits no rest, "But in this motion,Hei mihi, quod non est Tempus vt ante fuit. &c. Ouid. Tempo∣ra temporibus succedunt pessima primis. worst succeede the best. If loue be said to liue, honour encrease, Or Ʋertue flourish in despite of Fate, I neede not feare this noble Heroes state, Though much pursu'd (as't seemes) by publike hate, His Ship is harbour'd in the Port of peace: Where times-succeeding ioyes shall neuer cease; Great are they sure which none can explicate, And great in worth, which none can estimate. Thus great on Earth, and great in Heauen together, Ʋertue with greatnes, makes him heire of either. Let this same Epitaph I consecrate Ʋnto thy Noble-Hearse, expresse my loue And duty both: (for both doe me behoue;) "If of my poore endeuours thou approue. These lines be th' obsequies I dedicate, Which though they come like Seede that's sowen too late;
Yet some in due compassion they may moue, To plant more cheerefull tendrells in thy Groue. "Honour attend thy presence (famous Herse) "Too much obscur'd by my impolisht verse. Epitaph. Mortis vbi stimulus? pro me tulit omnia Christus: "Consul eram primo tempore, Consul ero. ¶ A funerall Ode. O thou heauen-aspiring Spirit, Resting on thy Sauiours merit! liue in peace, for encrease Blest this Iland in thy being: Mindes vnited still agreeing. Peace possest thee, Peace hath blest thee. Halcyon dayes be where thou dwellest, "As in Glorie thou excellest. Death by dying, Life enioying. Richer fraight was nere obtained, Then thy Pilgrim-steps haue gained. Blessed pleasure, happy Treasure. Thus many distinct ioyes in one exprest, Say to thy Soule, Come Soule and take thy rest.
¶ Vpon the death of the ver∣tuously affected Sr Thomas Boin∣ton, a Knight so wel-meriting, as his vertues farre aboue all Titles, enstiled him worthy the loue of his Coun∣trey. Sad shadieMeaning a shadie tuft of trees adioyning to Hannaby his Man∣nor-house. Groue, how faire so ere thou show, "Reft art thou of thy Teare-bath'd maister now: Yet grow thou shalt; and mai'st in time to come, With thy shed-leaues shadow thy Maisters tombe, Which is adorn'd with this Inscription: "Weepe Marble, weepe, for losse of Bointon: Yet he's not lost; for as the Scripture saith, "That is not lost (for certaine) which God hath. Ceasse Ladie then with teares your eies to dim, "He must not come to You, but you to Him.
¶ Vpon that memorable Act atchieued by an Auncestour of the Cogniers in the discom∣fiture of a Winged-worme or Snake, Whose approach was no lesse obuious then mortally dangerous to the distressed Passenger; His Monument remaineth in the body of the church atAntiquae & no∣bilis familiae de Cogners domici∣lium. Camd. in Britann. Sockburn, where hee lieth crosse-legged, (which inferreth his being be∣fore the Conquest) hauing his Fauchion by his side, his Dogge at his feete, Grasping with the Snake, the Snake with the Dogge: the renowmed me∣morie of which Act addeth no lesse glory to the houses Antiquitie, then the worthyMeaning Sir Iohn Cogniers, now deceased, a Knight no lesse generous then gracious in the eye of his Prince and Countrey. Knight who now possesseth it, gaineth harts by his affability. Colle sub exigu iacuit canis, vnde peremit Aligerum vermem, quo sibi fama venit. Quo sibi Fama venit, veniet, semper{que} manebit, Sidera dum coeli, gramina tellus habent.
Paraphrastically translated. Vpon a hill his Gray-hound lay, till that his Maister blew His writhed horne, at whose approach the winged Worme he slew: Whēce Fame gaue wings to Cogniers name which euer shalbe giuē So long as grasse growes on the earth, or stars appeare in heauen. Vpon his Tombe. Who slew the Worme is now worms meat, yet hope assures me hence, Who th'worme ore-threwhe after slew, the worme of Conscience. ¶ Epitaphs vpon diuerse of the Sages of Greece, translated, omitting Thales and Solon, and beginning with the rest, original∣ly traduced from La∣ertius. Vpon Chylo. Thankes to the blushing morne that first begunne To decke the Laureat brow of Chyloes sonne, Which He (old-man) as ouer-ioy'd to see, Fell dead through Ioy; I wish like death to me. This Inscription also was engrauen on his Tombe. Heere Chylo lies, in Lacedemon bred, Who 'mongst the Seuen was rightly numbred.
¶ Vpon Pittucus, whose Tombe was erected by the Citie Lesbos wherein he liued; beauti∣fied with this inscription to per∣petuate his memory. Within this Tombe doth Lesbos thee enshrine, Drencht with their teares and consecrate as thine. ¶ Vpon Bias whom Priene with all solemnitie and magnificence, at their owne proper cost in∣terred: Engrauing these verses vpon his Tombe, for the continuance of his Name. This well-wrought stone doth Bias corps containe, Who was an honour to th' Ionian: Pleading his friends cause (as a faithfull friend) Pausing to take his breath, He breath'd his end. ¶ Vpon Cleobulus, who was buried in Lyndus, which boundeth on the Sea-cliffe; the situ∣ation whereof is shadowed in this inscription vpon his Tombe. That wise Cleobulus should extinguish'd be, Lyndus laments enuiron'd with the Sea; So as two Seas neere Lyndus strand arise, "A Leuant Sea, a Sea in Lyndus eies.
¶ Vpon Periander of Corinth was this Epitaph ensuing found to be engrauen, which through the iniuie of time, and want of Art in the impressure, was so defaced, as by the testimonie of Laertius it could scarce be reduced to Sence: yet now ac∣cording to the Originall faithfully translated, in∣cluding a Christian resolution in a Pagans dissolu∣tion reposing a more true happines in his end then in his Birth, his exit or passage, then his intrat to this Theatre or transitorie Pilgrimage: making his diem fatalem, his diem natalem, the day of his death the day of his birth; where Man by an imputa∣tiue goodnesse, deduced from God not inherent in himselfe, may in his death be rather said to be translated then departed. Corinth both wise and rich in treasures store, Keepes Perianders Bodie in her shore. Continued by Laertius by way of an Epigram, Greeue not that Thou shouldst not obtaine thy wish, But ioy in that the Gods haue giuen thee this, For Thou by death hast past those sorrowes now, Which many one would doe, but cannot doe.
¶ Vpon the much lamented death of the truly ho∣nourable (eminent patterne of vnblemished Iu∣stice) Sir Augustine Nicholls one of our Iudges of the Northerne Circuit, who died at Kendall the third day of August, Anno 1616. Sic Nicholaus obit, potius Nicodemus, & astra nunc Astraea petit, quae moriendo tenet. Nicholls is dead, or Nicodemus rather, The Widdows cheerer, and the Orphans father; Dead! why it cannot be Iustice should die, For she ha's will and power enough to flie Aboue the reach of Death. It's true, yet Death Hath reft this Iustice-patron of his breath: Of Breath? No matter, Breath is but a winde That vades, but cannot preiudice the Minde Where Iustice sits as Regent: wherefore then Since Iustice liues, should she be mon'd by men As if deceast? Ile tell you, Heere is one, Or was one rather, for he now is gone, Who seeing th'end of Iustice-circuit nie, Embracing Death, did in his Circuit die; No maruell then if men do Iustice mone, When They do find her mansion vnder stone: And hard it is to finde Her whom They seeke, As t' heare the stone that couers her to speake. "This then shall be her Dirge, her dying Song, "She pleads in heauen, on earth she ha's lost her tong. Terras Astraea reliquit.
Another Dialogue-wise: Eubaeus and Tymaeus. Eubaeus. Silence, awake not Iustice. Tymaeus. Who can keepe the eies of Iustice closed? Eubaeus. Death and Sleepe. Tymaeus. Death cannot do it. Eubaeus. Cannot! pray thee see What Death hath done then. Tymaeus. "Lasse! how mortally lies Iustice wounded? Eubaeus. Wounded! no, shee's dead. Tymaeus. Dead! Eubaeus. Yes; see tong, pulse, arme, eie, heart, hand, head. all motionlesse; come nearer: Tymaeus. I'me too near. Eubaeus. Doest weepe? Tymaeus. I offer to her Shrine a teare. Eubaeus. Thou art too childish. Tymaeus. No, if I could more, I would expresse it. Eubaeus. Why, didst nere know before Iustice lie speechlesse? Tymaeus. Yes, but nere did know despaire of her recouery till now. Eubaeus. No, thou hast heard that saying new growne common. Tymaeus. What might it be?
Eubae. That Iustice's like a Woman; Tymae. In what respect? Eubae. In this it may bef'ed When she lies speechles, shee is neerly dead. Tymae. Most true in both Eubae. It is, but doe not weepe; Let's vanish hence, & suffer Iustice sleepe. Epitaphi∣um in Dia∣logi formā composi∣tum.¶ An Epitaph reduced to the forme of a Dialogue; consisting of two Per∣sons and two Parts, representing in the Persons, Affection and Instruction; in the Parts Passion and Consolation: prepared at first for the memory of his neuer-sufficient∣ly remembred Father by the Authour, emphatically shadowed vnder the name of Phi∣lopater. The Persons names are Philopater and Philogenes. Philop. Sleepes my deare Father? Philoge. Yes, my Sonne I sleepe: Philop. Why, then I wrong'd your quiet rest to weepe; Sith Christians should not any difference make Twixt Death and Sleepe; Philoge. It's true, for both awake, Both lie them downe, both rise, both bedding haue, The liuing haue their couch, the dead their graue;
For as our Death by Sleepe is shadowed, So by our Bed our Graue is measured. Philop. O pardon then my teares. Philoge. My Sonne I doe, These teares thou sheds do thy affectiō show, And beare record in Heauen; Philop. Where you are blest: Philoge. Indeede I am. Philop. Heauens grant my Soule like rest. ¶ A Diuine composition, stiled The Pilgrimes Petition. Keepe me (O Lord) ô daigne my Soule to keep, Thou art her Shepheard, shee the wandring Sheep: Thou art the liuing life, the Labourers way; The Pilgrims staffe, Faiths Anchor, Iosuahs day: Yea, Iosuahs Day-starre, who (so if thou please) Canst make the Sun goe backe without degrees. ¶ The Sinners Cymball. I cried vnto the Lord, he healed me, I sicke to death, he shew'd me remedie; I hunger-staru'd, he gaue me Angels food, I all a thirst, he quench'd it with his blood.
¶ In obitumDe Am∣blesiade. Thomae Brathwaite op∣timae spei, indolis generosissimae, vitae probatissimae, fidei integerrimae, omni ex parte parati peri∣ti{que} R. B. Memoriae eius studiosissimus lugubria ista Poe∣mata grati animi pignora diu meditata & iam serò sed seriò in publicam lu∣cem prolata (Dialogi mo∣re) composuit. Philaretus and Euthymius. Philaret. Quò redis? Euthym. In gremium matris: Philaret. Quos quaeris? Euthym. Amicos. Philaret. His moriendo cares: Euthym. His moriendo fruor. Philar. Tunc tibi mors lucrum: Euthym. Mihi lux, via, vita, leuamen. Philar. Tunc non amissus; Euthy. Missus at ante meos. ¶ In Anagramma quod sibi ipsi compo∣suit & Annulo inscripsit. Brathwaite Vita vt herba. Vita vt Herba tuum est Anagramma, tua{que} sub vrna Hoc videam, breuis est vita, sed herba leuis, Annulus hoc tenuit, nam{que} Annulus arctus vt annus, Quo (velut afflatu) fata futura refers.
¶ Vpon the late decease of his much lamented friend and kinsman, Allen Nicholson, a zea∣lous & industrious member both in Church and Com∣mon-weale. Hauxide laments thy Death, Grasmyre not so, Wishing Thou hadst beene dead ten yeeres agoe; For then her market had not so beene done, But had suruiu'd thy Age in time to come: And well may Hauxide grieue at thy Departure, "Since Shee receiu'd from thee her ancient charter, Which Grasmyre sues (since Thou art turn'd to grasse To bring about, & now hath broght to passe. Thus much for thee: nor would I haue thee know it, For thy pure zeale could nere endure a Poet; Yet for the Loue I bore thee, and that Blood Which twixt vs both by Natiue course hath flow'd: "This will I say, and may; for sure I am "The North nere bred sincerer Purer man. ¶ In obitum generosissimi viri L. P. genio quàm ingenio minus faelici, Franciscus Ridgeway eius memoriae studiosissimus hosce threneticos modos com∣posuit. Flebo, cur? amisi memorandi pignus amici, Falleris, amitti morte petente nequit; Praemitti fateor, Quis enim non fata capesset, Discimur exemplo, sic oriendo mori.
At dolet exemplis tua fata venisse sub illis, Quëis si tu perias, fama perennis erit. Quid dixi an peries? peries sanè corpore, quid si Hac species periat, mens speciosa manet? Altera pars terram repetat, pars altera coelum, Nec mutas mores caela petendo tuos. At vale, nam faciem neque discernere gratam Quae mihi semper erit gratia sed arcta nimis, Arcta nimis sed amaena satis, dum sidera vultum Splendida praestantem continuere tuum. Sic perijt quod terra parit, quod vertice coeli Profluit, in coelum tendat & alta petat. Aliud, Hic situs est Satyrus qui stupra a latere potentum Impatiens, patiens limina mortis adit. Englished, Heere lies a Satyre now reduc'd to dust, Who scourg'd desertlesse honour, great mens lust, These taxt He roundly, and had vow'd to doe it More boldly yet, if He had liu'd vnto it. ¶ A Funerall Poeme vpon the death of the hope∣full yong Gentleman Mast. Will. Horsey, who deceased the 24. of Aprill, Ann. Dom. 1615. "Plants that transplanted are, haue seldome grouth, Yet fares it otherwise with this blest youth,
For he transplanted to another Sphere, Perfects that tender grouth which he had her, Tender indeed; yet methinks there appeares Age in his houres, though youth was in his yeares, For by experience, of this sure I am, "Neuer came childe more neere vnto a Man. Well may we then excuse his mothers mone, To lose her Sonne and that her onely One, Whose hope gaue life vnto her house and her, "(If mothers erre in this they lightly erre) For natiue loue must needs enforce a teare To see them laid on Beare whom they did beare: To see their Birth turn'd Earth, their very wombe Which brought them forth conuerted to a Tombe; Yet this should make his mother change her song, To see her hope translat'd'boue hope so yong, To see her onely and now happy Sonne, To haue his Pilgrime-taske so quickly done; But shee ha's lost him; no, he is not lost, "For where He seemes to lose He gaineth most: And though He haue not Her, He ha's another, "For now the Church triumphant is his Mother Feeding his infant-glory with her pap, Dandling him sweetely in her heauenly lap, For this is confirm'd by the sacred word, "He cannot die that dieth in the Lord. Cease then thou tender Mother, cease to weepe, Thy Sonne's not dead, but onely falne asleepe; Which sleepe dissolu'd, his corps shall be vnited Vnto his soule amongst the Saints delighted.
"Peace happy Soule crowne thy eternall daies "With wreath of glory to thy Makers praise, "That as thou liu'd a Mirror to thy Age, "So thou may shine in Sions heritage. His Epitaph. Orimur & Morimur.Heere interred in this Tombe, Yong, yet vertues hopefull Bloome, Fathers Boy, Mothers ioy Shrined is; yet from this shrine, There's a substance, that's diuine, Which no graue Can receaue: Making claime to Heauens pure clime. ¶ The Author vpon his selected and euer to be remembred E. C. Parragon for beautie and vertue: who died the 5. of De∣cemb. Ann. Dom. 1615. Take mother Earth thy virgin-daughter heere, Borne on her Bere ere shee was borne to beare; Take her, for of her wonders may be said, "Heere one and twentie lies who di'de a Maid.
¶ Vpon the much lamented Death of the vertu∣ous virgine A. T. in Scarborough, lately de∣ceased, and of her sorrowfull Parents incessantly moned. Dead; say no more shee's dead, keepe in that word, It will goe neere to drowne her teare-swolne Foord: Why, He must know it; true, yet such as these (If grieues) should be imparted by degrees; How must they be imparted? By her Tombe; It cannot speake; Such grieues are seldome dumbe. Vpon her Tombe. Weepe, weepe Rosemarie sprig and shew remorce, Thou shold haue deckt her brideFor neere the time appointed for her Bridall, was the day of her Buriall, making way no doubt by her earthly Funerall to a heauen∣ly Nuptiall. now decks her corse ¶ Vpon the Tombe of ..... lately erected. ..... Perhaps thou may haue Shebnaes doome, To haue thy corps deuided from thy Tombe, And haue name of that crest thou gaue thy Neighbor To close thy corps in Earth, and saue this labor. How fond then thou, to build so costly Shrine, Neither (perchance) forThis Martiall shadowes vnder the title of Hermus, Sic tibi nec tumulum conde nec Herme tuis. thee nor none of thine? Yet if thou want thy Tombe, thou shalt not misse To haue thy Epitaph, and this it is: ....... Is Dead: The cause if you would know, His winde-pipe burst, and he no more could blow.
¶ Vpon a late deceased Pinch-gut. Macer dide rich they say, but it's not so, For he dide poore, and was indebted too: How should that be? Obserue me, and Ile tell ye He dide indebted both to backe and belly: For all he scrap't from his Atturnies Fees, Seru'd but to starue his Maw with bread & cheese; So as'mongst those we rightly may him call, Whose life spent lesse then did his Funerall: For all his life, his House scarse eate one Beast, Yet Dead, his Sonne makes vp the Churles Feast. ¶ This the Authour wrote vpon an excel∣lent Bowler and his Friend, aptly re∣sembling Mans life to a game at Bowles. The World is the Alley where we play, The Bowles we play with, Creatures that we vse; The Rubs the Passions of our minds, the way Needs no Ground-giuer, there's but one to chuse The way of all Flesh: Seauen's our Game we say, (For Seauen yeere is liues-lease that limits vs) The Blocke our end, which when it draweth on, We poake our Bowles, and so our Game is done.
¶ Vpon a singular Irishman. By him lies heere, I finde from whence we came, Where we must goe, how life's an Irish game, This day in health and wealth, next poore & sicke, "For Irish games haue still an Irish tricke. ¶ Vpon the death of one Cookes wife, an Inscrip∣tion allusiue to her name. Death's the cooke prouideth meate, For the crawling wormes to eate; Why shouldst thou then Cooke repine Death should dresse that wife of thine? All must die, yea time will be, Thou wilt thinke he pleasur'd thee; For no question, being told, She was saplesse, toothlesse, old, He thought fit she'sd liue no longer, That thou might chuse out a yonger. This then on her Age thy youth May be writ as grounded truth, "Heere she lies, long may she lie, "Ere she dide, was wish'd to die. This the Author presently composed vpon this occasion; being with sundry Gentlemen at Walt∣ham exceeding merrily disposed, one Cooke a neighbour of the Hoasts where he lay, came sud∣denly in, pitteously lamenting the death of his
wife, being newly departed: euery one laboured to allay his sorrow; but by how much more in∣stant were their comforts, by so much more vio∣lent were his Passions: at last the Author percei∣uing by his Hoast that he expressed a dissembling sorrow, being impatient of her life, and therefore (by all probabilitie) inwardly content with her death, being an old decrepite woman, and He in the Prime of his age, in stead of all vnnecessarie comforts, applied this soueraigne Discourse as a salue to his griefe, without further premeditation. — coenae fercula nostrae Mallem conuinis, quam placuisse cocis. Englished: As in my choise of meate so in my Booke, I'd rather please my guests, then please my Cooke. ¶ In Actorem Mimicum cui vix parem cerni∣mus superstitem; Quaecun{que} orta sunt occidunt. Salust. Ver vireat quod te peperit (viridissima proles) Quae{que} tegit cineres, ipsa virescat humus. Transis ab exiguis nunquam periture thatri Vt repetas sacri pulchra Theatra Iouis.
¶ In vultum incredibili lepore respersum. O facs mutata nimis; spectacula praebes Vermibus, ingenuis saepe probata viris. Quo mutata tuae magis est Prstantia formae, Integra nunc remanet quae peritura fuit. Vita vt mimus. Exit vt exegit soboles lepidissima partem, Pramia fert hominum, sed meliora Deûm. ¶ Vpon a Traueller, who taking Inne in a vil∣lage at the signe of the Boore was la∣mentably murdered by his Hoast. The brutish-brisled Bore that was my Signe, Where th'Hoast (Bore-like) shed this poore bloud of mine. Ibidem. An crudelis Aper magis, an crudelir Hosps, Nescio; saeuus Aper, saeuus & Hospes erat. At saeuus magis Hospes erat, nam conuenit vrsis Inter se sauis, non Hospes ab Hospite tuts. Englished. Whether the Bore or Hoast more cruell be, Cruell the Bore, the Hoast as fierce as He, I know not: but the Hoast's the cruellest: "Beares do agree, while the Hoast betraies his Guest:
¶ Vpon certaine Bones found of late buried in the ground, supposed to be some murder commit∣ted by the Hoast, in whose yard these Bones were found; but as yet only suspition is groun∣ded, no apparancie of Fact discouered. Brow'd be thy hands in bloud, although Thou be Free to the world, thy Conscience is not free; For these drie Bones lie mouldred now in Dust, Will manifest thy guilt, for God is iust. Vpon murder. Murder may seeme to sleepe, but cannot sleepe, For Feare and Horrour do her eie-lids keepe. Another. Murder sometime to slumber will betake her, Till furie, wrath, and vengeance do awake her: ¶ Vpon a Gentlewoman who died in Child-birth. One, and my onely one lies buried heere, Who in the Birth she bore, was borne on Beere; To him askes more, this for excuse appeares, "Ioy can find words, but words are drown'd in teares.
Vpon an Infant (his fathers first borne) was this written: By this auouch I may, right sure I am, That meagre Death's an vniust Tithingman, This was my First, not Tenth, and we do say, "With Tenth, not First we vse our Tithe to pay. ¶ Vpon one Gray. Gray was my name, gray were my haires of hue, And Gray to graue return'd, payes Natures due. ¶ Vpon one Graue. Graue I was, where now you see, Graue is all is granted me: Yet with me my name I haue, Since in graue doth lodge a Graue. Another. Iesu Christ my soule he saue, Ere my Met-wand tuch my graue. ¶ Vpon one Winde towards the North-bor∣ders is this written; Winde I'se can'd an new I find, An mans life is but a wind; Whilke an I had winde at will, I had yet bene liuing still: But I's, wele, though wind be gaue, Siker I's wind feele I nane.
¶ Another. Hoc Epitaphtum are insculptum vidimus cathedrali templo Ebo∣racensi, pulcherrimo more (in aerea quadam lamina) consitum, sed baerbarie temporis magis excusanda, aut ineptia Autoris non satis miranda, parum condite dispositum in Orientali  prope me∣diam partem rt erigitur.Miseremini mei my Friends all, For now the World hath enformed me to fall; I must no longer endure, Pray for my Soule, For the World is transitory and terrestriall. ¶ Vpon old Mammon. Here lies experienc'd Prouidence, whose care Hath well enrich'd himself, made others bare; And yet when Nature did denie Him breath, Wormes had their Legacie by meanes of Death: Pray for his Soule, who prai'd on many a Soule, "And houle amaine when as the Bell doth toule: The reason is, if you doe aske me why, "Howling should supply mourning when Dogs die. Animae meae propitietur Deus. ¶ On a Cobler at Cambridge. Maruell not much though death in doubt did stand, He found him alwayes on the mending hand; Yet by misfortune and by change of weather, Death ript his Soule quite from the vpper leather.
¶ Vpon an Eminent STATESMAN in this Land, absolute for his generall suruey in all know∣ledge, his approued iudgement in all Learning. Reade STATESMAN here thy owne mortalitie, O meditate of Death before thy death; Be not transport'd with Honour: for if we Ere can shew vertue, it is while we breath, Raising our hopes 'boue Earths felicity, To crown our Temples with Fames glorious wreath: Behold I was, and being was admir'd, Elected STATESMAN, and esteemed fit At all assaies of STATE, to manage it; So all that Frame which was so much desir'd, Ends in this Chest, where STATE retires expir'd. ¶ In the memory of that famous Professour of Physicke, Mr Butler, generally renowmed for his approued practice. Death might dissolue thy forme, but not thy fame, For shee hath reared on thee such a frame As shall preserue thy mem'rie, sure I am, So long as Age shall neede Physician; Cease Criticke then for to traduce his worth Whose Oyle though it be spent, his Light's not forth. "To sundry States our sundry Fates vs call, Some for the Soule, some bodie few for all: Yet we in way of Charity should know "He had receits for Soule and Bodie too.Sic Aesculapius exit, & vrnam in quam omnes redeunt, repetit Supremam.
¶ On one More. Here lies More, and no more but he, More, and no more, how can that be? ¶ On one Pricke. Cupid and Death they both their arrowes nicke, Cupid shot short, but Death he hit the Pricke. ¶ Vpon Sir Ignorance. Here lies the body of Sir Ignorance, Who liued in a mist, died in a trance; And may he so long sleepe where he is laine, Till he forget to come to vs againe. ¶ Vpon Gregorie Cade. Sib my wife did promise me Shee would die when I did die, But no trust's in Her I see, And you see't as well as I: For my shrowde was scantly rotten, Till my Sib had me forgotten. FINIS.
