1046 S115252 99850471 15678
THE SEAVEN SPIRITVALL Exercises of a de∣uout Soule. CONTAINING the Life and Death of our Sauiour CHRIST: compiled in seauen Meditations, replenished with most godly, and deuout mo∣tions, and seruing for the seauen dayes in the Weeke. PSALME 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy wayes. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, and are to be solde at the great South-doore of Paules, and at Britaines Bursse. 1613.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. William Bull, MAYOR of the Citie of WELS, I. B. Wisheth all prospe∣ritie in this life, and eternall happinesse in the life to come. IF all men are by nature and duty bound to gratifie their
wel-deseruing Friends, (most deare, and much respected VNCLE) then must I not ouerslip time to make requitall of your manifold kindnesses, by some slender gift, such as the zeale of my dutie, and the abilitie of my minde is able to performe. And now to make it appeare, not so much in comple∣ments as in action, I haue sent you a small Trea∣tise, which (in the iudge∣ment of some Diuines, whom I reuerence in my heart) is, for matter, of worthy respect; for me∣thod, plaine; for practise,
godly; and (I hope) for the fruits of it, profitable: for what of higher re∣gard, of more facilitie, of deeper deuotion, and of greater comfort, then the meditation of the Historie of our Sauiour CHRIST, which you see here parted into seauen dayes practise, and may be the Christians daily taske. I will say no more of it, onely vse it, peruse it, practise it: and after your charitable censure, if it may seeme worthy your patronage, claime it as your owne; your owne you may then call
it, for without you, it had neuer seene the Sunne, nor the Sunne it. The re∣flexe of your fauours to∣wards me, and the vnde∣serued kindnesse of Some that are neare allyed to you (whom I onely point at, R. B. &c. I neede no more, as also the godly disposition of you all in matters of pietie and deuotion) haue called this light out of darknesse, and made it (that long hath wandred from the Author) like a wearyed Pilgrime to flye to you for prote∣ction. As you loue Christ,
so fauour it, and as you fauour godlinesse, so loue It. Make it your daily, Viz. This Booke. though not your whole, taske: and resolue of this, that Christ cals men, as well to Mount Tabor by diuine Meditation, to ad∣mire his goodnesse and glory; as Caesar cals them to beare the Sword, for the defence and counte∣nance of authoritie. Thus crauing your fa∣uourable acceptance of this poore mite, vnder∣taking the patronage of the same, I wish you all health and happinesse. Leauing this to you, with
the remembrance of my humble dutie. London, this 3. of Octo∣ber. 1612. Your Cosen in all seruice to be commanded. I. B.
THE PREFACE to the seauen Medi∣tations, of the Life, and Death of our SAVIOVR CHRIST. AMongst all spi∣rituall Exerci∣ses, (if we may giue credit to an Ancient Writer) there is none more profitable, In Prol. of the Medit. of the Life of Iesus. then the Meditations of the Life and Death of our Sa∣uiour. For as they worke in vs, a despising, and con∣tempt
of all visible things; so doe they arme vs against all the power of the world, the flesh, and the Diuell: They purchase familiaritie with God; they procure his loue towards vs; they make vs confident, and they bring our soules to the Paradise of all vertues, and height of all heauenly perfections. For, where may wee finde the force, vertue, and true effects of pouerti-, hu∣militie, patience, meeknesse, loue, obedience, and other celesliall Graces, more per∣fectly displayed, then in the life of our Sauiour. There∣fore Bernard speaketh
rightly, when he saith: That man that would get vn∣to himselfe vertue, labou∣reth in vaine, if hee seeke it any where else, or de∣sire it of any other, then of him that is Lord of all vertues, whose doctrine is the rule of Wisedome, whose mercy is the work of Iustice, whose life is the example of Tempe∣rance, and whose death is the perfect president of Patience. In this Exercise this sweet and holy Teacher spent and consumed his whole time, making bene∣fit and fruit of the godly
collections, which hee ga∣thered together of the anxi∣eties and bitternesse of Christ his Passion: in whose person he pasionately spea∣keth; Sup. Can. Serm. 63. O homo, vide quae pro te patior, non est do∣lor sicut dolor meus. Whereof also he was not at any time vnmindfull, as he witnesseth of himselfe. Therefore a man shall doe a worke of exceeding worth, if once (at the least) in euery weeke, eyther by prayer, or Meditation, hee runne ouer the whole life of our Sauiour Iesus: see∣ing there is no prayer more acceptable vnto him, then
that, in which is made a remembrance and comme∣moration of his life, and death, of his merits, and benefits which hee hath done for vs. And that this may be done more fitly, the Au∣thour hath comprehended the Life, Death, and Re∣surrection of Christ, in seauen Prayers or Medita∣tions following, that they might serue for the seauen dayes in the weeke; and the same in manner of a thanks∣giuing, seeing there is no benefit for which wee owe greater thanks vnto Al∣mightie God. Then let God
haue the glory, that re∣quires no more of vs, then the Confession and remem∣brance of his benefits, op∣tima beneficiorum cu∣stos est ipsa memoria be∣neficiorum, Hom 25. sup. Mat. & perpetua confessio gratiarum, saith Chrisostome; The best pre∣seruer of the graces of God is the mention and confessi∣on of his graces.
SEAVEN MEDITATIONS, of the Life of IESVS. MEDITAT. I. Christ descendeth from heauen, and is concei∣ued in the Virgines Wombe. I Render vnto thee immor∣tall thanks (oh sweet Iesu) that
for the loue of mee, didst descend from thy Regall Pallace, and high bosome of thy Father, into this low vaile of all miseries, and vouchsafedst to take vpon thee humane flesh, in the holy wombe of thy blessed Mother, Mat. 1.18. I beseech thee (O Lord) to prepare my heart a Tabernacle for thee, and to that end to adorne the same with all manner of vertues, that thou maist therein make perpetuall habita∣tion. Oh would to God it might please thy good∣nesse, to make my heart
to be such towards thee, that I be not afraid to in∣uite thee, but that thou maist come to dwell in mee, and that I may be fit to receiue thee with spirituall delight, Luke 19.6 as Za∣cheus which receiued thee ioyfully: and that thou maist sweetly rest in my heart without end. Oh that I could embrace thee with the armes of strong affection, that at any time, I be not drawne from thee by thought, word, deed, or vaine ima∣gination.
Mary visiteth Elizabeth. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) for that after thou wert conceiued in the wombe of the blessed Virgin Mary, thou wil∣ledst her, by thy Angell Gabriel, Luke 1.39 to goe by the Mountaines and visit Eli∣zabeth that she might sa∣lute, and congratulate with her, for that GOD had made her barren wombe to beare. Thou didst not disdaine to be shut nine Moneths in the glorious bowels of thy
Mother. Therefore I be∣seech thee to giue me the grace of true Humilitie, and so to imprint the same in my heart, that thou maist alwayes finde me ready in those things that appertaine vnto the godly worship and ser∣uice of thee. Grant (O Lord) that my heart may still dis∣daine all worldly things, and that I may continu∣ally desire to rest and dwell in thee, and that my heart may be hum∣bled to endure any low estate for thee, that wil∣lingly enduredst the low∣est
degree of humilitie for my sake. Phil. 2.7.8 Christ is borne. I Giue thee thanks (O my sweet Iesus) which art borne of the most holy Virgine, without damage of Virgines puritie, and who laid thee straight∣way, being borne, in a Manger or Cribbe, as poore and mortall; and humbly worshipped thee as immortall God, Luke 1.46 and Creator of all things. I pray thy diuine mercy, that thou wouldest vouch∣safe
to be continually borne in mee by a new desire of Charitie, and that thou alone maist be my whole desire, my one∣ly fulnes, and firme hope of my heart. Let it be pleasing vnto thee, that I alwayes seeke thee, al∣wayes thinke on thee, and alwayes feruently loue thee.
Christ is wrapped in base clothing. I Giue vnto thee infinite thankes (O sweet Iesu) that being borne, wast subiect to the bitternesse of the ayre and cold sea∣sons, and yet createdst the ayre, and orderest the seasons: thou didst not disdaine to be wrapped in base clothing, and to partake of my weakenesse and miserie, to sucke vir∣gines Milke from the brest of thy glorious Mo∣ther, as the innocent
Lambe of God, in the forme of a poore and simple Babe; when thou wast indeed the true om∣nipotent God. Thou be∣camest poore for our sakes, that art indeed the King of heauen and earth, that we through thy po∣uertie, 2 Cor. 8.9 might be made rich. Grant then (O Lord) that in thy sight, I may alwayes be a true Infant in Humilitie, thy Childe in Innocencie; and that I may be alwayes truely poore in spirit, but rich in grace, and plentifull in goodnesse. Grant that for
the loue of thee, I refuse nothing in this World, that is eyther bitter, or laborious; that I loue no∣thing in this world, but thee; desire to possesse no∣thing aboue thee; nor esteem any worldly thing in comparison of thee. Christ is worshipped of the Shepheards. I Giue thee thankes (O bountifull Iesu) that as soone as thou wast borne, was celebrated with the sweet Hymnes of holy Angels, Luke 2.14 and worshipped
of the Shepheards, Luke 2.20 with great ioy and admirati∣on, whom thou diddest choose to publish thy praise, non sapientes, Beda. sed simplices, qui fucare audita nescirent; not the wise∣men of the world, but plaine and simple men, that knew to publish no more then they heard. Giue mee grace (O Lord) to perseuere al∣wayes in thy praise with gladnes, that I may seeke therein the societie of the godly, and in seeking may finde thee; and (found) may ioy in thee; and ioy∣ing, may enioy thee eter∣nally.
Finally, that my ioy may burst forth with them, to publish abroad these glad tidings to the comfort of others, as they haue comforted me. Christ is Circumcised, and called Iesus. BE euer praised and glorified (O sweet Ie∣su) for that the eight day (according to the cu∣stome of other Infants) thou wouldest be circum∣cised, Luke 2.21. and diddest begin to shed thy bloud for the loue of mee, in thy most
tender age, and that thou wouldst comsort me with ineffable cōsolation, wert called Iesus, a Sauiour; Mat. 1.21. to saue mee, that otherwise had vtterly perished. I beseech thee (O Lord) to account mee in the number of thy elect, and to write my name in the booke of the blessed. And that thou wouldest circumcise my hart from all superfluitie, that is, from idle and hurtfull speeches, from vniust workes, and from impure and vaine thoughts, and cogitations. Set a watch before mine eyes, keepe
the dore of my lips, and so search my heart, that I may confine my selfe within the bounds of thy will. Oh my Redeemer, thou art called Iesus, that is, a Sauiour: for to thee onely it belongeth to giue saluation. Therfore I pray thee (O Lord) that the re∣membrance of this sweet Name of Sauiour, may expell from mee all de∣spaire, al inordinate faint∣nesse of heart, and sloath∣fulnesse; that it may en∣due mee with a stedfast hope of thy mercy, and may saue mee from all the power of sin, the rage
of Sathan, and the deceit∣full delights of this pre∣sent world. Christ is worshipped of the Wise men. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) that wert found of the Magi, or wise∣men, seeking thee with sincere faith, and inward deuotion, by the appea∣ring of a Starre; who fal∣ling downe vpon their knees before thee, offered Gold, Frankencense, and Mirrhe. Grant (O Lord) that I
may seeke thee in the companie and societie of those Wise-men, not in Bethlehem, but euen in the center of my heart, and (being found in the same) I may worship thee in spirit and in truth, that I may offer vnto thee, the Gold of pure Charitie, Gregor. in Homil. the Incense of true Deuo∣tion, and the Mirrhe of perfect Mortification: fi∣nally, grant me grace, that with readinesse of heart, and willingnesse of minde, I may bestow all my strength, and power in the imitation and fol∣lowing of thy most holy
life. And if at any time I erre from thy truth, make (O Lord) thy Word to be the starre of my guide to leade mee till I finde thee. Iesus is presented in the Temple. I Giue thee thankes (O Lord Iesus Christ) for that thou (to leaue vs the example of Obedience and Humilitie) wouldest be subiect to the Law for the loue of vs, Luke 2.22. for that thou wouldest be presen∣ted in the Temple in the
Armes of thy blessed Mo∣ther, and wouldest the Oblation of two Turtle Doues (not of him that was rich, Leu. 12.6. but of a poore man) to be offered for thee. Luke 2.25.38. When Simeon with Anna the Prophetesse re∣ioycing at thy presence, did giue a worthy testi∣monie of thy glory. Grant that it may please thee (O Lord) not to suffer the least thought or imagination of vanitie at any time hereafter, to enter into my heart, and more especially, that I be not lifted vp with pride, nor carryed with
presumption. O how hap∣py were I if all manner of presumption, were ba∣nisht from mee, and all desire of worldly fauours, together with the inordi∣nate conceit of Selfe-af∣fection, were extinguish∣ed in mee? Grant to me thy grace (O Lord) that I may be carelesse of vaine oftenta∣tions, that I submit my selfe to all men, and wil∣lingly obey them for thy ordinance sake. And as thou (O Lord) camest not to destroy, but to ful∣fill the Law, so direct and sanctifie my heart, and
helpe me with thy righ∣teousnesse, that I may be obedient to thy Law, and performe those duties in thy sight, as may please thee, and stand for thy glory. Iesus flyeth into Egipt. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesus) for that euen in thy minoritie thou diddest beginne to suffer persecution, and disdainedst not to flie in∣to Egypt, to auoide the bloudy hands of Herod, Mat. 2.13. thogh thou mightst haue
crusht him with thy Rod of Iron, and dasht him in pieces like a Potters ves∣sell. Grant mee grace that in all my persecutions, tribulations and tempta∣tions, I may wholy flye vnto thee, as my onely re∣fuge; onely seeke thee, as my chiefe treasure; and call vpon thee, as the one∣ly hope of my saluation. And how often soeuer thou imposest any of those crosses vpon mee, grant that I may endure them with all patience; abide them with all tranquili∣tie, and suffer them with
all gladnes of hart, giuing thee continuall thankes, for all things that may please thee to appoint to happen vnto mee: and in euery estate to learn me to be content: Lastly, guide mee with thy free Spirit, that at the summons of thy Angels, or at the voyce of thy word in the mouth of thy Ministers, I may be ready and wil∣ling to rise from the bloody pursuit of Sinne and Sathan, that seeke to destroy my soule.
Iesus sitteth among the Doctors. I Likewise giue thankes to thee (o Lord Iesus) for that thy Mother sought thee with great sorrow, when thou remai∣nedst in the Temple, and after three dayes found thee with great ioy, sit∣ting in the middest of the Doctors, Luk. 2.46. whom thou did∣dest heare, and disputedst with them, astonishing their harts with thy great Wisedome, which they could not in any wise re∣sist.
O Lord, for thy good∣nesse, grant mee, that I be neuer seperated from thee, nor thou from me: Put from mee all sloath∣fulnesse and feare: expell the coldnesse of affection from my heart, which is so much displeasing vnto thee; and giue me a per∣fect deuotion, and an ar∣dent thirst after thy righ∣teousnesse, which may so possesse my Soule, that I neuer grow faint, or wea∣rie in seruing thee. And if at any time I finde not the comfort of thy pre∣sence; so touch my heart (ô Lord) with an ardent
desire of thee, that I neuer cease till I haue found the comfort of thy presence againe, and may ioyfully say with thy Spouse; Cant. 3.4 I haue found him whom my Soule loued. Amen.
MEDITAT. 2. Iesus is Baptized. I Giue THEE thanks (ô most sweet IESVS) for that thou wouldest be baptized, en∣tring into the Riuer Ior∣daine, by the hands of S. Iohn Baptist, Mat. 3.15. thy Seruant, and fore-runner, to fulfill all righteousnesse. Vouch∣safe (ô Lord) to purge mee in this life, and to make me cleane from all
my sinnes: Confirme in me this thy Couenant of grace, and seale vnto me the assurance of righte∣ousnes and washing away of my sins by thy bloud. Let mee surfet with the loue of thee, and with the vehement desire of thy heauenly kingdome. Fa∣shion me (ô Lord) to thine owne will and pleasure, before my Soule depart from the imprisonment of my body, that I pre∣sume not to dispute with thee, but willingly to sub∣mit my selfe to thy holy ordinance: That leauing this pilgrimage, I may
forth-with be with thee, that I may alwayes see thee, and alwayes enioy the happy eternity, which hath no end. Iesus is tempted of Sathan in the Desart. I Giue thee thankes (O bountifull Iesu) that be∣ing in the Desart, diddest fast fortie dayes and for∣tie nights, and afterwards sufferedst thy selfe to be tempted of Sathan, Mat. 4.2.3 and when he was ouer-come, the Angels came, and mi∣nistred vnto thee.
Grant (O Lord) that by thy grace, I may pu∣nish and chastise the wic∣kednesse of my flesh, and all vicious affects therof, and that (with the gift of perseuerance) I may ex∣ercise my selfe in conti∣nuall fasting, watching, praying, and other godly and spirituall Exercises. But chiefely grant (O Lord) that by the help of thy grace, I may be free from the sinne of Gluttonie, and from all other deceits and sugge∣stions of the Diuell. Let no temptation preuaile against mee, nor be able
to separate me from thee. But rather grant that all these things may giue greater occasion, that I may be the more firmely and strongly vnited and ioyned vnto thee, and that I may with more heedfulnes, watch against all the subtile sleights of the Tempter, to follow thy example in resisting, and to returne with thee in triumph.
Iesus suffereth diuers la∣bours and necessities. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet lesu) that for the loue of mee, hast beene afflicted in this world with infinite sorrowes, and sundry necessities, as heate, colde, hunger, thirst, labour, and weari∣nesse, with diuers watch∣ings, trauels, persecuti∣ons, and all kinde of tri∣bulations. Grant (ô Lord) that for thy sake, I may su∣staine all aduersities with
gladnesse, as imposed vp∣on mee, by the worke of thy hands, for the iust merit of my sinnes. And that I may abide them with great patience. Grant, that in all estates, as well in aduersitie, as prosperitie; in griefe, as ioy; in troubles, as tran∣quilities; I may still per∣seuer in thee, and neuer start or swerue from thee, but that in all things, thy will may be my will: when thou strikest, let mee not murmure against thee: when thou dost afflict me with pouertie, and losse of worldly comforts, then
lift vp my heart, that I may repose my wealth and my comfort in thee, ô blessed Sauiour. Iesus prayeth and preach∣eth. I Giue thee thankes (O most sweet IESVS) for that thou didst performe many things for my sake, whilest thou didst seeke the conuersion and safe∣guard of my Soule, and in no wise didst omit the office, and dutie of a good Pastor: but (euen as a true Shepheard, and Sa∣uiour
of the World) didst watch in praying, and weary thy selfe in tra∣uelling from Prouince to Prouince, and from place to place, to preach and teach, and publish thy heauenly doctrine. I beseech thee (O LORD) to impart this grace vnto mee, that at any time hereafter, I be neuer found slacke, or sloathfull in thy seruice, but that I may be euer ready and forward to doe al good duties, respecting thy glory, and the good of my brethren, Grant, that I may feruently thirst
after the sauing health of all people, and that I may alwayes haue a de∣sire & zeale of thy name, and then shall I stand for the defence of Religion, and refuse no labour or studie, to promote thy glory. Iesus is conuersant amongst men. I Giue thee thankes (O benigne Iesu) for that by conuersing amongest men, thou wouldest cheer∣fully comfort them, and cure their infirmities, of
thy great mercy. Grant mee (O Lord) that I may haue a heart full of louing affections towards all men, that I may haue compassion on all that I perceiue to be in affliction. And grant me thy grace (O LORD) that I may esteeme other mens miseries as mine owne, that I may beare with other mens imper∣fections, with a sincere heart, and without any passion of anger, hatred, or contempt; and that I may help and relieue their necessities after my abi∣litie, or at least, haue a
fellow-feeling and touch of their miseries. O Lord, purge my soule perfectly from all vicious concu∣piscences and vaine de∣sires, which haue any do∣mination in my heart, that the same (being hea∣led of all these euils, and freed from all these im∣pediments) may safely flye vnto heauen, and ne∣uer rest before it may be fit by pure loue and affe∣ction, to come vnto thy heauenly embracements.
Iesus suffereth many things for vs. I Giue thee thankes (O good Iesu) that for the loue which thou bearest vnto mee, thou diddest suffer innumerable iniu∣ries, blasphemies, slan∣ders and persecutions, and euen of those chiefely, on whom thou bestowedst infinite benefits and bles∣sings. I beseech thee (O Lord) to giue me a pure, inno∣cent, and simple heart,
that I may loue my ene∣mies, and that from my heart I may lament their euils and wickednes. That I may alwayes excuse them if they trespasse in any thing, and that (in∣tending good for euill) I may truely imitate thy perfect charitie and pa∣tience. Iesus commeth into Ieru∣salem. I Giue thee thankes (O most louing IESVS) for that thou camest to Ie∣rusalem, Mat. 21.5.
humble and meeke, riding vpon an Asse-colt; and on them that came to meete thee, singing with pleasant Hymnes, and glorious praises, thou sheddedst forth teares full of bitter∣nesse, which thy griefe did expresse, that was conceiued for the losse of so many soules, and the destruction of so beauti∣full a Citie. Giue me (O Lord) an inward knowledge, and feeling of mine owne e∣state, that I may wholy humble my selfe, and openly acknowledge my
vilenesse. That I may so far despise my selfe, that the flatterings, commen∣dations, and applauses of men be not (hereafter) pleasing vnto mee, but that I may daily mourne and bewaile, as well the sinne of my neighbour, as the impietie of my selfe, still reckoning and reputing his euill as mine owne, Ier. 9.1. that mine head may be filled with the waters of bitter sorrow, and mine eyes a fountain of teares, lamenting the destruction that thou hast threatned against vnpe∣nitent persons, because
they know not those things which belong to their peace. Luk. 19.42
MEDITAT. III. Iesus washeth the feete of his Disciples. I Giue THEE thankes (O Lord Iesu) for that thou (to prescribe an end of the old Law) diddest eate the Pascall Lambe in Ierusa∣lem with thy Disciples, and to giue an example to them of thy great hu∣militie, & ineffable loue, diddest wash their feete, kneeling.
I beseech thee (O Lord) that this example may pierce my hart, and may suppresse all pre∣sumption and pride in mee. Giue me (O Lord) all humble submission, by which I may subiect my selfe to all men, not with constraint, but wil∣lingly. Giue mee also perfect Obedience, by which I may fully satisfie thy Commandements, and the ruling power of them that command in thy Name. Stirre vp in me (O Lord) a most fer∣uent Charitie, by which I may loue thee and my
neighbor with true pure∣nesse and simplicitie. Let not the pride of my hart carry mee to disdaine my brethren, but to endea∣uour my selfe to do them all christian seruice, whe∣ther it be in the refresh∣ing of their bodies, or ministring spirituall com∣fort vnto their soules. Iesus ordayneth the Eucha∣rist. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) that of thy most excellent Charitie, thou hast ordayned the
Sacrament of thy body and bloud, Mat. 26.26 and of thy vnspeakable bountie hast giuen thy selfe to be food for vs: and for that also thou hast not refused to be here spiritually pre∣sent with vs, to the end of the world. O Lord, excite in me (I beseech thee) a liuely desire, and most ardent thirst of this Sacrament. Grant, that I may come vnto this Table of life, receiue thee, by a liuely Faith, with chaste Loue, with low Humilitie, with Puritie of heart, and with Sinceritie of mind. Grant
also, that my Soule may so thirst after thee, and be so wounded with thy loue, that at the length, I may be admitted to possesse thy heauenly pleasures, for the honour and glory of thy Name. Iesus comforteth his Dis∣ciples at his last Supper. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) for that be∣ing willing to leaue the world, thou diddest ad∣monish and comfort thy Disciples with words full of holy affection, and by
earnest prayer didst com∣mend them to thy father, Iohn 17.9.11. shewing thereby, with what loue thou diddest imbrace them, and all those that should beleeue in thee by their doctrine. I beseech thee (O Lord) that my heart may feele a sweetnesse in thy words, and that they may be al∣wayes more pleasant vn∣to mee, then the honey or the honey-combe. O Lord, let the spirit of thy affection raigne in mee, that I may wholy trans∣forme my selfe into thy loue. Direct all my acti∣ons, that in mee, and of
me, alwayes thy will may be done. Iesus prayeth to his Father in the Garden. I Giue thee thankes (O louing lesus) that fal∣ling on the Earth, (thy Armes spred forth) thou diddest pray vnto thy Father, commending thy selfe wholy into his hands, and praying that in all things not thy will but the will of thy Father might be fulfilled. Luk. 22.42 I beseech thee (ô Lord) that in all tribulation, and necessi∣tie,
I may runne vnto thee by heartie prayer, that I may belieue in thy pro∣uidence wholy, without election, or choise of my owne will, or the expecta∣tion of any proper com∣moditie. Grant that I may not at any time shunne ad∣uersities, nor be with∣held from any good en∣terprise by the same. But that whatsoeuer shal hap∣pen vnto mee, I may take it patiently, bearing and suffering all things with an humble & quiet hart, as sent vnto mee by thy holy hands. And that I
may account them not as thy heauy iudgements, to confound me vtterly; but as thy chastisements, to correct mee, and that not in thy fury, but in thy Fatherly loue and good∣nesse. Iesus is apprehended. I Giue thee thankes (ô holy Iesu) for that thou wouldest be taken with ar∣med men, and be bound by them as a wicked man and malifactor, and be brought before Annas, Mat. 26.47 and diddest not abhorre
to abide the Iudgement and sentence against thee. Oh wonderfull meeknesse of my Redeemer, whilest thou wert apprehended, bound, scorn'd, and euill entreated, thou diddest neither lament, murmure nor grudge, but holding thy peace, didst patiently follow them that did lead thee, draw thee, & weary thee, thou diddest obey them that commanded thee, and with great pa∣tience sufferedst the tor∣ments which they infli∣cted vpon thee, when thou couldest haue had a legi∣on of Angels to haue re∣scued
thee, and haue cru∣shed the backes of thine enemies. O Lord, grant that such an example of thy great vertue and pa∣tience, may shine in mee, for the glory and honour of thy most holy Name. Iesus is smitten on the face. I Giue thee thankes (ô amiable Iesu) that stan∣ding before the proud & stiffe-necked high-Priest, no otherwise, then if thou haddest beene a vile and abiect person, Luk. 22.64 thou wert stricken, and most pati∣ently
diddest suffer a cru∣ell blow, which one of his wicked ministers strucke on thy face. Oh Lord, I beseech thee, mortifie in me all wrath and indig∣nation; take from me all manner of enuy and hate, and extinguish in mee all desires of reuenge, that when any one doth wrong and iniure me, I may not be troubled or molested, neither deuise at any time to be reuenged, but suffe∣ring all things, with pati∣ence, for thy sake, and by thy example, I may for thy loue, render to euery man good for euil. Amen.
MEDITAT. IIII. Iesus is diuersly molested the night in which he is apprehended. I Giue THEE thankes (O sweet IESVS) that in the night of thy Passion, thou wert scorned, and delu∣ded, Luke 22. & Chap. 23. smitten of thine ene∣mies, and diuersly iniu∣red and molested. Thou knowest (O LORD) how grieuous & troublesome it is to mee, to beare and
suffer the least wrong or iniurie. Thou knowest that my will and desire is slow and slacke to all ver∣tue, and that all good af∣fections and appetites waxe cold in me. O Lord, for thy mercy, help my infirmitie: mortifie in mee all carnall affecti∣ons, as heate of anger, hope of reuenge, and quicken thy graces with∣in mee. Grant, that for no ad∣uersitie, my minde be throwne downe, or deie∣cted. Help me that I faint not vnder the burden of tribulations, which shall
fall vpon mee; neyther let me repine at the iniu∣ries done vnto mee by others; but giuing thee thankes for all things, I may referre all things to the honour and glory of thy Name. Iesus is accused before Pi∣late. I Giue thee thankes (O Lord Iesu) that standing before Pontius Pilate, Mar. 12.17 thou diddest not answere vnto the false complaints and accusations where∣with they did iniure thee,
diddest passe ouer all things with silence, euen like a meek lambe, which openeth not his mouth, but is mute before the shearer. Grant mee (ô Lord) that the reproches, mur∣murings, or reuilings of wicked men, make me not to swel against them, or puffe me vp with en∣uy, but that being taught by thy example, I may ouercome all them, when the case so requires, by silence and taciturnitie, that slander or impeach my good name. Giue me the grace of perfect Hu∣militie,
that I may ney∣ther desire that men praise me, nor be afraid to be dispraised for thee: But to comfort mee with the reward of blessednes, that thou hast assured them that are reuiled, and suffer persecution for righteousnes sake; name∣ly, that theirs is the King∣dome of heauen, Mat. 5.10.11.12. & quod eis magna est merces in coe∣lis; that great is their re∣ward in heauen.
Iesus brought before He∣rod. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet IESVS) King of Heauen and Earth, that with great stirre and fu∣ry of the people, thou wert brought before He∣rod, Luke 23.7. by the commande∣ment of Pilate. Giue mee fortitude (ô Lord) that persecutions may not confound mee, nor the iniuries of my enemies prouoke mee to anger, nor that their im∣pudencie make mee to
blush, or be ashamed, but that I may beare all things with meeknesse & patience, and ouer-come with silence, according to the prescript of thy Commandements; re∣membring alwaies whose cause I haue in hand, and that thou denyest them before thy Father, that deny thee before men. Strengthen me (ô Lord) in thy cause and quarrell, for thou art greater then the Princes of the earth, and canst make thy ser∣uants to stand against them.
Iesus is accused before He∣rod. I Giue thee thankes (O holy IESVS) that stan∣ding before Herod, Luke 23.9 10. and accused before the chiefe Priests and Elders of ma∣ny crimes and iniquities, thou wouldest answere to nothing, but didst iustifie thy cause by holding thy peace. Giue mee the gift of silence (ô Lord) that I haue not at any time, a desire to speak vaine, idle, or vnclean speeches, nor
that I waste not my time in discoursing of barraine and vnfruitfull matters; but grant that my tongue vtter nothing that is not iust, honest, profitable, and consonant to thy ho∣ly will. Let mee detest (ô Lord) the vice of backe∣biting, and that I be still pleased to heare & speake well of all men: And when they shall band themselues to plot my destruction, yet make me to pray for them; and in all things to be milde and mercifull, Luke 6.36 as my heauen∣ly father is mercifull.
Iesus is iudged more wic∣ked then Barrabas. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) that being compared with that in∣famous murderer Barra∣bas, Marke 15.15. Act. 3.14. thou wert iudged worse, and more vnwor∣thy of life, then hee: so that homycide was set at libertie, and thou (the author of life) condem∣ned to dye. O King of eternall glory, what grea∣ter infamie could thy maiestie be afflicted with? From hence (O LORD)
from hence it appeares, that thou art that liuely stone disallowed of men, which God neuerthelesse hath chosen to himselfe, and placed in the head corner. Grant (ô Lord) that I may preferre nothing be∣fore thee, that for any thing I be not changed from thee, but that I may account all things as vile and base that are com∣pared vnto thee. Grant, that the poyson of enuy neuer infect my minde, but that I may alwayes rest in thee, and place my saluation in thee.
Iesus is whipped. IEsu, I giue thee thanks, that being spoyled of thy garments, Mar. 15.15 thou suffe∣redst, thy chaste, holy, and naked flesh to be loo∣ked vpon, and afterwards wouldest abide to be scourged, and whipped, that by thy wounds our wounds might be healed. O Lord, despoyle my heart of all vncleane co∣gitations: dis-robe me of the old man with all his workes, and cloath mee with the new man, which
is created to thy image and similitude, in Iustice and holinesse, and grant that with all patience and humilitie, I may abide the scourge of thy father∣ly visitation. Iesus is crowned with thornes. I Giue thee thankes (O bountifull Iesu) for that thou wert so diuersly il∣luded after so great en∣uies, so many wounds, Mar. 15.17 and after thy bloud so plentifully shed through thy whole body; & to thy
greater reproach, they at∣tyred thee with a purple garment, & put a crowne of thornes vpon thy head, with a Reed in thy hand, in stead of a Scepter, and bending their knees salu∣ted thee as King (or ra∣ther mocked thee) say∣ing; Haile King of the Iewes. Let (ô Lord) the me∣morie of this miserable Tragedie be euer im∣printed in my heart, and neuer blotted out of my remembrance. Fixe thy charitie in my mind, that I may onely loue thee: thinke of thee, and of thy
iniuries; and so, euer rest and depend on thee. That neyther tribulation, mi∣series, nor persecutions, separate mee from thee: neyther let it be grieuous vnto me at any time, if I be dispised, contemned, mocked, and derided of men for thy sake. Iesus speaketh to the wo∣men. I Giue thee thankes (O good Iesu) that in this laborsome iourney, when thou wert brought forth
to be crucified, thou did∣dest louingly admonish the women that were la∣menting, Luk. 23.28 not to poure forth their plaints ouer thee, but ouer themselues and their children. Grant (ô Lord) that I may shed the teares of loue and compassion so a∣bundantly, that the hard∣nesse of my heart may be mollified, and made ac∣ceptable in the sight of thy Maiestie. Grant (ô Lord) that being wholy inflamed with the loue of thee, I may little or no∣thing esteeme of world∣ly causes, but that I may
imbrace thee, onely loue thee, and rest in thee, world without end. A∣men.
MEDITAT. V. Iesus drinketh the Vineger mixt with gall. I Giue THEE thankes (O bountifull Ie∣su) that thy bones being wearied, Mat. 27.34 thy body being weakened, and thy selfe ouer-much pressed with the weight of thy tortures & sorrowes, at length thou camest vn∣to the place of sacrifice, where thou wert found wholy afflicted, & almost
killed with thirst; at which time those barbarous and wicked Souldiers offered thee Vineger mixt with gall to drinke. Let it please thee (ô Lord) that the remem∣brance of this Cup may extinguish in mee the inordinate concupiscence of gluttonie, and delights of the flesh; and grant, that at any time I giue not consent to filthy and vnlawfull pleasures, but giue mee the necessarie vertue of Temperance, that all other appetites and de∣lights being suppressed, I may onely hunger and
thirst after thee, and place my whole pleasures in thee. Christ is crucified. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet IESVS) that wert cruelly distract and hand∣led: when they came to crucifie thee, Mat. 27.35 did dest also suffer that thy holy hands and feete should be nay∣led and fastened to the Crosse. Graunt me (ô Lord) that with a faithfull and acceptable heart, I may alwayes be mindfull of
that thy most ardent cha∣ritie, by which thou wert moued so louingly to stretch forth thy armes, and open thy hands to be nailed, and to endure such horrible torments. Arise (O Lord) and wound my hart with per∣fect charitie, and fill all my senses with thy loue and affection, that at any time my desires and cogita∣tions be not separated from thee.
Iesus hangeth vpon the Crosse. I Giue thee thankes (O most holy Jesu) that for three houres space thou diddest hang vpon the Crosse, Ioh. 19.18 molested with ma∣ny and intollerable infa∣mies, abundantly shed∣ding thy bloud, and in all thy members sustai∣ning immeasurahle for∣rowes. Fasten (O Lord) my wretched Soule (which lyeth prostrate on the ground) to the same Crosse: purge the same
from vncleannesse of Sin, and filthy desires, washing it with the flowing springs of thy precious bloud, which yeeldeth life and saluation. Refuse not (ô Lord) to cleanse me with the same bloud, to san∣ctifie and make me pure with that most precious liquour of life. Offer the same (ô Lord) vnto thy Father in remedie and full satisfaction of my sinnes and iniquities. Grant (O Lord) I befeech thee, that my heart may taste, and my soule may drinke of the sweet drops of that thy precious bloud.
Iesus hangeth betweene two Theeues. I Giue thee thankes (O sweet Iesu) that for the loue of me thou wouldest be hanged betweene two Theeues, Mat. 27.38 and be also ac∣counted like vnto them, that by this thy meruei∣lous humilitie, and pati∣ence, thou mightest heale and vtterly destroy our haughtie pride and pre∣sumption. Grant (ô Lord) so to exalt my spirit, that I may despise all the things of
this world, and that I may onely behold thee, onely loue thee, that I may neuer meditate of any thing, but that thou (ô LORD) and thy suf∣ferings may be fresh blee∣ding in my heart; that I may onely thinke of thee, onely talke of thee, de∣light my selfe in thee, and that all my actions be in thee, and by thee, and that nothing may satisfie my minde without thee.
Iesus prayeth for them that crucifie him. I Giue thee thankes (O beloued Iesus) that wert so good to them that handled thee in such hard measure, and didst also pray vnto thy Father for them that crucified thee, Luk. 23.34 saying; Forgiue them (Father) for they know not what they doe. Giue mee grace (O Lord) that I may haue true patience and meeke∣nesse; by which being ar∣med (according to the
example which thou hast giuen mee, and the com∣mandement which thou hast left mee) I may loue my enemies, & doe good to them that hate mee, and that I may pray vn∣to thee for them, that thou forgiue all their in∣iuries. Iesus is scoffed on the Crosse. I Giue thee thankes (O bountifull IESV) that wert scorned & despised of thine enemies, Luk. 23.36 & suffe∣redst so many iniuries and
blasphemies, euen at that time, in which they infli∣cted such ineffable griefes & sorrowes on the crosse vpon thy naked body. Grant mee grace, (O Lord) that being mind∣full of the humilitie which thou didst suffer, and pa∣tience with which thou didst abide so great do∣lours and infamies, I may also with the like suffe∣rance endure all aduerfi∣ties, perseuering with thee (euen vnto death) in the crosse of patience. Let no force of temptation, no tempest of tribulation, nor no affliction of iniu∣ries
with-draw mee from any good purpose begun. Let neither life nor death, things present, nor things to come, nor any crea∣ture separate mee from thee. Iesus promiseth Paradise to one of the Theeues. I Giue thee thankes (O excellent IESV) that didst also suffer the iniu∣ries and blasphemies of one of the Theeues, Mat. 27.38 and to the other that confes∣sed his sinnes vnto thee, and set forth thy inno∣cencie
with a pure Faith, didst promise the glory of Paradise. Oh happy mee, if I might euer become so blessed, as to be so respe∣cted with the eyes of thy mercie, with which thou didst behold that happy Theefe; and to liue so in∣nocently, by the help of thy grace, that at the end of my life, I may heare this thy most sweet say∣ing: This day thou shalt be with mee in Paradise! Amen.
MEDITAT. VI. Iesus complaineth that hee is forsaken of his Father. I Giue THEE thanks (ô most sweet Iesu) that thy Wounds being opened, thy head crowned with thornes, thy hands and feete fix∣ed to the Crosse, Mat. 27.46 thou didst say; Oh God, my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? Worke in me (ô Lord) that in all aduersities and
temptations, I may flye vnto thee my louing Fa∣ther, and (distrusting in my selfe) may onely trust in thee, and wholy resigne my selfe into thy hands. Grant (O Lord) I be∣seech thee, to wound the inward parts of my Soule, with the remembrance of thy wounds. Let them be imprinted in the clo∣set of my heart, and so let mee be satisfied with thee, that I may thinke of none but thee, nor seeke any other then thee, that seeking, I may finde thee; and found, I may possesse thee for euer.
Iesus thirsteth vpon the Crosse. I Giue thee thankes (O Lord Iesus Christ) that hauing thy body weake∣ned, and drie, by reason of thy most grieuous torments, and great effu∣sion of thy bloud, diddest vehemently thirst, Ioh. 19.28 and burning with desire of our saluation, didst say, I thirst. Grant (O Lord) that I may ardently thirst after thy honour, and the sal∣uation of Soules. Let me
wholy occupy my selfe in the same, & conforme my selfe to thy holy will, doing as much as my e∣state is able. I beseech thee, that no loue of transitory things carry me away, nor no crea∣ture draw mee into pe∣rilous dangers. Nay, ra∣ther let mee embrace all things for the loue of thee, that are to be im∣braced, but let mee still hold thee more deare vn∣to mee then any thing, and onely in thee finde rest and quietnesse.
Iesus drinketh gall vpon the Crosse. I Giue thee thankes (O most mercifull IESVS) that in the houre of thy death; Mat. 27.34 to quench thy thirst, thou wouldest ap∣ply a Sponge full of vine∣ger vnto thy mouth, that by tasting in that thy af∣flicted estate, thou migh∣test satisfie thy heauenly Father for all our intem∣perances and voluptuous∣nesse, and leaue vnto vs a miraculous example of thy pouertie.
Grant mee grace (O Lord) that for the loue of thee, I may despise all dilicious sauours, and ex∣quisite banquets, and that I may be contented with modestie and tem∣perance, to eate & drinke that onely that may suf∣fice to the sustenance of this body, rendring thee infinite thankes for the same. Purifie and heale my Soule, that whatsoe∣uer is acceptable vnto thee, may be pleasing to mee; and what displea∣seth thee, may be vnsa∣uery and loathsome vnto mee.
Iesus endeth the worke of our Redemption. I Giue thee thankes (O Iesu, the feruent louer of mankinde) that in so absolute order thou didst end the worke of our Re∣demption, offering thy selfe a liuely Sacrifice on the Altar of the Crosse for the sins of the world. I beseech thee (O my Redeemer) that thou wouldest vouchsafe to be the onely harbour of my heart, and the scope of my cogitations, wordes,
and workes, that in all things with pure & chaste intention, I may onely looke on thee, that I doe that thing onely which thy glorie requireth, that nothing please mee, but thee; and that I desire no∣thing besides thee. Grant (ô Lord) that hereafter at any time, I be not slacke or remisse in thy seruice, but that (the fer∣uour of thy holy Spirit being daily renued in mee) my diligence may increase more and more in thy praise and seruice.
Iesus dyeth. I Giue thee thankes (O most meeke Iesus) that thou diddest call Death, and command thy Spirit to leaue the prison of the flesh (being commended into the hands of thy Fa∣ther) in which thing thou declarest, Ioh. 19.30 that thou art that true Shepheard, that dyed for the safeguard of his flocke. Grant mee (O Lord) that being dead to sinne, and all wicked vices, I may onely liue vnto thee,
that (the course of this life being ended in chari∣tie) I may forth-with en∣ter into thee, that art the true Paradise of our soules. Iesus is buried. I Giue thee thankes (O beloued Iesus) that with great complaints and mournings of thy friends thou wert taken from the Crosse, Iohn 19.40.41. annointed with most precious ointments, wrapped in linnen cloths, & put into another mans Sepulchre: O Lord, bury
with thee all my senses, and desires, that being ioyned to thee in the strong linckes of loue, I may be, as it were, dead, in those things that displease thee. And of the contrary part, in all things that please thee, let mee be wholy aliue, ready, and ioyfull; let me onely be delighted in thee, my Redeemer and treasure of my Soule. Amen.
MED. . Christ I  for  hast not spared to vnder∣go the torments of death and hell for my sake, that thou mightest aduance mee into thy Kingdome. Let the consideration of this (ô God) terrifie me from sinne, because thou sparedst not thine onely begotten Sonne, but that
endure the grea∣  and . Let it also  in my hea∣ , that thogh  of wrath  in mee, Iob 6.4. and  thereof drinke  spirit, yet I may still remember, that thou my Sauiour hast satisfied for all my sins, and con∣quered both Death and Hell, Col. 2.15 when thou diddest leade captiuitie captiue: and by the spoyle of all principalities & powers of darknesse, hast swallow∣ed them vp into victory. Behold, (O Lord) behold
my infirmities, and con∣sider that I am in thy hands but as the clay in the hands of the Potter: If thou try me, giue mee patience to beare it, and when thou smitest me, lift me vp againe; and if thy terrours should fight a∣gainst mee, Iob. 6.4. yet teach me (ô Lord) to resolue that it is thy fatherly worke to kill sinne in me, that I be∣ing mortified in my sin∣full flesh, may be raised vp vnto the life of glory. Amen.
Christ is risen from the dead. I Giue thee thankes (O good IESVS) that vi∣ctoriously comming out of thy Sepulchre with most noble triumph, af∣ter thou haddest ouer∣come death, diddest rise againe the third day in great Glory and Maie∣stie, visiting thy Disci∣ples & comforting them with exceeding gladnes. Grant (ô Lord) that being quickned from death, and the deadly
action of my sinfull life, and vngodly conuersati∣on, I may walke in the newnesse of life, and seeke onely for those things which are high and hea∣uenly, and not those things which are vile and transitorie, that when thou (being the true life) shalt secondly appeare in the glory of thy Father with the Angels, I may likewise appeare with thee in glory, and be made euerlastingly blessed in the ioyfull fruition of that Kingdome that neuer shall haue end.
Iesus ascendeth into hea∣uen. I Giue thee thankes (O louing Iesus) that fortie dayes being ouer-past af∣ter thy Resurrection, thy Disciples did behold thee triumphantly, Acts 1. and glori∣ously ascending into hea∣uen, where sitting at the right hand of thy Father, thou rulest, and raignest as King, world without end. Let it be pleasing vn∣to thy goodnesse (ô Lord) that my Soule may be
rauished with the loue of thee, Coloss. 3.1 and to seeke those things that are aboue, and may despise al world∣ly things: Let it alwayes aspire vnto thee, that it may be lift vp vnto the heauens, from whence must come my comfort, my crowne, and my ioy. And that my prayer may ascend vnto thee as the morning Incense, let it affect, or be delighted in nothing, but in thee my onely Lord and God.
Iesus sendeth the HOLY GHOST. I Giue thee thankes (O most louing Iesus) that didst send thy holy spirit vpon thy elect which per∣seuered in prayer, and didst send them to preach and teach the people throughout all the world. I beseech thee (O LORD) to purifie the in∣ward parts of my heart, and to giue mee true pu∣ritie and cleannes of con∣science, that the same Comforter finding in my
soule an acceptable dwel∣ling-place, may adorne and beautifie it with the most fruitfull gifts of his Graces. Let him onely comfort me, onely streng∣then me, onely rule mee, and be onely respected of me. Let me neuer want the comfort of thy Spirit (ô God) but that I may finde him in his sweet in∣fluence of grace and as∣sistance, to sanctifie my Soule, and to strengthen the inward man in all godlinesse and vertue.
Iesus shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead. I Giue thee thankes (O bountifull IESVS) that when thou shalt come at that last day to iudge the world, thou wilt render to euery one according to his workes, eyther the ioy of eternal life, or euer∣lasting punishment. Grant (ô my louing Father) that I may haue grace to spend the course of my life in innocencie, according to thy holy will, that at length, my
Soule leauing the impri∣sonment of the body, may be presented blame∣lesse before thee, and be∣ing garnished with many vertues, may through thy mercy be receiued in∣to thy Tabernacle of glo∣ry, and that it may glo∣rifie and praise thee in the fellowship and com∣pany of Saints, world without end. Amen.
A PRAYER, or Meditation on the Name of IESVS. O Good IESV, ô sweet Iesu, the Sonne of the Virgin Ma∣ry, full of pittie and mer∣cy; ô sweet Iesu, after thine infinite goodnesse, haue mercy vpon mee; ô bountifull Iesu through that thy precious bloud, which thou didst plenti∣fully shed vpon the Altar
of the Crosse for wicked Sinners, that thou wash mee from all my sinnes and iniquities, and that thou despise not thy Ser∣uant, which humbly prai∣eth, and calleth vpon thee by this holy Name Iesus. This Name Iesus is a sweet Name; yea, it is sweeter then any Nectar & Ambrosia. This Name of Iesus bringeth life and saluation: for what is Ie∣sus but a Sauiour? Therfore ô good Iesus, which of thy goodnesse hast created me, and by thy precious bloud hast
redeemed mee; suffer not my Soule to be ouer∣come with the multi∣tude of sinnes and offen∣ces. O good IESVS, let not mine iniquities con∣demne my Soule, which thou hast made of thine infinite goodnesse: ac∣knowledge in me (ô good Iesu) that which is thine, and take from me all my sinfull and filthy enor∣mities. O good Iesu, haue mercy vpon mee so long as I am in this world, least at that terrible day of Iudgement I be dam∣ned
with the wicked and reprobate. O good Iesus, if ac∣cording to thy Iustice, I (being a peruerse sinner) deserue to be condem∣ned by reason of my grieuous sinnes and of∣fences, I humbly appeale from thy seuere Iustice, to thy mercy and com∣passion, trusting altoge∣ther (ô my Lord Iesus) that thou wilt be graci∣ous vnto mee, and wilt haue mercy on my soule, as a louing and pittifull Father. What profit will be to thee (O good IESVS) in my flesh, if
my Soule descend into hell? for it is certaine that in hell none shall confesse the holy Name of Iesus. O most merciful Iesus haue mercy on vs, ô most sweet Iesus, deliuer vs from all our tribulations, and aduersities; ô excel∣lent Iesus be good vnto vs miserable sinners; ô most holy IESVS, grant that our soules may en∣ioy the fellowship of the Elect in thy heauenly ha∣bitation. Strengthen mee ô most louing Iesus, with the sauing health of all that trust in thee. O Iesu the Son of the most holy
Virgin Mary, giue vnto vs thy Mercy, Grace, Wisedome, Charitie, Chastitie, Humilitie, and Patience in all our aduer∣sities, that wee may al∣wayes praise and glorifie thee, our Lord IESVS, which liuest and raignest God world without end. Amen.
A short Prayer for Morning. I Thanke thee, most merci∣full Father, my maker and preseruer, that thou hast so louingly vouchsafed to ten∣der my safetie this night past, giuing me sweet sleepe, to the refreshment of my soule and weake body. So (of thy goodnesse) vouch∣safe to extend thy louing fa∣uour towards me this day, that thereby I may be both safely preserued from all kinde of euill, and imploy my selfe diligently vnto the execution of my vocation, to thy glory, and to the re∣liefe of me & mine, through Iesus Christ, Amen.
A short Prayer for Euening. O Almightie Lord God, I thanke thee, that this day past, thou hast of thy mercy vouchsafed vnto me thy poore creature, not one∣ly protection against all dan∣gers and euils, but also all things necessarie. I humbly beseech thee, of that same thy mercy, and for thy Son Iesus Christ his sake, to ex∣tend the like protection and fauor toward me this night, that I may enioy at thine hands safe and quiet rest, to the comfort and refresh∣ment both of my body and soule, for Iesus Christs sake. Amen. FINIS.
