1059 99840184 4660
A new Tragicall Comedie of Apius and Virginia, Wherein is liuely expressed a rare example of the vertue of Chaste, by Virginias constancy, in wishing rather to be slaine at her be slaine at her owne Fa∣thers handes, then to be deflow∣red of the wicked Iudge Apius. By R. B. The Players names. Virginius, Mater. Virgina. Haphazard. Mansipulus. Mansipula. Subteruus. Aptus. Conscience. Iustice. Claudius. Rumour. Comforte. Rewarde. Doctrina. Memorie. Imprinted at London, by Wil∣liam How, for Kichard Ihones. 1575.
The Prologue. Qui cup aethereas & summas sandere sed Vim simul ac fraudem discute chare tibi. rau hic nulla ,  forti facta ib, Sola Dei tua te trahat, terse fides. Qui placet in terris intactae palludis instar, Viuere Virginim nitore virgo sequi, Quo tulit & luctus, discas gaudia magna Vitae, dum prcide fila pareot. Huc a ô virgo, paritere moritura sepulchre, Sic ai & faciem pallida morte mutat. WHo doth desire the trump of same, to sound vnto the Skies, Or els who seekes the holy place, where mighty Ioue he lies, He must not by deceitfull mind, nor yet by puissant strength, But by the faith and sacred lyfe, he must it win a length, And what she be that virgins lyfe, on earth wold gladly leade, The Sluds that Virginia did fall, I wish her reade, Her doller and vir dolefull losse, and yet her wyes at death, Come Virgins pure to graue with mée, quoth she with latest breath, You Lordings all that present be, this Tragidie to heare, Note well what zeale and loue, heerein doth well appeare, And Ladies you that linked are, in wedlocke bandes for euer, Do imitate the life you sée, whose same will perish neuer, But Virgins you, oh Ladies faire, for honour of your name. Doo lead the life apparent héere, to win immortall same, Let not the blinded God of Loue, as Poets tearme him so, Nor venus with her venery, nor Leehors cause of wo Your Virgins name to spot or file: deare dames obserue the like, That faire Verginia did obserue, who rather wish the knife, Of fathers hand hir life to ende, then spot her chastety: As she did waile, waile you her want you maids of courteste. If any by example heere, would shun that great anoy, Our Authour would reioyce in hart, and we would leap for ioy, Would Gods that our indeuer may, as well to please your eares, As is our Auctors meaning héere, then were we voyde of feares: But paciently wee wish you beare with this our first attempt. Which surely will to do our best, then yéeld vs no contempt, And as you please in pacient wise, our first for to receiue, Ere long a better shall you win, if god do graunt vs leaue. A.Y. FINIS.
Enter Virginius. BEfore the time that fortunes lot, dyd shew ech fate his dome, Or Byrde, or Beast, or fish, or Foule, or Earth had taken rome The Gods they did decree to frame, the thing is ended now, The Heauens, and the Planets eke, and moyst from ayre to bow. Then framed they ye man of mould & clay, & gaue him time to raign, As séemed best their sacred minds, to runne and turne againe: They framed aiso after this, out of his tender side, A péece of much formositie, with him for to abide: From infansie to lusty you, and so to raigne a while, And well to liue, tyl Etas he vnwares, do him begyle. And sith to see these giftes of them, no grounded caue to vew, Not daintyly to deck them vp, which after they may rew: Wherfore I thank the Gods aboue, that yéeld to mee such fate, To lincke to ée so iust a spouse, and eke so louing mate. Ey her I haue a virgin pure, an ympe of heauenly race, Bosh sober, meeke, and modest too, and vertuous in lyke rase: To Temple will I wend therfore, to yéeld the Gods their praise, For that they haue thus luckely, anexed with my daies. But stay, behold the peerelesse sparks wherof my tongue dyd talke, Approch in presence of my sight, to church I déeme they walk, But stay I wyll, and shroud me secretly a while. To see what witte or counsell graue, proceedeth from their stile. ¶ Heere entreth Mater and Virginia. The perte and pricking prime of youth, ought chastisment to haue, But thou deare daughter needest not, thy self doth shew thee graue: To se who Phoebus with his beames, hath youth so much insected, It doth me wee to see them craue the thing stould be detected. I draw to graue, and naught can leaue of thee to be desired, As much as duty to thy deare, as reason hath required: Thy sufferent Lord and frindly feare, Virginius father thine, To nourse as doth become childe, when boanes are burried mine. Virginius, eel your minde of mournig plaints, deare mother rest your minde
For though that duty dainty were, dame nature will me binde, So much to do, and further force, of Gods that rule the Skies, The Glope and eke the Clement, they would me els dispes. Mater. Then if the Gods haue graunted thée, such grace to loue thy syer, When time shall choose thee out a make be constant I requier: Loue, liue, and lyke him well, before you graunt him grace or faith, So shall your loue continue long, experience thus he saith. Virginia. I graunt deare Dame I doo agree, When time shall so prouide: But tender youth and infansie, Doth rather wish me bide, What should I lose Dianas gifte, And eke the spring to shun: By which Acteon fateally, His finall race did run: Should I as abiect be esteemed, Throughout Pernassus hill, Or should my Virgins name be filde, It were to great a skyll: But yet it is vnspotted loe, Right well I doo conceaue, When wedlocke doth require the same, With parents loue and leaue: Yet obstinate I wyll not be, But willing will me yeeld: When you commaund and not before Then duety shall me sheeld. Virginius. Ah Gods that rule and raine, in heauens, in seas, in flods and lands, Two couple such I surely dee me, you neuer made with hands, A Gods why doo ye not compel eche Dame the lyke to showe? And euery Impe of her againe, her duty thus to know, I cannot stay my tounge from talke, I needes must call my deare, Oh spouse wel met & Daughter to, what newes how do you cheare?
Mater O deare Virginius Ioy to me, oh pearelesse spouse and mate, In health I praise the Gods I am and ioifull for thy state, Virginius. Virginia my daughter deare How standeth all with thée? Virginia. Like happie state as mother tolde, Like ioyfull sight to mee. Virginius. By the Gods wife I ioy me, that haue such a treasure, Such Gemme and such Iuell, surmounting all measure: Such a happy spouse, such a fortunate dame, That no blot or staine, can impayre her fame, Against such an Impe, and graffe of my tree, As cleare doth surmount all others that bee. Mater. Nay rather deare spouse how much is my case, To be now aduaunced by such happy grace: Doth dayly distill, my husband so louing, Graunting and geuing to all thing behouing, Ioying in me, and in the fruicte of my wombe. Who would not requit it, the Gods yeelde their dome And if it be I, the Gods doo destroy mée, Rather then sinne, so sore should annoy me. Virginius. Oh wife refell thy wishing for woe, My selfe thy faute rightwell do know: And rather I wish my selfe to be slaine, Then thou or thy daughter ought wo should sustaine. Virginia. Oh Father my comfort, oh Mother my ioy, Oh Deare, and O sufferaigne, do cease to employ Such dolorus talking, where dangers are none, Where Ioyes are attendant, what néedeth this mone,
You matron, you spouse, you Nurse, and you wife, You comfort, you only the some of his lyfe: You housband, you harte, you ioye, and you pleasure, You King, and you Keyser, to her only treasure, You Father, you Mother, my lyfe doth sustaine, I babe and I blisse, your health am againe, Forbeare then your dolor, let mirth be frequented Let sorow departe, and be not attempted. Virginius. Oh wife, oh spouse, I am contente. Mater. Oh Husband. Virginia. Oh Father wee doo consent. Sing heere. ¶ All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth earth as wée sée, Is man, wife and children in one to agrée, Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed With reason, in season, where friendship is fixed. Virginius. When nature nursed first of all, yong Alexander learned, Of whō the Poets mention make, in iudgement so deserned, Oh what did want that loue procured his vital end well neare, This is the hope where parents loue, their children do not feare, All sing this. The trustiest treasure in earth as wée sée, Is man wife and children &c. Mater. When time King Nisus would not let, his daughter to be taught, Of any one correcting hand to nurtue to be brought: She void of duty cut his lockes, and golden tresses cleare, Whereby his realme was ouerrun, and she was payd her hisr,
All sing this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see, Is man wife and children. &c. Virginia. When Dedalus from Creete did flie, With Icaru, his ioy: He naught regarding fathers words, Did seeke his owne anoy: He mounted vp into the skies, Wherat the Gods did frowne, And Phoebus sore his winges did frie, And hedlonge flins him downe. All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see. Is man wife and children &c. Virginius. Then sith that persualitie, doth partly discorde mone, And hatred often times doth creepe where ouermuch wee loue: And if we loue no whit at all, the faming trump will sound, Come wife, come spouse, come daughter deare, let measure beare ye ground. All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see Is man wife and children in one to agree, Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed, Exit. With reason, in season, where frindship is fixed. ¶ Here entreth Haphazard the Vice. VEry well sir, very well sir, it shalbe doone, As fast as euer I can prepare, Who dippes with the Diuel, he had neede haue a long spoone. Or els full smale wil be his fare: Yet a proper Gentileman I am of truthe Yea that may yee see by my long side gowne.
Yea but what am I, a Scholer, or a scholemaister, or els some youth. A Lawier, a studient or els a countrie cloune A Brumman, a Baskit mer, or a Baker of Pies, A flesh or a Fishmon zer, or a sower of lies: A Louse or a louser, a Leeke or a Larke: A Dreamer a Drommell, a fire or a sparke; A Caitife, a Cutthrote, a creper in corners, A herbraine, a hangman, or a grafter of horners: By the Gods, I know not how best to denise, My name or my property, well to disguise: A Marchaunte, a May poole, a man or a mackrell: A Crab or a Creuise, a Crane or a cockerell: Most of all these my nature doth inioy, Somtime I aduaunce them, somtime I destroy, A mayde or a Mussell Bote, a wife or a wilde ducke, As bolde as blinde bayerd, as wise as a wood cocke. As fine as phippence, as proude as a Pecocke, As stout as a Stockefish, as méeke as a mecocke, As bigge as a begger, as fat as a foole, As true as a Tinker, as riche as an Owle, With hey tricke, how trowle, trey trip, and trey trace, Trowle hazard in a vengeance I beshrew his knaues face For tro, and trowle hazard, kéepe such a range That poore haphazard, was neuer so strange, But yet Haphazard, be of good chéere, Goe play and repast thée man, be mery to yéere: Though vittaile be dainty and hard for to get. Yet perhaps a number will die of the swet, Though it be in hazard, yet happely I may, Though mony be lacking, yet one day go gay. ¶ Enter Mansipulus. When Maud, with a pestelence, what makest thou no hast? Of Baybery insence belike thou wouldest tast, By the Gods I haue stayed a full great while, My lorde he is neare hand by this at the Church stile, and al for Maud mumble turde, that mampodding madge By the Gods if she hie not, ile geue her my badge.
Mansipula. What drake nosed driuell, begin you to floute. Zle frie you in a fagot sticke, by cocke goodman loute You boaster you bragger, you brawling knaue: Zle pay thee thy fortypence, thou brawling slaue: My Ladies great busines belike is at ende, When you goodman dawcocke, lust for to wend, You, codshed you crackerope, you chattering pye, Haue with ye, haue at ye, your manhode to try. Haphazard. What holde your hands masters, what? fie for shame fie, What culling? What lulling? What stur haue wee here? What tugging? What lugging? What pugging by the eare, What part and be freinds, and ende all this strife, Mansipulus. Nay rather I Wishe hir, the end of my knife: Mansipula. Drawe it, geue mée it, I will it receaue, So that for the place it, I might haue good leaue, By the Gods: but for losing my land, lyfe, and liuing, It should be so placed, he should haue ill thriuinge: Mansipilus. By the Gods how vngraciously the vicksen she chatteth, Mansipula. And he euen as knauishly, my answer he patteth, Haphazard. Here is naught els, but railing of words out of reason, Now tugging, now tatling, now musling in season, For shame be contented and leaue of this brawling, Mansipulus. Content, for I shall repent it, for this my tonge wralling: Mansipula. Thou knaue, but for thee, ere this time of day, My Ladies faire Pue, had been strawed full gay: With Primroses, Couslips, and Violets sweete: With Mints, and with Marigolds, and Margerum meete,
Which now lyeth vncleanly and all long of thée, That a shame recompence thee, for hindring mee, Mansipulus. Ah pretie pranck parnel, the Coushen and Booke, Whereon he shoulde reade and kneele, are present here looke: My Lorde when he seeth mee, he will cast such an eye, As pinch wyll my hart neare ready to die: And thus wise, and thus wise, his hand wyll be walking With thou precious knaue, away get thee packing ¶ Here let hym fight. Haphazard. Nay then by the masse, its time to be knacking, No words at all but to me he is poynting: Nay haue at you againe, you shall haue your annoynting, Mansipula. Body of me, hold yf ye can, What will you kill such a proper man? Haphazard. Nay sure I haue done when women do speake, Why would the knaue my pacience so breake? Mansipulus. Well I must begon, there is no remedy For feare my tyle makes buttons, by mine honesty. Haphazard. For reuerence on your face, your nose and your chin: By the Gods haue ye hard such an vnmannerly villin. Mansipula. I neuer heard one so racke of rudnesse, Mansipulus. In faith it is but for sacke of lewdnesse: But here I burne day light, while thus I am talking A way come Mansipula, let vs be walking, Mansipula Contented Mansipulus, haue with thee with speede, Haphazard. Nay stay yet my freendes I am not agreede.
Mansipula. Wee dare not tary, by God wee sweare. Haphazard. Nay tarry take comfort with you for to beare, It is but in hazard and yf you be mist, And so it may happen you feele not his first: Perhaps he is stayde by talke with some friend It is but in hazarde, then sing or you wend Let hope be your helper, your care to defend. Mansipulus. By hap or by hazard, we singe or we crie, Then singe let vs say so, let sorow go by. Mansipula. We can be but beaten that is the worst, ¶ enter Subseruus. What how Mansipulus, thou knaue art thou curste My lorde standeth talking and I gape for thée, Come away with a wannion, runne hast and hie, Mansipulus. Nay herken Supseruus, stay I pray thée, Let us haue a song and then haue with thée: Subseruus. Content if thou hie thee. ¶ Sing héere all. Hope so, and hap so, in hazard of threfninge, The worst that can hap le, in end is but beating. Mansipulus. What if my Lordinge, doo chaunce for to misse me, The worst that can happen, is Cudgell will kisse mee, In such kinde of sweetnes, I sweare by Gods mother, It will please me better, it were on some other, With thwicke thwack, with thump thump, With bobbing and bum, Our syde saddle shoulders shal sheside that doth come? Hope so, and hay so, in hazarde &c.
Mansipula. ¶ If case that my Lady, do threaten my case, No cause to contrary, but beare hir a space, Untill she draw home lo, where so she will vse me, As Docters doth doubt it, how I should excuse me, With thwicke thwack, with thump thump, With bobbing and bum, Our side saddle shoulders shal sheilde that doth come. Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &c. Subseruus. ¶ What if your company cause me haue woo, I minde not companyons so soone to forgo: Let hope holde the Helmet, till brunt it be past, For bloes are but buffits and words but a blast, With thwick thwack, with thump thump, with bobbing and bum, Our side saddle shoulders shal sheild that doth come, Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &c. Haphazard. ¶ Then let vs be mery, it is but by hap, A hazardly thaunce may harbor a clap, Bestur ye, be mery, be glad and be ioying, For bloes are but buffits and smale time annoying, With thwick thwack, with thump thump, with bobbing and bum, Our side sadle shoulders shal sheild that doth come. Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &c. ¶ The end of the song. All speaketh this. Haphazard farewell, the Gods do thanke thee. Exiunt Haphazard. Farwell my friends, farwell gee pracke yée: By the Gods Haphazard, These men haue tried thee,
Who sayd thou wast no man, sure he belied thée, By loue master Marchant by sea or by land, Would get but smale argent, if I did not stand, His very good master, I may say to you, When he hazards in hope, what hap will insue: In court I am no man, by cocke sir ye lie, A Plowman perhaps or ere that he die, May hap be a Gentleman, a Courtier or Captaine, And hap may so hazard, he may goe a begging: Perhap that a Gentleman, heyre to great land, Which selleth his liuing, for mony in hand, In hazard it is the bying of more, Perhaps he may ride when spent is the store: Hap may so hazard the Moone may so chaunge. That men may be masters, and wiues will not raunge: But in hazard it is in many a grange, Lest wiues were the Godpeece, and maydens coy strange: As Pecockes sit perking, by chaunce in the plomtrée, So maides would be masters, by the guise of this countrey Haphazard eche state full well that he markes, If hap the skie fall, we hap may haue Larkes: Well, fare ye well now, for better or worse, Put hands to your pockets, haue minde to your purse. ¶ Enter Iudge Apius. THe sorowed face of Fortunes force, my pinching paine doth moue I setled ruler of my realme inforced am to loue: Iudge Apius I the prmeelest Iudge, that raigneth vnder sonne, And haue bene so estaeemed long, but now my force is done: I rule no more, but ruled am, I do not Iudge, but am Iudged, By beuty of Virginia, my wisdome all is trudged, Oh perelesse Dame, Oh passing peece, oh face of such a fature, That neuer est with bower such, matched was by nature: Oh fond Apelles pratling foole, why boastest thou so much? The famost peee thou madst in Greece, whose ments were Or why oldst thou decued man, for beuty of thy worke?
In such a sort with fond destre, where no kinde lyfe dyd lurke, With raging fits thou foole ran mad, oh fond Pigmalion, Yet sure if that thou sawest my deare, the like ye couldst make none, Then what may I, oh Gods aboue, bend downe to heare my crie, As once he did to Salmasis, in Pond hard Lyzia by: Oh that Virginia were in case as somtime Salmasis, And in Hermafroditus steede, my selfe might séeke my blisse, Ah Gods, would I vnfolde her armes, complecting of my necke? Or would I hurt her nimble hand, or yéelde her such a checke? Would I gainsay hir tender skinne, to baath where I do washe? Or els refuse hir soft sweete lippes, to touch my naked fleshe? Nay, oh the Gods do know my minde, I rather would requier, To sue, to serue, to crouch, to kneele, to craue for my dester. But out ye Gods, ye bende your browes, and frowne to sée me fare, Ye do not force my fickle fate, ye do not way my care, Unrighteous, and vnequall Gods, vniust, and eke vnsure, Woe worth the time ye made me liue, to sée this haplesse houre: Dyd Iphis hang himselfe for loue, of Lady not so faire? Or els did Ioue the cloudie mistes, bend downe from lightsome ayre: Or as the Poets mencion make, of Inachs daughter meeke, For loue dyd he to make a Cowe, whom Inach long dyd séeke: Is loue so great, to cause the quicke, to enter into Hell, As stout Orpheus did attempt, as histories do tell? Then what is it that loue cannot? Why loue dyd pearce the skies: Why Pheb. and famous Marcury, with loue had blinded eies? But I a Iudge of grounded yeeres, shall reape to me such name, As shall resounde dishonour great, with Trump of carelesse fame: Oh that my yeeres were youthfull yet, or that I were vnweded. ¶ Here entreth Haphazard. WHy cease sir Knight, for why perhaps, of you she shalbe bedded: For folow my counsell, so may you me please, That of carefull resurging, your hart shall haue ease. Apius. Oh thundring Gods that threaten yre, and Plague for eche offence:
Your selues I déeme would counsell craue, in this so fit pretence: And eke your nimble stretched armes, with great rewards would she, To purchase farie Virginia, so deare a wight to me: And friend, I sweare by Iubiter, and eke by Iunos seate: And eke by all the misteries, where on thou canust intreate: Thou shalt possesse and haue, I will thée graunt and geue, The greatest part of all my Realme, for aye thee to releeue. Haphazard. Well then, this is my counsell, thus standard the case, Perhaps such a setch, as may please your grace: There is no more wayes, but hap or hap not, Either hap, or els haplesse, to knit vp the knot: And if you will hazard, to venter what falles, Perhaps, that Haphazard, will end al your thralles. Apius. I meane so. I will so, if thou do perswade me, To hap or to hazard, what thing shall enuade me: I King and I Keyser, I rule and ouerwhealme: I do what it please me, with in this my realme: Wherfore in thy indgement, see that thou do enter, Hap life or hap death, I surely will venter. Haphazard. Then this, and in this sorte, standeth the matter, What neede many wordes, vnlesse I should flatter, Full many there be, will hazard their life, Happely to case your grace of all your strife, Of this kinde of conspirasie now let vs common, Some man, Virginius, before you must summon, And say that Virginia is none of his Daughter.
But that Virginius by night away caught her: Then charge you the father his Daughter to bringe, Then do you detayne hir, till proued be the thing: Which well you may win hir, she present in house, It is but Haphazarde, a man or a mouse Apius. I finde it, I minde it, I sweare that I will, Though shame, or defame, do happen no skill,Here let him make at though he went out and let Con∣since and lu∣stice come out of him, and let Consiéce hold in his hande a Lamp burning and let Iustice haue a sworde and hold it be∣fore Apius But out I am wounded, how am I deuided? Two states of my life, from me are now glided, For Consience he pricketh me contempned, And Iustice saith, Iudgement wold haue me condem ned: Consience saith crueltye sure will detest me: And Iustice saith, death in thende will molest me, And both in one sodden me thinkes they do crie, That fier eternall, my soule shall destroy. Haphazard. Why these are but thoughts man? why fie for shame fie For Consience was carelesse, and sayling by seas, Was browned in a basket and had a disease, Sore mooued for pitye, when he would graunt none, For beyng hard harted, was turned to a stone: And sayliing by Sandwitche he sunke for his sin, Then care not for consience, the worth of a pin: And Iudgement iudge Iustice to haue a reward, For iudging still iustly, but all is now marde, For giftes they are geuen, wher Iudgement is none, Thus Iudgement and Iustice awronge way hath gone: Then care not for Consience the worth of a fable, Iustice is no man, nor nought to do able. Apius. And saiest thou so my sured fréende, then hap as hap shall hit, Let Constence grope, & iudgement craue, I wil not shrink one whit I well perseuer in my thought, I will deflower hir youth, I will not sure reuerted be, my hart shall haue no ruth, Come on proceede and wayteou me, I will hap woe or wealth,
Hap blunt, hap sharp, hap life, hap death, though Haphazard be of health Haphazard. At hand (quoth picke purse) here redy am I, See well to the Cut Purse, be ruled by me. Exit. Go out here. Conscience O cleare vnspotted giftes of Loue, How haps thou art refused? Oh Consience cleare, what cruell minde Thy truth hath thus misused? I spotted am by wilfull will, By lawles loue and luste By dreadfull daunger of the life. By faith that is vniust. Iustice. Ah gift of Ioue, ah Fortunes face, Ah state of steddy life: I Iustice am and Prime of péeres, The end of Lawes and strife: A guider of the common weale, A gwerdon to the poore: And yet hath filthy lust supprest, My vertues in one houre, Well well this is the most to trust, In ende we shall espire: To see the end of thess our foes With sword and eke with fire. Conscience. Oh help ye Gods, we members require. Exit. ¶ Enter Haphazard. When gayne is no gransier, And gaudes naught set by: Nor Puddings, nor Pie meate, Poore knaues will come nie: Then hap and Haphazard, Shall haue a new cote: And so it may happen.
To cut couetousnesse throte: Yea then shall Iudge Apius. Virginia obtayne: And Geese shall cracke Mussels, Perhaps in the rayne: Lerkes shalbe Leuerets, And skip to and fro: And chourles shalbe codsheads, Perhaps and also: But peace for mans body, Haphazard be mum, Fie pratlyng noddy, Iudge Apius is come. ¶ Here entreth Iudge Apius and Claudius. THe furies fell of Lymbo Lake. my Princely daies doo shorte: All drownde in deadly woes I liue, that once dyd ioy in sport, I liue and languish in mylyse, as doth the wounded Deare: I thirst, I craue, I call and crie, and yet am naught the meare: And yet I haue that me so match, But Tantalus amids my care, I hunger sterue and pine: As Sissifus I roule the stone, in vaine to top of Hill: That euermore vncertainly, reuoluing slideth still: Oh, as if to her it were to me, what labours would I flie? What raging seas would I not plow, to her commoditie?
But out alas I doubt it sore, lest drousy Morpheus: His slumbry kingdomes graunted hath, with Dewes and bewtious: Oh Gods aboue that rule the Skies, ye Babes that bragge in blisse: Ye Goddesses, ye Graces you, what burning brunt is this? Bend downe your Ire, destroy me quicke: or els to graunt me grace, No more but that my burning breste, Virginia may imbace: If case your eares be dead and deafe, the Feende and sprites beloe: You carelesse arl of Limbo Lake, your forced mightes doo shoe. Thou Caitife Kinge of darksome den, thou Pluto plaged knaue: Send forth thy sacred vengeaunce straight, consume them to the graue: That will not aide my case, Claudius. Content and if it like your grace, I will attempt the deede: I sommon will Virginius, before your seat with spéede, Haphazard. Do so, my Lorde be you not afrayde, And so you may happen to Hazard the mayde: It is but in Hazard, and may come by hap, Win her, or lose her, trie you the trap. Apius. By the Gods, I consent to thee Claudius now Prepare the in haste Virginius vnto, Charge him, commaund him, vpon his alegeance
With all kinde of spéede, to yéelde his obeysance, Before my seate in my consistary Subpene of lande, life and treasurie. Here let Claudius go out with Haphazard. No let, no stay, nor ought perturbraunce, Shall cause me to omit the furtheraunce, Of this my waighty charge: Exit. Apius, Well now I range at large my will for to expresse, For looke how Torquin, Lucres faire, by force did once oppresse, Euen so will I Virginia vse: Here let Consience speake within. Iudge Apius prince, oh stay refuse, Be ruled by thy friende: What bloudy death with open shame, Did Torquin gaine in ende? Apius. Whence doth this pinching sounde defende? Conscience. From contrit Conscience pricked on, By member of thy lyfe, Enforced for to cry and call, And all to end our strife. Apius. What art thou theu declare be bréefe? Consience. Not flesh nor filthy lust I am: But secret consience I, Compeld to crie with trimbling soule, At point nere hand to die. Apius. Why no disease dath me aproche, no griefe doth make me grudge, But want of faire Virginia, whose beauty is my Iudge: By hir I liue, by hir I die, for hir I wy or woe,
For hir my soule doth sinke or swimme, for hir I swere I goe. Conscience. Ah Gods, what wittes doth rame, and yet to you vnknowen? I die the death, and soule doth sinke, this filthy flesh hath sowen. Apius. I force it not, I wyll attempt, I stay for Claudius heare, Yet wyll I goe to meete with him, to know what newes and cheare. ¶ Here entreth Haphazard. Hast for a hangman, in hazard of hempe Runne for a riddueke, there is no such impe: Claudius is knocking, with hammer and stone, At Virginius gate, as hard as he can lay one: By the Gods my maisters, Haphazard is hardy, For he will run rashly, be they neuer so many, Yea he wyll singe sowsnowt, and sknap with the best, But peace, who comes yonder, what Iely good gest? ¶ Here enter in with a songe. WHen men will seeme misdoubtfully, Without an why, to call and cry, And fearing with temerety, its ieopardy, of libertie, Wee wish him take to chere his hart, Haphazard, Boulde blinde bayarde, A Fygge for his vncourtesie, That seekes to shun good company. Mansipulus. What if case that cruelty, should bussell me, and iussell mée, And Holywand should tirkle me, for keeping of good companye: Ile folow by my honestie, hap Haphazard, bould blinde bayard, A figge for his nvrourtesie, that seekes to shun good companie. All singe this. When men wyll seeme misdoubtfully, Without an why, to call and crie. &c.
Mansipula. Neuer was that misteris, so furious nor curious, Nor yet hir bloes so boisterous, nor rosterous, nor dolorous, But sure I would venterous, hap Haphazard, boulde blinde bayard A figge for his vncourtesie, that seekes to shun good companie. All singe this. When men wyll seeme misdoubtfully, Without an why, to call and crue. &c. Haphazard. Then wend ye on and folow me, Mansipula, mansipula. Let cropyng cares be cast away, come folow me, come folow me, Subseruus is a ioyly loute, brace Haphazard bould blinde bayarde, A figge for his vncourtesie, that seekes to shun good company. All sing this. When men will seeme misdoubtfully, Without an why, to call and cry. &c. The end of the song. Heere Haphazard speaketh. I by the Gods my maysters, I tould you plaine, Who companyes with me, will desire me agayne: But how dyd ye spaede I pray ye shew me, Was all well agreed did no body blow ye. Mansipulus. Masse syr, hap dyd so happen, that my Lorde and maister, Staied in behelding and viewing the Pasture. Which when I perceiued, what excuse did I make? I came in the crosse way, on the nerside the Forlake, Hard by Hodges halfe aker, at gaffers Millers stile. The next way round about, by the space of a mile, Andat Sy mkins side ridge, my Lord stoode talking, And angerly to me (quoth he) wher hast thou ben walking Without any staggeryng, I had ready my lye,
Out at Bridgenredow, and at Benols lease (quoth I) Your fatlings are feding well Sir, the Gods be praised, A goodly loume of beef on them is all redy raised, The outsteps on Frauncis Fabulator that was neuer my friende, How past you Carters hay rocke, at long medow ende There might one (quoth he) within this few dayes, With a cast net had geuen, mi knaues great assayes: Under the Hedge with a payre of new Cardes both rip and firdge, Is it true quoth my Lorde, will this geare neuer be lefte, This causes swearing, and staring, proling and thefte: Well (quoth my Lorde) take hede least I finde it, And so past his way, and did no more minde it. Haphazard. By the Gods that was sport, ye and sport alone, Mahsipula. Yea, but I was in worse case by Saint Jhon, My Lady in Church was set full douout, And hearing my comming she tourned aboute: But as soone as I heard hir snappishly sounde, In this sorte I crouched me downe to the grounde, And mannerly maude, as though I were sad, As soone as the Pue then strawed I had, She gaue me a wincke, and frowardly frowne, Wherby I do iudge, she woulde cougell my gowne: Then I dyd deuise, a prety fine pranke, A meane whereby to picke me a thanke: Of Margery Mildon the maide of the Milke house, And stainer the stutter the guid of the store house, Then was my Ladies anger well gone, And wilbe so still, and the truthe be not knowne. Haphazard. er lady, barefoote this bakes trimly, Subseruus. Nay but I escaped more finely, For I vnder this bedge one while dyd stay, Then in this bushe, then in that way:
Then slipt I behind them among all the rest, And séemed to common to, of things with the best, But so it did happen, that all things were well, But hazard it is, least time will truth tell. Haphazard. Tut, tut, that was but by hap, and if it be so, Well sith it was in hazard then let it goo. Subseruus. Content by my honestie, then farewell all wo. Mansipulus. Come out dogge, ye speake happely of truth if it be so, ¶ All speake. Now master Haphazard, fare you well for a season, Haphazard, Let my councell at no time with you be geason. ¶ All speaketh. No by the Gods, be sure not so. Haphazard. Well sith here is no company haue with ye to Jerico. Exit. Enter Virginius. What so the Gods they haue decreed to worke and do by me? I meruaile why Iudge Apius he, such gretings lets me see: I serued haue his seate, and state, I haue maintaind his weale, I haue supprest the rebels stoute, I beare to him such zeale, And now he sends to me such charge, vpon my life and lands, Without demur, or further pause, or ere ought things be scand, That I in hast, with posting speede, to Court I do repaire, To aunswer that aleaged is, before his Iudgement Chaire, Some Histories they do expresse, when such mishaps do fall, They should haue tokens many a one, I haue not one but all: My Iuels somtime precious, do vade and beare no hewe, My seuces they do shun there course, my lights do burne as blewe: My willing wights are wared slow, that once were swifte in speede My hart it throbs in wonderous sort, my nose doth often bleede:
My dreadfull dreames do draw my woe and hatefull hazard hale, These tokens be of euell hap, this is the old wiues tale: But yet O thou Virginius, whose hoary heares are olde, Didst treason neuer yet commit, of this thou maist be bould: In Mars his games, in marshall frates, thou wast his only aide, The huge Carrebd his hazards thou, for him was ofte assaide: Was Sillas force by thee oft shunde, or yet Adrice lande, Laceface childe that Minnotaur, did cause thee euer stande: To pleasure him, to serue thy leach, to keepe all things vpright, Thou God aboue, then what is it, that yéeldeth me this spight? Sith nothing néede misdoubted be, where grounded cause is none, I enter will Iudge Apius gate, reiecting care and mone: But stay Virginius, loe, thy Prince doth enter into place, Oh sufferant Lord, and rightfull Iudge, the Gods do saue thy grace, ¶ Here entreth Iudge Apius and Claudius. With tender hart Virginius, thou welcome art to me, I sory am to vtter out, the things I here of thee: For Claudius a subiecte here, a man of mickle fame, Appealeth thee before my Courte, in deede of open shame: And though in deede I loue thee so, as thy deserts desirer, Yet not so but I must Iudgement geue, as Iustice doth require. Virginius. My Lord and reason good it is, your seruaunt doth request, No parciall hand to aide his cause, no parciall minde or brest: If ought I haue offended you, your Courte, or eke your Crowne, From lofty top of Turret hie, persupetat me downe: If treason none by me be done, or any fault committed, Let my accusers beare the blame, and let me be remitted. Apius. Good reason to Virginius, come Claudius shew thy minde, Let Iustice here, if Iudgment may, Virginus gilty finde Claudius. Thou sufferant Lord, and rightfull Iudge, this standeth now ye case,
In tender youth not long agone, nere sixtene yeares of space, Virginius a thrall of mine, a childe and infant yonge, From me did take by subtell meane, and keepes by arme full strong And here before your grace I craue, that Iustice be exstended, That I may haue my thrall agayne, and faultes may be amended Virginius. Ah Gods that guide the globe aboue what forged tales I here, Oh Iudge Apius, bend your eares, while this my crime I cleare: She is my child, and of my wife her tender corpes did springe, Let all the countrey where I dwell, beare witnesse of the thing. Apius and Claudius go forth, but Apius speaketh this. Nay by the Gods not so my friend, I do not so decrée, I charge thee here in paiine of death, thou bring the maide to mée: In chamber close, in prison sound, she secret shall abide, And no kinde of wight shall talke with her, vntill the truth be tride: This doo I charge, this I commaund, in paine of death let see, Without any let, that she be brought, as prisoner vnto me: Exit. Here let Virginius go about the scaffold Ah fickle faule, vnahppy dome, oh most vncertaine rate, That euer chaunce so churlishly, that neuer staide in state: What Iudge is this: What cruell wretch? What faith doth Claudius The Gods do recompence with shame, his false and faithles minde: Well home I must, no remedy, where shall my soking teares, Augment my woes, decrease my ioyes, while death do rid my feares ¶ Here entreth Rumour. Come ventus come, blow forth thy blast, Prince Eol listen well, The filthiest fackte that euer was, I Rumor now shall tell: You gods bend downe to here my crie,
reuengemente duly showe, Thy Rumor craues did Claudius lay, and bring Iudge Apius loe? That wicked man, that fleshly Iudge, hath hiered Claudius, To claime a childe, the only heyre, of olde Virginius. A virgin pure, a Quéene in life, whose state may be deplored, For why the Queene of chaste life, is like to be defloured: By false Iudge Apius cruell wretche, who straightly hath commaunded, That she to keping his be brought, Prince Pluto this demaunded: To skies I flie to blase abrode, the trompe of depe defame, Reuenge yo Gods this Rumor craues, this bloud and bloddy shame: Haue through the ayre, geue place you ayres. this is my dutye done, The Gods confound such lecherers, loe Rumor this I run. Virginius. O man, O mould, oh mucke, O clay, O Hell, O hellish hounde, O aulle Iudge Apius wrablinge wretch, is this thy treason found: Woe worth the man that gaue the seede, wherby ye first didst spring Woe worth the wombe yt bare the babe, to meane this bluddy thing: Woe worth the paps that gaue ye sucke, woe worth the Fosters eke Woe worth all such as euer did, thy health or liking seeke: Oh that the graued yeares of mine, were couered in the clay ¶ Here entreth Virginia. Let pacience deare father mine, your rigor something stay, Why do you waile in such a sorte? why do you weepe and mone?
Virginius Oh doughter deare and only heyre, my life is neare forgone, And all for loue of thee Virginia. A Gods how may this be? Deare father do withdraw your dread, and let me know the cause, My selfe wyll ayde with lyfe or death, without demur or pause: Then tender your childe, that craueth this bound. Virginius Oh harken deare daughter attend thou my sounde: Iudge Apius prickt forth with filthy desire: Thy person as Lemmon, doth greatly require: And no kinde of intreatie, no feare nor no shame, Will he heare aledge, defending the same: And straight without staying in paine of my death, I must bring thee thither, wherfore stop my breath, O Sisters, I search, I seeke, and I craue, No more at your handes, but death for to haue, Rather then see my Daughter deflourde, Or els in ill sorte, so vildely deuourde. Virginia. Oh father oh friendship, oh fatherly fauour, Whose dulset words, so sweetly do sauour, On knees I beseeche thee to graunt my request, In all things according, as lyketh thee best: Thou knowest, O my father, if I be once spotted, My name and my kindred, then forth wilbe blotted: And if thou my father, should die for my cause, The world would accompt me as gilty in cause: Then rather deare father, if it be thy pleasure, Graunt me the death, then keepe I my treasure? My Lampe, my light, my life vndefiled, And so may Iudge Apius, of flesh be begiled: This vpon my knees with humble beheste, Graunt me O father my instant requeste.
Virginus Then ryse vp my daughter, my aunswere doo note, From mouth of thy father, whose eyes do now flote: O daughter, oh deare, O darling, oh dame, Dispatch me I pray thee, regrde not my name: But yet, as thou satest fith remedy none, But Lemmon thou must be, if I were gone, And better it is to dye with good fame, Then longer to liue to reape vs but shame: But if thou do dye, no doubt is at all, But presently after my selfe folow shall, Then end without shauie so let vs perseuer, With trompe of good same so dye shall we neuer. Virginia here kneeleth. Then tender armes complect the neck, doo dry thy fathers teares, You nimble handes for wo whereof, my louing hart it weares: Oh father mine, refraine no whit, your sharped knife to take, From giltles sheath, my shame to ende, and body dead to make: Let not the shameles blouddy iudge, defile my virgins life, Doe take my head and send it him, vpon your bloudy knife: Bid him imbrue his bloudy handes, in giltles bloud of mee: I virgin dye, he leacher liues, he was my ende you see: No more delayes, so kisse me first, then stretch your strongest arme, Do ryd my woe, increase my ioy, do ease your childe of harme. Virginius. O weary wittes of wo, or wealth, oh feble aged man, How can thy arme geue such a blow, thy death I wishe thee than: But sith that shame with endles trempe, wil sounde if case thou ioy, By meanes of false iudge Apius he, myselfe will thee destroy: Forgeue me babe this bloudy deede, a no meekely take thy ende, Here let him profer a blowe, The Gode forgeue thee father deare, farewell, thy blow do bend: Yet stay a whyle, o father deare, for fleash to death is fraile, Let first my wimple bind my eyes, and then thy blow assaile. Now father worke thy will on me, that life I may inioy.
¶ Here tye a handcacher aboute hir eyes, and then strike of hir heade. Now stretch thy hand Virginius, that loth would flesh distroy. O cruell handes, or blouddy knife, o man what hast thou done, Thy daughter deare, and onely heyre, hir vitall ende hath wone: Come fatall blade make lyke dispatche, come Atropos, come ende, Strike home thou careles arme with spede, of death be not afrayde. Here entreth Comfort. Oh noble knight Virginius, do stay, he not dismayde. I curing Comfort present am, your doller to ayde: Virginius. Sith ioy is gone, sith life is deade: What comfort can there be? there is but deee disire
Heere entreth Haphazard. I came from Caleed euen the same houre, And Hap was hyred to hackney in hempstrid, In hazard he was of riding on beamestrid, Then crow crop on thee top hoist vp the sayle, Then groned their neckes, by the weight of their tayle, Then dyd Cmx, put these three together, Pays them their pasporte for lutring thither. Apius. Why how now Haphazard, of what doest thou speake? Me thinks in mad sort thy talke thou deest breake, all in one.
