10784 99837817 2160
FENNORS Descriptions, OR A TRVE RE∣LATION OF CER∣taine and diuers speeches, spoken be∣fore the King and Queenes most excellent Maiestie, the Prince his highnesse, and the Lady ELIZABETH's Grace. By WILLIAM FENNOR, His Maiesties Seruant. LONDON, Printed by EDVVARD GRIFFIN, for GEORGE GIBBS, and are to bee sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Flower-Deluce. 1616.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Earle of Pembroke, LORD Chamberlaine of his Maiesties houshold, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, &c. THis silly Infant, borne before the time, Got life by reason, though begot in ryme By hir true father; she is very yong, And yet as females quickely finde a tongue, So doth this changeling babble for a Patron, Forsakes hir Father, and out-runnes hir Matron. At length for hir protection she hath found, Your honour with a wreath of vertues crown'd, To whom hir selfe she humbly dedicates That knew hir birth, and breeding, let the Fates Proue happy to the end of your liues race, To crowne your Greatnesse, with immortall grace. Your Honors euer bounden in all duties, William Fennor.
To the Gentlemen Readers. WOrthy gentlemen, of what degree soeuer, I sup∣pose this Pamphlet will hap into your hands, before a play begin, with the importunate clamour, of Buy a new Booke, by some needy companion, that will be glad to furnish you with worke for a turn'd Teaster. I rest well assured some of you will know mee at the sight of the infant, to such I commend it for acquain∣tance sake; others (I make no question) haue heard of me, to those I send it, in hope of better acquaintance; A third sort (it may be) neuer knew mee, nor I thinke care not whether euer they doe or no: To them I present it as carelesly as vnthrifts spend their anuities. Last to Criticks, I wish it may hap as seldome into their hands, as Vsurers giue almes, or Lawyers plead pro nihil. If any chance to say my inuention runs low, in regard I sell relations for demonstrations, to such I answere, not like a light hus∣wife, that will be wonne before she be wooed; but like a chaste virgin that would be scarce wonne with wooing: as for example, it is three yeeres since I spake some of these speeches, and since that time I haue beene earnest∣ly intreated by noble personages (who haue had priuate copies for their owne vse) to print it for publike delight, at length I consented, & since I am won, haue amongst you gallants, let it speed as it will. This is my comfort, how ere it proue in the reading, it was well lik't in the re∣hearsing, by that Imperiall power; for whose prosperous continuance we are all in dutie bound to pray, Farewell. Yours in honest mirth, W. F.
In Laudem Authoris. WHat Enthousiasmos, what celestiall spirit, what sacred fury doth thy braines inherit? When as without the libertie of time, with reason thou dost couch thy witty ryme So quicke, so nimble, and acute that all wise men, will hold thy wit Canonicall. Why shouldst thou not then weare a wreath of bayes, nay a whole groue of Lawrell to thy praise On thy ingenious temples, seeing no man can match thee, our times best Ouidian? Though in this wit-blest age ther's many men, haue gain'd them endlesse glory by their penne, Yet none of these could euer say like thee, that what they writ, was done extempore. Therefore were I thy Patrone and possest but halfe that wealth wherewith some men are blest: Thou shouldst for euer in thy life inherite meanes, as were correspondent to thy merit: And being dead thy name should liue inroul'd, not in course parchment, but rich leaues of gold. Iohn Meltonne.
In Laudem Authoris. WHy hath thy penne beene hid in obscure shades, or thy lines lockt in the darke wombe of night, Which being publish't, when thy body fades, in earths deepe Cauernes may giue others light? Thy Muse the loue of Noble-men perswades to shelter her, by their protecting might, Gain'st pining enuy, who with rusty blades, stands opposite against good workes to fight; With belching hate, who her full gorge vnlades, to make wit loathsome in the vulgar sight Of men illiterate, and Mechanicke trades, that scarce can iudge betwixt the wrong and right, Of thy indeauours which the heart inuades of worth (to praise thee) what though Criticks byte, And through the gulfe of base disliking wades, so farre vntill she drowne her selfe in spight Of all mans succour, other winching iades can like of nothing, but all things indight, To their owne censures; but bright fame shall spread hir leaues, where thou shalt liue, when thou art dead. Tho. Gunson.
TO HIS FRIEND Mr. FENNOR. I Prayse thee not because thou art my friend, nor would I hate thee, if thou wert my foe, But these good parts in thee I must commend, which Art and Nature did on thee bestow In thy blest cradle, but goe forward still, Make thy friends sharers of thy nimble quill. J. B.
THE CONTENTS of this Booke. 1. THe discription of a Poet. 2. The discription of the Palse∣graues Countrey, with an addition of the marriage betwixt the Prince, and Prin∣cesse, &c. 3. Cupids iourney to Germany with the effects of the same. 4. The originall of the most noble or∣der of the Garter. 5. The deciding of the difference betwixt Oxford and Cambridge, about the Kings entertainement. 6. The Gowries and Gun-powder Treason. 7. A Parliament of Gods in a pa∣storall song.
The Description of a Poet. A Poets life is most vnfortunate, Gouern'd by Starres of high malignant fate; Yet for his worth thus high my pen shall raise him, The rankled tooth of enuy neuer stayes him From writing nobly. A true Poet can Describe the inside of an outward man: Kill him in's life time, make him liue being dead, His lines with Bayes adorne his victors head: This is his chiefest blessing to be good: But when his writings are not vnderstood, (O) ti's a plague beyond mans patient thought, What he makes good a multitude makes nought. A horrid murtherer, or a base theefe In his foule bosome harbers lesser griefe, Then heauen-bred Poesye: they shall be tryed By vpright Iustice, and their faults descried Before a publike Bench, hold vp their hand And plead not guiltie, on their iust cause stand, Twelue men empannelled to finde this out Before the sentence passe, to cleee the doubt, Of iudging rashly. But sweet Poesye Is oft conuict, condem'd, and iudg'd to die Without iust triall, by a multitude Whose iudgements are illiterate, and rude.
Witnesse Sceianus, whose approued worth, Sounds from the calme South, to the freezing North. And on the perfum'd wings of Zepherus, In triumph mounts as farre as Aeolus, With more then humane art it was bedewed, Yet to the multitude it nothing shewed; They screwed their scuruy iawes and look't awry, Like hissing snakes adiudging it to die: When wits of gentry did applaud the same, With Siluer shouts of high lowd sounding fame: Whil'st vnderstanding grounded men contemn'd it, And wanting wit (like fooles to iudge) condemn'd it. Clapping, or hissing, is the onely meane That tries and searches out a well writ Sceane. So is it thought by Ignoramus crew, But that good wits acknowledge's vntrue; The stinckards oft will hisse without a cause, And for a baudy ieast will giue applause. Let one but aske the reason why they roare They'l answere, cause the rest did so before. But leauing these who for their iust reward, Shall gape, and gaze, amongst the fooles in th'yard. Now to our Poets; they are much like mothers, That loue their owne babes farre aboue all others Though harder fauor'd: so a Poets quill With his owne labours best doth please his will, The reasons this, because he knowes the paines He tooke in the Composing, from whose braines, A Poets worth takes birth, at first ti's weake Till by the life of Action it doth speake,
In a square Theator; yet vnderstand The Actor speakes but at the second hand. The Poet scans, and knowes, what best befits His birth whom he adornes with Epethites, Congruus accents: but I heere strike saile That haue iust cause my weakenesse to bewaile, That am no Poet, rather a poore pleader For friendly sentence from the iudging Reader, As you allow the best, forgiue whats ill, Though harshly wrote accept of my good will. FINIS.
A description of the Palsgraues Coun∣trey, as it was deliuered in a speech before the King, the Prince, the Lady ELIZABETH, at White-Hall. By W. F. THe mornings Bridegroome with his Rosie cheeke inuites chaste Cynthia to a Royall feast: Long for her welcome presence did he seeke, to grace his Princely region in the East, Faire Phebes light he doth esteeme diuine, to make his splendor mongst the Germaines shine. High Princely Palsgraue, Protestants Protector, loud sounding fames report, Germaines rich treasure, Arch-shewer of the Empire, chiefe Elector, whose yea, or nay, sets vp, or puts downe Caesar. O! let it not in me be thought ambition, To shew the Countries worth, and Thy condition. On the right side of Pals the riuer Rhyne, runnes swimming by the bankes of pleasant vines, Vpon whose tops bright Sol so warme doth shine, that from the flintie rockes flow Rennish wines, And on the left side glides the gentle maine, there are few Lands haue two such flouds againe.
These riuers meet at Mence and are vnited, like Gemeni to swim towards Belgicke Seas, But vpward these sweet waters are diuided for Pals-Lands comfort and the people ease: The Rhyne brings boats vnto each South-ward Towne, but in the North the maine brings treasure downe From Brandenburgh and High-borne Saxons Land, great Chamberlaine, and Lord high Martiall; Mence, Triurs, and Cullen, for the Popes right stand, if either side in choice be partiall, Bohemiaes King he is indifferent, betwixt the Papist and the Protestant. These are the seuen pillars of the Land, on which great Europe Empire standeth fast Pals, Brandenburgh, and Saxony in one hand, vnite their strength which makes their powers last: The Popish Prelates at these Princes frowne, yet these three Protestants vphold the Crowne. To second them ther's Brund-swickes valiant Duke, Hessons great Landsgraue worthy of renowne, And for the Popes right ther's the Prince of Luke, the Citie Cullen and great Ausburge Towne, But Franckfords force with Protestants doth hold, which by the Palsgraues power make Papists cold.
In this faire Franckford Caesar was instal'd, this Citie borders on the Palsgraues Land, Tis richly furnisht and most strongly wal'd, well stor'd with all prouision, stoutly man'd. But leauing Frankford seated on the maine, the bridge hath brought me into Pals againe. Betwixt the Riuers that are nam'd before the Palsgraues Land stands like a Paradice: The ground is fruitfull yeelding vine-yards store, and mightie woods for hunting exercise Stand on the hills, inuironing the plaines, these Forrests brings the Palsgraue trebble gaines. First they inrich his Countrey (large) with wood, secondly, they afford him venison store, Thirdly, for hunting pleasures they are good, to rouze the Stagge, or chase the tusked Bore: If man on earth would chuse a place of pleasure, His Country yeelds it in exceeding measure. On rocky clifts his stately Castles stand, like to mount Sion built of Marble stone; With turrets out of which he viewes his Land, such worthy prospects heere are few or none. Their aire it is so wholesome kinde and sweet, they seldome die till death and age doe meete.
At Bachrade stands a Castle on a clift, and vnderneath a Citty of some state, Which euer is his eldest sonnes by gift, it would seeme tedious if I should relate Each seuerall Castle, but let mee report the state of Hedelberge his Princely Court. Palace of pleasure and a house of State, his winters White-Hall, and his summers Hampton, A Riuer glideth vnderneath the gate, which brings him plentie, nothing hath he lack on: There stands a vessell which shall neare want wine, so long as earth beares fruit, or sunne doth shine. Braue Knights and Barons on his grace attend, His Countries ordered by a Martiall: All strangers doe his gouernment commend, because in nothing he is partiall, But deales withall according to desert, which makes all people honour him in heart. His Court is pleasant, and his person Royall, his Councell graue, his Officers care true; His Gentry faithfull, and his Commons loyall, his lands are fruitfull, what can then ensue? Nothing but his Religion, which is grounded vpon the Gospell that hath Rome confounded.
In him there flowes the best of Art and Nature, himselfe like Dauid, and his Court like Sion; Of louely visage and of comely stature, yet full of maiesty as is a Lion, For with seueritie his grace is kinde, Iustice and pittie in his heart are ioyn'd. What may be in a Prince in him their flowes, excepting Vice for that he euer hated; What should be in a Prince in him their growes: for Englands good this good Prince was created, His Lawes are iust his gouernment is ciuill, he doth pursue good and escheweth euill. Many braue Castles his faire Land doth yeeld, and toll houses vpon the riuer Rhyne, Which vnderneath his Castles he doth build, to store his Cofers with all Countrey coyne, Each passage boate before they passe away, vnto these Toll-houses must custome pay. Fiue Princes in this iron age suruiue, which makes it seeme the siluer world againe: To match them hardly shall we finde out fiue yet weell forbeare to speake of France or Spaine, Fiue heires, fiue youths, fiue kinsmen, and fiue Princes, Of one Religion, though in fiue Prouinces.
Yong Prince of Hesson is the first must enter, to act his vertues on the worlds Theater; Tis hard to finde a yong man on earth's center, that is a vertue louer and vice hater, Old Landsgraues glasse hath many houres to runne, whil'st all his vertues liueth in his Sonne. Yong Prince of Brundswicke craues the second place, whose vertues with him brings a noble spirit: Hee's milde and courteous, mixt with maiesticke grace, his praise is not so much as he doth merit: A Prince, a Schollar, and a Trauailer, a peacefull youth and yet a Souldier. Yong Prince of Brandenbergh, Prince absolute, for now thou raignest in thy Fathers stead; Thy eares are open vnto euerr suite, thy hand is prone to euery worthy deed, Many degrees thy vertues doe commence, Brandenburgh neuer had a better Prince. Yong Prince of Pals, or Palsgraue of the Rhyne, were this a Chronicle and the letters gold; To register thy vertues most diuine, to make all Nations wonder to behold, Thy grace of all their goodnesse doth allow, But all their graces to thy goodnesse bowe.
Yong Prince of England period of my praise, thy vertues now thou entrest fils the round, Subduing euill and all good to raise, thy powers ready now my praise is crown'd: Foure kingdomes comfort, and Great Brittaines ioy, mischiefe befall him that thinkes the annoy. These Princes seuerall vertues doe agree, and in a true coniunction symphathize; When Princely fruit springs from a royall tree, there future branches to the like state rise: Each of these are their Countries ioyfull hope, friends to the Gospell, foes toth' Diuell and Pope. Three matchlesse Virgins in this wanton age, vertue doth heere commend for the worlds mirror, Their hallowed feete tread on Dyanes stage, their spotlesse thoughts are free from female error: In framing of these three, Nature did well, but made a fourth that doth her selfe excell. Hessons faire Virgin one of vertues traine, Lady of pleasure, and the Nymph of peace, Whose face the stampe of beauty doth containe, which in her liuely image neare shall cease; A match fit for a Prince, sweet Saint-like creature, wonder of all that gaze on thy faire feature.
Brunswicks bright Virgin, Germines louely rose, whose vestall lampe shines like the Moone at full, Thou art admired by the Dutch-land Froes, Saxony vowes thy blowming bud to pull: A Prince of vertues and a Princesse true who can deny, when such for loue doe sue. Brandingburghs Sister of an Angels face, the top of vertue and the branch of beautie; Of humble, modest, and maiesticke grace, the gods haue stroue who first should shew their duty, Dyan and Venus are for hir at strife; which choise is best for hir, a maide or wife. Thus they contend each houre 'boat all three; Dyan speakes, Virgins hearken to my voyce, Keepe your selues single if you would liue free, Venus sayes sports in bed cause maides reioyce. But let them chide, I can iudge neither rude, till the fourth virgin wife the iarre conclude. Englands faire Phoenix, Europes admiration, of matchlesse beauty, yet of vertue rare; A kingdomes comfortable consolation who euer rarest is, yet she is rarer. Now in the East she lets her splendor shine▪ all doe confesse she is a light diuine.
She seeing Dyan and Loues Queene at odds, Dyan made claime, bright Venus swore shee'd haue hir, At last the cause being heard before the gods; Hymen stood vp and this sweet sentence gaue hir, For chaste virginitie, mates hast thou none, and being wed like thee, shall scarce be one. Poets leaue writing of the Graecian Queene, and of Aeneas, Lady Venus sonne: Two rarer beauties shortly shall be seene in Almany, when Englands pride is wonne. Make hast yong Prince, swim liuely downe the Rhyne, to stile hir peerelesse Princesse Palatine. Lend all your hands to knit this Princely knot, all euerlasting ioy binde sure the same; A noble Prince, a Princesse without spot, will fill the trump of euer sounding fame: All Europes bells that ioyfull day shall ring, Pals hath ioyn'd power, with Englands royall King. FINIS.
Cupids iourney to Germanie and the effects of the same. WHen Hymen had his sentence ended, He of the gods was much commended, Venus was buxome blith and glad But Dyans front with frownes look't sad, Almaine was fild with loues desires Their heart flam'd Citharean fiers, Oldenburgs Earle and Hessons Prince Sent presents from their hearts Prouince: Loue in a rich shape crost the maine From Courtly France and hauty Spaine, With hope to gaine this matchlesse prize. But stormes of Non-suite did arise, Which fil'd their sailes with discontent, And blew them backe incontinent. Then Cupid tooke a box of balme, And gaue to Neptune for a calme; To Aeolus he sent a ring, Intreating him no sighs to fling: In his sailes forefront thus he went To th' Seas imbark't with sweet content, Sweet Zephirus to winne a wreath Into loues sailes goodwill did breath, Which soone conuey'd him to the Rhyne Where Bachus quaffes vp Rennish wine.
There Cupid feasted in each Court And at the length met true report, Whose newes did cause the boy admire, Filling his heart with ardent fire. And presently he mounts the skies, To craue one of his mothers eyes: Shee grants the suite and thus she spake, Ile doe it for the Princes sake. Hir left eye she plac't in his for'head, Which made the God of loue adored. He tooke his leaue and humbly bends, And from hir Deity descends; The winged youth who vnderstood, His way by's eye through thickest wood, Where Siluian tooke vp her stay, And met with Cupid on the way, But she from him began to flye, When she perceiu'd he had an eye, Least he her nakednesse should see She shrowdes hir selfe behide a tree. For Autumne that the field bereaues Had left hir nought but withered leaues. Cupid amaz'd kept still the path Which brought him to a priuate bath, And close by it a thicket stood, More like an Arbour then a Wood, The willowes twisted arme in arme, To keepe the Bower in winter warme, And in the summer when the sunne Through the high Meridian runne,
Hee cannot pearce in with bright eyes But peepe through hole cut checker wise. This Arbor fil'd with naked Imphes, The thrice three Muses and their Nymphes. Dyan with sundry flowers crown'd Begirt abount with Virgins round: Cupid drew nye and got a sight, Which bred in him no small delight. None did deny the shamefast boy, But in him tooke exceeding ioy Saue Dyan, whose wrath did inuade hir, Vntill at length all did perswade hir To smiling mirth which shee allowes And tooke her violl from the bowes, Whereon most sweetly she did play A well contriued Roundelay. Which rauisht so the god of Loue, That he a question thus did moue. You Nymphes and Goddesses of grace, How doe you call this sacred place: This is (quoth they) the Muses fountaine, Impayl'd with many a craggy mountaine, The name of it is Helycon: Hence Germaines bounds first borders on, It parts the lowe Dutch from the high, And heere great Caesars crowne doth lye: We know yong Archer thou art sent, To wound a Prince with Loues content; Thy shaft shall not be shot in vaine, For he a faire Princesse shall gaine:
Whose beauty no Appelles needes, Hir vertues all our worths exceeds. But hast thee Cupid, flye away, And Hymen crowne their Nuptiall day: The one ey'de boy tooke leaue of all, And tooke vp's bowe which he lets fall. His quiuer on his backe he hung, And spread both wings and vp he sprung; With matchlesse swiftnesse to the Rhyne, Which shewes the way to Palatine: But being driuen in by stormes, He was constrained to lodge at Wormes. The Cities worth the God admires, And the next day he din'd at Spyres. But e're the night approached nye, He came to the Vniuersitie; Cal'd Hedelberg a famous place, Where he beheld the Princes grace Well mounted on a stately steed, Which did Bucephalus exceed. The day had left the Easterne Coast, And to faire Thetis gallopt post; Which made the Germaine mountaines darke, Cupid drew nye to view the marke: And at his bosome sent a shaft, Which after it a tincture left; No sooner Cupid dedicates This stroke, but straight he eleuates To the gods, where he a lecture redde, How loue had metamorphosed
This Princes heart perplext with paine, Which caused him to crosse the maine To Brittaines Coast, first Graue-send gaines him, And England brauely entertaines him. The Court his company desires, London the louely Prince admires; Such ioy sprung forth on euery side, That all the Gods mans mirth enuide: Therefore they held a Parliament, How they might worke his discontent, Last they agree'd (O! dismall day) To take our chiefest hope away. Grim visag'd death presum'd to strike A Prince that neuer had his like; For as his vertue all excel'd His valour was vnparralel'd Heauen tooke his worth, earth knew his want, And made a generall complaint; Great Brittaine clad in sable blacke, With endlesse teares lament his lacke. This hopefull match begot great gladnesse, But Henries death a solemne sadnesse. And had not these two opposites Met, England sure had lost hir wits: For had their beene no funerall, To stay this happy Nuptiall This Kingdome being ouerioy'd, With mirth her selfe might haue destroy'd. So had their beene no Nuptiall, After this driery funerall,
This Iland would her selfe confound, Of force to drowne with her owne teares A heart of cork. Therefore the Scene, 'Twixt mirth and mourning kept the meane. And time which all things doth expell, Prouided for this Kingdome wel: For though he tooke our hope away, He left behinde a second stay, Whom heauens highest hand preserue For he all goodnesse doth deserue. Thus leauing hearts with sorrowes clad, For him whose like earth neuer had; Tis fit my pen pursue the carriage, Of this selected sacred marriage: Twixt these two Princes dignity, Who were with all solemnitie, Ioyn'd with the forefront of the spring, In Nuptiall bands before a King. But time that for no King will stay, Conducts this Virgin bride away; T'wards her new confines, blest conten Attended on her grace in Kent: The trees stood all in suites of greene, To guard this Nymph-like natures Queen. She leaues a Land where she is knowne, To see a strange Land of her owne. The louely Nightingale did sing, Hir sweete farewell from Englands King. Thus after many parting stories, Time brought them to their teritories:
And eare twelue moneths their course had run Betwixt them they possest a Sonne. This blessed newes the Seas sent post, To comfort vs for him we lost; From Henry's ashes, there is sprung, A second Henry, who eare long We hope shall in this Land arriue, The hearts of all men to reuiue: And greet his royall Grand-sires raigne, The Queene and's Vncle Charlamayne. Whom heauen still protect and blesse, With royall issue to possesse This Kingdome, Scepter, and beare sway, Till Sunne and Moone doe passe away. FINIS.
The Originall and continuance of the most Noble Order of the Garter, as it was spoken before the Kings Maiestie, on Saint GEORGES day last: Anno Dom. 1616. By W. FENNOR. EDward the third, that truely Potent King, whose Temples worthily wore Englands Crowne: This Noble Order, of whose fame I'le sing, inuents for Britaines Trophy of renowne. Salsburies Countesse, hath all Ladies grac't, that loose their Garter, yet keepe Honour chast. From Honor'd chastitie the Garter fell, and in a moment rose to royaltie: King Edward grac't this Ladies fauour well, who humbly bends his kingly Maiesty, Catcht vp the ribbon had a leg inbrac't that neuer capor'd with a step vnchast. The Lady dies her cheekes with tell-tale redde which blabs she blushes, that her Garters found, By him that had aduanc't it to a head, which with Imperiall dignity was crown'd: The Nobles murmur, and the King by chance perceiv'd, spoke Hony soit quy maly pense.
Exchanges lawlesse loue for lawfull Armes, buckles on' armour, weell's his warlike sword, Beats his brac't Drums, Trumpets sounds alarums: thus like bold Hector rode he to the field, Subdu'd his foes, and for his deeds in fight, of the rich Garter was instal'd a Knight. Which bred such luster in each Noble brest, as if new Troy had mustred vp the Sonnes, Of strong back't Priam, and amongst the rest, the bold blacke Prince toth' field most fiercely runs; And with his sword hammor'd in Vulcans forge, made the French Dennys kneele to English George. For which he with the Garter was instal'd, and made a Knight of that most Noble Order; With many other Nobles that were cal'd worthy by fame, that ancient, true Recorder. The Garter bred such luster in great hearts, each stroue for excellence in Armes and Arts. Saint Patricks Crosse, did to the Garter vayle, Saint Iaques Order waxt with anger pale: Saint Dauids leeke began to droupe ith tale, Saint Dennys he sate mourning in a dale; Saint Andrew look't with cheerefull appetite, as though toth' Garter he had future right.
But Dragon-killing George that still depends vpon the Garter since third Edwards dayes; In this age present hath as many friends, as well deseruing high eternall praise: As any ages euer had before, neuer at one time better; neuer more. Hanniball stroue for Romes triumphant bayes. Scipio for the Carthaginians bough; But thanklesse Senators did dimme the rayes, of these two worthies, and would not allow, Nor wreath, nor branch, they dy'd and left their fame vnto the glory of the Garters name. Impartially a royall King bestowes it, vpon some Subiect worthy of the wearing; His Armes aduanc't within a Church that owes it, the oath administred in publike hearing, Which being falsifyed, the Honors crost, by Heraldry, the Armes, and Garter lost. Say that a man long languishing in loue, whose heart with hope and feare growes cold and warme: Admit some pitty should his sweet-heart moue, to knit a fauour on his feeble arme; All parts would ioyne, to make that one ioynt strong, to appose any that his loue should wrong.
The Garter is the fauour of a King clasping the leg, on which mans best part stands; A poesye in t', as in a Nuptiall ring, binding the heart, to their liege Lord in bands; That whil'st the leg hath strength, or the arme power, to kill that Serpent would their King deuoure. For which the George is as a Trophy worne, and may it long, and long remaine with those, Which to that excellent dignitie are borne: as opposites vnto their Countries foes. God keepe our King and them from Romes black pen, let all that loue the Garter say, Amen. FINIS.
The Deciding of the Difference be∣twixt the two Vniuersities, Oxford and Cambridge, about the Kings entertainement, spoke before his Maiesty at Theobalds, the xiij. of Iuly, 1615. By W. F. PErnassus and the fountaine fell at ods, Who should giue best content vnto the gods: The mountaine spake, tis not thy fenne can yeeld Such learned Arts, nor can thy foggy fiel'd, Giue such delightfull taste to gods or men, As my sweet shady groues; Hellicon then Returnes this answere, though thou that stands on high, My braines are moist when thine are hote and dry. But leauing this vpbraiding argument, To stand to triall dar'st thou be content: (Dare? quoth Pernassus) yes I dare and will, Make triall when thou dar'st not shew thy skill. Thus throwing downe their Gauntlets they appeal'd, Vnto the Gods who iustly with them deal'd: Ioue sent his nimble footed Mercury, With all the Trophyes of high Herauldry, To signifie vnto the learned Mount, That kingly Ioue himselfe made full account To visite him in's progresse; she or'ioy'd, Hir chiefest, choysest, curest wits imploy'd;
To giue him welcome, Syluian left the woods, Heards-men their cattell, Towns-men from their goods Fled with amazement to be hold the shew Of royall maiestie. Amongst this rowe Stept in some fortie of Helconians race, Amongst the Pernasitians tooke their place, To view in secret note the whole euent Of his receiuing, welcome, and content, And where a word or letter was mistooke, To Brack a gram it in a Table-booke. Time turn'd three hower glasses, whilst they stood Expecting him whose sight should doe them good: But on a sudden all their voyces summes, A ioyfull generall clamour, yon he comes, See, see, whose that rides with agilitie; Peace, peace, that's one of the Nobilitie, Who passed by in state and due degree; And after them his Royall Maiestie. Drawne by the winged Coursers of the sunne, About whose Chariot thousand people runne: With shouts of ioy the multitude still speakes, Welcome dread King, the Students, Viuat Rex: The Heards-men mov'd to testifie their loues, Bestow'd on him a paire of hunting gloues. So vshard him vnto Parnassus hill, And there to welcome him shew'd their best skill, With Masking, reuells, and a Comedy, Which was performed very solemnly. In penning it the Poet paines did take, To cause Ioue sleepe, though he himselfe did wake.
But when their sports were past, great Ioue retyr'd, Yet at their learned arts he much admir'd: Helycons Nymphs returned to their Cell, And there the whole discourse of all did tell: Which when some heard, they laid their heads together, And made a Ballad of the Buck-skins leather. The kings entertain¦ment at Cambridge.Now time with stealing steps doth swiftly hast, Imagine seauen yeeres compleatly past; When Ioue remembring the Gods request, Hath tane his royall iourney North by East; To visit the distressed Helycon, Whose face till now his eye neare look't vpon. Parnassus hearing, that he thither would, From frozen Alpes sent forth a bitter cold; Which did congeale the waues of Neptune so, That all the water in the ayre turn'd snow. And from the ponderous clouds, fell downe in flakes, Couering high mountaines, filling dales and lakes. By which the little brookes forsooke their bounds; And waters all the passages so drown'ds, That thousands durst not venture, yet his Grace Held firme his resolution, spight the face Of grisled Hyems, or strene Boreas, Aeolus, Auster, or sweet Zephirus. Thither he would to view the learned skill, Betwixt the fountaine and Parnassus hill. Minerua hearing this, she cal's the Clownes, And rusticke swaines, and saide, put on your gownes: You first shall meet his Maiestie in order, By the aduice and wit of your Recorder:
Out rode the rustickes in their glittering pride, And when they had their royall Ioue espyed, Vpstart God Pan, who with a studied speech His kingly Maiesty he did beseech; That hee'd be pleasd still to protect his darling, Before his Croch came neere by halfe a furlong. Moreouer that the Nymphes might beare no sway, Aboue them and their wiues by night or day. And furthermore their good wils to vnfold, They gaue a siluer cup was three yeeres old: So gaue him way, he on rides toward's the Towne, Met by Minerua in a scarlet gowne; Who spoke a rare speech, of such high deserning; That at the very first she shew'd her learning. Which when Ioue heard he rode vnto the Cell, And after was conducted to the well; Where he most freely of the water tasted, And for foure daies this royall pastime lasted. But when Mineruaes maides their wits had spent, Great Ioue retir'd thence incontinent: Yet at his parting graciously did say, He would returne and visite them in May. Which promise he perform'd, Parnassus then Wrote sharpe invectiues from her whipping penne, Which sent to Helicon, were backe retorted, Thus these two worthies the wide world haue sported. Th' are like two famous Castles in one Towne, Who for their worth's would put each other downe: Or like a iealous husband who breeds strife, If he espy another lookes on's wife.
Two beautious Virgins cannot well indure, One man vnto them both should be made sure: Were there a difference t'wood be no contention, But being equals both, breeds this discention. But to conclude, Parnassus is the mountaine, Of learned Arts; and Helicon the fountaine, And this is all I'le say of both, I thinke The one giues food to vs, the other drinke: Then why should they each others worth controule, Since they can both giue Physicke for the soule? FINIS.
A speech concerning the Gowries trea∣son, and the Gun-Powder-Plot: spoken before the Kings Maiesty, at the Bishops Palace at Salysbury, Alias Sarum, the fifth of August. 1615. By W. F. NO Poets Muse can better tidings bring Then mine: the safetie of a royall King; Yet I with words cannot describe the faction, So well as you, dread King, which try'd the action Of base deluding Traitours: whose inuention Proceeded from the authour of discention. Whose blacke plots in the heart all mischiefe sowes, Which not preuented to ranke Treason growes. As this day well can witnesse to all ages, The Gowries cruell and insatiate rages: Well may their titles stile them goe awry, Who in their by-paths led a King to die. But th'Almightie for his chosen stands, And strikes amazement, staies the villaines hands, That are lift vp against his true Anointed, All praise be to him, that all disappointed; Nay, gaue vnto your Maiesty such strength, To grapple with your Butcher, till at length He shew'd his power, as once to Abraham, And in the place of Isaac sent a Ram;
Who rushing through the midst of bramble thornes, He gor'd the Gowries with his two edg'd hornes; Which deed hath rais'd his name eternally, And hurl'd them downe to lasting infamy. For whosoeuer speakes of Ramseyes name, Shall found it to the Gowries endlesse shame: Or whil'st the fifth of August can giue light, Let men giue praises to the God of might. And let it be as Holy-day obserued, Wherein your grace by wonder was preserued. Or who soeuer shall that day remember Let him record the fifth of cold Nouenber, Where they the Diuells highest plot shall read; Who sought not to destroy the royall seede Alone: but with it all posteritie, The Gentry and the States Nobilitie. Making this Land a Chaos in an houre, After replant in it their forraine power: But heauen's iust, when he begins to speake, And sent a warning in Mounteagles beake; As he by Ioseph did to Pharaoh tell, Of scarcitie for th'good of Israel. So in your royall heart he sent a doubt, By which the hight of Treason was found out: And the base Traitours for their workes rewarded, Thus a good Prince is by the Angels guarded. What Plots were lay'd gainst Queene Elizabeth, To cut her off by an vntimely death? Yet maugre all their blasted blacke infection She liv'd, till heauen cal'd her by election.
Inioy abounding, and her Princely Throne, She left vnto your Maiesty alone: Whom God hath placed with a peacefull hand, The like hath scarce beene heard in any Land; To haue so many foes, and all turne friends By th'which the sword of warre, toth' Oliue bends. I ghesse the reason since you entred heere, The Lion rampant keepes the rest in feare: The Dragon is dismist, whose poysonous breath; Hath oft beene cause of many a thousands death. And in the place you haue put the Vnicorne, T' expell the poyson with his precious Horne; By which each royall subiect safe may dyne, And taste the propper fruit of his owne vine: Then if ingratefull men will this record, Can they forget to praise or laud the Lord For his preseruing, of you many wayes, Giuing them peace in your most happy daies. Sure who forgets, is an vngratefull guest, Not worthy to inioy this peacefull feast: Which God continue many, many yeeres, And still preserue you from all forraine feares: False plots at home, euer confounding those, Who in their heart professe to be your foes. But let good subiects Haleluiah sing To God, for the protecting our good King, O! let their prayers inuocate agen, God long preserue your grace, Amen, Amen. FINIS.
A Pastorall Sonnet containing a Parliament of the Gods. WAlking of late it was my chance, To view Floraes rosy bowers; When drowsie Morpheus into a trance, Did confine me certaine howres Where I might spy, very much resort passe to amaine And one did come vnto me this meeting to explaine. Come, quoth he, prepare thy selfe to goe, Where thou shall attend, I to thee the full euent will shew Whereto and what end: Straight me thought I was conuayed away, Wherevnto my sense he did display, How that this meeting was of all the Gods, And that braue Mars and Vulcane falne were at ods: Vulcane as plaintiffe did for iustice cry, Cause Mars which was defendant, did with Venus lye. And moreouer would discouer, but (alas) it was, his fate: Whil'st he's working, they are lurking, how they may cornute his pate▪ Straight a discention there arose, Who in iudgement chiefe should sit,
Fearing that man would hold them as foes, Each of other thought most fit. At last it past, that bright Sol as Vmpire needs must stand, For why, his eye vnderneath the Spheares, hath chiefe command. Phoebus at the last did condiscend, Yet with this condition Cynthia might sit as Venus friend, Ioyntly in commission: Presently was set a chaire of State, On which the pale fac't Luna sate; Next Ioue and Iuno, did assume their place; Then Saturne, Aeolus, and Neptune with his Mace. After Appollo with the Muses nine, And blackt fac't Pluto tooke his place by Proserpine: And belowe, there sate a rowe of Shepheards, Which adore God Pan; Each one sitting, all thing fitting, straight a silence there began. A ciuill silence being proclaimed, One there stood vp presently, And as I deeme he was Mercury nam'd, Which full loud began to cry O yes, then he pausd a while and began againe, O yes, silence in the Court on further paine. Thus O yes, being thrice proclaimed, they beginne to plod, On the inditements which pertained 'gainst this worldly god.
Straight a Iury of twelue Shepheards Swaines, Which with rurall pastime keepe the plaines; Impannel'd were the sole euents to proue 'Twixt Noble Mars, and Venus faire, the Queene of loue. Without Atturneyes Mars and Vulcane plead, And Venus absent, Cupid stood in's mothers stead: Vulcan still swore, Mars did ill, in wronging of his marriage bed; Which was cause 'gainst reason lawes, he alwayes wore a Heart-like head. Mars in reply was resolute, As he e're in the field did fight, And soone he did poore Vulcane confute Sometime might, may ore'come right. Yet he did gree vnto all that Vulcan could report, And would withhold, if this age would yeeld him better sport. For, quoth Mars, alas, I am kept so long From my wonted vse, 'Its no maruell though I Vulcan wrong With so small abuse. Idely I sleepe in Ladies laps, Childishly I am dandled on their paps; Armour, shield, sword, which oft my foes did chase, Are into silkes and veluets turn'd, O too too base, I that before my foes in field did iust, Now in a downe-bed lye, whil'st all my Armor doth rust, Souldiers now, alas must bow, vnto each silken feathered Swaine; That before had gold good store, besides the credit they did gaine.
Thus hauing ended, the Iury resin'd The sole verdict, which did say, Mars in no errour at all they could finde, But the Fault in Cupid lay: Which then began to excuse himselfe, but all in vaine, And swore no more rusticke clownes, henceforth his loue should gaine. Crooked Vulcan seeing that his suit, Might no whit preuaile On poore Cupid, which alas stood mute, He began to raile, Hud wink't boy, how darest thou be so bold, As let flie those shafts whose heads were gold; It had beene fitter shot with them of lead, Then Mars had ne're made me to weare a horned head. Cupid made answere, vrging this disgrace If hornes thou were, thou need'st not feare to breake thy face; Sol stood vp & drank a cup of Nectar, to his fellow gods Which being done, he thus begun, to sentence this there fore past odds. Cupid, quoth Phoebus, hold vp thy hand, Heare thy sentence from my lips; Twelue moneths I banish thee the Faiery Land, Cause bright Mars thou dost eclipse, Thy flight with spight, hath bereft souldiers thy chiefest ioy In place of disgrace, hath tooke vp her seat, to worke annoy: Wel, quoth Cupid, I your wils obey, but il'e match you al;
And no doubt, ea're long i'le finde a day, when to minde i'le call; How that you wrong'd the God of loue, As the stout's of all in time shall proue: Peace else, quoth Ioue, what dost thou threaten me? Yes Ioue, ere long, shall finde me strong, to o're match the▪ The Court being ended, long they did not stay They to their Mansions, Cupid banish't, went away. Then came he that first led me, with charge my vision to indite▪ 'Twixt warres King, and loues bright Queene, to relate  spight▪ He being gone, my eies anone, from sleepe their haery freng▪ Now remaines▪ I take some paines▪ in the relating loues reuenge▪ FINIS. Gentle Rder, in Cupids iourney to Germany, there is  a line misplac't, being the second line of the last page . Of force to drown'd with hir owne teares, read With hir owne teares, of force to drown'd.
