11324 99838391 2767
THE FORBIDDEN FRƲIT. OR A TREATISE Of the Tree of Knovvledge of Good & Evill, of which Adam at the first, & as yet all Mankind doe eate death. Moreover, How at this day it is forbidden to every one as well as to Adam; And how this Tree, that is the wisedome of the Serpent planted in Ada  is that great Image, and that many headed Beast; mentioned in Daniel and the Apocalyps, whom the whole world doth worship. LASTLY, Here is shewed what is the Tree of Life, con∣trary to the wisdome, righteousnesse, and knowledge of all mankind: With a description of the Majestie and nature of Gods Word. By AUGUST: ELUTHENIUS. Translated out of Latine into English. Printed in the yeare, 1640.
CHAPTER I. What is the Tree of Knovvledge of Good and Evill. I Will not much contend with them that would have the Tree of Know∣ledge of Good and Evill, accoding as it is in the Scriptures to be a Na∣turall Tree, which being planted in Paradise, had that nature de∣vinely given unto it, that who should eate thereof, their eyes should be opened to view themselves, and they be made Gods, and so know both Good and Evill: per∣haps God would teach Adam both in∣wardly and outwardly, and what hee forbad or taught him inwardly in his heart, that he would propose outwardly to his eyes for greater testimony: but yet
I desie of them, that they would grant this unto me, that as the thing was done out∣wardly, so the same to have happened in∣wardly in the heart of Adam, that there hee was tempted by the seed of the Serpent to have the guiding of his owne will and na∣ture, not to be so void of knowledge and action, as to be subordinate unto God. That I should so thinke, two reasons or causes doe especially move mee. The 1. is, that the Seed of the Woman was to breake the head of the seed of the Serpent; but as a naturall and living Ser∣pent, whose head was broken, of that Seed we doe not reade of any: but as even then the Seed of the woman was spiritually in the heart of Adam, so in the same manner was the seed of the Serpent, for man at the first was created good, not of God but of nothing, and for that cause doth he turne himselfe alwayes from God, and bend downewards to his owne nothing and vanity againe; which nothing I with the auncient Fathers, but especially Taulerus, doe judge to be sinne, Satan, death, & hell; and this perhaps was that devill, inhabiting in Adam, as also in Lucifer. The other reason is this, which the scrip∣ture
doth testifie of the Citie of God and the Heavenly Ierusalem, that Paradise to be in us: but God alone and his omnipotent Word is our Paradise, the Tree of Life, and the Temple wherein we inhabit, walk, serve, pray, &c. as wee are on the other part the Temple of God and his Paradise. In like man̄er the Beast (which even now the whole world both great and small) doe worshipp in their hearts, of which the scriptures make mention in the Apocalips, as also the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil is in us, for the exterior world, & whatsoever outward∣ly is to be seene or is done, is onely an acci∣dent and a certaine signifying figure of the true and interior nature: and there is no∣thing true in all those things which are seen with the eye, that is substantiall; for it be∣hoveth that the forme of this World perish, because it is nothing else but an imaginary world, and a figure of the right true eternal and by it selfe the constant world; therfore it is expedient that all these things in their course be done over againe, which through∣out all the Bible are related outwardly and significantly to have beene done, and yet to this day after their manner, the Historie of the Bible, Moyses, and the Prophets, are spi∣ritually
and truely of force, but all things are brought into the truth by Christ, and it it is expedient, that all the prophecies, which have been from the beginning of the world, which God hath spoken by the mouth of his Saints, be againe reiterated: Therefore that Tree was nothing else then the nature, will, knowledge, and life of Adam, whereof he ought not to eat. That is not to attribute any part of it to himselfe: But freely and willingly submitt himselfe to God; and know nothing but what God would know in him; doe nothing but what God would doe in him; speake nothing but what God would speake in him, &c. Whereby with∣out any impediment God might exercise his Kingdome, will, nature, and power in him, that being void of will, wisdome, and knowledge, he might have nothing of his owne, or arrogate any thing to himself, this God would, this was pleasing to him, and thus he commaunded. To this opinion the German Divinity ascents: Theologia Ger∣manica, 3470. cap. Which saith that this tree is nothing else but our owne will & know∣ledge, of which alone in the Earthly Para∣dise of the world of our hearts, we are not to eate, but acount it is forbidden, unlesse
we desire to dye, or eate death from it. And now when Adam was fallen, and had eaten of this tree, then was it planted in his heart, & the same was derived into all his boughts and fruit, so that the same case, word, pre∣cept, and interdict, is common to all his po∣sterity, we all have eaten death, vvhosoever are in Adam, and this uncorrected poyson have vve received from the Serpent, being evill Egges of an evill Bird. Hence may every man easily perceive, hovv each man is the greatest enemy to himselfe, and vvhat hee ought to esteeme of himselfe, his vvill and understanding, vvis∣dome and knowledge, since it is the Coun∣sell, seede, wisdome, knowledge and head of the Serpent, which by Christ is to bee broken in our hearts: it behoveth that all things (which Circumcision in the old, and Baptisme in the new Covenant doth signify) which are hereditary and naturall from A∣dam should dye in us: that we should la∣bour to unlearne, and put of all things, as if they were death and the devill; that is our will, wisdome, and righteousnesse, &c. with which as with figleaves Adam strove to cover himselfe: for this is sinne, and the stinge of sinne and death, that is to eate of
this forbidden Tree, and to arrogate any thing to a mans selfe, as his will, nature, and understanding, or himselfe; But alas, alas who knowes this, or beleeves this, who abandons or is weary of his owne will, un∣derstanding, or knowledge, when will men give a farewell to them: Give a Farewll say J, why every one delights himselfe in his own imaginations, & sweetly slumbring recreats his soule in his own wisdom, know∣ledge, workes, &c. the Tree is fayre to the eye, and pleasant to the tast: Here all man∣kinde as Adam himselfe doe taste death; But yet no man knowes, no man thinkes of this, but every man judgeth it to be right, and the flesh esteemeth it to be the Tree of Life. That is to follow its owne pleasure and opinion of Good, which is false: To know much, to finde out much, to learne many sciences, and finally to become a God; Neither doe any consider, that this was Adams estate and morsell, that bitter morsel of death. How doe we speake and talke of Adams misery, and yet not marke that the same is fresh in us; We can talke of his eating, and wonderfully detest it, when notwithstand∣ing we doe the same that he did.
O man, who art thou that thus preparest a staffe for thine owne shoulders, and pro∣nouncest a Sentence against thy selfe, while thou condemnest thy Father Adam, and yet considerest not that thou thy selfe art ensnared in his Nett. Here propound and consider what our will is, our knowledg is, our wisdom is, &c. in which wee so insolently boast our selves, yea and by which we imagine and suppose that we can come unto God, when not∣withstanding it is nothing, nothing else but death it selfe, and the bitter Fruit of the forbidden Tree. Is there any amongst all men who under∣stand this? Who can away with this? To deny, put off, fearefull to rest in their owne will, wisdome, knowledge, &c. No: doe not most chuse and extoll them as true gold and Eternall Life, when notwithstanding they are nothing but Eternall death.
CHAP. II. Why the Tree of knovvledge of good and Evill is mortall & forbidden. THIS may be easily answered by that which hath beene before related. God (as right it is) would be in us both Lord and Master; and in the same, will worke, doe love, omitt, thinke, &c. therfore should we be free from al these things of this kind: so that we should know, or doe nothing, but what God himselfe would know and doe in us. Which reason even against its will, doth confesse to be equity to him that con∣cludes and proves it by trueth; for what is more equall then that the Potter have so full a Dominion over his pots, that none of them challenge any the least authority to them∣selves, since they were not their owne ma∣kers; the same is our condition: God alone is called the God of understanding, know∣ledge, wisdome, &c. wherefore hee alone will know all things in us, and by conse∣quence nothing but himselfe; if therefore any man will taste of the Forbidden Fruit, and so know himselfe, be made a God, be of
himselfe, stand upon his owne bottome, and so be his owne God; it is necessary that together with Lucifer, he fall into the hell of death, and like the Dragon be cast downe from Heaven, because the Fruit of that For∣bidden Tree is death. Wherefore God would know onely himselfe in us, and for that cause would have one to know no other science, esteeming this only necessary to life: and will teach the same to us, it so be we will obediently attend him: That is know onely God, praise him, pray to, and heare him, which things I say he himselfe would worke in the obedient: For this cause the Wise Man saith: (Wisdom 5.) Lord to know thee and understand thee is all righteousnesse. In which hee justi∣fies many, and by consequence much more his owne: Let not the Wise Man boast himself in his wisdom, nor the strong Man in his strength, but in this let every man boast that he knowes me, Isay. 53. Ier. 9. Which thing God by the mouth of his owne Christ, Ioh. 17. calleth Eternall Life; For from this knowledge, roote, and Tree of Life, proceeds all whatsoever can be called good or is truely good; This is the onely
and true Key of David, which so openeth that no man shutteth, &c. CHAP. III. Of the abuse of all things, hovv all things are unclean to the unclean flesh: yea those things which in themselves are cleane; and wherfore that curious flesh de∣sireth to know much; and on the contrary, how men ought to know nothing but God, and for God, and use all things in God. THAT lost nature of man, who in the Scripture is called the Flesh, is an in∣strument so impotent to al things, so vile, & obscure, that it knows neither to have, speak or doe any thing, but abuseth and defileth it by touching, because he converts all things (which are from God, in whom truely they are) to himself as his proper owne: although hee ought never to be his owne. No not in that which is his owne, but therein to bee subiect to God. Neither ought he to chal∣lenge to himselfe that wisdome and know∣ledge
that is in him; but to have all things se in his God, as if he himselfe had them t. But this he doth not; but arrogates mselfe to himselfe, and will needs be, ve, and know himselfe, and this is the fall nd degeneration of Adam, and his posteri∣, in, and with all things with them. Againe, the true and onely use with, and n all things, is thus: God would that Adam hould know nothing but what hee would now in him, should be nothing but what e would be in him; should doe nothing but what he would doe in him; should have nothing but what hee would have in him; This would not Adam, but all those things e arrogated to himselfe, as his owne, or ather he himself would be all these things; This is the fall of Adam, and the abuse of all hings in all things, by all mankinde, to the nd of the World. The abuse is, I say, to arrogate any thing to mans selfe, as his owne, & not to possesse he same freely, as though he had them not; but to steale and use them from God, in and o himselfe. As for Example: if having Money, Wife, Children, knowledge, life t selfe, yea my selfe, I challenge these to my elfe as my owne.
But since God exacts them, if followes the I would therfore detaine them, and as mu as in me is, not yeeld them unto God, b knitt my mind unto them, that I may keep defend, and never losse or forsake them (when notwithstanding they are Gods an not mine) this is the Fall of Adam and b theift, being the abuse of al things inbred i the flesh: untill man be translated into new kinde of estate or condition, where∣fore it is behoovefull that we be borne a new doe vomitt up the Fruit of the Tree o Knowledge of Good and Evill: And al these things which wee having stolen from God as theeves, doe challenge to our selves and so forgetting them restore them again to God; this truely is the resurrection and conversion of Adam; and by this meanes a∣lone shall the Fall of Adam be repaired & amended. Therefore the true and onely use of all things, knowne alone to the regenerate and new man is this: That I be altogether free from all things, and alone subiect to God: and being void of name, will, and know∣ledge, &c, remaine nothing in my selfe, no vindicate, deliver, or claime any thing to my selfe (because whatsoever I have, am, know,
doe, &c. all are of God,) no more then the Cow doth for her milke, the Tree for it fruit, the Bird for its long; but wholy refer∣ring all things to God, and have know, doe ove, and be nothing but in him; Thus the redeemed, free, and perfect Christians, have, know, doe, &c. all things they possesse, wife, children, life, knowledge, wisdome, sub∣stance, &c. yea and themselves altogether freely in the Lord: neither doe they attri∣bute any thing to themselves; even as if they were nothing, had nothing, knew no∣thing; for they know that God it is, who is, hath, knowes, and doth all those things which they are, know, or doe; so the Chri∣stian hath his wife in the Lord, that is doth not challenge her to himselfe as his owne, but freely designeth her to God, whose she is, and from whom she is lent unto him, whom he is willing to restore whensoever it shal please God to requir her, & as he never challengeth her to himselfe as his owne, even so he ever enjoyes her in God, and in, and for God, loves her; This Paul & David calls it, to sing, rejoyce, marie, & have in the Lord: that is to reduce all things unto God, in him, know, love, have, bee, doe all things,
neither detract any thing from God as my proper owne and right. And whosoever have not thus their knowledge, Wife, Children, and themselves in the Lord, they offend in this: because they love them, it being a carnall Love out of God; And so farre are all things unclean to the unclean, that even his prayers are sin unto him, yea his praises of God, Fasts, Ora∣tions, Supplications, God despiseth accor∣ding to the Prophet: And although hee be bountifull to the poore, yet he doth it in vaine. Breefly, what he doth, he doth it in vaine, it is not pleasing but displeasing unto God: Whether hee love or hate his Wife, Children, and Neighbours, whether hee chyde or pray, all things are uncleane unto him, Wife, Children, Feilds, Lands, Money, povertie, riches, fame, infamy, life, deathknowledge, learning, yea God himselfe. And lastly, he is unfitt for any thing that is good. By himselfe, he is evill, sinfull, and nothing. And what shew of goodnesse so∣ever is in him, it is stained by an hypocriti∣call eye and affection; Therefore its no matter what he hath, knoweth, or doth, hee is a Vessell of no price, an evill Tree; unpro∣fitable
for any good worke, since both his mind and conscience is depraved. Therfore before al things it is necessary, that with Nicodemus they be born again, that al things with them may bee n new unto them, the flesh must be changed in∣to the spirit, & so cease to be flesh. For it is so impure and every way desirous of its owne gaine, and so infected and de∣praved with the poyson of sinne, that it draweth all things to it selfe, seeketh it selfe in all things, and arrogateth that to it selfe as its owne, which it knoweth, lo∣veth, or doth, and hath all things under a false pretence, & out of a love to it selfe. Neither doth it love any thing but what is pleasant and profitable for it selfe. But a Christian loveth an unprofitable, sicke, and loathsome Wife for God, and hath her not for his pleasure or profit only, but for Gods will & pleasure. The naturall and fleshly man doth no∣thing but out of a love to himselfe, and whatsoever he doth, he hath an eye and reflecteth upon himselfe, and in what he sees, he can finde to delite himselfe in, he is willing to meddle with that.
Hence it is that the house of sorrow, poverty, banishment, troubles, sicknesses and reprehensions, and whatsoever hee sees harsh unto him, he hates no lesse then the Devill doth the crosse of Christ Jesus; But whatsoever is excellent, great, pleasant, bewtifull, &c. to this he cleaves as fast as the clay to the wheele; Whereby he may enjoy what he saw and desired in them. Breefly, he doth nothing but out of a love to himselfe, and in what he doth hee challengeth the chiefe part to himselfe; I say, that in all his actions both with God and Man, he respects nothing but his owne profitt and pleasure, which if he be deprived off, he looseth his cheerfulnesse and alacrity of spirit, and becoms sorow∣full & desists to worke any further, what therefore can be done by such a man as this but what is uncleane. But the regenerate man being borne of God▪ doth quite contrary in all his ac∣tions, he is desirous of the common pro∣fitt, being altogether so affected and dis∣posed as God his Father; He doth no∣thing but most freely subiected unto
God, suffieth him to doe and care for all things in him; so that it followes that in this man is the meere nature & work of God; and he or rather God in him re∣paires to the humble poore, sicke, and to to those that are in the house of sorrow, to help and comfort them: by whatsoever God hath either given him, or doth work in him as his substance, milke, and conso∣lation, and in all those things he lookes upon no other thing but only God; who rather in him only lookes upon himselfe; Neither is it the Man, but God in the Man, who communicateth to other ne∣cessities, loves, prayes, heares, worshipps, honours, wills, and possesseth. Thirdly, Adam would know, and ther∣fore labours for much knowledge, and so Eates of the forbidden Fruit, that he may live and become a great one, even God; and for this only end the whole World now a dayes applies it selfe to all studies; because it desires not to dye in obscuritie and oblivion, but to live and florish, not in the lower degrees of estimation, but in the chiefest seate of reputation and honour, and with all to know all things
that possible it can, that so it may be made famous, and thereby be glorified and delighted therein; wherefore every day he works more and more to encrease his knowledge, by which he may be more and more emminent, greater, and more like unto God; that if it were possible to know more then God, that with Lu∣cifer be might be equall with him; But that this ambition was the fall of Lucifer no man will consider; but every man in those prosecutions, disputations and stu∣dies for knowledg seeketh for life, when indeed there is in them nothing but bit∣ter death; which both in Lucifer, as also in Adam most manifestly doth ap∣peare. Truely it is a wonder that of this for∣bidden Tree of Death; every man should be so much desirous to eate; Gods will is that we know nothing, but what he will know, write, and teach in us; and that be∣ing void of all knowledge, prudence & wisdome in our selves, wee become fooles, wee remaine under him as fooles and babes; but we busie our selves about the obtaining of many thousands of
Sciences, and treasure them up unto our selves, as if in them our life consisted, that like to God wee are ignorant of nothing, and all flesh desireth rather to be like unto God then to Christ. But on the contrary, Gods will it is, that before this bee, we as Christ was, be deprived of every thing that is our own, and be wholy subiect unto him: Have, know, doe, love, bee nothing, but what God hath, knowes, doth, loveth, is in us; For by this privation and denyall, will God draw us unto himselfe, make us like God, and teach all men wis∣dome in him, and not out of them∣selves. Therefore the knowledge of Christ in Men is quite contrary unto this; For hee hath knowne nothing, doth, or wills to know nothing, but onely God, this is his rejoycing, for this only cause doth hee learne sciences, or rather doth God in him; And to this with all his endeavoure and strength doth hee apply himselfe: that as in Adam hee was made something,
even so in Christ and with Christ he may be brought to nothing againe; and all his knowledge and sciences, even as it were foolishnes & deadly poyson, he may vo∣mit up againe, & esteem as nothing; that he may wipe out of the tables of his heart all human arrogancie, having action, knowledge and science: to the end that nothing may remaine there, but only that which God teacheth and by his owne finger writeth. Breefly, a true Christian is a certaine bare naked thing, who with Socrates knowes nothing but this, that he knowes nothing; In these blessed and unknowing fooles, God will know all things, if so it be, man know how to empty himselfe, and to cast away the basenes of his old ragges; But the fls for this onely cause doth learne that it may be something, or rather be all things, know, have, and doe all things; wheras the spiritual man learnes only for this cause, that befor God he maj be made nothing to himself▪ & all other creatures whatsoever, that thereby God may be all things in him: know, have, doe, love, and live in him; this is behoovefull to bee
knowne; this is the true use of all things, and for this only end ought we to labour to know any thing. But every fleshly minded man, who belongs to the Kingdome of Satan, and lyes captrivated under his power, thinkes farre otherwise; and defendeth quite contrary; and therefore is in the sight of God foolishnes, wickednes, sinne, and Sa∣tan; From whence it is that he esteemeth their wisdome to be foolishnes, their life to be death, and righteousnesse sinne, ac∣counting their love no better then ha∣tred. Fourthly, the naturall man hath many goods, wife, Children, life, riches, know∣ledge, wisdom, will, glory, honour, name, and all things as his owne proper, these he arrogates to himselfe; to these he ap∣plies his minde; these are pleasant, pro∣fitable, and deare unto him. But if they be taken from him, and God exact his owne, then the theefe appeares, neither will hee willingly send them againe: he turnes himselfe, and seeketh for all safegards and wayes of escape, and means whereby he may retaine them still, and
award God the proper owner of them, who now exacts them of him: the whole World lyes sick in this misery, and those things that are Gods, are abused by men. And what is common to all, or rather ac∣commodated from God, he labours as much as in him lyes to make it his owne, and whensoever hee is to restore it againe, he doth it very unwilling∣ly. But if it be so, that that which he hath stolen from God, is now no longer pro∣fitable or delitefull unto him, he then surrenders it of his owne accord. And if it so bee, God giveth it againe into his own bosome, and if it be Gods will, hee shall retaine it longer, yet will he not re∣taine it, if he be able to resist it, by com∣pulsion; if hee have it, it is with great resistance, so that before God he rather wilfull casts them away, then retaines them. So is it that the flesh, which hath all things out of God, offends in all; and be∣cause it apprehends al things out of God, it necessarily followes, that although it have all things, yet hath it nothing. For
what can it have who wanteth God, the essence of all things, and in whom all things subsist: Surely they can be no other then like Tantilus Sicicus, & Me∣deas. Again, what can he want who hath God, and in him all things, since that God is all in all. Hence it is, that often times those that seeme to have all things, have truely no∣thing, and those that have nothing, may truely be said to have all things. On the contrary, the new Man hath nothing but only God, wherein he can glory; neither doth he any way claime any thing to himselfe but God; As for that which God gives him, he useth it for Gods sake as his guift and reward, ready to render it every moment, as it shall please God to exact it; For he can willingly restore that which he did never claime as his own, but as God did give, or rather lend it unto him; so that he wil∣lingly permits God at his pleasure to as∣sume it from him. Breefly, he useth all things as the traveller doth his Inne, or a freind money, committed to his custody, ready every houre to restore it back.
This Paul tearmes so to have any thing as not to have it, or as though thou hadst it not: (which in the eyes of the World is accounted meere folly) that is that thou arrogate nothing unto thy selfe; offend in nothing willingly, forsake all things and with God (as a true wife with her husband have all things common) Wife, Children, Money, life, and all things else he loveth in God, and for God; and ther∣fore keeps them, loves them, hath them, and takes them as lent from God; ready to yeeld them to God againe, whensoever he requires them; all the guifts of God, as Wife, Children, and all other things he loveth only for the givers sake, & the giver above all his guifts; and although some things are contrary to his nature, as the Crosse, death, exyle, &c. yet hee lo∣veth all things alike, and this it is to have, know, love, and marie in the Lord. But the world and worldly minded men, are carried headlong unto the guifts of God, as the Sow unto the Dunghill; Never doe they any whitt respect the giver but the guift; with the which they committ adultery, challenging by right
unto themselves; and so long as it is ei∣ther pleasant or profitable unto them, so long they dearely esteeme it: and wil∣lingly will not permit God to have it againe; whatsoever is contrary unto them therin, that they unwillingly suffer, though it come by divine providence; unto them; for incontinently they looke about them which way they may pull their neckes out of the yoake: and ther∣fore whatsoever they undertake, doe, speake, &c. that they altogether abuse; and in the abuse it is altogether unfitt for any good: untill they cease to be that which they are, and being translated into Christ, become in him new creatures. Here it will availe nothing to patch up with God, for if thou stopp one hole, or fill up one crevist, an other will presently be made; therefore it is necessary that men be borne againe, and altogether for∣gett this Tree of Knowledge of Good & Evill. And breefly, be quit contrary to what he is or hath beene. He is flesh born of flesh unto death, and therefore it is behovefull, that he be made spirit borne of spirit unto life. Which before he bee
all things are uncleane unto him; as he is himselfe, although all things in them∣selves are very good; yet are they per∣verse & evill unto him, as all things seem blew to him that lookes upon them through a blew perspective: all things degenerats into the nature of the posses∣sor, and therefore all things by Adam are made vanity, although by themselves (as ever they have beene) they are good: For all foode is savory according to the pal∣let & temperature that receivs it: even so is every thing according as he that pos∣sesseth and hath it, is cleane to the cleane, uncleane to the uncleane; it cannot be o∣therwise but that all things be unjustly done, loved, prayed for, knowne, and re∣tained; which an unjust man doth love, pray for, know, and retaine, as the very words themselvs declare; For how can it be that a wicked man can doe any thing justly, a foolish man speak any thing wise∣ly, an unclean man doe any thing purely, a lying man speak any thing truely. Fiftly, the naturall man, as before hath been said, is Flesh, borne of the flesh, alto∣gether of an uncleane nature, perverse, &
adulterous, the servant of Satan sprong of the Seede of the Serpent, seduced and turned away by his word, and the tree of knowledge; & so infected with poyson, that betwixt Lucifer and Adam there is no difference: for as al true Christians are of Christ the sonnes of God, gods & God himselfe, so are all the Sonnes of the De∣vill, the Devill, being of the same kinred & ofspring, appertaining to the same Kingdome and covenant, as Princes and Subiects to the same, being al in the same estate of condemnation, neither is there any remedy to prevēt this jayle; but that a man put of the old man, so as he be no lon∣ger man, but a new offspring & creature born of God. Hence we may easily gather what is the naturall prudence, justice & knowledge of man, to witt, foolishnes, sin and enmity unto God; because that all flesh is an enimy unto God, freinds unto Satan, and altogether of the same witt, nature, wil, & birth, & as it were his flesh & blood; In so much as he is nothing but an enimy unto God; can perceive nothing that is divine; would be nothing but with out God, or rather his own God.
Attributing all that is good to himselfe, as Adam and Lucifer did, the Father of the flesh; these are the Fruits of the for∣bidden Tree. But the Christian is borne of God, is a spirit and life, altogether of divine na∣ture, and nothing else but the Jmage of God; or if you wil a visible and corpo∣ral God; who being made one with God, is of the same nature: rich in love, de∣sirous of the common profitt; attributing nothing to himselfe; like to God; free, strong, void of proprietie, ambition, and anger. Breefly, or in a word, whatsoever can be said or may be said of God, may in its kinde be said of the true Christian, since now it is not, he that lives but Christ lives in him: Not now he is any thing, but God is all things in him: that is, whatsoever he speakes, teacheth, hath, wills, &c. and although they unwillingly carry the old man about them, yet never doe they live unto him, but alwayes con∣trary, earnestly endevouring themselves against him, untill they have quit put him out.
Therefore to conclude this chapter, the true use of all things is knowne only to the sincere Christians, and the abuse to the naturall man: Not yet ju∣stified, living in himselfe: who can nei∣ther use, speake, teach, doe, love, know, have, or not have any thing truely; But with all hath a defiled, both conscience & minde. Hence it is that he is altogether unfitt for any good work, like a black Collier; and in all his actions like a stage player, foolish, blinde, dumb, deafe, abscene, and wicked. In a word, whatsoever evill man hath, or title can be invented, it's proper unto him, untill he returne from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evill; unto the Tree of Life, and eating thereof, and he be delivered from the Kingdome of Darknesse into the King∣dome of Light: Otherwise the flesh doth alwayes retaine its proper nature, and hath in all things a false and ungod∣ly cause and end, for which it doth every thing that it doth. In a word, he alto∣gether aimes at himselfe, yea under a pretence of God; although he thinke
himselfe to know, love, and desire God only for God, without any respect had to himselfe. No man hath yet truely learned to know himselfe, the flesh being so cunning and craftie to excuse it selfe, no man knowes whether or no hee sinnes in all his workes, so unsearchable is the craftines of the heart; yea no man truely understands, that in all his works, as in his loving, doing, speaking, know∣ing, praying, giving, willing, having, possessing, &c. he mortally sinnes, untill he be redeemed and pulled out of the dregs of Adam, & translated into Christ, he become a new Creature; Of which things reade Paul & Bochus, de consola∣latione Philosophiae, the third Booke and the tenth Proofe: How we must live unto God, and so be made blessed in him.
CHAP. IV. Hovv Man being of God could sinne; and what it was that moved him to sinne. ADAM was not taken out of God, or made of a Spirit, but of nothing of the Earth; if he had been taken out of God, he could never have fallen by sinne; as those that are borne of God cannot sinne, Jo. 3. but God created him of nothing, and then left him to himselfe and his owne arbi∣trament whether he could returne to his owne nothing againe, or according to the order of his kinde be drawen unto God. Sinne in Man and in the Devill is nothing else but that they doe avert themselves from the condition of their creation, and that which they are unto their vanity and nothing againe; the essence of Man and Satan is very good, put this is their nature acquired in their fall, that they strive to be not that which they are, to wit, nothing, but that which hey are not, & so doe turn themselv; frō
As if it so were, that that nothing of theirs were something in it selfe. This is sinne, this is that devill in all our hearts, which stirreth up all sinne in us: For as soone as Adam by the instinct of the Serpent fell away from God, and returned unto his nothing again, he was indeed made nothing: which thing Satā, who before had fallen into his nothing, did spinne and weave into the heart of Adam, by the externall obiect of the tree; and he made the Fruit of the Tree so pleasant to behould, that no sooner they beheld it, but they were inflamed with a desire to eate of that Fruit; For which cause it is written (Ier. 9.) that death en∣ters in by the windowes, that is by the sight of the eyes. And this moved the Schoolemen to define sinne to be nothing, that is, no Creature of God: Neither that death which it produced: both which came into the world by the malice of Satan; & for the same cause sinne brought man back againe into his first nothing; where∣fore the Devill and Adam are run out of the sight of God; He not acknowledging
them for his owne: neither having any commerce or societie with them: So long as they doe not acknowledge their vanity; therfore since man by sin is made nothing before God; and yet will not ac∣knowledge himselfe to be nothing, but even then esteeme himselfe to be some∣thing, it is necessary that so long he be expelled out of the presence of God, till he be made nothing in his owne heart: then doth God love his hand, and creates him againe of nothing: For God knows not how to create any thing of somthing, but of nothing, for that is his nature: He that yet is not nothing, hee cannot hope that he shall be something; wherfore be∣have thy selfe to Godward quietly, like a livelesse trunke, as thou didst in thy creation: Suffer God to doe; Fast, Feast, and Rest, and doe thou nothing at all; least it happen that thou be taken with a desire of the forbidden tree, or any other thing; or esteeme thy selfe to be some∣thing according as the Law commands, yet doth it not cease to curse and con∣demne us, untill it hath brought us unto that spirituall Sabbath; that so forsaken
in our selves, we doe no more worke to our new birth then wee did to our firs creation, but only suffer; So that our actions are only to doe nothing, and bee like a stone or trunke; For this desire to be somthing is alwayes that which brings to nothing. CHAPTER V. Wherfore the Tree of the Knovv∣ledge of good & evill was created, then for∣bidden to Adam, and now to us, since God knew that both he & we should eat death from the same, and what is that tree. Wherefore was Adam and Eve for∣bidden this Tree, seeing to know Evil is not Evill, but to doe Evill. If Adam had not knowne good in himselfe, God had beene alone good in him, and he had not arrogated any thing to himselfe, but had beene as free from pride therein, as a
bird is in her song, a horse in his strength, a Cow in her milke, and a Tree in its fruit; but assoone as he knew good, and considered it what it was; as a bewtifull woman doth her bewtie, he arrogated it to himselfe, and therein became a theefe unto God. This God foreknew, and therefore was unwilling that Adam should know good, that so he might walke in his inno∣cencie, and be ignorant both of Good and Evill: For this cause God said unto him, thou shalt not eate of it, as if he had said beware, least thou thy selfe desire to know what is Good or Evill; but suffer me to be all things, and be thou quiet in all things, that that good which I am, and desire to worke alone, I may worke it in thee, to my owne praise in thee, according as I doe it in the rest of the Creatures; And thus hee was forbidden to know Evill, for God knew, that assoone as Adam had smelt what Evill was, it being of its owne nature, like to him nothing, would be pleasing to him, and so it would come to passe that he would desire and affect the same.
Besides this another evill hath rises from hence, that that evill which man according to his nature delighted to doe he denyeth that he hath done it. Thus pulling his owne necke out of the yoake▪ he accuseth the Serpent that it was done by it. Againe, the good which God doth in him, and which is not his owne, he falsly contendeth that he hath done it himselfe being deceived with a presumptious opinion of his owne power and strength▪ this being the perverse estate and condi∣tion into which Adam did fall willingly; therfore after that Adam was fallen into this perverse wisdome, by eating of the forbidden Fruit, and his own arrogancie, he was so depraved, that whatsoever hee thinkes, speakes, or doth, is displeasing unto God; and we all in him have eaten death, and fallen into the same estate and condition; but after we are raised from death, and redeemed from it againe, by means of Christ, there is the same reason that the Tree of knowledge of Good & Evill, should be also forbidden us, least afterward wee fall into the same estate
againe: wherefore the next way of com∣ming unto God is this: that now Adam with all his Children abstaine from this tree, that is, deny it, vomitt up the For∣bidden Fruit, and repent himselfe of his wit, as if it were foolishnes. But when we eate of the Forbidden Fruit or Tree, God forgives us, but upon this condition, that for ever afterward we fast, and alwayes repent our selves of our first eating. This tree is planted in every one of our hearts, & is nothing else but our own witt, reason, flesh, knowledge, and will, to which as long as we adhere, and are not made foolish in our selves, and as little Children, we can have no pardon from God; wherefore we must either abstaine from this wisdome, and become little Children againe, or else want God; and that prohibition of God, eate not of the tree: if thou doe thou shalt dye; is the same with that saying of Christ, except ye renounce your selves, and hate your owne life, ye cannot enter into the King∣dome of God; For what was spoken unto Adam, the same also was said unto
us; neither is our estate to be amended any other wayes then that of Adams; the hearts of all are like to a vessel which smels of that matter and meate which Adam did first power into it. Therefore as Adam declined from God and inclined towards himselfe, and made himselfe as it were a wise deaster, and admired himselfe like a little God, the same is also fresh in every carnall heart. Now therfor, we must labour as it were to goe backward, and that inbred witt of Adams is to be rejected & esteemed of us no otherwise then foolishnes. Here many things are to be unlearned, and this we are to learne & know, that all our conceit & opinion of wit is foo∣lishnes, and that which seperates us from God, and hinders us so that we cannot attaine the true wisdome indeed; and we must labour to be freed from the bond∣age of our selves. And to this worke we should all apply our selves; to wit, quietly to rest our selves, not in knowledge, but in God known; and so affect knowledge only as an Index, which only shews and
paints out God unto us, and is of God; That is the Fruit of the Tree of Life, and not of the Tree of Knowledge of Good & Evil; to wit, that we permit God to be, know, love, & have all things in us, so that he speake, worke, know, and love in us nothing but himselfe, when, where, and wherefore he will. Julian th' Apostate ignorant of this secret, against whom Civill writes, was greatly offended at this: that God would have man to know neither good nor evil, or rather that he would have Man to have, teach, be; and will nothing at al, &c. He (I say) was offended at this. But if the matter be brought unto the light of truth, we shall finde that all this happened because of us: even as a Father forbids and detaines a Sword from his Son, knowing that if he had it, he would hurt himselfe upon it, or otherwise abuse it; In the same manner God denyed unto Adam, and also unto us, that Tree of Knowledge, for our profit and good; Neither did hee envy us therein, but only did it to prevent the future evill, into which he foresaw we should fall;
For he knew that assoone as Adam, like God should know Good and Evill, hee would challenge the same to himselfe, & desire to be his owne God; otherwise God had not cared though Adam had eaten of that tree for satiety. For assoone as Adam had eaten of it, there followed thereupon selfelove, and arrogating all things to himselfe, praise, and all other vices. So God in all his commandements hath respect not so much to himselfe as to us and our salvation, which not he but we enjoy: as Iob himselfe doth mani∣festly confesse, that God is neither hurt by our sinns, nor profited by our righte∣ousnesse, but still remaineth an eternall, perfect, and impassible God, to whom nothing can be added or any thing de∣tracted; though we try, yet can we not make a Heaven, neither put the Sunne out of them; nor dry up a Fountaine; but all these things remaine in the same estate and condition wherein God hath placed them: He that assumes to throw a stone against Heaven, it will fall upon his owne head,
Therefore we can make God neither richer nor poorer, greater nor lesser, no he is no way advantaged by us, though we all adhere unto him; only he hath a care on us to helpe us; we never deserve to be what we are, therefore we ought to attribute the cause of all our good to him only, and give him the glory: he hath an open hand more ready to give then we are to receive; rich to all those that call upon him; Neither doth he desire any thing at our hands but only this: that we quietly receive of him that which he is willingly pleased to give, for he that with quietnes doth not receive, can have no hpe that he shall receive; all our witt we ought only to imploy to this end, to the denying of our selves. This should make us nothing, children, Fooles, and prostrate low at the feete of God. And to the effecting of this denying of our selves, all our knowledge ought to be directed; but that knowledge only which proceeds from God, can effect it; it can make a man nothing, a Child, a Foole, and casts him downe at the feete
of God; But that knowledge that puffs up a Man, making him great and wise in his owne conceit, such being the wisdom of the World, comes not from God, but is rather the Serpents Seed & forbidden fruit. Now every one that eateth of the for∣bidden Tree, for no other cause eateth hee thereof, but only that he may obtaine a great name, honour, titles, and glory, that he may have preheminence to bee coun∣ted the light of the World. And by this meanes he eateth death in stead of life. This the holy Scriptures testify unto us, for whereas we ought to know and learne nothing, every man learnes to know and be wise in all things. Now here some man might enquire, why therefore did God create the Tree, if he foreknew that both Adam and wee would eate death thereof, and not rather hinder our sinne? I answer, that God at the first made us of earth, and assuredly did know that we would not constantly abide in the estate of our creation, and yet he suffred Adam to take his course, & make tryall of mise∣ry; that forced through sorrow & death
he might hast to God again; for so it was to be that God would create him againe out of sorrow, and make him againe a new, not as before of nothing, but with grace of himselfe; this God foresaw from all eternity, and therefore suffred his fal, and gave way that man should first tast of the bitternes of death, before that he would give him the sweetenesse of eter∣nall life, by which he might know the better what he hath in God, and what that life is compared with death, which before he tasted. Besides it was meete that God suffered the freedome of sinne, rather then re∣strained it, as well for many other causes as more speciall for this, that otherwise it had beene coaction and force, and not libertie, and also the goodnesse of God & his mercie, having no other obiect, could never have been manifested in his Crea∣ture: Therfore it behoved that things should come thus to passe by the provi∣dence of God, and yeeld without necessi∣ty or any fault in God; Read Brentius lib. 4. & Ambros. in Rom. 9.
CHAP. VI. Of the 2 kinds of knovvledge, and Will, and how the one all∣wayes resists the other. THere is nothing under the Sunne but it may be said to be twofould, that is Just and wicked, Good and Evill. Now just, and also that which is evill and wic∣ked, may in like manner be said to the twofould, the one according to the judg∣ment of God, and the other according to the estimation and opinion of men. And now seeing God is a spirit, and Men flesh, contrary to the spirit, it fol∣lowes, that all their judgements, wills, knowledges, and actions, be contrary and repugnant one to the other. Whence it is, what man calleth good, right, sweete, light, life, knowledge, wisdome, ju∣stice, &c. God esteemes that to be evill, wicked, bitter, darknes, death, foolishnes, and sinne, according as the Scriptures testify of God and of the World. Therefore there is nothing in the
world but it may be called good or evil, according as the judgement of men are disposed, to whom it is proposed. What God is unto the world, the same is the Devill unto God; and so on the contrary; So that nothing can be called Evill, but all things are in their order right and good, and evill and wicked, according as the Touchstone is, by which they are examined. If I say, that the Word of God is false, foolishnes and Heresie, the same is true in the judgement and opinion of the world; and thus all things are twofould, either good or evill; & good is twofould, as also evill: the one truely good or evill in the sight of God, the other appa∣rantly good or evill in the sight of Men or their opinion; so that there is a two-fould fasting, praying, willing, &c. to witt, one that is really good in the sight of God, so as is God himselfe, the author and teacher of all goodnesse; the other in the sight of the World good, but in truth evill and wicked; for what seems holy in the opinion of Men, is prophane in the sight of God.
So there is a twofould knowledge and witt, the one divine of the Tree of Life, the other humane of the Tree of Know∣ledge of Good and Evill. Humane wis∣dome is a Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, and the roote thereof is the Seede of the Serpent, and so is mortall. These are all the arts which Naturall Men have found out, if no: without God, yet surely not in God. Breefly, all witt and arts, which God himselfe doth not plant in the hearts of Men, by the power of his spirit and Word, but acquired and gotten out∣wardly by the industry and helpe of men are death it selfe, or rather a deaster; if man doe any manner of way, trust or hope in them, for they doe make man no more acceptable to God, or any way more righteous before him, then doe his meate, drinke, or cloathes, for all these things are out of man; and a certaine superstition and worshipping of a false God, if thou restest thy selfe in them; thou mayst seem to thy selfe to be nearer unto God, because thou knowes and un∣derstands many things, being more
wise and accute then some simple good man, who cares only to know God; But in very truth, thou art no better then a foole, who art ignorant of these; For by how much thou art wiser then others hereby, by so much thou art worse; For since it is so, that all the knowledge of this World, and all the righteousnesse of the flesh is Devilish, according as Sainct James giveth this and other more oppro∣brious names unto it. It followes, that by how much a man offends and growes higher, and increa∣seth in this witt, by so much is hee the worse and more Devilish, so that a good and simple man, who cares and desires to know nothing but God, if he be com∣pared with him in respect of him, hee may seeme to be a Saint or God, and one of those is worth a thousand of others, as holy Scriptures doe testify, one right∣ous man is more worth then a thousand wicked men. The other wisdome, which in the eyes of the world is foolishnes, is that deny∣ing wisdome, the fruit of the Tree of Life, which whosoever hath, he shall never die.
This springeth up in man out of the seed of the Woman, and is given and taught of God alone, being in its owne nature, ful of love, working divine solace and is called in the holy Scriptures the Knowledge of God; because it knoweth nor acknowledgeth nothing but God; This teacheth and professeth only God in the hearts of his servants; it arrogateth nothing to it self, but as it meerly know∣eth God; So it renders all it receives, to him againe; This renewes man, justifies him, enlives him, and makes him like unto God, but it is to be found in no mans heart, but only in his who hath gi∣ven a farewell to all Earthly pleasures, arts, will, and witt, because that since it is so that these two knowledges are so con∣trary one to another, as fire is to water, it cannot be that they should live toge∣ther in one heart, but the one will expell the other, as the day the night, and the night the day; wherfore all fleshly know∣ledge, will, and witt, must be quite un∣learned, and we must become little Chil∣dren and Fooles againe, according as the holy Scriptures testify unto us, if we
would have the true knowledge & wis∣dome of God to dwell in our hearts; For God requires a free and empty soule, which he would fill with his knowledge and goodnesse, and imbrace as a pure & unspotted spouse, possessed with no other love but his: He would be the only Fa∣ther of the Family, and cannot endure Satan in his Kingdome to be neare unto him, who is altogether light and void of all darknesse. Now this wisdome being humane, and a Fruit of the forbidden Tree, so is it fleshly puffing up the possessor of it, so as it makes him provide selfe-loving, de∣sirous of his owne profitt, bould and wicked. In a word, it makes a man a Lucifer, and so contrary and abominable to God, that he cannot or will not flow into his soule. And indeed nothing so much hurts man as his owne knowledge, witt, and righteousnes, &c. which makes the word of the everliving God to appeare foo∣lishnes, and God himselfe, to seeme Sa∣tan unto him.
Therefore as it hath already beene said of witt and knowledge, the same may be said of the will of God and man. The one cannot endure the other; No more then the spirit can endure the flsh, life death, fire water; Therefore the wisdome of God aymes at the utter destruction of Adams life, nature, will, and wisdome, labouring to plucke us from the duggs of humane wit, by which we are nourished. We must therefore learne to forgett, and unlearne whatsoever Adam knew, or doth know, wils, loves, &c. and all things must be made a new in Christ, this is the wisdome of God. Now let us see how farre we are from this, if a man have but onely a thought to learne his way presently, he thinkes it is well with him, and without any re∣pentance he doth sweetly delite himselfe in his owne knowledge, art, and will, and all men will be good Christians, and if God will, will compose whole bookes and volumes of Christ, which they nei∣ther doe nor have knowne; and by this meanes they doe so wearily imploy and
vex their minds through Satans motion, with so many questions, arts, and idle disputations, that scarcely can they have so much time as to thinke of the know∣ledge of God; Whereas the true know∣ledge of God is not learned by prying into, running over, reading, or hearing a company of doubtfull questions; as the 1. Chapt. of the German Theologie & Taulerus in many places elegantly doth teach; but by patient and obedient remai∣ning, hearkening and attending to that which God doth work in us; For he that would be divinely wise, and learne the knowledge of God, its needfull that hee heare and learn the same from God him∣selfe, he having detained it to himselfe, so that it can by no meanes be taught of man; For as humane arts and sciences proceede from men, and is their worke; so divine science is from God, and is the worke of his onely word. For as Iohn Stapitius saith in a little booke of the love of God: that those things that cannot be knowne but by sence and experience, neither can they be taught by, or learned from others. As for Example:
No man can teach another to see, heare, tast, and touch; in like manner, and much lesse can any man teach another, to beleeve, love, hope, repent, so that divine truth and Theologie may rather be said to be experience then Arts: no man can learne of himself the knowledge of God, love of God, Faith, and such like, because the naturall man cannot perceive things divine; nay the Letter of the Scriptures is not able to doe this: it doth not begett in man any new nature, it but shewes un∣to him what a one he ought to be, and what he ought to doe; But yet he is, not such, neither can they make him such, but rather kill him and slay him by shew∣ing unto him his want and misery. Therefore is the position true, that faith & love cannot be conceived in the heart of man by the Letter of the word; Otherwise it would be that none should be more faithfull then the Learned; and yet for the most part none are more per∣verse. The letter of the word indeed proposeth faith unto us, but cannot write it in our hearts, that being the worke of the holy
Ghost. Therefore that of Saint Iohn is alwayes true: as the anoynting teacheth you; As also this, he that hath heard and learned of the Father commeth unto me; For faith and love commeth into no mans heart but his who is indued with the Holy Ghost. From whose inhabiting in our hearts, the light of faith and the knowledge of God deduce their origi∣nall; yea love it selfe is not begott or infused in us, but by the holy Ghost and an affect of the love of God towards us. Wherefore the conclusion is this: that whom the Holy Ghost doth not comfort, teach and direct, he cannot be comforted, taught, and directed to the obtaining of Life. Now all men will say and confesse, that the world is darknesse, mans wis∣dome is foolishnes: yet if so be you will indulge nothing unto him, but will tax his will, witt, and designes, and say they are all foolishnes and darknesse, there is no man will confesse it of himselfe, or that it is earthly, but every man wil eger∣ly and earnestly contend, that his witt is heavenly and divine, especially if it be
any way exercised about Religion, when in very deed it is nothing else but the wisdome of the flesh; Yea even that use of the holy Scriptures, which is in the world, which are wrested and turned as every man likes to either hand; neither can these bare words, these words of God, containing in them the knowledge of God, which are common in every mans mouth, profitt him any whitt: these must be tryed according to the will of God, and accordingly used. Otherwise these very words will become a very snare of Satan, and in stead of the word of God the word of Satan to him. It is not to say how well the wisdome of the flesh knowes how to change it selfe into each shape, and to flatter it selfe with a forme of the word of God; what cannot men pretend and undertake, to say in the name of God: pretending indeed no∣thing lesse then the meere honour, praise and righteousnesse of God.
CHAP. VII. The Testimony of the Scripture, how we ought to evacuate the Seed of the Serpent his counsell & word, and so vomitt up the Fruit of the forbidden Tree, and purge the same away as deadly poy∣son by the Fruit of the Tree of Life. THis we oftentimes reade, that our wisdome is foolishnes with God. Which forme of speech we steale from Paul, & bable of it, when indeed we neither know our own nor Pauls meaning touch∣ing it. No man remembers to re∣nounce & give a farewel to his own wis∣dome. This forsooth every man thinks is spoken of the wisdome of Turkes and infidels; As for his own wisdome, his rea∣son being corrupted and houlding some tenents, gathered from the holy Scrip∣tures (though he miserably wrest them to his own turn) yet he thinks his wisdom to be the wisdome of God, and divine.
This every man witnesseth in his own writings, in which for the most part hee goes on securely, without any doubting upon the seeming approbation of the Scriptures, to his tenents and opinions; Not considering that this is the very presumption of the Turkes and infidels, with all Sects of false Christians, whom I have knowne every one hath, or would seeme to have the Word of God to be the foundation of their tenets, as the Turkes and Jewes thinke at this day, their faith is grounded upon the Word of God. Hence it comes to passe that every man is deceived in himselfe, and shutt up to himselfe, from the knowledge of himselfe. This being it which God fore∣saw, when he said that the serpent should bite the heele of the woman, that is se∣cretly and craftily lay snares, and deceit∣full ginns in the hearts of men. Therefore know whatsoever naturall man, though wise man in the judgement of the World, yea Adam with all his of∣spring the whole nature of men unrege∣nerate knowes, speakes, doth, thinkes,
lives, &c. all this is human, the wisdome of reason, and the counsell of the flesh, & the knowledge of that deadly and for∣bidden Tree: only that rare Phenix, which the Scriptures call the new man, or the regenerate that hath the know∣ledge and wisdome of God, being taught it from above; All other things are the inventions of men, the wisdome of the Serpent and Fruit of the forbidden Tree. Now we have said before that the wisdome of man must be forgotten, and we must learne to unlearne it: For as the flesh, even so the wit of the flesh, and the righteousnesse thereof is nothing but foolishnes and wickednesse in the sight of God. And on the contrarie, the wisdom of God, and his righteousnesse, is foolish∣nes and wickednesse in the sight of the world and to the flesh. So that all arts and sciences, being only fleshly, are alto∣gether vanity, filthines, and a Fruit of the forbidden Tree, from the which all men eate death. It is no purpose for a man in word to deny his owne witt, and yet in his heart to extoll the same as the wisdome
of God; Or, secretly to be elevated there∣from, these are but the findings out of the deceived heart of man; outwardly sugred over by Satan with faire words; And whosoever rests and depends upon these faire pretences, hee builds upon hell, which will all damne. For as meate, cloathes, time, place, person, and such like doe make men neither lesse or more ac∣ceptable to God; So all humane arts and sciences doe not make the possessour thereof one jot the better in the sight of God, if he looke at them, and (as Adam did) arrogate them to himselfe. Therefore the most learned and wise of this world are in this respect in no better a condition then the foolish Idiot that is. It is necessary therefore that those wise men goe out of themselves, and learne to become fooles, by going out of their witt, will, knowledge, &c. if they desire to be indued with divine knowledg from above: Therefore even as the naturall man voluntarily for his owne bellies sake doth torture himselfe day and night, in
the finding out of so many covetous, cu∣rious, and with God unprofitable arts; Even so it is necessary that with the same paine and labour he learne to forgett and forgoe the same, and become a Childe and Foole againe; For it is a greater difficulty, and more labour by many de∣grees to unlearne his fleshly wisdome, and forsake that good he hath gott al∣ready, then from the beginning to learne it for his profitt. In so much that this is true, who once hath played the Asse, will scarcely learne to leave those doultish tricks. O how difficult is it for them to be∣come Fooles, who have grounded them∣selves in a presumption of their owne witt. And yet it is necessary that this they must bee, or otherwise they shall bee nothing lesse then that which they desire to bee. Therefore so requisite is this denyall, hatred & forgetfulnesse of himselfe, that without it no man can be the disciple of Christ; that is, no man can be indued with divine wisdome, unlesse in his affections
he hath excluded, and given a farewell & adewe to his owne. Wherefore what wonder is it if the worldly Man, who is busied about the things of this life, be altogether igno∣rant of the knowledge of God; For since he is not obedient to that wisdome that is sprituall, neither can perceive any di∣vine thing, nor receive the spirit of truth; nor for the wisdome of God ex∣change his owne; For he neither cares to nourish that wisdome in his heart, nei∣ther desires to learne it, and because hee desires it not, he cannot learne it. And now it is requisite, that as Sainct Paul sayes, if any man will be wise, with God he must be a foole in the World, that thereby he may become truely wise: That is; he must cease to thinke, as the world doth labour to gett a new minde, and deliver over his sences & thoughts to be renewd by God. The cause of which Paul immediate∣ly annexeth to the same: For the wisdome of the World (saith he) is foolishnes to God.
And in his Epistle to the Romans hee calleth it death and enmity to God. And the same Paul bids adew to all his owne witt which he had learned at the feete of Gamaliell, above all his equals and ac∣counts, all his owne righteousnes and knowledge as dung and drosse, in respect of the excellencie of the knowledge of Christ. And elsewhere he glories in this that he had learned to unlearne and forget all things, and now desired to know nothing but Christ & him crucified. In the same manner all the Apostles become little Children again. Besides, Nichodemus, and all other whosoever, (as Christ had said unto them) unlesse they be changed, and become as little Children, they cannot see the King∣dome of God. And a little after, Christ saith, that the Kingdome of God is of such little Chil∣dren. This is the reason why the Scriptures admonish us so often to beware of our owne witt, least we doe any thing that seemes good in our owne eyes; As also
that we resist our owne wils, neither that we suffer our selvs to be led, and guided by our owne affections and desires; and also those that trust in their owne hearts & obey their own cogitations, are foolish and wicked, also that we seeme not wise in our owne conceits, nor magnify our selves but feare, and in feare and trem∣bling worke out our owne salvation. And lastly, that we trust not, nor leane not to our owne witt; For what is or can be more wicked then what flesh and blood hath found out. Truely the flesh cannot of its owne nature seeke God, and have him in esti∣mation, unlesse it renounce it selfe, and hate its owne life and soule; that is all its owne workes; though it gloze them over with a pretence of the word, honour and glory of God; for he cannot be beleeved, loved, prayed unto, or found but only in God. Therefore all the endeavour, study, art, & diligence of is altogether void of God, and want his grace and spirit. For the word of God requires an humble, submissive trembling, and abiected mind;
and a soule poore in spirit, & free from the bondag of the creatures; & like to tender wax or clay, plyable in the finger of God to receive the figure and stamp of his image imprinted upon it. To these Fooles and Children, such as feare God, and are seperated from the Dugges of the World, doth he open his secrets, and teach his divine wisdome & knowledg; if there be any man that fears God, to him the Lord will shew the way that he may choose, and he walke in the truth, and his posterity shall inhabit the Land: He sayes not to the Learned, and to the wise of the World; as also in an other place; the Lord reveales his secrets to the righteous. For this cause Christ the Sonne of God gives thankes to his Father, that he had hidden his secrets from the prudent and wise of the World, and had revealed unto Children and Babes; That as wee have already spo∣ken out of the mouths of sucking Babes; Such as were Moyses, Ieremias, Amos, and the Apostles, &c. hee might speake his praise, and extoll his Kingdome and Glory.
Againe, the rich & proud he sends away emptie, and filleth only the hungrie with good things. Now, no Money-master nor rich cove∣tous Churle is more swollen up with the vaine confidence of his riches; nor any woman more proud of her bewtie, then these wise men pride and boast themselvs of their wisdome and knowledge; per∣swading themselvs that this is the divine wisdome and riches of the soule, which neither theevs can steale, nor rust canker it, nor moath corrupt it, when notwith∣standing it is nothing but meere death, foolishnes, and enmity against God, and in a word the knowledg of the forbidden Tree. Therefore the holy Scriptures speake expresly of the wise of the world, these righteous men, famous for their arts, priding themselves in their owne hearts, who are arrogant and proud, and are in∣dued with nothing lesse then the spirit of God, who abides onely in simple Doves. By this it appeares that no kinde of men are farther from the Kingdome of
God, and doe lesse square and agree with his word, and more disagree from his will, then those who leane and trust to their owne wisdome, knowledge, reason, and will. Christ in the holy Scriptures speaketh not so much against Publicans and com∣mon sinners as these, who being puft up with a conceit of their owne righteous∣nes, reflect upon themselves with a selfe pleasingnes; with these can Christ least accord, & unto them doth so often threa∣ten woes in the Scripture, and sayes that adulterers and Publicans shall enter be∣fore them into the Kingdome of Hea∣ven. These are those wicked men against whom David so fervently and often prayes, and of whom Christ hath so little hope, and unto whom he with his A∣postles and Steuen give so cutting lan∣guage; who being men of a wicked mind, would seeme nothing lesse; But those things which are written concerning wicked men, they ignorantly interpret of others, these are such whom the whole world esteeme and accounts to be the
shining lights thereof; Such were Ni∣chodemus and Paul before his conversion; these are those who in David, Moyses, Christs, and all other times of the church have beene the righteous Scribes & Pha∣rises with the people; who having a shew of piety, have so lived, as that they were esteemed Patrons and Examples for others to imitate; These righteous men of the world, the Scriptures call wicked; who want nothing but onely this that they have wicked minds, void of Faith and grace; yet they so cloake their wic∣kednesse with a forme of godlines, that they seeme nothing lesse. Neither thinke we that the times of Christ and David were onely pestered with these kinde of people; But we may rather conceive, that if those goulden dayes of theirs were full of such, these Iron ages of ours are much more abun∣dant. All times and ages have had their Dissemblers, Pharises and Scribes, these our last ages since are the worst, for seldome comes best things last; For the
world as it growes more aged, so it growes more wicked, as both the Scrip∣ture and experience doe testify. Wherefore it is behovefull that every man endeavour that hee be not of the number of those men, who wresting the word of the Scriptures apply and inter∣pret them on others, as most men doe; but in them behould himselfe as in a glasse, if he desire to see a wicked man, and one that is a capitall enimy against God; And let him but question with his owne conscience, it is as good as ten thousand witnesses, and then hee shall easily knowe what a one hee is. For this cause the Scriptures are so fyerie against these Godly Wise Men of the World; Yea denying all good to them, God in his just judgement striking them with blindnesse; So that they erre in their owne way, hiding himselfe and his word from their under∣standing. Besides, the Scriptures doe brand them with a thousand infamous names;
Calling them Wolvs, a generation of vi∣pers, Beares, Bulls, Sonnes of Beliall, painted Sepulchres, who are glorious in shew in the sight of men, and set forth themselves as righteous before men by their sage manners, modest habits, and graue gestures, when in the sight of God they have their hearts full of nothing but filthines and sinne. Of whom Christ saith, that unlesse we be more righteous then they, and exceede them, we shall never enter into the Kingdome of God. Neverthelesse they would not seeme to be what they are indeed, but cover them∣selves with a shew of Sanctity. Where∣fore it pleaseth the spirit of God to checke and rebuke them to the discoue∣ring of their secret houlds, and vizards of their faces; But he who accuseth him∣selfe, and denyeth himselfe before God, and in his presence, shall obtaine pardon, as the Scriptures testify; which repre∣hend those carnall spirituall spirits, or men, who place their state with God, and will be ignorant of nothing, and they are admonished by God in Solomons Pro∣verbs, that they would desist from this
their arrogancie; Otherwise they shall be so oppressed with the glorie and Majesty of God, that they shall not be able to en∣dure and stand; But those who humbly submitt themselves, and creepe unto God, and willingly know nothing, nor are nothing but what God knowes and is in them, they in not seeking finde that which the other seeking with great auxiety of minde shall never obtaine; For all things are theirs, and they know what God is, hath or knowes, because they in God and God in them inhabits and dwels: Hence it is that Paul saith, the spiri∣tuall man searcheth all things, yea the secret things of God; which is denyed to the foolish flesh, according as we may reade in the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, for in counsell of the wicked there is no health, no word of God, knowledge, or love. To the same purpose is that saying of Solomon, God made man at the first upright, but he found out to himselfe many inventions, many difficults, many labours, with which he doth weary and
vex himselfe; God that is good, simple, & just, commandeth him that he should know nothing but him, and follow and be obedient to him as all the rest of the Creatures; He should (I say) be so obe∣dient to him, as to doe, know, will, love, omit, and speake nothing but onely what God doth know, will, love, omitt, and speake in him, by which as in all other Creaturs so in the heart of man he might enioy a plenary Kingdome, and ruling and governing him according to his own will, neither should man have any title, claime, power, or priviledge over him∣selfe. Satan suggestion it was that man found out so many ambushes & curious questions, with frivilous difficulties, by which he is degenerated from that sim∣plicity wherein God created him, and subordinated him, being transported with an ambitious desire, to become a Lord & God to himself; and so remained in the power of his owne will; but how just this is, let man that hath reason judge, that the clay should desire to know or be any thing contrary or besides that
which the maker thereof would have it, know, or be; such similitudes doth not yet fully expresse the matter. Therefore it happens deservedly unto us, that our wisdome, knowledge, and vvill, should bring upon us all punish∣ment due unto sinne, and also make us utterly disquieted, bringing unto us no∣thing but torture and vexation, since be∣sides and contrary to the will of God we have deserved them. Hence it necessarily followeth, that sinne is the punishment of it selfe, and Fooles are destroyed by their owne wis∣dome and knowledge. This is that which Solomon expe∣rimently complaines off, when he sayes: where there is much knowledge, there is much vexation; And he that increaseth learning sorrowes. And these wise men are Fooles, for whosoever endeavoureth to be wise above measure, this man shall endure greiffes and sorrowes; and by how much they become more wise, by so much they are more disquieted: For God will have us to finde rest in him onely.
Neither must we rise, come, goe, or doe any thing before him; For whosoever commeth before him is a theefe, and whosoever speaketh or doth any thing of his owne accord, without him, is a Devill. Therefore it is that all men are de∣luded, deceived, and fooled by their own witt; yea even because they professe themselves to be wise, therefore they are foolish. And as God did the Caldean, Philo∣sophers, and wise men, so he suffers those to be seduced by their owne knowledge, and to be wearied with their owne in∣ventions, actions, and arts. Hence it is that Christ would not have his disciples desire to be esteemed some bodies, or couett that men should call them Masters, Lords, Doctors, or Rab∣bins, but onely Ministers, Brethren, and witnesses of him, Ioh. 15. Ye are my witnesses.
CHAP. VIII. Of the great Deaster of humane wisdome and knowledge; and how all men doe kisse their owne hand, and all the World adores it selfe, and its owne worke; that is, inventions, actions, and deliberations of Fleshly reason and wis∣dome. What other thing is the worshipping of Images, Superstition, and the Institu∣tions of men, then the reason, witt, art, invention, and prudence of man. Therfore the worshipping of Deasters is nothing but the adoring of the images of God, not according to his Word as he doth teach, figure and forme it to us, but according to our own opinion and selfe conceit. Againe, what other thing is sinne then our owne will, witt, and counsell, sowne unto us with the Seeds of the Serpent. Consider the institutions, practice, and Life of all Mankind, when and how you will, you shall finde it nothing else
then humane wisdome; here every man would be his owne God, guide, governe, teach move, revenge, defend, excuse, and enrich himselfe; and every man sets his owne braine, will, and reason in the place of his God, so that sinne & the fall of Adam is nothing else but the humane affectation of the art, reason, & know∣ledge of the flesh; and therfore deserved∣ly is tearmed foolishnesse and enmity, deadly and Devilish. All men ought with Christ to become nothing, and with a continuall decrease & depression of soule, become asses, fools & children; but now it is quite contrary: every man labours that he may be wise, great, illustrious and mightie; so many arts and sciences are learned of men, that they may be great, famous, and excellent in the eyes of the world; and may obtaine titles of honour, & names of respect. Hence it is that yong men are inflamed with a desire of glory, & labour not only to be famous in Schooles, but to be admi∣red in the pulpitt also; and for that end they seeke out learned Tutors, who may make them expert, quick, and acute in all
kind of Literall deceits and exercises of arts. By which it is as cleare as the Sunne that the whole world is contrary and en∣mity to God. Here every man kissing his owne hand and adoring his owne witt, esteeming it to be his light & his God; Even it that was the only sinne of Adam; and it from whence other sinnes came & have their originall, as Job confesseth; (Job. 33. 31.) For to admire & worship himselfe, and to be led by his own will; In a word, to stand on his own bottom, & to desire to be something of himselfe without God, is that one mortall sinne, which is the fountaine of al other; for the lusts of the flesh, and the witt thereof is very dead. And man like a Logg, is no better then dead; but while he doth nothing, knowes & desires nothing, but keeping a holy Sabbath or rest; dyes wholy unto himselfe; and being void of will or witt, resignes himselfe over unto God, and permits him to know and doe in him, what, when, and how he will.
And now the whole world lyes over∣whelmed with this sinne; in so much that it doth no other but adore the worke of its owne hand, that is its owne inven∣tion, counsels, comments, and wisdome. To this purpose all things are directed, intented, and wrested; yea the very Scriptures themselves, the word of God; that it may be agreable to our corrupt reason, and not hinder the course of our carnall and fleshly witt, and knowledge, but all these things must bee unlearned and cast away if we will see God. And therefore the Scriptures urge so often times, that wee should become Fooles, little Children, and purge ourselves with the Fruit of the Tree of Life, that we may vomit up that poysonfull witt and knowledge of the Forbidden Fruit.
CHAPTER IX. That the Tree of the knovvledge of Good and Evill, planted in the heart of Adam, is the Seed, word, and spirit of the Serpent and that great Daster, An∣tichrist, sinne, death, the Devill, & that Beast, which is mentioned in Daniell, and the Apocalips, which is the greatest and commonest Idolatry. 1. What is that Beast of which Daniell writeth, which speaketh against the high∣est, and slayeth the Saints of God? 2. What is that Serpent who deceived Adam & Eva? 3. What is the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evill? 4. What is that impudent King and An∣tichrist, of whom Daniell and Paul speaketh, 1 Thes. 2? 5. What is that many headed Monster, mentioned in the Apocalyps, whom the whole World doth worship? 6. What is sinne? What death? What the Devill?
I answer: it is every mans owne car∣nall wit and reason, righteousnesse, and the like; For which cause Paul calleth it death, enmity, & foolishnesse unto God; and Saint Iames calls it earthly, humane, and devilish, because these three are one; For whatsoever is humane, is worldly, & Devilish; and whatsoever is Devilish, is Earthly. For the Devill and Man, Adam and the Serpent, are sworne Brethren, yea both one; For the Serpent hath so shed his wisdome, and fained righteousnesse into the heart of Adam, that the Seed of the Serpent and his word are incorpo∣rated and made man, so that now the same thing may be said of both. And even as those that are borne of God, and in whom the Word of God is incorporated, are called God, or one spi∣rit with God: So all men borne of flesh and blood, before they be regenerate & planted into Christ, may be called De∣vils; and so whatsoever is Earthly, may be said to be Devilish, and whatsoever is Devilish, may be said to be Earthly. Againe, what is the Fall of Adam but only the wisdome of the Serpent and
Fruit of the forbidden Tree? What is that old Dragon, who ascends out of hel? and with his tayle drawes a great part of the Starres of Heaven after him? But onely the wisdome of the Flesh, which doth extoll it selfe against God, and desires to become a God unto it selfe? What are the thoughts of the Flesh? What is sinne? what pride? But the wisdome and Fruit of the Forbidden Tree. What are the Decrees of Men? The workes of reason against God? Mens inventions, knowledge, and bookes? But onely the are of the Devill, Eaten of the Tree. What is all the worship of Images and all false Religions? as of Jewes, Turkes, infidels, and all false Christians. What are all Sacraments, Assemblies, and Ceremonies? But an apple of this For∣bidden Tree: which bearing a shew to be of the Tree of Life, offers unto Men, pleasant Fruit to his eye, that is, reason which whosoever eates, he shall finde to be deadly.
No man can fully expresse that ido∣latry, with which all the corners of the world and hearts of men are stuffed up; and who is it that doth not adore him∣selfe, and sayes to his hand, wisdome, and reason, his art and his knowledge, thou art my God, in thee I trust, in thee J hope. Indeed men say not this with their mouth, but surely in their lives, workes, and hearts, they plainly testifie as much. Hence all men deny that there is a God, and testify the same by their works; For if they thinke there is a God, wher∣fore doe they not resigne vengeance un∣to him? Wherefore are they so doubtfully distracted? Wherefore doe they forge such wicked deceits, to deceive one an∣other? Wherefore doe they so warre upon one another (whether with right or injustice it matters not) and contend together for mine and thine? Why doe they lye, cogg, and flatter one another? Wherefore doe they labour night and day to gett and heape up riches? Wher∣fore are they so forgetfull of the word of God, and so little esteeme his precepts
and commandements? But that they thinke God cares not for them, or that he cannot or will not revenge them; there∣fore it is necessary that they helpe and revenge themselves; or that they thinke that while to long to wait and expect the helpe of God, before that he take ven∣geance and punishment they themselves shall be overthrowen; And because they thinke that nothing but povertie comes upon them, if they have any commerce and communion with the truth of God; therefore it is necessary that they helpe themselves, and labour for their living, by lying, cogging, deceiving, and usury, and the like; this makes a man rich and honourable. As for the word of God that is but a late helpe, and deficient in ad∣versitie; it stands us in hand, therefore to adore our selves, speake bigge & swel∣ling words; elevate our selves as much as we can. VVho but my selfe is God? saith the world in the course of her Life.
CHAPTER X. An ansvver to certaine obiections, that we ought to be wise, and not fooles; and how we ought to be wise, and how foolish. But you wil say, that the learned shall shine as the Starres or Sunne in Heaven, and in a thousand places wee are com∣manded to apply our hearts unto wis∣dome, as in the Proverbs and Eccles. wise men are commended? To which I answer, that it is rightly spoken, if it be rightly understood, to wit, of the tree divine & heavenly know∣ledge, which God himselfe doth worke & teach in those that are poore in spirit; I say, it is understood of the wisdome of the tree of life; and not of the deadly and foolish wisdome of the Flesh, which is the knowledge of good and evill; and the Scriptures will have us to acknowledge our folly, and to be made fooles in our owne judgement, (and indeed we are so,
but we would not be accounted so) and forget all things wherby we may become truely wise, and receive the influence of divine knowledge into our soules; For we are all foolish & wicked, and we will not see and perceive it, nor beleeve it; and therfore God would have us by con∣fessing our folly in true simplicity, to give a farewell unto it, & by submitting our selves over unto God, be made truely wise and learned by him. Hereupon it is that Solomon calls them fooles, whom Paul calls wise & prudent; Solomon calls them what they are in∣deed in the sight of God; but Paul calls them what they seeme to be in their own eyes, and in the sight of men: We must unlearne, and therein strive to be fooles in that wherin we learne and strive to be wise in; But as it is given us of God, so it can be learned from none but God; and as the love of God shed abroad in our hearts, begets a mutuall love of him againe; Even so Gods knowing of us, be∣gets in us a knowledge of him, as Paul witnesseth to the Gal: after that ye knew God, or rather are knowne of him.
As also to the Phill. I desire to know▪ as I am knowne. And also 1. Ioh. 3. He first loved us. Also in another place: if any man love God, he is borne of God. Out of all these places I gather, that God is never knowne, loved, sought, or found of us, untill we be knowne, loved, sought and found of God; as Christ saith to the Pharises: the Kingdome of God is in you; and Paul to the Athenians: Hee is not farr off from every one of us; for in him we live, move, & have our being. But this is most miserable and lamen∣table, that those who professe themselves to know God, know him not as they ought; as Paul testifies of the world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And againe: if any man seeme to know any thing, he know∣eth nothing as he ought. VVe should know this, that by nature we know nothing, but are altogether blind, dead, and foolish in spirituall things; and ths knowledge should make us nothing, foolish and Children in our owne eyes; But wee desire to know, and seeme wise, whereby it comes to
passe that we know not how, or for what end we ought to learne knowledge, for wisdome is not given unto us for this purpose, that thereby being puffed with pride, we extoll our selves, and become something in the eyes of the world, but on the contrary to make us nothing. This is the knowledge of God, that makes us Fooles and Children to our selves and the world: it doth not puffe us up, making us seeme wise in our own opinion; Noe, for that is the knowledge of the Serpent, both most devilish and deadly. Thus you see that the whole world knowes not what, how, and for what end they should desire to know, but alwayes strives against God in their knowledge; and know not of what things they ought to be ignorant off, but cheifly are desi∣rous to know those things they ought to be ignorant off; and so by their owne art and knowledge make themselves Fooles. Breefly, that which they doe know and doe desire to know, that they should learne to unknow; and what they resist
to know that they should learn to know, otherwise God will never acknowledge them for his owne, because God hath de∣termined never to acknowledge, crowne or reward any thing in us, but his owns guifts and workes, that is never to love or accept any thing in us but himselfe: For he alone is the Light, Life, the way, and the truth, so that whosoever is not in him, or he in them, they alwayes wander in the pathes of errour and shadow of death. Now every man knows what it is to walk in darknes. The walls of Ierusa∣lem were not to be opened before the Sunne did rise; even so should no man intend to goe forth before the Sonne of righteousnesse arose in his heart; since all things depends upon him, and bee should be our Teacher and Example, by whose instruction we should learne, and by whose Example wee should walke, as the Scriptures testify. It is an easie thing to say, that the world is in darknesse, and uncapable of the spirit of truth: but no man will either acknowledge or beleeve himselfe to be the world, or that the whole world to
God is all Fleshe as the Sonnes of Adam all were naturall men, with the universall righteousnesse, reason, and wisdome therein; but by the world men thinke to be understood, the Turkes, Gentles, & Heathens; and I know not what people of the farthest parts of the world, attri∣buting so much to arts, tongues & Scrip∣tures, which they almost preferre above the spirit; and if a man doe reade and have a Bible, they thinke it enough, and that by which they may easily obtaine the Holy Ghost; not considering that either the Holy Ghost must bee their guide, and enlighten them in the know∣ledge of the word, or otherwise it is but a dead Letter; and is so farre from bringing Life with it, that it mortifies & kills the Reader: as Paul implies, where he sayth, the spirit quickens and not the Letter. The Iewes in auncient times, and so men in these dayes doe boast themselves of the word of God, & are strongly per∣swaded, that out of it they are able to gather Life to their soules; but they are farre deceived.
Wherefore Christ sayes: In whom thinke ye to have Life. As for the Scrip∣tures his testimony of them is this, that they are them which testify of him. Therefore all arts and knowledges are no wayes the cause of Life; but the know∣ledge of Life to know him in and with God; wicked nature hath alwayes a per∣verse end, proposed to it selfe, and there∣fore it desires to know all things, not for God but for its owne sake; therefore all things are to the flesh (as it is its self) vaine and perverse, if the learning of so many arts had beene necessary to salva∣tion, God had created and taught them in the beginning; Neither would bee have suffered that men should so long have wanted that, without which they were not able to attaine to Life; but because they were formed out by men, and still are found out by them, though no man be any whitt the more unhappie, if so be he never know any thing of them; Yea hee were more happie if he could unlearne them, though with greater dif∣ficulty then he learned them; you may by the Tree conjecture what the Fruit
is, what humane arts and sciences are: to witt, the Fruit of the forbidden Tree; How then can they conduce any thing unto Life, being the only precepts & in, ventions of men. Therefore very well in praise of that word of God doth Cornelius Agrippa call all arts and actions of men meere igno∣rant fables and foolishnes, in his Booke de vanitate Scientiarum. The beginning and end whereof wee have putt in this Booke, that wee may not seeme alone with Ernestinus to contemne arts and praise folly. Wherefore if thou leane unto arts, please and boast thy selfe in them, having any hope or accounting thy selfe any thing better for them, they will prove death unto thee, for they doe no more conduce to thy happines then garments, time, place, or such like circumstances: But as they are the inventions of the flesh, so doe they produce no other thing in thee then the workes and Fruits of the flesh, to witt, selfe-love, pride of spi∣rit, contempt, disdaine, security, & such like; And this is verified by experience,
for no men are more perverse, craftie, & covetous, then these wordly wise and learned men bee, being men drowned in their owne selfe-love, esteemed of them∣selves worthy to be beloved and reve∣renced of all; full of rash judgement, lovers of all pleasures, and so full of all vices: that the whole world gives cre∣ditt to no men lesse, speakes worse of no men more: being full of taunting & reproaching proverbs against them; such as these, the better learned, the worser mannered, the better Scoller the worser Christian. No man scapes scotfree out of the clawes of a preist. He that wil have an honest house, must keepe it free from Preists, Apes, & Doves. A monk dare doe as much as he dare thinke. These & such like proverbs are common in every mans mouth; which arise from this that they are so swollen with the poyson of the fruit of the forbidden tree, so puft up with the false opinion of their owne wisdome and righteousnesse, that no rich man is more insolent by reason of his riches, then these perverse wise men are by reason of their arts & knowledge; So that it is as easie to
remove Cyrus out of his Kingdome, as one of these wise men out of his opinion and tenent; And truely it cannot be but by how much a man is more wise in the art of the forbidden tree, by so much hee is more miserable, as Christ witnesseth in the gospell: that the multitude of their arts and knowledge is an impediment why they come not into the Kingdome of God, and publicans and harlots enter in before them. Therfore these men are to perish with their arts, & to depart empty, and so farr is any of them from leaving his art, wis∣dome, knowledge, & righteousnesse, that he esteemeth these to be the good and riches of the soule, which neither theevs can steale, nor moathes corrupt, when in very deed they are nothing but the in∣ventions of Satan, fruits of the forbidden tree, and the death of the soule; For the life of the soule is the true knowledge of God, which himselfe doth work & teach in us, to wit, the fruit of the Tree of life, whose fruit is that it makes a man gentle, loving, humble, lowly, meeke, &c. By this let a man examine himselfe, with what witt and righteouseesse hee is endued;
For if day by day, he be lesse in his own eyes and in the judgement of the world; if he seeme still more foolish in himselfe, and a Child in his owne thoughts, his knowledge is divine the Seede of the VVoman, a Fruit of the Tree of Life; but if hee finde contrary effects in him∣selfe, then is all his wisdome Devilish, the Seede of the Serpent and Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, and so the death of the soule. CHAP. XI. Of the Tree of Life, vvhat it is? why Adam was excluded from it, and not permitted to eate thereof. I also grant thus much, that this Tree was visible in Paradise, and had this divine vertue bestowed upon it, that whosoever eate thereof, should live for ever; But whereas Adam before had eaten of the Forbidden Tree, and had incurred death,
therefore he should not eate of this Tree of Life, least otherwise he should have lived for ever; and in a word, God should have beene false in his word, which was that he should dye the death, but God who is Life it selfe, would not for ever be angrie with his Creature, but was unwilling that man should for ever live in that misery, into which he had cast himselfe, and therefore drove him out of Paradise, and afterwards shewed him the way by which he should returne into Paradise againe, and eating of this Tree live for ever; and then gaurded the Tree of Life with a Cherub and a flamming sword, least man in his exile should have presumed to have come to this Tree, and have eaten thereof. The will and counsell of God was that it was better that man should dye in the flesh, and so putt of this miserable life, and change it for a better, then live in it for ever. Therefore God who cannot nor will not hate us, delt every way most merci∣full with us, if so bee we would truely consider of it.
Now doe J think that the same also hap∣pened in the true Paradise of Adās heart, the Tree of the Knowledge of Good & Evill, is the Seed, Knowledge, and wis∣dome of the Serpent: And the tree of Life, is the Seed of the Woman, and the wisdome of God; and these two Trees are, as God and Satan; so contrary one to another, that the one brings Life unto us, and the other death. Therefore he that eates of the one, its impossible he should eate of the other, because they are divided by a flying Cherub and a flaming sword; which I in∣terpret, sinne and disobedience, which sometimes in the Scriptures is called a partition wall. For hee that eates of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evill, that is hee that is possessed with a Diabolicall wisdome of the Flesh, he cannot eate the Tree of Life; that is, he is departed from divine knowledge and wisdome that proceeds from God: For these two wisdomes are incompitable, they cannot bee in one and the selfe-same heart, being as contrary one to the other, as
heaven to hell; He that eateth of the Tree of Life, and is pertaker of divine knowledge, hee cannot dye, neither sinne; For this Fruit eates the eater of it, and changeth him into its owne nature, into Life, as the Scriptures doe testify of those that doe eate the flesh of Christ. For it is one and the same thing, to eate Christ, to live in his word, to eate of the Tree of Life, to beleeve in God, &c. as it is also the same thing to be in Adam, to live in Adam, to eate of the Tree of Knowledge, of Good & Evill, to obey the word of Satan, and be God. Therfore those that eate of this dead∣ly Tree, and adhere to the word and wisdome of the Serpent, and are borne of Satan, these cannot doe any thing that is pleasing unto God. As on the contrary the other doth not any thing that is displeasing unto him. Therefore he that would be the one, must bidd adew to the other: He must putt off the wisdome of the Serpent, and
vomitt up the Fruit of the Forbidden Tree, who would eate of the Tree of Life. Adam must dye in us, and the witt of the Flesh must be unlearned of us, if we would have Iesus Christ to live in us, and obtaine the direction of the holy spirit; For the death of the one is the life of the other; the infirmity of the one is the strength of the other. No man can serve two Masters, nei∣ther is it possible to unite Adam, God, & the Devill together. CHAP. XII. The praise of the Word of God, on which alone man ought to build, rest, re∣side, and it onely know, if he will remain unshaken in adversity, have his Faith manifest and approved, and finde quiet∣nesse to his Soule. INdeed there be many arts profitable to the body, which God the belly hath created, and yet doth dayly finde out,
which truely bring much profit to the kitchin; and onely serve, worship, & obey their God the belly most zealously, as it is expedient they should. But as the cōmon proverbe is, that which is profitable to the body: doth often hurt the soule, and that which is the bellies and flesh, as life, foode, and plentie, is often times the death of the soule, and a meere poyson unto it, because the spirit is contrary to the flesh. Hence it comes to passe that table or belly arts, because they be the Fruit, off-spring, and witt of the flesh, are altoge∣ther vaine, famine, and death unto the soule. And on the contrary, that onely art, the end whereof, was not for God bellies advantage; which the whole world doth so much sleight and litle regard, that onely true wisdome and Theologie, to witt, God and the knowledge of his Word in him; together with the know∣ledge of him divinely infused into our soules, is the sole art onely necessary to mans salvation. Therfore the true, heavenly, & divine art, the true tree of Life, of which who∣soever
eateth hath everlasting life. Furthermore I say, this art is the Foode, Wine, Milke, excellencie, defence and all whether the profitt, pleasure or advancement of Soules; All other arts being vaine, doubtfull, and the poyson of the Soule, hurtfull and deadly to the Spirit of Man, if hee leane upon them, rest in them, glory in them, or build his happinesse upon their sandy foundation. In a word, they are the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good & evill, of which whosoever eates, as J have amply proved, hee shall dye the death. Therefore I desire that wee would not be to righteous nor wise in our owne eyes; As Solomon (Eccles. 8. as also Proverbs 3.) doth faithfully instruct us: that we should esteeme nothing to be our wisdome, righteousnesse, or any other vertue in us, but onely to know God in and with himselfe, and love, praise, worshipp, feare, honour, and un∣derstand him as wee ought. Which thing must necessarily proceede from
God himselfe, beeing the worke of his eternall, and in it selfe everlasting and immutable word, which without spokes∣man from him proceeds out of his mouth: that hee speakes in our hearts, teacheth himselfe in our soules, imprin∣ting and engraving his Image in us, thereby enlightning so our understand∣ing, that to speake in a word, he so teach, love, know, understand, pray unto, heare, guide, governe and worshipp himselfe in us. All other things whatsoever are to dull, and all the vertue of things are to base, that they should be able to teach us God, and give us everlasting felici∣ty; or that God by them should give it unto us. God will be himselfe, teach him∣selfe, give, and convay himselfe into our hearts: Neither will hee suffer his honour to bee given to any Crea∣ture, that by it wee should be saved or sanctified; but hee that heareth and learneth it of the Father commeth un∣to him.
He will himselfe be the Master of spirits; and so a spirit shall be taught of a spirit. And all those that are divinely instructed of the all-knowing and understanding God, shall be said truely to be learned and wise. The flesh hath teachers, who belong∣ing to the ould covenant, have commerce with the flesh. The new covenant, because it is spirit and Life, and in like manner hath a spirituall and new birth of God to be instructed, hath also a spiritual word and Master to instruct it, which is the word and spirit of Life. Therefore if any man would know himselfe, submitt himselfe quietly to the direction, and permitt himselfe to bee spoken too, sought and found in him; He surely should be elevated to a won∣derfull Light; if any man I say doth fol∣low the instruction and Doctrine of the Father in himselfe, he verily should finde God in God and with God. But the world busied and accupied in the Crea∣tures passeth away in a confusion, and not considering the hidden and secret treasure that is closed in his heart; Nei∣ther
seekes for this precious Pearle, but covered all over with the earth of the Creatures, remaineth in darknesse with the multitude of his arts and sciences; weary, ignorant, and void of all true arts and sciences; yet doth he in the meane space learne art after art, further and further searcheth into the my fierie of knowledge. And to use the words of Saint Paul, is alwayes learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; but the more he learneth, the more per∣verse he is; and to such a madnesse doth he come at last, through his overmuch wisdome, that he quite forgets what to say, bable, determine, beleeve, and what opinion to hould; and so he together with his fraile foundation and fickle arts, staggers here and there, slides out of one errour into another, untill hee become vaine in all his imaginations, and like to Foxes, caught with all their trickes and turnings; is thereby miserably ensnared in the Netts and snares of his owne arts and sciences. But the Christian like to the Catt, hath but one way, knowes but
one art, whereby he is able to save him∣selfe, yea that a cheefe one, viz. his God, in whom he hath all things, knowes, loves, and comprehends all things; And therefore hee scapeth, when the Fox though he know many sleights, & those craftie ones indeed; yet often together with his sleights, hee falleth into the power of the Gods and the hands of the hunter. Therefore thou canst boast of nothing, nor build upon any other thing whatso∣ever, but onely that sure foundation and art, which is God himselfe, & his holy word: For all other things forsake man in adversitie, except the hope and con∣fession of God; this is the true preacher in our hearts, if any man will attend and hearken to what he shall speake in him, he hath planted in us the Seede of the woman neere unto the Seede of the Ser∣pent, for opposition unto the same; yea he hath confirmed his Spirit, finger, word, and Image in us; His Spirit he hath cloathed in us with Flesh, and hath pla∣ced it captive in the midst of its eni∣mies in the Tabernacle of the Flesh,
that it may prevaile and overcome, and subduing the Flesh may with it selfe carie it unto God, deify it, engraffe it, & unite it unto God; For this is the fight betweene the Flesh & the Spirit in us, of which Paul speaketh off. Therefore if any will yeeld himselfe over in the midst of his enimies to the holy Spirit, & glory in God, as in a most fortified Campe in him: God would (without doubt) once come and van∣quish his enimies, and so he should know all things to eternall Life. But the World doth not attend unto God in himselfe, alwayes occupied with the sound or noyse of the Creatures, passeth on with tumult and confusion, and so knowes nothing, heares nothing, learnes nothing, though in the meane time it compasseth, searcheth, and in∣quireth out a thousand unprofitable arts, and continually learnes, and the longer it learnes, it is the more un∣learned, untill sliding into errour at last, it falls quite downe.
But if men as Christians doe, would abide with God privately in the Schoole of their hearts; and with Marie would sitt attentively at the feete of their Lord,Luke 10. and would both heare and learne what God would be pleased to speake,Deut. 11. teach, & interprise in them, verily they divinely instructed, would at last vomitt up all their arts, as ignorant and folly. And with Paul would forgett them, deny them, and account them as drosse and dung. Standing water is easily made bright with the beames of the Sunne; and a rolling stone gathereth no mosse; but the roaring Rivers of this world must necessarily be either lukewarme or cold. Therefore it is behovefull, that before al things we turn unto God in our soules, and compose our selves with him in quietnesse; dayly talking with him, heare him, and learne of him. Which thing the whole world is ignorant off; it knoweth not how to heare the word, the Master, the teacher, and how to learne of him in himselfe; but alwayes it flyes out of its owne heart into the mouth of man; who
when they be altogether lyers, filthie, vaine, it comes to passe that they are all∣wayes deceived; are alwayes learning, and heaping many arts; when notwith∣standing with all their arts they are ig∣norant and foolish, because that which they know, is but meerely surreptions, theevish, untried, taken upon trust from others, of which they themselves never had experience; but if any to please the people have profunctorily beleeved, yet together with the people they beleeve some other thing. Then truely like Bees they fly out in swarming sometimes, prosecuting a poor Wesell, making deare enquiry into a matter of little moment, and fall into some matter of dispute, upon whose, foundation and ground they are altoge∣ther ignorant off, untill they be satiated with it, then they fall upon some other thing. So in times past all Israell (in whom all the whole world is figured) together with their Kings and Preists did fall, un∣till they wholy erred from the Faith, and once taken were led away captive.
Read the people painted in my booke of the World. Now J call with Paul the word of God: that foolish and offensive speech, which to weet doth bring with it the crosse, greefe, and death of the flesh, and maketh all things which seeme somthing to be nothing, and only looketh upon & regardeth those men who are nothing in themselves, which in the eyes of the world seeme the greatest folly that can be. Neither can it be perswaded, that let∣ting passe that which it sees, it should embrace that which it neither hath not sees; for it would rather have one bird in hand then two in a bush. Neither doth it doubt so it might keepe it to preferre a temporarie life before a thousand eter∣nall liues. And therefore the Word and the preachers of the word have beene perse∣cuted for fooles. Now the word of God is of such a nature and force, that though it hath a vulgar stile so simple in the language of truth, yet it overthroweth all things whatsoever rise against it, it dulleth the
edge of all witt, and these entysing and corrupt contemplations, together with the more eloquent kinde of lying, it doth bring into such straight, that it ma∣keth them to blush for shame; although (as it is alwayes the properties of lyes and ungodlinesse) they will not confesse themselves to bee overcome; For the word of God doth say such strait seege to the heart of Man, that every one, if he doe not speake against his owne con∣science, is forced thus to thinke, and so to determine as the word doth speake, that so it is, and otherwise it cannot be but a lye. On the contrarye bursts in with a long Circumlocution, and one lye doth almost waigh ten lyes, that it may seeme to be true and have a shaddow there∣of. But the word of God, as I have alrea∣dy said, doth proceed after a most simple manner, but it doth so gird a man, that will hee or not, hee becommeth, ama∣zed, and with admiration astonished & affrighted, doth say, this is the finger of God.
No man ever spake thus; for this word hath such a sharpnes, sting, and strength, that it pearseth even into the heart, and seperateth the flesh from the spirit, so as the minde beeing captivated without all controversie, assents to the same, and confirmes the truth thereof with all assu∣rance; not so craftie subtiltie can be ob∣jected against the truth, but that may be battered, weakened, and refuted with one word; neither can any thing so ac∣cute be produced, which weakened with the like accute, may not be overthrowne, onely the word of God overcommeth with such force, that even the minde of the enemy is overcome and taken with it; the outward man alone, and the face of the flesh, which would not be bridled, seekes out all kinde of ambushes, trickes and turnings, to escape this thunder∣clapp. And falshood, for shame covers its face with its hands, and thereby thinks that the whole body is covered, that it cannot be seene. Moreover, it is behovefull, that all other traditions of arts, words, and spirits, bee examined by the word of God, as by an
index, golden rule, and touch-stone. I call that the word of God, which is the Spirit and Life, (not the Letter) written without Inke and paper in the hearts of beleevers, which speakes unto the soules of all those that are obedient unto it. This J call the Word of God; Not the Scriptures. For if we speake properly, the Scriptures or Letters are not the word of God, but the minde, spi∣rit, and that true divine meaning, which Paul calleth the sence of Christ and mind of the Spirit, and Christ the Word of God. This I say is the word of God, as saint Paul doth testify: The Letter (sayth he) doth kill, but the Spirit, that is the true and spirituall meaning thereof, which onely spirituall men are indued with, which doth quicken. These alone have the Key of David, for the opening of all the Seales of this closed booke; to all other the booke is Sealed with seven Seales; Of which men∣tion is made in Dan. 7. Apoc. 5. and Mat. 13. by way of parable; and the vaile of the Letter doth hang before their eyes,
untill they turne unto God, and seriously will obey his will. The spirit of understanding entreth into no froward scorner, who in the letter only desireth to shew his nicitie and Clarkeship. For the truth is, that word of God, and his secrets, are made manifest to them that feare him. Therefore many in our times are snared, who betwixt the writings and the word of God doe know no difference, and so doe they esteeme the Scriptures for the word of God, so as beside it they knovv no other. But it appeares by the Testimony of many divinely taught, that the scriptures are nothing but the huskes, the shell, the sheath, the Lanthorne, the shrine, the let∣ter, the cave, the vaile of the word of God. From whence it ariseth that they appeare so sinister, and in shew often re∣pugnant, and are hidden from wicked men. But the Word of God placed in and under them, is the kernell, the life, fulnes, and thing it selfe, or substance: For other∣wise those learned men the Scribes and
Pharisees had been blessed and happy, if the Letter had beene the word of God, viz. the light, &c. because they had so well conned the Scriptures, that most part of them they could say by heart, yet were they for all that most miserably to perish with this Art; and so death is eaten by the Tree of good and evill, while yet men thinke thereby to have Life. But Christ doth more ingenuously te∣stify, that they know not the Scriptures, that is what in the Scriptures is the word of God; for what otherwise belonged to the Letter and grammaticall sence they writt, but knew not the mind of Christ, which was the force and meaning of the Letters; and the Letters in my judgment are of sett purpose, so sinister and darkly dictated by the Holy Ghost, compre∣hended and declared, that those impious Swine and Dogges may not understand them, according as Christ out of Esay doth alleadge them, and giveth this rea∣son, why he speaketh so obscurely by si∣militudes, and demonstrateth the same thing more significantly in Iohn, least we should make an idoll of the Letter;
And that wee should thinke some other thing more necessarie to salvation then Bibles: to weet, that of God we should desire the Light of his word, which is hidden in this Lanthorn; and also that true teacher the Holy Spirit, which may direct, lead, and instruct us in the holy Scriptures, and may open the Seales thereof, declaring unto us the mysterie of this shrine, that is his divine word, Law pleasure, will, and meaning, hidden under the dead Letter. Many thinke it enough that they have Bibles, and know how to reade; Here forsooth they find the Holy Ghost, the word of God, that double Sword of the Spirit; yet wrapped up, and closed in the sheath. But who can understand, gaine, finde, and brandish the same? He answers by the Prophet Esay: Yong Children, who will be affrayd at this killing Letter, they are sore out of heart, tremble and dye for feare. Therefore it is not enough, although it is good, to have Bibles. What to have Bibles? All the Pharises had the same,
could say them by heart, and yet they lived no lesse blinde and dead. These very Bibles are the Tree of Good and Evill, of which they did eate death, although to the godly who consult with God about the meaning of them, and renouncing themselves, pray unto him for the obtaining of his Spirit, they be the Tree of Life; God will give his glory to none other, no not to the Scrip∣tures, but hath made them darke unto us, and hath reserved the interpretation to himselfe, that he may teach, enlighten, rule, and guide, how, when, and as hee will; and his will is, that we alwayes wax stronger, and by degrees come nea∣rer to the knowledge of the truth, if so be we would doe the same by his helpe; but hee hath not sowen his word by the way side for dogges and swines, but hath covered it, the same beeing hiding in the Letter, that we may not rest our selves contented in the Letter, but digg up the hidden treasure; and with all Religion pray for grace and understanding, and consult with his Holy Spirit, that he may take us into his tuition, guide us, teach
us, leade us unto the Tree of Life, the Fruit whereof may feed us up unto eter∣nall Life. And this is the tryall of all Arts, Doc∣trines, and Spirits, that they be compared and agree with the word of God, that that which is divinely unto us, we finde to be true by his word in our hearts. In a word, that our spirits may confirme the same so to be by its testimony, as wee have divinely learned the same, and that we sustaine for the defence thereof to dye. Therefore it is likely and so it shal be indeed, what Doctrine soever commeth frō god, the same is not repugnant to the word, which divinely taught, we have in our hearts, but agreeable, thereunto gi∣veth testimony that wee know his word, as we are knowne of God, and compre∣hended as we are comprehended of him, otherwise how could we say Amen, and assent if the contrarie should be fall in us. Therefore they are much deceived who thinke that nothing is the word of God, but what altogether differeth from
our minds; and therefore compell them∣selves only to beleeve those things which in their inward man they can perceive, feel, & comprehend to be far wanting in them, and contrary to them. Indeed the word of God invadeth our hearts with an exceeding force, because it is spirit, our hearts are flesh; but where the beleeving heart addicts it selfe to the worship of God, the word is soone in∣corporated in us, and our heart made one with it, is converted into spirit; so as now the truth it feeleth, yea and what more it witnesseth that to be true, which the spirit doth speake unto it; and is so bound that it necessarily must assent un∣to it; Neither doth it so compell or force it selfe to beleeve, but it is so com∣pelled, that it cannot but beleeve, and would a thousand times make a losse of its body rather then beleeve otherwise. So again the mind cannot be beleeved, and as long as the minde doth not assent, it is a sure argument, that as yet is hath not comprehended, nor as yet is the word incorporated in thee, nor the Sonne of God borne.
For he who comprehendeth the word as he is comprehended, feeleth the same, yea testifieth, & knoweth that the same is true. Wherefore compare, or examine all learning with the testimony of the spirit. For if thou art a beleever, God dwelleth in thee, and thou art sealed with his word and Spirit, but if thou dost not beleeve, this examinatiō nothing belong∣eth unto thee; For it is spoken to the be∣leeving Thessalonians, try the Spirits. If in a wicked man the spirit were to be compared with his heart and with the letters, he could never rightly judge how he doth understand them, because hee taketh that to be the word of God what∣soever pleaseth his wicked and perverse heart and eyes. On the contrary, it is commanded to the Saints, that they try and prove all Spirits and Doctrines by the word of God, which divinely taught, they have approved in their soules; not to the wic∣ked who are unfitt to every good work, and whose judgement God doth not ap∣prove off.
But if they say, they are to be brought to the touch-stone of the word the holy Scriptures. J willingly grant the same, so that you understand that of the minde of the Scriptures, which is the onely word of God; which also onely those who are of God doe understand, but if the Doc∣trine and Spirit be compared with the Letter of the Scriptures, it will be com∣pared diversly, every one according to his owne understanding, in which they are deceived; neither is this the true trial, as more cleare then Light wee may see it; Since all desire the Letter to be this judge, and thinke them of themselves to be the same. Therfore that which hath not the exa∣mination I speake off, which I but now spake off, is as easily confuted as it is admitted, as Gregory sayth. Here are casheered all the arts, expla∣nations, orations, and comments of men, which are boughes and fruits of the for∣bidden Tree, in the Paradise of this World, from which as yet all men doe eate death, and yet neverthelesse with Adam and Eva thinke themselves to eate
life, and hope to be Gods. Therefore all mens arts are no other then a plant of the Devill, who thinketh by this meanes to change men into Gods, & from hence promiseth life & immortality, when ne∣verthelesse death is before their eyes, so soone as they have eaten of this fruit. Now that Sentence standeth firme: Every plant that my Heavenly Father hath not planted shall be cutt downe. Therefore all those Arts must a∣gaine in their original be brought to nothing. That J confesse is the only Scope of the holy scripturs, which is the word of God, knowne of them who are of God; But that the literall and grammaticall sence is, this I doe not think, which wicked men doe understand, and also follow, and yet by Christ are denyed to understand the Scriptures, but as they expound them∣selves in the Godly, out of the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost; And this meaning cannot be comprehended in open Com∣mentaries and rules, but the Holy Ghost will have this book & mistery reserved to himself, neither wil he have it imprinted
but will shew, teach, & open to all, accor∣ding to the measure of every mans faith, as much as is necessarie, neither will he have it so committed, that one may teach another, and so incroch upon the priviledge of God, but will teach it him∣selfe, that all and every one of us may be divinely taught, and may glory that wee have learned the Word of God from God, and not from men, with plea∣sant docility, yet so as men ought, and every one may one to another give that testimony which hee hath learned from God. So it commeth to passe, that with Christ and his Apostles we are witnesses of the Word, not Ministers of the Spirit; For who hath commaunded the Wind but onely the Master of the Winde. To this belongs that which Job, Jere∣mie, and Esayas say, that we shall all be taught of God, so as it shall not be necessary for us to be taught of any other, but that so its true as the holie vnction shall teach us.
And whereas God is onely true, and all men are lyars, it cannot be but it must be a lye and errour whatsoever commeth not from God; and that cannot come from God which all wicked know and understand. Since they are not of God, but are seperated from him by the parti∣tion wall of sinne. Now what commeth not from God is sinne, and not good; and what shineth not from his Light, is altogether dark∣nesse, although it seeme to be Light and wisdome, as Esay upbraideth the Cal∣dean Philosophers, their owne witt hath deceived them, and they were wearied with the multitude of their owne in∣ventions, &c. God speaketh this against all arts, ex∣cept the art of God, formed in us by his word; which exhibits unto us nothing to be meditated upon, and vewed in the Light but onely God, to know and un∣derstand God, because that word is veri∣ly God, without any distinction of na∣ture; there as God cannot be defined, described, or divided; but if we speake properly, God is all in all things, and yet
nothing of all these things which can be felt, conceived, or comprehended by sence, reason, or understanding, spoken, written, or heard; so is the Word of God infinite, infallible, incomprehensible, eter∣nall, by it selfe existing, and farre ex∣ceeding all the writings and words of men, because it, as God cannot properly be written, read, or spoken. Since it is God, and was before writing or man was, and shalbe when man is deceased & writing are ceased. Therefore all things are subiect unto vanity; For which cause the nature of all things are called vaine and vast, by rea∣son of the accident of vanity, although in it selfe it be good; onely the word of God, which in it selfe is perpetuall and semperternall, can neither be written in Letters, nor expressed in word, endureth for ever. Hence it comes to passe, that whatso∣ever is spoken or written of it, as that which is not of God himselfe, remaines but as a shadow, a figure, and testimony thereof, and is not properly God and his word.
Now no man can speake or utter this word, therefore it is necessary that it speake it selfe, in an obedient and wil∣ling heart; and for this cause it is re∣quired of every man, that hee submitt himselfe under the potent hand of God, void of his owne will, free and cleare from his owne heart, and subordinate to the will of God, that God or his word may speake, teach, seeke, love, finde, ac∣knowledge, beseech, hear, praise, honour, feare, and adore it selfe. This alone is the art of God, which he himselfe doth teach in us, without this all other arts are nothing; For besides this to know all things, is to be ignorant of all things. All arts without this art is vanity, which yet is better conceived in hearr then it can be uttered in word; yea it cannot be expressed or declared in worde, therefore no man can teach the same to an other, but it is to be taught and manifested by God, to the teaching of which whosoever are sent, they are not Doctors or Masters, but onely wit∣nesses of that word, which by the vertue of God is before in our hearts.
Therefore it hath many names, which oftentimes are used one for an other; so that as sometimes the Father, sometime the Sonne, and sometimes the Holy Ghost is called the Fountaine of Life or Truth; So the word of God is some∣times called the Seed of God, sometimes his soule, sometimes his soonn, some∣time his arme, sometimes his hand, some∣time his right hand, sometime his Law, sometime his will, sometime his image, sometime his inspiration. And hither may be referred all the names which the Scriptures give to the Father, Sonne, and Holie Ghost, and the word of God, which are all one, and re∣ferred unto one, serve to the significa∣tion of the same thing. And this Word which in the New Covenant is called Christ, is the essence of all things which are, and all things are created by it, and also are preserved, nourished, and sustained by it, and in it. So that all things have their bee∣ing rather in the Word then in them∣selves.
And if God should withdraw this word to himselfe, as was the estate of them be∣fore the beginning of the world, while yet the world was not made of him, so should all things necessarily in the same moment be turned to nothing againe. Therefore doth God even to this day preach this word unto us, and yet it is ineffable, as Taulerus saith, though in him all things have their essence and being in & from God. Wherefore to committ and consecrate a mans selfe to this living word of God, is the onely life eternall; and that true one art and part of Mary which cannot be taken from her; all other arts are vaine and must perish with the inventors and professors, only to know God, & obey his word, which the Scriptures calls to eate Christ, to beleeve in him, to putt on the new man, to adhere unto God, to be born a new, to live to the spirit, to heare and receive the word of God, to be baptized, to be ingrafted into Christ, to receive Christ, and many other tearmes: is not onely of it selfe immortal, but preserveth all from death, who are indued with the
same. No man can consume this bread, but it preserves him the eater thereof, from eternall death, and hunger unto eternall life. This treasure can no theefe take away, no rust or moath corrupt. In a word, this eternall word is to a Christian all things▪ in adversitie a Sword & Weapon against all dangers, meate to him that starves, cloathing to the cold, for want of di∣vine grace, and a sure sanctuary to every fugitive. But he that knoweth all things, and is ignorant of this, knoweth nothing; even as hee who knoweth and hath all things, and wanteth God, possesseth nothing; and if it could be, that any man could know all arts, which all men at any time have knowne and understood; if he were a Pandora, or a Hippias, knowing all things, yet were he not therefore any whitt better in the sight of God; yea J dare say, he should be so much the worse, by how much he had glutted himselfe of the tree of knowledge & eaten death; for the more poyson is received, the speedier will the destruction be.
And even as this was the fall & death of Adā, viz. to become a god, & to arrogate to be something in himselfe, & to know, J will not say to be ignorant of nothing. That fal cannot be forgiven, or repaired, unlesse thou vomitt up all that Diaboli∣call art and curious knowledge; and be∣sides eate of the Tree of Life, which shall worke in thee an utter forgetfulnesse of all those arts, and make thee a Childe, a Foole, and reduce thee to innocencie un∣der God, that at length thou mayst know that which God would know in thee; so he himselfe should teach and suggest in thee by his word, according as it is said; otherwise all things are unprofitable, yea though a man know all things, they are not onely unprofitable, but also a hinde∣rance to this art of God. He that is igno∣rant of this, in vaine hath he learned & knowne all things else besides. In the word of God alone, which pro∣ceedeth out of the mouth of god, is seated the rule of all things, the Scope, Doctrine, art, life, and truth, teaching what is to be done, what not to be done, what to bee spoken, what not to be spoken, whether
to enter, from whence to depart and come out. All other arts they be variable what∣soever they be to time, fortune, vanitie, death, and oblivion; and not onely these arts, but also the Letters, bookes, formes, masters, tongues, which we use, doe perish, and others after them, which suc∣ceed in their places, so that nothing is cō∣stant & of long continuance in the earth, but all things according to their visible nature, are frayle, mutable, and momen∣tary. How often are the tongues them∣selves changed; how often the formes being removed, doe new succeed in their place▪ (as I have said before) Orthography is not ever like it selfe, and the same with all people in all times; yea the true pronounciation of the Latin tongue (as Cornelius Agrippa in his booke, called De vanitate scientiarum, formerly alleadged by us) is perished, and no where extant. Moreover, the auncient Letters of the Hebrews are gone, so that there is no memorie left thereof, but onely those which Esdras in their place in∣vented.
Adde moreover, that the tongue is made verie lame by the Caldeans, which also hath been incident to perish of other tongues; So that no man there is who can finde out their auncient forme and dia∣lects; Besides this new words doe all∣wayes creepe in the old word, beeing growen out of use. And againe, the old words are received, the new being thrust out; so farre forth, that nothing is durable or constant in this life. And if any man would observe, he shall finde that our mother Tongue in England is dayly changed: that at this day they speake otherwise then they did a few yeares since; yea and such a curiositie & nice∣nesses there is in the word and tongues, that what men have a while made use off, suddenly they cast away, as disdaining the same; Every man endevouring to bring out some new and rare thing, that he seeme not to imitate the words of any other: insomuch that the cheife inven∣tour of words doe now obtaine the chief praise and estimation of Art. And by this meanes all things are confounded in the earth; and what now is new, is presently
growen old, and anone become new againe; and the hearts of men, the King∣domes, peoples, and Languages of the World, like to the course of the yeare. In times past France spoke the Dutch language (as Beatus Rhenamis writing of the Germaine affaires, most elegantly proves) but now it hath gathered a proper speech to it selfe out of Italie, Germaine, & Spaine, but most specially from Italie; which thing of the tongue was caused, perhaps by their warre, because divers people being mixed to∣gether, they made and used a mixed kind of Speech. Hence it came to passe, that as yet they retaine some of the Germain words: as Suppen Sacken kushen, which they al∣most according to the Nether Germains pronounce, after the bastard Germaine Souper, Sacen, Cuysten. This I speake that we may see, that nothing is constant or new in the earth, and that is true which Terence writt: No∣thing is spoke now which was not spoke before; So nothing is done which was not done before. So that Cornelius A∣grippa
thinkes the invention of Gunpow∣der, and uns was no new invention; of which opinion in the Historian Volati∣ramis; and this may be gathered out of the sixt of Virgils Eneads, where thus he writes of Salmon: I Salmon saw with paine & torment late Who would loues flame & thunder imitate, For caried by foure steeds, with torch in hand Through Elis Cittie & all Grecian Land Did ride in triumph, and command that all Shuld give him honour and a dietie call; O mad man, he who with his Chariots noyce Would imitate the mightie thunders voyce, And Solomon shewes the same all along in the 3. chapt. of Eccles. as also to the first: that what hath beene that shall bee, what hath beene done, the same shall be done, neither is there any thing new under the Sunne. There is something which is as if it were new, yet was that in auncient times which hath beene before us. There is no memory of former ages, neither shall there be of those that are to come;
amongst who are to be; and a little after things past, and things to come, are all forgotten, and the wise together with the fool doe dye. In which words what other thing would the preacher show then that all arts are subiect to oblivion and death; Neither can they alwayes re∣maine in the soule, but together with the body departs or perisheth by death. For nothing (I say) can adhere unto the I∣mage of God, (I meane the Soule which is like unto God) and consist in death and fire; but what is onely God and his word, this is the onely endure able creature, and the meate of Eternall Life: Not that opinion and Art of Philosophers, but the true good of the minde and Soule, which can happen to no other thing but the word; although I doe not denye but that word appeared to some of the Gentils, and taught them; because God is no respector of Persons, but as a common Light of soules, as the Sunne is the Light of the whole world; neither is the hand of God short∣ned, nor his eye envyous, that he should not looke upon the whole VVorld.
With the same love, eye, and grace since we are all alike the same workmanshipp of God, all of the same love, estimation, and authoritie with him. Hence thou mayst collect, that all arts (invented by men) are death, and fruits of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evill. For assoone as Adam had eaten of that Tree, the same day he dyed in the eyes of God; as the historie declares; al∣though afterwards according to the flesh hee lived many yeares; as from heavenly matters the same day was his eyes shutt up, and he eat death, although in his owne judgement his eyes were opened, and he seemed to himselfe to be a living God, knowing Good and Evill: Then began he to exercise his art, his cunning to expound, dispute and seeke out a malitious sutle and captious mea∣ning in all things, and also to deale de∣ceitfully with God, and in all things to hide himselfe, to cover himselfe with Figge leaves, to kisse his owne hand; in a word, to worship himselfe, by inventing many arts amongst his posterity. And out of this Roote spring up all
the precepts of men, their expositions, their arts; and so excellent a foundation have they, as both the inventour and the authour of them was the Devill; and the first Scoller that learned them, did eate death therefrom. And this Science and Art is utterly to be abhorred, being no other then a Dia∣bolicall perswasion, conceived in Adam, formed and hid in the Seede of the Ser∣pent; And yet all the World, as Adam did, thinkes that Life is placed in it; nei∣ther doth it receive any instruction from Adam▪ neither indeed understand the hi∣storie of Adams fall, or his rising againe; and that whole matter at this day doth live yet, accounting it but a Historie long since acted & done, and afterwards dare say the word of God endureth for ever. Therefore wee must needs confesse that nothing is past which in its kinde is not yet extant. Whole Moyses is urged upon Chri∣stians, neither is one jott of the word of God lost, which shall not be fulfilled in every moment in spirit & truth.
Therefore the fall of Adam happeneth dayly; dayly doth Adam in his posterity eate of the forbidden fruit; And therfore his Sonnes in Adam, as in the roote, are damned & dead. Now this our fall as Adams, is amend∣ed and repaired, if we spirt out and vo∣mitt up this knowledge of good and Evill as poyson, and become as Adam was before his fall, Children, Fooles, and innocent Turttles, that wee may eate of the Tree of Life, and suffer the Seed of the woman to be ingrafted in us. This is not the Seede, the art, witt, and coun∣sell of the Serpent; but the Seede, word, will, the minde of God, the Tree of Life, which whosoever eateth, and suf∣freth himselfe to be fedd therewith, is indowed with Eternall Life. Now in us there is a Medicine with poyson; For as by sinne the Tree of knowledge of good and Evill was plan∣ted into the heart of Adam, so by his conversion, rising againe, and Seede of the Woman, the Tree of Life is planted by the Tree of death in the heart of Adam. From these two Seeds & trees so
different, doe spring different Fruits, so as one is poyson and death, the other is Medicine & Life; and if any man would know that plant, which is called Man, he may easily know what he ought to think of his owne art, knowledge, wisdome, and righteousnesse, how that this plea∣seth all men, and is of great respect with them; For what is current with the world but its owne coyne? What but the wisdome, art, and righteousnesse of the Flesh, seemeth holie in the sight of men: onely the Holy Ghost can repre∣hend the world of sinne, righteousnesse, and judgement. It is wonderfull to behould how the world doth dayly yet eate death of the forbidden Tree; which tree you may call (as the Germaine Theologie doth) our own will; and although God doe dayly cry aloud in them, and moreover provi∣deth by the witnesses whom he sendeth to teach them externally, that they abstain therefrom, or otherwise they shall reape death therefrom, yet none beleeveth but all follow that Serpent, which se∣cretly in our heart doth speake thus:
Not death shal you reape by any meanes, but if you know many arts, you shall bee like unto God, and live for ever; (this the whole historie of the Bible remaines in force at this day;) & from hence ariseth a certaine art and curiositie, enquiring & searching out; Neither will any submitt himselfe docibly and simplie unto God, and obey his word. But every man will be his owne, yea Gods Master too, and teach both himselfe and God, bring him into the Schoole, and there prescribe unto him, with whom, where, what, wherefore he shall doe, speake, permitt, or omitt. Hence it commeth to passe that wis∣dome is justified alwayes of her Chil∣dren; and those men skilled in a thousand arts, and above measure craftie, God can∣not satisfie, neither can he obtaine his Kingdome, or gett any love or right at their hands. Since they will be altogether Gods, and kisse their owne hands, will, wisdome, prudence, and reason. The art of the Devill, which is sucked out of the Duggs of the Serpent, here∣upon we compose many bookes, desiring
to teach the whole world, not knowing how to teach our selves. From hence it comes that the proud Devill, alas! is buried deepe in Learned men, whom their deadly knowledge doth so dangerously puffe up, that they thinke themselves worthie all honour, both from God and men, and oftentimes if not in word, yet indeed they make their estate as Lucifer and Adam did. No man understandeth how we dayly become Lucifers and Adams, but thinke that to bee the relation of a thing long since done in Adam, and condemne his wicked pride and fal, when neverthelesse we all sticke fast over head and eares in the same, and yet deride others who in this kinde are foolish. Divines preach much the word and his precepts, but when they are to be kept, indeed they are wanting in this; yea what themselves doe sometimes teach they will not suffer others to practise, but contented meerly in the bare words, so making the word of God nothing but a meere Art, a matter of talke and dis∣putation, & had rather be called knowers
and fearers of God, then lovers of him, that not in vaine is the proverbe, which is verified by experience, teaching and confirming the same: The greater Scol∣ler the worser Christian. The Gramarian is carefull that he erre not in his speaking, but little regardeth the errour of his life. In like manner the Poets had rather bee lame in their lives then halting in their Verses. Philosophers would know all things, but not themselves. The Hi∣storian describeth all peoples, but neg∣lecteth himselfe. The Orator is more sollicitous that he speake not rudely, then that he beleeve not, or live wicked∣ly. The Logitian will sooner forsake the truth, then leave his opinion and con∣clusion. They that have any thing to doe with Geometrie, doe sooner measure the Earth then their wayes. The Musi∣cian taketh more care that his Song bee not dissonant then that his cariage bee consonant. Astrologers travell over the whole Heavens, and foretell things to come, but see not the ditch under their feete.
The Cosmographer relates of all Mountaines, Valleyes, Woods, and Ri∣vers, but that makes him not one haire better in the sight of God. The Phisi∣cian healeth sick mens bodies, but ne∣glecteth the healing of his owne soule. Lawers are alone expert in the precepts of men, but negligently violate the Lawes of God, so as the proverb from hence hath risen. Neither doth the Phi∣sician live, nor the Civillian dye well, be∣cause Phisitians of all men are most in∣temperate, and Civillians the worst Chri∣stians; and for that cause (as Baldus being an expounder of the Law himselfe doth say) the most part of them are taken away by sudden death. Other Arts-men J will not here men∣tion, but referre you to Cornelius Agrip∣pa, chap. 100. So the Devill doth compasse us about with the rope of folly; insomuch that sometime with one question, sometime with another art, we be so amazed; in the meane time wee neglect the onely science of God, in which all things con∣sist, even as the Adulteresse Medea▪
when her husband Jason pursued her, cutt her Children in peeces, & dispersed their members in the way, that Iason might bee busied in the gathering of them up, while shee escaped out of the Countrie. Alas, shall death, sinne, and the Devill thus please us? shall wee alwayes thus seeke God in hell with the Devill? Light with darkenesse? The living among the dead? One thing is necessary, and this no man will desire; many things are unpro∣fitable and unhealthfull, yea deadly; yet these are greedily desired off, and devou∣red by all men. In the word of God alone, and no o∣ther thing, are all things placed, neither therefore will it profitt thee to have all things, to know, will, speake, surpasse in measure, dispute off, number, paint, a∣dorn, judge, teach al things, &c. To know all things, is nothing else then to know the arts of the Devill, eaten by his coun∣sell of the forbidden tree; Onely to know the word and will of God, and to live according unto it; to be fruitfull in good
workes, is the true art and eternall Life, eaten of the tree of Life; in vaine, it is to know all things, yea rather it is bitter death, as hath beene sufficiently spoken off before. Since therefore all the arts, witt, and righteousnesse of men, springeth from the tree of knowledge of good & evill, or rather from the Devill; and therefore is the fall and death of Adam; it necessa∣rily followeth, that the more any man is learned therein, and experienced▪ the higher he hath ascended, the worse and more perverse he is; as hee who hath made the greatest proficiencie in the wis∣dome and knowledge of the Devill. And againe, the more foolish a man is in this art, and in the wisdome of the flesh and the Serpent, and the more bee hath unlearned, forgotten, and emptied himselfe thereof, the more righteous he is, and wise before God: For we must al∣together forget and unlearne this fleshly art, this curious sagacitie, this Devilish righteousnesse; And in steed thereof must learne the onely new, contrarie, and di∣vine art, wisdome, and righteousnesse, by
the eternall word, by the Seed of the wo∣man of the Tree of Life, of which who∣soever eateth, shall have eternall Life. For this cause the Scriptures doe so ve∣hemently urge new birth, Childishnes, Foolishnes, hate of a mans Life, deny all of himselfe; which would not be, if there were any thing that is good or acceptable to God in man before. No man thinkes of this, but all men being puffed up with their owne arts, witt, righteousnesse, goodnesse, &c. bee∣ing secure and without conscience or Religion, and yet doe eate death of this forbidden tree, that is of their owne will, witt, reason, knowledge, goodnesse, and art, by that Seed of the Serpēt, implanted in them. But God doth exact nothing but the knowledge of himselfe, and that we would be obedient to his word, and submitt our selves to be taught by him, which the Scriptures doe sometimes call faith, which bringeth us unto God, begets us anew, and regenerates us, that thence doe flow the waters of Life, the fruits of the spirit, love, peace, joy, a guiltlesse minde, and all other good things, which
the Scriptures doe sometimes call faith, which bringeth us unto God, begets us a new, and regenerates us, that then doe flow the waters of Life, the Fruits of the Spirit, love, peace, joy, a guiltlesse minde, and all other good things, which the Spirit of God effecteth and powreth in∣to us. Therfore Theologie is the true Magick, the worship, & sciēce of God, which God doth equally exact from us all. And this is the same which God doth exact, teach, and effect by his Word in them, who offer and submitt themselves to that his word and clemency to be taught. Therefore doth he so frequently and oftē admonish us, that he might make it knowne, that in him alone is Life and all other things to be found, and that hee threatneth and inflicteth great punish∣ment on them that despise him, as many places of the Scriptures doe witnesse, though the word of God is not tyed or bound unto them, as wee will prove a∣none; yet they give good direction and testimony to the mind, if any man
can have the same & use it aright; and yet doe much more, abuse the Scriptures then rightly use them. Neverthelesse they are not to be forsaken any more then a mans wife, Children, meate, drinke, &c. all which may be abused, but yet wee must learne to use them rightly. CHAP. XIII. Of the Maiestie, of the free, con∣stant and eternall Word of God, how it can be bound to nothing, included in nothing, nor buried in the Letter; and also the difference betwixt the internall and the externall Word. THE word of God is as God, infinite, invisible, ineffiable, a Spirit and Life, which no mortall man can speake, see, or heare, but as farre as is Lawfull to speake of it after the manner of men, and by similitude. The word of God is nothing else then the glistering, the essence, the Image, the
forme and splendor, as well imprinted like a Seale into all Creatures, as more specially into the hearts of the faithfull, which in all things is the cause of their being, in all beleevers teacheth, in al wic∣ked men reproveth, exhorteth, and con∣tendeth and reprehendeth the world of sinne, and which in the beginning did enlightē & informe the hearts of Adam, Abell, Noah, Loth, Abraham, Iob, Mercu∣rie, Termigestus, Plotimus, Cornelius, and all other upright-hearted Gentils. For though God giveth beeing, in, above, below, without, and beyond all Creatures, and is the essence of all things that bee; yet in nothing is hee so clearly to be seene as in Man, whom therefore he created after his owne image, and perfected in Christ. Therefore as brightnesse doth so proceed from the Light of the Sunne, as yet it is not seperated from the Sunne, but for all that remaines in the Sunne, though it fill the whole world, and en∣lighten the same; So is the Sonne in like manner whole in the Father, and in all the Creatures, as the Light is in the
Sunne and in the whole World: Therefore it is called the brightnesse of his Majestie, and the image or figure of his divine essence; Of the same na∣ture, substance, and essence with God; So as nothing can bee spoken of the Fa∣ther, which may not also be verified of the word: God is no where and every where, in all places, in all things, and yet incomprehensible above and beyond all things; Limited to nothing, so farre forth that the heavens and earth are not able to containe him, nor all the Creatures. So is the word. Even as the Light of the Sunne hath an originall, from whence it proceedeth, and a force & action into which it tend∣eth, which originall is the Sunne it selfe, and which externall active force is the heating or enlightning of the whole world, or as the word of every man hath originall force and spirit, which originall is man, whose expression and image the word is, and of the same essence with him. And thirdly, it hath an active force or spirit, which qualifieth this word, and
makes it either cheerefull, or angrie, or sorrowfull or displeased. So the originall of this divine word is the Father, or the action, or active force, or vertue of it is called the Holy Ghost. As therefore the Sunne, is light, and that active force of that Light, is the same; and as man his word, and the active force of that word, is the same; So the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are one God. Wherefore nothing that appertaines to their essence can be spoken of one, which cannot also be veri∣fied of all, that is all three; and as they are of the same essence, so of the same con∣dition, disposition, and nature. As therefore God is in nothing, and yet in all things; so also is his almightie word, which is the same: as God is so in all things, yet that he can be included in nothing, and so above all Creatures, as the Earth, Heaven, or any other Creature is not able to conceive or circumscribe him. And so in all Creatures, as nothing is without him, or rather nothing there is that is not full of him. So is also his Word.
As God can neither be spoken or written, nor any man is able to declare what God is, but all things which are said of him, are but Images & shadows. J will not say as Taulerus and Dr. Eicka∣rius say, seeing if we speake truely and properly, the whole nature of God is farre otherwise then man doth or is able to speake of him. Lastly, as God is a thing opposite, and contrary to humane cogitation, and farre otherwise then he is conceived to bee in the thoughts of man; So also is the divine word of God. As there is nothing so little in which there is not God; and againe, nothing so great that can receive or circumscribe God. As nothing is so little but God is lesse, and nothing so great but God is greater, beyond, without, below, & above all Creatures; So also is his divine word. As the free, almightie, eternall, immu∣table, omniscient, incomprehensible, in∣visible, and unconceivable God is the beeing of all things; So as as all things consist rather in him then in, and by
themselves (as Taulerus and the Germain Theologie in a 1000 places doe avouch) and is none of these things which can be seene or comprehended by sence or ex∣pressed by word; So his divine word is free in all, and beyond all, bound unto nothing, neither tyed to the prison, or letters, or cover of the Letter, concluded, included, and so tyed unto it, that other∣wise it is no where; even as the follow∣ing Position and Sentence of a Learned man divinely instructed doe show. As the word is covered and hidden by the Letter, so it is opened and revealed by the spirit. Hence it commeth to passe that the Letters be as a closed or sealed Booke; so as the dark Letter, except it be opened, doth slay; but the Spirit doth quicken, and the Letters are as a certaine Image, void of Life and Spirit: that is a printed and dead expression of the Spirit; there∣fore they want Life, (except the soule of the spirit be present) and doe erre. Therefore the Letters cannot be the word of God. Since the word is farre otherwise an other thing then the letters;
For it is a spirit, truth, & life; but the let∣ters are cōtrary: flesh the letter & death; yea the letters if they want the Light of the word, are an offence; & if they want the soule of the spirit, are a stumbling block. Therfore the Letters are an otherwise thing then the word; that is, they are not the Sword of the Spirit, but a sheath; For as the womb of the virgin conceived the word, so the Letters. For the word is clothed both with flesh & with the Letters, that Seede of Abrahem layeth hould of the Scriptures or Letters, (for they are both one,) and againe is apprehended by them; but the spirit is not apprehended in the flesh or Letter of the Scriptures. The cause thereof is this: the flesh or Letter cannot containe, conceive, or comprehend the Majestie of the word; yet even as it was so in the flesh, that the Majestie thereof did not appeare; so it is in the Letter, that true neither to all, or to any one that reads, is it obvious and apparent. This is witnessed by all Learned men
in the meere Letter, since the world began, who neither could know, finde, or comprehend Christ in the flesh, nor the word in the Letter; which they should have done, if Christ in the flesh, or under the miserie of the flesh had beene known unto all, not hidden but manifested; and the Letter had beene not the covering mysterie, but the true living and enlight∣ning word of God it selfe. As therefore the flesh was not the word, but the cover thereof, and a cer∣taine great mysterie; So the Letters are not the word properly, but the shell, the barke and cover thereof. The word was made fleshly assump∣tion, not mixture, and so the same word is made Letters, yet not so as the same can be said of the Letters, as of the word, but as in a certaine Seale. Therfore so farre are the Letters from being the word of God, that they onely be the figure and barke thereof. For the word is not that which is spo∣ken by the Letter, but that which is ex∣pounded by the Holy Ghost, and under∣stood onely of the Faithfull.
Therefore the Letters doe paint out, & shadow out; and after a certaine manner set forth unto us the word, and expresse something, but are not the word, al∣though they be spoken and expressed. For the word did not assume the flesh that it is not out of the flesh. So it did not so fall into the Letter, that it is not out of the Letter; For there was the word when there was no Letters; and the same will remaine after the Letters are pe∣rished. Therefore as the word was never included and circumscribed in the flesh, neither is it in the Letters. For so it was in the bodie, as it never yet left heaven, and in the same manner it is so in the Letter as yet it is every where. Therefore the word is in the Letter altogether, but not all. Hereupon we see that the letters have been exercised with a continuall encrease and addition. Therefore the Letters are the Image of the word, and not the word it selfe; And if they be, they are altogether a written, and a dead, & not a living word;
For there is a twofould word, one that quickneth, viz. the Spirit, another the Letter, which is said to kill and slay. The living word is that which in∣wardly teacheth, and maketh us to fructi∣fie; the dead word is that which in the Flesh and Letter is proposed unto us. The living word is a true Light, which enlightneth all men, and therefore a re∣generating spirit, because it reneweth all things. In a word, it is the power and might of God, which giveth unto us that knowledge, sence, soule, and Life, which is from God. A certaine brightnesse of the face of God, which enlightneth us from above, & imprints in us the unction of the Holy Ghost, by which it teacheth and instructeth us in all things; But the dead word are the Letters, that sealed booke, and dead Letter, sence, and will, which is the word of the flesh, not of the Spirit of God. The true and living word is that which God begetteth in us, and the spirit of God effecteth in us; But the dead and Litterall word is that which the Letters show unto us and men propound.
Therefore he doth not alwayes want the word who hath not the Letters: For he may have the interior who wants the exterior word, to witt, the Law of God written in our hearts. Hence it comes to passe, that no man hath absolute neede to be taught of an other, or to admonish his brother con∣cerning the knowledge of God. For al these shall know, from the least to the greatest, and are all the Disciples of Christ divinely taught. This writing is not printed with inke and paper, but written with the finger of God in the tables of our hearts. This is the Doctrine of the truth, and the inspiration of the Spirit, to wit, the propheticall breathing, the inspiration of the Spirit, and the true art of God. Moreover, hee may have the living word of God who wants the dead of the Letter; and the thing it selfe who wants the signe, that is the Life of the word, though he wants the dead Letter; For two things are cheifly to be considered in the word.
The first is the disposition and nature of the word, which is a certaine Light intended for the enlightning of men. The other is the action of it, that is the spirit, which giveth action and operation to the word. For the word hath not onely a knowledge, but also a certaine action, it is not onely a Light and splendor in us given from above but also Life. The interior word containeth both of these which sometimes is called the Kingdome of God, sometimes the Spirit, sometimes Christ dwelling in us. For it is not onely a Light, way, and guide, but also Spirit, truth, and Life; that is, which not onely teacheth man that he may un∣derstand, but also moves him that hee workes. But the exterior word is farre from this priviledge, and hath farr a different nature; For it is nothing else but a certaine forme & figure of the interior, J will not say a shadow. Therefore the interior words, as it is the onely live∣ly, so it is the onely true word, as being the truth and life.
But on the contrary the exterior is nothing but a killing Letter, and a de∣ceitfull figure of the word. Hence it ariseth, the Letter, (as Christ) becomes a certaine snare to wicked men, a stone of offence, darkenesse, not Light, death, and not Life. Therefore it is necessarie, that beside the exterior word, the interior be sought after and knowne: Since the exterior deceiveth a man with its shape, is death and darknesse, unlesse the Light & Life of the spirit bee together present with it. Moreover, the exterior suffereth a man to be sluggously and idle, except the power of the interiour bee present with it. Therefore the interiour word may be without the exterior, as the exte∣riour without the interior. Therfore it doth not necessarily follow that a man hath the word of God, because he pretends and hath the letter; as on the other side it followeth not, that eh who wāteth the exterior word or letter, wāteth also the interior, true, and heavenly word, which is God himselfe. For he doth not
alwayes want the word who hath not the Letter; For the Letters doth onely give a testimony of the word, so farre are they from being the word it selfe; yea they are scarce the Image of the living word; Much lesse are they it, which neither can be written nor expressed by words both which is incident to the Let∣ters. Therefore the Letters are farre from being the word of God, yea all the word, though sometimes they bee called the word of God; as the image and picture of a man is called sometimes by his name, even as God is sometimes called man, & the word flesh: not that God is man, or the word or spirit is made flesh, by imi∣tation, appellattion, and permixion; So as what is said of one, may be verified of the other, or so as God cease to be God, and to be truely changed into man, as that water in Cana Galilee was changed into wine. Or so as the word is so flesh, as not now it is not the spirit, or the word but flesh, in no wise.
The word is not so in the Letter, that they be one and the selfe same thing, or so as the word should have changed it selfe into the Letter; and yet well and rightly the Letters are called the Word of God; so as God is called Man, and the Word flesh; although to speake pro∣perly, neither is the word of God chāged into Letters, nor God into Man, nor the word into flesh. Therefore both these may be true, the Letters are the word of God, and the Letters are not the word of God. Now although the Letters are some∣times in some respect the word of God, yet truely are they not the sole, nor alto∣gether, nor all the Word of God; yea if we speak properly, they are not the word of God, which either can be spoken or written; and that the Letters are not the sole word of God, may be made knowne by this: That many things besides the Scriptures are revealed & inspired unto many, and many things are spoken and written by them which are not contained openly in the letters, yea which somtimes are contrarie to the dead Letters.
The Prophets, & Moyses, & Christ, and his Appostles, whose words seeme to be contrary to the Prophets, what they have written of the Temple, the Sacri∣fice, Circumcision, and of the vision of God. Moreover, the true word of God hath beene from all eternitie; yea even before any scripture was, (as I have said before) & it will be hereafter whē the scriptures are perished. Therefore the word is improperly in the Letter and flesh, and therefore it is improperly called flesh or the Letter; For my word (saith Christ) is Spirit and Life. Therefore the word cannot be that word which is flesh or dead letter; wher∣fore though the word truely and indeed is onely in spirit, as in which it onely liveth, yet it is also in the flesh, but yet weake if there it bee alone without the Spirit and Life. It is also in the Letter, but altogether dead, unlesse the Spirit doe quicken it, as the soule doth the bodie; and it is in both, and yet not truely, and if truely, yet not all, and onely, and lively.
Now, although the word is in the Spirit lively and true, yet after a more peculiar & excellent manner it is in the flesh then in the Letter, although the Spirit be present with the Letter, and lend a hand, it teacheth nothing, but when the spirit dwelleth with the flesh, it not onely teacheth, but also maketh alive, and bursteth out into workes. So the letter of the Law brings men to no perfection, although it be the word of God, as also the Scriptures spoken by the mouth of God, and written by his finger; For the word of the Law did teach the knowledge of the precept, but did not give man a will and strength to fulfill the same, but the word which is made flesh giveth life to beleevers. Hence it commeth to passe, that the flesh inspired with the word and spirit of God, wills and doth keepe the Com∣mandement of God. Therefore the word in the flesh doth onely give an Example of life, when on the contrarie it leaveth in the letter all things idle and sleepie.
But in the Spirit it truely stirrs up the heart and affections towards the Law, for the Spirit is the life and soule of the word, and therefore the word it selfe; but the flesh is a certaine imi∣tation of the word, the letters a certaine printed picture and Copie of the word. Wherefore the written word is not the true word, but a certaine image thereof; yea the Scriptures pronounced in words are not the true word of God, but onely a testimony thereof: For the Scriptures had beginning in time by occasion, but the word was from all eternitie. Adde to which the Scriptures doe lead men into errour, except the interpreter, viz. the Spirit be present. And they are a sealed booke, and a perplexed Laborinth, unlesse the Spirit be present, as the Treede of Thesius, to to guide us, and as the Key of David to open unto us. Hence it comes to passe, that many men seeing see not, and hearing heare not, and as who know the Scriptures, and yet neither know nor understand.
Therefore we confesse that the letters are a certaine image and figure of the word, yet they are not truely the very word, because they are but onely an image & figure thereof. This is the reason wherefore we ad∣mitt no other word but what is answer∣able to this Image or Example of the Scriptures, and to the true and spirituall sence. Therefore the Scriptures are as the Index or golden Scales of the word, so they be understood not according to the dead letter, but according to the minde of Christ and will of the Spirit. Therefore we reject not what is agre∣able to the true meaning of the Scrip∣tures, so we doe not deny what is not contrary unto them; For whosoever is not against us is of us. Therefore we deny not the exterior word, written or spoken, so doe we con∣firme the interior or living, so it is wee grant the maistery and unction of the Spirit, and doe not deny the guift of Prophecye and interpretation of the Scriptures.
For the word hath something to come and something obscure & difficult to the flesh. That which is to come, the Spirit taketh it of the word, and declareth it unto us, that which is obscure & hard to be understood, it dayly teacheth unto us, and leadeth us into all truth. Therefore under the name of the word of God, the Letters are not onely understood, but all prophecies, visions, dreames, unctions, in∣ward speakings, Doctrins of the Spirit & revelations if they be frō God; also what∣soever holie men by the instinct of the spirit have either spoken or done. Therefore no man must adhere pe∣remptorily to the onely letter; where the Holy Ghost is, there is libertie, and the free word is bound to none. Moreover, the Holy Ghost suffereth no rule or limit to be prefixed to it in its owne; therefore to nothing it is tyed but to it selfe, that is, be not contrarie and disagreeing to it selfe, as therefore many things come and are spoken frō God; al which (nay not the thousand part) are writtē in the scripturs; So many things at this day happen & are spoken by God, which are not written;
And yet neverthelesse they are the word of God, and wrought by him. Add to which that many things there are not written, nor expressed in words, which wee yet receive for the word of God, and onely by hand as it were, have received them from our Forefathers, of which kinde are the abrogation of the precepts of the first counsell, renewed after by the Holy Ghost to the Church; So as the Church was freed from the same; Of which things wee notwith∣standing have no written or expresse word. Christ himselfe taught all in word, and writt nothing, and commanded his A∣postles to preach, not to write. And the Church is begotten rather by word then by writing. Moreover, the Doctors & preachers of the new Covenant were called and indeed are the Ministers of the Spirit, not of the Letter. By all these it is manifest, that the free and swift Spirit is not tyed unto letters, nor the Doctrine of the Spirit can bee included into the Jayle, prison and
corner of the Scriptures. Therefore although there bee many bookes of the Law, something some∣times may change to come in handling of which there is no expresse Canon or Law to be found, but it is to be excogi∣tated and ruled by reason. So oftentimes such a rare thing happe∣neth, the letters doe universall forsake a man, that they cannot teach, comfort, guide, or appease him; but a man must necessarily repaire unto God, and con∣sult with the peculiar word of the Spirit by prayer, to comfort and strengthen his weakned conscience; For it is not suffi∣cient to have the common call and word, except a man have speciall, proper, and inward call, which yet is not contrary unto the common. And although the word of God is al∣together one, and undivided, yet how much thereof a man hath received by faith, so much of it is his; and this is his word; His issue the Word of God is, as God himselfe, must be made every ones by faith.
No otherwise then whereas the Light of the Sunne is common; yet as much as every one is enlightned thereby, so much is the Sunne his, and no more; So as much as every one hath of God and his word, so farre is he his God, and so farre hath he God and his word, which are common to all, peculiar to him∣selfe. Therfore the letters are farre weaker then to satisfie a troubled conscience in the offences thereof, and to make quiet againe; the lively word of God must doe this, and this honour hath God reserved onely to himselfe, neither will he permitt it to the letters, or any Creatures whatso∣ever. Moreover, the Holy Ghost will not be bound or captivated in those that are his, nor be subject to the masterie of any one, nor suffer that it should be taught by any writing or mouth of man, but will it selfe be the light, the Doctor, master, cap∣taine, and in a word all in all things. Moreover, he who useth the Scriptures for a testimony of that worke & spirit, so hee doe it according to the minde of Christ; not interpreting them according
to the interpretation of the Scribes and Puarisees, doth onely use the Scriptures aright, according to the will of God, ac∣cording as he ought; all others are meere abuses, and the worship of images, as the whole world busies it selfe in the Scrip∣tures, and esteeme them to be their A∣pollo, as if the Holy Ghost & God were no longer to be consulted with, concerning any affaires, but onely the letters. In a word, here they enquire and have all things; here with the Pharisees they think to have life; neither will they grow by an others mans harme, nor will they see how blinde, impious, ignorant, and dead they ever have beene in all ages, in divine things, and in the word of God, who have beene the most Learned, and could all the Bible at their fingers ends, having for all that neede to heare and learne the truth from Christ; So darke and deadly are the Letters, which they make their Idols. Paul calleth the Letters death, but they life; but indeed they are eternall darknesse, death, aenigma, allegorie, and a sealed booke.
Unlesse thou have the living word of God unto the Light, and in them relie upon the Holy Ghost; For thy teacher, inspirer, interpreter, guide, and master; and yet many of them dare make the booke to be open when as yet they can∣not agree in the exposition of it. And from thence doe as many Sects and He∣resies arise, as Readers and Heads doe attempt to reade it. But know thou, and have it as a thing most true, that they are cleane onely to the cleane, Spirituall to the Spirituall, the Word of God to them who are of God, and Religiously studie them by the direction and guidance of the Holy Ghost, whom they carie alwayes with them, and put as a Light into this, other∣wise darke Lanthorne; so as by the the doctrine of the Spirit & direction of it they bring more light unto them; then they receive therfrom; what they receive therefrom is nothing else or no other but a certaine Testimonie of the Spirit of them and all Doctrine. The Bereans used the Scriptures as Christ would have them to bee used:
(Acts 17.) Search the Scriptures, (saith he,) in which yee thinke yee have Eternall life, Ioh. 5. But he thinkes otherwise; For it followes, they are they which testifie of me, that I am the Life and Word which speak∣eth unto you, John 8. As therefore we graunt that the Scrip∣tures are the rule of the word & judge of spirituall things; So in no wise will we remove out of the Church, the word of God, and unction of the Spirit. For even as wee defend the Majestie and authoritie of the word of God a∣gainst the dead Letter, so will we main∣taine the masterie of the Spirit against the executioner of the Letter. And so doe we grant the fulfilling of the swift and short word, as in the onely precept of loue all is contayned, both the Law and Prophets be comprehended therein, we ingenuously confesse. Wherefore as wee doe not take away the word of the Law, but confirm it: So we doe think that something is yet dayly to be opened in the Church, by the unction of the Doctors thereof; the signe and earnest not of that which is necessary
to salvation, but to the guift of Prophe∣cying, and the hidden interpretation of the Scriptures. Since Christ never forsaketh his Spouse, but is alwayes present with her unto the end, Math. 28. and being ever in the midst of her, doth guide & direct her, 2 Cor. 9. This is the reason wherfore we doe not force or include the Majestie of the word of God within the narrow prison of the Letters. FINIS.
