11908 99838881 3271
ARGALUS AND PARTHENIA. As it hath been Acted at the Court before their MAIESTIES: AND At the Private-House in DRURY-LANE, By their MAIESTIES Servants: By HEN. GLAPTHORNE. LONDON, Printed by R. BISHOP for DANIEL PAKEMAN, at the Raine-bow neere the Inner Temple Gate. 1639.
The Persons. Argalus, beloved of Parthenia. Demagoras, a Suiter to Parthenia. Kalander, her uncle. Amphialus, a Noble Lord. Philarchus, an Arcadian Lord. Chrysaclea, Mother to Parthenia. Parthenia. Clitophon, an inconstant Shepherd. Stephon, a foolish swaine. Alexis, another swaine. A servant to Demagoras. Sapho, a Poeticall Shepherdesse. Nymphes. Aminta. Florida. Castalia.
ARGALUS AND PARTHENIA. Actus I. Scena I. DEMAGORAS, PHILARCHUS. VRge this no more, 'tis troublesome. Philar. My Lord, though I affect you Almost with that Religion I do our Gods, yet The constant motion of my will does fixe On noble Argalus, and I confesse His gracious merit challenges a wife, Faire as Parthenia, did she staine the East, When the bright morne hangs day upon her cheeks In chaines of liquid pearle. Demagoras. I must confesse, I have not studied the nice rules of love, Nor can with flattering eloquence adore A Ladies ayery shadow, court her smiles
With adoration, or with supple knees Cringe like an humorous dancer, when the ayre Play's with her hayre, or fret to see the Sun Be over savcy with her cheeks or : I speake this to my glory; the big War Has been my mistris, where intented fields When I have  a moving grove of Pike Advanc'd as if the splendor of their heads Meant to obscure the Sun beame, gore the clouds Till they wept loud, ad heard the fiery hrse Neighing destruction to n host of men, From their hot nostrils: there I did command With ample Fortune; and to be repuls'd In an effeminate Skirmish; wounds my soule Worse than a quiver of sharp Parthian shafts Could prejudice my body. Philar. I could wish Both for your present peace, and to secure Your future quiet, you had still confin'd Your disposition to that war∣fare; this Is far more dangerous▪ He that means to win Loves bloodlesse battails, must be strong in teares, Marshall his Army in a Field of Sighes, Have for his Ensigne beauty in his looks, Under which colours ought to march kind smiles As ablest  the van. Smooth vowes, And amoros  will batter Ladies hearts, Sooner than slings or iron rams demolish Resisting Citadels. Demag. Canst thou conceit, That I Demagoras, to whose very name Laconian Matrons have with earlyhaste, Payd tributary vowes, her choysest mayds, Have left Pans Orgies to present sot Hymns To th' honour of my merit, can decline So much my great soule, as with forc'd intreats To beg Parthenias mercy; let tame fooles
Such as have hearts scarce fit to furnish Doves, Or spleen lesse Iambs with courage; intercede For female favours by submissive prayers; My resolution grounded on the worth Of my desert, shall with her mothers power Inforce Partheniae, were she cold as ayre In its most subtle motion, to become In her affection fervent as the day, That she was borne in, was to gawdy light, Or ruine her best comforts, Enter Chrisaclea. Chrisa. I am faine to be Your most industrious advocate: my Daughter Thinks she offends in each familiar looke Bestowd on manhood, but I hope that Time And Counsell may convert her to become Loves proselyte, Demag. Shee's that already Madam, Or Argalus durst not without consent, And patronage from her, rivall my love; But if the boy oppose me in a thought, Borrow a smile, or pay an amorous glance As tribute to her eyes, were he defenc'd, With some light bogge, that dances to the winds Loud whistling Musick, I would dart a frowne Should ravish his mortality into Ayre, For the presumption. Chrisa. 'Tis my Lord, This rough demeanor (though it speake you man) Declares a spirit full of fire, which does fright Parthenia's softnesse: Virgins loves are wone (Like Heavens compassion) by submissive prayers. 'Tis not the brave relation of a fight, Can move the milde brest of a tender mayd
To ought but terrour; she will start at sight Of scars though bought with honor, bleed in teares, When wounds are mention'd; for Lord Argalus His affable and courtly carriage cals Respective blushes into the bashfull cheeks Of every Virgin, that my daughters bound By a due Justice, to esteeme his worth, With more than common curtesie, yet my will Seconded by a Mothers kind intreats, Shall work upon her duty to accept You'l as her servant. Demag, Servant, Lady; What mortall foole ambitious to out-vie The Gods in honour, dare presume to hope That glorious title from me? have I stood (When armies timorous of a generall death, Quaking with Panick horror, have invok'd Divine assistance) fearlesse, and not deem'd Heavens power deserving a religious prayer, After so many Trophees as may clayme Each its particular star, to be esteem'd A servant to a woman. Philar. Nay, my good Lord. Demag. Persuade the girle T'attire like Iuno in a dresse of clouds Her beauteous head; put off her human Earth For Immortality, and atchieve a seat Due to the Queen of Heaven, that with regard The humble Senate of the petty Gods, And Goddesses may tremblingly adore The sparkling Majesty, yet were my will Not satisfied by voluntary gift Of her affection, my great soule would scorne it, Worse than the proffered service of a Slave.
Enter Parthenia. Chry. See my Daughter, My Lord, loose not this opportunity, You shall have place, and leasure, for my presence Shall be no detriment to your purpose. Exit. Demag. Now Lady, Are you in haste, or do you slight a presence May challenge your observance? I am come, Confident of my merit, to informe you You ought to yeeld me the most strict regard Your love can offer. Parth. Sir, I am not (Though I affect not selfe conceited boast) So ignorant of my worth, but I deserve From him who will enjoy me, a respect More faire and Courtlike. Demag. The blunt phrase of war Is my accustom'd language, yet I can Tell you yo'ar hansome, and direct your looks With a becomming posture; I must speake In the Heroick Dialect, as I use To court Bellona, when my high desires Ayme at a glorious victory. Phi. You'l scarce Conquer a Lady with this sterne discourse, Mars did not wooe the Queen of Love in Armes, But wrapt his batter'd limbs in Persian silks, Or costly Tyrian Purples, speak in smiles, To win her tempting beauty. Demag. I'le bring on Well-manag'd troops of Souldiers to the fight, Draw big battaliaes, like a moving field Of standing Corne, blown one way by the wind Against the frighted enemy; the Van Shall save the Rere a labour, and by me Marshald, shall fold bright conquest in the curles
Of their conducting Ensignes, while grim Death Shall on the feather'd arrows with more haste, Then on his own shafts, fly upon the foe; While the shrill Trumpet, and each piercing Fife Shall sing their Dirges, and the hoarse mouth'd Drums, Wars fatall bels, with surly noyse proclayme Their soddaine funerall: This brave resolve Vanquish'd my steele wing'd Goddesse, and ingag'd Peneian Daphne, who did fly the Sun, Give up to willing ravishment, her boughes T' invest my awfull front, and this shall prostrat Spight of all opposition, your nice soule To my commanding merit, Par. These high tearms, were apt to fright an enemy, or beget Terror in flinty bosoms: Can you think A timorous Virgin, can affect her feare, Yeld the security of her peace and life, To the protection of her horror. You must not perswade my thoughts that you who vary so the Scene of love, can act it perfectly. Demag. Slighted in this: 'tis a contempt inhumane, and deserves my utmost scorne. Enter Chrisaclea. Chri. Nay may most honor'd Lord, be not transported with a needlesse rage, 'tis but her childish folly. Parthenia You have done ill to entertaine a man Of such an absolute worth, with such a meane Exeunt Dema. and Philar. Regardlesse value; you must alter this Neglectfull temper, or my anger will Surpasse my naturall love, and I shall chide Your too affected nicenesse. Parth. Gracious Madam The zealous duty which religious laws, Teaches me owe my parents, would inflict A heavy curse for disobedient guilt,
Upon my Innocence, should I transgresse Th' intention of your honourable will, In what I can obey it. Chri. Then in this You are resolv'd t'usurp the priviledge Of your discretion: and not fulfill My will in the disposall of your love. Parth. Yes with that freedome that I would to Heaven Tender my best obedience; but since love Is by example and discourse allow'd Reasons superior, it must be esteem'd Above all duty. Chri. Yet there ought to be Consent attayn'd from those whose power sh'ud guide Their childrens youth and actions. Parth. 'Tis confest, But not except it justly sympathise With their affection: you would have suffred A conflict in your peace, had you been forc'd, When your free will had yeelded up your heart, My fathers choyse, to've had it ravish'd back, And in despight of your resolve confer'd Upon another. Chri. I was not so childish To contradict my parents, but subscrib'd To their discretions, as I would advise, You would obey mine, and yeeld consent To wed Demagoras. Parth. What can your Wisdome Behold in him, (if with impartiall Eyes You would survay his quality) that should ingage Your inclination to inforce my love, Besides the native fiercenesse of his looks Apter to fright a Lady, than beget Fancy: his courtships cloth'd in angry threats, As if that Love were turn'd a Souldier, And had unyok'd her teeme of spleenlesse Doves,
To have her Chariot drawn by ravenous Wolves, Tygres, or trecherous Leopards, had put off Her wreath of harm esse Mirtle to invest Her brow with Yew or Cipresse. Chri. This excuse Proceeds not from his merit, but your love To Argalus, a stranger only known For his brisque Courtship, the Queen supports His wavering Fortune, he depends on her, And should she faile by death, his utmost hopes Embrac'd a soddaine ruine. Parth. Argalus, Were he more abject in his fate than your Imagination could conceit, deserv'd My Equalst fancy; in his youthfull looks Sits a divinity able to inchant Queenes to admire, nay to adore his worth, Continued smiles make Summer on his cheeks, At his bright Eyes does Cupid warme his wings, When he intends to fly at Womens hearts; Musick and rich perfumes are in his breath, Aptly resembling aromatique winds, That sing the Phenix Exequies. Chris. Can my daughter So much decline the greatnesse of her spirit, Hereditary to her bloud, To affect a person meerly for his smiles, Effeminate carriage without any proofe Of manly valour in him. Parth. You mistake His character, though he can tread in peace An ayery measure to the warbling Lute, Demeane his actions with that sweet deceit. Can cosen Ladies of their soules, yet when The glorious war does summon him to th' field, He does excell in feats of active armes The ablest youth of Arcady; instructs
Old Souldiers Martiall discipline, that those Who had beheld his sweetnesse in the Court, Pusled in Faith, believed that conquering Mars Had cloth'd his fiercenesse in a Cupids shape, To vanquish some more beautious prize than was The blind Gods mother. Chri. 'Tis offensive, I'le heare no more of this. Parth. Thus I'me inforc'd to prove, Dead to obedience if I live to love. Chri. Your nicenesse Must not excuse the due respects we beare The Lord Demagoras; if the shepherds be prepar'd, They shall present their mirth to expell his melancholy. Exeunt Chris. & Parth. Scena 2. Clitophon. Strephon. Strep. Pish, you'r as fierce an aspen leafe you wag every way. Clitop. I'le tell thee honest Strephon, I No more affect a woman than the Sky Does Birds that sore in it, they are as vaine Inconstant as the flying showers of raine In Aprill Strephon. Strep. The more dissembling fellow you: why do you pro∣test to every Wench you see, you are inamor'd on her: why you should see, and seeing ought to imitate your betters, Cli∣tophon, ther's not a Lasse That trips nimbly ore the Arcadian grasse, When shee does faire Strephon veiw, Though I fly, but will pursue, Throw her eyes out on my shape,
Call me Pigsny, pretty Ape; Some there are that doe suppose Loves hot fire in my nose: With which they scorch'd, for pitty cry, Blow it ou't Strephon, or' we die; Others say my head's a bell, My hayre the ropes, that ring the knell, My tong the clapper which though their deaths it rings, They sweare no Courefeu halfe so sweetly sings; The hollow of my eyes, the grave, Which with their nailes they dig: but have— But who comes here? Enter Sapho, and Aminta. Sapho. Strepho, you'r well-met, good Aminta, see, Is he not chast, and faire as young Goates be, His head like to a Cedar over-growes, His studded cheeks and rich enameld nose. Strepho. I would be loath to give my face for the washing Girle, now Clitophon doe not you not imagine Venus girdle was My swathband, the maids so doate on my well timber'd limbs. Here's a leg, Satho, that's as neatly made, As any that ore Shepherdesse is laid; A thigh proportionable I tak't, I know thou longst to feell it nak't, A taile, some say, does hang therby, Which none must know but thee and I: I have a back too, though I say't That should not, can beare any waight, Full limbs, with sinews strong and plump, A lusty chine, and for my rumpe 'Tis so well made, and firmely knit, The Nymphs are all stark mad for it, Because they think the rest of my members proportionable. Clito. What a quick flame
Into my brest from Saphos bright eyes came, Another from Aminta's; my desire, Erst cold as Ice, grows active as the fire, Dearest Aminta, Sapho lend your eare To my just vowes. Ami. Fond Clitophon forbeare To sweare in earnest, I do know your heart Was never wounded with the blind Gods dart. Saph. See how bright Strephon does intice the ayre, To play with the sweet belropes of his hayre. What a soft murmuring the tresses makes, As did Medusa's locks, or Alectos snakes. Clito. Gentlest Virgin, white as infant snow, Pleasing as Ladon that does cooly flow, Through our green meadows; trust a loving swaine, When he protest with truth. Amin. There does remaine Enter Florida. No such good property 'mongst men on Earth, Truth is fled to Heaven with Justice. Florida the newes. Florid. The Lord Demagoras this way pursues, And must have entertainment, 'tis a charge From our great Lady, that we strait inlarge Our Pastorall devises. Sapho. We have none On such a sudden, lesse she will have done Those that were for Argalus welcome meant. Florid. Be prest with speed that greeting to present— Chrisaclea, Parthenia, Demagoras, Philarchus. Clit. They are upon us ere we are ready for the action. Chri. Florida, are the shepheards here? Florid. Madame they are, Castalia only wants. Chri. This Musick speaks her intrance. Enter Castalia.
Please your Lordship, Under this shadie Poplar, sit and see Our rurall pastimes. 1. Song. Loves a Childe, and ought to be Wonne with smiles, his Deity Is cloth'd in Panthers skinnes, which hide Those parts which kill, if but espide. Hates warres, but such as mildly led By Venus are to pleasures bed, There does soft imbraces fight, Kisses combat with delight, Amorous lookes and sighes discover What will win a Virgin-Lover. Demagor. 'Tis too effeminate this; I had rather heare The cryes of dying men than these nice straines, Or Souldiers with loud clamours rend the aire With shouts of victory. Phi. Patience my Lord, the Shepherds are proceeding to dance. 1. Dance. Demag. I doe not like this Morall, it includes Something that is distastefull; a mans possest With eminent frensie that would a minute View these idle Morris-Dances. Phi. That fellow That woo'd with such obsequiousnesse and wonne His yeelding Mistresse, sure did represent Effeminate Argalus. The other, who With confidence attempting, was repuls'd, Figur'd my selfe. This same was an abuse, Such as no hospitality, nor lawes Of true nobility can suffer. Madam.
You have done well and justly. I perceive You are as various in your giddy faith, As your coy daughter in her choice; reserve her For gracious Argalus: but if this scorne Meet not a sudden and severe revenge, May all my former glories be obscur'd; Though to performe it I should scale the Starres, And snatch them like quick wilde-fire from their Spheares, Then dart them on the earth: catch the dull clouds And squeese them into a deluge, and aspire To startle Iove with terrour of my ire. Exit. Demag. Chri. This is the suddenest passion I have seene, Whence had it its originall? My Lord, Let's follow and perswade him. Exeunt. The end of the first Act. Actus 2. Scena 1. Argalus, Kalander, Philarchus. YOu are too strangely timorous, your full worth Speakes in as loud an accent of Desert, As the most meriting Arcadian Lord, Who boasts his Ancestry. Arga. My Lord, The faire Parthenia instructs all hearts. Nobility, with Musick of her voyce; Miriads of joyes are in her looks; her eyes Are Natures richest Diamonds set in foyles Of polish'd Ebony, her breath expires Odours more sweet than issu'd from the trees Of Balme in Paradise. Philar. Demagoras
Drunk with opinion of himselfe, declines As much her glorious merit, as your just Expressions honors it. Arga. 'T were sacriledge Not to confesse so manifest a truth, 'T was shee when first I did salute the War With my unable person; who inspir'd My soule with courage active as the wind, Gave me a manly being, and infus'd By the divine reflection of her love, Thoughts fiery as that passion: I do live Only her creature. Borrow my poore heat From the extended vertue of her flame. Kalan. You are too modest, T'ascribe a greater glory to my niece, Then the whole stock of women ever boasted; You'l make her proud my Lord, 'tis an excesse Of naturall sweetnesse in you; you must temper With a more moderate confidence. Arga. Alas my Lord, Of more sincere devotion; every thought My fancy offers, is a sacrifice To the bright deity of Parthenia, Whose noble freenesse, though it may afford Me entertainment, more repleat with grace, Than she bestowes on every Suitor, yet My timorous hopes dare not assume that life, As to beleeve she loves me; pray my Lord, You are familiar with Parthenias thoughts Resolve your friends this questionable doubt; Whom her affection at purity has chosen Her loves blest favorite. Phi. My Lord, you know him, He's your most intimat friend. Arga. My friend, Were he my utmost enemy and belov'd, Of faire Parthenia: that should be a tie
Of adoration to me, pray declare The man must be made fortunate with the title Of Lord of such perfection. Phil. He is A noble generous and well manur'd youth Beares beauties ensignes in his gracious looks. Has that supreme Divinity in his eyes As sparkles flames, able to fire all hearts, And the superlative vertue of his Mind, Transcends his outward figure; he is wise As most mature age, Valiant in resolve, As fames belov'd Child reputation, Conjoine the masculine graces of his soule, With lovely carriage, and discret discourse Has not your knowledge reach'd him yet? Arga. This character So far excelling me undoes my hopes. Phi. My Lord were not to Secure your peace, I'de not disclose this secret, 'tis your selfe, 'Tis Argalus Parthenia has receiv'd A welcome guest into her open heart, Amase not your quick senses, 'tis a truth. Kalan. Your mutuall modesties Defer your just desires, I must become The moderator 'twixt your bashfull hopes You do affect, as timorously as Swans, (Cold as the brook they swim in) who do bill, With tardy modesty, and chirring plead Their constant resolutions. Enter Chrisaclea. Chris. Noble Argalus, My honor'd brother, pray heaven out entertainment, Be worthy your acceptance, you must not expect That happy welcome, here your house affords
To such deserving guests. My Lord Philarchus, Saw you the Lord Demagoras lately. Phi. Madam, Not since he flung last night hence in a rage From the presentment by the Shepherds. Kal. Demagoras Is of so haughty a disposition (Though noble otherwise) that I can wish No alliance with him: sister, I doe feare, You are too zealous to advance the match ' wixt him and your Parthenia: her's a Lord As great by birth, and greater by the favour Done him by th'King, but greatest by his owne Superlative goodnesse, does affect her with So true a fancie, that you much would wrong Humanity to dispose her to another, Wheresuch a meriting Suiter does pretend A holy interest in her. Chri. Good brother doe not Question my honour so much, I am loath To give the least occasion of distaste To my Lord Demagoras, and since my daughter Cannot affect him, I conceive he will Cease his unnecessary suit, and leave her To her owne disposure. Kala. I wish it. My Lords, and sister, honour me to transferre Your companies to my Castle; it doth stand Oppress'd with solitude, and mournes the lacke Of noble hospitality, like a widow Depriv'd of a lov'd husband. I doe long To see Dame Ceres crown'd with wreathes of wheat, Kisse plumpe cheek'd Bacchus there in daily feasts, To view my table furnish'd with such guests As would esteem't no trouble to adorne it A yeare or two together, and there finde No entertainment like a bounteous minde. Exeunt.
Scena secunda. Enter Parthenia with a Lute, & Exit. Enter Demagoras. This way she went, I followed her thorow the grove of Cy∣presse to this Bower, she cannot befarre off. Exit. Song. Parthenia within. Parth. O Argalus! Enter Demagoras. It was her voyce, Parthenia's voyce, she nam'd Her minion Argalus: that sound (though cloth'd In the inchanting accents of her breath) Was harsh as Screech-owles, or the Whislers notes, And shall be fatall to her as the straines The Syrens (dancing on the peacefull Seas) Bestow on wretched Mariners. Come forth, Drags out Parth. Imploy your airie numbers on your owne Proud beauties Epitaph. Parth. What meanes my Lord, This rude intrusion on my retir'd thoughts? How dare you hand me thus? Uncivill man Forbeare this boldnesse. Demag. Perswade me to't. When you can sing the world into a sleepe, Or tame wilde lightning with a teare; you'd best Try if the passing sweetnesse of your tunes Can (like the voyce of Magick) charme my rage To pity, or bring Argalus to your rescue;
Would he were here, and arm'd with sulphurous clouds, Like Iove imbracing Semele in fire, This hand should snatch thee from his circular flames To my revenge, inforce him to behold, Helplesse, the present ruines of thy beauty. Parthe. Your threats cannot affright me, I defenc'd With mine owne innocence, feare not your malice, Should it invade my life; your foule intent Will (like an arrow shot upright) descend On your owne head. But pray declare my Lord Why you thus riot on my guiltlesse selfe. If 'cause I cannot love you, I will die That causes Martyr. Demag. Die! your Fates reserve you Not to so brave a period as death From my great hand: I'le stick on thee a shame Worse than the poore deprivall of thy life, Such as will kill thee daily with conceit Of thy unequall'd misery. Parth. Perhaps He does intend my ravishment. My Lord, Mischiefe I see in your distracted looks Pretended to my purity: Oh doe not Murder mine honour; I'le resigne my breath With freedome to your fury. Surely Sirs A virgins gore (sooner than blood of kids) Will mollifie your heart of Adamant To a soft fleshie substance. Demag. Doe not prate, Nor with loud clamours fill the wood, nor question What my intent is. Though you had not lov'd me, You need not in contempt have throwne your heart On that effeminate Argalus; that wrong Fills my vast soule with horrour, and invites My active thoughts to a severe revenge, Since he whom I can name, but in contempt, Usurps my lawfull priviledge; otherwise The injury with patience had been borne,
Revenges cause is an immediate scorne. Exeunt. Enter Strephon, Clitophon, Sapho, Aminta. Clito. Gentle Aminta heare me. Amint. Have you done? Winding Meander first shall straitly runne, Roses in winter flourish, and our flocks Weare golden fleeces in stead of woolly locks, Ere Clitophon's false heart doe serious prove, And entertaine the perfectnesse of love. Streph. 'Tis her love to me makes her slight Clitophon thus. This 'tis to be a handsome man: I shall doat shortly (seeing my lovely Physnomie in some cleare spring, the Shepherds looking-glasse) on my owne shadow, and like Narcissus leap into the waves to embrace it. Which is she among the Swains On whom the gentle Strephon dains To cast a sheeps-eye, nod or wink, But does her selfe immortall think? Who indeed has such a face, So full of a bewitching grace. My head loves pillow, where he does rest As safe as Magpie in her nest. My forehead sweetly is bespred With Violets, and Tulips blew and red: The amber Couslip, and the corall Rose, Pretious complexion of my sweeter nose. My eyes are elements from which fall showers That make my cheeks a spring of severall flowers. So is my head a nose-gay growing on one stalke, My body is the garden, though it walk; And ther's no woman but may well, To th'worst part about it smell. My armes are Dragons that defend all these: Now view in me living Hesperides. Sapho. Who looks on Strephon that will not suppose The blushing Piony growing in his nose? The yellow Primrose that in woods had wont
To flourish, springs up in his amber front. Streph. I had a face of brasse indeed should I deny this for truth: shee'l praise me shortly into the starres, and then I shall (for a new Planet) be set i'th the Shepherds Kalender. What a gull's this Clitophon, ow long might he live ere he be in such favour with the Shepherdesses. Why when on him they will not gaze, On me they stare with much amaze; And when on him, as on a Clowne, With lowring lookes they scowle and frowne, Let gentle Strephon but vouchsafe To let them looke on him, they laugh. Clitoph. Oh you are pleasant Strephon. Sapho say, Are you as cruell as Aminta? Day Loves not the Sunne-shine dearlier than my flame Is equally devoted to your name: To yours Aminta joyntly, Oh you two, Are clearer, sweeter than the morning dew Falling in May on Lillies, fairer farre Than Venus Swannes, or spotlesse Ermins are. Which first vouchsafes me answer? There does flie Immediate comfort from Aminta's eye: Sapho speakes joy in smiles: but Virgins, here Comes beauties abstract, who has no peere Enter Florida. Grace me, deare Florida, with one blest looke. Florid. Away dissembler; Fishes scorne the hooke They see laid bare before them: but prepare, The other Shepherds hither comming are, Attending on my Lady and her guests. This musicke does invite us to Pans feast. Enter Kalander, Argalus, Philarchus, Ca∣stalia, singing. Great Pan to thee we doe confine This fleece of Wll, This  of Wi
To father Bacchus Ceres deare This garland of the Accept. Silvanus we present These fruits to thee, thy bounty sent. And you maid, from whose eacheye Winged shafts of love doe flie, Doe not shame to let your feet In a countrey measure meet With these youths, whose active parts Will play the theeves, and steale your hearts. Dance. Kaland. Shepherds, we owe our gratitude to your thankes. Sapho. Lords, and Ladies, thankes to all That grac'd our harmlesse festivall. Exeunt Shepherds. Kalan. I doe admire we wanted my faire Neece At these solemnities: me thought the sports Shew'd dull without her; noble Argalus My best wishes wait upon you. Exit Kaland. Arga. Your honours Creature: I much wonder where Partheni has bestow'd herselfe. Enter Parthenia. Phi. Shee cannot Be absent long, see here she comes; Madam, you were expected here, the Shepherds Did in their Pastorall presentments move Dully without your presence. Why thus vail'd, Extend your glorious beauty, and ecclipse The emulous day with brightnesse: Heavens protect me, What strange delusion's this? Arg. Surely a mist Shades our amazed opticks, or has some Black Devill taken her habituall forme To mocke our erring fancies; 'tis her face Vail'd in a robe of darknesse, yet her eyes Shoot their accstomed brightnesse through the clouds, To tell the admiring gazers, two such lights Cannot indure privtion: Horror friend! What should portend this ominous sight?
Deare Madam, have you devis'd this embleme of disguise▪ That when disperc'd 't may give more perfect lustre To your most exquisite figure. Parth. Oh my Lord, Look not on such a monster, lest my sight Infect your spotlesse purity. I am (Stop your innocent eares, lest the harsh sound Pierce them with horror) poyson'd. Philar. What ignoble villaine, Madam, has spoil'd natures most glorious frame, Demolish'd such a beauty as the most Cunning Painters with their skill shall never imitate? Arga. Let her name Guesse at his appellation that has ventur'd This irreligious blemish to white truth; And were his heart wrapt in a marble rock, Fenc'd with a Mine of Adamant, this hand Should from the stony casket dig it out, And with his vile blood poyson all the world. Parthe. Deare Sir, the employment of this fruitlesse rage Cannot attach him for this mischiefe. 'Twas Demagoras, who mad with the conceit That for your sake I did neglect his love, Surpris'd my guitlesse person in the wood, And with a juyce (more poysonous than the foam Of angry Dragons) sprinkled my cleare face, By th' owerfull venome straight ore bespred with this Contagious leprosie, and then he fled. Arga. Whither? What place can be so strong to guard So mercilesse a Tyger? Should he mix His conversation with unsetled aires, Breake (like a cunning Pioner) through the earth, And hide himselfe i'th Center, some quick wind, Or hideos earthquake, would inforce him thence To his deserved punishment. Oh friend! Me thinks this object should affright the light Into a sad concealment, force the clouds.
To drop upon the earth in floods of teares, And drowne it everlastingly. Philar. Pore Lady. Parth. Doe not Lords Urge violent rage to discompose your peace, I will (like The pleasing aire) wrap in that cloud, my head, That has infected it, and seeke out death: Nor doe I grieve for my vaine beauties losse, Since shivering sicknesse, or the hand of age Would have perform'd that office which his poyson Usurp'd upon its lustre: this onely wounds My fraile resolve, since I beleeve that you, Lord Argalus, affected me, that I Should be so wretched, as to be depriv'd Of that indifferent forme, for which I might Have merited your favour. Arga. Gracious soule! Inforce my immortality from my brest, Which like a flame (inclos'd 'twixt walls of brasse) Strives to ascend to heaven, and fetch from thence Thy ravish'd beauty: 'twas thy excellent minde That I admir'd; no noble soule can fix Onely on fleshly glory; and since that Remaines intire, immoveable as faith, I should undoe my honour, in revolt From sacred truth, should I renounce thy love: I'le yet imbrace thy Nuptialls with a heat Holy as altars incense; for thy face! A thousand virgins with immaculate teares Shall weep upon it, bathe it in their bloods, Till (from the different colours) the fresh Rose And glorious Lillie, in that snowy field, Regaine their ancient seats, and re-create thee The absolute Queene of beauty. Par. Oh my Lord, Your fancie wanders in distracted paths Of vanquish'd reason; since infortunate I,
Must like a piece of By an unskilfull Carver, needs becoe A most imperfect statue. Since I cannot Boast any thing that's meriting your love, Strive to forget , who will eeke Some desert, where poore moll never trod, To spend the wretched  of he lifein. Farewell my Lord, hereafter wish to meet, As I doe, in one tombe, one winding sheet. The end of the second Act. Actus 3. Scena 1. Enter Demagoras and servant. ARe all our forces muster'd. Serv. They are my Lord. Demag. Let them be All in a readinesse. I meane this night T'attempt Kalanders Castle: my great soule Is not yet satisfied by my revenge Upon Parthenia's beauty: the contempt (Cast on me by▪ refusall of my match) Cannot be wash'd off, but in streames of bloud. Serv. But my Lord, thinke on Kalanders strength. Demag. I know my owne. And 'twere a sin 'gainst my undaunted courage To doubt 'tis large has not power To vanquish any enemy. Let hosts, Conjoyne to hosts, affront me; yet this arme Has an innated vertue, that shall force Victory from their multitudes, as due Onely to my deservings. Let the Capaines Prepare our forces, while in this grove I meditate
The sweetnesse of my just revenge. Arga. Pray Sir to whom belong yo forces. Serv. To Lord Demagoras, there is the Generall. Exit Ser∣vant. Arg. You'r happily encountred, Doe you know me? Demag. Though such things as you are, Fit onely for effeminacie and sport, Doe seldome meet my knowledge, you are, If I mistake not, Argalus; I sent you A glorious present lately, your Parthenia Dress'd in her new robes of beauty, such as might Intice your wanton appetite to love. Arga. Villaine, to glory in thy most detested act, Shewes that thy Fiend-like nature has forgot All lawes of noble manhood; but I sinne To interchange a word with such a Monster; Yet before thou dost fall by me, as, if heaven have not Lost all its cure of innocence, thou must doe, I'le force thee heare the blacknesse of thy mischiefes. What devill cloth'd in humane shape, except Thy barbarous selfe, would have atchiev'd the wrack Of so much matchlesse beauty. Demag. 'Twas too meane, too light a sacrifice for my re∣venge, Had her whole Sex beene there, attired in all The glory of their beauty, and you Sir present, My anger had invaded them, and spight Of your defence converted their choice formes To the same loathsome leprosie. Arga. Peace Monster. Each syllable thou utterest does infect The aire with killing pestilence: it was Heavens never-sleeping Justice that directed My erring person hither to revenge Parthenia's murder'd beauty on thy life. Nay stare not on me Sir, were you defenc'd With heaps of men as numerous as your sinnes, This sword should force a passage, and dig out Thy heart from that black cabinet of thy brest,
And cast it a prey to Vultures. Demag. You'r very confident Young gallant of your fortune, prithee goe Poore boy and fight a combat in the court With some soft Mistresse, dance, or touch a Lute: Thou art a thing so abject thou'rt not worthy The anger of Demagoras; arme, be gone, Lest I doe frowne thy soule away. My sword Will be an uselesse instrument 'gainst such A childish enemie. Arga. Glorious Devill, My furies growne to that unequall height 'Twill not admit more conference; thy crimes Are now ripe for my punishment: though Fiends Guard your black brest, I'le peirce it. Demag. So valiant? I shall chastise your fury. Fight, Demag. falls. Arg. Parthenia, Thou art in part reveng'd, and if mine owne Death doe succeed his, I shall goe in peace to my eternity. Demag. Sure great Mars Has put on armes against me in this shape, For 'tis impossible mortality could Atchieve Demagoras conquest. Farewell light, 'Tis fit the world should weare eternall night. Dies. Arg. I hate to triumph O're his loath'd carcasse, which should be a prey To Wolves and Harpyes: O Parthenia! Here lies the Fatall Cause of all our mischiefes; And sure no soule will at his death repine: Revenge, when just, 's, not humane, but Divine. Ent. Serv. Serv. Where have you left my Lord? Arg. There lies your Lord. Exit Arg. Serv. Dead? Curst Fate, that so much greatnesse Should suffer this great overthrow, and fall From such a height to a sad funerall! Exit
Amphialus and Philarchus. Amphi. 'Tis such a cruelty, as no report, Though it discourse of rapes, and timelesse deaths, Has ever equall'd. Phi. The successe will speake The wonder more prodigious. The poore Lady (Still lovely in her sorrow) after this sad rape Of her rare beauty, privately stole thence, And with that strictnesse has obscur'd her selfe, That though inquest (though many indeavour'd In her desir'd search) can attain the least Discovery of her present being. Amph. How beares Argalus this sad disaster? Philar. As a man Whose noble courage, 'bove the crosse of Fate, Seemes patient at his misery. Amph. He and I Are both made up of sorrow, our full griefes Might (like two swelling Oceans when they meet In a contracted channell) aptly combat For rough priority. Philoclea My glorious Cousin, will by no intreats, No services, yet be induc'd to love, That I was forc'd, against the naturall zeale I beare the King my Uncle, to transgresse (Such is the power of my fancy) the strictnesse Of my obedience, captivating her By force, to whom by a most free consent My soule before was prisoner. Phi. I could wish, noble Amphialus, that your desires Might both atchieve forgivenesse, and successe: I'm none of those strict Statesmen, though I love My King, that hate your vertues for this fact, Because I know the greatnesse of your spirit Attempted it not for inveterate hate,
Or for ambition, but to gaine her love. Amphi. Philocleas love, upon whose meanest thought The Art of Memorie's grounded, and inspires Each organ of our meditating sense, With their perfections merit. Phi. But my Lord: How brooks the king the bold detention Of his faire daughters? Sure he will invert Some sudden forces on you, and compell Their back-deliverie. Amp. He shall first inforce Mortality into nothing. I did send, To avoid effusion of more humane bloud, This faire defiance, that he should elect A Champion daring singly to oppose Me in a combat, and if Fate decreed My fall by him, security for the freedome Of his imprison'd daughters. Phi. Did his Grace accept the noble offer? Amp. With a freedome Fitting a King, but who the person is That hopes to gaine a Trophee by my death, Fame has not yet divulg'd. This urgent businesse Hinders my visit of my Lord Argalus; Present my true hearts service to him, tell him I Doe inwardly dissolve into a dew Of bleeding passion for his loe, and would To re-invest blest quiet in his heart, Act o're the Scene of dangers I have pass'd Since I knew earliest manhood, so your Lordship Will please to pardon my rude haste, I must, As to my friends, to my owne affaires be just. Exeunt.
Enter Clitophon, Strephon, Alexis. Clito. Perswade me not to this, there is no woman Worthy my love, they are all too falsly common To every Suiter. Alex. Why Clitophon say you so, who are blest With her society whom I love best? Yet in her presence I'm forbid to move My suit, nay dare not name the name of love. Stre. 'Tis your own flat foolery Alexis; you should with garbe and gesture pastorall, with as much scorne as you would o'returne your enemy at football, contemne the force of wo∣man, Why? Women are shadows, fly away When follow'd, or desir'd to stay; But if you slight them, they will sue, Follow, intreat, nay flie to you: But if stiffe and strong you stand, You may tread them at command. But lie downe, the pretty Elves Will straight fall under you of themselves. Like my Spaniell, beaten, they Will lick your lips, and with you play. This is the reason why They love me so doggedly; You might by my example edifie, And live in peace Alexis. Alex. Why Strephon, you usurpe without a cause The priviledge of their love; your carriage drawes Their laughter, not affection; you appeare To them for sport, not for your person deare. Streph. Ther's your foolery still, thou hast commerc'd it seemes with none but thine owne sheepe, and art farre sillie than they: your woman is the greatest dissembler in the world, and where they toy and jeere, they most affect: Finally women are slippery, as at their tayles are Eeles, Their mindes as light as are their heeles.
And every one's for what she feeles: And so with my opinion, farewell. Clito. Stay honest Strephon, I did late compose verses in hatred of them. Stre. They are not prose, pray read them. Clito. Who would trust a woman, when They'r the onely curse of men? Syrens sing but to intice, They men to a fools paradise: Hyaena's speak, 'tis to betray To certaine ruine, so doe they: Crocodiles shed teares of slaughter, Women weepe when they meane laughter. Inconstant, cruell, falfe, unkinde, Are attributes that suit their minde. Stre. Now, as I am true Arcadian, thou would'st be whipt for this; Cupid shall cite thee into his Court for this by some of his villanous Apparators, where his wide conscienc'd Pro∣ctors, and their Clerks, shall with their pen and inkhornes beat thy braines out: if thou scap'st that, Ladies shall beat thee to death with their Monkies, you jack-a-napes; cham∣bermaids shall worry thee to death with kisses, than which there can be no greater tyranny; then, the very Cooke, and Milkmaids, shall in scolding prose, baste thee into a jelly, or charme thee into May-butter; you shall answer this, I'le peach, I'le play the Informer. Clito. I'le not recant it, not deny this truth, Alexis you shall heare it justified. Exeunt. Enter Kalander, Argalus, and Philarchus. Kalan. Where met you Lord Amphialus? Phi. In the grove, 'twixt Mantinea and his Castle, while Our servants led our horses down the hill, We did exchange some accents in discourse. The noble youth, as hopefull of successe In his designe, as brave in his resolve;
But the great rumour'd warfare 'twixt the King And him's converted to a single fight Betwixt Amphialus and what champion The King will venter to ingage in such A cause of weighty consequence. Kalan. I'm glad: Arcadia long blest in a happy peace Shall by the letting of so few veines bloud Continue in her quiet; it was fear'd This sad domestick quarrell would have cost More lives than might with justice have beene spar'd; But 'tis not yet divulg'd by fame whose valour Will be imploy'd i'th combat. Phi. His knowledge Has not yet attain'd the notice of't: My Lord, He does present his best respects to you, Deplores your sorrows with a brothers griefe, intreats you Have so much mercy on your glorious youth, As not to spend its blooming pride in sighes. Arg. My Lord, I thank him, and rejoyce his Fate Has sorted him so honourable a triall Of his undoubted valour: for my griefes, They doe increase on me, like a disease, Spreading through all my faculties, which shakes My soule into an agony of death, And will, I hope, ere long, dissolve this flesh Into forgetfulnesse. Kalan. Nay good my Lord, Renounce this passionate temper, wee'l depart Hence to my Castle, expell our cares with feasts, Hunt the wild bore that will with masculine rage Resist the hunters, till he foame to death, View swift hounds running hotly in pursuit Of the chac'd game, and from the neighb'ring hills Force Ecchoes to their shrilnesse. Arg. Alas my Lord: The sole conceit of faire Parthenia's losse
Would from a heart of marble force salt teares Cold as the dew the stone distills, invite An unremorsefull Crocodile to shed Drops as sincere as does the timorous Hart When he o'reheares the feath'red arrow sing His funerall Dirge. Kala. See Alexis accompanied with a stranger Lady. Enter Alexis and Parthenia. Alex. Sir, this Lady, newly arriv'd from Corinth, has Some businesse she will disclose to none but you. Exit. Parth. My vow's absolv'd. Arga. Angels, or if there be a power has charge Of humane frailty, shrowd me with their wings; The sight of this divinity will strike More than my Eyes, my Reason, and inforce me Here to die gazing. Phi. Blesse me! 'tis sure Parthenia. Kala. My vertuous Neece recover'd. Arg. 'Tis her face. I have examin'd with industrious eyes Each line, each lovely circle that adornes This best perfect piece of nature and all speakes Parthenia's figure. Parth. My honour'd Lords. Arg. 'Tis her voyce! The same well-sounding musick did inchant With its melodious harmony my heart. Let me adore the miracle. Parth. My Lords: Doe not distract with a deceiving joy Your noble soules, I will not seeke to fold Your thoughts in doubtfull errour: you mistake, I'm not Parthenia. Arg. What delusion playes with our faculties? Parth. My Lord, afford me patient hearing, my discourse Containes much consequence, you never lov'd
Parthenia dearlier than my selfe: we wore The very figure of each others mind, As well as body, and I should transgresse Th'integrity of our inviolate truths; Not to fullfill each scruple of her will With ceremonious duty, she being dead. Arga. Oh my just feares! Phi. Deare Lady, is she dead? Par. Dead, cold in her dark urne, As was her Icy chastity; she did arrive Some few dayes since at Corinth, where resolv'd T'obscure her self to all but mee, kind heaven Pitying her sad disaster, by mild death, Translated her to the immortall blisse Prepar'd for innocent lovers. Arga. Sure I am insensible of misery, or my brest Would burst with fulnesse of my griefes; deare Lady Informe me where Parthenia is intomb'd, That like some humble pilgrime, I may visit The holy place with a religious zeale, and bathe Her virgin ashes in my teares, Weepe o're her grave till from my drops arise Parthenias monument. Some crystall pyramid to tell the world: Par. You interrupt, what my sad heart, as an unwelcome load, Desires to be disburdend of: before Her dying breath, she did injoyne me by All our friendships rites, when I had laid Her corps in earth: straict to repaire (with notice Of her expiring) hither. Phi. Deere my Lord, be not so much distemper'd. Parth. Tell, quoth she, my noble mother that I dy in peace, Even with Dmagoras; commend me to my love, My dearest Argalus; informe him that His very name flies with my soule to heaven, There to remaine for ever; and ingage him T'accept of you as my last guift, you are So like Parthenia that, hee'll love you for
My memory: So with a constant truth To my dead friend I'm come, my Lord, to offer What she bequeath'd, her legacy of my love, To your acceptance. Arga. Madam, I must rest For your kind wish your servant; but in me Parthenia only must have room to live, While I have vitall motion. Had she impos'd What charge (but this) soever, I'de endevour It's strict performance: but I am resolv'd As she enjoy'd my first, my latest love Shall on her memory waite till we do meet I'th happy shades together. Part. Sure my Lord, This is contempt of my desert, I must not Be thus repuls'd: to satisfie your feares, I am your true Parthenia. Argalus. Parthenia. Part. Yes, and by the Queen of Corinth cur'd, whose sk and care clens'd my fowle leprosie. Arga. Parthenia, 'twas well your wisdom by degrees Diffus'd this comfort; had you showr'd it all at once, T'would like a torrent have o'reborne the banks Of my amaz'd mortality. Kal. Come, discourse Your story at your leisure, Argalus Take your Parthenia, treachery nor hate Cannot undo the firme decree of Fate. Exeunt. Sapho. Aminta. Strephon. Clitophon. Strep. Ile try your impudence, have you the face To deny your libell Clitophon? Clit. Good Strephon urge me not, I shall not want Audacity to expresse them to recant. My just opinion were injust, and fit To staine my resolution, and my wit. Amin. Clitophon, how dare You arm'd with boldnesse greater than dispaire
Venture abuse to woman, or defile That name with scandall, to whose meanest smile, You have done worship? Sapho. Prais'd looks with flat'tring art, Each look, each lineament, as the best part Of Natur's choysest workmanship: but men Are more inconstant than light whirlewinds; trust The sea with feathers, or March winds with dust Rather; and let their words, oaths, teares, vowes passe, As words in water writ, or slipery glasse. Clit. This is more jugling. O! with these h'as found A passage through my Eyes, to give a wound To my poore Heart: it is their looks beget This soddaine alteration, which as yet Does but with infant feathers strive to fly To heaven, tels Justice of the njury I have done sacred womanhood: thence Thou scrowle detracting spotlesse innocence. Aminta deare forgive me, Sapho see How my teares distill. Stre. If they were every one as big as a Turnip, it should not serve to feed my anger: well wenches, if you doe pardon him, may your maidenheads be a burden to you, till you bee fore∣score at least, then may you turne Witches, and some Goblin get them; or else perish in your Virginity, and leade Apes in Hell for't: Nay if you do forgive him, I will have you arraing'd of treason against Venus, and Cupid shall be your blind Judge, and condemne you for the fact, to loose your heads; your mai∣denheads I meane, and have a man of fourescore and ten for your Executioner. Sapho. Deare Strephon, do not frown, it does disgrace The sallow color of thy wither'd face. Stre. You would faine cog your selfe into my favour again; but till you bee converted from this Clitophon, you shall not kisse the worst part about me. Saph. O say not so, Thou art more sweet than Yewe or Miscletoe,
Alex. O Clitophon, Aminta, every voyce Be fill'd with admiration, sing, rejoyce, Till th' earth dance like our young Lambs, till trees Grow active at the musick; all degrees, Of greefe are banish'd: all our flocks shall play For joy Parthenia, O Parthenia? Clito. What of Parthenia? Alex. Is return'd, her right Beauty new shining like the Queen of night, Appearing fresher after she did shroud: Her gawdy forehead in a pitchy cloud, Loves triumphs in her eyes; audaious I, That durst name love, and faire Alexis by: Be dumb for ever. Sapho. Stay Alexis, She shall now revoke that loving tyranny, Since our Parthenia's return'd, I'le turne My Elegiack strains away, and burn in high love raptures. Alex. She must strait be wed to Lord Argalus. The bridall bed is in preparing. Sapho. At a verse of mine, Hymen shall light his Nuptiall flaming pine, I will enchant them to embraces free, With a devoted Epithalamy; Till I sing day from Tothis armes, and fire With ayry raptures the whole morning quire, Till the small birds their Silvan notes display And sing with us, joy to Parthenia. Dance & Exeunt. The end of the third Act.
Actus 4. Scena 1. Argalus, Parthenia. Kalander. Philarchus. Kalan. SIt my most honor'd Cosen, you are Lord Both of this house and feast: the honest Shepheards Were taken too much o'th soddaine to provide A fitting entertainment; but they've striv'd With their most early haste, t'expresse their duty: Sapho inspir'd with her Poetique fury, Will speake your Epithalamy; They do intend to dance too, I see; This Musicke declares their purpose. Musick. Enter Shepheards and Shepheardesses. Sap. The joyes of health and what the spring Of youth, strength, happinesse, can bring Wait upon this noble paire; Lady, may you still be faire, As earliest light, may you enjoy Beauty, which age cannot destroy, May you be fruitfull as the day, Never sigh but when you pray, Know no griefe, but what may be To temper your felicity. And you my Lord, may truest fame Still attend on your great name, Live both of you espous'd to peace, And with your yeares let love increase,
Goe late to Heaven, but comming thither, Shine there two glorious stars together. Song and Dance. Kalen. Does these presentments please you? our dull wits Are not so fortunate, in rich conceits As your quick Cyprian intellects. Exeunt Sheepherds. Arga. You vouchsafe Too much to grace them, but Parthenia The King as conscious of my meane desert To make me seeme more worthy of thy love, Has by imposing a command, confer'd An honor greater on my sprightly hopes, Then the addition of estate or bloud Before enrich'd me with possession of. Part. Let me participate your happinesse, My dearest Lord, what is it? Argal. An honor which like the Eldest child of Fame treads on the neck of glory. Kalan. Come, my Lord, let's leave these happy lovers to themselves. Part. What may it portend tell me, and Ile rejoyce As much to heare it, as when I recover'd my poyson'd beauty. Arga. Thou shalt know't, And with lowd acclamations sound my fate, For most compleatly happy: by the King I am elected instantly to meet In single opposition, honors type The brav'st of Soldiers and the best of men, The noble Lord Amphialus. Par. Blesse me divinity! can you conceive my Lord That act an honor, upon which the losse Of the unvalued treasure of your life Has strict dependence? sure my Lord, the King Cannot be such a Tyrant to employ
You in your infant age of peacefull love, To sutch a cruell warfare. Arga. Now I see, Parthenia loves not Argalus, if she wish him Turne recreant to his valour; what account Unlesse of Coward, shall I give the King? Should I refuse this honorable taske; Which but to meet I'de scalestar-neighboring rocks, Travell through desarts, scarcely known to beasts, And combat all that durst oppose my passage, To this brave enterprise. Par. My dearest Lord, This resolution does oppresse my soule, With torments worse than death: there's not a word Which you have utter'd, but like mandraks grones, Or howles of wolves affrights me: Can there be Such a contempt of my regardlesse love Be got so soon? Can you forsake my bed, Before I scarce conceive my selfe a wife, Or you a husband? Oh Argalus, I thought We should have liv'd, and taught the erring world Affections primitive purenesse; grown like Palmes (That do with amorous mixture twine their boughes Into a league-union) and so florish, Old in each others armes; when now if thou Proceed to triall in this bloudytaske, My feares do with prophetike motion tell me, We are undone eternally. Arga. Have you so slight an estimation of my worth, In managing bright armes, that you can feare My persons suffrance, O Parthenia? Thou wouldst deprive me of that same, which time, Should he decline his restlesse course away, Shall never equall, from my youth-full head: Thou wouldk detaine a chaplet of such bayes, As not Penein Daphne first transform'd Could boast the like for freshnesse: dry my love, Those sacted eyes drowned in christall streames.
Or if thou wilt, I'le kisse away thy teares, In stead of heavenly Nectar. Part. This but ads to my misfortune, Sir, I am your wife, And never yet requested any grant, Unlesse your love deny me not my first, And only suit; leave my good Lord to tempt Your destiny, Amphialus is so good In his kind love to women; that I doubt not To find some meanes without your honors breach, To put this fatall combat off. Arga. No Parthenia, 'Tis but in vaine to tempt me with your prayers, Could he spit thunder would afright the Gods, Or wore at each lock of his haire a flash Of piercing lightning, yet I should attempt To snatch the fery chaplet from his head, And as a garland of victorious bayes, Wreath it about these temples. Par. Well my Lord, since no perswasion will reclaime your will, Goe, and be happy in your disastrous task My maids and I will pay each houre to heaven A thousand vowes for your successe; I give You my free licence; O that deathfull word Comes from the Organs of my troubled soule! As a constant does from a timorous maid, To an inforcing ravisher. Arga. Why now, thou art my best Parthenia, doubt not love, But I will bring white victory to crown Thy glorious front; give me but one kind look, T will fill me with heroick force: let's in, And feareleffe take a happy parting kisse, Suspicion hinders loves immediat blisse. Exeunt. Clitophon.
nter Clioph, Srephon, Alexi, Sapho, Amina, Florida. Cli. Sweet Sapho, will you still persist, and kill whom you might save? Sapho. 'Tis your owne various will Inforces my contempt; but ere's no place T'afford our loves an answer: the kinde grae, That decks the plaines, will smile when we do fit On its greene tapistry, and aptly fit Our wilde affections: Shepherdesses, lt Our woolly charge within our folds be set, Lest the hoarse Wolfe to sate his ravenous thirst With blood of Lambes, doe through our weak flocks burst; After let's meet upon the neighbouring plaine, And there determine of our loves: I'le straine A little on your patience to rehearse, On the late Nuptials, this uing verse. Amint. Doe my deare Sapho. Flor. Shepherds, attend her Layes. Amint. They get us credit, and our Sapho Bayes. Sapho. The holy Priest had joy'd their hands, and now Night grew propitious to their Bridall vow, Majestick Iuno, and young Hymeies To light their Pines at faire Partheia's eyes; The little Graces amourously did skip, With the small Cupids, from each lip to lip; Venus her selfe was present, and ntide Her virgine Love; when , on either side Stood as her handmaids Chastity and Truth, With that immace gider of her youth Rose-colour'd Modesty: These did nd esse The beauteous maid, who now in readinesse, The Nuptiall tapers waving 'bout her head, Made poore her garments, and enrich'd her bed; While the fresh Bridegroome, like the lusty Spring,
Did to the holy bride-bed with him bring Attending masculine vertues; down he lay'd His snowy limbs by a far whiter mayd; Their kisses linke their minds, as they embrace A quire of Angels flew about the place, Singing all blisse unto this paire; for ever May they in love and union still persever. Amin. 'Tis almost sung for the nuptialls, Why was't not sung with musick? Saph Castalia's voyce would have been tir'd with it. Come, let's depart, Love though obscur'd still flames about the heart. Exeunt. Enter Amphialus, Argalus, Philarchus. Amph. I could have wish'd the King Had destin'd any to this fatall task But noble Argalus; in him there rests Such a commanding fulnesse of true worth, That as't will be a glory to o'recome, 'Twill be a griefe equall to think'gainst whom The present fury of my arme must be Unwillingly directed. Arg. Famous Amphialus; 'Tis so much honour to be held your friend, 'Twere indiscretion in me to admit A thought of being your enemy: we two Should meet, my Lord, to revell, not to fight: But since th'injustice of our Fates does force▪ This sad contention; deare Amphialus, Think that two brothers may with hot resolve Strive to atchieve one crowne, yet still be friends▪ The lawrell destin'd for my head will wither If it be snatch'd from thine. Amph. More famous Argls, Under whose hand the great fell
These attributes of curtesie doe speake Your noble natures freeeffe you and I Should rather exercise our able armes In one anothers quarrell, than imploy them Upon our selves. Deare Argalus, our fates Are too in just t'ingage our swords against Our bodies; for in harming thee, I offer Wounds to my selfe; we two retaine so much Affinity, by friendship, we must needs be One individuall substance. Phi. Good my Lords, Since there's that sympathie of love and nature 'T wixt your two soules, dissolve it not; the blow That shall divide your hearts will be more impious In sep'rating that union, than in cutting Your twists of life asunder. Arga. Philarchus, you are so noble, Our wills desir'd▪ you an indifferent Judge In our unwilling difference, since you are An equall friend to both. Amph. Philarchus, We two are fortunes scorne that we should be Such friends in soule, yet by our deeds be thought Severest enemies. Deare Argalus, Let not thy lenity regard my life, Which is so worth lesse, 'tis a weight I wish Rather to lose than keepe: but guard thy owne, Preserve that precious bloud, which I shall grieve To see diffus'd on earth, nay rather weepe Than shed a drop of it. Arg. How much, my Lord, you vanquish him with cur∣tesie Whom your arme means to conquer? But Amphialus, Since we are mutuall friends, and yet must seeme. Mutually enemies, to testifie 'Tis by our fate, not malice, we are foes, I'le make thee my full Executour; bestow A gift upon thee of that pricelesse worth
Posterity shall never boast Iparllell When I am ashes, if there be a wretch (For some there are that dare blaspheme the Gods) Does injure my Partheni; prithee friend, Let be thy Care to punish that contempt 'Gainst vertuous purity: and as the last And most supreme inducement of my love▪ If by thy hand I perish, let my heart Be sent to my Parthenia. Amph. The same justice I beg of thee, my Argalus, to have mine Convay'd to my Philoclea; and if ame (As it may chance) traduce me after, death, Noblest Argalu, justifie thy friend, Thy poore Amphialus; and defend the deare Authour of my misfortune, sweet Philoclea; otherwise Posterity inform'd by bad report, May black her precious memory; and say A worthlesse man fell by thy sword. Let us embrace, my Argalus, and take A true, though sad, farewell; and once Let us employ our hands against our hearts. Arg. Kill our selves mutually; for who first does fall, Leads but the way toth' others fuerall. Fight. Enter Parthenia. Parth. Eternall darknesse seaze me: O my Lord, You are reported to be thrall to love; or her sake you affect most, doe not make A breach in ebbing nature; More! This bloud Clothing the grasse in purple, does convert My heart to Alablaster. O Argalm! Arg. O Parthenia! Never till now unwelcome have I liv'd To such an abject lownesse, that my life. Must (like a malefactors) be by prayers Redeem'd from death. Let us renew the fight.
Me thinks I tread on slippery glasse, my unsupporting . Dance measures on light waves, and I am sinking Into the watery bosomes, there to rest for all eternity. Amph. I have seene So dying tapers, as it were, to light Their owne sad funerall; expiring, dart (Being but stirr'd) their most illustrious beames, And so extinguish. Parth. Angels, if ye have charity, afford Some Surgery from heaven. Now I see the cause Why my sad heart (fill'd with propheticke feare) Sought to have stopt your journey and why I Compell'd by power of overruling Fat Follow'd you hither. Oh Argalus! Arga. Parthenia, I doe feele A marble sweat about my heart, which des▪ Gongeale the remnant of my bloud to Ice; My Lord, I doe forgive you, friend, farewell. Parthenia, showre on my pale lips a kisse, 'Twill waft my soule to its eternall blisse. Parthenia, O Parthenia. Die. Phi. So cracks the cordage of his heart, as Cabls That guide the heavie Anchors, cut by blasts Of some big tempest. My Lord, your wounds are many▪ And dangerous, 'tis fit you doe withdraw▪ And have'm cur'd. Amph. I am carelesse growe, my life Is now more odious to me than the light Of day to Furies: Madam, I am past The thought of griefe for this sad fact, and Griefes individuall substance: pray forgive me, Heaven knowes it was not malice that betray'd Your Lords lov'd life; but a necessitous force To save my owne. Joy comfort you: thus Fate Forces us act what we most truly hate. Exit. Phi. Deare Madam, calme your passion, and resolve
To arme your soule with patience. Parth. Patience Sir? Doubt not so much my temper, I am calme. You see o'th sudden as untroubled seas. I could stand silent here an age to view This goodly ruine. Noblest Argalus, If thou hadst died degenerate from thy selfe, I should have flow'd with pity, till my teares Had drown'd thy blasted memory; but since Thou perish'd nobly, let thy soule expect A joy, not sorrow from me: the greene oake Lawrell, and lovely mirtle shall still flourish About thy sepulchre, which shall be cut Out of a Mine of Diamonds; yet the brightnesse Proceeding from thy ashes shall out-shine The stones unvalew'd substance. Phi. Sure she is growne insensible of her griefe, or fallen Into some wilde distraction. Parth. You mistake; 'Tis not a fury leads me to this strange Demeanour; but conceit that I should sinne Against my Argalus. Should I lament His overthrow? No Blest soule, Augment th'illustrious number of the starres. Outshine the Ledan brothers: Ile not diminish Thy glory by a teare, untill my brest Does like the pious Pellican's, break forth In purple fountains for thy losse, and then, It shall diffuse for every drop thou shed'st A Crimson river, then to thee Ile come: To die for love's a glorious martyrdome. Exit. The end of the fourth Act.
Actus 5. Scena I. Enter Strephon, Clitophon, Alexis. Clito. 'TIs certaine my Alexis; have not I (Who in their presence for love dayly die) A cause to blame my destiny, and be Oppress'd with a continuall melancholy? Alex. You are your owne Oppressour. Clito. O wretched fate! I in their presence oat on every one, Yet in their absence am content with none. Stre. Yet I am in a farre worse case Than any of you both alas. This villaine Cupid play'd the knave, Or at my birth his mother gave Some of her beauty to my naturall parts, Which doe allure even stony hearts, That I am weary of so many Good parts, and would lend some to any. I Clitophon, even every limb About thee can with beauty trim, And never miss'd: I are be sworne There's not an inch about me worne, Which has not, all the Maids can tell, Waiting on it of love an Ell▪ Alex. O far more happy Strephon, Stre. I doe Alexis, I will surrender you That happinesse with all my heart: Were there but only two or three, Or foure or five did doate on mee, I grant you then'twere very well, The handsome thn should eare the bell;
But there's not in this face a wrinckle, Nor on my precious nose a pimple, Nor a haire upon my chin, (But those you see are very thin) Nor any squint comes from mine eye, But that soe wnch for it does fry In loves hot furnace: Though n'ere so coy, Each Lasse would my good pars enjoy. Clito. Why does not Strephon then, Make use of time, and chuse the richest Jemme Out of this Mine of beauty, and enrich Himselfe by marriage▪ Streph. My fingers itch at thee to foolish∣ly: Would'st have me make an Anatomy of my selfe? Or dost suppose That unto one I'le wed my nose. And to another all the rest Of this sweet face? A pretty est▪ Should I pretend my selfe to match, The wenches then would play at catch That catch may; each get a limbe, Or rather with themselves in rage, They cruell civill warre would wage, And with those terrible weapons, their nailes, Which them in battell never failes▪ And farre more terrible tongues▪ They'd fighting scold, and scolding Enter Sapho, Amit, Florida. Clito. Still dearest By prayers and teares be mov'd though Delight in murder; you doe seeme to take Your naturall fiercenesse from them, there cannot So much sterne vigour in humanity, As to contemne a suppliant, and prove To him most cruell, who does truliest love.
Saph. You are too sickle' Clitophon, you see Leaves in green Autumne scatter'd from each tree By the rude winds; you are more light than they, More fading than the flowrey dresse which May Attires the prickly thornes in; lighter far Than frothy bubbles, or dispers'd smoakesare, Yet I should love you, did not Strephons eye Dart flames might fire a marble heart; they fly, With nimble wings about me; Strephon see She who refuses him, will yeeld to thee. Str. Would you could perswade me to't my nimble toung'd Melpomene. I must not bee injust to wrong my friend Clitophon, my friend's my friend, sweet Sapho: and you are a woman, of which gender (thanks be to Heaven and my good parts) I have indifferent choyse, a hundred or so. If you Aminta, or you Florida love me, the best comfort or course you can take Is to run mad for my deare sake. And hang your selves, for you'l so prove True lovers hang'd in chains of love. Amin. A cruell resolution: Sapho, well, We must resolve not to lead apes in Hell. And we have vow'd never to match but where Strephon vouchsafes to give us; for you two, Unlesse he please, our wils can nothing do. Stre. Come hither Clitophon, you love this witty rogue, this Sapho. Clit. Deare as my own eyes. Stre. That's deare enough; and you Alexis love Aminta. Alex. I dare not name that word, yet ther's in me A most severe and lasting constancy, to faire Aminta. Clit. O be gentle Strephon, let kind pitty move Thy honest heart, not to deprive our love Of its true comfort. Stre. I shall be sure now to be famous for some thing, Your hands, your hands, my pretty payre of turtles. Amin. Will you forsake us Strephon? Saph. Will you give me away?
Whose heart desires to live only by your affection. Stre. I cannot helpe it, lesse I should distribute my selfe amongst you; I'me very glad the matter is depos'd into my handling; these wenches are in good hope now that I will have one of them my selfe, and that makes them refer themselves to mee: here Clitophon, take Sapho, and you Alexis the beautifull Aminta: But bee sure to con∣fesse you have but my reversions. You'l give mee leave to kisse your wives, or so, when you are married, Ile not goe an inch further, as I am a true Arcadian; and so shake hands, and Heavens give you joy. Now Clitophon you're excellent at that sport, shall's not have a frisque or so at your Wedding, ha? Clito. We'r all your servants. Dance. Saph. Now Strephon wee have suffered you to play the foole all this while, Receive our true opinions of you. Stre. I, come, let's hear't. Sap. Thou hast a face So full of vilenesse, it does disgrace Deformity it selfe; ther's not a woman, Were she to filthy prostitution common, That could affect thee. Flori. Cease to torment him Sapho, the pretty ele Begins to see the beauty of it selfe: We must attend our Lady. Sap. Strephon go, And hang thy selfe, or else resolve to shew Thy selfe no more, but like an Owle by night, Or keep thy ill-favourd countenance to affright Wolves from our sheep: Come lovers, now 'tis time To celebrate our joyes, which then renew When proofe has seal'd our fancies pure and true. Exeunt.
Stre. Now doe I perceive my selfe an errant asse, and could hang my selfe in earnest, were I sure but to dy in jest for't: these wenches are shee-furies, and I hope in time to see them grow so abominably ugly, that they may hate them: for to say truth, These women are mere Weather-cocks, And change their minds more than their smocks; Have hearts as hard as stony rocks, And toungs that lie worse than false clocks, By which they catch men like Jacks in a box: And so with my curses I leave them. Exit. Enter Philarchus. Amphialus. Phil. 'Twould be the safest way my Lord, and which Would best suit with your honour; be a means To gaine faire Philoclea. Amphi. That blest name Charmes me to adoration: O my Lord, Philoclea's love is like a mine of wealth, Guarded by watchfull Dragons; there attend Legions of feares, and unrelenting thoughts, On the unvalued treasure. Phi. I could wish you would expresse a more indul∣gent care Towards yourselfe: you see the angry King Griev'd for his daughters, and Zelmanes losse, Attempts what ever may invade your life; I shall endevour your reconcilement with him; but my Lord, Farewell, I know you wait some opposite; I wish Your actions crown'd with a deserv'd successe. Exit Phi. Amphialus. Thus honest Lord engages my observance: how my fate Plays the sly tyrant with me, and involves
My thoughts in killing passions: flames meet flames With equall resolution, and contend, Like Cadmus earth-borne brothers to destroy Each other by their fury; feare kils hope, But a new rising from the former urne, Takes vengeance on the murd'rer: wretched I Live as to live were every houre to die. Enter Sapho. Amina. Florida in mourning, Parthenia after. A most sad apparition suiting well The inward horror of my mind! this Knight Sure should not be my enemy, he fights Under my very colours; Noble youth, If what your outward figure speake, does chalenge Relation to your mind; I see no cause We should indanger our mortalities In this infortunate quarrell: there appeares So great an outward sympathy, it tels My soule wee should not combat. Parth. Teach your feares This fruitlesse hope: I come not hither arm'd With resolution big as Fate, to part, O'recome with aeyry treaties; sooner thinke To charme the Genius of the world to peace, When earthquakes have affrighted it, tha with Well-worded eloquence, to decline the height Of my wak'd wrath. Amph. Sir, you promise An Early conquest o're me, but there rests In mee a manly pitty, would not staine My conquering hands in your too innocent bloud; I would not have your vertue, gentle youth, Be like a toward Cedar overwhelm'd By an outragious tempest blasted ere.
It come to full growth; if for honors Cause, And to atcheive fame, you attempt my life, Let me desire you to employ your force On some lesse fortunate Warrier. I am loath To triumph in the guiltlesse spoiles of your Yet blooming honor. Par. Read thy friends this dialect of cowardise: Know, to incense thee more, I'me one that hate Thy deare Philoclea, with so dire a spight, That I pronounce her one, who lives upon The spoile of innocent vertue, that has caus'd Guiltlesse esfusion of more Noble bloud, Than ever fill'd hers or your baser veines. Amph. Then I see, you come to raile, and must chastise the wrong You do inflict on her, whose spotlesse soule. Is so much ignorant of the least guilt, It understands it not: recant this wrong Opinion of her purity, and leave off To wake an anger that had rather sleepe, Than rise to hurt you. Part. I see then I must adde New truths to affright your cowardise: Your mistris Is the decay of more same-worthy soules, Than she has hayrs or vaine bewitching looks T'inthrall your wanton passion: on your heart, My sword shall write this for a serious truth, And underneath it, that unworthy lie You have pronounc'd, in justifying her free From my just affirmation. Amp. Feinds could never have so incens'd me, Fight, Her Helmet fals off. Blesse me! sure some Angel's entred Into armes against my unworthy selfe; Those golden locks, surely are Pallas head-tyre, or the Queen. Of Love has masqued her selfe in Mars his shape, So to betray my lucklese arme to slaughter Of the worlds exquisite beauty. Par. Now my joy
Exceeds the greatest trophees: Argalus, Me thinks I see him riding in a chariot drawn by Doves, Cut the bright firmament, and there attend My wish'd ascention. Amph. Some mountaine that Has stood the longest rage of time, unloose Its stony roots, fall on me, that I never May be on earth remembred; deerest Lady, Looke up, and let me showre a floud of teares Into your wounds: distraction seaze me; may I Like some black prodigy contemn'd by light Never be more distinguish'd. Part. Nay my Lord, Do not let passion discompose your thoughts. You've done an office for me, that blots out All my conceit of hatred: pray, forgive me, I injur'd your Philoclea; arm'd for death, I came to have it from that hand which My Argalus; weepe not girles, I do not need your moyst religious teares To usher me to Heaven: Looke how an host Of Sainted lovers on their turtles wings, Conducted by my Argalus, approach To wat me to Elisium; take my breath That flies to thee on the pale wings of death, Argalus, O Argalus. Dies▪ Amph. Can I retaine mortality, and behold This impious act of my dire fate? this piece Of new demolish'd Nature, were it plac'd For its own Ivory figure on a Tombe Of purest Alabaster, would be thought One with the stones white substance: Maids, convay Your Ladies body hence, while I depart To find a grief out, that may breake my heart. Exit. Amin. Haplesse Lady, Let us resolve not to out-live her, but Like constant servants, waite upon in death
Our murd'red Mistris. Sapho. Our poore lives cannot Redeeme her losse, not pacify her ghost, For her late slaughter. I have compos'd An Elegy on her death, and beauty: heare it. Happy Arabians, when your Phoenix dies In a sweet pile of fragrant spiceries, Out of the ashes of the Myrrhe-burn'd mother, That you may still have one, springs up another. Vnhappy we, since 'tis your Phoenix nature; Why could not ours our, only matchlesse Creature, Injoy that right? why from Parthenia's urne. Should not Parthenia gloriously returne? O, there's a reason: 'tis 'cause Natures store All spent on her, is now become too poore To frame her equall: so that on her Herse My trembling hand shall hang this funerall verse. True love, and beauty, none can boast to have, They both are buried in Parthenia's grave, Who was loves, glories, beauties, vertues pride, With her love, glory, vertue, beauty dyde. Now girles, Strow flowers upon the body, while our teares Imbalme her memory; and what ever eares Shall heare this story, may with Justice say, None lov'd like Argalus and Parthenia. FINIS.
