11999 99852609 17938
A FVLL, AMPLE AND PVNCTVALL DISCO∣very of the Barbarous, Bloudy, and inhumane practises of the SPANISH INQUISITION against Protestants: With the originall thereof. Manifested in their proceedings against sundry particular persons, aswell English as others, upon whom they have executed their Diabolicall TYRANNIE A Worke fit for these times, serving to with∣draw the affections of all good Christians from that Religion, which cannot be maintayned without those rop of . First written in Latin by Reginaldus Gonsaluius Montanus, and after translated into English. PSAL. 74. Arise O Lord, and judge thine owne cause. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Bellamy, and are to be sold at the three golden Lions in Corne-hill, neere the Royall Exchange. 1625.
❧ The speciall matters contained in this Treatise, placed orderly in such wise as the Inquisitours proceed in their Court. Chap. 1. THe ordinary manner and forme commonly vsed of the Inquisitours, as well in citing as apprehen∣ding such persons as are accused in their consistorie. Fol. 1. 2. The Sequestration of their goods, commonly cal∣led the Sequester. 9. 3. The seuerall dayes of hearing. 11 4. The publication of the witnesse, as they terme it. 27 5. The confutation of the same. 36 6. The judgements and condemnation to the racke, and the manner of execution thereof. 42 8. Other practises of the Inquisition, to driue the Priso∣ners to confesse such matters as the Inquisitors are de∣sirous to vnderstand. 56 9. Certaine other more secret then the rest. 59 10. How the prisoners bee entreated concerning the whole manner of their diet. 71 11. The visitations of the prisoners. 84 12. The Acte containing the Publication of the senten∣ces. 88
13. The Interpretation of the sentences. 110 14. Speciall examples, plainely shewing the treacheries and legerdemaines of the Inquisition in practice and exercise. 117 15. A list of certaine godly Martyrs, who constantly dying for the truth; the Inquisitors notwithstanding laboured to slander with apostasie and revol∣ting. 134 This Table is according to the chapters as they are printed; the seuenth being mistaken for the eighth, &c.
The translatour to the Reader. THere is no good nature (gentle Reader) that beholding on a stage an old Tragedie, wherein be represented the miseries of any one man, or the ruine and desolation of a whole countrie, will not accompany the out∣ward motions of the players, with some inward affection, yea, sometimes with teares and vehement compassion. Which if we doe in a play, whereof the matter is many times but inuented, and howsoeuer it be true, yet happened in Countries farre off and long agoe, the parties neither touching vs in kin∣dred, nor the matter in example: surely the dange∣rous practices and most horrible executions of the Spanish Inquisition, declared in this booke, which now is brought with fire and sword into the low Countries, the sodaine imprisonment of honest men without processe of law, the pitifull wandring in exile and pouertie of personages somtime rich and wealthy, the wiues hanging on their husbands
shoulders, and the poore banished infants on the mothers brests, the monstrous racking of men with∣out order of law, the villanous and shamelesse tor∣menting of naked women beyond all humanitie, their miserable death without pitty or mercy, the most reprochfull triumphing of the popish Syna∣gogue ouer Christians, as over Painimes and Eth∣nicks, the conquering of subiects as though they were enemies, the vnsatiable spoyling of mens goods, to fill the side paunches of ambitious idle shauelings, the slender quarrels picked against king∣domes and nations, and all this onely to hoise vp a pild polling priest aboue all power and authoritie that is on earth: these things ought surely much more to moue vs to compassion: Being no stage∣play, but a matter fit for any Poet to make a Trage∣die of hereafter, either for that it will bee an argu∣ment most lamentable, or most incredible to them which shall not haue seene it; The persons which suffer being our neighbours by their habitation and dwelling place, our acquaintance by entercourse, our friends by long acquaintance, of the same houshold of faith, and our very brethren in Christ. And if we weepe when we see cruelties set forth in playes, because the like either hath happened to vs heretofore, or hereafter may betide vs, then have we not ouely good cause in these calamities of our poore brethren to bewaile that which happened to them, but also to feare what will follow vpon vs. For if we, that not many yeares since felt but a taste of this Iron whippe, and since haue enioyed quiet∣nesse
and leisure to serue God, thinke our selues sure and the storme passed, and that wee be but hearers and seers, and haue no parts in this Tragedie, be∣sides that we are vncharitable in so lightly estee∣ming the griefes of others, we doe also foolishly and dangerously abuse our selues. For who is so igno∣rant of the holy Complot and Conspiracie agreed on by the Pope and his Champions for the executi∣on of the Councell of Trent, and the generall esta∣blishing of this Inquisition? Behold the attempts in Scotland, the proceedings in France, the executi∣ons in Flaunders, and if we Englishmen haue one of the last parts, let vs bee sure, as in Tragedies the last parts and Actes be most dolefull, so wee neuer knew yet what persecution meant in comparison, to that is meant and threatned vs now. If the Diuels holinesse, and his lieutenant generall, the Popes maiestie, were a little moued then, they bee now (doubt ye not) enraged, and transubstantiate into furour and horne woodnesse, to see their reuenues decay, their Monasteries and Synagogues defaced, their villanies detected, their noble champions slain. And therefore you must set before your eyes the Diuell in person, and the Pope his chaplaine and Con∣fessour, gotten vp into the top of some high moun∣taine, and from thence shewing the kingdomes of the earth to such Princes as will themselues fall downe and worship, and thereto driue the world. Which is so farre off from any figuratiue speech, as it is knowne to be the very Platforme and foundati∣on of all these broyles and troubles. Be not deceiued
(good Reader) vnderstand the world, these men seeke no religion. For how can they seeke Religion, that thinke there is no God? They seeke the ho∣nour and wealth of the world. If the Gospell would allow ambition, pleasure, profite, the Pope would haue long since beene a protestant. If Popery had al∣lowed preaching of the truth, reformation of life, pouertie: Popery had beene esteemed (as it is) Here∣sie, and so persecuted. But the Pope would bee thought most holy, and be indeed most mightie; the world is falne from him: he hath spent all: nought comes in to supply; he hath a great sort to enter∣taine, a great sort to reward, a great pompe and state to maintaine. Trow yee these things will bee raised of the spoile of poore Protestants? Nay, be thou sure of it, Papist or Protestant, if thou be rich, and hast any fleece, it will be all one. Thy land will vndoe thee: thy goods will condemne thee. Euen as the good Citizen of Rome, Q. Aurelius in Scyllas time, that was neither of the one side nor the other, but lamented the spoile and misery of his countrie, when as he came into the market place, and heard hi name read among them that were proscribed to death, cryed out, O vnhappy man that I am: my house at Alba is the cause of my death, and by and by was openly slaine. If euer there were time like to Scyllas, it is now in our dayes, in which hungry need, and vnsatiable couetousnesse armed with crueltie will spare nothing. The seruant will betray his master: the friend his friend and acquaintance: the brother shall murther his brother. As in the same time
L. Catilina, he that after would haue set fire on the Citie, slew his owne brother, and after prayed Scylla that hee might bee proscribed. The which being granted him, he recompenced with killing another, M. Marius one of the contrary faction, and bringing his head, the blood running along his armes, pre∣sented it in the market place to Scylla, and ranne to the holy water-pot of Apollos temple which was hard by, to wash his hands, a very fit vse of such ho∣ly water. The which storie I the rather recite, spa∣ring an infinite sort of our times, because yee may vnderstand by the way, that Idols and holy water bee ancient things, such as were before Christs com∣ming, and will be continued by his enemies till he come againe, and that knowing the Papists religion to be no better then those heathenish peoples was, their couetousnesse greater, their need more, their cruelty farre passing not onely all present example, but also all written history, you may daily looke for worse then Scillas time if they ouercome: hauing on the other side no fierce or cruell Marius to withstand them, nor to quarell with them for the gouernment; but a poore flock of silly sheepe behinde their shep∣heard affraid of the wolues, halfe yeelding, halfe de∣fending their liues: and on their sides thousands of desperate Catilines, that to repaire their decayed states, will not spare neither to kill their owne bre∣thren, nor to fire their countrie: and hauing at all times, but specially now such a Scilla, vnder whose banner they fight, as the old Scilla may in respect of this, be both forgiuen and forgetten. Take heed, we
haue now to our holy Father a Frier, no secular priest, but a regular Hlhound, who though he think it no robbery to be equall in pompe with his prede∣cessours, and in malice with the diuell his father: yet hath he vouchsafed to take vpon him the shape of a man, and goeth (they say) on foot, and maketh his tenants the stewes keepe-in like good huswiues, which is no small reformation, and doth good deeds at home, and worketh wonders (forsooth) whiles he vndoeth all abroad, and openeth such a gap for the great Seigneur the Turke, as neuer was yet made. But what will not these fellowes do to reuenge their fall? and what ought not we rather to endure, then to admit these spirituall tyrants? who would not ra∣ther be conquered of a mightie Prince and honou∣rable (in comparison) then of a villaine bankrupt priest? who hath for these eight or nine hundred yeares occupied the whole world of credite; and now he should come to accompt, killeth his credi∣tours. A miserable choice, but yet a ready choice. For the Turke contenteth himselfe with honour and tribute, permitting religion. The Pope, no honour will satisfie him, no riches suffice him, no blood as∣swage him: neither the death of the liuing, nor the soules of the dead, will content him. Whose very name should not be spoken of without Surreuerence and great contempt, for the basenesse and vilenesse of his counterfeit state, were hee not so iustly to be hated and abhorred as the great abuser and very vn∣doubted Antichrist of the world, and sworne ene∣my of God and man. The cruell and tyrannicall
outrages of whose Inquisitours founded and esta∣blished by the Diuell and this Antichrist, if we con∣ferre with the milde proceedings and discipline of Commissioners appointed by God and his Anoin∣ted, we shall thereby see euidently by the heauenly iudgement and sentence of wise Salomon, to which mother the liue childe appertaineth: To the Ro∣mish whore, who (in despite that she cannot possesse the poore infants that belong not to her, to smother them sleeping with the huge and filthy body of her traditions and ceremonies) seeketh by all meanes possible to diuide and mangle them: or to the natu∣rall and pitifull mother the true Church of the faithfull, whose fathers and ministers (knowing of whose spirit they are) seeke with all gentlenesse to call home the lost ones, and watchfully to nourish them. Whose prince imitating the peaceable raigne of Salomon, hath not so much as executed the false Prophets, not killed the wolues, not destroyed the foxes. Onely they are tyed vp short, which though it bee no such suretie for the little ones as worldly wisdome doth require, and necessitie long since hath cried out for, yet is it to them no small griefe to see the Lambes feed before their eyes, and the poorest shepheards least whelpe baying at them: whilest they in the middest of their gluttony and drunken∣nesse, houle for hunger of their brethrens flesh, and thirstinesse of their blood, and pine for very enuie of the proceeding of Gods word. If the poore igno∣rant people will but compare the imprisonmens of the persecuted Protestants, with the restraints of the
bridled Papists, their famine with these mens fat∣nesse, their tongues fettered with Iron torments, with the libertie of railing, that our men haue and vse, seditiously against their Prince, & blasphemous∣ly against God, their most miserable and strange kindes of deathes, with our mens liuing and liking, they shall easily know the tree & the persons by the fruit. Wherefore (good Reader) hauing so euident markes of their woluish and rauening natures, and so good notice of their bloody conspiracie, & so way∣ing the very true cause of all these troubles and wars that be in Christendome, and thereto conferring the present executions & slaughters, euen in our neigh∣bours house, the fire whereof may soone imbrace our owne, let vs be stirred vp to pray for their deli∣uerance, and that it would please God, to turne from vs the same iustly deserued plague for our vnthank∣fulnesse. Let vs be strong in faith, and couragious in deed, to repell these common enemies from our countrie whensoeuer they shall offer that they haue so long determined. And if in this translation, there shall happen to be some faults, pardon them till the next impression; for the meaning of the translatour was onely to make thee speedily vnderstand of so great and so imminent a perill: besides, that thou mightest vse this booke as a taste in the meane space, whiles the booke of Martyres be reprinted, wherein there is a most plentifull and notable History of the like matter and argument.
The Preface of the Author. IN so great a hurly-burly of ciuill dissensions, wherein so many people and nations bend force against their owne companions and fellow-citizens, and furiously rush their swords and weapons into the very bowels of their owne naturall countrie, and for none other cause in very deed but for the Inqui∣sition, it would make a wise man doubt in this case whether of them were madde: the one side, which main∣taine the Inquisition, as a thing most holy and wholesome for the Common-wealth; or the other, which seeke not to auoide any god∣ly Inquisition and reformation of religion, but to defend them∣selues like men worthy of liberty wherein they were borne and bred, from a strange, vnworthy, and intolerable slavery. For though they be both alike ready armed, yet differing asmuch in their opinions and iudgements, as they doe in their mindes and af∣fections, it cannot be that right and equitie should bee on both parts: so that, if the one haue iustly taken weapon in hand, the o∣ther (no doubt) haue done it vniustly. And to passe over the great number of inferiour estates, it is not likely that the chiefe Sove∣raignes of the world, who are perswaded that they ought by all meanes possible to maintaine the same, and haue vowed the defence thereof with great deuotion and solemne oth renued from yeare
to yeare, should erre from the truth, or doe any thing against right or conscience: specially being neither the first authors there∣of, nor maintaining it as a thing newly deuised, or without any certaine originall, but as that, which being receiued from their forefathers, and reuerenced both for the opinion of holinesse and countenance of antiquitie, hath by a power greater then is the power of man, beene esteemed here among men as a heauenly thing. Besides these glorious titles, there be also thereunto annexed other singular commodities; to wit, a diligent endeuour to remoue the infection that might grow aswell of the Iewish and Mahometicall heresies that daily doe arise, besides the reuenues of the Exche∣quer encreased hereby, and the sodaine and maruelous enrich∣ing of diuers priuate persons, which though they be great matters in worldly respect, yet are they not so greatly to be accompted of in this cause. But forasmuch as by Christs owne saying, and by naturall reason, a man cannot haue a more easie or perfect iudge∣ment of the qualitie of a tree, whether it be good or bad, then by the fruit thereof, I may without offending of any man in the tri∣all of this matter, which is no lesse profitable then hard and dif∣ficult to doe, obserue the same order: since the mischiefe is now already so farre detected, and men growne to be so curious, that they feare not to call into question such things, as they haue hi∣therto by great errour and doltishnesse worshipped and held for most holy and sacred. Now if the Inquisition be a good tree, or as they delight to terme it a Holy, I doubt not but it will be content to shew the fruits openly, by the goodnesse or holinesse whereof, it may without fraud or enuie be esteemed how good or holy the stocke it selfe is. For light loueth the light, and he that dealeth truly and vprightly is willing to come into the light, in de∣spight of the diuell and all other darknesse, that his workes done in the feare of God may come to light. But he that worketh the things that be euill hateth the light, and hauing power and autho∣ritie, bridleth mens tongues, couering his faults with forced si∣lence, lest that the light should discouer them, and shew them to be reproeable. Wherefore let all Christendome now behold these
fruites of the Holy Inquisition: which being otherwise very plentifull, by the onely meanes of Gods goodnesse, wee haue here and there plucked for a say and taste of the tree, and by these let them iudge (as casily they may) whether this Holy Tree be wor∣thy to stand still, or to be turned vpside downe. For herein resteth all and some concerning these matters; whether the reports that I shall make in this Treatise of the Holy Inquisition, be true or no. Secondarily, how I came to the knowledge thereof, for no man will doubt but that this tree doth worthily deserue to bee hewed downe, if there be sufficient proofe that it buddeth forth such pe∣stilent blossomes, and beareth like fruites as these be. Againe, it were a dangerous and inconuenient matter, if we heretickes that detest the Inquisition as a sharpe and iust plague of God, and therefore worthy to be holden suspected, should haue any credite giuen vs herein. Wherefore I haue thought it a thing worthy the trauaile, to shew the briefest and most certaine way, whereby the truth thereof might without any great trouble be vnderstood. That is to say, if the King whose office it is specially to see to the administration of justice in his owne dominion, would first bee brought to beleeue, that both he might of his absolute authoritie, and of dutie ought to call the holy Court of Inquisition to ac∣compts, and that no lawes or decrees of their making, no Priui∣ledges, no Bulls, no Pardons or dispensations, finally, no Oath ought to let or hinder him from the doing of his dutie herein. Se∣condarily, if after he had appointed such a speciall Commission to examine the Inquisition, he would seeke meanes to be ensormed of such matters by men of grauitie and good consciences, who cal∣ling vnto them others, such as might be thought to haue the most knowledge and best experience in these matters, might learne out a truth, as the best custome is, in all other courts and consistories as they call them. For the which purposes those that either presently are, or haue beene heretofore fettered in the Inquisitours prisons, were first to bee sent for and examined but vnbridled in any case, hauing those worse then Iron bittes, taken from their tongues, with the which the Inquisition hath hitherto kept her tyrannie
close; that is to say, their solemne swearing of them to be silent while they liue, inhibiting them the vttering of any thing by any meanes, that they either knew, or saw, or had experience of themselues touching the Holy Inquisition, or their whole manner of proceeding against them in Court or otherwise: but that they should rather repute themselues as dead persons for for that time concerning the knowledge or sense of any such matters. And as though their oath (for sooth) were not a mat∣ter of force enough, they annexe thereunto terrible threatnings. By meanes where of all the trickes of the Inquisition haue hither∣to beene secret and hidden, and passed vnder couert to and fro, with a cloake and shadow of a zeale of godlinesse, and yet not so obscurely or secretly, but that the whole world (though confusedly and as it were a farre off) hath at the length espied and found out their outragious tyranny. And this is the onely cause that maketh all men keepe their tongues, least it might bee their happes likewise to haue experience thereof in themselues. This bridle I say must first bee remoued and taken away from them of whome these questi∣ons should be asked, and libertie must be giuen to speake boldly and without danger, if a man would haue these secrecies come to light, that haue beene kept close so long, to the great decay and hinderance of the Common wealth, Wherefore if small credite shall be giuen to vs in this Treatise, or none at all, because wee be as it were a partie, and therefore justly to be suspected, seeing for our owne parts wee desire no credite, but referre the matter whol∣ly to diligent and orderly triall, there is no cause why any should thinke better or worse of it for vs, but judge of it indifferently by it selfe as it is. Moreouer it is as greatly pertinent to our purpose to shew how we came to the knowledge hereof. Wherein, albeit we take God to record and our conscience, that all this is true, yet notwith∣standing wee craue no such credite to be aided thereby: neither shall any have just cause to lay that to our charge, that we haue gone from the triall of the matter, and vsed this as a shift.
But to passe the Kings treasuris, and the enriching of other priuate persons, howsoeuer they came by their wealth, because wee would not bee thought to enuie their prosperitie of many o∣ther and so great commodities as wee haue before rehearsed, (whereof the fauourers and maintainers of the Inquisition do com∣monly make their bragges, that there is nothing that maketh for them, but rather for the contrary part) it is easie for any man to perceiue, that will consider with us but thus much, that of so ma∣ny thousands of people, either Turkes or Iewes, or true Christi∣ans or heretikes (as they terme them) and reuolters from the Ro∣mish faith, as haue come within the Inquisitours iurisdiction from the very first beginning of the Inquisition, till this day, there are to bee seene many thousands of Sambenites, as moun∣ments of some that were burned, some whom besides the per∣petuall and vnrecouerable infamie that hath redunded thereby both to themselues, and to their whole posteritie, they haue bin de∣priued of all their substance. To be short, that so many spoiles of poor soules doe remaine to be seene as haue suffred at their hands for very trifles: but of any whom they haue instructed and amen¦ded, or withdrawn from their errors, not so much as one example or any one memoriall. Now as concerning the originall of the Inquisition, the con∣tinuance, and the glorious title that bleareth and bldeth mens eyes now adayes (for what man is he that would bow downe and worship these sacred names and titles: The holy Inquisition. The fathers of the faith: The Inquisitors of leud heresies and apostacie?) I will speak somewhat, to the intent men may vnderstand by what right they claime and hold the same. After the warres were ended, wherin Ferdinando and Isabel∣la of famous memory expelled the Turkes out of the territory and Citie of Granata, and other places in Spaine, which had vsurped there by the space of 778. yeares, from the time of Roderico the last king of Spain, that was of the race and line of the Goths, hauing restored their country into the ancient estate that it was in before, and gotten to themselues perpetuall fame and renowne, they fell from those continuall troubles and tumults of warre to
reforming and purging of religion. The occasion whereof came as well by the Mores, that being conquered, had liberty to remaine in Spaine, and enjoy all their goods with condition that they should receiue the christian faith: as by the Iewes, that were in num∣ber as many as the other, who were permitted to continue still vn∣der the same condition that the Mores did, commandement being giuen to all that were not content to admit this condition, that they should immediately depart Spaine, passing ouer the straites of Marrocke, and retyre into their owne countrey. For the Iewes (as their most ancient Chronicles doe report) did inhabite Spaine from the time that Titus Emperor of Rome destroyed Ierulalem. Who caused them to bee transported thither, there to remaine in miserie and thraldome, being notwithstanding in good case for one thing, in that they were not compelled by any to alter their religion till the time of Ferdinando. Whereupon the kings of Spaine considering, that those people were but only Christians by name and for fashion sake, submitting themselues for feare and awe, and for safegard of their riches, rather then any loue or zeal which they bare to christianitie, deuised to make prouision, and to take some order for their better instruction. A godly purpose surely, and meet for christian Princes, if euill counsellers had not maliciously peruerted their good intents. For there were alwayes about the king certaine Friers of the order of Saint Dommicke, to whom diuers well disposed Princes gaue very great care and credit, especially in matters of religion and conscience: which be∣ing a proud and ambitious sect, that tooke vpon them great skill, and outwardlly professed much holinesse most arrogantly and im∣pudently; by meanes thereof, had more free accsse to Princes pri∣vie chambers, and thereupon growing to be of their priuie coun∣sell, and obtaining such credit, that kings were content to bee or∣dered and directed by them in these and such like good purposes, whereas they should haue prouided godly instructors, pastors and teachers to win and allure the counterfait christians (as it becom∣med them) by charitie and gentlenesse, labouring with all diligence to withdraw them from their errors, to embrace true christiani∣tie sincerely and without dissimulation, they erected a new kinde
of Consistorie of an Inquisition; wherein the poore wretches, in steade of better instructions, wherewith there was some hope to win them, should be robbed and spoiled of all their goods, and possessions, and either put to most cruell death, or suffer most in∣tolerable torments by whippe or otherwise, leading the rest of their life in perpetuall obloquie and ignominie, and sustaining extream pottertie by losse of lands and goods. Neither was this executed onely vpon such as had most shamefully blasphmed Christ, but the least and most trig ceremonie of the Iewish or Morish law, or the smallest error in christian religion, whereof they did neuer teach them so much as their articles, had beene matter sufficient to condemne them. To the furtherance of this new deuice Sixtus the fourth of that name, Pope of Rome, put his helping hand by adding his confirmation, so that at the length it became of such force being ratified and established by the kings authoritie and the Popes, that were it not for that the hugenesse thereof is such, that is not able to sustaine it selfe, being a thing so burdenous to the world and so importable, a man might very well thinke it to bee impregnable. See I pray you how well these godly pastours prouided for the new increase of Christ's flocke, whom they ought to haue had greater regard to feed than their owne bellies, and should not in milking them haue drawne the very bloud to deuoure it, nor besides the hauing of their fleece, flame them also most cruelly to couer themselues with the skinnes, neither ought to haue killed the fatlings, but to cherish the weake∣lings, to binde the broken, to seeke the stra-sheep and bring them home to the folde, like good and carefull shepheards, without vsing such force and violence, or claing any iurisdiction or su∣perioritie ouer them: to whom they should rather submit them∣selues and become seruants, considering that they are the folde of Christ But as for seeking, they sought indeed and daily doe, inquiring with great diligence after the wandring sheepe panting and fainting but it is to slay them, not to sae them. But to pro∣ceed. As the Dane were the first authors therof, so for the authoritie and estimation that they were in with Princes, they ob∣tained the execution of this tyrannie vnder the preence of tea∣ching
the true christian faith, whereof they had of long time bin accounted the patrons. But afterwards by meanes of their vnsa∣tiable couetousnesse and ambition, (for the whech two vices they are already discredited among the common people) as also for their crueltie and tyrannie which they practised, being exalted to that high estate and dignitie, they became so intolerable, that the Princes themselues who lately before had aduanced them to those estates, were enforced to displace them, pretending diuers reasonable causes and allegations, and so committed it vnto the Clergie: Whereof the ancient Churches of the Dominicans hung round about with ancients and ensignes of victorie, ouer such as they conquered during the time that they were in authoritie, is proofe sufficient. Ne from her heart the causes old of wrath and sore disdaine Was slaked yet, but in her brest high spight did still remaine: Vrig. Aeneid. How Paris Venus beautie praised, and hers esteem'd at nought, She abhors the stock of Ganimede, who loue to heauen had raught. Howbeit they retaine till this day the title and name of Inqui∣sitours still with tooth and naile, and will one day no doubt haue a cast at the office againe, and claime their right. So that we may thanke these wicked counsellors and none other for the Inqui∣sition at this day, most diuellishly peruerting the godly purposes of Princes, which tended to the weale of the Church, and conuer∣ting them wholly to the aduancement of their owne commodi∣tie and estimation. Or else whereto I beseech you appertained it, that they which would be accounted diligent and faithfull sow∣ers of the seede of christianitie, and the zealous furtherers of the same, should erect a new kind of Consistory, so rare and strange to the whole world, which is not set vp to informe the ignorant, or to conuince the obstinate, and bring them to the knowledge of true religion, either by perswasion of learning, or by charitable dealing, the only meanes that Christ would haue his ministers to work by, but to compell them by force and might, by rigour and ex∣tremitie, by commissions and authoritie, by Racks & Torments,
Chaines, Halters, Barnacles, Sambenites, by Fire and by Fa∣gots: which holy Consistorie of theirs, is not assisted with men of godly conuersation, or knowne to be learned in the mysteries of holy Scripture, such as would labour painfully in the Lords vine∣yard, and set forward his haruest: but is garded with Sherifes, Treasurers, Notaries, Sumers, Iaylers, Proctors, Promo∣ters, or Familiars (as they call them) a foule and an insinite com∣pany. And who would not iudge think ye, that all these things were devised rather to lay new taxes and impositions vpon the people, and to encrease the reuenues of the Eschequer, than for the fur∣therance of religion. As for the purpose, if a man would chuse out a cunning huntsman with all his furniture, hauing his art∣lery about him, his tres, grinnes, heyes, dogges, &c. and send him thus arayed to preach the Gospel, and publish Christ's re∣ligion, what man I pray you that were well advised, and should behold such a man, hauing his hands daily imbrued with the change of preyes and spoiles, would not account him a better hunter than a preacher? For (doubtlesse) the commission an dau∣thoritie of preaching was giuen to good and godly Bishops and pastours (if any such there were) both by the lawes of God, and constitutions of man, that they should teach and instruct, as well the young nouices as the elder schollers, to tread the path of true godlinesse. But these men being so blind, or so carelesse, or both, that either they couldnot, or wouldnot see to their office and due∣tie in this behalfe, there was neuer a man of them all, either Bishop or Diuine, but he thought that a great part of his dutie touching his function was abbridged & dispensed withall, by meanes of ere∣cting the court of Inquisition; all good and godly laws concerning christianitie, are so cleane raced out of the tables of their hearts. And this Inquisition being erected in this wise at the first, and ratisied afterwards by the greatest authoritie in the word, that is to say, the Kings and the Popes, though it had the opinion of holinesse to countenance it, so that it should seeme to deserue the approbation of most men, yet was it neuer generally receuied o all. For at what time king Ferdinando went about to establish it
in Arragon, which was his owne inheritance descended from his father, the Nobles of the realme did first make humble supplica∣tion that it might not be established. Afterwards, being by vio∣lence forced vpon them, they did also with force and violence withstand it, alledging that it tended rather to the impeachment of the libertie of their countrie, then to the reformation of reli∣gion. In so much that it was not received (if a man may say it were receiued at all that, was forced vpon them against their wils) till the settling of it had cost many a mans life. And besides the hatred which the Nobles and Commons of that Realme beare a∣gainst this their holy Inquisition at this day, it dth well appeare by the death of Seignor Aepila, who being sent thither by the King with large commissions to execute the same, was slaine of the Noble men at Sarragoss in the Cathedrall Church. The which caused many of the foolish superstitious people to worship him euen as a Saint. For it is very certainely reported, that the bloud issuing out of his body, being newly slaine, sprang out in such aboundance, that it spirted to the Altar. By the which mi∣racle (say they) God declared both the innocencie of the person, and the goodnesse of the quarrell wherein was slaine. Notwithstan∣ding all this and that diuers other miracles are sundry times seene vpon his tombe, to confirme the same opinion and fasie of the common people, such is the folly of men, and the power of the diuell (as Paul saith) to deceiue men which haue reed the loue and zeale of the truth, he could neuer yet  to be ca∣nonized a Saint, and called Saint Aepila: forasmuch as enter∣prising a iust quarrell, he was not only found to haue a srt of male on at the time of his death, (which thing notwithstanding they say, he might wellenough haue enioyed the holy  of a Saint) but he had also vnder his other garments a short hanger by his side, and that (forsooth) only hndred his absolute honour. This Inquisition you will say was not brought in, to the end that any should thereby be instructed in the principles of true re∣ligion, but onely that heresie by meanes hereof might bee aboli∣shed. Marry so much we yeeld vnto them indeed For it appeareth
plainely by the zeale that was in those good Princes, that they had a better meaning with them at the first, then that which through their wicked counsellours afterward was put in execution. The Inquisition being th established for the same ends and purpo∣ses which I haue before mentioned (as some affirme) before the battell at Granata, which maketh nothing against me if it be so, the charge of instructing the people in the principles of religion, was first referred to I Tears and Curates, and from them transla∣ted to the Wardens of the Church, and afterward to the Clerkes in euery towne and parish, who taught the simple abused people their Aue Maria, Pater noster, their Credo, with Salua re∣gina in Latine shall I say, nay in a barbarous kinde of Latine, and that with sporting themselues, and mocking the poore silly soules, without any deuotion or zeale, not without reward neither, but very dearely and at a high price; many times besides their com∣mon wages, they were payd with the goodwies honestie, or the daughters virginitie. For the other fiue cōmandements of the holy Church, which they sad were necessarie to saluation: that is to say, the hearing of Masse on holy dayes and sundayes: The go∣ing to shrist and holy confession: The receiuing of holy bread, the due obseruing of Fasts enioyned by the Church, and the true paying of their tithes and Church-duties, these things I warrant you were beaten into their heads in plaine words and mother∣tongue. By which kinde of discipline, what other thing I pray you could seeme to be sought, thn to bring men into a heape of perpetuall errours? And the court of Inquisition being erected on the other part for reformation of errours, they might be sure like good hunters to lodge the Deere, and take their stand, and so to obtaine a continuall prey. But to proceed, let vs grant them thus much, that the Inquisition was ordained to none other end, and that they be two seuerall and distinct offices, to teach the faith, and to roote out heresies, yet were it the part and dutie of good and discreet counsellours, to prouide that the authoritie committed to Bishops by the holy Scriptures of God, should not thereby be taken from them: neither should any other perswasion
enter into their heads, that there were any other fire or sword to root out heresies, but only the sword of Gods word: both the which things the holy Apostle did most euidently teach in the Epistle to Titus; where among other qualities required in a Bishop, hee would haue him embrace the word of God fit for instruction, that he may be able to exhort by wholesome doctrine, and to con∣uince the gainsayers and aduersaries. For surely a true and iusti∣fying faith cannot be forced, (the nature thereof is such) no more can heresie be destroyed by the heretickes death. But the word of God is most apt and sit for both purposes. For thereby faith is not only engendred, but increased and multiplyed meruel∣lously, and whatsoeuer is not agreeable to true faith, if it be exa∣mined and tried by the light of this word, shall soone be bewray∣ed. Wherefore they ought first to haue resorted to the Scriptures, and taken counsell of them, whether they had limited any punish∣ment for such as should shew themselues wilfull and obstinate a∣gainst the truth, or the most cruell execution that can be by fire. For as concerning the confiscation of goods, what can be thought more wretched and couetous, or more vnjust and shamelesse, or further from the profession of a Christian man? And to let passe their open infamy, the staine whereof will hardly be spunged out againe, who can worthily speake enough against them, that vse the same kinde of punishment euen against those poore wretches, wh they haue perswaded to recant their errours? Paul in the place aboue mentioned, appointeth no penaltie, for as much as it may well be, that the partie condemned may in time be reclaimed, and therefore mercy ought rather to be practised of euery good shepheard with all gentlenesse and loue, then any such extremitie. But let vs enter further, and see what Paul appointeth for such as are obstinate persons. Auoide the company of an hereticke (saith he) after one or two admonitions. First hee would haue him charitably admonished of his error twice or thrice, and that by the Bishop, not cited into the court, not put to the torments, or otherwise punished for his erronious opinions with such extremi∣tie, and so continually. Then if gentle admonition will reclaime
him, there is good cause why both the Bishop and the whole congregation may rejoyce of the winning of a brother, to be a member of Christ. But if such admonitions will not pre∣uaile, he counselleth vs to proceed to excommunication: that is to say, to cut him off and exclude him the company and fellowship of the Christians: the which notwithstan∣ding must not be executed in way of reuenge of his error, but ministred as a medicine for his amendment. And this judgement of the Disciple agreeth with the rule of his Ma∣ster: If hee wil not giue eae to thee, nor other (saith he) that is to say, them that haue giuen him admonition the second time, Let him be thence forth accompted of as an Ethnicke or Publican. Which is as much in vn∣derstanding, as if he had neuer receiued the faith. In this degree of seueritie, which being duely considered is sharpe e∣nough, Christs discipline stayeth, and proceedeth no further. And this is the Court, these be the lawes thereof, and the whole manner of proceeding, wherewith a true Christian man (if there had beene any such among them) should haue contented himselfe in proceeding against his brother being beside the right way; or against any heresies, of what sort or condition soeuer they be, because Christ hath thought them to be sufficient, and prouided these remedies, which the Church hath alwayes vsed from time to time to great profite, in the rooting vp of all heresies that at any time grew therein. As concerning the putting of heretickes to death, it is like altogether, as if a Phisician, to the intent to rid the patient of his disease, should for the nonce rid him also of his life. Moreouer, they that doe pretend most of all now adayes the rooting vp of heresies by such meanes, do not only not attaine thereunto, (for as yet the world is blinded, to take falshood for truth) but if it were so, then by taking away his life, they cut him off from all those meanes and possibilities where∣by he might attaine his owne saluation. For it might very well come to passe in time, for asmuch as Gods judgements
are deepe and incomprehensible, that the partie continuing aliue, might bee brought into some better case. But it is to be feared will some say, lest he infect others. True it is, and for that consideration both Christ and his Apostle com∣mandeth us to schue him, and to cut him off from the bo∣dy of the Church. But if they would needes proceede far∣ther, and vpon other reasonable considerations punish such obstinate persons more seuerely; were not the ordinary ma∣gistrate sufficient to execute the same? Doubtlesse their answer will bee this, that the knowledge of heresies, can in no case appertaine to the secular magistrates, because they for the most part are ignorant in the holy Scriptures and Ecclesiasticall affaires: For this is a common saying with these Fathers that are so far seen in Gods secrets, that neither the knowledge nor determination of matters in reli∣gion doe appertaine to the Secular magistrate, as they terme him in despight and reproach But I pray you in what respect are they themselues chosen to supply those places, and to bee Inquisitours to determine matters of faith, whereof they are termed the Fathers, or to discusse heresies, whereof they are said to ridde the world, being neither learned in Scrip∣tures, nor able to teach the beliefe? For they are thought men good enough for that office if they be Doctors in the ci∣uill and canon lawes. As for their Diuines (and yet a silly diuinitie God knowes) truly since the time that the Domini∣cans were displaced thence, (wherof I made mention before) we haue not seen any of them execute any such office. Yea, what if since that time there hath bin an order taken by the Inquisitors, and entred into their books, that no Diuine thence∣forth should occupy any such place? Now as concerning the ci∣uil law, surely the Inquisitors do not excell the secular magi∣strate; and as for the canon, if a man were neuer so well seen in it, they cannot deny, but it serueth as little to the deciding of matters in religion as the ciuill. How then is it possible to be otherwise, but that when such ignorant men bee admitted
to determine matters of Religion, as haue no manner of know∣ledge in the holy Scriptures, saue only a little poore skill in the constitutions of mans braine, they must needs turne sweet into soure, and soure into sweet: call light darkenesse, and darkenesse light? That is to say, in professing themselues to bee the Patrones of saith, roote out all faith, and maintaine monstrous errours: slea the children of God, and cherish the children of the diuell: kill the seruants of Christ, foster, maintaine, and encrease the seruants of An∣tichrist. Here they will answer vs, that albeit they themselues can no more judge of matters touching faith, than a blinde man can of colours, yet they take into counsell and commission with them, to debate such matters, divers Diuines, whose pre∣script rule and order they put in execution, specially Domi∣nicanes, who haue nothing now to doe with the high autho∣ritie and commission of Inquisition, saue only that they are admitted to consultations, and to the Qualifications of doctrine, as they terme it. And here though we examine not narrowly with what quan∣tity of Diuinitie they come furnished to this office, yet we may easily ghesse, that being remoued for the causes aforesaid, and thought vnsit for the place, they are not since growne much more apt: specially seeing besides their old infirmities, they are grieuously sicke of their ancient shame; daily renewed by beholding from a low place, the loftie Tribunall seat from whence they are ismounted, and are in a perpetuall headach and madnesse of jealous men, to see their aduersaries enioy the honour which they haue lost. Wherein we report vs to the Inquisitours themselues, for no manknoweth better then they, what tokens the poore Dominicanes giue outwardly of the great bile within their brest full of malitious matter, as oft as they are called to those graue and waightie deliberations: in-so-much that it hath perhaps beene thought on, to shut them quite out of the Inquisitours doores.
But goe to, they are peradventure amended since. Why might not then the ordinary magistrate call the same Di∣uines to the same consultations? Now to appoint any man iudge of matters which hee vnderstandeth not, where∣by he must needs hang altogether of other mens opinions and sentences whatsoeuer they bee, what an iniquitie is this? What a peruerting of all law and iustice? Who there∣fore can maruell, if when we see the Holy Inquisition sit in her heauenly Tribunall seat, we say with Salomon, I haue seen vngodlinesse sit in the seat of iudgement, and iniquitie in the place of iustice? And yet notwith∣standing all this, what libertie and prerogatiue they will al∣low themselues, in the very same matters which they punish in others, as the highest points of herefie, you may behold in the example following. It happened a few yeares passed, in Barchinon a very fa∣mous Citie in the teritory of Cathalonia, that when they should march forward in their procession on corpus Chri∣sti day to carry the Masse bread about, and all things were ready, requisite to so solemne a shew, euen as the Priest that had danced the Tragicall high Masse, should couch the bles∣sed host in the golden pixe, as the Diuell would haue it, it was too great a compasse to be put in the boxe. All men were amased: the whole shew staied: there was not a man in that great and notable assembly that knew what to doe, in a case so strange and so vnlocked for. Now surely it was a sport alone, and a iest worthy so great a company. Some perhaps of the wiser sort, saw no way but one to help at a pinch; namely to begin a new Masse in Gods name and with better lucke, and to shape a cake fit for the boxe. But that was too late: for the procession had farre to goe, and it was too too much paines to defer it any longer. And be∣sides, perchance there was neuer a sir Iohn there but had broke his fast well, the better to take paine in so great a solemnity. And tho the Diuines were of opinion that hee that
sang the high Masse, might dispatch another in case of neces∣sitie, yet he good soule looking for nothing lesse then such a chance, had already supt vp the rinsing of the Chalice, as his dutie was to doe. Well sir, there was one of the Inquisi∣tours, a man of Arragon, whose name was Molonio. This Gentleman being as hastie by nature, as bold by authoritie, made no more adoe, but tooke a paire of cissours, and pared his maker where he was ouergrowne, and so by a little paring, put both him in the boxe, and the people out of doubt. Some perhaps will praise this mans present wit in so great a dif∣ficultie: others will abhorre and detest his godlesse and rash boldnesse: others will bewaile and lament the hard fortune of their God so to be pared and circumcised by the cursed hands of a cruell Inquisitour. But good Lord, if any other had beene so saucie but an Inquisitor, specially if he had had any Iewes blood in him, how would they haue handled him trow you? Indeed Molonio was put out of office: but he tarried not many dayes ere he was sent to be Inquisitour at Siuil, for they might not lose so stout a souldier of the Inquisition for a trifle. What should we here talke of the Popes autho∣ritie? they extoll and abase him: they adore him and contemn him: they reuenge his wrong and doe him wrong, euen as hee serueth or hindreth their holy office. Wee purpose not to pro∣secute these matters any further, meaning only to touch them in way of Preface, to declare by what beginnings and occa∣sions the Inquisition is growne: what antiquitie and holi∣nesse it carryeth: and what profite it hath brought to the world vnder the title of reforming religion. These things being as we haue declared them, so true in deed, and such in qualitie, as no honest man can either plainely denie them, or justly excuse them, no man ought to maruell if the people, which haue otherwise hitherto beene most dutifully obedient to their Magistrates, to driue so horrible a pestilence from their countrie, haue be taken themselues to their weapons and defence of armes, as hauing none other more reasonable
meanes to helpe themselues. They protest, that they seeke not to auoide the reformation of religion, which they heartily wish for, so that it be such a one as is worthy of so good a name, and bee directed by the prescript word of God, which ought to be the onely rule of religion, to all that loue true religion. And in that behalfe, what can they hope for of the Inquisition, besides that it hath already yeelded? They protest further, that they owe to their lawfull gouernours, and that by the expresse word of God, obedience, honour, and tribute, the which they are most ready to performe with their accustomed chearefulnesse and hearty good will. Only they humbly pray and beseech, that it may be taken of them without the dishonour of God, and the most miserable captiitie and thraldome of their consci∣ences, the which ought to bee more recommended, and deare to good and godly men, then their very liues. They protest besides, that they will not any manner of wayes shake off the yoake of just obedience to their Magistrates, but they complaine, (and that not without great cause) that besides the easie and gentle yoke which they haue hitherto borne with that meekenesse of heart that became them, they are scour∣ged with the Iron whips of the Inquisition, which seeketh nothing but the slaughter of innocent Citizens, and the con∣fiscation and spoile of their goods. They might haue in times past with some colour blamed the men of Arragon, which receiued not the Inquisition without tumult and bloudshed, for it was then couered with that goodly and fresh name, and shew of holinesse: neither as yet had it raged against all in∣differently, but only against the Iewes and Moores, and that also for very plausible and apparant causes. But now since it hath not ceased to bring forth such fruites, as wee haue rehearsed for these threescore and fifteene yeares: I thinke they shall not seeme to be madde, that seeke by all meanes to them possible, to driue it from their borders. Nay, they might rather be truly judged to bee madde men,
if in stead of their faithfull fathers, and good shepheards and preachers of true religion they would wittingly and willingly receiue into their houses the very enemies, and most cruell destroyers of all faith and religion. And if there be any that know them not to bee such as wee terme them, let them read but part of their sleights and manner of procee∣dings discouered in this booke, (for wee could not learne them all,) and let them well waigh and consider them, and then judge.
A DISCOVERY AND plaine declaration of sundry policies pra∣ctised in the Spanish Inquisition. CHAP. I. The ordinary manner and forme commonly vsed as well in cyting, as apprehending such persons aS are accused. WHensoeuer any denunciation (as they terme it) or rather information is gi∣uen against any person, be it onely for matters of no great importance (as nothing commeth into this court so small or simple, but the parties accused are very great∣ly endamaged thereby) the Inquisitors accustomably vse this kind of practice. First, they suborne some one out of a number, such as have learned their lessons for the nonce (commonly called Familiars) who of pur∣pose The Inquisi∣tors Famili∣ars. shall cast himselfe to meet one, and being proui∣ded afore hand what to say, shall greet him on this wise. Sir, yesterday, it was my chance to bee with my Lords the Inquisitors, and as they happened to have speech of you, they said they had to talke with you a∣bout certain of their affaires, and therfore gaue me in charge to summon you to appeare before them to morrow at such an hour. Now the party may not (be∣ing once warned) either refuse or differre to come, but at his very great perill. Whereupon the next day hee repaireth to the place where the Commissioners sit, and requireth the porter to signifie vnto the Lords that he is come. Whereof as soon as they haue intelli∣gence, all three (if they be present) or at least two of them, meet in a Counsell chamber where the Court is commonly kept, as at Siuil; in the castle Triana, and
such like places else where in other Cities abroad, and calling the party in before them, they demand of him what his sute is. Who answereth, that yesterday he The Court and prison of the Inqui∣siti, was warned vnder their precept to come and speake with them. Then inquire they his name; and that knowne, what he would: for as for vs (say they) we wot not whether you be the same man that we com∣manded to be here with vs, yea or no. Marry now si∣thens you are come, if you have any thing to enforme vs of in this holy Court either of your selfe or of any other, in discharge of your conscience (man) let vs hear it. Wherunto the party either answereth that he hath no such matters to enforme them of (as indeed to stand vpon that point to the end with them, who seeke nothing els but his vndoing and such as he shall appeach; is the wisest & safest way that may be taken) or els of meere simplicity, not knowing how he en∣tangleth himselfe, rashly & vnaduisedly vttereth some thing of himselfe or of some other. Then my Lords the Inquisitors glad that they haue caught him, to the intent the more easily to fear and amase him that thus foolishly hath made himselfe so fit a morsell for them to prey vpon, cast lookes one at another, and reioy∣cing as though they had smelled the rat, all at once fix their eyes vpon him, and behold him earnestly: and whispering together a little while (Iwot not whether they say ought or nought) at the last either award the party to prison, if the matter that he discloseth of him∣selfe seem any thing waighty, or if he chance to con∣fesse nothing at all, they will him to depart, preten∣ding that they know not, without better informati∣on, whether hee bee the same party whom they com∣manded to come before them or no. Whilst the party is thus in examination, prouision is made that the promoter who gaue information against him, is se∣cretly hidden behind some tapistry, where hee cannot
be seen; yet so, as he may see the parties face, and know if it be the same man, or no, if haply the Inquisitors know him not. Then licence they him to depart, being assured that it is he which shall minister matter for this tragedy, and perhaps call him not before them of 2. or 3. moneths after, specially if he be there inhabitant: for if he be a for∣reiner, they lightly giue him not so great respit. The next time, when their pleasure is to send for him, they exhort him againe, that if he know or haue heard any thing that concerneth their holy Court, to disclose it vnto them. For we know right well (say they) that you haue dealt with certain persons suspected in religion; which if you will confesse of your own accord, assure your selfe you shall receiue no harme: therefore we charge you take heed and looke well to your selfe. Our opinion is of you, that like a good Christian man, you will call to your remembrance such things as are by-past: for indeed a mans memory is weak (we wot well) and may fail him, and therfore it may be you haue forgotten, and faine would tell all you know if you could call it to mind. By these and such like subtil∣ties they abuse many silly soules, or els dismisse them for that time: yet so, as they shall not think themselues cleer∣ly discharged; but to keep them continually occupied and vnquieted in their minds, and to make them stand in dai∣ly fear & awe of them, tell them it may be they shall haue further matter against them, and occasion to call them a∣gaine. Yet sometime it hapneth that they beare with some person, and winke at him many dayes, and with some whole yeares, ere they cause him to be apprehended, al∣wayes prouided, that he shall haue one or other of these iolly mates to keepe him company wheresoeuer he go, and waite vpon him at an inch to creepe into his bo∣some, and grope his conscience: who vnder the colour of friendship and familiarity, very craftily and subtilly, whilst he good man thinkes no harme, shall daily come and visite him, and haue an eye to all his doings, & mark
with whom he conferreth, where hee vseth to resort, what he doth there, and, as nigh as may be, where∣abouts he goeth and what he intendeth: in so much that without the speciall ayde of Gods holy proui∣dence, it is not possible for a man to escape their snares. Now if any of the Inquisitors chance to meet any such persons so dismissed, they salute him very courteously, and shew him a good countenance, pro∣mising to stand his good friend. All which courteous kind of entertainement tendeth to none other end but to make the man more carelesse of his estate, and so to vndoe him ere he be aware. But what good (I pray you) can they getby get by these detestable and abo∣minable sleights, except perhaps they vse them for their recreation, and take like pleasure in them as doth the fouler in his pastime, when hee playeth and dallieth with his game: or the fisher, who after he hath stricken the fish, suffreth her to play with the line, and to sport her selfe for a time that will scarfely last the turning of her taile: or as the catte that playeth with the mouse, after she hath giuen him some priuy pinch, leaving him at large, and hunting him afresh, and by and by teareth him with her teeth, and eateth vp eue∣ry morsell? Wherein it may be that some secret myste∣ry lies hid, which all the world perceiues not, nor al∣together without gain to these holy Officers. How∣beit this kind of dallying with their prey, they vse not with euery body alike, in such sort as is before declared. For they haue very great respect of persons and causes in this behalf. Which is a plain token that they deal not in this sort either with such strangers or town-dwellers as they thinke are like to escape from them by this liberty, neither yet with such as are char∣ged with great matters, whom they thinke needfull to be seen vnto betimes, specially if there be any hope that by their confession they shall haue intelligence of
any other. But first, when they are determined to appre∣hend any person that is accused, they vse to send for the Bishops deputy of that diocesse or Ordinary (as they call him) and making him priuy to the depositions of the wit∣nesses against the party accused (which they call an Infor∣mation) after a little consultation had with him of the matter, they all subscribe to a writing, which is a warrant directed from them to attach him: which kind of dealing seemeth to haue a shew of good equity. Forsooth they wil not bee thought to touch any of another mans flocke without th'aduise & consent of his own Pastor, who be∣ing full ignorant & vnskilfull (God knows) in the duty of a Pastor (as commonly all of that coat vnder Papacy are) is brought to giue his consent, that the sheep ouer whom he hath a speciall charge, shall first be fleeced, & afterward miserably slain, & bereft of goods & life. For as yet there hath neuer any breach bin heard of about these matters betwixt the Inquisitors and the Ordinary for defending any of his flocke that hath been by them sent to execu∣tion. Yet may a man see oftētimes, yea daily almost, great numbers dy in prison, some hunger-steru'd, some extream∣ly racked and dismembred in euery ioynt of their bodies, some euen in the midst of their torments yeelding vp the Ghost betwixt the tormentors hands (as I will not faile hereafter to declare, when I shall be occasioned to treate therof more conueniently) insomuch that the Inquisitors wil say of some of them, that they were as harmlesse men, and as innocent, and put to death as wrongfully as any men could be. Wherby it is euident, that this sending for the Ordinary to confer withall, about the apprehending of some vnder his cure, is a very vaine thing, and rather a foolish ceremony, than a matter serious or done of any iustice. And to tell the plaine truth, their manner is to bid the Ordinary to a banquet to quaffe his part of the Banquet. blood of his owne sheepe, that the wolues may conti∣nue the faster friends. Our Lord Christ, the great shep∣heard of the sheepe, come when hee seeth his time,
and render to each of them according to their owne de∣serts. Yet sometimes it hapneth, that they call not the Or∣dinary to counsell, before the party be both accused and apprehended. For being well assured that hee will not gainsay them, nor controule any of their doings, they thinke it enough when the party is fast & forthcomming, then to declare to the Ordinary the occasion and man∣ner of their proceedings: who hearing it read vnto him, liketh very well thereof, aswell that they haue already done, as is also content with whatsoeuer els they can deuise to do. Now if any that is accused doe chance to make an escape, either before he be apprehended or af∣ter, then vse they all deuices that may be to find him and fetch him againe. Neither is it sufficient that they giue the searchers certain common signs and tokens to know him by, as to describe his apparell, his countenance, age, &c. but they draw his counterfaite as liuely as may be in Counterfaits sundry patternes, and distribute them among the sear∣chers, to know the party the more easily by, whom per∣haps they neuer saw in all their liues: whereof I will re∣port you a true tale for example. Not long agone they apprehended a certain Italian at Siuil, who had wounded one of the Paratours on a time being at Rome, commonly called the Inquisitors Algua∣zil. And albeit the Familiars that were sent to seeke him, The Algua∣zil is in manner of a Sheriffe. had his counterfaite about them, as they vse to haue: yet notwithstanding hapning vpon him at Siuil, and halfe in doubt whether it were he or no, because hee had altered his apparell, and of purpose changed his name, they pur∣sued him a good while onely of a bare suspicion, which they had by his countenance that it should be he. There∣fore one day as he was walking and talking with diuers in the Cathedral Church at Siuil, they foūd out this new deuice to attempt him withall, seemely for such Familiars. Two or three of them came somewhat nigh about him, and as he hapned to turne in his walke; his backe being
towards them, on a suddaine one of them calleth him by his old name. The party being in earnest talke, and mi∣strusting nothing, suddenly looked behind him, & made answer: whereupon the catchpoles forthwith laid hands on him, and were cleerely resolued that hee was the selfe same man. This fellow lay in yrons a good season, and after long imprisonment was whipped about the towne, and condemned to the gally perpetually. and thus was he serued for hurting the Alguazil, partly through his owne folly and negligence for want of a little heede ta∣king. The which deuices albeit they be very subtile, and such as no mans wisedome can auoide, yet shall it not be greatly amisse to shew one other special example, how God oftentimes maketh them starke fooles, and guardeth his with a holy kind of policy, that they may bee able to goe an ace beyond them. Not long since there was a certaine man of the Low Countries that had escaped out of the Inquisitors prison at Valladolit, who was apprehē∣ded for the profession of the Gospell, and had bin a long season in prison. There went out to seeke him (as the cu∣stome is) diuers of these hunting Familiars, who within a few leagues off, ouertooke him in the high way, and stay∣ed him. The party told them flatly hee was not the man The Fiscal. they tooke him for; and yet would not these good fel∣lowes leaue him, but by force and strong hand went a∣bout to bind and bring him backe againe, still contrary∣ing him, affirming him to be the selfe-same man whom they tooke him to be: and thereupon demanded of him, not doubtingly, but as though the matter were very cleere; Are not you he (Sir) that escaped out of the In∣quisitors prison at Valladolit, about eight dayes since? Not I (Sirs) saith he, setting a good face on the matter, and therefore view me better. I am no such man, but am new∣ly come from Castile, where I haue wrought in mine oc∣cupation a great while: and because you shall the better credit my words, and know it to be so, here is my testi∣moniall
which I carry for my pasport, take and reade it: and forthwith tooke out a certaine writing which he had about him, and offred it them to read. Which, after they had read it, they gaue credit vnto, and let him goe with shame enough that they had been so childishly deceiued in taking one man for another, as to their thinking they had done. And as touching the testimoniall that stood him in so good steed, this is the truth of it. After his de∣parture out of prison, making as much speed in his iour∣ney as possibly he could, he chanced to meete with a countrey man of his by the way, one of his old acquain∣tance tho. newly come from Castile, and to helpe himselfe withall in this distresse, found meanes to obtaine his pas∣port, which beyond both their expectations, as God Pasport. would haue it (a thing so appointed by his secret proui∣dence) did serue this mans turne, and saued him from so great a perill. For the other was departed from him but two dayes before, and left his testimoniall behind him in this mans hand to keepe: whereby he was in good time preserued, and they colted like knaues very prettily. Yet haue these Familiars another fetch beyond all this, to re∣triue them that are escaped and fled away. As, some of them shall trace him by his footing if they can finde his foot-steps: others shall pursue him that way whither they thinke in their owne iudgements hee is most like to bee gone: another crew of them shall lye in waite for him by night, because they are sure he will trauell by night rather than by day. For I tell you, they are moe than a good sort that are appointed for these purposes; insomuch that a flie cannot escape the Inquisitors fingers, but there shall be enow at hand ready to fetch her againe. But God, against all their deuices and narrow searching dili∣gence, shall arme and safegard him, whom his good will and pleasure is to deliuer. And thus much concerning the apprehending. Now to tell how they entreate them after they be arrested and committed to ward,
CHAP. II. The Sequestration of their goods commonly called the Sequester. IMmediately after euery arrest done by the Alguazil, or complaint made to the court of any person by any of the Familiars, they straightway take from about him all the keyes of his chests or lockes whatsoeuer, if he haue a∣ny, and forthwith send a Notary and certaine catchpoles with the Alguazil himselfe to take an inuentory of all such goods as are in his house whatsoeuer they be. Which be∣ing done very exactly, such as they finde, they leaue in the custody of some rich man dwelling thereabout, who vn∣dertaketh to be accomptable therefore, and to re-deliuer them duly and truly whensoeuer they shall be demanded. But in this Sequester (as they terme it) the owners of such goods had need to looke well about them, and alwayes haue an eye to their fingers which are at the sequestration, and are the doers, specially when they come to rifling of money and iewels, either gold or siluer, or any other thing els that is of any price, and light for conueiance, or will lye in a narrow roome. For they are commonly lime∣fingred, and willightly make something sticke by them, if they be not narrowly seene vnto. And indeed the grea∣ter part of this rabble of Familiars are bauds, theeues, shif∣ters, and the vilest sort of people that liue only by filching, which cannot, nor will not hold their hands if they should hang for it. Besides that, they are persuaded in con∣science, that they should not in such cases forbeare other mens goods, although they haue no manner of right thereto. Now to tell you briefly whereto this sequestration ten∣deth. Forsooth, that if it happen the party be condemned, so that his goods or any part thereof be confiscate, this ho∣ly house I warrant you will not lose so much as a dodkin of them. For who knoweth not thus much, that the prey and spoyles of such silly soules is all that they seek for? els what should these holy fathers that respect nothing but
vertue and godlinesse, doe with their goods (I pray you) whom they beare vs in hand they would so faine bring home againe to the right way? Or who is so mad to think that misbelief can be amended by losse of lands or goods? Yet it may very well beseeme Christian men to be spoyled of all their substance, yea, and of their clothes from their backs also, by their enemies, seeing their head, whose mem∣bers they are, and whose truth they professe, was so ser∣ued: for whose garments (likewise) not much worth, perhaps halfe thread bare with wearing, after they had put him most cruelly to death, they determined also to cast lots. And this kind of Sacriledge is now so ratified and confirmed by the common consent of their Diuines, that is to say, the Monkes and the residue of the Clergy, that they shame not to preach & teach openly, that who∣soeuer is not iumpe with the Pope, or dissenteth from him in the least iot, is bound in conscience, in all hast (say they) to bring in all his goods into the Kings Eschecquer, and that he hath no more right vnto them then if he had rob∣bed the King of them before, alleadging this reason, that for so much as he is reuolted from the Church of Rome, he is no longer any right owner thereof, but the King, to whom the Pope hath adiudged them. Wherefore a man is bound (say they) to restore them vnto him, although the Inquisitors neuer heard so much as one word of him. And thus these subtill foxes by this one policy are both greatly gracious with Princes, and therewithall doe in∣ueigle the consciences, & pick the purses of the silly foo∣lish people, deeming them as gods. But to returne to our purpose. As soon as the prisoner is entred within the first gate of y• prison, the keeper hauing with him a Notary, as∣keth him if he haue a knife about him, or mony, or rings or any other iewels. And if it be a womā that hath a sheath of small kniues at her girdle, rings, little chains, bracelets, ouches, or any other ornaments, such as women weare, they strip them of all these, & commonly they be his fees
that findeth them. This is done to this end, that the priso∣ners during the time of their imprisonment shall haue no∣thing to succor themselues withal any waies. They search them also, le they bring in priuily about them any wri∣ting, or book, or any other such like thing. But after they be once entred into prison, they are shut vp in a close cab∣bayne, where they haue scarsely good elbow-roome, for cleanlines and lightsomnes not much vnlike to Litle se. And some are close prisoners all alone for 8. or 15. dayes, some by the space of 2. or 3. moneths, and other some all their liues long. Some againe haue fellowes and compa∣nions from the very first day of their imprisonment, as the Lords Inquisitors will, and as they thinke most con∣uenient to bring their matters about. CHAP. III. The seuerall dayes of hearing. AFter they haue thus continued in prison about a week or two, the Inquisitors priuily packe with the Iaylor to be in hand with the prisoner, as though it came from himselfe, and to aduise him to sue that he may come to his answer, and pray to haue a day of hearing. Wherein, it is not to be thought the contrary, but that there is some mi∣stery meant thereby, that the prisoner must first begin to stir in his owne cause. The keeper therefore either at din∣ner time, or some other most conuenient to bring his matters about, resorteth to his prisoner, and among other talke, at the last falleth to question with him how it hap∣neth that he sth not to come to his answer, that his mat∣ters may be more speedily ended, and aduisth him to la∣bour it with as much speede as may be, making him be∣leeue, the sooner the better, and that it will much further his cause so to do, and at the length bring his sute to some good effect: Adding moreouer, that for the acquaintance which he hath with him, in the way of friendship hee is mooued to giue him the best counsell he can, & such as is meetest for his behoofe, promising to do & deale for him
therein to his power, like a faithfull and trusty friend. Yet surely it may be thought with good reason, that if any thing may doe the poore wretch good, being in case rea∣dy for to be deuoured by these rauenous beasts, it will fall out in the end to be better for him if he refuse to craue a day of hearing, and tarry till the Commissioners doe call for him. But if there be none other good to be done, hee may chance to get this by his tarrying; in driuing them to begin with him, to take care for nothing but only to make answer to their obiections. But sith it is so secret a mystery, I will let it goe, and leaue it to the iudgements and consi∣derations of the wiser sort to scan and iudge vpon. The poore prisoner knowing none of these subtilties, for the most part is ruled by his keeper, thinking that he hath gi∣uen him good and wholesome aduice, and prayeth him therefore to be a meane for him, and in his behalf to craue a day of hearing: whose sute is easily heard of the Inquisi∣tor, and granted at the first I warrant you. Whereupon the party is brought into the Consistory, where the Inquisi∣tor, as though he were altogether ignorant of the matter, beginneth to talke with him much after this sort: Sirha, your keeper came and told vs, that you were desirous to come to your answer. Now say on, what is your sute? The prisoner answereth, that he would be very glad to haue his matter heard. And vnlesse he look well about him, and be circumspect in his dealing, very lothsomnesse of his imprisonment, and fear of afterclaps, driueth him to con∣fesse somewhat whereof he suspecteth himselfe to be accu∣sed. The which thing doth the Fathers good at their hearts, because they are accustomed at this and sundry o∣ther seasons, to grant the prisoners dayes of hearing, and to call them often into the Court before they shall know their whole accusation, and all that is deposed against them (which by order and common course of law should haue beene the first act that should haue beene done a∣gainst them) and all is to this onely end, to make the par∣ty
vtter somewhat of himselfe rashly and vnawares, that they as yet know not of. They aduise him moreouer to let it come from himselfe, promising that if hee will ac∣knowledge his faults voluntarily, he shall be foorthwith sent home againe to his owne house, and bee dispatched with all expedition, and dealt withall as gently as may be. But if for all these vaine and flattering promises he hold them hard, and stand mute (as indeede it is best for him) they charge him earnestly to disburden his owne consci∣ence: and when he hath bethought himselfe, and is dispo∣sed to confesse any thing, that then he should sue to come to his answer, saying that in the meane time, they will consider of his case, and so they remand him to prison. Then after 6. or 8. dayes or mo, as they thinke good, they call for him againe, and aske him if as yet he be determi∣ned to confesse ought. The prisoner answereth, either that he hath nothing to say, but that he is innocent, or perhaps confesseth somewhat. But whatsoeuer his answer be, they are sure still harping on their old string, vrging him to discharge his conscience, and perswading him that they goe about no other thing but to doe him good, and to procure his safety, of very loue and meere compassion which they take vpon him. Which gentlenesse of theirs, and well meaning towards him, if he refuse now, and set light by, he shall finde them sharpe Iusticers hencefoorth if the Fiscall informe against him, and so send him againe to prison. The Fiscall is an officer which taketh all such ac∣cusations as the Promoters bring vnto him, and by office is the onely pleader, during the whole time that the cau∣ses be hanging, as it were the Kings Atturney, hauing his name no doubt à Fisco, that is to say, the Eschecquer: for whose aduantage he is altogether, and from whence hee is answered his fee. At the third day of audience, the party is called for a∣gaine, and demanded, if yet hee be resolued what to doe, with earnest request after their accustomed maner, to con∣fesse
a troth of his owne accord: if not, they threaten to vse extremity towards him, and what they can do by law. And here they vnderstand by this word law, extreme tor∣menting and mangling of men, yea such as their owne owne lawes doe prooue very Innocents, saying hee may well assure himselfe, that no man shall sustaine any iniury within their holy Office, and that their fashion is not to trouble any man but vpon good and sufficient informati∣on against him, with such like talke. Howbeit, if the party happen to disclose any thing: nay (say they) yet are we not satisfied, we haue not all you can say, we suspect you keepe something in of purpose, and so send him to prison, put∣ting him to further paine, and calling him coram day by day, as they perceiue that by these means they wring more & more out of him, though it be but by little & little. But if he stand stoutely in the matter, giuing them direct an∣swer that he hath nought to say in that place, by a shift of descant (as it were) they try him another way, exacting an oth of him: & to the intent to proue his zeal, they hold him an Idol, representing the crucifixe, couered with a blacke lawn, & certain other Idols, I wot not what. They do also lay before him a Masse book or a Missall, and sometime the bare image of the crosse. For such deuices and foolish toyes as these be, they haue alwaies in a readines to vse as occasion serueth, & as they think most requisit, respecting the party whom they are to deal withall. Here is the Chri∣stian man driuen into a narrow streight, so that he must needs vtter himself, and plainly shew what he is in consci∣ence and in belief. For if he be a faithfull man indeed, and one that from the bottom of his heart abhorres Idolatry, hauing before his eies the fear of God most mighty & iea∣lous, which in his most holy law hath reserued this glory to himself, that we should swear by him alone, he will be∣ware that in no wise he giue part therof to such vile Idols of wood or mettall; which being made to resemble the highest in shape, are so much the more abominable in the
sight of God, and of his congregation. Therefore a godly man will take heed of such a wicked and vngodly oath, yea though he were to be torne in pieces presently, seeing they be very Idols, and not God, to whom alone that ho∣nour belongeth, as the Inquisitours themselues cannot say to the contrary. After they haue thus put him to his oath, they begin to examine him vpon these interrogat∣rie: What countrey man hee is, and vnder whose alle∣geance. Of what Prouince or Diocesse. In what city, town, or village he dwelleth. Who were his ancestors, & what their names were. What brethren or sisters he hath. What his father and mother were, and what were their names: how they liued, and by what trade and occupation. If he, or any of his kindred at any time haue beene conuented before the Inquisitours, and vpon what occasions. More∣ouer, many other things they inquire of him; as of his age, and trade of life, where and with what manner of men he hath been most conuersant: and thus is he sorced to giue a straight account of his whole life, where he hath passed his time yearly, and made his most abode, answering to e∣uery point by it selfe seuerally. For out of each of these questions they fetch no small arguments, wherewith they charge the poore soule afterward too too pittifully. When he hath answered to all these by-questions, then fal they a∣fresh to their old exhortation, sometime by faire meanes, and sometime by foule, aduising him to tell the truth frankely, assuring him, that they neuer cause any to bee arrested without iust cause why, or without sufficient wit∣nesses: so that whether he confesse or no, away he goeth to prison againe. And in these three first times of hearing, a great sort are either allured with their faire speeches and promises, that they shall bee sent home to ther owne houses as soone as they will confesse that that is demanded of them; or else of very awe and feare of their euill and mena∣cing words, vtter many things whereof the Inquisitors
knew not one iot before, because none had informed them thereof, but themselues onely suspected, lest they had been accused by some, with whom they had dealt heretofore in such affaires. Thus betraying themselues like fooles, they bring other men into as euill case as them∣selues, which perhaps neither feared any such matter at all, nor the Inquisitors had euer heard any thing of them be∣fore. But most of all, when they perceiue that these most holy Fathers, who hunt after nothing so much, as daily to haue change of spoyles, will take it thankefully at their hands, then labour they by all meanes possible to curry fa∣uour with them, to get themselues rid out of misery, and to be set at liberty: So that it commeth oftentimes to passe, that the parties being at the first arrested for very tri∣fling matters, vndoe both themselues and many others moe, by giuing ouer-much credit to the fair promises and goodly gloses of these false and faithlesse Inquisitors, through want of skill how to behaue themselues in their owne affaires, much lesse able to iudge and discerne what opinion they should haue of these Fathers, that is to say, not to be fathers (as they glory to be called in derision of all humanity, piety, and fatherlinesse) but their most cruell and deadly enemies, which by craft, subtilty, and lying, and by all kind of knaueries, priuily goe about to get that they gape for, both life and goods of the guilty, and of the guiltlesse. Against all which snares of theirs, there is one onely way of auoydance, to wit, that he whose destinie it is (I meane by Gods ordinance and appointment) to fall into their hands, beleeue neuer a word they say, promise A generall Caua. they neuer so fairly; nor be afraid of them, threat or thun∣der they neuer so terribly: hauing alwaies before his eyes the loue and dread of him, who after hee hath killed the body, hath power also ouer the soule to send it to hell fire; and hauing numbred the very haires of our head to the vttermost, will not suffer the least of them to perish or fall to the ground without his good pleasure and prouidence.
The next lesson is to keep his tongue for his life, & speake not one word till the time that he hath heard his accusa∣tion, with the depositions, whereunto he is bound by or∣der of law to make answer. Furthermore, at the fourth day of hearing, they tender him an oath, vehemently exhorting him to shriue himselfe voluntarily: otherwise they will deale with him as hardly as the law will permit them, if the Fiscall once commence his sute against him. And if he do yet perseuere constantly, affirming that he hath no more to say, then reade they vn∣to him a long inditement, & charge him with many great matters, falsely forged and deuised against him, such as nei∣ther the party did euer so much as thinke vpon, nor any had accused him of to them. For it is a point of cunning forsooth in this their crafty faculty, for the Fathers to make these great matters and huge offices on their fingers ends for these special causes. First, by thus loading the poor man, and laying to his charge many great and made matters, to bring him into such a maze, that being scarcely his owne man, he shall not well know where he is, nor which way to turne him, nor what answer to make. Secondarily, to prooue if happely he will admit any of these misdemeanors that are laid against him, or at the least, if by argument a∣bout any of them they can trippe him in his tale, and so catch him in their net. Is this then their following of Gods iudgements, whose cause these Fathers of the faith brag and boast so much, and beare the silly ignorant people in hand, that they take vpon them to maintaine, in the very first steppe of the stage, whereon they are ready bent to do execution of a sort of innocents, thus shamefully and moc∣kingly to cry, Arise (O Lord) and iudge thine owne cause? Do Psal. 74. these policies proceede of faith (trowe ye) where of they tearme themselues the Patrons? Did euer any true Patrons of faith either teach them to other, or els vse them them∣selues? Are these the most direct meanes to bring him into the right way, that of meere ignorance and simplicity hath
gone astray from the truth and word of God, or to teach the vnlearned, or to correct and amend him, who hath erred and fallen of common infirmity? Or are they not rathermore likely to be the snares of Satā, practised frō time to time by contentious and diuellish people, priuily laid to supplant a poore man withall, and very stumbling blockes craftily and maliciously cast for the nonce, to make him breake not onely his shinnes, but his neck also, that plainely and simply shall passe thereby, and lookes not wa∣rily to his footing? And who would haue thought (I pray you) that these holy Fathers would haue busied themselues in making such mouse-traps, and setting such pitfals? But how many good Christians haue fallen into these snares, to the great perill both of their bodes and soules onely by the detestable meanes of these pestilent and pernicious Ty∣rants, Christ the searcher of secrets, and chiefe Inquisitor o∣uer all at his generall doome, sitting in his seat of Maiesty, will one day make manifest. As touching their accusations, the great and principall The Inquisi∣tors generall obiection. matters wherewith they burden euery one that commeth within their iurisdiction, be these: First, for that he being baptized, & vnder the obedience of the Church of Rome, forsaking her profession and doctrine, is become one of Luthers disciples, by admitting and harbouring his here∣sies in his heart; and yet not content therewithall to be an heretike himselfe, hath prouoked and poysoned others by teaching & preaching the same heresies vnto them. And to this effect well neare, they vse many big words to make the simple folke afraid withall. Next to this, they charge them also with other matters, sometime of more importance, sometime of lesse: Prouided alwayes, that the matter wher∣of the party is accused, be brought in, either in the begin∣ning or ending, or else some other thing that some man hath him half in a iealousie for. Which thing they lay to his charge, not as a matter surmised or of likelihood, but most constantly affirmed and testified by witnesses. For in this
holy Consistory they may do what they list, and what they think expedient. Then is the party accused put to answer to euery article that is laid against him, seuerally and directly, either yea or no, as he thinketh good, hauing alwayes a clerke by him to record euery word that he speaketh. After this examination and confession thus had & done Ex tem∣pore, without either order or any great aduisement, they straightway giue him pen, inke, and paper to put in his an∣swer in writing if he will; pretending hereby, that they work for him al the means & helps that may be to try him∣self an honest man. And thus is this crafty Inquisition clo∣ked with this goodly pretence of equity & iustice, where in very deed this is their fetch, that hearing him first make one confession by word of mouth suddenly and without ad∣uisement, and after that another with more deliberation in writing, they may easily find some ods betwixt the one and the other, hauing neither any copy of his former confes∣sion to lay before him, nor being able for very feare & trou∣ble of mind to remember euery word that hath escaped him. But if there chance to be no contrariety, yet haply shall there be somwhat either more or lesse in the one than in the other. Moreouer, it standeth him vpon to be able to chop logicke with them, and to find out such contra∣dictions as the other look for, because his latter confession penned with some diligence, alwaies ministreth some mat∣ter of new cauillations. Which fetch of theirs whoso will wisely and warily auoid, must take heed he play mumme, and speak not one word, but premeditated and deuised vp∣on afore hand: and being mute in all other matters, craue onely this one thing at their hands, and that in as few and apt words as he can possibly, to haue a copy of his accusation, with paper, inke, and sufficient time granted him, that he may by leasure, and with some ood delibe∣ration make answer to such matters as are laide to his charge. But forasmuch as they (no doubt) wil not hold thē∣selues contented with one answer, but will seeke to haue
it both by mouth and by writing for the causes before al∣leadged, the party must in any case see to himselfe, and seek to wipe their noses by shaping them a short answer: yea, be they neuer so full of their questions and flourishes, or how froward or vntoward soeuer they be, let them not get within him in any wise, but hold them offaloofe, and be as briefe with them as he can. For albeit these raueners be ve∣ry greedy of that answer that was suddenly made, & with∣out any study, yet set they most store by that that was of his owne penning, specially if it bee done by one that is learned, whom by common and daily experience they know to be of that nature for the most part, that whiles they labour to auoyd matters of no great importance by some nice construction, they fall into diuers other absurdi∣ties, or at the least, by vttering a little of their poore skill they minister much matter for captious fellowes to quar∣rell and cauill vpon. By meanes whereof, many times such learned clarkes, who at the first fell into their fingers but onely for trifles, were afterward burdened with so many matters and so weighty, that they could neuer rid them∣selues thence, til either they went to the stake, or els endu∣ring some other punishment, led the rest of their life in perpetuall shame and ignominy. Wherof I could shew you sundry examples, but that I would be loth to fall from de∣scribing the subtill practises of the Inquisition, to discourse in a manner of a whole history. Wherfore, I hold him wise which can obserue in that place, vpon a little study to make a briefe and a resolute answer Christian-like, so as he ney∣ther hurt his conscience, by suppressing or shaddowing a truth, nor by his long processe giue his aduersary any thing to take hold vpon, or haue any aduantage against him, which (doubtlesse) is the onely makr they shoot at, in putting him to answer it by writing. It is also very good for him, that so oft as he can, he make sure his side by some Schoole and C. of their Canonists and Schoolmen (as they call them) for so shall neither the truth be obscured, nor these so easily
make a quarrel to his answer, being ratified and confirmed with his aduersaries arguments. But whensoeuer any ey∣ther by writing, or word of mouth, confesseth any thing o∣penly before them that is hereticall, they vse this order commonly; out of that one saying to draw & deriue diuers others by hooke or crooke, & to charge him with each of them seuerally, as if he had spoken and affirmed them all precisely, though the party neuer spake them, nor then will grant them, nor greatly vnderstandeth them, or wel know∣eth what to make of them. As for example, I will report a thing that hapned at Siuil a few yeares agoe: neither need I to coyne any examples in a case so common as this is, that is almost in experience dayly in that holy Court of theirs, to the great losse and vtter vndoing of many silly and simple soules. There was a certaine man cited before the Inquisitors at Siuil, for saying in presence of his familiar friends & ac∣quaintance, that he knew none other Purgatory but one, & that was the blood of Christ, which daily washeth and pur∣geth our sinnes. The party who said it, was but a simple man, brought vp in the countrey all the dayes of his life, hauing no spark of good ciuility in him, or of any good e∣ducation, and by chance hearing this on a time among cer∣taine of his companions, liked thereof very well; but now, comming before the Fathers for the same matter, told them plainly how he was of the same mind once, marry sith it misliketh their worships, he is very well content to forsake it. But what did it auaile (thou foole) to make so rash and so sudden a recantation? By confessing the matter, thou set∣test them agogge. By keeping thy tongue, thou hadst grie∣ued them to their very galles. By making thy purgation, thou couldest but haue lost thy labor. Yet this did not con∣tent the cōmissioners, but there must needs be some other quarrell picked against him. For the Inquisitors Organs (forsooth) went hard for want of exercise, & therfore they must necessarily haue some body to play vpon them, and
keep them from rusting. Ergo, say they, and conclude of this antecedent against this poor plough-man, the Church of Rome which in time past hath determined the contrary by law, doth erre, and the councel erreth also, and iustification commeth by faith only, wherein a man is made free & ab∣solued à poena & culpa. To be short, out of these they fetch a rabble of opinions and assertions, which they call heresies, & charge the poor man with euery of them, as if he had af∣firmed them all in plain tearms, say he nay neuer so stoutly that he knoweth nothing of any such matters, nor so much as once euer thought vpon them. Now who seeth not that this kind of proceeding in this holy office is packed full of subtill policies, and all the diuellish practices and deuices that may be? Yet herein is the mighty prouidence of God toward his elect specially to be had in admiration, that these men wanting the means of calling & teaching which other men haue to induce them by, in a place so quite con∣trary to these means as is fire to water, are both called and taught by God, hauing their eyes opened by him, & their vnderstanding lightned. For the Inquisitors themselues, who seek vtterly to destroy and root vp all faith & truth, they (I say) by such meanes as I haue before declared, are ye very preachers, teachers, and furtherers of the same, as it is euident and manifest by many notable examples of sun∣dry persons that haue fallen into their hands only for pra∣ting rashly and foolishly, rather then of purpose or adui∣sedly, that there is no purgatory, and that it is but a dreame and no such thing indeed; whereas they haue been at their first comming in, ignorant in most of the points concer∣ning saluation, by their only questionings, collections, il∣lations, brought either in forme or out of forme, haue de∣parted thence very well instructed: wherof this rude fellow of the countrey, of whom I last made mention, may bee a sufficient testimony. Moreouer, if he party chance to con∣fesse ought, they vse to haue another hooke ready bayted, sharpe and perilous enough, I warrant you: to wit, they
enquire of him whatsoeuer it be, of whom he learned or heard it, or if he haue haply read it in some booke, or if hee haue had any conference with any other about the same matter, or he himselfe haue been an instructer to others, or by any meanes haue mentioned it in the presence of any: in what place he did so, and who they were that stood by? For whosoeuer was present, whether they liked his talk or no, yea though it were his owne father, or nigher him, if nigher could be, they are sure to buy it full dearly: the In∣quisitors will haue a firt at them, because they came not foorth with, & made complaint thereof vnto them. All wch things it behooues a man greatly to be cunning in, that if it be Gods will that he fall into their hands, he may learne before hand out of his holy word and will how to preuent them, and prouide an answer to such demands, lest he vn∣doe both himselfe and others through his owne folly and negligence. At the last, when his accusation is read, if the party be an infant (as we tearme one within age) they pro∣uide him a Patron whom they call a Tutor. A very godly The Tutor. way (no doubt) if such a man were appointed to that place as would play his part stoutly, and as it becometh him in respect of his office. Howbeit he is no such manner of man as the infant would and should haue for the better brin∣ging of his matters about, but one of their own choce, wch either is a very wolfe to ioyn with them against the simple lambe, or at the most, to stand like a cipher in Arithmetick, and doe nothing but fill vp a place, and for fashion sake and order stand in stead of a Tutor to performe the cere∣monies and circumstances of the law. For most common∣ly the Porter of their holy house serueth that turne, or in his absence some other of the Porters lodge, and indeede but onely that he beareth the bare name and title of a Tutor, dealing in nothing that appertaines to the office, my Lords Muleter may easily be Tutor in such sort to the whole com∣pany of the prisoners all at once. By reason whereof, the Porter cannot alwayes bee ready to answer euery bo∣dy
that knocketh at the gate. And on this sort do these ho∣ly Fathers fulfill the commandements of God, and the laws of man touching poore infants and orphanes, who as well by the law of God as of nature, are commended so specially to the consideration and regard of all men, but most chief∣ly to Iudges. Neither rest they here, contenting themselues to mocke the law in this point alone, but in another of more im∣portance: wheras the law prouideth, that euery defendant The Aduo∣cate. shall haue his Aduocate, some man expert in the law, to pleade his cause, and order it discreetly according to law and conscience, and to defend their right if any they haue, or at the least to temper the rigor of the law, lest it be con∣strued and ministred with extremity in this so waighty a matter, and the onely succour that these silly soules haue to helpe themselues withall; they deale with them in like sort as they do in the former for appointing them a Tutor, and so shift it off with a meere shadow and a bare ceremony: onely because it is a very waighty matter, therefore they would seeme full of curtesie and humanitie, and would faine cloke their wicked contempt of lawes with some goodly pretence. For they name vnto the party 3. or 4. of the most famous men toward the lawes, to chuse out of them some one to pleade his cause, and besides all this their gentlenesse (of fatherly affection I dare say) they aduise him to take such a man, who in their iudgements is the best learned. And what would a man desire more? Yet whosoeuer is chosen to be his Aduocate, will bee sure that he tell not his Clyent any point of law that may doe him ease any way. For he knoweth right well, that if the Inqui∣sitors haue intelligence thereof, he shall not scape scotfree, seeing their meaning is nothing lesse then to prouide him an Aduocate to defend his cause, but onely to bleare the common peoples eyes withal, and make them beleeue that they proceede by order of law like good conscionable Fa∣thers, where in very deede they compasse their matters
both against Gods lawe and mans. For the Aduocate and his Clyent may not so much as haue a word together se∣cretly of any matter, but in presence and hearing of the Inquisitours or of some Notary. And what doth the Ad∣uocate then would a man thinke? Marry he receiueth his Clyents answer to the accusation rude and rough hewn as it were, and that doth he smooth and set together in forme of lawe (yet ilfauouredly framed full oft, God wot) and all this while taketh vpon him the name of an Aduocate, onely to delude the lawe withall. But forward to our purpose. Within 2. or 3. dayes after the party hath had the copy of his accusation, he is called into the court, where his ad∣uocate standeth, like one that would stoutly defend his Clyentes cause, and saue all such matters as should seeme to make against him. Then the Inquisitour, as though hee had done the party an high pleasure, & discharged his con∣science wholly for that part of the lawe, pointeth out the Clyent his Aduocate with his finger, and straightway fal∣leth into his old note, exhorting him to vtter the truth, and take heede to his conscience, and if hee haue any more to say, to say it at once. All which time the Aduocate sitteth or standeth mute, and if he haue ought to say, yet dare hee not let it come out before hee haue made the Inquisitours of his counsell. For the Aduocate all the while that hee is telling his tale, so eyeth the Inquisitours, that one of their eyes is neuer off from the other: the Inquisitour is so much afraid lest the prating Aduocate vtter something rashly & vnawares, wherin the Clyent might espy somwhat for his aduantage in lawe, and so auoyd the danger of their se∣cret and hidden snares. The Aduocate on the other side is as much afraid, and quaketh euery part of him, lest any word chance to slip him suddenly that the Inquisitours happly shall not well like of, and therefore dare say no∣thing for his Clyent, but onely giue him a few wordes of comfort, and bid him bee of good cheer, and tell the truth
in any case, saying, that that is the onely way to preuaile in this Court: and as for me (saith he) I will be ready to do for you the best that I can. Then commeth the Inquisitour in with his part, singing the same note, and so is the pri∣soner sent to his prison againe. After this day of hearing, the party beginneth to bee of better courage, hoping that his matter draweth nigh to an end: but it is farre otherwise God knoweth. For many of them are forgotten: some for a yeare, or halfe a yeare, or perhaps for three or fowre yeares, as it pleaseth these good Fathers to deale with them, and there they lie in prison, as it were a peece of leather that lieth steeping in the tan∣ners fatte. During all which time, they neither are called any more, nor one word mentioned for their deliuerance. Then, if any for very lothsomnes and intolerable filth by reason of their long imprisonment, do craue to come to their answer, some perhaps obtaine it, and some go without it: but in the end both their luckes are alike. For they that after long suite get a grant thereof, are com∣manded into a Parler; where they haue such countenances made them, and such speach vsed towards them, that it is easie to be espied, that they haue no manner of regard vn∣to them at all: and there (forsooth) they put them a question a great deale meeter to be asked of men in a farre better case then they are in. As for the purpose: what their sute is? or what they would haue? Whereunto each answereth, that he would bee glad to haue some end and determination of his trouble. Marry and thereabouts we go (say they) as carefully as wee can, and assure your selfe we will not forget you. But if he be earnest to haue it determined, they bid him bethinke himselfe then, and say the truth, asking him why hee no more regar∣deth his conscience? &c. At the length, laying the fault of his long imprisonment to himselfe (whereas hee poore man would haue been content, if hee might haue had his choyce, to come forth to the stake, rather then to
continue there so long) they send him to prison againe. And albeit they afterward do grant him diuers other daies of hearing: yet as he continueth his sute, so keepe they him off with their accustomed delaies, till they thinke it bee time to communicate vnto him the depositions made against him, which they terme the publication of the witnesses. CHAP. IIII. The publication of the witnesses AFter a long & loathsom time of imprisonment, in such sort as mās nature is not able to endure it any longer, when the poor soule in their iudgements is brought so low, that he could be content to be delivered with all his heart, though it cost his life, & therfore likely to tell all & more too, yea, euen as much as they themselues can demand or desire: they call him yet again before them, & in a speech framed as it were a mean betwixt a sharp rebuking & a gen∣tle admonition, doe aske him how it happeneth that hee hath slipt his owne matters so long, and now at the length would haue him come in and tell the truth. Vpon which point they stand very long in perswading him: and then eyther on this or the next day of hearing, the Fiscall en∣treth his action against him, praying that publication may bee made of the witnesses: which being granted, forth∣with the depositions are deliuered to the party, but yet without any names subscribed. The order and pen∣ning whereof is a sufficient declaration what great zeale this holy Court hath to bring the truth to light. For all things are so difficultly reported and so abruptly; so wrested and wrung with such doubtfull tearmes of double sense and vnderstanding, that a man would iudge him sure neuer well in his wittes that vttered them. And this is a peece of the Legerdemaine of that ho∣ly House, purposely inuented to driue the party alwaies into a doubt, euen of those points which hee knoweth are alreadie deposed against him. Secondarily, that so nigh
as may be, he should haue no maner of knowledge of the witnesses, who they were that did depose against him, lest happly hee should take some exception against them. Fi∣nally, that if he haue conferred with any other then his accusers, concerning those matters whereof hee is accused, and knowing not who were his accusers, but labouring to find them out, should perhappes reckon vp all, and so by that meanes bring a great sort of mo fishes to the In∣quisitours holy Angle. And here would I be glad to know of these Fathers of the Faith, seeing they are so well learned in the laws (if they would be so good as to tell vs how it commeth about) that whereas the Publication of witnesses is ordeyned of common right to bee vsed sincerely and plainly, yet in this holy Court it hath no place, neither is allowed for lawe, by rea∣son that the names of the witnesses are suppressed, and so the one halfe of the law, yea the better halfe of it, is curtal∣led and quartered, and the residue neither vprightly han∣dled, nor faithfully, but most craftily and falsly abused, as I will make relation hereafter. And if an exception will lie against witnesses, not onely by order of law, but in other respects vpon very good and necessary considerations, because knaues and villaines should not any way trouble nor molest honest men that are guiltlesse and innocent, why is there no place in this most holy Court for such ex∣ceptions? For in ciuill causes but of small importance, they Witnesses ad∣mitted in their holy Inquisition. will not admit a mans enemy, nor a lyer, nor a defamed person, nor an Idiot, nor a Bedlam, nor a drunkard, nor a ew, nor a villaine, nor any such kind of people to bee sworne as witnesses: and who then (I pray you) hath enabled all this route of Rakehels, in matters of religion and the weightiest causes that can bee, to bee accepted and admitted for witnesses, and that their testimony shall bee receiued and reputed in matters touching life and death: seeing they are disabled by all lawes to condemne any man in the least trifles that may come in question betwixt man
and man? But here perchance they will say they deny not, but the party hath very good liberty of challenge against the witnesses, if he could learne by any meanes or con∣iecture who they be that deposed against him. Therefore if hee chance at any time to gesse him right that hath thus testified against him, so that the Court iudge him insuf∣ficient, and doth therefore refuse him, they haue done no∣table iniury to both parts, or to one of them at the least. First of all to the witnesse, by refusing him now, if they did right before in suppressing his name, because the party should not know him: next, to the party himselfe, being now at the length content to admitte his exceptions, so he can gesse or by some other meanes learne his name, and haue sufficient matter to charge him withall, and such as may bee thought good cause of challenge: which surely in all indifferent mens iudgements that haue any consciences at all, is an horrible and most detestable kinde of iniurie. But to returne to their policies. The depositions of the witnesses therefore is an euident proofe, aswell by their order and manner of examination, as also by their kind of speach therein vsed, whether the Inquisitours haue kept the euen street, or gone by crooked lane. For this is most sure that they are not commonly read to the party in such sort as the witnesses haue deposed, but if any thing be vttered besides by the witnesses that might make for the prisoner, or be construed on his side, they reiect all that as needeless and superfluous, admitting onely that that maketh most against him, and clap on all that on their owne biace side. For the further proofe and declaration whereof it will bee worth the noting vnto you, to shew what their common vsage is in registring of such depositions: As for example. N. a witnesse (suppressing his name) sworneand allowed, &c. saith that heeth said N. heard in such a place, and such a yeare, and of such a moneth (if he can so precisely remember the times) such a man report, that the aforesaid, that is to say, the party accused, said thus and thus, &c. And in their
Records (which they call their Originall processe) they haue all those circumstances at large, which they exact of the witnesses for a further truth and tryall of the mat∣ter: but in that exemplified copy which they deliuer to the party himselfe, very subtilly they suppresse all the cir∣cumstances of time and persons present, whereby the par∣ty might haue any inkling of his accuser or witnesse, supplying those places with these or such like words: A certaine person: another man: and a third person. In which kind of depositons there bee certaine priuy points and nice conceits diligently to bee obserued, that is to witt: Whensoeuer they say that he heard it of a certaine person whom he hath named, it is to be vnderstood, that the wit∣nesse heard the party himselfe speake it; and by the craftie conueyance of the Inquisitors it is so brought about, that in the counterfeit copy which they deliuer to the parties hands, it seemeth as though he had heard it of some other mans mouth, because he shall not ghesse who it was that gaue euidence against him: but hauing conferd therin with diuers others, as well as with this man that deposed against him, should no more know who hurt him, then he that playeth at blind-man-buffe can ghesse who gaue him the blow. And in this behalfe, if the prisoner chance to men∣tion any such persons as the Court hath not yet beene en∣formed of, they are incontinently outlawed, and reputed as fauourers of heretickes, for suffering an hereticke to sow such pestilent seedes among them, without making com∣plaint thereof foorthwith to the Inquisitors. But if the depositions bee on this wise, That he heard it of another cer∣taine person whom he hath named, &c. it is to be vnderstood, that the witnesse heard it by a meane, and therefore will not serue to ioyne with another witnesse, though he bee man good enough for them, and fitte to feede their sus∣picious humors. The difference betwixt both these depo∣sitions is no more but this, that in the one this word other is vsed, that is not put in the former, which is
onely thus, that he heard it of a certaine person, &c. This geere, I tell you, is taken out of their Sancta Sanctorum. Thus by these subtill and captious quiddities, the Inquisi∣tours beguile many a Christian soule that knoweth not their cunning dealings, but thinketh himselfe safe enough, because he feeleth his conscience free from vttering any vntruth. And truely it is greatly to bee lamented, that such poore wretches being guiltlesse (God knoweth) a great sort of them should be so hemmed in of these crafty Catchpoles so farre beyond all humanitie, for want of a little skill in these their subtill and slightfull deuices. Wher∣in this counsell of ours (perhaps) may doe them some manner of pleasure, for the more easie espying and auoy∣ding of these their policies. The defendant therfore must take heede that he speake not one word at this day of hea∣ring, tending to the confutation of that which the wit∣nesses affirme, yea though it be as false as God is true, and he himselfe neuer so well able in his owne iudgement to answer it presently; lest the Inquisitours by their importu∣nity happen to wring out somewhat from him on a sud∣daine, as they vse to deale with diuers. Onely let him this doe; that is to say, craue a Copy of the depositions, and licence to answer them in writing by leasure and with de∣liberation, against the next Court day, or so soone as he can conueniently. In which answer, let him see in any case that hee obserue those things, whereof in the accusa∣tion made by the Fiscall, I haue giuen him instructions be∣fore. Secondarily, after he hath obtained the Copy, diligent∣ly to mark of himselfe, who be witnesses with the witnes∣ses, and who not, and whether their testimony be able and sufficient to condemne him in these matters wherin they beare witnes with the other, or no. As for his Aduocate, he is but onely for fashion sake, and it were as good for him to haue one of clous, for any helpe that he is like to haue The number and quality of their wit∣nesses. at his hand, much lesse (may ye thinke) at the Inquisitors. But as concerning ye witnesses, two that heard it of report
are in this lawlesse Court as good as one that heard it of his own mouth: so that two such witnesses of heresay, and one that heard it of the parties own mouth, are enow to condemne him. Moreouer it is to be noted, that the kee∣per of the Inquisit urs prison, whom they commonly call Alcaidium, is as good as two of the best witnesses. And therefore for such mattters as he hath seene and obser∣ued in the prison, his onely testimony is sufficient to con∣demne any whom he himselfe accuseth. Yea, and in some cases one onely witnesse, though he haue nothing but by heresay, yet is he sufficient to put the party in ieopardy of the racke, if he haue not some iust cause of challenge a∣gainst him. But if there were any respect at all, or regard of iustice in this Court so farre from all conscience, it were enough in all godly and indifferent mens iudgements, either for the parties deliuerance, or at the least for his pur∣gation, to auoyde that quiddity in the depositions which I mentioned before, by faire and flat deniall of that, which the witnesse said onely of heresay, were this word other there or no. Wherewith the Inquisitors seeke to salue the matter, and to saue themselues, being indeed but a very false and a friuolous cauill, onely, to colour a lye. For so should it fall out in the end, that he who deposed nothing but of heresay, should, as right and reason is, be refused as insufficient: and the other that spake of his owne pre∣cise knowledge, be likewise reiected, if there were iust cause of exception: so that both their secret practises should bee auoyded, and the Inquisitours enforced to lay away all this their double dealing, and to tell him plainely that the witnesse heard it of his own mouth, and so driue the party to auoyd it more substantially. But what shift should a man make in such a case? For, hauing the law in their owne hands like Lords, nay, like most cruell Tyrants rather, when they know the witnesse had it at the first hand, yet will they make as though they were content to admit the exceptiō of the party who took the witnes to be none
other then such as had it by report, and will afterward or∣der the matter as it pleaseth them, whiles the party suppo∣seth that hee hath sufficiently auoided that witnesse, and thinketh himselfe sure enough for him. Let him therefore well and warily cast with himselfe aforehand, or rather pray vnto God to reueale vnto him, what is to bee done in this perplexitie. Furthermore, in this holy Court euery Iohn-a-Nokes may The Pro∣moters ser∣uing their holy Inqui¦sition. bee a promoter, and euery frantike Bedlam that is be∣sides himselfe, euery varlet or villaine, and so forth euery one of the 24. orders, bee he a person neuer so much disabled in law to be a witnes. For a hungry hunter, & one that is greedy of his game, will be glad of euery curtalled curre that will do him seruice to bring home his prey. But if the Promoter in his information chance to want words of weight, or to misplace them, or haue forgotten the very words which hee heard the partie say, so he can hit of the matter, and remember the substance, the Inquisi∣tors by vertue of their office instruct him, and bring it into his remembrance again: In so much, that oftentimes the Promoter will tell such a tale as neither he heard, nor euer meant to tell, but euen as they themselues haue promp∣ted him word by word: which a man may well thinke is not all of the best sort. Yet God hath sometimes so blinded their senses & vnderstandings, that they haue quite forgotten both themselues & all their owne practices and deuices. As it came to passe at Siuil, that a certaine fran∣tike woman, in the absence of her keeper chancing to breake loose, and to vndoe her bolts & irons wherein she was fettered in a certaine godly mans house, came to the Inquisitours to the castle Triana, and there had almost dis∣couered to them the whole assembly of the congregation, which in that great cittie heere and there met in corners. The which (no doubt) had beene a prey alone for them, but that God meruellously defended that good flock of his, being at that time very small in comparison, and farre
vnable to abide the punishments which since that time they haue for the profession of Christ endured most con∣stantly. This woman before she fell mad was one of the chiefe in the congregation: I meane for feruencie of zeale and skill in holy scripture, farre aboue that which a man would look for at a womās hand. By means whrof, she was very well acquainted with all those, who in this perillous time professed the Gospell of Christ, but in the heat of her phrensie all her former loue and zeale that she bare toward the congregation, being turned into an extreme and a deadly hatred, she raged so vehemently against the assem∣bly of godly persons, that in all her madding time shee had nothing else in her mouth, but cryed vpon the Inquisi∣tors on this sort: Fire and fagots, fire and burne them; possessed (no doubt) of some euil spirit labouring quite to ouerthrow that good Christian congregation by the meanes of that mad woman. Therefore so soone as euer she was got loose, she went straight way with all speed to the Castle where the Inquisitours lay, & there knocked at the gates, which were opened vnto her by and by, as commonly they are not strait kept vpon any that can informe that holy Court a∣gainst a sort of poore innocents. Wherupon at her first en∣trance within the gate, shee required that in all haste she might come to the speech of the Inquisitours. Who straightway assembled all together in their Parler, as it were to consult about some waighty affares, and sent for the woman before them to heare what she could say. Who immediatly decared vnto them, that she had brought them a Bedroll of Lutherans that swarmed abroad in the Citie, whiles they that should diligently see to such things, sat idle within and ouer-slipt their matters: and so began to reckon them, & if she had proceeded, she had appeached to the number of 300 and aboue, that were very earnest pro∣fessors of the Gospell: but that the Inquisitours astonied at this suddaine sight, and meruailing at the first what this should meane (for till that time there had been little talke
or none of any Lutherans): besides, espying many madde toyes which she vsed in the telling of her tale (which was a truth indeede as she reported it) caused her to cease her prating in good time. Yet because they would not bee thought negligent in doing their dutie, though the matter were but of small importance, they kept the woman still, and sent for the good man in whose house shee was kept, whom she meant to haue made foreman in her bil, because he had enteated her somwhat roughly at such times as her fittes were vpon her, to the end to make her leaue her ra∣uing. The mans name was Francisco à Cafra, the Parson of Saint Vincentes Church: who afterwardes was impri∣soned for religion & escaped away by a miraculous means: notwithstanding in the very first triumph ouer the Luthe∣rans, they burned his picture. When hee was fetcht and brought afore them, being takē for a good honest man, they asked him what the woman meant by talking of such a nū∣ber of Lutherans, &c. but he forthwith forcing a laughter, fained himself to maruaile at them, in that they perceiued her not to be besides her selfe; declaring vnto them, that she had bio in that plight by the space of two or three moneths, in so much that he was constrained to beate her and binde her, as was to see by her shoulders both blacke and blue, & by the print of the Irons on her legges: adding moreo∣uer, that he for Gods sake and in the way of charity kept her at his house: from whence shee brake loose, causing him and his whole houshold to seeke her ouer all the city: howbeit he was now right glad that he had once met with her againe, and found her safe. As for the Lutherans whom she prated of so much, he told them, that during the time of her fits, she had none other song, as most commonly mad folke will be alwayes talking of some one speciall matter or other. And for the fetters wherein she was chayned at his house, if it were their pleasures either to send any to see them, or to make enquiry of his neighbors about him, they should find all things so as he had reported, and therefore
besought them, that some of their seruants might take and bind the woman, and bring her home againe to his house. Where at the woman fell into a great rage and exclamati∣on, that all the castle rang withall, saying shee was not mad, but hee was the greatest and starkest Lutheran in all the City, that laded her with Irons, and scourged her dayly most pittifully. At which words they all fell in a great laughter, and thereupon commanded their ser∣uants to take and bind her, and to carry her to her old home againe, and to her cold Irons, commending him greatly for his good worke, in taking vpon him so great a charge as to deale with a madde woman, and to seeke meanes to amend her; aduising him hencefoorth to make her surer, lest she should chance to breake loose hereafter, and make as much businesse at some other time. Thus the Inquisitours forgetting themselues and their owne practi∣ces, lost at this time as great a prey, as all that amounteth vnto which they had beene scraping and gathering toge∣ther in the haruest time and increase of the Church for two or three years before. But to returne to our matter. It is furthermore to be considered and obserued in this holy Court, that the Promoter neuer speaketh in open Court against any person, but onely the Fiscal, who is, as it were, an Atturney generall to mooue the Court in all the mat∣ters that are brought vnto him, and to take all the infor∣mations, and follow them accordingly, so that the Pro∣moter serueth him for a witnes. Whereof, like (as of other things) I need not to bring any other proofe or testimony then their owne. Let euery man therefore iudge by what right or reason they doe it. CHAP. V. The confutation of the witnesses. THen after 3. or 4. dayes, the party is commanded to come before them, and to put in his answer to the de∣positions. And with him commeth also his Aduocate. But here I should not forget to tell you by the way, that
whereas it is the part of euery Aduocate in all iust causes diligently to conferre with his Client about the depositi∣ons, and to aduertise him which bee the chiefe and principall points that require answer, and not onely thus to do, but also to draw the answer himselfe, and set it in such order as most may further his Cliēts cause (else wher∣to doth an Aduocate serue but for such purposes?) they leaue the simple man to himselfe, to deuise and dispose it as well as he can, hauing none in the world to helpe him, saue God alone. And if you aske this holy Court the que∣stion, why they doe in this behalfe breake and contemne this custome, which doubtles proceeded of the very law of nature, they can yeeld you no reason for it, nor make you any other answer, but onely this: Forsooth there is a great difference betwixt this holy Court, and other common Courts. In very deed they say truth, and so it is: for all their nice quiddities were not worth a straw, if the parties might there frankly and freely defend themselues by such means as are to them by all lawes allowable. But when the party hath already framed his answer so well as he can, then in good time his Aduocate commeth in, to play his part at the length. Who very warily (I warrant you) and circum∣spectly, as he knoweth full well it standeth him vpon, dea∣ling in, so dangerous a case, lest he likewise, ere hee be aware, fall into the Inquisitors hands by some little o∣uersight, declareth vnto his Client openly before the In∣quisitors, which depositions they be that touch him nigh∣est, and what be the great matters that are prooued against him, who be witnesses with the witnesses, and who not, and that there is no good to be done any way but one, to ghesse if it be possible who is his accuser, and to deuise ex∣ceptions against him. And yet it is not best for the Aduo∣cate here to be ouer busie in prating to the party, or to put him in mind of any further matter that might doe him good, more then he by aduisement and leasure can pick out of himselfe. Onely this counsell he giueth him, to remem∣ber
himselfe, and call his wits together when he is most at leasure, with whom he hath fallen out at any time, be∣cause it may be that some of his enemies haue accused him for some old grudge. For if there be any apparant matter of some speciall quarrell that hath beene betwixt the par∣ty and his accuser, this is all and the onely cause of chal∣lenge that this Court will admit against any witnes what∣soeuer. Furthermore, he declareth vnto him, that he may refuse peremptorily such witnesses as haue varied in their tales, or be his enemies, as is aboue-said: or if he can bring mo witnesses, to proue that he hath alwayes beene an ad∣uersary to that whereof he is accused, and one that hath rather frequented and dayly beene conuersant in the con∣trary. And here is all the helpe that the poore Client hath at his Aduocates hands. Whereupon hee is remanded to prison againe, with this Item alwayes, that he vtter the truth, with a few menacing words now and then enterla∣ced, more then well doe beseeme them, that if he will not be ordered in time, they will extort it out of him by ex∣tremity of law: whereby it is giuen the party to vnderstand, that he shall be hencefoorth more straitly examined, and more hardly dealt withall: insomuch that after three or foure dayes respite giuen him to call his wits together, and to remember himselfe, they send for him againe, and aske him whether he hath yet be thought himselfe, & haue ought to say. But whether he hath, yea or no, his Aduo∣cates question is: If he haue hit on the names of any of his witnesses or accusers. Wherin if the party can cal any thing certainly to mind, he declares it vnto the Inquisitors, pray∣ing them to consider, whether such and such men be not his accusers, betwixt whom and him there hath beene an old grudge, which as yet resteth betwixt them vncom∣pounded? Howbeit if he ghesse not a right, besides this, that his answer is not worth a button, both his whole three or foure dayes labour spent in ghessing, is quite lost, and his accusation abideth still vntouched. But if he chance to
ghesse right, his Aduocate asketh him what exceptions he can take against such as he hath named, but dares not for his life directly tell him that he hath ghessed aright, for it is not good for him I wis to talke so plainely. Yet when the Aduocate hath heard his Clients exceptions, and taken the names of such witnesses as he nameth vnto him for proof thereof, being now at more liberty then before, he taketh vpon him the charge to examine those matters by interro∣gatories, and further domandeth of his Client, if he be able to bring-in proofe for his better purgation, that he hath beene a friend to the Fryers and Monkes, and familiarly acquainted with them, and diligently obserued and kept all and singular the customes, rites, and ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and vsed to come often to shrift, and to receiue his maker; and in passing by any image or crosse, if he haue done to them their due reuerence, that it may ap∣peare that he is none of Luthers sect. Finally, if hee can a∣uerre generally, that he hath beene quite contrary to that whereof he is now accused. Which things if he proffer to prooue particularly, the Inquisitors by solemne act in law doe openly declare in Court, that they are content that he make his purgation accordingly within 9. dayes next after. The whole charge whereof, after that the party hath giuen in the names of those witnesses that deposed against him, resteth wholly on the Aduocate, as I haue said a little be∣fore. Howbeit euery man hath not thus much fauor shewed him to make his purgation on this sort, but onely in such cases, where the witnesses in their depositions agreed not with their fellowes, nor greatly with themselues in their owne tales. For otherwise they haue but small succour or none at all to auoyd them by making their owne purgati∣on, but onely are admitted to take exception against the witnesses (as I said before) if they can deuise who they be. And when the party is proceeded thus farre, let him perswade himselfe, that God hath brought him thither for tryall of his fayth, whether it be pure and perfect, yea
or no. For if he, vpon hope to auoide the present perill of the body, determine to use such shifts for his succour in procuring his purgation by meanes aforesaid, albeit he be throughly quit in this Court concerning his duty & obe∣dience to the Church of Rome and her Idolatries: yet bee he well assured, in that generall day of doome which will be so terrible to all creatures, & in the judgement of Gods true Church, it will fall out against him farre otherwise. It shall therefore stand a man vpon in this case to look well about him, and to enter into his owne conscience, and se∣cretly debate with himselfe the causes of his imprisonment diligently. For if it be for the glory of God, and the free professing of the truth, and he forsweare Christ, treading the bloud of his testament vnder his feet, & denying the truth wherunto God hath called and raised him out of that deep dungeon of darknesse, ignorance, and sin, hoping by these cursed and damnable meanes to escape the tyranny of men, perhaps he may doe so for a season, and purchase the favor of men again: but let him him be most assured, that he shall never escape the sharp and most just judgement of God, from whose truth he is revolted: whose power is not only over the carcasse to kill the body, but afterwards to throw the soule into vtter darknesse. Therefore if hee haue any sparke of grace left aliue within him, or any zeale either of Gods glory, or loue of his owne salvation, or that the au∣thority of our Redeemer may waigh with him any thing at all, saying: Whoso denieth mee before men, him will I deny Matth. 10. before my heavenly Father: and he that acknowledgeth me before men him will I also acknowledge before my Father and his Angels in heaven &c. he will wholly rest vpon that authority, and sticke to his tackling in that pinch, and vtterly renouncing with heart and mouth all these meanes to saue this tempo∣rall life, offred vnto him by his Advocate and the Iudge (whereunto he cannot giue his consent without great dis∣honour to his Creator, and danger of his owne soule) will yeeld a plaine and open confession of his faith, thinking
himselfe a thousand times in better case, that God hath pre∣serued him to that instant, to suffer some affliction for Christs sake, battering in pieces this earthly tabernacle, that is to say, a full weak and wearyish body, for so noble a quarrell as is the honor of God and the building vp of his Church. For these cursed meanes to saue a mans life (which that holy house, the very sinke of sin and iniquity, vseth, of like curtesie and compassion as is in the Crocodile, to grant to these poore soules) are not here reported, to the end that the godly should learn hereby the shifts to saue them∣selues, but rather, that by knowing them, they should vt∣terly auoyde and abhorre them, and that the world may see that all the deuices and policies of this holy Inquisition tend to no other end, but after they haue layd their cruell hands, continually stained with the bloud of some of the Saints, vpon any person, if he relent and recant Gods glo∣rious truth, so to destroy him both body and soule▪ if o∣therwise, yet at the least to kill his body, ouer which alone their power is able to extend it selfe in such as liue in the feare and seruice of God duly and truly. Thus, after that the party hath endured two or three months in prison at the discretion of these good Fathers, they send for him foorth once againe to the place of this combate: where the Inquisitor beginneth to declare vnto him, how that the witnesses which he brought for his pur∣gation, haue beene heard what they can say, and therefore he desireth to see what he can say for himselfe, or else to draw to an end. Then he, after their accustomed manner, falleth to exhortation that hee tell the truth, which is al∣wayes one peece of their talke, so that I beleeue, a man should tell them a good long tale, ere they would be satisfi∣ed. Whereunto the party maketh them such reasonable an∣swer as he thinketh best for his owne case. Howbeit, vnto diuers they vse to put sundry questions, & oppose them in their owne answer exhibited vp by thē in writing, quarrel∣ling at euery letter and syllable, like to subtill Sophisters.
When the party hath spoken all that he hath to say, the Fiscall concludeth vpon his sayings; and lastly, the Inquisi∣tors with the assent of their Councell and Assistants giue sentence when and what they list or like themselues, the Diuines & Monks, and other of the Clergy first waighing and considering such things as the party hath vttered tou∣ching doctrine and faith, and so valuing it after their owne rate and measure, and trying it by their own touch, which they call the qualification of doctrine. At what time if the par∣ty be able to prooue substantially, that he neuer dealt in Christs Gospell, which they, by a new name of their owne coyning, commonly call Luthers heresies, either they ab∣solue him, and giue him his Quiet us est, or else most com∣monly vse to order the matter, and giue iudgement ac∣cordingly as they haue him in a certaine iealousie and su∣spicion stil either more or lesse: Prouiding alwayes, that none passe their hands without such markes and badges as he shall carry with him to his graue, in token that hee hath bin within the Inquisitors paw. The marks are com∣monly these: Confiscation of their goods, imprisonment during life, or for a great part of it: A white linnen gar∣ment with a red crosse called a Sambit, and last of all, a The Inquisi∣tours cog∣nisance. perpetuall slander and ignominy to all his stocke and po∣sterity, such as never will be worne out, as shall be hereaf∣ter declared. But if the party shrinke not for the matter, but constantly continue so confessing the truth, or disaffirme the depositions that be against him, hauing not excepted against the witnesses, he is sure o try the torments: where∣of I haue now to say somewhat. CHAP. VI. The condemnation to the racke, and the manker of the execution thereof. THe state and condition of the godly (gentle reader) hath beene euermore from the beginning hard and very miserable, in comparison of the prosperitie which the wicked and vngodly enioy in this world. For accor∣ding
to Christs owne saying in his Gospell after Iohn, they thinke they doe God great good seruice, which slay them vpon euery light occasion, and study daily by new deui∣ces and practices to circumuent them: whereof you haue heard some sufficient proofe before. And albeit the iniuri∣ous dealings and subtile practices which I haue declared al∣ready, be such as any good natured people, or that can be content to be ordered by law, reason, or equitie, would worthily thinke intolerable: yet in respect of these that shall ensue hereafter, which I am now to shew, they will seeme not onely sufferable, but very reasonable and full of equity and good conscience. For they doe farre exceede all barbarousnes, yea I may well say all brutish and beastly madnes, that a man cannot more aptly liken them to any thing in the world, then to that which they do most liue∣ly resemble, and from whence they proceede, that is to say, Sathan their Syre: so that the diuell, though hee should force himselfe thereto, is not able in matters touching men, no nor in any thing else in the whole world, to goe beyond them in these their most monstrous and diuel∣lish examples of tyranny: neither hath he any mans heart in his belly, that can without teares reade or heare these things that hereafter ensue, which in rifling this butchery, wherein many a good soule vpon trifling occasions, yea diuers of them guiltlesse (God knoweth) are made away, we will lay open before the face of the whole world, and plucke off their hood of holinesse, wherewith they haue bleared all mens eyes, and abused the whole world hi∣therto. After the sentence be once giuen, except it be to the racke, the party is not sent for againe, till the great day of their glorious shew; at what time he commeth out into o∣pen audience with the other prisoners that come to heare their iudgements pronounced vpon them, and euery man foorthwith to receiue his punishment accordingly, vnlesse hee be found not guilty, and so quit by proclamation.
For then is he kept in prison still by the space of 2. or 3. dayes after the triumph, that the world may thinke that he also departed out with the rest. And this forsooth is one of their holy deuices, because they would not be thought to lay their hands vpon any person rashly, or without good cause why: as they are wont oftentimes to tell the parties by the way, in such exhortations as they make vn∣to them, to vtter the truth. The holy house is so perswaded of their owne doings, that what extreamity soeuer they shew vnto the prisoners, yet they think they do vnto them no iniury. Howbeit diuers of them, whom they shew spe∣ciall fauour vnto for certaine causes to them knowne, are set at liberty, and sent away to their owne houses two or three dayes before the great day of their solemnities, cau∣sing it to be noysed abroad, that they were accused by false witnesses. Yet is this their slye dealing open enough to any man that list to mark it, euen by this one thing, that a man shall neuer fee any such false witnesses openly punished therefore, which in all other cases are accustomably most sharply seen vnto. But if they be determined to put any man to the rack at such time as he least looketh for it, then shall he be sure to be brought into the Audience: where all the Inquisitors, or the greater part of them, sit in their seates of Maiestie, and besides them the Prouisor, as they tearme him, or deputy Ordinary of the Diocesse, like a shepheard ready to flea one of his own flock, who of duty ought to be present, as well to heare the sentences giuen, as to see execution ministred. And at this Court-day they declare vnto the prisoner, how the Inquisitours, with all the learned Councell, haue deepely considered his whole case, bearing him in hand, that they haue found it out for a surety that he will not wholly declare the truth, & there∣fore are resolued, that he shall ride the racke, and there be spurred certaine questions, and so by hooke or by crooke will wring it out of him, will he, nill he: therefore they ad∣uise him to do it voluntarily, as he will avoyde the paine
and perill of the racke. Whereunto they ioyne a certaine exhortation, which they intermingle with some sowre speech of high and threatning words, and set it out with great seueritie of countenance, rehearsing vnto him all the seuerall torments of the racke as terribly as they can describe them, to make him quake in euery ioynt of him. Yet whether he confesse, or not confesse, all is one, for to the rack he must go. Wherupon they send for the Officer, & command him to haue the party into that place where The place where the prisoners are tormented. the Racke standeth, which commonly is a deepe and a darke dungeon vnder the ground, with many a doore to passe thorow ere a man can come vnto it, because such as are put thereto, should not be heard to shrike or cry: In the which place there is a scaffold reared; where the Inquisi∣tour, the Prouisor, and the Clerke do sit, to see the Anato∣mie made of him that is brought to them. Then the linkes being lighted, and all the players entred that haue parts in this Tragedy, the Executioner, who tarrieth last to make all fast (as they say) and to see euery man in before him, commeth also at the length, and of himfelfe alone maketh a shew worthy the sight, more then all the rest of that rout, being wholly arrayed all ouer from the top of his head to the sole of his foote in a sute of blacke canuas, such as the superstitious Spaniards weare on Maundy-thursday, when The descrip∣tion of the Tormentor. they scourge and whip themselues, as the custome is in most places vnder Popery, if not in all: much like that ap∣parell that the diuells in stage-playes vse here with vs in England. Moreouer, his head is couered with a long black hood that reacheth ouer all his face, hauing two little peep holes to see through, and all to this end, to make the poor soule the more afraid both in body and mind, to see one torment him in the likenesse of a diuell. O Lord, such are their holy guiles. After that the Lords be set downe each in their places, they begin with him againe, and exhort him afresh to speake the truth freely and voluntarily: otherwise at his
owne perill be it. For if either his arme, or his legge, or any other ioint be broken in the Rack, as it happeneth to diuers, so that hee chance to dye thereof (for more gent∣ly than so, they mean not to deal with him) let him blame no man but himselfe. For they think that after they haue giuen him this faire warning, they are now discharged in conscience both before God and man, and therefore are guiltlesse, what harm soeuer come vnto him by meanes of the Rack, yea though he dye thereon as innocent as the child newly borne. After this, with sharp rebukes and me∣nacing words, they command that the party bee stripped starke naked, be it hee or shee, yea though it were one wel knowne to be the most honest and chaste mayden or ma∣tron in all the city (as they bee neuer lightly without sun∣dry such in this their shambles) whose grief I dare wel say is not halfe so great in respect of any torments that present∣ly they endure, as it is to be seen naked in such a presence, and of such maner of persons. For these wicked Villaines without any regard of humanity or honesty, (which mee thinkes they should somwhat respect, if it were but onely for their long beardes and side-gownes, with the name & countenance of grauity and holines which they pretend, seeing that neither for Gods sake, nor for the honesty of the good and godly matrons and sober maydens they wil not forbear one iote of that barbarous impudency) cause them first to be stripped into their shirts and smockes, and then out of them also welnigh (sauing your reuerence) vp to their priuities, drawing on a close linnen breech, & af∣ter that make bare their arms also to their shoulders, as tho the Wrench and Rack, wherewith they are about to tor∣ment them, were not able to pearce their linne, or as tho their linnen breeches would more manerly couer those partes, which they may bee ashamed to discouer, then could their side-shirts or smockes. And here those ranke Rmmes declare how they will not lose that diuellish plea∣sure which they take in that shameful and vnseemly sight,
though the poore wretches that suffer this, buy it both with paine and shame enough full dearely. The which thing surely is a good occasion, why that after this shame∣full and impudent dealing of these Fathers of the faith bee once noysed and bruted abroad, they whose wiues or daughters eyther haue already, or may hereafter fall, or presently are in this the holy Fathers foule handling, suf∣fering this shamefull villany, should be vtterly abhorred and shunned of all the people wheresoeuer they goe, aswell of Papists as of other, because they ought to esteeme the honesty and chastity of their daughters and wiues aboue all other treasures. But to returne to our purpose. When the parties are thus stripped out of all their clothes, be it he or shee, into their linnen breeches, they signifie unto the Tormenter by some token, in what sort they would haue the party ordered. For this is one other peece of their art, to talke by signes and watch-words like to pedlers french, wherein from the highest to the lowest all the pack of them in that cursed Court, as well Iacke layler, as my Lord Iudge, can vnderstand one another very readily. As for the torments by the which these holy Fa∣thers vse to bring men to their beliefe, as they be many in number, so in sorts they are sundry, yea moe by a great many than any poore soule is able to endure, or can come to the knowledge of. But the most vsuall be the Ieobit and Pullie with water, The Ieobit or Pullie. cordes, and fire: whereof I meane to speake seuerally. And yet haue they one other cast at him first ere he goe to his punishmēt, perswading him afresh to vtter whatsoeuer he knoweth either by himselfe or by others of his acquain∣tance: In the mean space, while they are thus communing with him, one commeth behind him, and bindeth his hands with a cord, 8. or 10. times about: and because no∣thing should be thought to be done without authority and order of law, the Inquisitour calleth vpon him to straine each harder than other. Being thus bound to the Racke,
they begin yet once againe to perswade with him: and be∣sides the binding together of his hands, they also cause his thumbes to be bound with some smaller line drawne very straite, and so fasten both the lines that tye both his hands and thumbes to a certaine Pullie which hangeth on the Ieobit. Then knocke they great and heauy bolts vpon his heeles, if the party haue none already, or else hang be∣twixt both his feete vpon those bolts which he hath, cer∣taine waights of Iron, at the first time but of fiue pound, and so hoyse him vp from the ground. Whiles the poore wretch hangeth in this plight, they fall to their perswasi∣ons once againe, commanding the hangman to hoyse him vp on high to the very beame, till his head touch the Pul∣lie. Then cryeth the Inquisitor and the Clerk vpon him to confesse somewhat, promising to let him downe out of hand, if so be that he willbe ruled: otherwise, they tell him that he is like to tarry there till hee would be glad to de∣clare whatsoeuer they would haue him. After he hath hung thus a good space, and will grant nothing, they command him to be let downe, and twice so much Iron more to bee layde on his heeles, and so hoysed vp a∣gaine one inch higher if it may be, threatning him that he shall dye none other death, except he declare vnto them the truth in such matters as they demand of him; & there∣fore charge the hangman to let him vp and downe, that the waight of the Iron hanging at his heeles, may rent e∣uery ioynt in his body from other. At which intolerable paines piercing all the parts of his body, if the party shrike or cry out (as he hath good cause to doe) they are as loude on the other side, roaring and yelling vpon him to de∣clare the truth then, or else they tell him hee shall come downe with a vengeance. Neither will they onely say so, but the party shall find it so. For if hee continue in the same mind, they goe on forward as fast in their mad moodes, and bid the hang man to slip the ropes suddenly, that he may fall downe with a sway, and in the halfe way
to stop, & giue him the Strappado: which being done with a trice, all his whole body is out of frame, both armes, The Strap∣pado. shoulders, back, legs, and all the rest of his ioynts, by rea∣son of the exceeding great waight hanging at his heeles, and the sudden sway tearing each part from other. And yet here is no ho with them neither. For renuing their exhor∣tation and threats, if he will not yield vnto them, they cause more Iron to bee added the third time: so that the poore wretch being in that pittifull plight, halfe dead and more, is by their commandement heaued vp once againe; and to mend the matter withall, besides the extreamity of his griefes, they begin to raile vpon him, calling him Dog and Heretike that will stand so obstinately in concealing the truth, and at the length tell him that he is very like there to make his end. Now if the pittifull creature in the midst of his pangs call vpon Christ (as for the most part, all that are thus persecuted for his truths sake doe) that he would vouchsafe to ayde and assist him, thus miserably tormented, and almost slain for his sake, then fall they to mocking and deriding him, saying, Iesu Christ, Iesu Christ. Let Iesu Christ alone, and tell vs the truth. What a crying out vpon Christ makest thou? confesse what we aske thee, and make vs no more ado. In much like sort (as a man may easily iudge) were the blasphemous speeches of the Iewes against our Sauiour himselfe, saying: Behold he calleth for E∣lias. He trusteth in God, let him deliuer him now if he will: for he Math. 27. Psal. 22. calleth himselfe the Sonne of God. Which is a true token and most euident argument, that it is Christ against whom they kicke and make all this broyle: whose name when it is called vpon by such as suffer for his sake, they doe so ill digest, that they can hardly abide to heare him named, or once spoken of. But if the party at any time desire to bee let downe, promising to tell them somewhat, and per∣forme it indeede, that is the very ready way to make him be worse handled than before, because they thinke that now he beginneth onely to broach his matters. For as
soone as this tale is at an end, they begin afresh to ex∣hort, to threate, to rack him, giuing charge to hale him vp, and to let him downe againe in such sort as is before declared. This execution for the most part continueth from nine of the clock in the morning till high noone, or an houre after: and when they are disposed to leaue him and let him downe for that time, the Inquisitours for a policie ask the layler if his other instruments be in a readi∣nes, to put the partie in feare of further torment, being al∣most dead with these alreadie. The layler answereth that they are readie, but that hee hath not brought them with him. Then see (say they) that they be made readie against to morrow, and looke that nothing bee wanting. For wee will try one way or another, whether wee can get the truth out of this fellow, yea or no; and so depart, giuing these and such like words of comfort to the poore wretch that lieth distracted in euery limme: How now Sirrha? how like ye this geare? haue ye enough of it, or no? Well, see yet betwixt this and to morrow, that ye call your wits to you, and bethink your selfe what to say, or else looke to die none other death but this: and yet we promise thee that all this is but a fleabiting in comparison of that which thou art like to feele; and so depart. Then beginneth the Iayler to play the bone-setter so well as he can, and to put his armes and leges in their right ioynts again: and putting on his clothes, bringeth him back to his prison, or carrieth him rather, hauing neuer a leg to stand vpon, yea somtime draggeth him by the armes or legges too-too pitifully: and then forsooth for fashion sake, and to seeme somewhat mercifull (minding in deede no such matter) telleth him that a Surgeon shall be sent for if neede bee. But if they bee determined to put the partie no more to the racke, then within two or three dayes they send for him forth againe into the Audience, and prouide so, that in the way from the prison, as hee passeth by the place where the rack-stocke standeth & is commonly occupied,
the hangman shall stand for the nonce, to shew himselfe in the selfe same likenes of a Diuel, the which I haue before described, that the party in passing by, may haue a sight of him, and thereby bee occasioned the more to remember his former torments. Who comming into the Court, find∣eth the Inquisitor, the Ordinarie and the Clerke readie set each man in his place; which after their maner fall in hand with him, sometime by perswasions, and sometime by earnest intreatie, mouing him to vtter somewhat. At which time if they prevaile not, neyther can get any thing out of him, they cause him to bee carried to prison againe. But if hee declare any thing, they presse him the more, and such mat∣ter it may bee his hap to disclose, that it may chance to purchase him the Racke once more, vpon hope of getting some greater matters at his hands. Marrie if they were re∣solued before to put the party to the Rack once again, then about 3. dayes after his last being there, when the ache in his ioints is most grieuous and painfull vnto him, they send for him againe to come before them; and what with earnest entreatie and with terrible threats, they labour to haue him shriue him selfe of all his opinions and he∣resies, and to appeach as well such persons with whom hee hath had conference in such matters, as also all other whom hee knoweth to bee of the same minde and opini∣on. Otherwise, they will him to make himselfe readie for the Racke: wherein if it bee his chaunce either to be main∣med in any part of his bodie, or to receiue his deaths wound, let him blame no man but himself. And if he con∣tinue stil the same man that first he was, the keeper is com∣manded that once again he prouide the Rack, all the afor∣said parties taking their places as before to see him strip∣ped out of his clothes, and put to it once again in such sort as is before declared, or somwhat worse, after this maner. The partie hauing his hands bound behinde him and hanging at the Pullie, they bind both his thighes together with small, but very strong cords, and so in like maner his
legges about the calfe or mid-leg. Then put they betwixt the cords and his legs a short peece of wood, wherewith they wrest the strings so stiffe till they bee so deepe sunke into his flesh, that they are past sight: a very extreme and a terrible torment, and much worse then any that as yet hee hath endured. In this plight the poore soule lieth by the space of two or three houres, abiding the Inquisitours goodwill & pleasure: who neuertheles cease not to molest and trouble him all this while, either by questioning, or entreating, or perswading or flouting & mocking him, or disquieting him one way or another. Or in stead hereof, they practise, as they thinke best, another kind of tor∣ture: which, albeit it bee vsed vpon offenders in other places aswell as in this, yet for one especiall point of cruel∣tie added by them, we may iustly ascribe it to their holy Court as a deuice of their owne. The name of it, as it is cō∣monly called, is Burri or Aselli, and the maner of it is this. Burri or Aselli. There is a bench made of massie timber, wrought some∣what hollow on the vpper part like a trough, so large that a man may lie open in it on his back; and thereabouts as his midriffe lieth, there is a sharpe bar going crosse ouer∣thwart, whereon a mans back resteth that it cannot settle to the bottome, because the partie should find the lesse ease, where otherwise he might stay or rest his back against the bottome of the trough: being also placed in such sort, that his heeles shall lie higher than his head. When the partie is laied hereon, his armes, thighes, and legs are bound with very stiffe and small cords about the middest of the maine bone, which afterwards they straine with certaine stiffe wresting stickes or truncheons put vnder∣neath the cordes, till the cords be settled downe within the flesh, and pearce almost to the very bone, insomuch that they bee cleane out of sight, and then commeth in this The Torment by water & the laund. deuice of their owne addition: First, they take a very fine and a close laund or linnen cloth, and ouerspread the par∣ties mouth therewith as hee lieth vpright, so as it may
stop his nostrils also, that when the water is poured into his mouth, he should take in no ayre at his nose. Then take they a certaine quantity of water, so much as it plea∣seth the Inquisitours to appoint, which they poure vpon the cloth, not by drops, but in the maner of a long streame like a thread: which having somewhat a high fall, beareth downe with it the fine linnen cloth into the furthest part of his throat. And here, whoso should behold the poor wretch in this pitifull case, would thinke him, I dare say, to bee in as great an agony as any man is at the giuing vp of the ghost. For in all other torments a man may haue li∣berty to draw his breath: onely here he cannot, by reason that the water stoppeth his mouth, and the cloth his no∣strils, so that when they plucke it out of the bottome of his throat (as manie times they doe, to see whether hee will answer to their demands, yea or no) the cloth is so wet with water and bloud together, that a man would thinke the verie intralles would come out of his bodie. And thus the partie continueth in these pangs so long as pleaseth them, with promises of sharper sauces than any that hee hath tasted as yet, and so they send him to prison againe. But if these good Fathers be disposed to deal with him further, & proceed to other greater tortures (for their lust is law in this their lawlesse Court, where right & reason can take no place) then within a month or two vnder or ouer, as they think best, the party is once againe brought to the rack, some twice, thrice, foure, fiue or six times, & there∣in entreated easily or roughly as it pleaseth the Inquisitors to appoint. And some are tormented in another sort, that is no where els vsed but in this holy House, the which is termed by fire, the description wherof is shorter to shew The Torment by fire. than the rest, but the paines and cruelty, as great altoge∣ther. They take a charcole pan of Iron full of hot coles, which they setiust ouer against the soles of a mans feete before he goe to the foresaid rack, and to the end that the
fire might haue the more force to burne them, they baste them with lard or bacon. Thus after they haue occupyed and vnedged all their tooles one after another, and are past hope of hauing any thing at the parties hands, they respite him for a season to take his rest, and after a while call him before them againe, and fall to questioning with him, inquiring and requiring many things in a farre other order than they vsed before, in such tearms as euery word may minister matter enough to quarrell at. The questions also are framed so cunningly and Point de vice (for this is their onely shift that neuer fay∣leth them) that by granting one thing, they must needes grant another, and deny the contrary to that. For these Fathers are passing good Logicians, and maruellous subtil Sophisters, their crafts-masters I warrant them, which notwithstanding that they are dayly in vre with such mat∣ters, will not sticke to take a little paines, and vpon study to coyne cases and questions for the nonce: which to help their memory withall, lest when the time commeth that they should haue vse thereof, they might forget them, are written and laid open before them: so that if the party, when any thing is demanded of him, be neuer so little retchlesse, it is not possible for him to auoyde them, but that one way or other they will ouertake him. The onely helpe for a man therefore in this case is, to haue a perfect remembrance of all such things as he hath deliuered vp in∣to their hands: for it is but in vaine for him to craue to haue them read vnto him, because either they will not grant him that; or if they doe, yet will they read much amisse. Wherefore if he doe mistrust his owne memory, let his answer be this, that he wholly referreth them to his former doings and sayings, and in any case auoyde reaso∣ning with them. Or if by their subtilties of Logicke, they inferre any thing thereupon, which either he knew not of, or else neuer affirmed, let him take heed in any case how he answereth it, lest either they entrap him in some new
matter, or else driue him to the denying of Gods truth most wickedly. And the readiest way will be, to cut off all their questions with a quicke and a round answer, and to tell them plainly that he was neuer set to schoole in all his life to learne these quiddities in argument, nor exercised in any manner of disputation. For these fellowes are so cunning herein, and so full of interrogations and strange deuices, besides, so troublesome therewithall, and so im∣portunate, that many times they will get that out of a man by these meanes, when all the racking in the world will doe no good. As at Siuil not long agone, they apprehended a certaine godly Matron, whose husband they had burned a little before, and so made her a widow. But because her confessi∣on, while she was on the racke, and there tormented most cruelly, was by their owne decrees insufficient either to condemne her to the stake, or to confiscate her goods such as they were, and yet, if they could but get onely thus much out of her, that she knew full well that the Church of Rome had determined clean contrary to that which she affirmed, this should be sufficient cause to make her to for∣feit that poore remnant of her riches that she had to keep her selfe withall in her widdow-hood, though poorely (God knows) they did rather compell her by their impor∣tunity, than compasse it by their Sophistry, that she was content to say so much. For perceiuing that else they would neuer make an end thus to molest and trouble her, Indeed (saith she) I confesse that the Church of Rome hath so determined, and therefore I pray you enter in mine an∣swer to be so, and let me depart quietly; and afterward as you shall see cause, determine what shall become of me or mine at your pleasure. Whereunto they gaue her neuer a word, but only wrot as she had said, and sought no further▪ For whether it were so yea or no, what care they, so the party say so much, that they may haue the spoyles whatso∣euer, either by hooke or by crooke.
CHAP. VIII. Certaine other deuices to driue the prisoners to confesse such matters as the Inquisitors are desirous to vnderstand of. WHen the extreamity of torments with the subtill practices before expressed will doe no good, but that the party constantly endureth the one, and anoydeth the other very cunningly, then fall these good Fathers to other farre better fetches to their thinking, wherein who∣so is able in a deuice to go beyond the rest, is counted a chief Champion, and therfore hath yielded vnto him the preheminence of place aboue other in this holy House. Be∣ing therefore past all hope of hauing any thing at the par∣ties hands by foule meanes, they deuise to compasse him by faire, shewing themselues very mild and mercifull, and so affectioned, as though the misery and affliction which they see the other in, went to their own hearts. They weep with him, they entreat him, they cōfort him, they giue him their aduice, and deuise for him some secret meanes to rid him out of his misery, making him beleeue that they tell him that in secret, which they would scarce tell to their owne fathers, or brethren, or dearest friend that they haue aliue, with many other like words. And this they vse com∣monly to doe to such as bee the simpler sort of peo∣ple, but specially to women, which for the most part are not so cunning to discerne forced and fayned tears. Ther∣fore when the Inquisitors begin to vse them so gently, and to proffer them such kindnesse, then let the party see to himselfe warily, and learne betimes to discerne wherea∣bouts they goe in vsing such flattering speeches, assuring himselfe, that they are but faire baites put vpon sharpe hookes: whereof I will of a number report vnto you one example. The very first time that they began to burne for religi∣on at Siuill, (which was diuerse yeares since,) among certaine other that were for the same cause apprehended,
there was a very godly Matrone, with two of her owne Daughters and one of her sisters children, who hauing pas∣sed all these aforesaid pikes with manlike constancy, were pressed very sore to betray some of their brethren, but e∣specially one to appeach another. One of the Inquisitors counterfaiting a maruellous kind of compassion towards these silly women, sent for one of the daughters to come vnto him. And when shee was come, they two being a∣lone together, hee began to make a long speech vnto her in way of consolation, and afterwardes sent her to prison againe. This he vsed to doe diuers times and vpon seuerall dayes, alwayes towards the euening, and there held her a great while, declaring vnto her, how great a griefe it was to him to see her in these troubles: and there∣withal would interlace some other pleasant communicati∣on more familiarly many times, than did well become him. Which tended to none other end (as it fell out in proofe) but to perswade the mayden, that he of very good affection sorrowed to see her in such distresse; that in see∣ing him so fatherly aduise her what the best were both for her self & her mother & sister to do in this case, she should wholly commit her selfe and her cause to his ordering. After that two or three dayes had been thus spent in such like conference and familiar communication, weeping (as it were) ouer her for the misery which she was in, with o∣ther many moe arguments and tokens of compassion, wherin he vttered the affections and sorrowes of his heart for her pitifull estate, with often protestation of his good will and best furtherance to his power: after all these po∣lices (I say) when the wilie Wolfe was sure that the sim∣ple sheepe was within his reach, he beginneth to perswade with her to disclose vnto him the truth of the matter, as∣wel in such things as touched her mother, sister and aunt, as any other that were not as yet apprehended, binding himselfe by an oath, that if she would so do, and disclose to him whatsoeuer she knew concerning these matters, hee
himselfe would stop all these gappes well enough, and find a meanes that they should all depart home againe quietly to their own houses. The maiden being but simple witted, was soone induced to credit the faire promises and allurenents of this flattering Father, and thereupon beginneth to open vnto him certaine points of religion whereof they were wont to conferre among themselues, in maner almost, as if one should giue holy things to a dogge, or cast pearles before a swine. The Inquisitour hauing gotten this thred by the end, laboured to vnwind the whole clew, and therefore calling in the maiden many times before him, to the end that her depositions might bee entred by order of law, made her beleeue that hee would take it vp and end it so reasonably, that she should receiue no manner of harme thereby, and in the last day of hearing made a repetition vnto her of all his former promises, as to set her at liberty againe, and such like. But when the time came that she looked verily for the performance thereof, there was no such matter, but con∣trariwise my Lord the Inquisitour and his adherents per∣ceiuing how this deuice had brought somwhat to light, which al their extremities otherwise could in no case doe, to the end to make her confesse the residue, determined once againe to haue her vpon the rack, wherein she indu∣red most intolerable paynes both vpon the Pullie and the Trough, vntill they had, as it were, in a presse wrung out of her aswell her beliefe, as also forced her to accuse those persons whom they had hunted after so long. For the damosell through very extremity of pangs and tor∣ments, was driuen to betray her owne naturall mother, and sisters and diuers others, that were thereupon imme∣diately apprehended, and afterward put to the torments, and at the length sent to the fire. Moreouer, the selfe same maiden within a while after plaied a notable part in testimony of her beliefe. For when shee was brought vp vnto the solemne scaffold with other
ofher companions there to be seene of all the people, and euery one to heare sentence of death pronounced vpon them, as shee returned thence to her place againe; hauing heard her iudgement, which was to bee burned, shee came to her Aunt who had beene her Schoolemistresse, and taught her her catechisme and beliefe (for the profession whereof shee should presently bee executed) and with a bold courage without change of countenance, bending her head downeward maidenly, gaue her most hearty thankes for that exceding great benefit in taking the paines to instruct her, and praied pardon at her hands if at any time she had offended her, for that she was now at the point of taking her death, and departing this life. Whom her Aunt on the other side comforted as stout∣ly, willing her to bee of good cheare, and to let nothing disquiet her, for she hoped in God that she should be with Christ ere it were long. And this did she in the presence & hearing of all the people, but specially of all those of the holy House and their adherents. This Aunt of hers was the selfe same woman, which a yeare or two before being mad had detected the whole congregation to the Inquisi∣tours, whereof I made mention before: who being re∣stored to her former wits againe by the goodnes of God, so well as the reliques of her disease would let her, did now both confesse his truth, and for the same endured most horrible and othsome imprisonment and torments: moreouer, was openly whipped, and so remained in prison during the rest of her life. But to returne to their practises. CHAP. IX. Certaine other more secret practises, THe passing excellency of these practises which pre∣sently I entend to discouer, is such, that they rather deserue to haue some speciall place by themselues, then to be thrust in heere confusedly among these other grosse and common deuices. For they doo as far passe all the other that haue been spoken of heretofore, as there is difference
in dignitie betwixt a Court of Pipowders and the high Court of Parliament. The first whereof in order as it fal∣leth out, and the most mysticall (and I beleeue as beneficiall to their boxe as all the rest) is the abuse of their sacra∣ment (as they terme it) of Confession, which by their owne decretals is no small offence. But all is law in this holy House (as I said before) whatsoeuer they list. Their deucie is this: Whensoeuer any of the prisoners beginneth to be but a little crazie, they aske him whether hee bee dis∣posed to go to holy shrift. The which is done for two espe∣ciall considerations. The one is, to proue whether he like well of their holy confession, yea or no. The other, to see if perchance he will be perswaded to say somwhat vnder Be∣nedicite, either touching himselfe or any other, that this ho∣ly house may bee set on work. If the party bee willing, at hand is Sir Iohn and a Clerke behind him with pen and ink left behind the prison dore, & so the ghostly father fal∣leth to his Confitetor: in processe whereof he examineth the sicke man first generally, & then specially, whether he hold any of Luthers articles, chiefely in this or that article, or haue at any time conferred with any other concerning the like causes: finally, of whom & by what occasion he heard them, &c. willing him boldly to confesse it & to feare no∣thing, neither to think any such villany to be in him as to reueale it, saying that hee hath authority immediatly from the high Cōmissioners to absolue him of all, so that he dis∣charge his conscienc: with other such like talke to the same effect. Now if the party follow him so far that hee begin to confesse ought, then is he surely caught. For when he hath poured out al, & said what he can say in these cases (though he do it through the earnest & wicked perswasions of the priest) then doth he charge him further to confess the same before a Notary, otherwise he tells him that his absolution is nothing auailable vnto him. And if the party yeeld vn∣to him so much, & be content so to do, then the clerk, who lieth lurking not far off, is straightway sent for, and so▪ is
this matter dispatched. But if he refuse, either mistrusting him altogether, or else halfe in doubt to credite him, yet is he no lesse in dangered by disclosing it to the Priest, than if he had confessed it before a Notary. For this kind of con∣fession is not right auricular, but all is done aloud, by meanes that the crafty confessor repeateth the words after him, and so driueth the party to answer him almost in the self same note: who knoweth not nor feareth any such matter, that there lurketh any body o closly behinde the door to heare or, write what he speaketh. Then after they haue gotten thus much, either they charge the party there∣with, or else by occasion hereof examin him further vpon greater matters, & therupon pick a new quarrel with him, to the intēt to vse more extream tortures. Neither doth this good ghostly Father either fear excommunication, or feele any trouble in his conscience, for reuealing his ghostly sonnes confession, both because he is perswaded, that a lit∣tle loud speaking, and in somewhat a higher note than the secrets of confession would wel allow, is not to bee accoun∣ted any disclosing at all; & for that, whatsoeuer he did, was done in the seruice and behalfe of the holy louse. Iulianus Apostata (as histories of very good credite doe report) spoiled the Christians of all that they had, and co∣loured his theeuery with a false glose vpon the Gospel; whereas Christ commanded all his Disciples to loue po∣uertie, and to bee carelesse for things of this world. At another time hee persecuted them most cruelly, and ex∣horted them to patience, saying, that Christ had giuen them an example. And no doubt, these holy Fathers haue borrowed one of their deuices of him. For when they see any constatly & like a good Christian man to continue aswel in his faith towards God, as charity towards his bre∣thren, they hedge him in with this argument: Now surely Sir, you are but afaint Christian belike. For you pretend the doctrine of the Apostles and Primitiue Church: and the Apostles and Martyrs in those dayes being brought
before the Ethnike Magistrates, and examined whether they confessed Christ or no, answered plainely that they did: and being further demanded, what fellowes & com∣panions they had, would tell the truth at the first. There∣fore th you professe your selues to be followers of them & their examples, in like sort should you confesse of your selues and of your fellowes. And this is their goodly rea∣son that they make. In very deed Iulianus Apostata spake truth, that Christians in the time of affliction should not be wauering, nor giuen to the gathering of these earthly treasures. Euen so (say the Inquisitors) should a Christian man comming before a temporall Iudge, and there exami∣ned of his beliefe, yield a plaine and euident declaration of the same. But they lye both of them by their leaue, when they say that the Christians in those dayes did of like zeale betray their brethren vnto the Ethnike Iud∣ges, as they did make open confession of their faith: for that were flat against the rule of charity. And therefore it is a plaine matter, that in all other things the Inquisitours are altogether as bad as euer Iulianus was, because they vse the selfe same reasons that he did, and all to one effect: that is to say, to make waste in the Church of Christ, by cutting downe the branches thereof, making but a iest of the lawes of true Religion. As there was once an Inquisitour, and one of the chie∣fest of them, whom it shall not be greatly amisse to touch by name, because if his friends hap to reade this, they may acknowledge it to be true that I will report of him. His name was Iohn Gonsalue, borne at Siuil, and Bishop of Tar∣racon. The Bishop of Tarra∣con. It was his common saying (which I beleeue other of his fellowes learned of him) speaking of such as were brought before him for the profession of Christ, that it was a wonderfull thing to consider, how firmely these here∣tikes haue ingrauen in the tables of their hearts this com∣mandement: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, which will neuer be brought to confesse of their fellowes, till
they be almost torne in peeces with torments, and yet can ye not get it out of some of them by these meanes neither: such notable testimonies hath true religion oftentimes, e∣uen of those that are her deadly enemies. For the law of God concerning both the Tables, is perfectly written and sealed in the hearts of true Christians, and the print of this seale of Gods law is not elsewhere to be found but in these onely. But all the Lawes of the flesh are signed with this marke: To day mine owne man, and yours to morrow. And surely, me thinketh, a Christian Bishop ought to haue beene very much ashamed to bee so blind and ignorant therein, and not alone so to be, but thereunto to adde such blasphemy besides. The selfe-same Bishop (seeing we haue begun to talke of him) was sent from the Kings Court to Siuil to be one of the Commissioners in the Inquisition there, about two or three yeares before: at what time so great a multitude of the faithfull were first espyed, of the which euen till this day, at certaine times appointed there be diuers sent to the fire. For all his Predecessours were not worth a strawe in comparison of him, neither halfe so stout as he, nor so cun∣ning in bringing their matters about as was this one man, but specially such as concerned the holy Inquisition. For vntill this time there was neuer an able man, that was thought so prouident as to preuent so great a mischiefe be∣fore it hapned, or otherwise able to vphold the Church of Rome drooping, as it were, by meanes thereof, and in danger of ruine. But for any other good qualities that were in him to commend him to this Office, or sufficien∣cy to discharge it, I report me to himselfe, I report mee to them that chose him to this roome, yeal report me to all that euer knew him, if there were any thing in him at all that might preferre him, specially and aboue his fellowes, either apparance of learning, or skill in Diuinity, or know∣ledge in the ecclesiastical Histories, or any great reading of the anciēt Fathers or the late Writers (whose authority the
Church hath worthily in great estimation) or if hee were greatly seene in matters of faith, whereof they tearme themselues the Inquisitors and Iudges, as it were, both of oyer and terminer, in these cases: to be short, if there were a∣ny knowne and approoued godlinesse of life and conuer∣sation in this man: wherein the whole packe of them flat∣ter themselues so much, that they arrogate vnto them∣selues a very gay and glorious title thereby, but rather be∣cause he was more cruell and vnnaturall, and somewhat more slie in the deuices and practices of the Inquisition than the rest were. In respect whereof, he obtained both a discharge from his seruice, and a fat Bishopricke besides in recompence of his trauailes, and partly in consideration that he was an old forworne soldiour; and hauing now good leasure, like a wicked impe of Rome, returned to his old occupation againe. At the self-same time whiles he re∣mained in commission at Siuil, so many were apprehen∣ded for professing the Gospel, that he was driuen to bestow some of them in his owne lodging, because all the prisons in the towne were not able to receiue them, the number was so great. Yet his Reuerend Lordship wanted neyther time nor leasure to take his pleasure abroad, and to row vpon the riuer in Barges titled with purple and silke, with such preparation as had better beseem'd one of Sardanapa∣lus schollers, than any sober man or Christian Bishop: ac∣companied with Musicians, but not with the Muses, ha∣uing a very great traine after him besides, and so passing to his garden adioyning thereunto, all the whole people ga∣zing vpon him, and running in heapes and throngs to see this sight. In very deed these triumphs & iollities were not greatly out of the way for him and his mates to delight in, their matters being in such plight as they were; and the Church of God, whereunto he was a professed enemy, so full of troubles, vexations, and afflictions. But to returne to their practices againe. Whensoeuer these good gentlemen are desirous to
learne out a certaintie of such as liue altogether in one prison, (whom they suspect to haue some conference in matters touching saluation, either by way of exhortation, or by comforting & confirming one another in the faith, being in so great misery as they are) they send in a Flie a∣mong them (as the prisoners vse to tearme him) whom the Inquisitors cast in prison craftily and for a colour, to mark euery mans talke, who after two or three dayes that hee hath once crept into their acquaintance, will begin afarre off to offer some talke in matters of Religion, making as though he would be glad either to teach others, or to learn himselfe, and by these subtill deuices many of the simple sort are soone beguiled. Wherfore let euery man take heed after this faire warning, that he bee not ouerlight of cre∣dite in trusting strangers too far (I meane such as are put in prison with them,) hauing no manner of acquaintance with them before. And to the intent that they may know such a Flie the better, I will giue them one sure token: to wit, he will commonly be the first that will offer talke, and pretend a zeale towards true Religion, both beside time and without occasion: and then shall they doe well to let him preach alone till his chaps ake, giuing him neuer a word. For if he chance to get any thing out of any of his fel∣lowes that he longed for, so soone as the Iayler commeth to visite his prisoners at his accustomable houres, hee is straight-way in hand with him to craue a day of hearing for him, as the manner is that sometimes the prisoners will sue for. But so soone as he is out, I warrant them, the rest that tarry behind, shall shortly after feele the fruites of his fellowship, little to their liking. A maruailous matter, doubtless, that men should be so diuellishly bent, to be con∣tent for a small gaine of a little money, to serue in such offi∣ces, so much to their owne hindrance, that to obtaine their purpose they sticke not to lye in prison with others bound and chayned as they be, by the space of two or three moneths, and then to endure all the other miseries
incident thereunto, as hunger, filth, stench, which the o∣ther prisoners can in no case away withall by their willes, and yet can these men with all their hearts. Besides this (a more wonderfull thing to consider) they wil so passe from one prison to another, that they are no sooner out of one, but by and by they willbee in another, and so in the se∣cond and third, &c. and be content to endure the same extreamities twice, thrice, or foure sundry and seuerall times, yea, all their life long to feede vpon these dishes of dainties. And when this good fellow is out of prison, and come before them to yeeld account of his office, he doth not onely declare what he hath heard the prisoners say, but also what countenance they made him when hee called these matters of Religion into question, and how they tooke it, whether as liking or misliking therewithall, or what opinion he hath of them, though they neuer answe∣red him one word. And this mans accusation is of as great force as the strongest and most allowable witnes that is or can be, and is without all exception, be he neuer so meane a man either in calling, or credit, or cōmon reputatiō of mē: yea tho he be but a lakes-farmer, & serue in his place for a smal reward, yet is he reputed a worthy member for that purpose, well beseeming such a head as is that holy House of theirs. It happeneth also many times, that some such as are apprehended for Religion, fall into the company of some that are layd in for speciall matters; who to curry fa∣uour with the Inquisitors, will villanously accuse their fellowes whom they haue heard confer together in pure and sound doctrine: and the testimony of such persons is of the greatest credit that can be, and most highly esteemed in their holy House. For to the state of the matter, or qua∣lification as they tearme it, a great respect is to be had of the circumstances; as the prison, the person of the accuser, and the party accused. Other Flies there be also which serue the holy House to do the like feat abroad out of prisons, secretly and slily go∣ing
about to compasse in by like wyles such as are among the common people suspected to be Lutherans; whereof some haue so good wings, that they will flye quite ouer the sea into very farre countries to take such as are content to leaue Spayne, and banish themselues thence, to the end that they may liue the more safely in other places else∣where: such is the earnest zeale which these good Fathers haue both to the glory of God, and the health of mens soules. But to keep within the bounds of Spaine, & to speak onely of those that flye about the Cities there where this holy Court is kept: there are a great sort of ghostly Fathers, both Priests and Monkes, which are not behind with their parts in playing the Flies. To whom if a simple man, and one whom God hath sent some light of his word vnto, doe chance to resort, and in processe of his confession o∣pen his conscience vnto them, eyther doubtingly, or else as only ready perswaded, praying to be further instru∣cted or confirmed▪ they labour not onely to quench that light which began to shine in his heart, but some of them are in hand with him, either by gentle entreaty, or sometime by threatning him terribly, to the end to get him to goe to the holy House there to accuse himselfe, promising him in the behalfe of the Lords the Inquisitors, that he shall haue all fauour shewed him that may be: so that it commeth to passe many times, that the poore soules like silly sheepe, will runne of their owne accord into the Wolues mouth to be torne in pieces and deuoured euery morsell. Another policy they haue which they put in practice likewise, more vnhonest by a great deale then this, which is also borrowed out of the Inquisitours budgets. After they haue groped a mans conscience that suspecteth no such treachery at a holy mans hand, specially vnder their blessed Benedicite, they dissemble the matter for that time without contrarying him, willing him to resort vnto them the next day when they shall haue better leasure to
hear him thoroughly, and to talke with him more freely in those matters, and so send him away halfe shriuen, with halfe a confession ilfauoredly cut off. His meaning is this, that when the party commeth the next morrow, & com∣muneth with him of the selfe same matters out of shrift, he may freely, and without danger of reuealing his confession, complaine of him to the Inquisitours: neyther doth this their purpose want his performance. This religious rout (forsooth) can choke with agnat, & swallow downe a ca∣mell. And of such crafty dissemblers, diuers haue gotten this good by their trauail at the Inquisitours hands, that if any thing escape them ignorantly or for want of heed ta∣king (as it happeneth many times) which had bin enough to haue heaped coales enow vpon anothers mans head, though the same things were proued against them so ma∣nifestly that they could not bee denied, yet can the Inqui∣sitours bee content to winde vp such matters and winke at them wisely, accounting it a greater losse to forgoe the gaines that commeth trouling in by such fellowes, than the spoile were worth that might bee gotten by taking ad∣uantage of them. Of the which sort I could, if I were dis∣posed, recken vp a great number by name, and sure they wel deserue it for their wicked dealings in this kind of ser∣uice, to be so serued. But I meane to suppresse their names in consideration of Gods great might and mercy, who may hereafter shew his fauourable countenance vnto them, and grant them grace to repent (as I know hee hath done vn∣to diuers) and then should I repent mee too late, that their names were made so infamous and execrable to the Con∣gregation by my meanes, though for their owne demerits. For truely a great number of these at the first knew the truth, yea some of them preached and taught it to others. But so soone as the storme began to arise, and to trie each mans building vpon what foundatiō it stood, on the rock or on the sands, they thought it wisedome for them to goe backe with that legge betimes. And being moreouer assu∣red
that diuers had them in a great iealousie for so doing, they imagined that they could not spunge out that stain by any other meanes, then if they should become Promoters of such as had bin their fellowes and companions tofore, & so to become dayly Guests and stout Seruitours to this holy House; and thus were perswaded that they had taken a readie way to saue themselues from the Inquisitours. But what consciences they carrie about within them, and what testimonies of the terrible iudgements of God prouided for them, they know best themselues. It shall be sufficient that I giue this Item by the way, to consider that it is not any zeale in the Inquisitours of the truth or cutting down heresies, that moueth them to such butcher-like slaugh∣ters as these (the which things both they pretend to doe, and the common people are like wise perswaded of them) though we should yeeld unto them so far that they bee er∣roneous opinions which they correct so seuerely. For if it were so, then should they not haue fauoured them that that haue done them so profitable seruice, and procured them so great gains as is said before. Nay, all the zeal which they haue, is rather to fill the kings Treasury & their owne purses. Yet if we respect the chiefe cause that moueth them to make so many poor innocents to be so miserably puni∣shed & tormented, & afterwards put to death, besides their wiles, their guiles, their villanous breach of faith, and the diuellish deuices, by the which they doe procure their mat∣ters, it is a sting of Sathan himselfe, who hath been a murde∣rer of the children of God, the Father of lyes, and Patron of such practices from the very beginning. For who is so blind but hee may easily espy, that this kinde of dealing can proceed of none other spirit? or who will be so blas∣phemous to refer it to the spirit of God as author thereof? Moreouer, one other good lesson to the godly may be this, that they take diligent heed, whom they deale withall or admit into their company and familiar acquaintance, and not to trust euery man. For truely the saying of Iermi
that euery brother will supplant another, and euery neighbour will be guile another, may aswell be verified at this time, and in er. 9. these matters, as euer it might in any other age or case heretofore. Yet haue the Inquisitours one other net more: which al∣beit they cast not but at aduenture, yet commonly they draw a great draught whensoeuer they vse it. If they chance at any time to apprehēd any notable & famous fel∣low, whom they know either to be a great teacher or prea∣cher to others, or else to haue great resort made vnto him for learning's sake and for their better instructions, as some Doctor and Preacher of some name and fame, then their maner is to cause it to be bruted abroad by their Famili∣ars, that the same person being on the rack, hath detected diuers of his Auditors; and for the further confirmation thereof, they suborne some of the next neighbours in the prison adioining to auouch it, and to affirme that they heard the great shrikes which hee made being vpon the the racke. The which rumors are coyned out of this their holy Mint to this end, that such as haue beene his schol∣lers should come to the holy House, and there make open confession of their faults, & craue pardon betimes before they be sent for, or the Sergeant attach them. For they perswade the common people, that whoso will come vn∣called and vnsent for, and confesse their owne offences, shall either escape scot-free, or else very easily: and their punishment at the vttermost shal be only the doing of a lit∣tle penance (as they call it). Thus by this meanes they de∣ceiue a great number, which if they had taried till they had been sent for, might haue taried still till this time vn∣sent for; or if it had so happened that they had been sent for, they should haue been no worse entreated then they were, being so doltish as to credit the Inquisitours so farre vpon their faire and flattering promises, and follow their foolish aduice.
CHAP. X. How the prisoners are dealt withall concerning their diet. THe prisoners within the Inquisition, concerning their meate and drink & other necessaries, are vsed in all re∣spects accordingly, as they are in credit with the Inquisi∣tours and the rest of the officers of the holie House. For the common estimation of them is no better than as they tearme them, dogges, heretickes, &c. And yet they deale not with them altogether so well as most men will doo with their dogs, that doo them either seruice or pleasure; but as men commonly vse to intreat those men, whom in de∣rision of all humanity they terme dogges, and so esteem of them. The discourse whereof shall neither be altogether needelesse, nor impertinent in this place, because it may do much good to the godly in many respects. First to let them to vnderstand the miseries of their poore afflicted bre∣theren, that they may depart with some things for their reliefe, euery man according to his ability: Secondly, to put them in minde that the staffe standeth at their dores, and their turne therefore to bee the next, and that God hath reserued them for a time, that they may follow the o∣ther in this fight, and serue him in this most glorious kind of seruce, by confessing his holy name before the world. Thirdly and lastly, that this horrible and most barbarous tyranny of these holy Fathers may appeare to all the world among other of their cruell prankes, which wee are to report of them, and of their bloudy butchery. Happy ther∣fore and thrise happy was that preacher of Siuil, Constantine (for so Solon accounted him happy that had liued in ho∣nour and estimation, and died accordingly); who being imprisoned (as I will declare hereafter) for the testimony of Christs Gospell, tasting their tyranny and endlesse tor∣ments, bewailed his own misery, crying and lifting vp his voyce to God many times with these wordes: O my Lord God, were there in all the wide world no Sythians, nor
cruell Cannibals, into whose hands thou mightest haue deliuered mee, and let mee escape these men? Another named Olmedo, a man singular both for vertue and lear∣ning, falling likewise into the Inquisitours hands for the selfe same cause that purchased vnto Constantine his death, first vpon his imprisonment fell sicke, and afterward died amids the filth and stench of the prison, and was wont to say in like sort: O Lord God, doo with mee what thou wilt. Throw me headlong where thou wilt, so thou giue me not ouer to these men, whose entertainment is such as may more rightly be termed a perpetuall Torture, then a place of Imprisonment. For first and formost, the place wherein each of them is shut vp seuerally, what with the The descrip∣tion of the prisons. straightnes thereof, and the euill aire, & damp of the earth, if it be below, may more properly bee likened to a graue, then called a prison: but if it be aloft, it is at the time of the yeare, by meanes of the extreme heate, more like a frying fornace. And in euery of these Holes, for the most part (specially if their prizes bee so many that there bee moe seuerall persons then seuerall roomes) two or three of them are thronged together, so that they haue no larger scope then to lay them down and rest them in, saue onely a foote in compasse perhaps, which serueth for their stoole of easement to stand in, and by it a pitcher of of cold water to quench their thirst. Neither in the day time is their light any more then may come in at a key∣hole, or at a little long rift no greater then a mans finger. Howbeit there bee certaine prisons that bee somwhat larger, but they are also more then somwhat costly, and doo serue for such as are not greatly suspected for religion. Againe, other there bee, lesse in compasse then the for∣mer, and worse a great deale to lie in, for that they are not a mans length: in so much that they which enter into one of them, lightly neuer go out till they be halfe rotten, or die of a consumption. All which places and prisons are bestowed according to the qualitie of the person, and
of his or their deserts, and many times as it pleaseth the my Lords the Inquisitours and master Iayler to bestow them in, according as they beare affection to the party ei∣ther good or bad. And thus much concerning the place of their imprisonment. The order of their dyet is answerable to their lodging. The manner of their diet, and their al∣lowance. The rich pay very large fees to the holy House, and euery prisoner is rated at the discretion of the Inquisitour. Out of the which there is deducted an allowance for his daily charges 30 dipondia, commonly called Maruedis, whereof 17. make a dutch batte 8 and a half, a french souse, 10. a fle∣mish stiuer, which amounteth in our reckning after the English rate, to 6. pence well nigh. Howbt if any of them be disposed to exceede, & haue any other dainties, he may at his pleasure, so that he pay for it on his owne purse. And yet they deale not so fauourably with euery sort of priso∣ners, but onely with such, by whom they looke not to haue any bootie, being laid in but for trifling matters. For if they be such prisoners, as they know by the information giuen in against them, likely to lose all that euer they haue, they will not suffer them to exceed in such sort, but let thē feed only vpon a little brown-bread, and a cruze of cold water, not suffering them in any case to haue any speciall cates besides their ordinary, be they neuer so rich, because they make this accompt, that the more is spent in that sort, the lesse shall be their parts when it commeth to reckning and rifling. Notwithstanding, if any be so poore that they are not able to liue of their owne in prison, the King alloweth them a certaine for their daily diet, that is to say, halfe a riall of Plate, which is as much as a dutch batte, and is worth two souse french, that is, 3. pence sterling. Out of the which poore pittance is to be defrayed their Stewards and Laundres wages, and whatsoeuer other necessary char∣ges grow besides, must bee thence also deducted. More∣ouer, of this allowance giuen them by the King, there
commeth not the one halfe to their vse, for whom it was specially limited & appointed: for it passeth through two or three mens hands that will be ready to finger some of it. First, thorow the office of Receipt (for so I thinke they tearm the Treasury) who is accountant for all the reuenew that come into the Eschequer, and disburseth for such and Fees dedu∣cted out of the prisoners allowance. other like vses. And this is the sweetest office in all the ho∣ly House, and therfore not granted but to speciall men, es∣pecially fauoured. Next to him the Steward or Cater will haue another peece, who will commonly for one penny bestowed, demand two to be allowed: then the Cooke that dresseth their meate: and last of all the tythe which is the Iaylers fees, which many times alloweth the same vnto the poore prisoners of his owne beneuolence. This I haue described the more largely, because all these Officers haue their certaine fees out of this small allowance of the king: which passing thorow such limed fingers is so fleeced, that it commeth not to the prisoners, but euery of these Officers will take not onely Tole, but Tythe, ere it passe his hands. For in this House both maister and man, from head to foot, are all couetous and giuen to the spoile. Now if it happen at anie time by a speciall grace of God, that any of these are touched with compassion to pitie the poore prisoners, and of verie almes doe relieue them by any meanes, that is counted such a ainous offence in this their holy House, that it will goe neare to cost him a scourging till the bloud follow, that doth any way relieue them. As it chanced within these few yeares, a certaine man to bee appointed keeper of the Inquisitours prison in the Castle Triana at Siuill, that was not verie euill dispo∣sed, for as yet hee had not learned the trickes of that holy House, nor well digested their couetous and cruell lawes, being otherwise verie courteous, and a man not far stricken in yeares: his name was Petro à Herrera. Who entreated the prisoners very well, and shewed them such
gentlenesse and fauour as he could, yet closely and couert∣ly, because he knew the Inquisitours in that poynt well enough, how much they were enclined to tyranny. It happened in his time (as oftentimes it doth when a num∣ber are apprehended at once) that among other prisoners, a certaine honest Matron was commited to his ward, with two of her owne daughters: which being put into seuerall prisons, had a great longing to see one another, and each to comfort the other in their distresses. Whereupon they besought their keeper to suffer them to come together, if it were but onely for a quarter of an howre, or the space that each might but imbrace other. The keeper being of a good nature, was content they should so do, and suffered them to be together by the space of halfe an houre: & after they had a little shewed their affections, and done their duety each to other, the daughters to their mother, and shee to them again, hee brought euery one to her owne prison where shee was before. Within a few dayes after, the keeper seeing the same persons in most terrible tor∣ments, and fearing lest the very extremity thereof would driue them to confesse that little curtesie & fauour which hee shewed them, in suffering them to meete and talke together but onely for halfe an houres space, went to the holy House, confessed his fact, and prayed pardon there∣fore, supposing like a foole by his owne confession to haue escaped the penaltie thereof. But the Inquisitors (to whom it is incident to abhorre all kind of humanity) deemed it so haynous an offence, that they commanded him forthwith to be haled into prison: wherein, partly by meanes of the great extremitie that was shewed vnto him, and partly of very thought and a certaine conceite that hee tooke thereupon, being therewithall somwhat melancholike, fell beside himselfe: and yet his infirmity and madnes notwithstanding, they released him no iote of his punishment. But after that hee had beene kept a whole yeare in a vile prison, they brought him vpon their
triumphing stage, hauing a Sambenit on his back, and a rope about his neck like a fellon, and there gaue sentence vpon him: first to be whipped about the city in the high streetes, and to haue two hundred stripes bestowed on him, and and afterwards to serue in a Gallie as a slaue, for six yeares. The next day following, as he was brought from the Ca∣stle Triana with their acucstomed solemnity, to bee scour∣ged, one of his madde fits that was wont to take him each other hower, came at the same time vpon him very pitiful∣ly, so that in casting himself off from the Asses back wher∣on he was set in despight, hee fell vpon the Alguazil, and doubtlesse had slaine him with a sword which he snatched out of his hand, if the people that gathered about him, had not suddainly laid hands on him, and set him vpon the Asse againe, binding him somewhat surer, to the intent that he might receiue the rest of his payment. And after he had receiued his two hundred stripes, the Inquisitours commanded, that for his euill vsage & behauior shewed towards the Alguazil, he should continue in the gally four yeares moe ouer and aboue the other six, to make vp a iust halfescore. So well doe these good and godly Fathers re∣ward charitie and good deeds, and courtesie with crueltie and extremitie, so that a mad man with them may not play a mad touch. Howbeit, there was one that was this mans predecessor called Gasper Bennaidio, for couetousnes & cruell dealing a monster rather then a man, insomuh that he was growue to such a greedinesse, that hee would defraud the poore prisoners of part of their small pittance and allowance, be∣ing both euill of it self for want of good cookery, & worse a great deal by meanes of his filching: of which victuals so lurched and purloined from them, hee would make good Marchandice, & sell them in Triana. Moreouer, such allow∣ance of mony as should haue been paid to a Laundres for washing the prisoners clothes, hee conuerted wholly into his owne purse, nothing regarding how sluttishly the pri∣soners
went for a great whil together, without any shift, & thus deceiuetd both the Inquisitors & the Treasurer, who allowed the keeper in his accounts for such & such mony paid & receiued to the prisoners behoof, for whose weekly expenses it was appointed. And herein mark, I beseech you, the notable negligence & slippery dealing of both parties: First, the winking of the Inquisitours at the keepers beha∣uiour: and secondly, the keepers vniust oppression of the poor prisoners. But to say the truth, it is no very hard mat∣ter to deceiue them that wil neuer take paines to boult out a truth. For if any of the prisoners receiuing neuer so much iniury at the keepers hand, had complained at any time, or grudged any thing at all, the cruell tyrant would finde the means to be euen with them: for he would take & remoue him from the place that he was in before, and thrust him into some deep Dungeō which they cal Mazorra, & there would keepe him alone for two or three daies, giuing him not so much as a little straw to lie vpon: & as for his diet, neyther should it be wholsome, nor yet sufficient to hold life and soul together, but like to kill him, or at the least to breed some extream sicknesse: all the which should be done without commission or warrant from the Inquisitors, and yet would he very craftily and maliciously beare the pri∣soner in hand, that he did it wholly by the Inquisitors spe∣ciall commandement. Now if any that had beene so iniu∣riously dealt withall, meaning to make complaint thereof to the Inquisitours, should desire him to pray a day of hea∣ring (as none may solicite that matter saue onely the kee∣per) the craftie knaue suspecting that hereby hee should make a rodde for his owne taile, would beare the priso∣ner in hand hee had so done, and therewithall tell him, it would not bee granted at that time; and thus wlth such forged answers would keepe the poore prisoner in that deep dungeon twelue or fifteene daies, till hee thought his anger were somewhat asswaged, and his courage tho∣rowly cooled, and then at the length would remoue him
thence to his old prison againe, making the poor man be∣leeue, that he had cause to thank him for it, which of meer compassion and pittie that he took vpon him, trauayled to the Inquisitours, and became an earnest suter to them to get him released. In summe, such filching he vsed, and such extremitie hee shewed towards the prisoners, that di∣uers men of very good credit and estimation with the In∣quisitours, did make complaints thereof. Whereupon he was committed to prison, and being found guiltie of diuers kindes of treacheries, yet notwithstanding in gi∣uing sentence vpon him, he found the Inquisitours his very good Lords and maisters, who knew full well that he had beene a full sure stake to their holy House, and a trustie seruitour: so that his iudgement was easie enough; nothing like as was giuen vpon the other his successour, that only suffered the mother & her daughters to meet & talk together for the space but of one halfe hower. albeit for his owne misdeedes well knowen and proued by him, he deserued to be dealt withall in as euill sort altogether, as the other was for his pittie and mercifulnesse. But to proceed. His iudgement in the end was this: to stand vp∣on the scaffold holding a wax taper in his hand, and after∣wards to be banished the citie for fiue yeares. And wheras they vse wholy to confiscate other mēs goods, they did on∣ly put this man to his fine of forfaiting the fee due to him by reason of his office, that should haue bin paid vnto him by the holy House: and this was done rather to satisfie his accusers, then for any great zeal of punishing such offences done by their holy Officers. The very same man had a maid-seruant in his house while he was in office there, who pittying the miserable e∣state that the poore prisoners were in, pined and hunger∣starued by meanes of that wicked Iew her Maister (for she herselfe fauoured the Gospel) did diuers times speake vn∣to them at the grate, comforting & exhorting them so wel as she could, to arme themselues with pacience, and did
sundry times put vnder the dore some good & wholesom meates for their weake and feeble bodies, declaring no lesse charity in deedes, then shee had before vttered in words. Whose zeale (no doubt) was so much the more meruailous, that wanting of her own to part withal to Christs afflicted members, shee would priuily conuey from her Maister some of the meate which hee had lurched from the priso∣ners of their due allowance, and so restore vnto them their owne. And to giue vs the more cause to wonder at the miraculous prouidence of God, which of euill seede sen∣deth not alwaies the worst corne, but somtimes the best, this maiden had a little damosell her maisters own daugh∣ter to help her in these her conueiances. Moreouer, by this maydens meanes the prisoners came to vnderstand one of anothers estate▪ and to know in what case euery of their afflicted brethren was: the which thing was both a singu∣lar comfort to themselues, and a speciall furtherance to their affaires. At the length, this also came to the Inquisi∣tours eares: who, after that they had kept her in prison a whole yeare, and there made her partaker of the like hardnes that the other prisoners were in, caused her to bee brought out vpon the day of their triumph, and set vpon the scaffold, where they gaue sentence vpon her, to weare the Sambenite, and to bee whipped about the town with like infamy and extremity as had beene vsed to other be∣fore, with two hundred stripes: the which was wholly performed the next day following. Besides this, they did also banish her the cittie and the suburbes for tenne yeares, with this writting on her head. A fauourer and aider of here∣tikes. Another thing also that so sore incensed the Inqui∣sitours against her, was this: for that it was confessed vnto them vpon examination of others, that shee had disclosed vnto diuers citizens, after what sort the prisoners were entreated at the Inquisitours hands, aswell in their diet as otherwise. The which example being compared with the former concerning the fact of her master, and the punish∣ments
that each of them had therefore, is euidence en∣ough to shew what indifferency they vse in punishing ma∣lefactours. But to my matter. It is a thing that hath neuer beene seen nor heard of be∣fore The prisoners restrained the libertie of song. their time, that either the most gallie slaue, or he that endured the worst kind of bondage that euer was deuised by man, should bee restrained and forbidden the solace of song, to recreate himselfe withall in the middest of his so∣rowful dumpes, to driue away fantasies, and to relieue his pensiue and heauie heart with some kind of lightning. But this holy House passing & exceeding all the tyrannies that euer haue beene practised by or vpon any, depriueth the poore wretches of this small solace in their greatest mise∣ries and extremities. For if any of the prisoners begin to sing any Psalme, to the intent to ease his present griefe somwhat, or do recite any text of scripture, the more that the saying or singing thereof doth ease the silly soule, the greater matter do Inquisitours and their officers make of it, taking it to be a great hinderance to their affaires if the prisoners be at any time light harted, because their purpose is to keepe them in perpetuall slauery and thraldome, without hauing any one good day in all their liues. Ther∣fore so soone as they heare any of the prisoners to sing or say ought aloud, by and by is there a limme or two of the Diuell, that is to say, one Notary or other, with the keeper of the prison to command them silence, and to charge them in the Inquisitours names to make no countenauce of mirth vpon paine of Excommunication. Which if hee seeme to contemne and make light of, or else to laugh at (as indeede it is no better worthy) hee shall haue a bit on on his tong, and be taught his obedience, will he nill he, and thenceforth be taken for a rebell and a contemner of the Inquisitours authority, and shall not bee suffered to speake but in a very low note, whereof they themselues will apoint him the tune, and Sol-fa it before him. This is done for two speciall considerations. The one to bereaue
the poor soules of all kind of solace (as I said before): the other, for that the craftie old Syres learn by dayly experi∣ence, that such singing of Psalmes or other songs made out of the Scripture, is a maruailous comfort vnto them, and a greacouraging and hartening to others their weak bre∣thren that lie a great distance from them in other prisons. There is also another cause why they enioin them silence, for that by song or loud speaking they might one know of another. Therefore it happeneth many times, that a man and his friend, the father and the sonne, the husband and the wife, shall be all within one prison-house, by the space of two or three yeares together, and neither of them know of the others being there, till the time come that they see one another at the great Doom-day vpon the scaf∣fold. And vpon this consideration especially, this is wont to be one of their common questions in euery day of hea∣ring: Whether the prisoners of seuerall prisons haue con∣ferred or communed together, or the one know of the o∣thers being there: and if they find it to be so, straight vpon it, they shift prisons, and examine them vpon another in∣terrogatory, to beat one thing out of another, if they haue had any maner of conference, or what counsell each of them gaue to the other. And this is the whole order of the prisoners diet: so that such as goe not to the stake, for the most part perish there, eyther of the great filth & stench of the prison; or if they bee deliuered thence, dye shortly after of the french dis∣ease, growing vpon them by reason of their corrupt and naughtie diet: either else of abundance of Melancholy, be∣come altered in their wits, or at the least haue such quesie bodies disposed to these or to some other greater maladies, that they consume away by little and little, leading a farre more miserable life, than were any death that they could dye. For proofe whereof, out of a number of examples, that might be brought only out of the Inquisition at Siuil, I wil chuse one worthy to be reported in al Chronicles for a
speciall example of their barbarous dealings. Not many yeares agoe, there arriued a certaine English ship into the port S. Lucars, which the Familiars going a∣boord vpon, to make search for Religion, as their manner is to doe before any man of them may be suffered to come on land, they tooke and carryed with them to prison di∣uers Englishmen that were in her, vpon suspicion which they had on them to be professors of the Gospell, by cer∣taine tokens and likelihoods which they espyed in them, and knew them by. In the same ship there was also a little boy not passing tenne or twelue yeares of age, sonne to a very rich Marchant of England, that was owner (as they said) both of the ship, and the most part of her lading. A∣mong other they tooke also this yong child (as they pre∣tended) for hauing in his hands Dauids Psalmes in English. But whoso doth indifferently vnderstand of their coue∣tousnesse and naughty practices, may well thinke without any offence to the holy Inquisition, that the Fathers wealth was the occasion, both of the childs imprisonment, and of the other misery that did befall him afterward. Wherupon, they made Sequestration of the ship and goods, and carryed the child to prison with the rest of his com∣pany, where he aboad by the space of 6. or 8 moneths. This child was so well brought vp by his parents in vertue and good discipline, and the same tooke so deepe root in him, being dewed with the grace of God, that notwith∣standing his tender age and hard imprisonment, he ceased not still to giue most euident tokens of the same his good and godly education: insomuch that many and sundry times, but specially euery morning and euening, hee did accustomably vse to lift vp his eyes to heauen, and to call vpon God, from whence he was taught to looke and hope for all helpe and succour. And as his keeper espyed him now and then making his prayers in that sort, whereas he ought to haue beene ashamed of himselfe and of his paga∣nisme, to see in so tender age such a patterne of piety and
godlines before his face, in stead thereof, so soone as he be∣held him lifting vp his eyes to heauen, saying some Psalm or other prayers in English, Now surely (saith he) this boy is become a pretty heretick already. After the child had continued the foresaid space in that darke dungeon (being tenderly brought vp to fore in his fathers house) by reason the moisture & dampe of the prison, & of his corrupet, he fell into an extreame sicknes. Whereof as soone as the Inquisitors had intelligence, they gaue commandement to remoue him thence, and to carie him to the Cardinals hospitall till hee were recouered. This hospitall is a house T  p in the Inquisi¦tion. that serueth for such as fall extremely sicke within any of the prisons belonging to the Inquisition. Howbeit they are not dealt withall there in any thing more gently then they were before in their prisons, sauing onely that they haue physick, which is allowed them verie liberally by the Hospitall, and may tender their bodies somwhat more charily for their healthes sake. Neither may any man bee suffered to resort to the patient, but his physiian and the seruants of the Hospitall. But so soone as the patient beginneth to bee on the mending hand, though hee bee not altogether sound, and perfectly whole, he is carried thither from whence he came. Marry this child being by reason of a great sicknes which he caught in this long and painefull imprisonment, remoued into this Hospitall, be∣came benummed in his legs, neither can any man tell any certainty what became of him afterward. Let euery man weigh now with himselfe & consider, whether it beseeme these good fathers so rudely to deale with a child and a strāger, or if there be found any such vnreasonable kind of dealing among the wild Scthians: to ouerpasse the great spoile of the ship and her Marchandise with silence. At the same verie time welnigh there was a certaine Turke taken and carried to the same prison, who had vo∣luntarily forsaken and abiured the Mahometical impietie, and was newly come from Marrock, the chiefe Cittie and
head of the realm of Mauritania, into that part of Spaine that lyeth directly ouer against it, diuided by Midland sea. But sauouring as yet of that venemous licour, wherewith he was poisoned in his cradle, and fed withall from his in∣fancy (for as yet he had not takē out any one lesson of Chri∣stianitie for want of a teacher) and finding moe faults and worse enormities among the Christians, than hee had left behinde him among his countreymen the Mores, suppo∣sing himselfe to bee in good safetie there, and therefore more carelesse, happened to say on a time, that the Morish law (meaning their religion) was farre better than the Christians: for the which saying hee fell into the Inquisi∣tours hands; who to the end that they might bring him into a better mind, schooled and catechised him in such sort, that he confessed in prison plainly, that from the first day of his Christendom it neuer repented him that he was become a Christian, till he came within the Inquisitours iu∣risdiction, where it grieued him to see force and violence, wrongs, iniuries, and tyrannie of all sorts, executed with extremitie. CHAP. XI. The prisoners visitation. IT hath beene a custome generally receiued in all pla∣ces which haue sought to bee renowned by sitting in the seate of Iustice and equitie vprightly and indifferently, that certaine times should specially bee appointed for the visitation of prisons, to the intent that the keepers should not oppresse their prisoners, but that such iniuries as eyther they had alreadie, or thereafter might receiue, should bee redressed, and preuented, by the ouersight of the chiefe rulers and iudges, so oft as neede were. A thing which both conscience craueth, and the law of nature, & all policie and good gouernment: last of all, God by his word commandeth, wherein the case and poore estate of such as lye in bonds, is commended vnto vs, and giuen vs specially in charge to be considered. Wherefore, to resist
a number of wrongs (besides other that come not to our eares) which the report was that the holy House had done to their prisoners, where there was no good to be done a∣ny way but one (I mean by the visitation of prison-houses) marke I beseech you the Inquisitours, & consider ye what hypocrits they are: which in respect of their holy house & Consistorie, with their glorious titles, and the very name of Sanctity, wherin they seeme to excell all other prophane and temporall Courts, should haue bin by all reason more bountifull and gentle, more full of comfort and charity, and in withstanding iniuries, most iust and vpright, care∣fully prouiding for the necessities of the poore afflicted, and duely punishing such as had wronged them any way, eyther by couetous or cruell dealing: yet were they so farre from doing their dueties herein, that it seemeth ra∣ther their visitation was deuised of purpose to a clean con∣trary end: in so much that the dayes when they keep their visitations, may be more worthily termed dayes of Doom to the poore prisoners, than be thought meanes of ease or reliefe of their miseries; as it appeareth most euidently by their common maner of dealing, on such dayes appointed for the visitation. Whereof wee purpose here to make re∣hearsall. The visitation of prisons is commonly once or twice euery moneth kept by the Inquisitors, a Notary, and the Keeper, & for the most part vpon the Sunday or some o∣ther festiuall day. The maner of it is on this wise. At the very first entrance into the prison, the Inquisitor demand∣eth of the prisoners these questions: How it is with them: The maner of their visi∣tations. what they want: whether their Keeper giue them any e∣uill language, or threaten them, or vse any words of despight or reproach towards them: if he giue them their ful allowance in their diet duly and truly, or prouide them shift of shirtes, with such words. For in very deede there is no hope of one drop of comfort at their hands for all this businesse: but are onely words and questions of com∣mon
course, & speciall articles prescribed vnto them to in∣quire vpon, whereunto they neither adde any more in words, nor performe so much in deeds. As; if the priso∣ner be halfe naked, or want a couch to rest him on, and should pray that his necessity may be considered & proui∣ded for, they shape him such an answer as serueth thē both for winter & sūmer. And their answer in summer is thus, in very mild & fatherly terms: Well (say they) now the wea∣ther is warm, you may liue full well without either clothes or couch. And for winter in this sort: True it is, it hath bin a great frost of late, but now that it thaweth, and the cold is come downe and resolued into snow and raine, so that the ayre is open and cleared, you shall haue a more seaso∣nable time. Care you for the garments wherewithall you should cloth your soule, which standeth in vttering the truth, and discharging your conscience before this holy House: for this should be your speciall care. And here is all the prouision which they make for them, for all their que∣stioning at the first; and so departing as they came, their visitation in the end turneth but to a iest: so that, if their visitations were dayly, ye see all the comfort that the priso∣ners should haue at these holy Fathers hands. Yet notwith∣handing true it is, that some such whom they owe speciall fauour vnto, receiue some curtesie at their hands, and easie it is to iudge who they be that find it, where coueteousnes and cruelty keep their Court. Likewise if any of the prisoners, either learned or vnlear∣ned, desire to haue some good book, or the holy bible per∣mitted them to read, to the intent to pass that troublesome and carefull time away to some profit, they shift him off with the like answer for a book, as they vse before to him that was naked and without garments. For the Inquisi∣tour will answer him-like a graue counseller, That the true booke is, to speake the truth, and to discharge his consci∣ence in that holy Court, and that hee ought to bee occupied in that booke, that by recounting and recording
thereof, hee might lay open his wounds and soares to their Lordships, that were most readie to giue him a plai∣ster: and this (say the) is the true booke, &c. But if the pris bee and importunate in crauing the same, either at  the next visitation; hee shall be taught to hold his peace, and to be answered with reason. For if hee be so ke what liketh him, they will bee so good as to deny what liketh not them. To bee short, they seeme to be wholly bent vpon his thing of purpose, diligently to see vnto it, that the prisoner haue nothing to looke or think vp but only his present estate in misery, that the grief thereof grating vpon him, may force him the rather to sa∣tisfie their requests as much as may be. Howbeit, if the prisoner haue any friends or kinsfolke that ae able to re∣lieue his misery by any meanes, perhaps they will send the Inquisitour some prettie present or other, to obtaine his fauour & good will, that their kinseman may be somwhat more fauourably entreated. Now, all the hardnesse of this matter resteth on this point, to get the Inquisitour to take it. But for any other vnder-officers, it is an easie mat∣ter to bribe them, so it be done priuily or by night: for such fellows will soon be corrupted. Marrie their maisters make it somwhat more daintie and strange: yea it were a thing impossible, if a man would take their first nay. Which commonly is after this sort; that this holy Court is a Court incorrupt, that can away with bribes in no case, &c. But sith their answers are but from the teeth outward, all this adoo in excusing themselues, and refusing the proffer, is a plaine token that they would bee content to haue it with all their hearts. Therefore is the Inquisitour for the most part neuer without some of his brethren or sisters children about him, or some one seruant to whom hee sheweth speciall fauour and good will: the which seruant must be tendered and regarded as much as himselfe. Then is there also another wayter that standing by and seeing this great adoo betwixt the Inquisitour and the other par∣ty,
the one proffering, and the other refusing as fast, when the party beginneth to relent, shall come vnto him imme∣diatly, and teach him a trick how to obtain his purpose, & entring talk with him without any manner of occasion, wil point him to one with his finger, and say, Sir, see ye yon∣der the young gentleman that standeth at my Lords el∣bow? He is my Lords Nephue. Now is there none so very an Asse, that hauing made so much adoo in tempting the Inquisitour, but hee may easily perceiue that there is one ready to hold the poke, and to receiue his proffer, though the other refused it. And so by this meanes at the length the poore prisoners get somewhat released. Whereby it is apparant, what spirit this holy House is gouerned by, when couetousnesse is able more to preuail with them to further a deed of charity, than charity for her owne sake could e∣uer haue gotten or obtained at their hands. CHAP. XII. The act contayning the publication of the Sentences. THere remaineth now the last Act of the Tragedy, wch is the very winding vp of all that is to be done in this holy Court. Wherein both parties are pleased, & haue their desire. The Inquisitours in obtayning their prey: the pri∣soners seeing the terrible and continuall torments, the sub∣till sleights and practices of the Inquisitours, with their ex∣tream and cruell dealings, grow to an end. For then doe they heare their finall iudgements after their matters haue been tossed to and fro many yeares in open Court, and in so great an audience and assembly, as there hath not been seen a greater, no not at Olimpus it self. This Act of Faith they commonly called Auto. And surely good cause why. For then is the prisoners faith tried to the vttermost, and sheweth it selfe what it is, either by denying and abiuring Gods truth in open and solemne audience, or else by stand∣ing stoutly and manfully therein, in like solemnity of shew and view of all the people, thronging together purposely. Let the inquisitours therfore deriue the word, and descant
of it as they please: we doo construe it thus, as in a sence most agreeable to Gods iudgement. This act hath many idle deuices, or to speake more aptly, this Pascall of Gods people Pelah: that is to say, this passage out of Egypt to the land of promise, I meane from the world to God, hath his Euen, his preparation. Ios. 13. For a few dayes before this feast, the Inquisitours vse to call into the Court seuerally one after other, all such persons whose goods are confiscate: examining them what lands or goods they haue, and where they lie, charging them earnestly that they conceale not one iot; declaring vnto them further, that if afterward it can be proued that they haue kept any thing back, both fellonie shall be laid to their charge, and they also in whose hands it is found shall pay for it most assuredly. After they haue confessed the whole truth of all their other goods and substance, be∣sides such as were taken and found in their owne house at the first time of their apprehension, and so sequestred, and that all be estreited into the accomptes of the Eschec∣quer, they returne euery one to his own prison againe, being assured to lose all their goods, howsoeuer they escape with their liues. But the right Euen is the daie next and immedi∣ately going before the festiuall day. For then towards night they cause all the men to bee brought together into a large prison house, such as are appoynted to bee brought forth the next morrow to doo di∣uers kindes of penance before all the people, accor∣ding as it is enioyned vnto them in their seuerall sentences. This word penance, is a word borrowed and vsurped by them vpon the vse of the old pri∣mitiue Church, for certaine penalties and punish∣ments vsurped towards offenders. Into another like prison they bring all the women together likewise. But such as are iudged to death, are put each in their seuerall pri∣sons
again, about 9. or 10. of the clock at night, there is sent to each of them some pelting Priest to cary them this heauie tidings, and to be their ghostly father. And now at this last instant, the man to whom God hath giuen the spirit of constancy and boldnes, maketh his last protesta∣tion of his faith, to the shame of his Confessour, and con∣fusion of all that hellish army. But on the other part, hee that hath not beene constant to fore, nor is at this pre∣sent, hath now a time to call for grace at Gods handes (the onely giuer of all gifts and graces) those especiall gifts of constancy and patience. Howbeit both sortes haue much to do with their ghostly fathers: the one in mainte∣nance of their faith now in their last howre and most dan∣gerous time of all: the other in hopelesse entreating and praying their pardon of life. Yet is there neither of them both but in that night they are occupied on euery side, su∣staining (no doubt) a great temptation, both in that their flesh is fraile, and the diuell stirring; and yet sure it is, that the heauenly Father forgetteth not his children in that howre. Yea, this night wherein his members suffer such agony, may be well resembled vnto that, which God him∣selfe the head of all, suffred, both for the anguish of the pa∣tients, and the comfort that came from heauen. The next morrow by day breake, the Familiars and all the rest of the officers pertaining to the Inquisition, assem∣ble together euery man to doe his office about this holy Sacrifice, and to attire such prisoners as are to be brought out before the people euery one in his aray, very curiously, in such sort as was by the sentence pronounced & prescri∣bed. Whereof such as stood stoutly to their tackling, & de∣fended their profession against their detestable falshoods, weare the Sambenit vnto the very stake, which is a linnen garment of the colour of the earth, made like to a coate-ar∣mour, The descrip∣tion of the Sambenit and all to be painted with black diuels, ouer whom the manful souldiour of Christ triumpheth in token of vi∣ctorie.
On his head he hath a hat long like a turret, wher∣on is pictured the image of a man burning in the fire with many diuels about him, plying him with sire and fagots. It is much after the maner of a foughten field, as I may li∣ken it. For there is the whole skirmish, with the ouerthrow of his enemies, set for a greater glory & shew of conquest and victory. Moreouer, their tongues are nipped and pin∣ched with a cleft peece of wood which they call Mordazas, of the Latin word Mordeo to bite, because the prisoners should not make any protestation before the people, either of their innocency, or of their beliefe; hauing besides this about their necks new cords made of bentes, and their hands fast bound behind them. Whereby he declareth (in mine opinion) like a good champion (though his deserts in other respects be somewhat) yet that hee reposeth no trust or confidence in them, but in the onely and vnspea∣keable mercies of God, for the confessing of whose holy name he is readie to dye the most terrible death, & so will appeare before the iudgement seate of God: whereas if God should deale with him straitly according to the letter and the law, notwithstanding all those glorious workes that make him so famous among men, hee should well find, there were nothing remaining for him in the end, but the destinie and reward of a villanous theefe. And on this sort come these constant martyrs disguised, and bearing these badges: first vpon the stage, & so consequently to the stake. Likewise, they that by reuolting and denying the truth, haue brought the Fathers in some hope of their sal∣uation, haue iudgement of death neuerthelesse, and are a∣rayed in like sort, saue only that in steede of the diuels pi∣ctures, there is the image of the crosse, hauing their hands bound in like sort; that as the other haue borne the en∣signes & cognizance of true faith and manly courage, so these may carrie also the badges of dastardie & false faith. And in like sort doe all the rest come forth, arayed as the other, and besette with like badges more or lesse, as
it pleaseth the Inquisitours to disgrace them in the sight of the people. But at what time the prisoners are ready to passe out of the Castle Triana where they were imprisoned, then the holy House affecteth of purpose to seeme full of pitty and charitie towards them, in the sight of the common people. For after that they bee disguised on this sort, and euery man set in his order as he shall issue forth, they are commanded to pause a while, and forth with are cer∣taine tables spread for them as they stand, and a very plen∣tifull breakfast in shew, of rosted hennes, kidde, and such like prepared, wherewith they would blind the common sort, and perswade them, that they had bin none otherwise vsed in prison, beginning now at the last to make them a∣mends for the euill entertainment which they had before. Howbeit the poor souls are in that taking at that time, that they will doe the meat no great harme, and therfore those cut-throats the Familiars, wch vse to gard the prisoners on each side, do cōmonly snatch the meat from before them, & deuour it without either check or controlement. As for the preparation, such is their state in that triumph, as neuer was The order of the Inquisi∣tours tri∣umph. the like pomp in Persia, nor triumph in Rome comparable therunto. First & formost goe the Children of the Colledge where the youth is brought vp at learning, who both with their apparel, & song, & aray which they are kept in by cer∣taine Clerkes that walke vp and down by them in surplus∣ses, moue a pretty deuotion. Their dittie is the letanies: the one part of the Quier answering another, and the foote of their song is, Ora pro illis. After them goe such as doe pe∣nance, placed as it were in certain degrees, so that such as haue the easiest punishments goe next in order vnto the Children, and are to bee discerned from other by these to∣kens: tapers in their hands vnlighted, ropes about their necks, & Barnacles vpon their tongues, with hats of paper, bare-headed, except they put on those hats, but without clokes like slaues: & the better or richer man commeth al∣waies
hindmost. Next vnto these goe they that are disguised in Sambenites, that is to say, a linnen garment shaped like a coat-armour with a red crosse ouerthwart, obseruing the state and condition of euery person, as is said before. But such as haue bin berayed with their Orders, are preferred before others, both for estimation & place. Lastly cōmeth in the third rank, those that are condemned to the fire: of the wch sort, so many as haue refused Gods truth, and beta∣ken themselues in steed thereof to lyes, in hope of mercy at mans hand, doe well deserue to goe before the rest that re∣mained constāt to the end, whom the Inquisitors place in the rereward as the fittest place for them euen in their own iudgements, in respect of their vertue and faith. Also on each hand of euery prisoner, there goeth a Familiar all ar∣med to gard him, and besides them two Monks or Theati∣i These be th Iesuites (as they term them) attending on euery one that is rea∣dy to suffer, to perswade them tooth & naile, not to cleaue vnto that doctrine now at their departure out of this world, wherein they haue bin trained and taught hitherto. Which wicked importunity is as great a grief in my fācy to him that constantly hath perseuered hitherto, as any tor∣ment that hee hath endured. Immediately after the pri∣soners, doe follow in order, as the maner is in all solemni∣ties, first the whole state of the City, which consisteth vpon Alguaziles, Constables, Gouernours of the 24. Wards, the Iudges of euerie Court, the Regent or Viceroy and Assi∣stant, and after them a great troupe of noble gentlemen on horseback: next vnto them the State ecclesiasticall. In the first rank the Clerks, Vicars and Curats: in the second the whole Chapiter of the Cathedrall Church commonly called Cabildum Ecclesiae maioris: In the third place the Abbots and Priors with their Couentes: and last of all, after all these followeth the holy House, which triumpheth indeede, and is in iolly state that day. Be∣fore whom as they passe, there is a way made in re∣spect of their honours, and a compasse kept, wherein the
Fiscal, one that taketh no small paines in the holy Houses behalfe towards the obtaining of this victory, hauing a flagge of red damaske displaied in warlick fashion (for all the world) occupieth the place of the Standard-bearer. The flag is of turky worke, full of much good work∣manship, and hath on the one side the Popes armes that first granted the charter of the Inquisition, and on the o∣ther the image of King Ferdinando that first admitted it, all verie sumptuously embrodered with silke and purple: and in the top of the Standard is fixed a rich crosse of sil∣uer and gilt with the crucifixe, which the people make after more superstitiously a great deale, than they doe af∣ter anie other crosse, onely because it is the crosse pertai∣ning to the holy Inquisition. Last of all, come the Fathers themselues a verie soft set pace for grauity sake, trium∣phantly as chiefe Emperours of that conquest. Hard at their heeles follow the Familiars and Promoters belong∣ing to the holy House, all on horseback, as the maner was in the triumphes at Rome for euery Captaine conquerour to haue his souldiers hard at his elbow. After the which, come the common people hand ouer head with a won∣derfull presse. With this pomp they passe from Triana where the Inquisitours prison is, to a certain scaffold made of wood, and reared vp a good height in the middest of the high street and chiefe of all the citie, for the Penitenti∣aries to stand vpon in view of all the people, there to hear the sentence pronounced vpon them. Being come vpon the scaffold, they cause them to sit downe, euery man and woman in the same order that he or she came in. Right ouer against the which, there is also another stage set vp of like quantitie, wherein is erected a stately kinde of Consi∣story for the Inquisitours, where they sit in their maiestie like gods with all their traine about them that followed them thither. Here it would not be impertinēt (as I iudge) to discourse a little in comparing the Triumph of our aduersaries with
the publicke Penance vsed in the primitiue Church, and set out by these godly Bishops and Pastours in those daies, The maner of the pe∣ vsed in the Pri∣ . wherein was nothing but meere Godlinesse sought, with a feruent and vnfained zeale of the amendment and salua∣tion of the repentants: into the which neuer anie entred but hee departed thence to his great comfort, though with some shame. And his shame was for his offence, but the ease of his griefe; and the plaister which the Pastours and Preachers applied to his ruptures, was the perfect Plaister and true Sanatiue, that healed his wounded and corrupt conscience. Neyther was it their maner that prescribed the penance, to triumph on that day, or to send for their brauest sutes out of their wardrobes, to goe and shew them∣selues abroad-in in token of ioy and victorie: but came themselues in mourning weede, and so likewise did the whole congregation, declaring by that outward shew of sorrow, that their hearts were touched inwardly with the fall and infirmities of their brethren. Insomuch that manie times the Censors themselues haue been seen to shed moe teares than haue the Penitentiaries, vnfainedly sor∣rowing the shame which the other sustained (as right and reason was) for their misdeeds. Neither was any of them put to any kind of death one or other, or so smartly scour∣ged, that by meanes of the stripes pearcing so deep, a man might haue seene the bare bone, nor the vtter shame & discredite both of themselues and their whole posteritie sought hereby: but whatsoeuer was done, it was referred to this end, that they might recouer the good name again a∣mong the congregation, wch they had lost before by their misdeameanor. As for any of the Preachers or Ministers, none of them had any allowance or fees from the Eschec∣quer, or any one fleece or locke of wool from the backes of any of his flocke, neyther was any thing found in their houses that came by spoile of the poore. Ezechiel 34. Esay 3. Woe be to you shepheards, &c. Against the which albeit there be good cause to complain and cry out presently, yet may
there perhaps be some other oportunitie elswhere to do it. My meaning in this place is, onely to make a plat without any order or fashion, that such as haue any sense at all left within them in this vniuersall time of ignorance and do∣tage, may beginne to weigh and consider what difference there is betwixt these triumphes set out with such prepara∣tion and iollitie, and the publick penance vsed in the Pri∣mitiue Church, which the holie House braggeth so much that they retaine till this day. Thus, when euery man hath taken his place in order, one beginneth a Sermon, which is purposely deuised much in commendation of the holy House, and the con∣futatiō of such heresies as they are presently about to pro∣secute. But the greatest part of it is spent in shamefull and slanderous reproaches, wherewith they charge the good christians, adding one trouble and griefe in the neck of another. Which if they seeme to take in good part, seeing themselues set there as wondering stocks to all the world, and marks for them to shoot all their diuelish darts of shamefull and reproachfull slanders at, either it is be∣cause they beare them off with the sure buckler of faith: or else by reason that they haue been acquainted therewith, and their hearts hardned with such continuall exercise, like sencelesse men they feel now no touch of them. When the sermon is finished, they begin to reade the sentences giuen vpō the penitentiaries in order as euery man came, or in place as they sit, beginning with such as are to haue the easiest iudgements and punishments first. This part of the Act is somwhat long, & because it is the chiefest part, therefore it requireth some speciall treatise, but hereafter in more conuenient place. The Sentences being thus or∣derly al pronounced, the chiefe Commissioner for the In∣quisition singeth certain short praiers for the Conuerts (as they call them) which neuerthelesse must die also: the effect wherof is, that God would vouchafe to extend his mercy and fauour towards them, that they may perseuer in con∣fessing
the doctrine of the Church of Rome, & die therin. Which don, they begin to sing Miserere the 51. Psalme for the obtaining of Gods fauour and mercy towards the Pe∣nitentiaries; and that the discipline and absolutions done and executed vpon them by the Fathers, may be effectuall & auailable vnto them to true repentance. The sentences are most commonly these. Death without mercie: Whip∣ping with extremitie, that the parties either not at all, or else verie hardly escape with their liues: Condemnation to the gally, & Forfaiture of all their goods, with such like penal∣ties, wherein the good mother-church of Rome exten∣deth her pittie and compassion towards her children by the Inquisitours as by her meanes, thinking the proofe and the effect of true repentance necessarily to con∣sist therein. Now surely the whole world may see and perceiue (and that not onely such as haue drunke of her cup) the ourageous tyrannie of such Termagants as haue bragged and boasted of themselues, that they are the true Church of Christ, and be occasioned thereby to remember themselues, and to esteeme of them as they are. The Psalme being ended, which they abuse to their purpose most impudently and abominably, in a plaine mockerie (as they doe commonly all other places of Scripture) the chiefe Inquisitour singeth a sort of Ver∣sicles: and the whole Quier answereth them with their Responses, in a high and a loud note, strayning their cunning and pipes to the vttermost. Which done, the Inquisitour of his absolute authoritie pronounceth abso∣lution in a kind of note, wherein hee absolueth all such as are come home to the church of Rome (but forsa∣ken Christ) from all their errors whereof they shew them∣selues penitent, forasmuch as they haue sweued from the Romish church. Howbeit this absolution must haue none other construction, than hath the Romish absolution à cul∣pa tantum, but not à poena. that is to say, from the fault only,
not from the penalty. For they must forth with, notwith∣standing this their recantation, abide the penalties with∣out either mercy, iustice, or conscience. After the absolution, the Inquisitours haue yet one o∣ther notable deuice to vphold their kingdom withall as it were with anker and chaine cable, which is a manifest proofe, that they are halfe in doubt, lest nor they nor their kingdome should long continue. And the deuice is this: That all the people gathered together at that time, whereof some come to see the solemnity aboue 20. leagues off, take a solemne oath before them, and bind themselues thereby, vowing the performance thereof, that they will liue and dye in the seruice and obedience of the church of Rome, and by all meanes possible, to their power defend and maintaine it, hazarding both life and goods against any whosoeuer shall goe about to ouerthrow it. More∣ouer, they make them to forsweare and curse, whatsoeuer is contrary to that which the church of Rome holdeth and affirmeth for true. Also that to their power they shall main∣taine and vphold the holie House, and defend all the offi∣cers thereof, &c. In witnes wherof, and for a further surety of the matter, they take recorone of another. And then may a man see the silly common people, & those of higher estate and degree crouch to the earth with great deuotion, and through ignorance take their oaths against God and his anointed, rashly & wickedly conspiring together, euery man to his power, to be a promoter and setter forward of the Inquisition. Now if you talk with any man about the abolishing of this monster of all wickednes and iniquity out of the world, though he confesse of himselfe, and grant indeede, that there is much cruelty & tyranny vsed therin: he will tell you a tale again, of his solemne oath taken and vow vowed, in open and solemne audience, and what can ye reply to him then? Marry (sir) thus. How that certain of the Iewes of very blind ignorance & superstition did bind themselues with an oath, and made a solemne vow, that
they would neither eate nor drinke till they had slain Paul, Act. 23. And these men (say we) sinne thrice so deepely as they, and therefore are lesse bound to seeke to saue their oath, so wickedly taken and so vngodly. First, for that they of a blind and therefore a wicked zeale, in defence of their law, do fight against the Gospell of Christ. Secondly, in a∣busing and abhominably prophaning the name of God, swearing by his holy name, with al their might & main, to maintaine an euill quarrell, and depresse a better, which lieth not in them to do. Thirdly, whereas they should in time reuoke and retract all things begun against God and his holy word, they do still proceed & go forward in their purpose like the stubburne and stifnecked Iewes. Can any man come in now and auer the contrary? But when it shall bee most manifestly proued, that the Inquisitors haue gon about busily & of purpose to destroy the kingdom of Christ, as did the wicked Iewes, then shal it also be euident and apparant, that such as haue vowed this solemne oath, though it were of ignorance, haue incurred all those three seuerall offences. Wherefore, if they will take vp them∣selues, and learne to be wise in time, this will bee one way and meanes for them to recouer their saluation. First, to consider diligently what kind of quarrel the Inquisitours do take in hand to maintaine. Secondly, to weigh with themselues, whether they fight vnder the Inquisitours banner for Christ, or against Christ, and so let them keepe or breake their oath, as they shall thinke good, after they haue debated the matter thorowly. Now to our purpose againe. After all things thus done and finished, if any there bee among the Penitentiaries that deserue to be so serued, they are straight-way degraded: and the Bishop that ministred the orders to the party, plaieth that part, arraied all in his Pontificalibus. The ceremonies vsed about the actuall degradation (as they terme it) of him that is to bee executed that day, are both strange and tragicall. First,
they apparell him in his massing robes, as though he were readie to d masse, and afterwards dispoile him againe of euery trinket one after another, vsing both dog-trickes, The maner of degradation. and termes of coniuration about euerie of the ornaments, contrariwise to that that they did before at the first put∣ting on thereof, when hee entred into orders. Then are his hands, lips, and crowne, scraped with a broken glasse or some sharp knife, in token that they scrape off the oyle that hee was greased withall at his first initiation. All the which is done in the full view and wonder of all the peo∣ple, some pitying the poore man, and some cursing him worse than lew or Pagane, being indeede most happie, if it bee but for this one thing, that in the latter end of his life hee cryeth abrenuntio to that greasie and stinking oyle, scraping away that Baals marke and that Apish patch so well as it will be, and so departing. But such as haue not iudgement of death, are degraded onely verbaliter (as they term it) that is to say, by word. Which is in effect a suspen∣ding from all function & preferment, during the Popes pleasure. Another ceremony they haue, that in no case is to be o∣mitted, wherin the holy House most shamefully and with∣out any kind of colour in the world, mocketh both God & man, and all the whole company present, giuing all men good cause iustly to laugh at their folly: & that is this. In the end of their sentence pronounced vpon such as haue iudgement to be burned (their conuersion to the church of Rome notwithstanding) they adde moreouer & cause there openly to be proclaimed, that forasmuch as the holy House mistrusteth that the party is not truly conuerted nor from his heart, but counterfaiteth, and doe feare therefore, lest a wolfe lurke still vnder a sheepes clothing, for all his sem∣blance of conuersion, they do giue & bequeath him to the secular power, with this humble request vnto them, to shew the partie so much fauour as may be, and to breake neither bone, nor pearce any skin of his body. But such as
nothing was able to remoue from their godly profession, whom they tearme Wilfull and Obstinate persons, they commend to the same power, with these words. Foras∣much as we haue laboured earnestly, and taken great paines with this man, to bring him home to our mother-church of Rome, and can doe no good on him, but that still hee continueth obstinatly in his opinions, &c. we therfore de∣liuer this fellow to the secular power, to doe execution on him according to order of law: yet praying them by the way, that if he shew any tokens of true repentance, to deal as fauourably with him as they may, with other such like speech. And what impudencie (I pray you) is this? They haue already giuen sentence vpon him that hee must dye, and therupon deliuer him to the secular power to be burnt, in so much, that if they that should see execution done, do eyther suffer the partie to make an escape, or else keepe him and not burne him, they themselues should bee as∣signed to supply his place: and yet they require thus much at their hands, to vse as much mercie towards him as they may. But what kinde of pittie or mercie is it I pray you, that they shew vnto them themselues, which bring the poore soule foorth into that place dismembred and shaken all into peeces in euerie lime and iointe of their bodies, with neuer a whole bone in their skinne, yea, the verie sinewes, veines, and guts, within them broken with their most cruell tortures, where∣with diuers haue perished presently, euen betwixt their hands? and yet will they sue to the secular power, to breake neyther arme nor legge, nor anie other mem∣ber, nor to draw one droppe of bloud on them. For∣sooth it is because the harme that they haue done to the poore wretches alreadie, is wholly within the flesh; and because they haue drawen no bloud of them, eyther with knife or launce, but onely at his mouth with a fine Lawne let down his throat, they forsooth are free from bloudshed and breaking of bones. They themselues haue entreated
him tootoo pitifully, & without all mercy or good huma∣nity, with exquisite deuices & such kind of cruelty as was aboue measure & more than barbarous, and fall they now to entreat the temporall Iudges to shew him as much mer∣cy a may be? Perhaps these flouting merchants suppose that by this onely shift of descant, in praying mercie for them, they haue cleanly auoided their Canon, which hol∣deth them accursed and excommunicate, whosoeuer be∣ing of the clergy shall shed any bloud, or giue any maime: for they can wipe away such a foolish penalty, in compari∣son of so great an offence, with as foolish and ridiculous a shift. And these most impudent toyes of mockery, both the Princes and the whole people, but chiefly the tempo∣rall magistrate heareth and suffereth, without saying any thing thereto: otherwise there is no man so void of all vn∣derstanding, but he may easily perceiue, that their praying of mercy and crauing of fauour for them, is but a very iest, imagined, to flout all the whole companie withall, and spoken then, when they mean it least. Loe, here is the pittie and tender compassion, and mother-like mercie of their holy mother-Church, which this holy House sheweth. This also may the reader see and marke by the way, were he ne∣uer so blinde, that this shift of theirs to send such to the fire of whose conuersion they stand halfe in doubt, that is to say, lest they leaue a wolfe in a lambe skin, is yet one of the cunningest trickes, that the holy House hath in all her bouget. I told you before, that the chiefest part of the Act consi∣sted in the reading and pronouncing of the sentences, and therfore most worthie the marking: forasmuch, as they do not onely by singular falshood, mis-report such things as the party vpon examination hath confessed, but also father those things vpon him most diuellishly, which hee ney∣ther spake nor thought in all his lifetime. And these hath the holy House deuised against the partie, whereof part is most filthy, part shamefull and abominable, and part blas∣phemous,
to the intent to disgrace his person, & to make both him and his doctrin the more abhorred of men, and encrease their owne estimation and credit, as most necessa∣rie members to scoure and ridde the world of such pesti∣ferous persons, Whiles all this geare is in rehearsing to the people. they clappe vpon the parties tongue a cleft peece of wood, in maner as it were a barnacle, to his great and intolerable paine, so that hee can answer ne gain-say, nothing in defence of himselfe and his owne inno∣cencie. For if hee might be suffered and let alone, he would openly giue them the lye to their faces: as it hath hap∣ned diuers times. Howbeit the controuersie were not like long to continue. For straightway the fellow should bee sure to haue his mouth gagged, or his tongue stocked, to teach him to be quiet, & to say nothing openly. More∣ouer, that which is the parties confession in very deede, is so peruerted and corrupted, with the words so changed, & rechanged in reading, that in a maner it may be very well said for him, that hee neuer spake nor thought any such thing. Wherof I will here shew some speciall examples, be∣cause they be matters of weight, and such as cannot easily bee contraried, forasmuch as the whole world seeth and knoweth them well enough. After that all the sentences bee read, and the act uall de∣gradation wholly finished, the temporall magistrate taketh them into his hands very solemnely, according as it is en∣ioyned him by the holy House, and so conueyeth them to the place of execution, with a sort of the diuels owne Pro∣ctors about them, calling & crying vpon them with great importunity to forsake the truth which they haue receiued and professed. And many times it chanceth, that such as constantly perseuer in confessing the truth to the end, doe breake their neckes against the stake with a trice, and then they noise abroad among the cōmon people, that such, & such repentantly recanted their heresies at their verie last howre, and came home again to the Church of Rome, and
therefore felt no force of fire at all, by reason of the Inqui∣sitours mercie and pittie extended vpon such as became conuerted. By these, and such like subtill practices, they goe about to bury the truth, as though God the auenger thereof were not able to raise it vp againe out of darknesse and dungeons. The residue, which be not condemned to dye, are caried backe to prison againe: and the next day after, are brought out & whipt, such as had like sentence pronounced vpon them: whereof diuers are afterward sent to the gally, others remanded to perpetuall prison, either to Triana the speciall prison for the Inquisition, or to some place elswhere altogether as euill as a prison, with this Item to them ere they goe: that if they happen hereafter to call anything to minde, that erst they haue not disclosed, they immediately resort to the holy House, and declare it whatso∣euer it be: for if it be found otherwise, that they haue craf∣tily and closely concealed any thing, they shall be reputed (say they) as persons without remorce of conscience, and like-to be sharply and seuerely punished therefore. But the chiefest matter that they giue them in charge is, in no case to reueale any thing that they haue either heard or seene during the time of their imprisonment, concerning the maner of their entreating in any respect, either of punish∣ment, or imprisonment, or otherwise, how and after what sort they haue generally proceeded in Court against them, and their fellow prisoners; but for the time of their being there, should take and repute themselues altogether as dead persons. For if the contrary can be proued by them, or that it come to the Inquisitours eares that they haue vt∣tered any of their secrets, they shall be taken for persons Relapsed (a they terme them) and be punished with most seueritie. And the iudgement appointed for such, is death without redemption, which surely is a deuise aboue al the rest, and might worse be spared. For by this their so strait en∣ioyning them silence vpon paine of their liues, they cope them (as it were) with needle & threed, and so keepe in all
their knauery and tyranny as sure as vnder locke and key, both close and secret to themselues. They know full well, I wis, that if the king who authorised them, should by any meanes vnderstand their false play which they vse, the vio∣lence and iniurie that they offer, the slanderous reports which they make the wonderfull fetches, and diuellish de∣uices which they practise to entrappe diuers and sundrie poore innocents, charging them with manie matters, which neyther they said, nor saw, nor heard at anie time, but specially if hee vnderstood of their couetous and cru∣ell dealings, & (as I may say) more than barbarous, grow∣ing of that greedie desire of theirs: he would (no doubt of it) turne the Inquisition on their owne neckes, and foresee the safetie aswell of his owne subiects, as the common-weale of the countrey, and prouide for it accordingly: but chiefly hee would see to the execution of Iustice, whereof he is appointed by God a lawfull Protectour, rather than the enriching of his bagges and coffers, won by such vn∣lawfull meanes. Or else, if the King sacked herein to doe that appertaines to him, the cōmon people would be rea∣die to fire them, that haue been so fierce with fire to others. Furthermore, they labour so earnestly to burie the truth, and are so carefull lest their crueltie should come to light, that among other great penalies which they enioine to diuers men of worship and good reputation, and some of honour and in authoritie, after they haue kept them in prison a season, and caused them to sustaine open infamie, they inhibite them the company and conference of any, o∣ther than such as they shal appoint & allow them: neither will suffer them to write to any friend of theirs without making them priuie vnto it, that they might haue the perusing thereof. Their colour for this matter (forsooth) is very prettie, lest that by conference or writing of letters, they should publish their hereticall opinions. But in verie deede their drift is, lest such men as haue good friends and bee well allied, should complaine and make their
mone to their friends & allies, of the iniuries that haue bin done vnto them, and they make means to the King to en∣quire further of their doings, & so bring the practices of the holy House to light. Wherof this is proof sufficiēt, that they vse not this kind of punishment to any of the meaner sort, but only to them that be of good bloud & parentage. For at the very first beginning, when the maner of their Triumph first came vp, and was executed vpon the Luthe∣ranes (as they call them) they that were present at the sight, and beheld the order and fashion well, were wont to write vnto their friends both within the Realme and a∣broad, of all such things as there were done and seene, es∣pecially of such as did penance: also what sentences were pronounced vpon them, with the causes and circumstan∣ces of all their other punishmentes and penalties. But the holy House (as dayly practice maketh euerie one his crafts-maister) grew so cunning in their affaires, that straight-way they beganne to smell out the matter, that it might in time worke them some displeasure, and therewithall that the doctrin which they so greatly detest and abhorre, might bee published and spreade further than they would wish it, so that manie which otherwise would haue con∣tinued in their blindnesse still, if they had neuer heard nor seene anie such reportes, should bee occasioned thereby, to open their eyes and vnderstandings, and to confesse as∣well the doctrine it selfe, and receiue it, as also espie the wickednesse of them that persecute it. Therefore for re∣medie of this mischiefe and inconuenience, the holy House prouided, by making and publishing certaine presidentes of such like reportes, briefe, and in such wise as were not likely to doe anie great harme: that who so were dispo∣sed to certifie their friends of such matters, should fol∣low those presidentes in any case: & therfore appointed cer∣taine great penalties for the transgressours hereof, that should make their reportes in any other more large or am∣ple maner, than was by their order prescribed. The ma∣ner
wherof was this: That after they had told who & what The Presi∣dents for letters ap∣pointed by the holy House. maner of man he was that was punished or executed, they should adde moreouer, because he held with Luther, with∣out naming any of his opinions, (which notwithstanding were specially recited before) was burned, or thus, or thus punished or executed, according to the truth of the matter. Moreouer, as the holy House well may erre (albeit men now adayes are so bewitched with superstition and flat∣terie, that they dare affirme the contrarie, being ordered, and guided (say they) by the holy Ghost) so it commeth diuers times to passe, that some be causelesse apprehended, some vpon verie small and light complaints, verie few vp∣on anie lawfull and sufficient information. And the grea∣test part, after they haue beene imprisoned in such misera∣ble sort as I haue before declared, for a yeare, or two, or more, till their causes were thorowly examined, at the last being tryed and found guiltlesse, so that necessarily they are to be discharged, within a day or two after their great day of Triumph, they bring them into the Court, & there beginne to set on them againe as freshly as euer they did, willing them to vtter the truth, as they will auoid their displeasures and the extremitie of law, threatning them the Rack, and saying that there is now come in suf∣ficient matter by information against them. Then if any will be feared with this facing, and be brought but to vtter one word of any such matters as they are desirous to heare of, they send him straight to ward againe, and renue their sute against him from the beginning. But if nothing can bee gotte out of him by this meanes, nor that they haue anie thing else to charge him withall, they leaue off threat∣ning, and fall to flattering: saying, that they haue a bet∣ter opinion of him than so, and therefore are resolued to send him home again to his owne house: for the which fatherly fauour extended towards him in sauing both his life and his goods, hee is to account himselfe much be∣holding and bound to their Lordships, willing him to per∣swade
himself, that what fauour they haue shewed him al∣readie, they mean to continue towards him, for the good liking that they had of him at the very first view, but speci∣ally for the good example of patience which he shewed du∣ring the whole time of his imprisonment. With these and such like Lenitiues the good and vpright Iudges think to sup∣ple the rest of his sores that were of their owne making, & to send him home to his house at the last, with speciall charge that he be silent. Yet sometime they detaine him in prison a good while after, notwithstanding that hee bee found not guiltie, nothing regarding what any, be he neuer so guiltlesse, suffer at their hands, and there doe keepe him closely & crastily till a day or two after their great state and iollity, that being dismissed neer about the time that the o∣ther are, the common people may think he receiued his pu∣nishment amongst the rest, tho in some lesser degree, and thereby be perswaded that the holy House neuer vexeth any man without sufficient information. And marke I pray you one other new found guise that these rauening wolues haue got to obtain their prey & spoile withall: that such persons as among other parcels of their punishments are condemned either to perpetuall imprisonment, either du∣ring the Inquisitors pleasure, or for a certaine season, albeit they remaine no longer in Triana, that is, the Inquisitours proper and peculiar prison, because they shall think them∣selues quite and clear dispatched, and to haue no more to doe with the holy House: yet whersoeuer they be appoin∣ted their place of aboad as an imprisonment, there be spies also to mark diligently how they take the matter, and whe∣ther they put it vp quietly, yea or no, or what they say vnto it. For if they bee chearefull, or doe any wayes make but a countenance of mirth in this time of their trouble, they shall both incurre the Inquisitours displeasure therfore, and feel a greater smart besides. They also that doe remaine in such appointed places, are likewise visited sometime by the Inquisitours; but in such sort as hath bin described of the
other, and to the very same end and purpose, that is to say, that the common people might see how full of mercie and pittie they are: howbeit it is to this end, to bring them more in feare and awe of them, & of their displeasure. For then beginne they (as it were) to keep Court, and to make inquirie both of the prisoners themselues & of the keepers; whether since their departure out of Triana they haue heard any of their fellowes say any thing touching matters of religion, who it was that did so, and what countenance o∣thers that heard it, made thereunto. Also, whether any man doe grudge or find himselfe grieued for any punishment that he hath endured, but especially, whether they haue dis∣closed any mysterie or secret of theirs, or whether any man haue compassed or imagined to make an escape, with ma∣ny other such like questions. And if they finde no such matters, they return as wise as they came, If otherwise there appeare any euident matter against them, then commence they their sute against him or them. Not many yeares agoe, it chanced at Siuill in such a like visitation, that a certaine prisoner, after hee had remained in prison for cer∣taine yeares at the chiefe Inquisitours pleasure, whose name was Licentiato Gasco, made verie earnest suite vnto him for his discharge and deliuerance thence. This Gasco was a man well learned in both the lawes, as it seemed: who strayning himselfe to speake somewhat wisely, made this graue and goodly answer vnto him, passing all wise∣dome or good religion. Now Sirs (saith hee) you must My Lord the chiefe Inquisitors occasion. take your affliction patiently, for here you suffer for the sinnes of the people, and for ours aswell as for your owne. Howbeit I will moue the rest of my Lords in the matter, and what may be done, shall be done. But vpon these and such like foolish and blasphemous speeches, neuer anie Commissioner made inquirie: and thus departed hee out of the Parler, wherein he had made such a clerke-like peece of worke to the poore prisoners in way of consola∣tion; and so like a gay-diuine, casting a word out to the
keeper verie solemnly, and charging him by vertue of their Office to look to them narrowly, that none escaped. For if there did, he should both seek them at his owne charge, and be punished besides for his negligence, in looking so slenderly to his duetie. CHAP. XIII. The interpretation of the sentences. THere be also certaine speciall termes which the holy House vseth for euerie kinde of penance seuerally. Wherein, seeing there lyeth also sorne secret mysterie, it shall not bee greatly impertinent to declare them in this place, expounding them after the Inquisitours owne sense and vnderstanding. First, concerning the iudgements, some are to bee burned quicke, and that is for such as haue constantly perseuered vnto the end, in the confession of a pure and perfect faith: and these men they call obstinate. Others are to bee burned also, but after they be dead, being first strangled at the stake. Such are they, that being once wonne by their owne frailtie and weaknesse, haue beene content to submitte themselues to the Inquisitours, and to footh wahtsoeuer the other will say, & yet haue by certaine euident and sufficient tokens, giuen the Inquisitours good cause of suspicion, to thinke that they remaine the same in heart still, notwithstanding their mouth hath confes∣sed the contrarie. After the same maner are diuers also of the former sort, whom they tearme obstinate, strang∣led ere the fire bee kindled, to make the people beleeue, that so soone as they were sette to the stake, they abiu∣red and renouced all their heresies, and returned to the holy mother-Church of Rome. But of these I haue made mention before. Another sort of sentences there are that haue a shew of more mercie, which they call reconciliati∣ons, because such as haue renounced the truth are as it were purged and clensed by doing that penance in way of satisfaction, and therby receiued againe into the very bosom of the Romish Church. Such for the most part cary
in their hands tapers vnlighted on the great day of their Triumph, with ropes about their neckes, and Sambenites vpon their backes aboue their other garments, as badges & tokens of guilt: & these they wear either during life, or for some other certaine number of yeares, or else are close kept and shut vp in some monasterie, or some other pri∣uate places, whereof as there be sundry sortes, so are there likewise seuerall names. Some are Perpetuall without re∣demption. Some onely perpetuall. Some for a certaine season: the which beeng expired, they must notwithstand∣ing remaine there still, during the Inquisitours pleasures: and some be no longer limited at the first than during the pleasure of the chiefe Inquisitour, the Generall they call him, because he is chiefe Iudge aboue all other Courts of the holy Inquisition throughout the Realme of Spaine: there be also some at the pleasure of the inferiour Iudges that gaue the sentence, in their owne Courts and priuate iurisdictions. These diuersities of prisons are like the properties of Purgatorie for all the world, excepting as∣well certaine cases in matter of penance, as also degrees of affinitie and bloud in cases of mariage. For they are de∣uised to glean all the mony out of the poor Penitentiaries purses, more or lesse, according to the quality of the of∣fence, and after the rate and proportion of the penalty as∣sessed on each of them therefore. And all this (forsooth) must bee vnderstood to proceede from the Inquisitours owneclemencie and mercie, of their own meer good will: by the only meanes whereof, the party that otherwise must necessarely perish for abiuring the truth, may stand in state of grace againe, and be in possibilitie to recouer his owne saluation. When iudgement is giuen to weare the Habite, (for so they call the Sambenite by a more cleanly terme) & to per∣petuall prison without bayle or maineprise, it is to be vnderstood, that there is no talk to be had of any remis∣sion thereof till the party hath worn that garment, & suf∣fered
imprisonment, the space of nine or ten whole yeares, except the partie haue so good hap, as by meanes of his friends to obtaine his pardon at the Kings hand, who one∣ly may by his prerogatiue pardon it at his pleasure. But af∣ter the expiration of those yeares, vnlesse the party haue gi∣uen some cause of suspicion againe, the chiefe Inquisitour is commonly wont to remitte the residue, howbeit with great crouching first, and much entreatie. When they adiudge a man to weare the Sambenite, and to suffer perpetuall imprisonment, without adding anie more, it is commonly taken for 3. yeares. if the chiefe In∣quisitor doe so think good: vpon whose pleasure it resteth either to giue the prisoner his discharge after those 3 years; or else to his perpetuall ignominie, there to detaine him all his life long. But when they say, that a man shall wear the Habite, and suffer imprisonment so many yeares or mo∣neths, so soon as that certaine time is expired the partie is set at libertie, except it be added moreouer, besides the li∣mitation of time certaine, that it shal be further referred to the discretion and appointment of the Inquisitours. The which clause they comonly vse to put in the latter end, in the winding vp of all, to choake men therewith, to make them thinke themselues much bound to them while they liue, for releasing the same. But if the sentence be to weare the Sambenite with imprisonment during the chiefe Inqui∣sitours pleasure, it is left to their discretions to pardon or punish accordingly, as they shall think good. In summe, how or after what sort soeuer their sentence be, the matter is wholly referred to them and to their ordering. Now the meanes to redeeme this imprisonment, and to dispense with the wearing of these robes, is the more common and ordinarie, by reason that the King hath in his Court diuers young gentlemen, to whom in respect of their seruice, he vseth to grant pardons for those matters. Then such as get the grant hereof, doe commonly make in∣quirie for such persons as are therunto adiudged, who they
be, and where they remaine, to the intent to make their market of those pardons to their most aduantage, as they can agree of price eyther more or lesse, respecting alwaies, both the abilitie of the person, and the qualitie of the sen∣tence. For such as had iudgement without redemption, pay more: other for release of perpetuall imprisonment, lesse: other for certaine time and during the Inquisitours pleasure, lesse againe: and least of all, that which onely resteth vpon the discretion and will of the Iudge. Also, at some times the King, of his like liberality & gracious good∣nesse, vseth to grant vnto diuerse, such money as should bee leuied for pardon of the Sambenite and other punish∣ment, towards the redeeming of their brethren and allies, being taken prisoners by the Turkes or Moores. And yet, whosoeuer sueth vnto the King for anie such pardon, must first in any case make the Inquisitours and the Clerks or other Officers of that Court his friends: otherwise, both the Kings owne charter, and the payment made by the partie besides notwithstanding, they will auoide him by hooke or by crooke, and tell him plainly, be it the King or the Pope himselfe that granted the pardon, he must bee better enformed how the case standeth ere he may depart so lightly. Then, if the matter be brought to that passe, it is an easie thing for them to imagine, that the partie is not so cleared, but that there was good cause a while to make a stay. But when anie hath iudgement of Imprisonment during the chiefe Inquisitours pleasure, who for cer∣taine secret occasions to him knowne will not bee en∣treated, and yet cannot well with honestie repulse the su∣ters, albeit hee doe them manifest iniurie to detaine them so long, hee will conuey the matter full cun∣ningly, saying, that he is content to referre it to the Inquisitours by whom the iudgement was giuen. And when the partie resorteth to them, then straight-way is he posted ouer from them backe againe to the high
Inquisitor, alledging that the determination hereof belon∣geth vnto him, and so by meanes that one of them vnder∣standeth the others meaning, they dally and prolong the poor mans imprisonment, driuing him off from day to day, so long as it pleaseth them. In like maner, the punishment is limited by the inferiour Inquisitours. For when they are loth to be entreated, they pass it to the high Inquisitor, and so one of them serueth another: and therefore except the partie goe cunningly to worke, and bribe eyther the Clerke or some other Officer of the holy House & that with no small gubbe, and there begin the ground of his sute, all his labour and cost bestowed vpon the redeeming of his imprisonment, is quite lost. But if any of the Inquisitors or any chiefe Officer of the Court doe make intercession for the partie, then straight-way the other vnderstand, that it is done vpon some such speciall occasions as they know, whereupon the suter is moued to pittie the state of the poor prisoner, specially if he vse the ordinary words known and vsed among themselues in cases of petition. Which is on this sort. My very good Lordes, my humble sute to your good Lordships is, that such a prisoners cause may bee fauourably considered, of whose good life and con∣uersation, but specially of his patience in the time of his imprisonment, I haue beene sufficiently and substantially enformed. Here are intermedled two or three good words in his commendation, but moderately, lest it should be thought that hee were too carefull ouer him: The con∣clusion then is, that it would please their Lordships to determine, whether the partie shall bee released yea or no. And of such as escape thus hardly through the bry∣ars, it costeth some the one halfe of their goods: some all: and some a peece, as it pleaseth the Inquisitours to deale with them. For they are perswaded this to be the nighest way to bring them home again, that are any thing gone astray or become aliens from the faith. Or perhaps the holy House thinketh it to be against Gods Lawes, that an
hereticke should haue whereupon to liue. Or else belike, they haue found out an Aphorisme for their purpose: that as a surfetter must vse a temperate and a thin diet: so must an heretick also be kept low, lest he swell and grow vp therein; and therefore take it for a soueraigne medicine, to keepe him so hungrie that he must be faine to begge his bread. Moreouer, of these (as is abouesaid) some haue iudge∣ment, besides the wearing of the habite and suffring impri∣sonment, to be also whipped. Some both to be whipped, & afterward set to the Gally. But these sharper kinds of punish∣ments they commonly vse to strangers, be they neuer so small offenders, to bee euen with them this way, because they make so light of wearing the Sambenite, for most of them make but a iest of it. And all these proceed from the Inquisitours owne mercie. The last and least penaltie is appointed for such as in their iudgements haue committed but a light offence: that is, to bee brought vpon the scaffold bare-headed and without anie cloake, hauing in his hand a waxe taper: whereof some are commanded to make Abiuration ex ve∣hementi: Some ex levi▪ Abiuration de vehementi they call, when it appeared not in the hearing and debating of anie mans cause, what is certainely to bee determined, for want of sufficient proofe, and because the partie him∣selfe confessed nothing that deserued anie maner of pu∣nishment. Therefore vpon such a fellow, whom they may neyther by iustice condemne for an hereticke, nor of their consciences can absolue and set at libertie, specially hauing some apparant tokens of scarce good beliefe, they giue sentence vpon him as vpon one vehemently sus∣pected: and so according to their suspicion, they cause him to abiure, And such a man being afterward found guil∣ty, be it in the least tittle of papistrie, they take for a relapse, and condemne to the fire. Abiuration de levi, is much after the same maner, but that it is enioined vpon smal∣ler
offences in their iudgements, whether the matter hath been apparant or no. Howbeit, no such person, though he be taken with the same maner againe, shall be reputed for a relapse, or haue iudgement of death therefore: albeit the qualifying of the second offence, that is to say, the iudgement and estimation thereof, bee referred to the In∣quisitours. And this kinde of abiuration is for the most part vsed in other matters, then concerning Luthers do∣ctrine, as for example, fornication (forsooth) betwixt sin∣gle persons, as though it were no sin: therefore it is accu∣stomably punished but as a trifling toy, by carrying of a waxe candle, and by abiuration deleui. Yet at some times they punish this sin with the whip, and that verie extream∣ly, but if the party offend a thousand times after, so that he put himselfe vpon the Inquisitours mercie, he is sure neuer to dye therefore. Loe, these be the goodly means wherby these good fathers bring into the right way the weaklings, as Paul tearmeth them. And thus much concerning their deuices practised in the Inquisition, till the time come that we may see the fall of that arke of Iniquitie, with the hidden secrets and mysteries thereof further disclosed, and all those things ful∣filled and accomplished, which in time (no doubt) must be reuealed and come to passe vpon this holy Inquisition, these good Fathers, and their holy House, finally vpon the whole man of sin, which God threatneth by his Prophet, shall fall vpon all such wicked hypocrites, which to the o∣uerthrowing of Christ's kingdome, and the vtter defacing of his glory, like shamelesse men, most wickedly do pretend the defence, and zeale, and the earnest aduancement of the same. Malach. 2. And now to you this precept (saith hee) O ye Priests. If ye will not giue eare, nor purpose in your heart to giue all glorie to my name (saith the Lord of hostes) I will curse you, yea I will curse your blessings, nay I haue cursed them al∣readie, because you doe not consider it in your heart. Behold I will destroy your seede, and will ouerspread your owne faces with the
filth of your solemnities, and it shall cleaue fast vpon you, and you shall know that this commandement toucheth you onely. Repentye. CHAP. XIIII. Certaine speciall examples, wherein a man may more plainely see the treacheries and legerdemaines of the holy Inquisition in very practice and exercise. HEre I haue thought good to annexe certaine speciall examples of their practices; wherein a man may eui∣dently see a great sort of their treacheries heaped and shuf∣fled together, ouer and aboue such as I haue heretofore made relation of in their speciall places, to the end that their crueltie in the execution hereof, with their vnsatia∣ble couetousnesse, and all other abominable iniquitie in the peruerting of all good lawes, may bee liuely described and (as it were) painted in tables, and set foorth to the shew, that such as doe behold them may take the full view thereof. And partly I doe it for their sakes, who for the professing of the Gospel, and the abiuring of an abo∣minable religion, haue bin ouertaken by the same meanes, seruing these holy Fathers in stead of a booty to prey and rauen vpon, because I think it expedient for the Church to continue some memorie therof. Now therfore, let all Chri∣stendome open their eyes, that they may know & discerne these rauenous Wolues, Lions, & Dragons, the very gene∣ration of Vipers, whom (notwithstanding their tyrannie) they haue till this day had in great reputation, and honored as gods, to the great decay and vndoing of all Christian common-weales: that learning to know them, and strip∣ping them out off their clokes of piety & godlinesse, wher∣of they haue gotten speciall commendation, they may ba∣nish them all Christendome ouer. But as for any examples whereof I mean presently to make rehearsall, they are ta∣ken out of one onely Court of the Inquisition holden at Siuill, whose secrets alone the reporters hereof were able
to disclose, hauing had the most part of them practised vp∣on themselues, By relation whereof, a man may haue a pretty gess, what a number there would be if a man should likewise course ouer all the other Courts of Inquisition throughout the whole realme of Spaine. Neither are these that hereafter ensue, or the other reported before in my whole treatise, of any long collection: but all within the compasse of 6. or 7. yeares next after they began to perse∣cute the Lutherans that grew vp in Spaine in great multi∣tudes vpon a suddaine, especially in Siuill and Valladolit. About wch time there was apprehended for religion, and brought before the Inquisitors of Siuill, a certaine En∣glishman whose name was Nicholas Burton, a very godly man, whom afterward they burned for that he continued constant in his profession & belief, detesting vtterly all their wicked & abominable religion vntill his liues end. Imme∣diately after his arrest, all the goods and Marchandise which he brought with him into Spain by way of traffick, were according to their common vsage seased and taken into the Sequester: among the which they also rolled vp much that appertained to another English Marchant, wherewith hee was credited as Factour. Whereof so soone as newes was brought to London, aswell of the imprisonment of his Factour, as of the Arrest made vpon his goods, hee sent his Atturney into Spaine with autho∣ritie from him to make claime to his goods, and demand them. When his Atturney was landed at Siuill, and had shewed all his letters and writings to the holy House, requiring them, that such goods might bee deliuered in∣to his possession, answer was made him, that hee must sue by bill, and retaine an Aduocate (but all was doubt∣lesse to delay him) and they, forsooth, of curtesie assig∣ned him one to frame his supplication for him, and other such billes of petition as hee had to exhibite into their holy Court, demanding for each bill eight rialls, albeit they stood him in no more stead than if hee had put vp
none at all. And for the space of three or four moneths this fellow missed not twice a day, attending euery mor∣ning and afternoon at the Inquisitors Palace, suing vnto them vpon his knees for his dispatch, but specially to the Bishop of Tarracon of whom I made mention before, who was at that very me chief in the Inquisition at Siuill, that he of his absolute authoritie would command restitution to be made therof: but the booty was so good & so great, that it was the harder to come by it againe. At the length, after he had spet whole four moneths in sutes & requests, & all to no purpose, he receiued this answer frō them, that he must shew better euidence, & bring more sufficient cer∣tificates out of England for proofe of his matter, than those which he hath already presented to the Court. Wher∣upon the party forthwith posted to London, and with all speed returned to Siuill againe with more ample and large letters testimonialls and certificates, according to their re∣quest, and exhibited them to the Court. Notwithstanding, the Inquisitors stil shifted him off, excusing themselues by lack of leisure, & by occupation in greater & more weigh∣ty affaires, and with such answers delayed him whole other 4. moneths after. At the last, when the party had welnigh spent all his money, and therefore sued the more earnestly for his dispatch, they referred the matter wholly to the Bi∣shop. Of whom, when hee repaired vnto him, hee had this answer: that for himselfe hee knew what hee had to doe: howbeit hee was but one man, and the determina∣tion of the matter appertained vnto the other commissio∣ners aswell as vnto him: and by thus posting & passing it from one to another, the partie could obtain no end of his sute. Yet for his importunitie sake, they were resolued to dispatch him, but it was on this sort: One of the In∣quisitours called Licentiato Gasco, a man verie well expe∣rienced in these practices, willed the party to resort vnto him after dinner. The fellow being glad to hear this newes▪ and supposing that his goods should be restored vnto him,
and that he was called in for that purpose to talk with the other that were in prison, to confer with him about their accounts, the rather through a little misunderstanding, hea∣ring the Inquisitor cast out a word, that it should be need∣full for him to talk with the prisoner; and being thereup∣on more than halfe perswaded, that at the length they meant good faith, did so, and repaired thither about the euening. Immediately vpon his comming, the Iayler was forthwith charged with him, to shut him vp close in such a certain prisō, where they appointed him. The party ho∣ping at the first that he had bin called for about some other matter, and seeing himselfe contrary to his expectation, cast into a dark dungeon, perceiued at the length that the world went with him far otherwise then hee supposed it would haue done. But within two or three dayes after, he was brought forth into the Court, where hee began to de∣mand his goods: and because it was a deuice that well ser∣ued their turne, without any more circumstance they bid him say his Aue Maria. The party began, and said it sim∣ply and plainely on this sort, after the English fashion: Aue Maria gratia plena dominiu tecum, benedictatu in mulie∣ribus, & benedictus fructus ventris tui Iesus. Amen. The same was written word by word as hee spake it: and without anie more talke of claiming his goods, because it was bootelesse, they command him to prison againe, and enter an action against him as an hereticke, foras∣much as hee did not say his Aue Maria after the Romish fashion, but ended it very suspiciously; for hee should haue added moreouer Sancta Maria mater dei ora pro nobis peccatoribus: by curtalling whereof, it was euident enough (say they) that hee did not allow the mediation of Saints. Thus they picked a quarrell to detaine him in prison a longer season, and afterwards brought him forth into their Stage disguised after their maner: where sen∣tence was giuen, that hee should lose all the goods which he sued for, though they were not his owne, & besides this
suffer a yeares imprisonment. His name was Iohn Framton a citizen of Bristow. In the confiscation of goods, it is neither any great noueltie, nor a thing so rarely seene in this holy House, that strangers goods should bee also seised among other mens. Otherwise (say they) it might easily bee wrought, if they should giue eare or credit to such allegations, that manie by meanes thereof might colour their goods vnder ano∣ther mans name, and by some false and forged Certifi∣cates proue them to appertaine to other men, and so de∣fraud the Kings Eschecquer. For remedy whereof, and for the better auoiding of all couerts & collusions, the ho∣ly House thinketh it the safer way to offer wrong than to suffer any. As within these few yeares there arriued at Si∣uill a certaine rich Marchant stranger, whose goods were afterwaad confiscate for religion. Among the which they seised a very faire and a goodly ship, such one, as by all mens iudgements, there neuer rode a better nor a fairer vpon the riuer. The party brought sufficient proofe that the ship was none of his owne, & yet notwithstanding the Inquisitours found a meanes that the law went on their sides, so that the ship fell out in triall to be theirs. And this Marchants name was Reuchino. Moreouer, in the same Court of Inquisition at Siuill, there was one of the Citizens, a verie godly and a vertuous man, seuerely persecuted by the Inquisitours for religion, howbeit not executed therefore. And a∣mong other of his punishments, this was one peece: that all his goods whereon hee liued and maintained himselfe, reasonably well and honestly among his neighbours, should bee wholly consiscate, and he com∣mitied to close prison for tenne yeares. Wherein, after he had remained by the space of two or three daies, liuing there full barely (God wot) of a poor stock, that diuers wel disposed persons had gathered for him of their deuotion, hauing somtine liued in reasonable good estate; one of the
Notaries of the Inquisition, came vnto him with a bill signed and subscribed by the Inquisitours, charging him to pay to the Notaries hands 130. ducates for his com∣mons and other expenses, during the time of his aboad in Triana their prison for the Inquisition. The partie made answer (as the truth was) that those good Fathers had taken from him all that euer he had, so that nothing was left him; and where nothing was, they could haue no∣thing. Howbeit this answer contented not the Inquisi∣tours, but they sent the Notarie vnto him once againe, straitly charging him either to pay the mony out of hand, or else to bee remoued from that priuate place, and car∣ried to the common iayle, and there to remaine till he had discharged it. What mad fooles were these, to confiscate all his goods, and charge themselues by account for them into the Eschequer, not foreseeing to demand allowance for his charges? About the same time wel-neer, the House of the Inquisi∣tion at Siuill apprehended a certaine noble woman, whose name was Ioanna Bohorquia, the Lady and wife of one Fran∣cisco Varquio, a noble gentleman, and baron of Higuera, daughter to one Pedro Garsia Xeresio a very rich Citizen of Siuill. The cause of her trouble was, for that a sister of hers called Maria Bohorquia, a very vertuous virgine, and one that afterwards was burned for her profession and faith, had confessed in the extreamitie of her torments, that she had conference with her sister in these matters of religion diuers times. This Lady, when shee was first committed to prison, was gone with childe well-nigh halfe a yeare: in respect whereof, neyther did they shut her vp so close, nor dealt with her otherwise so hardly, as they vsed to deale with others, for the regard of that that was within her. Notwithstanding, within foure dayes after her deliuerance, they tooke the childe away from her, and the seuenth day next after, they shut her vp in close prison againe, entreating her in all things as they did the other
prisoners, and with as much cruelty as they vsed to any: in so much that in all her miseries the only comfort that she had, was, of the good company of a certaine vertuous maiden that was her fellow prisoner for a time, but after∣wardes sent to the stake. Vnto whom she bare such good will, that being on a time caried foorth to the racke, & re∣caried to prison, sore strained thereon and so shaken in peeces, that hauing a bed of flags which serued them both to couch on, more painefull a great deale then easefull, whereon shee tumbled her selfe so well as shee could (though hardly God knowes, and to her great paine and griefe) the good Lady being not in case able to do her any other good, yet did shee inwardly shew singular tokens of loue and compassion towards her. The same maid was scarse recouered, or her ioynts well knit againe, but the said Lady was likewise caried out to bee serued in the same sort, & was so terribly tormented in the Burrie & Trough, that by reason of the exceding strait straining of the strings pearcing to the very bones of her arms, thighes, & shinnes, she was carried to prison halfe dead and more, the bloud gushing out of her mouth amaine, and in so great abun∣dance, that it could not bee otherwise, but that somewhat was broken within her body: but after 8. daies God deli∣uered her from these rauening Lions, and set her with himselfe in euerlasting rest and peace. The bruit of which fact the Inquisitours laboured earnestly to suppresse, lest it should be noised abroad among the common people, that they had so villanously torne in peeces this tender Lady vpon the racke: but the beholders of this their tyranny could not hold it in. Now surely, if shee had been a witch, or a traitor to her husband, or a murderer of her owne children, and the temporall Magistrate had dealt so with her to make her confesse these horible factes, what time hee were to giue vp his accompts (as the maner is) hee should pay for it full dearely, if so bee that hee had thus cruelly and without all reason entreated any person what∣soeuer.
Yet the holy House is not to yeeld accompt of any such matters, but may racke to death euen such, whom they themselues after more precise and exact proofe, do ac∣quit for innocents, and escape scotfree therfore, as it came to pass in the example of this vertuous lady. For being one of such estate, and of so good name and fame that they must necessarily yeld some accompt of her case vnto the common people, and were destitute of proofes sufficient (though they had left no deuice or policy vnpracti∣sed, that they could imagine) seeing the matter so appa∣rant to all the world, that by no meanes it could bee dissembled: therefore the very first day of their next Triumph, they caused their sentence which they had giuen vpon her, to be openly read there vnto the people one this wise: Forasmuch as this Lady died in prison (without shewing how or by what meanes I warrant you) and vpon diligent hearing and consideration of her cause, is found innocent: therefore the holy house doth wholly acquit and discharge her of all suites and quarrels commenced against her by the Fiscal, and doth restore her to her former estate of estimation and honour, absoluing her clearely from all guilt and crime: and thereupon doo command, that restitution be made of all such goods as were seised into the Sequester, vnto the hands of such persons as haue right and title thereunto, &c. Thus, after that they had most beastly murdered her on the rack, they made her this goodly amends, to denounce her not guilty. God will one day (no doubt) aske an accompte of this their beastly and barbarous tyranny, sith they maintaine it by the same power and authoritie in earth, which he hath ordeined, for the reuenge of these and such like iniuries. Notwithstanding, not long after it happened, that the holie house was aduised and fully bent to lay their baites and spread their nets in certaine quarters there: but if they had not vpon better aduisement afterward wound them vp againe, they themselues vnawares had giuen Rome
such a gird, as I beleeue all the Lutherans hitherto haue not giuen it a greater. And thus it was. There were certain persons, that were much more busie than I beleeue they had thanke for, which found great fault with a foule companie Monkes and other religious men, for abusing their auricular Confession; vnder the colour thereof, masking with honest matrons and maydens that resorted vnto them, making it a meanes to breake their sutes by, and to compasse their purposes. The which thing the holy House thought indeede worthie of consideration and redresse. But forasmuch as it was a hard to know who were these wooers and brokers, where none was appea∣ched specially and by name (as it happeneth in a matter wherein a multitude offendeth) they caused proclama∣tion to bee made throughout all the Churches within the prouince of Siuill verie solemnly, that whosoeuer knew of their owne certaine knowledge, or had heard by report of others, of anie Monkes or other religious or spiritu∣all persons (as they call them) that had abused their holy sacrament of Confession, to anie such abominable actes or enterprises, or that anie other ghostly Father had dealt in anie such like sort with anie of his shrift children, that euerie such person and persons priuie to anie such matters, should come in within thirtie dayes, & signifie it to the holy House of Inquisition; enioining moreouer, verie great penalties for such as should refuse or contemne to come in accordingly, and to make declaration, what they were able to say: The proclamation was no sooner made and published, but there came such a num∣ber of women, onely inhabitants within the citie of Si∣uill, to complaine of their ghostly Fathers, that twentie Notaries, and as many Inquisitors would not haue sufficed to take the names of such as came in and entred their com∣plaints: wherfore the Inquisitors, hauing more to doe than well they could dispatch, gaue them other thirtie dayes come in and doe the like. But because so little time
would not serue (they came in so thick) they gaue them so much more respite againe the third time: and after that the fourth, and there they were enformed to lay a straw. For very many honest matrons and of good calling, partly of a foolish feare and superstition, lest they should bee ex∣communicated, and partly in respect of their husbands whom they were loth to offend and bring into a iealousie or suspicion of their honesties, kept themselues at home, thinking to espie better some oportunitie to speake with the Inquisitours apart. Whereupon they they attired them∣selues with vailes or mufflers after the maner of their country, & went to the holy house as priuily as they could. Notwithstanding, their husbands did so narrowly watch them during all the time of this appeaching, that they could not possibly passe so priuily but diuers of them were espi∣ed, whereby they occasioned their husbands vehemently to suspect their honesties. On the other side, it was a iolly sport to see the Monkes and Friers and Priests goe vp and downe hanging downe their heads, all in dump and me∣lancholly, by meanes of their guiltie consciences, quaking and trembling, and looking euery howre when some of the Familiars should take them by the sleeue, & call them in Coram for these matters. Insomuch that a number feared lest as great a plague were come among them, as the perse∣cution that was so hot about that time against the Luthe∣rans. But the Inquisitours perceiuing that these matters thus purposed, would sound not onely to the great hin∣derance of themselues, but also turne to the decay of the whole Church of Rome, and that this onely enter∣prise of theirs, if it should goe on and take effect, would bee enough to bring all their spiritualtie into vtter hatred & obloquie, but specially tend to the discredit of their au∣ricular confession, which began alreadie to be but of small account, although it was a matter that otherwise deserued both straitly to be examined, and seuerely to be punished: yet did they in time take it vp, and made a stay there∣in,
contrary to all mens expectations: winding vp all these matters, whereof the Court was now orderly and lawfully seised. And as the report was, the Monkes and Priests made a common purse, & with a good round summe grea∣sed the Pope in the hand, so that he was content to grant a general pardon to all the whole company of Confessors, of his fatherly love and affection towards them, remitting all offences done or committed by them, & commanding the Inquisitours to surcease from proceeding any further, but wholly to suppress such things as were passed alreadie, not suffering them in anie case to come to light. Howbeit those that are priuy to the Inquisitours dealings, say it is an vnlikely matter, affirming, that if the Pope should make any such grant, yet is the holy Inquisition of such preemi∣nence, that if they take in hand any matter of weight, they will not surcease vpon the Popes inhibition or countermanding, and that it is oftener seene, that their au∣thoritie preuaileth against the Popes, than his against them, as by this example following may more plainely appeare. Not passing two yeares before this, the Bishop of Rome had by a like foolish part and vnawares cut the Inquisitors combes, by publishing a generall Iubily, which they call a generall charter of pardon, for the safetie of all Christen∣dome, because Christ belike did not sufficiently prouide therefore, besides a number of other pardons & indulgen∣ces for such as were suspected to be Lutherans: so cunning∣ly can this fellow make a gaine of the Gospel to himselfe. And wheras he cannot auoid the dart that Christ hath sent into the world to plague him withall, but that he must be stricken therwith, he ceaseth not to turn it some way to his owne aduantage. The words of the pardon were these: That whoso in time past had been a Lutheran, and would forsake that sect, might be absolued thereof by his ghostly father. An old deuice of the diuell, that in as much as there arose about the same time great trouble in Spaine, but spe∣cially
in Siuill the chiefe city thereof, and that a number of∣fended therein, and began now to shrink from them, they might the more quietly and with lesse danger keepe them in obedience, going about to win them by a kinde of cle∣mencie and mercie, though fained and counterfait, rather then by dealing with them straitly or seuerely. Howbeit, here was nothing found fault withall saue only the preiu∣dicing of the holy House, whereof as it seemed, the Pope had no great regard. Whereupon, they of the Inquisition being somwhat moued, by reason that that one only clause had lost them a good booty, contemned the Popes pardon, & resisted it with might and maine, commanding peremp∣torily, that no such pardon should be published, as should turne the holy House to any preiudice: by meanes wherof neither was it receiued ne proclaimed. Loe, heer may a man see Sathan diuided against himselfe, and perceiue thereby, that this denying of the Popes absolute authoritie, which these good gentlemen punish in others with fire & sword, as being a necessary article of our beliefe, is but a nose of waxe, which they turne what way they list: so that it ser∣ueth them rather in stead of a trap to entangle vs withall, then accounted of as an article of our faith, in the obser∣uation whereof consisteth our saluation. The propertie of euerie tyrant is, specially to hate both mercie and truth, and to vse all crueltie and extremity that may be: or else to seek vtterly to be hated, when he seeth there is none other meanes to vphold him. As it was said sometime by one: Whom men fear, they doe but hate. And truly, if a man be disposed to mark them well, he shall easily perceiue, that there hath bin hitherto no tyrant, that hath more duely obserued these lawes, nor executed them more cruelly, than this holy House hath done, deuising to doe all iniury and extremity that possibly they can, onely to bring men in feare and awe of them: so that they seem to desire nothing so much as this; that all men may fear them, hate them who dare, forasmuch as they punish trifling to ye,
and matters of no importance, yea such as are scarce blame∣worthy, most seuerely and beyond all measure, as by the examples here ensuing may appeare most manifestly. At what time their Church was in so good and quiet estate, that the Inquisitors had leisure enough to take their pleasure abroad, it chanced that the Bishop of Tarracon high commissioner in the Inquisition at Siuill (of whose holinesse I haue made mention before) walked in a sum∣mers day for his recreation by the sweet gardens that stand by the Riuer Guadalqueuir, accompanied with all his traine and in his state as he was wont at diuers other times to do. Hard vpon the banke of a certaine pond that was in the same garden, where my Lord Bishop at that time was re∣creating himselfe, by chance there sat a little child playing, that was the gardiners sonne, not passing two or three yeares of age, out of whose hands one of the Inquisitours Pages hapned to snatch a reede wherewith the child was making himselfe sport, as children are wont to doe, by meanes whereof the child cryed after his reede. Tke fa∣ther hearing the child cry, came straight-way to know the cause, and vnderstanding it, was somewhat offended there∣withall, & prayed the Bishops Page to giue the little child his reed againe: but because he made little account of the gardiners words, proudly scorning and disdaining the poore man, he offred to snatch it from him, and by reason that he held somewhat hard, a shiuer of the reed raced the Pages hand. It was no deaths wound I wis, nor any great maime, such as should deserue anie great punishment, but only a small scratch, like as a broken reed could make; I wot not well what to make of it, nor how to describe it: such a thing as the verie childe would haue made no mone for. The Page yet goeth to his Lord that walked not far off, to make complaint of this bloudshed. Whose Lordship commanded, that the gardiner should bee taken immediately and carried to Triana, where hee was laden with irons, and there continued by the space of nine mo∣neths,
and in the end lost that little that hee had: which was not much God knows, and yet a hard thing for the poor man to recouer and get before hand againe, his wife and children perhaps staruing in the mean time. And all this was only because he had no speciall regard to the Bi∣shops Page, in forbearing him as a member of the holy House: but after the 9. moneths hee released him, making him beleeue, that he had dealt with him in much more gentle and mild sort, than his case deserued. There was also in Siuill a certaine poore man that la∣boured for his owne liuing, and for his whole familie full duely and truely, and with the sweat of his browes, whose wife a certaine Church-man kept against his will, and neyther the holy Inquisition, nor anie other Court would punish this villanie. This poore man on a time being among his companions, where one of the compa∣nie ministred talke about purgatorie, and happened to take his tale by the end, of meer simplicitie, rather then of anie malice, and to say, that hee had purgatorie enough for his share in that a vile knaue kept his wife from him perforce, &c. the which talke comming to the good Priests eare, gaue him matter enough to worke vpon, and to procure the poore man a double displeasure. Whereupon he accu∣sed him to the holy House, as one holding an euill opini∣on of purgatorie. And they thought this a great deale more heynous offence, than the wicked fact of the Priest. For the poore soule for this onely offence was taken and thrust into prison, where he remained two whole yeares together, and at the length was brought vpon the stage, and had iudgement to wear the Sambenite, by the space of of 3. yeares more, in some priuate place of imprisonment; and after that time expired, to be dismissed or further retai∣ned as the Inquisitours should thinke good. Neither did they leaue him any one groat of all his poore substance, as they did let the Priest alone with his harlot: but notwith∣standing his long imprisonmēt, did likewise confiscate that
little that was renaining. Behold, this is the Spanish Inqui∣sition, which so stoutly maintaineth the Christian faith, purgeth religion of heresies, and persecuteth the teachers thereof. Moreouer, there was at Saint Lucars a certain stranger, howbeit such a one as had remained in Spaine by the space of twentie yeares, who of a very blind superstition dwelt in a wildernesse within a Chappell: where hearing it reported on a time, that a great number of Lutherans were dayly apprehended at Siuill by the Inquisitours, and that they had made an edict, whereby commandement was giuen vnder paine of excommunication, that euerie man should repaire to the holy House with all speede, and declare to the holy Inquisition whatsoeuer hee knew ey∣ther by himselfe, or by anie other, concerning anie of these aforesaid matters (for the Inquisitours meant speciall fauour to such, as voluntarily would come in and accuse themselues) this doltish Hermite came to Siuill, went to the holy House, and accused himselfe before the Inqui∣sitours. The matter was, for that hee being sometime at Geneua, had heard a certaine Frier dispute of such mat∣ters, namely, of Iustificatiō by faith in Christ, of purgatory, and such other like, and liked thereof verie well, though afterward since that time hee gaue no great heede to them, nor greatly remembred them, and therefore came now to confesse his fault, and to craue their pardon. But as soon as the Inquisitors had heard his confession (perhaps to fill vp some emptie room in their iayle, or to make vp their tale, wanting an odde man, they sent the Hermite to prison, where after he had remained a space, they brought him out vpon the stage, and there gaue sentence vpon him to weare the Sambenite, and to suffer three moneths impri∣sonment, and to forfait all his goods. So shamelesse (Loe) are these shauelings, that they can play such prettie pranks openly, and so seuerely punish these trifles euen in their owne darlings.
There issued also in the selfe same Triumph a certaine honest man a Citizen of Siuill, without eyther cap or cloke hauing a taper in his hand, of whom they exacted, after he had bin imprisoned a whole year together, a hundred du∣cates to wards the charges of the Inquisition. The cause of his trouble was, for saying, that these outragious expenses bestowed in the erecting of those curious monuments (as they unproperly tearm them) made of paper & wickers on holy Thursday to Christ that is in Heauen, as also the o∣ther, that are spent on corpus Christiday (as they of Siuill are marueilous excessiue that way) should be more acceptable in the sight of God, if they were bestowed vpon the poore in almes, or in the bestowing of poore and fatherlesse maydens in mariage. For the which words the partie was both punished in this sort; and as one suspected for a Lu∣theran, abiured de vehementi. Also at the selfe same time, and in the verie same Tri∣umph there was a certaine poore man brought before the people, who on a time as there chanced a quarrell to arise betwixt him and a Priest of Eciia a citie in Granata, hap∣ned to say of the Priest in presence of other, that hee could not be perswaded, that euer God would come downe into the hands of that most abominable adulterer. For the wch saying, the Ordinaries deputie had punished this poore man, howbeit the Priest held not himselfe content therewithall, but did afterwards before the Inqui∣sitours lay blasphemie to his charge: who not with stan∣ding his former punishment, commanded him to be shut vp close for a yeare, and at the end thereof, caused him to be brought out before the people in their solemne Tri∣umph without eyther cloke or cap, with a taper in his hand, hauing a barnacle clapped vpon his tongue, to re∣uenge the blasphemie that he had vttered, and so was abiu∣red de leui. Among the rest, there were also two brought into the stage at the same time, both young men and students: The
one for writing in his tables certaine verses, the author wherof was vnknowne: which were so cunningly contri∣ued, that they seemed to sound both wayes, eyther to the great praise or dispraise of Luther, as it pleased the reader to construe them: for the which onely cause hee endured a whole yeares imprisonment, and was afterwards brought vpon the scaffeld in his hose and dublet, bare-headed with a waxe taper in his hand, and banished Siuill and the sub∣urbes thereof for 3. yeares space, and abiured de leui. The other onely for taking a copy of those verses, liking them well for the deuice sake and prettie inuention, had the like iudgement, saue only that in stead of banishment, he paid 100. ducates towards the charges of the holy House. With such examples as these be, a man might easily fill whole volumes, but that I suppose these to bee sufficient which are already reported, to occupy mens eares withal, that they may vnderstand & see a great sort of more strange parts than these, which the holy House playeth dayly, whereby appeareth most manifesty, by what spirit they are guided and gouerned in all their doings, and what their intent is, and how good their title i whereby they claime and challenge to the place it selfe the name of the holy House, to themselues the titles of holy Fathers and Patròne of the Faith: where with they haue bleared mens eyes hi∣therto: so that it is easie for euerie man to iudge whether Christian godlinesse. & the true knowledge and worship∣ping of God, with the kingdome of Christ (the perfect comfort of all good men) be by these meanes encreased & enlarged, or rather not destroied, scattered and subuerted▪ and Sathans kingdome that is built vpon lyes, wrought with craft and subtiltie, vp holden and maintained by cru∣eltie, robberie, and murther of many good & godly men; whether I say it be not hereby more amplified & enlarged.
CHAP. XV. Certaine speciall treatises vpon diuers godly Martyrs of Christ, who dying very constantly like good Chrstians for the profession of the Gospel, yet the Inquisitors notwith∣standing deuised to defame and slander them with Apostacie and reuolting. THe Inquisitours thinke it not sufficient to execute such by most cruell death, as contemning all their ty∣rannie, remaine firme and constant in the profession of the Gospel of Christ, before their faces and in open Court, but seek by all meanes possible as much as lieth in them, vtterly to extinguish in them the life of their soules, which is Christ lesus dwelling in their hearts by faith, of whom they haue declared themselues to be faithfull Confessours as well at their death as in their life: For when they see all their poli∣ces void and to haue none effect, because Christ taketh in∣to his mightie protection and safegard all his seruants, so that no man is able to take them out of his hands (as he saith himselfe) then deuise they meanes to rob them as much as in them lyeth of their name and renowne of con∣stancie, by scattering abroad false tales and misreports of them after their deaths, yea sometimes ere they be dead, as they stand vpon the stage, clapping their engines vpon their tongues, because they should not contrarie them, re∣porting by them, that they haue forsaken their former faith, and returned to the Romish religion. And this is a double deuice of the diuels owne brain, for two speciall considerations, which doe euidently proue that they are assisted by his wicked spirit. For hereby they doe not onely rob the Martyrs themselues of their due de∣serued praise for their constancie and perseuerance: but al∣so the Church of Christ is spoiled of those examples, wherin she should otherwise reioice, in making her recko∣ning. Therefore sith that in diuers Acts of faith (as they tearm them) they haue dealt in this sort with diuers,
of whose constancie God hath many wayes assured vs: it will be expedient that vnto this former treatise I doe also adde these seuerall and particular histories, to the intent that the honour and estimation that is due to good and godly Martyrs, may be yeelded vnto them accordingly, & the Church like wise reioice as she hath good cause: lastly, that the memorie of them may be preserued and kept, both to the glorie of God, the increase of his Church, and the vtter shame and confusion of this their holy House. Iohn Pontio de Leon. IN the first session holden at Siuill against the Professours of Christian religion (whom they call Lutherans) there was brought forth in the triumph at the same time, one Iohn Pontio de Leon, sonne to Rhoderico Pontio de Leon Earle of Ba∣len, borne of a noble House, and a very good gospeller, as well for his learning and knowledge, as for the practice thereof, with the continuance of many yeares, as I my selfe am able to make report for the great familiaritie and acquaintance that I had with him a long season, and there∣fore (if need were) could giue a true and a faithfull testi∣monie thereof (before God I speake it) but that all that euer knew him, or that had occasion to marke his con∣uersation, will with one consent (I dare say) testifie the same. Among other vertues that appeared to bee in him vnsainedly and without hypocrisie, he was singular in one thing, in that he had an exceeding loue & compassion to∣wards his poor & needy brethrē: insomuch that being left very wealthie by his father, able to continue that port that his Ancestors kept, fell by such meanes almost into starke beggery: howbeit such as was to him neither noisome nor grieuous. Not with standing, diuers haue giuen their blind and foolish verdits of him therefore, attributing that to fol∣ly & prodigalitie, which he did of a rare & singular vertue. But since he liued so well that none could iustly so much
as suspect any euill example of life to be in him, and many were in their extremities relieued by his goodnesse: be∣sides this, accepted in so good part his poor & hard estate, as by all mens iudgements he did very patiently, and in such sort as a great deale meaner men would scarce haue taken a farre better estate than hee was in; these things must needs be euident proofes of a singular grace of God to be in him, and such a perfect kind of vertue as was void of all hypocrisie. Yet in recompence of that singular pitty & compassion which he shewed in this world towards o∣thers, he was apprehended by the Inquisitours for profes∣sing the Gospel, and after he had manfully maintained his quarrell against their malicious falshoods during the time of his imprisonment (which was the space of two or three moneths) whether it were the very extremitie of their tor∣ments that enforced him, or their faire and flattering pro∣mises of safetie and deliuerance that allured him, but hee shrunke at the length and yeelded, where erst hee was in∣uincible, stooping and submitting himselfe to the obedi∣ence of the Romish Church. The first that euer enticed him so shamefully to reuolt, was one of these stinging and venemous flies whom they had cast into prison with him in maner as hath beene already declared: who being a man verie well learned, and besides that a deepe dissem∣bler, did rather by his cunning enchantments bewitch him, than by any force of reasons disswade or seduce him. Howbeit though God suffered him so to fall for a while, that hee might somewhat vnderstand the frailtie of man, and sensibly feele it in himselfe, yet still remembring his owne word and promise, that none shall take anie of his flocke from vnder his hands, did not long time thus leaue him to himselfe, but raising him vp againe most mightily, restored vnto him the double strength that he had before. For the very night immediately before his exe∣cution hee did most manfully defend the truth against his Confessor in the hearing of diuers as well prisoners, as al∣so
the Officers of the holy House: for at such times, their confession is not meer auricular: insomuch that being demanded by the Priest whether he would bee shriuen or no, where before the time of his apprehension and impri∣sonment hee vsed commonly to goe to shrift, he now re∣fused, rebuking the Priest for his labour. And being vr∣ged with his former doings, answered, that hee did it to serue the weaknesse of his brethren, and for feare of offence to them that as yet were not proceeded so farre, and yet made his choice of his ghostly father; so as his shrift was more like a godly collation, than a popish confession: Ma∣ry now (saith he) as the case standeth there needeth no such yeelding. The next day, when sentence was pronounced vpon him, were openly read these articles among others, for the which he was chiefly and principally condemned. First that he should say, that hee from the bottome of his heart abhorred the Idolatrie that was committed in the a∣doration of the bread, & therfore so oft as it was his chance to meet it, being caried abroad to sick persons, hee eyther turned some other by-way, and auoided it, or else hasted so that he forewent it, because he should otherwise haue bin enforced to doe vnto it some kinde of worship or honour; and at many times chancing to bee in the high Quier, would turne his backe because hee would not behold the eleuation, and for the most part vsed to goe to the place where execution was accustomably done, (like as was Smithfield here in London) and there would walk a good sort of turnes, to the end, that by continuall meditation of the martyrdome, but specially of that faithfull and glori∣ous confession, which the wicked of this world by force and tyranny caused the godly there to make vnto Christ (by thus acquainting himselfe with the place) hee might be the more emboldned, looking one day to be called thither, and so should in the meane time prepare himselfe, patiently to take it when it came. Likewise, at such times as by order he should receiue his Maker (as they say) he v∣sed
to remoue his houshold, and to send them to some o∣ther place, making them beleeue at their returne that hee had so done, because they should not be offended to see him take such libertie. But the effect of his confession moreouer was this: that the iustification of a Christian man resteth only in the merirs of Iesus Christ through on∣ly faith in him, and that other purgatory there was none. As for the Popes pardons and indulgences, they were but meer parchment and lead, & he very Antichrist, &c. con∣cerning my selfe (saith he) I am not only willing, but desi∣rous to dye & ready to suffer any other punishment for this truth which I haue confessed, esteeming of this world and the treasures thereof in none other respect, then for my ne∣cessary vses, to serue my necessity, and the rest to bestow in the maintenance and setting forward of the same doctrine which I haue of late professed: & therefore I beseech God dayly vpon my knees both for my wife and children, that they may all continue in this quarrell to the very death. Howbeit the holy House labored earnestly by all means, to depraue him, & therwithall, to depriue him of the due cō∣mendation for that notable cōfession made by him, sprea∣ding abroad false tales of his fall and departure from his late profession, most spightfully and maliciously. Notwith∣standing I am able in few words to confute them, euen by this one argument, that in the exemplifications wch they caused to be made of such matters as were done and passed in that act or session, being not very circumspect, they haue vnawares told the plaine truth themseluesgoing about to set out the offences & punishments of this good man, con∣tained in these words, which are extant vnto this day: Iohn Pontio de Leon was burned as an Obstinate Lutheran hereticke. The which word of it selfe, to such as doubt of the parties constancie, is occasion sufficient to suspect the Inquisitors craftie and deceitfull dealing. But as for vs, his good conuersation, whereof diuers can bear witnesse, hath credit and perswasion enough of itselfe.
Iohn Gonsalue a Preacher. THere was executed likewise, at the same time & Tri∣umph, a certaine Preacher that some time had been a Priest, but at that time no great Clerke: yet afterwards a man of very godly life and conuersation, and one that be∣came very well learned in the scriptures, whence onely hee learned true Godlinesse, giuing ouer all that Sophisticall and Dunsicall diuinitie, wherein hee had spent a great deale of time very idly. In all his sermons hee bent his whole force to beatinto mens mindes the true way and meanes of our Iustification to consist in Christ alone, and in stedfast faith in him, all the merits of man quite aban∣doned and set apart. His name was Iohn Gonsalue. But of such profession, there could ensue none other effect than did. As for his confession, by the Inquisitours owne reports, it was all one with the former that Iohn Pon∣tio made, so that it fell out accordingly, that as before times they were ioined together in familiaritie and friend∣ship, they should also now bee linked together in like pro∣fession, and make the like ends. Howbeit the night before his death, preparing himself to dye, he suffered a great con∣flict with his Confessours; whom notwitstanding after much adoo on both sides, hee sent away with shame e∣nough. And at his departure out of the Castle Triana, to∣wards the scaffold, accompanied with two of his owne si∣sters that went to the same feast that he did, leauing also behind him two of his brethren, whereof the e and his mother were in like case executed at the next act, yet did he shew himselfe to be of a notable courage & constancy. For at the very first step, issuing out of the castle gate and standing in the full view of all the people, which had heard him at diuers times make very many godly sermons, e be∣gan with a loud voice to recite the 106. Psal. Deus laudem mea ne tacueris, &c. cursing & condemning all hypocrits as the worst sort of people that were. Neither changed he
his countenance any thing at all after hee was mounted vpon the stage, albeit they had stocked his tongue; because he began somewhat to comfort one of his sisters, whom he knew to be tender of nature, exhorting her to constan∣cie and perseuerance. Also when his sentence was in rea∣ding he gaue very good eare vnto it, being nothing there∣withall dismaied, eyther at the degradation, whereunto they setled themselues after their maner very solemnly, or at the putting on of such ornaments and ensignes as were appointed for him & his mates. The which things tho they seemed in the eyes of the world very odious, & much founding to his rebuke and infamie, yet in the sight of God and his Angels, were beautifull (no doubt) and glo∣rious. To wit: they despoiled him of those vile and wic∣ked Massing robes, and arayed him with a Sambenite, a cope, and a paper hatte. But night drawing on, and such as should suffer being come into the place of execution, they were all commanded to say their Credo, the which each of them did seuerally: and when they came to that article: I beleeue the holy Catholick Church, they were also commanded to adde therunto the Church of Rome. But there they staied all at once. Then were the Monkes and Friers in hand with Iohn Gonsalues sisters and other women then presently to be executed, that they would adde it in their belief, and in that article put in the Church of Rome. Who answered, that they would doe as Iohn Gonsalue did, not because they depended vpon him, or were doubtfull eyther what to say themselues, or else what he would doe, but to the intent that his tongue might by that meanes bee loosed, that hee might declare his minde as well con∣cerning that article, as the rest of his whole beliefe. Whereupon hauing his tongue at liberty, like a good and godly schoolmaister he comforted them, willing them to be of good cheer, & told them there was no more to be ad∣ded. Immediatly after this confession thus by them made, they broke their necks with a trice, ere the fire were kind∣led,
and forthwith began to noise abroad, that they had added those words of the Romish Church in that article of their beliefe, accordingly as they were willed to doe, and so departed, acknowleding and confessing the Church of Rome to be the true and Catholick Church. Of foure women of Siuil. IN the congregation at Siuill, which the Inquisitours had wellnigh consumed by fire, among those that had been a long time professours of the truth, there were foure wo∣men most notable and famous aboue the rest, for their good & godly conuersation. That is to say: Isabella Vaenia, Maria Viroesia, Cornelia, and one Bohorquia youngest of the four: for she was scarcely 21. years of age, & yet for vertu∣ous conuersation comparable to her other fellowes: but in the knowledge of holy Scriptures, which shee had got∣ten by continuall reading, and studying, and conference with godly and learned men (whereof there were in Si∣uill a great number at that time) shee became so singular, that shee did not onely farre exceede and surpasse her fel∣lowes, but many of our Maisters that are taken for great learned Clerkes, whom in the time of her imprisonment shee draue oftentimes to the wall, by their owne confessi∣on, and made them ashamed of themselues. But Vaenia the first woman was a Matron for maners, and her house a Schoole of vertue, and a place of resort, where the congre∣gation assembled to sing Psalms and hymnes to God both day and night. Nothing was there prophaned, nothing done of hypocrisie and dissimulation, all was pure & per∣fect religion. At the last, the time being come that God had appointed for them, to bee made ready and ripe for him, and so to be both apt and able professors of his name and truth, the Inquisitors sent for them, & at one draught caught these foure with diuers other of their neigh∣bours. The first thing that occasioned this Bohorquia to
such earnest study of the Scriptures, was a little skill which she had in the Latin tongue, wherein it was lawfull to read the Scriptures, both as often, and as long as she listed; being restrained and forbidden, that in no case the common peo∣ple should read them in their own tongue. Yea her school∣maister D. Giles, a man whom she did specially chuse for his singular integritie of life, as well as for his excellent lear∣ning, was wont to giue this testimonie of her, that he ne∣uer came into her companie but he learned somewhat, and so departed thence alwaies better learned than hee came. During the time of her imprisonment, the Monks and Dominicanes had great disputations with her, mar∣ueiling as much at the passing excellencie of her wit in an∣swering all their subtill and sophisticall obiections, and (as it were) cutting them so quickly with the sword of Gods word, as also at the wonderfull memorie which shee had in citing the holy Scripturs so readily: insomuch that after they had done disputing & reasoning with her, they gaue very good testimonies of her constancy and sober be∣hauiour, albeit they termed it by the names of wilfulnesse and obstinacie. After they had kept her a long time in that darke dungeon, and there caused her to endure all the cru∣ell and extream torments that might be (by meanes wher∣of they forced her to confesse of her owne sister, that shee was also one of the same religion: which was the occasion first of her sisters imprisonment, & so consequently of her death, being murthered most cruelly among those villains by extreame torments) they brought her forth vpon the scaffold, with diuers other godly men & women, wherof I made mention before. How beit she came in such sort as one making a semblance of ioy and mirth and conquest ouer the holy Inquisition, rather then otherwise. The which strange countenance of mirth, for so much as it was rare to see in her, and vnaccustomed, vttered by sing∣ing Psalms to God, the Inquisitours of spite and malice, sought to alter into another tune, by setting a Barnacle
on her tongue in the way as she went, which notwithstan∣ding ere they came to the scaffold they did vndoo againe. When they had read their sentence vpon her openly, and giuen iudgement of death, the Inquisitours asked her whe∣ther she would recant yea or no, acknowledging her here∣sies which heretofore shee had most willfully maintained. Wherunto she answered them roundly, that neither shee would, nor truely could confesse so much. And so from thence she passed with her other companions to the place of execution accompanied with these hypocrites, still cal∣ling vpon her and her fellowes by the way to adde the Church of Rome in the article of their creed: but shee among the rest most stoutly withstood them. Notwithstan∣ding, the abominable villains, to the intent to blemish their good name and renoune by their most villanous treche∣ries, strangled them with halters, as though they had at their last houres returned to the Romish Church: in con∣sideration whereof, the Inquisitours taking pity on them, would not suffer them (say they) to bee burned quicke. Moreouer, their tyranny did also extend to the very walles where these holy assemblies and congregations were kept. For there was speciall commaundement giuen, that the house wherein Vaenia dwelt, should bee razed to the earth, from the very foundation, and conuerted to a perpetuall wast ground, and in the middest of the plat an inscription to be set in marble; for the wicked and idolatrous genera∣tion, a monument of many misdeedes, but to the Godly, a perpetuall memoriall of the true seruants of God, in whom Christ did most truely and perfectly dwell. Ferdinando à Sancto Ioanno. THis man likewise was one of the chiefe and most worthy members of the same congregation; I meane for the true feare of God that was in him, his singular ho∣nesty, his seruent and exceeding zeale of doing good to
his neighbours without any regard of his own commodi∣ty, not in respect of his parentage, or any curiosity about his body, or otherwise in his behauiour or speech. A young man indeede, yet for integrity of life, very notable and famous, President of the House of learning (as they terme it) and chosen therunto by the iudgements of many godly men that were first founders thereof, to instruct and teach the youth in the Colledge called the Colledge of children. In the which office after he had remained by the space of 8. yeares, to his great commendation, he was perceiued to bee a Lutheran, that is to say, a man confor∣med to the very paterne of true and perfect piety: where∣vnto also (as his duty required) he had wrought his schol∣lers, as much as lay in him to do in a time of so great per∣secution and tyranny. But his reward for his paines, if we respect mans recompencing, was much like vnto that which the common sort of thankless people yeeld a man for his good deserts: but respecting faith, such as Christ foretold his disciples that they should find among men. For, being most terribly tormented vpon the Ieobit or the Trough, and so shaken in euery ioynt, that when hee was taken down thence hee was not of strength able to moue any part of his body: notwithstanding those vil∣lains the tormenters tooke and drew him by the heeles in this plight all along to his prison, as it had beene a dung∣sacke or any carrion. The occasion why the Inquisitours dealt so extremely with him, was for answering them som∣what roundly and homely, without relenting or yeelding vnto them one iote. Howbeit, during the time of this strait imprisonment, God vsed him as a meane to comfort and erect a certaine yong man called Morzilio, a Monke of the cloyster of Saint Isidore, laid in for professing the gospel openly, who by meanes of the Inquisitours faire and flatte∣ring promises, had a little before relented and yeelded som∣what in religion. The which thing (no doubt) was the ordinance of God, that these two should be matched to∣gether
in one prison. For this Ferdinando, perceiuing the yong Nouice to faint in courage, rebuked him sharply, ac∣cused him of cowardise before God, & driuing him there∣by to repentance, confirmed and strengthned him at the length: So that within few daies Morzilio prayed to come to his answer, and before the Inquisitors, then and there, solemnly renounced that recantation which he had lately made, desiring that his former confession might stand, the which hee tooke to bee very Christianlike▪ Yet was he strangled at the very same time, and afterward burned: marry whether he died in Gods fauour or the Inquisitors, that knoweth God alone. But to returne to Ferdinando. After sentence was giuen, the Inquisitours demanded of him, whether he were determined still to cōtinue the same man, and to affirme the same heresies. Whereunto hee answered them verie roundly and bluntly (after his fashi∣on) in the hearing of all the people that hee had vttered nothing but the very pure and perfect Gospel, and the true belief of a Christian man, and therefore was far from accounting them heresies. Whereupon immediatly they tooke away from him a crosse of wood which they had thrust betwixt his singers & the cord that bound his hands, and therewithall clapped a Barnacle vpon his tongue, which remained there vntill the fire had consumed it, and thus was he burned quicke. Iuliano Ferdinando. IT is a wonderfull thing I assure you for a man to consi∣der, that in so wearyish a thing as this Iuliana was and so poore, that a man would think he had nothing left but skin and bone, there should be so great courage and stout∣nesse of stomack: but that the holy Prophet saith, and daily experience besides confirmeth, that God hath oftentimes chosen the weaklings of the world to confound the strong and mighty. For this same Iuliano the little (as commonly
he was called for the smalnesse of his stature) being in Ger∣manie without all the Inquisitours reach, and there con∣uersant with many learned men, among whom hee came to the knowledge of true and perfect godlines, by the assi∣stance of the Holy Ghost, rather then by any mans per∣swasion or counsell, tooke in hand a very waightie and a dangerous enterprise: to wit, the transporting into Spain of two great dryfattes full of Bibles printed in the Spanish tongue, such was the feruencie of his zeale to publish and set abroad the light of the Gospel in his owne coun∣trey. In the which attempt and enterprise, there was a great cause of feare, as if hee had vndertaken to bring in cart-loades of Scorpians or other more venemous beasts, the hypocrites had so stopped all ventes, and made a re∣straint in euerie port, because no maner of light or vnder∣standing should by any meanes come vnto them. Notwith∣standing all this, God vnder his mighty protection, and by his owne safeconduct, brought that holy burthen thither, and that which was most miraculous of all, so prouided, that it was both landed and discharged within the walls of Siuill: where were such busie searchers & catchpols prying in euery corner, that a man might with a great deale more ease haue deceiued Argus for all his eyes, of the Cow which hee had in charge to keepe. The which dew of Gods grace sent vnto them so seasonably, that Paradise of the Lords did most ioyfully and thankfully receiue, wher∣by the fruit (no doubt) grew to ripenesse, and became more plentifull against the time of haruest and reaping. For at the last this matter broke out, and came to the In∣quisitours knowledge: first by meanes of a foolish fellow, more fearfull a great deale than need was, and afterwards by an vnfaithfull brother, pretending to professe the Gos∣pel, wherein he seemed to haue profited reasonably well, but shortly after shewed himselfe to be a Iudas, and a cham∣pion for the Inquisition, cloking & colouring his malici∣ous purpose, with that counterfait pretence of religion, &
by that meanes betraied the whole congregation. Then the Inquisitors well nosed like the diuell, and finding a lit∣tle, followed on so farre, till at the length they sprung the whole couie, found the neast, tooke both young and old, and so made hauoke of all. And this was the first ouzing they had, which broke that holy heard, that was so great in number, that the hunters themselues at the first were a∣fraid of them, and the spoile of them such afterwards, that they filled all their larders, & were enforced further to seek for other cellers to bestow them in, and to cause so many o∣ens to be heated, that they were almost quēched with the suet of the Deare. For there were taken at Siuill at that one time 800. & 20. of them or thereabouts, rosted at one fire. Among the which, this Iuliano was one of the first that was apprehended and sent to prison, where he lay continually, solitarie and without any companie, laden with irons a∣boue 3. whole years. By means wherof, there were dayly, diuers and sundry sights to be seen. Howbeit the constan∣cy of this man was so great and so wonderfull, that the tor∣menters themselues, were sooner wearied, than he vnpaci∣ent for all his torments; and notwithstanding his weake and wearyish bodie, yet alwayes remained of sufficient strength in minde to abide all their tyrannie, insomuch that hee neuer departed from the racke with worse cheere or lesse courage, then hee was of at his entrance: so that all their torments, all their theatnings, and all extreamitie which they could doe or practise vpon him, did not make him yeeld or shrinke one iote, but that returning from the racke, or rather drawne thence by other of his fellow-prisons, hee would signifie vnto them, how hee had conquered and confounded his enemies, singing on this sort: Vencidos vanlos frayles, vencidos van: Corrulos van los lobos: Corridos van. As much to say in English as thus. The Monkes depart vanquished, they depart vanquished: the Wolues doe flye with shame, they flye with shame. But long before this time came, hee was much troubled in
the first dayes of hearing with the Monkes, and other such maintainers of iniquitie as they are; by whom the Inqui∣sitours, being vtterly vnlearned themselues, vse to controle and ouerrule hereticks. From whom so oft as hee retur∣ned, he delighted alwayes to sing that song, in token of triumph ouer his aduersaries. And on the great and so∣lemne day of their Doom, being brought out of his prison into the Court of the Castle Triana, to be apparelled with such trinkets as are appointed for persons condemned (like as other of his companions were) the report is, that with a maruellous good courage and countenance hee be∣gan to exhort them in this wise. My brethren be of good cheere, this is the howre wherein we must be faithfull wit∣nesses to God and his truth before men, like as it becom∣meth the true seruants and souldiours of Christ, and with∣in this little while wee shall haue him ready to witnesse with vs againe, and shall within few howres triumph with him in Heauen for euer. But immediately, as hee was ma∣king this good and godly exhortation, the villaines set a Barnacle on his tongue, and so hee went to his execution. How beit standing vpon the step whereon they that are to be executed vse to stand, being not able in words to vtter the courage & constancie of his mind in the patient suffe∣rance of all these tormēts for the Gospels sake & the profes∣sion thereof, he expressed no lesse in gestures and behaui∣our. First, kneeling downe, and kissing the step whereon hee stood: and afterwards being tyed to the stake, and couered vp to the head and eares with fagots, did diuers and sundry times shrinke his head into the middest of them, as one most willing to receiue his death, & desirous to hasten the same: whereby, like a good souldiour of Christ, hee did very well foresee and prouide to haue his confession notified, and the infirmitie and weaknesse of his feeble brethren, if any such there were among them, hol∣pen and remedied, encouraging them by these signes and tokens which he gaue them, both stedfastly to stand to the
truth, and lightly to esteeme of the punishment. There was also present with him at his death one D. Ferdin ando Rodri∣guio, a false Apostle, whose importunity being not able any thing to remoue him from his profession, caused it to ap∣peare in the eyes of men, so much the more glorious: who supposing that the terrors of death would somewhat haue dismaied him, obtained leaue of the chiefe officer, that his tongue might be loosed, vpon hope that he would sgnifie his conuersion to the common people by word of mouth, Howbeit it fell out quite contrary. For immediatly after that his tongue was at liberty, this Iuliano made as plaine and solemne a protestation of his faith, as euer he did at a∣ny other time in all his life. As for his friend and acquain∣tance that gaue him so euil counsell speaking flatly against his owne conscience (as he knew full well) hee gaue him such an tem, and so tooke him vp for stumbling, that the villain hauing not a word to answer him for very shame, to the end to be euen with him some other way, fell into this outery & exclamation. O that Spain, the conquerer and dame ouer so many countries, should be thus trou∣bled with such a caitife. Kill him, kill him. And I warrant you there were butchers enow ready to doe as hee bad them, and to giue him his deaths-wound. The rumor also was spred of this man, that he had likewise recanted du∣ring the time of his being in prison: but God be thanked it fell out in the end far otherwise. Iohn de Leon a Monke of Saint Isidors cloister. THis man at the first was but a taylor in Mexico that fa∣mous Citie in the West Indies, called Noua Hispania, & at his returne thence to Siuill againe, felt in his conscience (as many good men doe) a certaine eae of God, though blind and not proceeding of knowledge, whereby hee was moued to become a Monk. yet his hap was such by Gods good meanes, who did so prouide for his desperate
attempt, that he entred into Saint Isidors cloister in Siuill, wherein the greater part of the couent at that time was well affected in religion. But after he bad been schooled there by the space of two or three yeares, and conuer∣sant among them, hee began to bee wearie of this monkish and solitarie kinde of life, seeking meanes to forsake his order, as hee did indeede: colouring the matter with his continuall disposition to sicknesse; and yet being once out, had such a desire to talke with his former schoolmai∣sters, that had instructed him in the true and perfect reli∣gion, that hee returned thither againe, for conference sake and for their companie. But all in vaine Form the time of his absence, all they for whose respect hee entred into that ilfauored order once againe, had left their coules, and were fled into Germanie. Whereupon hee perceiuing that there was no place of aboad for him, determined to alter his purpose so soone as he could certainly learn what was become of his old companions, and whither they were gone. But here perhaps some euill disposed per∣sons will call him a double Apostata in forsaking his or∣der twice. Marry the wiser sort will giue him double honour therefore, and account him the godlier man two to one. Therefore trudging after his fellowes, and (as it were) tracing them, he met with them at the length at Franckford with much ado, both for the painfulnesse of his iourney & the perils of passage: & from thence went with them to Geneua, to meet with the rest of his acquaintance that were setled there. About the same time, by meanes of Queene Maries suddaine death, and that the crown of England descended vpon the most gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth, they of the English congregation, that by occasion of the late tyrannie were dispersed here and there in Germanie, were by Gods good grace called home a∣gaineinto their owne countrey: wherupon diuers Spani∣ards that soiorned at Geneua, thinking England a meeter place for their congregation, did accompanie the English∣men,
that returned homewards into England, and for their more safety diuided themselues into seuerall companies. For the Inquisitours tooke the departure of the Monkes in so euill part, aswell in respect of forsaking their order, as re∣nouncing their religion, that albeit they were but few in number, yea but a handfull (to speake of) in respect of the world, yet they determined to plague them soundly, if they could come by them: and thereupon sent out their flies to lie in wait for them euery where as they should passe, speci∣ally at Colyne, Franckford, Antwerpe, & all the high waies that lay from Geneua that way: & in like case all the waies on the other side from Geneua to Millayne. The charges whereof were allowed out of the kinges treasury largely enough, both of the kings owne liberality, and of the de∣sire which the Inquisitours had to catch them. And God knowes much a do there was, sparing neither for labor nor cost to finde halfe a dozen dogges to do this feat, and to hunt them out: besides other great priuiledges and immu∣nities that were promised to such as would vndertake to bring them againe. A strange thing to consider, how the Inquisitours detest and abhorre the light of the Gospell, that they persecute it to the very death. This fellow therfore had gotten him a companion, one Iohn Ferdinando of Valla∣dolit, a very godly man, & purposing to passe together into England thorough Germany, were laid for at Argentyne, by meanes whereof they were dogged, and taken in a cer∣taine port in Zealand, as they were taking ship to crosse ouer into England. And being apprehended, this Iohn de Leon took the arrest with so good a courage, that he neuer changed countenance at it, but so soone as the messengers had said that their errant was to him, hee made them an∣swer straight way. Wel (quoth he) let vs go in Gods name, for hee (no doubt) will be with vs. Whereupon they were both brought back into the towne, and there racked most pit fully, to the entent to make them confesse of their o∣ther companions; and within a few daies after were ship∣ped
and carried into Spaine: each of them, during the time that they were in the ship, hauing a certaine Iron chaine wrought like a net, that couered both head and face, with∣in the which there was also another engine of iron made like to a mans tongue, wch being thrust into their mouthes tooke away the vse of their tongues. And in these conti∣nuall paines and torments, besides other ginnes and fetters of iron wherewith they were bound both hand and foot, they were brought into Spaine, and there deliuered into the Inquisitours prisons: Iohn de Leon to the Inquisitours prison at Siuill, and his fellow to Valladolit, where hee was afterwards in defence of Gods quarrell executed by fire quick: as was also one Doctour Cacalia a companion of his, but a little before him, whose brother or sisters daugh∣ter this man had maried. Howbeit Iohn de Leon remained a great while in prison, where he tasted the Inquisitors ty∣rannie, suffering both hunger and cold, as also endured all their torments each after the other: and at the last was brought forth in their solemne shew, arayed in like sort as the other that had continued & perseuered as he had done. It was a pitifull thing to behold, and (no doubt) would haue made many a man afraid to see so griezly a sight, and such a ghost as hee was: his face so ouergrowne with haire, his bodie so leane as any rake, hauing nothing left to couer his bones saue onely the very skin; and to the en∣crease of his paine, their Barnacle was set vpon his tongue, that it was loathsome to see the long streames of fleame come out of his stomack, & hang roping from his mouth to the ground, as hee stood vpright. But when sentence of death was pronounced vpon him, hauing then his tongue set at libertie, to the intent that he might abiure & recant (as they supposed hee would haue done) hee made such a confession with such a countenance, so quietly, without any apparant motion or affection; though in few words, yet so effectually, as if he had been in his best estate and most libertie that euer hee was in. At the very last
howre of his death, there was assigned vnto him a certain Monke to dispute with him, one of the same cloyster that he himselfe had once been on, and whose nouice hee was the first yeare after that hee entred that vnlucky order, that hee might record vnto him the principles of his old poperie and superstition. Howbeit the more meanes that they vsed to assault him withall, the stronger he grew and the more able to resist them: for Christ (doubtlesse) like a good captaine defended his souldiour. In the end, he was executed as cruelly, as in his life time before hee had beene tormented miserably, but with as quiet and patient minde as might be. For so it was alwaies likely that so good a man as he, should make so good an end. Francisca Chauesia. TOwards the furnishing of the same shew, there was also one Francisca Chauesia, a modest Virgine and one of a perfect profession, a Nunne of the cloyster of Saint Elizabeth. A wonderfull thing to consider how the perfect knowledge of Christ could come to her through such Iron doores and gates, notwithstanding all the froward superstition wherein shee was almost drowned. But the election of God in his Son Christ is a matter of such force and efficacie, that nothing can withstand it at the time appointed. Besides this, her happe was so good otherwise, to haue vnto her school∣maister one D. Aegidio, of whom we haue to speake here∣after. Truly the shining light of Gods Gospel could not long time be hid vnder that bushel, but when the time was come, it would appeare and shine to the ioy & comfort of the whole Church of God, and to the abolishing of dark∣nesse and iniquitie. Well, the conclusion was, that com∣ming before the Inquisitours, and entreated as others had been before her, at the length shee was brought out vnto the stage or scaffold: where shee (albeit that in all her
life time shee had had no great conference with men) yet many times by her manlike answers, did put the Inquisitors to afoule foile: and did moreouer, not only most constantly affirme the truth, but also most sharpely rebuked those good Fathers, calling them dumbe Dogs and the generation of Vipers. But of all the rest, the small regard which shee had either of death or the paines thereof, and specially the chearefull countenance which shee kept still euen to the very fire, was most worthy the sight of all that beheld it. Christophoro Losada a Phisition. THis man in like case was scholler to D. Aegidio, taught & trained vp by him in the principles of true religion. Among whose other good gifts & blessings of God, wher∣withall hee was indued, this one thing was in him most worthy of admiration, that whomsoeuer hee took in hand to teach and instruct in vertue and godlines, he did there∣withall kindle as it were a certaine seruent zeale in their harts, whereby they were enflamed to all the exercises of loue and charity both inwardly and outwardly; and be∣sides this, maruellously animated and encouraged to patience at the very houre of their deathes. Whereby hee gaue an euident testimony to such as were enlightned with Gods spirite, that Christ was alwaies present with him to make perfect his ministery, writing with his holy Spirite in their harts inwardly the same in effect that he in words pro∣nounced outwardly. But besides the good hap that this man had to light vpon so good a schoolemaster, it was also his chaunce to meete with no worse a father in law, a man so zealous and well affected in Gods religion, that this Losada being a suter to his daughter, although hee were a faire conditioned man, very well learned, and better seene in his faculty then a great sort of practifers bee, yet would hee not graunt vnto him his good will for hauing his daughter to wife, till hee were for a while become scholler to Doctor Aegidio, and learned of him some godly and vertuous instructions. A very hard condition surely
for a learned man, and one that thought himselfe suffici∣ently cathechised, to submit himselfe to another mans in∣struction, but specially to D. Aegidio, that was commonly suspected in religion at that time. Howbeit at the length he condescended thereunto, whether for vertues sake, as desirous of better instruction, or for his wiues, I knowe not. But howsoeuer it were, or in what respect so euer hee did it at the first, he applied it so earnestly, that notwith∣standing he lost his maister ere he could well haue spared him, yet after his maisters death he declared how much he had profited vnder him: in so much that aswell for his singular learning and skill in Scripture, as for his vertuous and godly conuersation, he was thought the happiest and worthiest person to bee Superintendent ouer the whole congregation, which was great in number, though here and there dispersed in corners. As indeede he tooke it vp∣on him, and did very wel discharge the office of a preacher among them, so far as hee might in such aduersity. After∣wards by meanes of those bookes of Iuliano paruo, hee was apprehended by the Inquisitours (being a thing almost impossible that such a faithfull pastour should hide him∣selfe when his flocke was dispersed) before whom hee made a plaine protestation of his faith, for the which hee endured, first, hard and sharp imprisonment with most cruell torments, and the open infamie of their solemne shew, and lastly was committed to the fire. Where he, stan∣ding at the stake, disputed very notably of true religion against those importunate hypocrites, who vpon a false perswasion that they had to conuert him, gaue him the li∣berty of his tongue, to the intent he might haue answered their expectation. And whereas they of policy fell out of their Spanish into Latine, because the common people should not vnderstand them, Losada also (not greatly mar∣king their meaning herein) began to talk in Latin so co∣piously and eloquently, that it was a strange thing to heare a man almost dead to this world, to haue his wits so fresh
and his tongue so ready, as euer they were at any time in all his life. Christophoro Arelliano. CHristophoro Arelliano, a Monke of the cloyster of Saint Isidore in Siuill, was by the confession of the Inquisi∣tours themselues simply the best learned of all that came before them, and was betraied by his owne friends, such I meane, as had receiued a great deale more commoditie and honour by him, then euer they had done by any, yet by their meanes was brought within the Inquisition. The cause why he was so highly esteemed & accompted of for learning, was because of his great reading and study in the schoole-doctours, as they tearme them. That is to say, Aquinas, Scotus, Lombardus, and such like, that whatsoeuer had escaped them in all their workes, making for the main∣tenance of the truth, with a very good iudgement and a passing memorie, next after the scriptures and the sounder sort of the fathers and doctours of the Church, hee did both readily vouch, and applied them to his purpose very directly, and so brought to passe, that all his aduersaries, with whom the authoritie of such trifling writers weigh more then the holy Scriptures of God, were confounded with their owne doctours. Notwithstanding all this, hee was condemned to the fire. For with these maine tyrants fire and fagots is aboue learning and truth, and able to controll & ouerrule them both. But ere he came so far, he was first brought solemnly, & set vpon the scaffold to haue sentence pronounced vpon him, where there was a shame∣full matter most impudently laied to his charge; That hee should affirm, that the blessed and pure virgin Mary, the mother of Christ, was no more a maid then hee himselfe was. A seemly speach for these good Fathers to publish and proclaime in such an open audience, if it had beene so that any were so beastly or so wicked to say it. Yet such meanes they vse to bring them into hatred among the
common people, whom they know many men to haue good opinion and estimation of for their singular and approued vertue. Howbeit when Arelliano heard that hor∣rible blasphemie, hauing the vse of his tongue (as GOD would haue it) he cried out in the hearing of all the people, that it was a most impudent and slanderous lie, saying, that as well at this present, as also at all other times hereto∣fore, hee did euer firmely hold, and beleeue the contrary, being thereunto perswaded by diuers and sundry places of Scripture, which hee could presently alledge if neede were. Also for a further vexation, there stoode of purpose one of the Monkes of the same house, that had beene his greatest enemy, laughing and reioycing at his misery, thin∣king it, belike, not sufficient to cause so godly a man, so excellently well learned, and a very innocent besides, to be brought into so pitifull a case, but to amend the matter withall, seemed to triumph ouer him in this extremity. The suddaine sight whereof did somewhat moue this good man: howbeit like a good christian hee put it vp quietly, and pacified himselfe, giuing a good example of patience to all that beheld it. Finally, standing at the very stake, he comforted and encouraged a certaine monke of the same house called Iohn Chrysostome, that sometime had beene his scholler, and now become his fellow, and so partaker as∣well of his death as his doctrine. But forasmuch as I cer∣tainly know not the very true cause why this Monke was executed, I haue therfore not annexed him here vnto the rest. Yet thus much I can truely say of him: A preacher he was, both reasonably well learned and of good conuersa∣tion and liuing, for any thing that euer was obiected to the contrary. And therefore those hogs that minded nothing but their bellies, did not greatly like of him. Garsias Arias commonly called Seignior Blanco. THe wonderfull prouidence of God toward his elect, which contrary to common course doth mightily saue & defend many that deepely were drowned, and lay a
long season soused in superstition and blindnesse, fansying it of will, and withstanding the known truth against their owne conscences (wch sin the holy Scriptures call the sin a∣gainst the holy Ghost, declaring vnto vs, that the prayers of the congregation shall not auaile such persons as are spotted therewith) this prouidence, I say, did most maruel∣lously appear by this one mans example to be of such force, that the deeper that men are drowned in desperation, the higher it afterwards aduanceth them in honour. This A∣rias, whom they commonly called Seignior Blanco, because of his white haires and faire skin, had a very sharp wit, and for his time was well studied in diuinity: marry, therewith∣all somewhat crafty and subtile with a little spice of incon∣stancy: which vices also hee did so couer with a counter∣fait cloke of religion, that he was able to deceiue him that thought himselfe the wisest man, yea, and did deceiue a great sort indeed. It hapned in this time that there were two sorts of Preachers in Siuill, and both of them had a great number of auditours disposed to heare each part, as they best fancied the one or the other. The one of them concerning doctrin & precepts, came nigher to the disci∣plin of Epictetus the Stoick, than to the rule of holy Scrip∣ture. But herein they were inferiour to Epictetus, that all his sayings and doings were one, but in these there was some ods: for they neuer ceased calling and crying vpon them, to moue them to often fasting, to mortification, to denying of themselues, to continue in prayer at all times, lowly to thinke of themselues, which they called humi∣litie, and to shew the same as well in apparell, countenance, behauiour and speech, as in all the rest of their life. But if you had stripped these fellows out of their side coats; Wel, I will not say all, but ye should wel haue perceiued them to be men. In sum, all their religion both top & taile (as they say) rested in works and outward exercises of the bodie, quite contrary to the other sect, and therefore they would seem to be doers in any case. Wherupon they left the true
exercises of a Christian man, I meane iustice, mercy, and faith, the only meanes to attaine true righteousnesse, and ranne by heapes to Masses, to hallowed places, to shrift (as they call it) & many other such like toyes, which the scrip∣ture calleth spiders webs that will neuer proue good cloth, hoping by these & such like meanes to be purged and clen∣sed from their sinnes. Moreouer they vrged pouerty, with sole and single life, euen vnto such as were already coupled in matrimony, but especially the vow of obedience, as do the foolish friers, to the intent to get them auditours. And this (say they) is the true denying of our selues, and there∣fore extolled it as much as the obedience that is due to God himselfe. Further, to the entent to keepe them in blindnes and ignorance still, they disswaded men from the reading of books written of diuinity; specially from Eras∣mus works, by the which they should learne nothing but a little pride in their owne knowledge, referring them ra∣ther to Henricus Herpius, and Bonauentures works, the A. B. C. and the scaling of mount Sion, and such others, wherein they should learne humility and obedience towards all, but specially towards their elders and superiours. Among others they also cited vnto them Masius, Cauallius, Guerra, Petrus Cordubensis, and many other moe then I can well call to mind: For whom perhaps it had beene farre better neuer to haue beene borne, then to leaue such monu∣ments behind them. Of the which sort of preachers there were diuers, I confesse, in some respects very honest and godly men, but yet none, that vnderstanding the iuggling and treacheries of their maisters, would forsake them, and take a better way. For sundry of them by their vnseasonable kind of fasting, and their curious searching of high and secret mysteries of diuinity, fell into a phrensie, or else pro∣ceeding in their foolish enterprise, grew euery day worse & worse, that is to say, of honest men, became very wicked, Pharises, enemies and crucifiers of Christ, and in the ende twise so euill as were their maisters whom they followed.
The other sort did deale more sincerely with the holy Scriptures, declaring out of them what was true righteous∣nesse and perfect godlinesse: by meanes whereof they brought to passe, that that Citie bare the name aboue all other in Spain for their iust and true dealing, by the space of a dozen yeares together, so that itappeared that they had fruitfully and effectually heard that peece of Scripture that treateth of true and perfect righteousnesse. For here∣vpon came all that plentifull haruest that hath been inning 8. or 10. yeares, of those good seedes of the Gospel, which then were by them so painfully sowen. The brightnesse whereof, according to the nature of light, did so plainly discouer all that counterfait holinesse, and pharisaicall de∣uotion, that it could not be but that needs there must en∣sue thereafter, first hatred and then persecution. The chief, labourers in this haruest, were Constantino, Aegidio and Var∣quio, Doctors all, and men both sober, wise, and learned: whose trauailes in setting forward the Gospel in so great mists of ignorance, and the worthie ends which they made at their departures out of this life, as they be worthie of eternall memorie, so will wee shield them that they shall not be forgotten. But yet of all the other aduersaries vnto the truth, this Arias was most spitefull, and more ma∣licious than any of the rest (perhaps because the other er∣red of simple ignorance, but he contrary to his owne con∣science kicked against the knowne truth) for that the o∣ther had been more generally receiued, was more sightly in shew, and more beneficiall to them that followed after it. Howbeit he would not gloze so openly as other of the same sort would, for feare of discrediting himselfe with di∣uers men of good reputation, and well affected in religion, with whom he was grown into some fauour & good opi∣nion, by reason of that vertuous and godly disposition, which they saw in him in apparance: but in such sort be∣haued himselfe, and so cunningly conueyed his matters, that though such as had tryed him knew what was in him,
yet others tooke him for a deare friend of theirs, and esteemed of him as if he had bin their kinsman or brother. But as touching his subtilties and dissimulation, he shew∣ed it most at one time specially aboue all others, at what time complaint was made to the Inquisitours by a sort of hypocrites, persecutors of the truth, of one Gregorio Ruizio, a man (as the report went of him) very well learned, for a certaine thing vttered by him openly in a diuinitie lecture in the Cathedrall Church of Siuill, tending towards the controuersies in religion, and concerning specially a mans iustification. For where the Inquisitors had assigned him a day of hearing, two dayes before the day of his appa∣rance, it was his chance to meete with this maister Arias; with whom hee had some aquaintance, by reason that they professed one kinde of studie, but chiefly for the re∣port of vertue that was spoken of him, though vnworthi∣ly. Whereupon, amongst others that were assigned, this Arias also was charged to be there at that day, and to pre∣pare himself to dispute against Ruizio: who like a crafty A∣postle so vndermined this Ruizio, that he gat out of him all the reasons and arguments wch he had deuised against the day of disputation for the maintenance of his side. For Ruizio (God knows) taking no great heed therof, nor suspe∣cting in him any such trechery, more than he did his ghost∣ly father, communicated the same vnto him. Which after Arias had obtained, he gaue him a friendly farwell, and so left him. At the day of disputation, when both parts were assembled, this Arias was also present, & ioined himself to the other side that were aduersaries to Ruizio. The which when Ruizio beheld, he was somewhat astonied therewith∣all, and perceiued at the length his Legerdemane, seeing him so readily out off his arguments, which hee had made him priuie vnto two dayes before, and to answer them so fully and exactly, that hee had nothing to replie againe: whereupon the silly soule being thus circumuented, and spoiled of all his weapons, yeelded himselfe,
leauing to Arias the honour of the field, which hee most like a Iudas had gotten by treason and treachery. The like honest part also for all the world he plaid with D. Aegidio. For whereas hee meaning nothing but well (as the most constant bruit is) had referred the matter concerning the opinion of his knowledge and learning to this mans iudgement, because he knew him to be as able to iudge as a great sort of others, he gaue such a verdit, as it had been somewhat reasonable for him to haue giuen in a matter of vntruth. Notwithstanding he was the first in all Saint Isi∣dors house in Siuill, that started out of that dead sleep of su∣perstition and ignorance, wherein they were all dead and drowned, and by meanes of a few sparkes which this man had set on fire, a great part of the house beganne to shake off their drowsinesse, and to see a glimmering of the truth afarre off appeare like the dawning of the day, and to de∣sire that the vaile might bee drawne, to the end that they might the more easily see the shining beames of true reli∣gion. For the whole scope of all his sermons, for the which there was a space appointed, as it fell out most con∣ueniently, sometime by night, from two of the clocke in the morning, till foure, was wholly to ouerthrow all their profession: howbeit not openly, but couertly and as it were afarre off. First, hee taught them that singing and saying of their prayers all the day and night, was no seruice, nor praier vnto God: that the exercises of a true Christian man were other then the common people took them to bee: that the holy Scriptures were to bee reade and studied with diligence, whence alone the true know∣ledge and seruice of God and of his holy will, of true religion, and such as was most allowable in his sight, was to bee had and learned: to the obtaining whereof, we must (quoth he) vse praier as a mean, proceeding as well of the sense and feeling of our owne infirmities and necessities, as grounded vpon perfect trust & confidence in God. Thus, by laying these and such like foundations of Christian re∣ligion,
he made them to loath that stale stuffe of their old & forworn religion, & wrought in them an earnest desire of the better, but specially moued thē to the study of holy Scriptures. Moreouer, besides his sermons hee read dayly a lecture vpon Salomons prouerbs very learnedly, & made application thereof with good iudgement and discretion, and had priuate and familiar conference with diuers, such as he was dayly conuersant withall, and vsed to accompa∣ny, onely to the same end and purpose. And for this one thing his hap was alwaies very good, to haue such schol∣lers as were tractable and soone wrought, and (which was wonderfull to consider) such as were not greatly wedded to their monkish superstitions though they were vowed: whereby he had lesse to doe with them, and might with more ease giue the assault, and in short time batter downe this forced rampire of superstition, with the perfect shot of Gods word. Howbeit his head was so full of toyes and new deuices, that after all these wholesome preparatiues, wher∣with he had so wrought in them, that the rest of their super∣stitious dregs might more cōmodiously be expelled, & that they were halfe wonne to his doctrine, he made them fall to vnseasonable fastings and watchings before the Sacra∣ment, whence they should looke for I know not what inspirations: hee caused them to remoue all their stuffe, bookes and beds, out of their celles, and to lye vpon the bare earth, or else to sleep standing, to weare a hairecloth in stead of their shirts, and a hoope of Iron next vnto their skin, with a number of such toyes moe, as though those stinking weeds would not haue taken root fast enough of themselues, except the earth had first been cared vp with the coulter of Gods word, as was before declared. For after hee had weeded the old superstition, he did nothing else but sow a like seede againe, more corrupt and peri∣lous than the other that grew before. By meanes where∣of manie of his auditours got such good as is like to en∣sue of so dangerous a doctrine. Insomuch that ma∣many
of them fell stark mad: some so consumed with me∣lencholy, that they were halfe frantick: some caught vn∣curable diseases and paines in the head, and became almost brainlesse, that they were not able to serue any turne thereafter: but they that had stronger bodies, and better stomackes to beare it out withall, had such a pharisaicall pride and glory in themselues by meanes of that vaine per∣swasion of holinesse and perfectnesse, that no wise man will account them in much better case than other of their fellowes. And yet perhaps were Arias excusable herein from this so grieuous guilt, either for want of better know∣ledge, or by destiny if it were so, first to take vpon him that office, & then so meanly to execute it, but that I am right wel assured that his conscience did condemn all the trash, wch he had planted in place of truth. For at the very same time being among his companions, would take pleasure in remembring the folly of such men, that were so forward to run any way that he would prescribe and appoint them. Notwithstanding such is the force and might of Gods ele∣ction, that these few good seedes sowne among those fit∣ches, fructified in the end to the great encrease of godlines maruellously. Insomuch, that diuers and sundry of them, hauing their consciences cleared & purged of their old hy∣pocrisie, and scarcely well staied or quieted with these new deuices, sought further by occasion hereof, for some better instructions, and vnawares hapned vpon the other sort of Preachers, that taught the truth with more sinceritie. Of whom (after they had entred some acquaintance with them) they learned the principles of pure and perfect reli∣gion, leauing by little and little that euill opinion which they had generally conceiued against the Lutherans. Afterwards, being perswaded that they could by no meanes attaine the perfect knowledge of the truth, ex∣cept they would sometime peruse their writings, God did likewise maruellously prouide for them herein, that they had not onely such bookes brought vnto them by a
miraculous means, as they had a long time desired, euen at such time as they securely slept and sought for no such things: but also all other sorts of books that were extant at that time, either in Geneua, or any part of Germany: so that hauing such store both of bookes and maisters to instruct them, they began to nosell their whole couent, insomuch that where at the first there were onely two that durst giue the attempt in so dangerous an enterprise, there were very few in the whole cloyster (which at that time was very well furnished) but they had some taste of true religion & godlinesse thereby, and none repined against it. Their time that erst was spent in mumbling their mattens and prime, was now bestowed vpon lectures of diuinity: their dirges eyther cut off altogether, or curtalled very short: their charters of pardons granted by Popes in ancient time whereunto all that crue leaned before, was now accounted for stale stuffe. As for images, they had a small deale of worship done vnto them, or none at all. Vaine fasting was turned into seemely sobrietie: neyther was anie taught to bee monkish, but to bee sincerely and tru∣ly religious, nor anie mention made of proceeding in their former fashions, but much talke rather in derision there∣of, and to haue them abolished. Neyther did they put this light vnder a bushell, imprisoning it within their owne walles, but sent it abroad into the Citie, and the townes and villages adioining, as well by publishing of bookes, as by other priuate conference. Then all things being brought to so good passe, that nothing was left in vse saue onely their stout Idoll of their masse, and their mon∣kish profession that rested in their coule and their crowne, which could neyther with good conscience bee longer suffred, nor attempted without present perill, and yet no great good like to ensue thereof; they beganne to deuise first, and afterwards determined with themselues, to for∣sake their neast, and to flye into Germaine, where they might liue with a great deale more safetie of
their liues and freedome of their consciences. A very bold enterprise (doubtlesse) and as some thought both rash and desperate. For neither was there any great possibilitie or likelyhood, that not one or two, but so many at once, and such as were not onely the soueraignes of the whole house and fellowship, but famous ouer the whole citie for their excellent learning, should forsake such a cloister as the like was not in all the territory of Granata, leauing it in a maner desolate, and escape in safety from the furthest part of Spaine into Germanie. And if they should steale a∣way in seuerall companies and at sundry times, then were they like to be in euill case that should tarry hindmost. For the Inquisitors that had been quiet a great while, hauing intelligence hereof by some cankred knaue or other, would bestirre themselues of all hands. Therefore they concluded briefly, that either all which were priuie to this counsell, must depart speedily together, or else looke to be apprehended shortly after. But God seeing them in this distresse, shewed them a meanes, how vnder an honest pre∣tence a dozen of them might take occasion to depart with∣in one moneth, and each betake himselfe a seuerall way towards Geneua, where they determined to make their a∣boad, & purposed to meet all together within one twelue∣moneth: as for the rest being as yet but young nonices in religion, which remained behind because they did not greatly like of going away, they within a while after a∣boad the brunt of the hurly-burly when it came. For at the very same time there were three burned out of that cloister, and diuers of the rest diuersly punished. Insomuch, that from that day till this, there was neuer any examinati∣on of matters touching faith in Siuill, but that house hath alwaies made out a man, or two. And very likely it is, that the truth sowen and planted there hath taken so deep root, that it sticketh to the hard stone walls, so that whilest any one stone standeth vpon another, it will yearely yeeld them one or two Lutherans.
I haue by occasion entred into this discourse somewhat largely, partly in respect of Christ's Church, towards the which I should scarce behaue my selfe vprightly, if I should rob these men of their renowne due vnto them, in regard of the ouerthrow which they haue giuen to Idolatry and superstition, behauing themselues as couragiously as they aduentured dangerously, preferring vertue and godlinesse before authoritie and power, voluntarily refusing their present estates wherein they liued with some worship and in much pleasure, and instead thereof contenting them∣selues to be poor and disdained, banished from their owne countrey, to suffer shame and ignominy: finally, to be eue∣ry howre in danger of their liues, which they led notwith∣standing in very great misery. Of the which good and prosperous successe, a great part next vnto God wee doe owe vnto this Arias, of whom our purpose is presently to entreat, forasmuch as all this great fire, that hath enfla∣med to Gods glory, not onely that house, but diuers pla∣ces in the citie abroad, besides a number of other without the citie which we meane not to touch, bred of those few sparks which this man kindled at the first: who by reason of his vnconstant and fickle nature, being halfe suspected of his friends, and hated of strangers, was diuers and sun∣dry times complained vpon to the Inquisitors, conuented before them, answered the matter, and so discharged. At the last it came to pasle, in that troublesome time wherein euery man almost was apprehended for religion, that A∣rias also went to the pot with his fellowes indeed, though hee had diuers times shifted it off before. The which end was foretold him two or three yeares before by Constanti∣no, and that with a vehement affirmation, on a time when Constantino bad this Arias to his house to dinner, where were present at the same time Aegidio and Varquio, to the intent to take him vp somewhat roundly for his halting, forasmuch as gentle admonitions vsed before would no∣thing preuaile. But in processe of talke when they were re∣buking
him most earnestly, he start out in a brauery and said, that he feared greatly lest hee should shortly see Bulles set forth in open shew, prophecying somewhat plainly of the Inquisitours Theatre. Whereunto Constantine made him this answer: Behold Arias, before God I tell it thee, that thou shalt not sit mounted alost, as thou supposed to see and behold othes, but shalt stand below, and bee condem∣ned thy selfe. As indeed it came to passe by Gods secret and diuine prouidence, that notwithstanding he had been in time before a faithlesse fellow, yet his last apprehension turned not to his vndoing, but wrought in him effectually, and contrary to hope brought forth in him the fruites of of true repentance. For hee did so earnestly and deepely lament and bewaile his former estate, that whereas before time, he had been as fearfull as euer was Hare of Hounds, or Ape of whip, now being vpon the racke with a maruel∣lous constancy (which argued in him a wonderfull ex∣change) hee withstood the enemies of Gods truth, and took vp the Inquisitors sharply, that sat in their seats of ma∣iestie like Demigods, saying that they were meeter to driue packs, & that such an office were more sit for them, than to sit where they doe in seat of iudgement, and take vpon them the determination of causes in religion, wherin they were as blind & yet as bold as Bayard; declaring moreouer vnto them, that for his own part he was heartily sorry, and did most earnestly repent him, and would doe while he had a day to liue, for that hee had wittingly and willingly in their presence impugned the truth against the godly defen∣dants of the same, whereof hee himselfe was now become a defender. Many other sharp rebukes, so oft as he came to his answer, the Inquisitours receiued at his hands. But in the end hee was brought forth after their guise and ac∣customed maner of pomp, arayed with all their robes, ho∣norable (no doubt) in the sight of God, though in mans iudgement reproachfull and ignominious: a man, to bee reuerenced for hisage, but specially for the hartie repen∣tance
of his former life, & for that notable confession of the truth which he made, leaning vpon his staffe: & so depar∣ting from the stage to the stake with a merry and cheerfull countenance, he made satisfaction to the Church of God by this notable example of repentance at his death, for all the mischiefe that he had done thereto by his vnfaithfull and hypocriticall dealing in the rest of his life time before. O man most happy of all other, worthy to be shrined, and to haue a seuerall place among the chiefe champions of Gods truth heer in this world, that hast forsaken the grea∣test mischiefe and folly, and returned to make the like pro∣testation of Gods truth that other martyrs and confessors haue done before thee: Paul, that chosen and elect vessell of God, placeth himselfe among the first sort of sinners, be∣cause 1. Tim. 1. he had bin a persecuter of the Church of God, tho of a good zeale, yet not grounded vpon knowledge. In what place then or degree shall we set this Arias of ours a∣mong the sinfull sort, who wittingly and willingly, secret∣ly not openly, behaued himselfe like an enemie, and perse∣cuted the same? Paul referreth it to the secret purpose of al∣mighty God, that he might obtain the more mercy, wher∣of he had made himselfe vnworthy so many wayes, saying it was to this end, that Christ in him might powre out all the aboundance of his mercie and graces, for an example to all them that should truely beleeue in him. How much then and how plentifully hath Christ opened his coffers, and bestowed his mercies (the treasures of his goodnesse) vpon this new Paul, if we may so tearm him? How sure and certaine a token doth hee giue hereby, of his excee∣ding great mercie, grace, and loue towards all sinners? Therefore by this one example, this lesson may we learne, as by the true mirrour of Gods goodnesse, to keepe our selues from rash iudgements and speeches towards such as wee see in the most desperate estate that can bee, foras∣much as wee cannot certainely tell what God hath de∣termined concerning them, but ought rather to follow
the counsell of Paul, that is, to hope the best. D. Iohn Aegidio a Canon and Preacher in the Cathedrall Church in Siuill. THis Doctour Aegidio, albeit he was a man both apt to attaine learning and painfull besides, yet hauing be∣stowed his time in vnprofitable studies, notwithstanding that he had runne his full race, and attained the highest de∣grees in Schooles, and professed diuinitie a long time, (such was the state of learning in those dayes) that he had scarcely his Latin tongue. Besides this his small skill either in the tongues or in any other good learning, he was a wicked contemner and blasphemer against the holy Scrip∣tures: Yea I haue heard himself be waile the euill successe of learning & studie in his time, & the ignorance of that age, confessing it to be such, that whosoeuer had any wayes medled with the holy Scriptures in the Vniuersitie of Al∣cala, where he himselfe studied, was so farre off from being accounted of among the learned, that many would scorn∣fully and in great derision tearm him a good Bibler, prefer∣ring Lmbardus, Scotus, Gregorius, Arithmeticus, and such other Dunses, before the expresse word of God, for pro∣foundnesse of wisdome or deep diuinitie. Afterwards be∣ing publike Reader of diuinitie at Siguenca, he was sent for to Siuill, by one Alexander that was his predecessor there, to the intent he might be their Preacher in the Cathedrall Church in Siuill: where he was so highly commended, both for his vertue and learning, that he was Subdeane of the Church, contrary to their orders, hauing neuer beene examined by the Doctours, as the custome is. And truely for such school-diuinitie, as was generally and vniuersally receiued all Christendome ouer, he was very famous, and of great credite, marry, hee neuer attempted to preach o∣penly, nor had once opened the Bible, to read or study the Scriptures. And therefore the very first time that he came
into the Pulpit, contrary to all mens expectations, he was found altogether so vnfit for such a function, that he began to be greatly out of conceit with himselfe, and to grow in contempt of others: by the daily encrease whereof on both parts, they fell so to repent them, the one for admit∣ting him so vnaduisedly, the other for taking vpon him that office so arrogantly, being vnable to discharge it, that both they minded to remoue him, and he himselfe deter∣mined to leaue them. But in processe of time, after hee had thus passed the pikes by the space of a yeare or two, it was his chance to meet with one that gaue him such in∣structions (or rather it was the ordinance of God, that prouided so well, both for him & for the whole citie) that within few howres conference, he learned by that parties meanes the readie way for a Preacher to trauaile in, and what the office and dutie of a Preacher was: to the obtai∣ning whereof it was told him, that he must vse other meanes, other bookes, and other maisters, then hitherto he had done. Whereat D. Aegidio was somewhat astonied at the first, hearing him make such a sermon vnto him, but especially maruelled to see his boldnesse, that being but a plaine fellow, and as a man would say a very Russet∣coat, besides that, one taken not to be very wel in his wits, would presume so boldly to teach such a Doctour as hee was, being neither familiarly acquainted with him, nor knowing him to his thinking. Yet D. Aegidio being of a gentle disposition by nature, and hearing him discourse so largely of the dutie of a Preacher, wherein hee ac∣knowledged his owne infirmitie, did the more easily bri∣dle himselfe, and gaue him the hearing quietly. The force of whose perswasions (being a man indued with Gods spi∣rit) was so great, that from that day forward D. Aegidio was quite altered and become a new man, thinking all his former life and labour euill spent, and therefore beganne a∣new to tread another path which should lead him vnto perfect wisedome and learning, whereof as then hee knew
not one step. Furthermore, perceiuing his counseller to stand so long vpon that point which concerned the dutie of a good Preacher, he took it to be a sufficient calling for him to that vocation, whereof he knew he should neither reap commoditie nor estimation in this world. Perhaps many will maruell to hear the party named that was the occasion of so suddaine a change and alteration of such a man in so short space, taking vpon him to teach him the true way to perfect wisedome. Truly I must needs disclose it, to the end that the wonderful mysteries of Gods electi∣on may be manifested and reuerenced, who by the foolish of this world confoundeth the wisedome of man. His name was Roderico Valerio, man long ago condemned at Siuill by the Inquisitors for a false Apostle, a counterfait Prophet, and a wicked deceiuer of the people, and there∣vpon banished, and in his exile suffred for the profession of the truth. Whose wonderfull kind of calling to the true knowledge of Christ, since I am occasioned to make mention of the person, it shall neither be greatly imperti∣nent briefly to speak of, nor tedious to such as be godly dis∣posed. This Valerio (a Citizen of Nebrissa, a famous towne as any is in all the precinct of Granata, both for the anti∣quitie thereof, and chiefly for the fame of one Antonio de Nebrissa a notable Clerke as any was, and one that first restored the puritie of the Latin tongue in Spaine in these our dayes) was descended of a good house, and of suffici∣ent abilitie to maintaine the worship thereof: howbeit he employed his wealth, not to vertue, but as commonly such men of abilitie doe, which think all their honor to consist in the maintenance of a good stable, & the furniture there∣of, in games, in costly and excessiue apparell, in hunting, & other such like pastimes and exercises. For in all these qua∣lities he was singular aboue all the yong gentlemen of the whole citie: insomuch that hee sought not only to match such as were his equalls in degree and abilitie, but also to exceede them far. In the middest of these vain phanta∣sies,
a certaine motion came into his mind (by what occa∣sion, or through whose perswasion, or otherwise by what meanes, God knoweth) but he suddenly left all his old de∣lights, contemning the speech of the people (which was a hard thing for a man to doe) and bent himselfe wholly both body and soule to the exercise of vertue & godlinesse, that a man would searcely iudge him to bee a man of this world. Moreouer, the wonderfull change that appeared to be in him otherwise, as well in his speech and behaui∣our, as in his apparell that was fine and sutable before, gor∣gious as might be, and now quite altered into simple stuffe and plainest fashion, was well liked of some, but on the other side a great number thought it meere madnesse or starke folly. But as the like false verdites giuen of the holy Apostles, that were indued with the Holy Ghost, were attainted by the effectes of the same spirit, so the per∣fect feare of God, with the bewayling of his former vani∣ties, the earnest desire of righteousnesse, and his whole talke tending to these ends and concerning these matters, alwayes framed according to the prescript rule of Gods word, was a sufficient proofe and euidence to men of per∣fecter vnderstanding, that the spirit of God most certainly possessed him. In his youth time hee had gotten a little smack in the Latin, by the help where of hee was conuer∣sant in the holy Scriptures both day and night: so that by continuall studie thereof, hee had a great part of them by heart, and could make application thereof to his purpose sensibly & maruellous readily. He had also dayly conflicts with the spiritual men (as they call them) the Priests and Monks, which were the causes (said he) that not only the estate of the Clergy, but also all Christendome was so fouly corrupted, that they were almost hopelesse of remedy: for which causes hee did also diuers and sundry times sharply rebuke them. Whereat this pharisaicall generation much maruelling, enquired of him how he attained so suddenly to all this skilin holy Scriptures? how he durst presume so
arrogantly to inuay against the very supporters and lights of the Church? For indeed he spared none, but would tell the proudest of them his minde, being but a lay-man voide of all good learning, and one that had spent the greater part of his time in vaine and vnprofitable studies. Like∣wise they examined him, by force of what commission hee did it: who sent him: how hee was called: and by what tokens hee declared the same. Alas for them good men, when they cannot denie their abominations, nor longer hold out the light which discouereth their darknesse, euen now as in all other ages from time to time, they are driuen to these shifts. Howbeit Valerio answered them truly and with a bold courage to euery demand: that he had not fi∣shed for that wisedome, and caught it in their most filthie puddles, and muddie ditches, but had it by the only good∣nesse of the Holy Ghost, who poureth whole floods of grace into the hearts of true beleeuers most aboundantly. As for his boldnesse, he told them, that both the goodnes of his quarrell, and hee that sent him gaue him the encou∣ragement, and that the spirit of God which is bound to no estate or degree, be it in name neuer so spirituall, specially if it be corrupt, hath heretofore chosen very idiots, and fishermen, and placed them in the roome of Apostles, to controll the Synagogue of the learned touching the law, to appeach them of ignorance, & to call the whole world to the knowledge of their own saluation: & that the same Christ had sent him, whose name and authoritie hee had for his warrant: but as for any signe to declare the same, he said it was the token of a bastardly generation, and of the branches degenerate from the true stocke of the chil∣dren of God, to aske for any signes in the time of such light, when all things shine therewith, yea verie darknesse it selfe as cleare as noone day. At the length, for these, and such like matters he was called to his answer before the Inquisitors, where he disputed very earnestly of the true Church of Christ, and which were the markes to
know it by, how man was iustified in the sight of God, and of such other points of religion: the knowledge whereof, he confessed that he had attained vnto by no meanes or help of man, but by the onely handy worke of God, and his wonderfull reuelation. Howbeit his madnesse & phrensie, wherewith the Inquisitors supposed him to bee troubled, excused him for this time: yet to the end that he might the sooner come to himself again, they condemned him in the losse of all his substance, & sent him packing as poor as Iob: but he neuer repented himselfe thereof, or be∣came other man; insomuch that within a yeare or 2. after he was sent for againe about the same matters, & then dri∣uen to make recantation: marry, in consideration that they tooke him to be lunatick still, they spared him his life, ad∣iudging him neuerthelesse to weare the Sambenite, and to suffer perpetuall imprisonment during life, saue onely that on sundayes they brought him forth, with many other moe of his companions, and carried them to Saint Salua∣tours Church to heare seruice. Whereas diuers and sun∣dry times he arose out of his place, and in the hearing of all the people, controlled the Preacher when hee taught them amisse. At what time it so chanced, that the Inquisi∣tors were not halfe so bad as other that had beene before them, so that his fact was wound vp quietly, and excused by madnesse and folly. Afterwards, he was remoued forth of prison to Saint Lucars, into a certaine house of reli∣gion, where he died, being a man aboue 50. yeares of age, a very wonder to the world at that time, sent to awake men out of their dead sleep of wickednesse & ignorance wher∣in they lay snoring and snorting so long. But forasmuch as those articles whereof he was most vniustly condemned, were strange and not heard of in Siuill at those dayes, hee had a Sambenite appointed to weare, such one as was of the largest size that any ware in his time, the which at this day is to be seen for a speciall monument of a notable heretike in the vestry of the chief Church in Siuill, in a place
where euery man may easily see it, with this inscription wrought in capitall letters, Roderico Valerio a citizen of Ne∣brissa, an Apostata, and a false Apostle of Siuill, who said he was sent from God. By this mans aduertisement, as I shew∣ed before, was this Doctour Aegidio first awaked, and by his instructions came first to the knowledge of the true Gospel of Christ, wch lay buried a long season before, so that nei∣ther maister nor scholler once heard so much as one word thereof. Therefore so oft as his matter came in hearing before the Inquisitours, this Doctor Aegidio did alwayes stand his good friend as much as in him lay, through whose meanes it was thought that he found the more fa∣vour at the Inquisitours hands in the mitigation of their sentence vpon him, being a relapse as their term is. But in the end Doctor Aegidio himselfe bought full dearely that little curtesie that was shewed to this man at his mediati∣on. For thereby he purchased to himselfe both much ha∣tred, and grew dayly into great suspicion with all that pack of Pharisies, that could not wel away with his perfect and vertuous sinceritie. Besides these good instructions, this Aegidio was also familiarly acquainted & conuersant with Constantino Fontio, a man excellently well learned, by whose dayly conference, he profited maruellously in studie, fell to the reading of good Authors, and so grew to profound knowledge in the holy Scriptures: but specially concer∣ning such matters whereof he would preach to edifie the people withall, he both learned them perfectly by confe∣rence with otherwise & learned men, & partly by his own reading and experience: at the length, beganne to preach as learnedly, godly, and zealously, as he had before times done coldly, foolishly, and vnskilfully. Then began the hearers to feel the maruellous force of that doctrine which these three men of great credit and estimation, Aegidio, Constantino, & Varquia magno taught with one consent, in∣somuch that the more they grew in knowledge from their old ignorance and blindnesse, the more were these men
had in reputation among them, and the old hyporcites de∣spised, that had taught them other doctrine to the great pe∣rill of their soules. Whereupon there were dayly diuers complaints brought to the Inquisitors eares of these men: but specially of D. Aegidio, who of meer simplicity, and by reason that he was in some more authoritie than the rest, did more openly inueigh against the aduersaries of the truth whom they began chiefly to enuie at such time as the Em∣peror in respect of his singular learning and integritie of life, elected him to the bishopricke of Dortois. For then those hypocrits began to bestirre them of all hands, and to lay all their heads together to giue him a lift, thinking that if he were once consecrated Bishop there, he would keepe a foule coyle in their kingdome. Therfore they cited him to come before the holy House, where plaint was entred a∣gainst him by such as were their crafts-maisters, able to worke him mischiefe, and to bring it about closely, so that by their meanes he was cast into prison, and therupon exa∣mined. The first matter was concerning the iustification of a Christian man, and diuers other that depend thereon; as of mans merits, of purgatory, of the meanes of satisfa∣ction for sinnes deuised by mans braine, of the number of Mediatours, and whether there were any moe than Christ alone: also concerning the assurance of faith in such as are iustified, &c. Besides these, there were also other matters that fell out by occasion of an abominable Idoll of the blessed Virgine Marie, wrought very artificially by Fer∣dinando the King (as the report goeth): the which Image, vpon diuers feastes of the blessed Virgine, is set vp and shewed to the people with great pompe: whereupon Ido∣latrie or the worshipping of Images came in question. Also by like occasion of a certaine chip of wood that is ve∣ry superstitiously honoured in the same Church, as a peece of the Crosse whereon Christ was crucified, the which re∣lique Doctour Aegidio wished to bee burned, the same matter likewise came in talke. Moreouer, concerning
inuocation and prayers to dead saints, and the banishing out of pulpits the deuices of mans brain, and of placing therein the perfect and expresse word of God and other such necessary matters of like importance: and therwithal, to set him forward, he was charged to be an earnest fauou∣rer of Valerio de Nebrissa, &c. Whereunto D. Aegidio made answer particularly, but chiefly touching the first poynt. whereof he made so perfect & absolute a defence, so learned∣ly, so godly, & so absolutely, as any hath bin hitherto heard or seene: in the which answere hee gaue his aduersaries twenty waies to take aduantage of him, and thereupon to inferre diuers other such heresies. But at that time the Inquisitours were not growne so bold as since then they haue beene, nor indeede durst burne such a man as he was for these quarrels, albeit they were vrged and called vpon on euery side very earnestly so to do. Therefore seeing that they could in no wise make him change or alter his minde, they began to deuise which way they might saue his life, because the Emperour, who lately had elected him to so great a Bishopricke, as also the whole Chapter of the Ca∣thedrall Church in Siuill, were becom very earnest suters in his behalfe. There was also one of the Inquisitours named Corrano, a good and a fatherly old man, who for that assu∣rance which hee had by his owne knowledge of the good conuersation of Doctor Aegidio, and of the froward∣nes of his accusers, stood his very good friend, though his wicked associate Pedro Diazio was sore against him; who like a proud Apostata forsooke the truth, wherein the same Valerio de Nebrissa had instructed him in his priuate lectures vpon Pauls Epistle to the Romanes: for the which hee gaue him at that time most hearty thankes, and yet notwithstanding was now become a turne-cote. When Varquio was dead, and Constantino in the low coun∣tries with the Emperour being his chaplaine and confes∣sour, there were certaine arbitratours appointed on both partes concerning this religion that was newly come
into Spaine. And Doctor Aegidio for his part among o∣thers named one Bartholomeo de Zamora, a Monke of the order of Saint Dominicke, a man very well learned, and one that knewe the truth. Who afterwards by the Empe∣rours meanes was preferred to the Archbishopricke of Toledo: whence hee was shortly after deposed for religion, or as it is more probably coniectured, vpon some priuy grudge which the Archbishop of Siuill, high commis∣sioner in the Inquisition, bare vnto him, and so after many conflicts with the Inquisitours, at the length died. But at that time hee could not bee present at this triall, by reason that hee was attendant vpon the Emperour: So that Arias, who was commonly called Seigneur Blanco, was Iudge at that time. But what his verdite was, is already partly re∣ported in the speciall history that I haue written of him, and perhaps the same may come forth to light hereafter particularly ioyned with the answer that Doctor Aegidio made thereunto. But whether Arias were thereto nomi∣nated by the Inquisitours themselues, or by Doctor Ae∣gidio, as yet it is not certainly known: so that some being absent, and some fearefull to speake their mindes for feare of afterclaps, the determination thereof was refer∣red to one called Dominico à Soto, a sophister of great same in the Vniuersity of Salamancke, and one other of the or∣der of Saint Dominicke, who after great expectation of his comming, at the last came from Salamanck to Siuill, and there entred disputation with Doctor Aegidio that was but a plaine-dealing man and of a small foresight, more craftily and subtilly then other had dealt before him. First, pretending much good will towards him, and per∣ceauing that by dealing with him openly, hee could in no case remoue him from his opinion, hee fained himselfe to be iumpe with him in the same: marry hee aduised him, that forasmuch as those articles that presently were called in question were somewhat odious in most mens eares, to the end to stoppe that gappe, hee would make and
publish some apt declaration and exposition thereof, the which he offred to prescribe vnto him in the best sort that he could, that he might vse it if it liked him, or else they two to conferre about it, and set it forth to the better dis∣charge of their consciences, furtherance of the truth, and contentation of the hearers. Whereupon Asoto prescribed such a president: both of them conferred about it, and in the end agreed without any controuersie. There was a so∣lemne day of hearing appointed by the Inquisitours for that purpose, and two pulpits set in the Cathedrall Church, the one for D. Aegidio, the other for Asoto, and all the peo∣ple were assembled thither. Asoto began his sermon, and proceeded accordingly. Immediately after the end there∣of, he drew forth of his bosome a declaration quite contra∣ry to that whereupon they were agreed. For in the former there was nothing but that which was consonant to the truth and his own conscience: in this, no such matter, but only a plain recantation of all those things whereof he was accused, and had bin a maintainer of before by the space of 2. whole yeares, and lately also during the time of his im∣prisonment. But the pulpits were such a distance asunder, that by meanes thereof partly, and partly with the mur∣mure of the common people, whiles euery man gaue his verdite thereof, there was such a noise, that Doct. Aegidio could not well vnderstand what Asoto said: but yet for the good opinion which he had of him, gaue him such cre∣dit, that at the end of euery article, when Asoto craftily asked his consent thereto, willing him to speake aloud that the people might hear him, or else to signifie so much by some countenance or gesture, he did so, confessing that he did a∣gree to all those things which Asoto had read vnto them. Whereupon he was presently condemned to suffer impri∣sonment for 3. yeares. Moreouer, this crafty Monk procu∣red a prohibition against him for preaching, reading or writing by the space of 10 yeares after, enioining him du∣ring that time, not to depart Spain. Wherat D. Aegidio mar∣uelled
much, hearing that his punishment was no greater, knowing nothing hereof, nor vnderstanding after what sort he was circumuented, til the time that he was brought to prison againe: whither diuers of his friends resorting to visit him, began to rebuke him for denying the truth. The which things wee neuer came to haue any notice of, but of his owne mouth in the time of his imprisonment. During wch time he chanced to hear of the death of 3. of his most deadly enemies, Sbarroia, a sophister & one of y• or∣der of S. Dominike, Pedro Mexia, oe that took vpon him ve∣ry arrogantly the title of a Philosopher without any ma∣ner of good learning, and Pedro Diazio the Inquisitor that plaied the Apostata and forsook the truth most wickedly as was before declared. Neither is it to be otherwise thought then to be the secret iudgement of God, that 3. of the grea∣test enemies that the truth had, and sore aduersaries to this innocent man, should dye all within one yeare each after other, while D. Aegidio was in prison, and his matters in examination, and (as it is reported) that some of them should depart scarce quietly. Howbeit hee liued foure or fiue yeares after that retractation which was compassed of him by such deceitful meanes, and was neuerthelesse estee∣med of all that godly congregation, and did as much good to other afterwards, as at any other time being at his most liberty. In the wch time, by reason of an embassie which he was sent in, he visited his brethren that sometime had been schollers to D. Cacalia at Valladolit professing the gospel vn∣der him, & renouncing all wickednes & impietie. Whom after he had comforted and confirmed, in his way home∣ward as he returned to Siuill, being sore shaken in that long iourney, by reason that he had not been acquainted with trauaile of a great while before, he sickned, and thereupon within a few dayes after departed this troublesome life, and went to euerlasting rest. He left behind him certaine Commentaries vpon the book of GENESIS, & Saint PAULES Epistle to the
Colossians, vpon certaine of the Psalmes and Canti∣ca Canticorum, written by him in the Spanish tongue very learnedly, and like one plentifully indued with the Holy Ghost, the which are reserued in the custodie of diuers men of trust and credit, as iewells and treasures to the be∣hoofe of the Church. The which albeit they were both learned and godly, yet other things which hee wrote in prison, doe so farre exceede them for the speciall affections moued (no doubt) by the spirit of God, and expressed therein, that a man may easily see the force of affliction & tribulation, how much it auaileth the godly for deepe iudgement in matters of diuinitie. But within two or three yeares after his death the new Inquisitors thinking that the other who had the examination of him had dealt a great deal more easily with him than became Inquisitors, seeing that they could not cite his spirit o appeare before them, which was in quietnesse and in rest, therefore they determined to shew their spite towards his carcasse & dry bones. Whereupon they digged him out of his graue, and buried in his place and vnder his name a puppet of straw, brought his corps vpon the scaffold, and vsed it in such sort as they would haue done himselfe that sitteth in Hea∣uen with Christ on the right hand of his Father, if they could haue caught him here in earth. But God that dwel∣leth on high, laugeth at their follies. Doctor Constantino Fontio, a Canon and Preacher in the Cathedrall Church in Siuill. IT was the singular good hap of the Church (sauing that it heaped condemnation vpon it the more) that Constan∣tino should come in place after so godly a man as D. Aegidio was: by whose meanes Constantino in very short space mar∣uellously encreased & profited in vertue and sound religi∣on. And therfore, forasmuch as the worthines of this man was so great, I am iustly occasioned somewhat largely to
discourse of him in this historie. Wherein I feare it great∣ly, lest I shall not bee able sufficiently to set out the com∣mendation of that man accordingly as his worthinesse de∣serueth. For how can I deuise to sound thy prayses suffici∣ently, being the most famous Diuine of any that hath li∣ued in our dayes, and one whom God of his aboundant gracious goodnesse, did indue so plentifully with so rare qualities, as hardly are to bee seen together againe in one man, so that well they may be wondered at, but neuer va∣lued to their worth? It is a strange matter, and almost in∣credible, and yet true that I will report of him, for I am a∣ble to iustifie it: that of many thousands of men that haue viewed this mans qualities thorowly, there was neuer any, but eyther loued him passingly, or else hated him spitefully. Therefore as he was ordained to be both beloued and ha∣ted with extremitie: so had hee many malicious enemies, and as many earnest friends and fauourers. And heere I comprehend not vnder the name of friends, such as hee himselfe bare good will vnto, more than I account those men among the number of his foes to whom hee wished euill: but onely such as he knew not, and yet they with all their hearts both loued and honoured him. For those that he bare speciall affection vnto (forasmuch as he knew the vnconstancie of this world) were onely one or two in all his lifetime. Notwithstanding, such as he thought worthy to be beloued in respect of their vertue, he would pleasure any way that possibly he could. His youth, in comparison of other young men that bestudious, perhaps he bestowed not so praysably: yet so, as it was no hindrance to him in his age afterwards, but that he passed it with great com∣mendation. For being a man of a maruellous pleasant wit, and in matters of disport pleasantly disposed (otherwise very faire conditioned) hee diminished his credit and esti∣mation somewhat after he was grown in yeares, by vsing himselfe ouermuch to esting. Howbeit, that was only with his aduersaries, who notwithstanding would as greatly
haue disliked him on the other side, if hee had been as sage and graue as either Curius or Cato. And indeed there are a great sort of his sayings in many mens mouthes, which being well weighed and considered, are more worthy to be called wise Apothegmes, than pleasant speeches: but they are such as cannot aptly bee expressed, and retaine their grace in any other language. Neither did he so commonly vse to iestat any, or so finely, as at those hypocrites the Monks and Priests that had a certaine pride in themselues, of a foolish pharisaicall opinion of holinesse, being but in meere toyes and trifles. But most of all he vsed to gird the foolish Preachers, whereof there was neuer any age so full, whom the holy Scriptures account to be the vilest sort of people that are, comparing them to salt that hath lost his sa∣uor, & wil serue to no vse. Neither can any man sufficiently maruell at his passing wit, that being in a barbarous age, when all good learning was almost lost, and forgotten a∣mong men, in this vniuersall time of ignorance, hee did either only attaine to grounded knowledge, or had very few fellowes. And in the tongues, to wit, the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, became so notable without any teacher, that he alone had been sufficiently able to restore them vnto vs of himselfe. As for all other kinde of learning that ser∣ued to the furnishing of a perfect oratour, he attained not onely a superficiall sight therein, but a perfect and absolute knowledge. With these helpes he fell to the study of holy Scriptures, wherein he became so well learned euen in his youth, that whensoeuer he was occasioned to shew his o∣pinion concerning any matters, or the signification of any termes therein, he left nothing vntouched that any might doubt of, except such as were blind as buzzards, & could see nothing. Moreouer, he was so eloquent in his owne tongue, that all his auditors were brought into a great ad∣miration thereof. Being thus furnished with these good gifts, he fell to preaching, and without comparison passed all them of this age or of the age before him. Besides these
good qualities, hee had a singular good discretion and iudgement in all his doings, the which he had attained vnto, partly by great study, partly by long practice and experience, but specially by great search and profound knowledge in holy Scriptures, wherein he plainly saw, as it had beene from the top of a high Tower, whatsoever all the world did. At such times as he preached (which com∣monly was about eight of the clock) there was so great resort to his Sermon, that after foure of the clocke in the morning, and many times from three, it was hard to get a good place in all the Church where a man might conveni∣ently heare him. Notwithstanding all this fauour and af∣fection which all the people bare vnto him (except the ma∣licious hypocrites) besides his meat and drinke for his rea∣sonable sustenance, and his Library which was but meanly furnished, he gathered together no other great substance: for he was a man farre from those two plagues that haue alwaies infected the Church of Christ, couetousnesse and ambition. In so much that being offered a good Canon∣ship in the Church of Toledo, which many a man of his or∣der would think himselfe in happy case if he might attaine vnto, he was so farre from the greedy desire thereof, that he contemned it, rather not caring for it t after his ac∣customed manner jeasted at it merily. Fo mmediatly af∣ter the death of the Bishop of Vtica, that was preacher in the Cathedrall Church, the whole Chapiter with one con∣sent offered him that place which they commonly call the Opposition, and sent for him thither very honourably. But he made them answer without any great deliberation, that he had great cause to yeeld them many thankes for their good opinions conceaved of him, in that they thought him worthy of so great a dignitie, saying that hee would doe the best he could to requite their curtesies. Howbeit forasmuch as his fathers and his grandfathers bones buried many yeares agoe, were now in rest and quiet, he would in no case doe any thing whereby the rest that they were in
might be interrupted. And this (I suppose) was the summe of his answer and the very words which hee spake. For a∣bout that time there grew hot quarrells betwixt the Arch∣bishop surnamed Siliceus a man of famous memorie for∣sooth, and the chapiter of the same Church. The Archbi∣shop was hated of the chief men of the chapiter because he had openly & in opprobrious maner reported them to be descended of the loine of the Iewes: and they on the other side being men in good estate, and not able to beare these reproaches, thought to be euen with this foolish Bi∣shop that came from cart & plough, and by good hap (as a man may say) without all respect of learning or honesty, was preferred to the highest dignity in all Spain next vnder the king: and because he was a troubler of common quiet, they purposed to work him all the spight that might be: by meanes wherof none were spared that had been buried by the space of a 100 yeares, but that this good Archbishop vnder pretence of religion made inquiry of the Canons fa∣thers, grandfathers and great grandfathers, driuing them to deriue their pedigree out of their graues. The which foo∣lish & vngodly controuersies Constantino took occasion to quip them for, at such time as he was sent for to supply that place. In like not long before he refused a Canonship in the Church o uenca, both rich to the purse & worshipful besides for estimation, situate in his own natiue foil. More∣ouer, being the first man that brought the knowledge of true religion into Siuill, he did so plainly set it forth and so sincerely, so sharply rebuked those pedlers that sold all their packs of pardons and other fancies for pence, laying such things so sore to their charge, that notwithstanding they saw full well that he would proue a plague both to them and their whole generation, yet could they not finde any iust cause to accuse him of but to their owne shame, and yet ceased they not to hate him deadly. Howbeit he took away their stings so cleane, that they could neuer come conueniently to poison him: neither did hee slacke for all
that to set forth the truth, notwithstanding that hee knew they lay in wait for him priuily. And surely it was the sin∣gular prouidence of God which so blessed that Citie, that there should be in that Church at once three such notable men and so excellently learned, Constantino, Aegidio & Var∣quio, which before times were Students together in Diui∣nitie, and now furtherers of vertue and good religion with one consent, and with like zeale. For Varquio did read vpon the Gospell after Matthew, in the Cathedrall Church; and that being done, did afterwards take in hand to expound the Psalter. Aegidio preached dayly: Constanti∣no not so often as Aegidio, but to as great fruit and edifying, continuing all together each man in his roome, till after∣wards that God sent stormie tempestes, to the end to try each mans building, that Varquio in the middest of this hurly burly, while hee and his aduersaries were bickering together, died: Constantino was sent for by the Emperour and his sonne Philip, and forced to forsake Siuill. So that Doct. Aegidio was left alone like a lambe among a sort of wolues to minister matter for a tragedy: the which is alrea∣dy declared in this historie. After whose death Constantino left the Emperours Court, where hee had gotten both wisedome and learning, and returned to Siuil againe to set forward the light of the Gospell that had beene stopped for a while. The which thing he did with as much zeale as euer he did before time: so that both he himselfe was ve∣ry well esteemed, and his sermons liked of all the people exceedingly. It was also his chance, by reason of a certaine order taken by the whole Chapiter, to bee appointed the next lent after his comming to preach euery other day in the Cathedrall Church. The wch when he refused to take vpon him because of his late sicknes, being scarcely well re∣couered, he was compelled to do it perforce, notwithstand∣ing that he was so weak a creature that he was somtime car∣ried thither, & for faintnes once or twise in a sermon com∣pelled to drink a draught of wine to refresh himself withal,
and to make him able to hold out til the end of his howre. The which (doubtlesse) was a very strange sight to behold: and yet such fauour euery man bare towards him, that hee was dispensed withall to vse that libertie. Afterwards be∣ing restored to his health, he deuised a ready way to set for∣ward his purpose, and such as none had troden in before him. For by his meanes one Seignior Scobario a famous man in Siuill, both in life and learning, to whom the Se∣nate of the Citie by common consent had committed the charge and ouersight of the Colledge of children (com∣monly called the house of learning) conferring with Con∣stantino about the matter, translated the reuenue that some drunken chaplen would haue deuoutly drunk for his soule, into a yearely stipend, towards the maintenance of a Di∣uinitie-lecture in the same Colledge, whereof this Con∣stantino was chosen reader. Who both happily tooke in hand and effectually pursued that profitable exercise: be∣ginning first with Salomons Prouerbs, the booke of the Preacher, and Cantica Canticorum. Which after hee had passed through very learnedly, he proceeded into ob, and expounded it more than halfe. All which workes are ex∣tant at this day in written hand, gathered very painefully by one of his auditors named Bab. Wherein it shall ap∣peare hereafter, as I can haue leasure to publish them, how farre hee hath exceeded all that haue written vpon these books hitherto, and how excellently wel learned he was. But some euill spirit enuying the good successe of that Ci∣tie, vnder the pretence of feruent zeale, caused him to for∣sake that course wherein hee ranne before, and afterward incombered him so many wayes, that he was neuer cleare quit of all till his dying day. About what time welneare, it hapned that the chiefe Canonship (which was first foun∣ded for a Preacher) fell void in the Church of Siuill, by rea∣son of Doct. Aegidio his death. Whereunto the whole Chapiter would willingly haue chosen Constantino, as one whom they thought of desert worthy the place, for the
notable gifts that both they and all the whole Citle saw in him of a long time while he continued Preacher there, but that it would not stand with the rules of their House to admit him therunto without oppositions. For vpon their last error in chusing Doct. Aegidio, immediately after, they entered an order, that none thenceforth should be admit∣ted to enioy that place without their accustomed kinde of oppositions vsuall in all Churches. Whereas Constantino on the other side had alwaies scorned and drided those ce∣remonies, as toyes, not much vnlike the contentions of iugglers & minstrels for the best games. Moreouer, one Val∣desio Bishop of Siuill & a courtier, owing Constantino a priuy grudge from the first time that he preached before the Em∣peror, & grew into his fauour, was very earnestly in hand with the Chapiter, pressing them with their own decree, after he vnderstood that they were about to vndo it again. Wherupon there was a day appointed for the opposition, and published in the most famous Cities in Spaine, so that diuers came flocking, as it had bin a sort of crowes about a carrion. But the wiser sort kept themselues away from encountring with him, for the greatfauour and estimati∣on that hee was in, so that there were but onely two that aboad the brunt: the one called Maiuelo a Canon of Alca∣la, the other a Canon of Malaga, hoping belike to get some great bootie thereby. Howbeit the first vpon better aduisement returned home againe shortly after to Alcala: the other Canon of Malaga, bolstered by the Archbishop to spight Constantino withall, wilfully continued the skir∣mish. At the length, Constantino being ouercome through the great entreatie and perswasion of the Chapiter, but especially moued by the importunate sute of a friend of his, to whom I wish he had not yeelded so much in this (for then perhaps he had been aliue at this time) resolued himselfe to stand for the Canonship, and to dispute after the accustomed order: by meanes whereof fulfilling that ceremony, he of Malaga was sent to shake his eares, and
the Chapiter preuailed against the Bishop. There was also at the same time a little zeale which blinded Constantino, lest perhaps some prater should haue sept in place, that would alwaies be barking against good & godly doctrine: whereas by his accepting of the same place there was a cer∣tain likelyhood and hope, that the doctrine therby should haue the more free passage. In respect whereof, hee was the more willing, rather then for any greedy or couetous desire of attaining any wealth thereby, the which vice hee alwayes contemned with a manly courage. Whereupon, his aduersarie that stood against him perceiuing himselfe vnable to weigh with him, either for learning; counte∣nance, or fauour which hee found at the Chapiters hand, bent himself wholly to take exceptions to his person, & to disable him that way. First he began to obiect against him all his youthly toyes, namely mariage, the wch was before he entred into orders, charing him that neither hee was rightly priested, nor came by his degree of Doctorship or∣derly. On the other side, a maruellous rabble of the hypo∣crites that had been of his old acquaintance began to bee galled afresh, seeing him so highly preferred, insomuch that they fell to reuiue old matters concerning diuers points of religion, vrging them more earnestly than they had done before time, & that in the court of ye Inquisition, wherein Valdesio his aduersary sat as Iudge. Notwithstand∣ing in the middest of these broiles, Constantino resting vpon the good wils of the Chapiter, was installed, and whiles the controuersies were at the hottest, there was much busi∣nesse in that Church by meanes of certaine books of Iulia∣no paruo, whereof I made mention before. In the which stormes what place was there wherein Constantino might shroud his head? And yet being brought before the In∣quisitours, albeit hee had thorowly displeased all his aduersaries in the former braules before, yet notwithstand∣ing he auoided all their quarrels picked against him by his quicke and ready answers (after his accustomed maner)
so easily, that they could in no case get him to make any open protestation of his faith, by the which their hope was to compasse and circumuent him. And in very deede he had escaped at the length, but that God of his wonder∣full prouidence compelled him sore against his will, brief∣ly and plainely to confesse his truth. For nigh about the same time there was a very honest and a substantiall wi∣dow, named Isabella Martina, apprehended, in whose house Constantino had hidde certaine speciall bookes for feare of the Inquisitours, which hee might not auow the keeping of in Spaine without present perill. Whose goods being sequestred according to the custome of the Inquisition, her sonne, one Francisco Bertramo, had con∣ueighed diuers Chests of the best stuffe that his mother had, because hee would saue somewhat, so that these gree∣die gulles should not deuoure all. The which thing com∣ming to the Inquisitours eares, by meanes of his vntrustie seruant who disclosed it, was the occasion that they sent immediately one Ludouico Sotellio their Alguazill to de∣mand those Chestes. Who resorted vnto him accor∣dingly; as he began to say his message soberly, Bertramo forgetting the Chestes, and supposing that the cause of his comming had been for Constantino's bookes, tooke the tale out of his mouth and said vnto him: Seignior Ludouico, I know whereabout you come, and therefore if you will promise mee on your honestly quietly to depart vpon the receite therof, I will shew you them. The Alguazill mea∣ning the Chestes (as for the bookes hee neither came for them, nor knew of any such before) promised him so to doe. Wherupon Bertramo carried him forth with into a se∣cret place far within the house, and plucking forth a stone or two in the wall, shewed him Constantino's iewells of paper indeede, but farre more precious than gold or pearle. Whereat the Alguazil being somewhat astonied, to find that which he looked not for, told him that he came to demand no such maner of thing, but certaine Chestes of
his mothers goods, which he had purloined from the Se∣quester. As for his promise made vnto him for his quiet departure, he said hee was not bound thereby otherwise, but that he must needs carry both him & his books to the Inquisitours. Thus by these meanes came all Constantino's writings out of corners to light, and to the Inquisitours hands, contrary both to his owne expectation and his aduersaries, which would haue giuen a great peece of mo∣ney to haue come by them before. And among other of his writings there was one great volume found written throughout with his owne hand, wherein (as the Inquisi∣tours themselues reported in their sentence which they gaue vpon him afterwards standing vpon the scaffold) hee did openly and plainly in maner, as it were for his owne satisfaction, handle these speciall points: that is to say, the state of the Church, the true Church & the Popes Church, whom he called very Antichrist: the Sacrament of the Lords supper: the inuention of the Masse, wherein hee said that the whole world was deceiued & abused through ignorance of the holy Scriptures: the iustification of a Christian man: Purgatory, wch he termed the wolus head, saying that it was a deuice of the Monks to feed their own bellies: also Bulles & Popish pardons, mens merits, shrift, and other articles of Christian religion. The which book so soone as it came to the Inquisitors hands, they deman∣ded of him if he knew his owne hand: howbeit he shifted them off from their purpose a good while, and droue them off from day to day, til at the last vnderstanding the will of God, who had now taken away all euasions from him, he acknowledged his owne hand, and confessed it to bee his owne writing, protesting openly, that all things therein contayned were full of truth & sinceritie. Therefore (said he) take ye no further paines in seeking witnesses to testi∣fie against mee, since you haue so plaine and perfect a con∣fession of my opinion and beliefe, but doe deale with mee as it shall please you. After the which examination and an∣swer
hee remained in prison by the space of two whole yeares: where partly by occasion of his corrupt & naugh∣tie diet, though he were not a man greatly curious or dain∣tie therein before time, but chiefly, of very sorrow consu∣ming him to see so much labour, both of his owne and o∣thers his fellowes, spent in vaine vpon that good Church, which now was so miserably sacked, he fell first to be a lit∣tle crased, and afterwards being not able to abide the excee∣ding heate of the Sunne, which made his prison like a hot∣house vnto him, was faine to strip himselfe into his bare shirt, & so to continue both day & night. By occasiō wher∣of he fell sick of the bloody lixe, and within 15. daies after dyed, amids the filth & soile of the prison, rendring vp his sweet soule to Christ, for the promoting of whose glorie he had oftentimes before aduentured it most manfully. And in this time of his sicknes, as well as at the howre of his death, there was present with him a certaine young man, a Monk of Saint Isidors cloister, vertuous and well disposed, who also was prisoner there for religion at the same time, and put in the same prison with him to keepe him compa∣ny. This Monkes name was Ferdinando. Perhaps in the eyes of foolish worldlings this Constantino seemed to dye, but in very deed he resteth in peace. As for the cruell tor∣tures, which other haue accustomably beene tormented withall, the truth is, he neuer tasted any, not for any re∣gard that these cruell Termagants had of such a man as hee was (whose displeasure hee had earnestly procured a∣gainst him by his sharpe and quicke answers while hee was prisoner) but eyther, for that they determined to de∣lay his punishment, meaning to detaine him, in prison a longer space, to the intent to discourage him, and to keepe other that fauoured his doctrine anie way, or were entred in that religion, in continuall awe: or else, because they thought not that hee should haue been ta∣ken forth of their hands so suddenly. Whereupon, the Inquisitours bruted a rumour abroad to the same end
and purpose, to daunt such as had been his schollers, that they might come trembling into the Court, and accuse themselues before they were sent for, vpon hope of the In∣quisitours mercy: causing it to bee noised, that he in his life being vpon the rack, had confessed vnto them of diuers that were his auditours & schollers. To the which end and purpose, diuers of the next prison adioining to his, were suborned to affirme that they heard the cries and shrikes which he made at the time of his tormenting. Therefore now after his death, seeing him to bee taken out of their hands by Gods good meanes, so that now they had him no more aliue among them to extend their crueltie vpon, they determined notwithstanding to worke him such poore spight as they could, in derogating from the good estimation and report which he had of all men, spreading false and slanderous tales vpon him, that hee should strike himselfe in a veine with a peece of a broken glasse, o auoid both shame and paine. There were also sung openly in the streetes ouer all the Citie diuers filthie and slanderous dities sung by boyes in his dispraise: but whether they were published by procurement of the Inquisitours, or some of their Parasites, or of meer malice deuised and set out by the foolish and variable people, God knoweth, but the other is the more likely. Also against the day of their solemne Triumph, his corps was taken out of the graue, & in place thereof, a puppet of straw put, and afterwards set vp in a pulpit so artificially, resting the one hand vpon the pulpit, and holding the other vpright, that it resembled Constantino very liuely, in such sort as he was wont to preach. And no doubt but that dumbe Image did preach as effectu∣ally in many mens hearts at that instant as euer he himself had done being aliue, in derisiō of whom this puppit was made. Then, at what time that sentence was to be giuen vpon him (to the hearing whereof, diuers came from pla∣ces farre distant from Siuill) the Inquisitours commanded that it should not be pronounced out of the pulpit where
other iudgements were accustomably read, but caused the Image to be brought into their holy Court, and there to haue sentence published: which place was so high, that the the people could not well vnderstand what was read. Whereupon Calderonio the temporall Iudge thinking it not conuenient, and that some other subtiltie was meant thereby, moued the Inquisitours in open audience, that iudgement might bee giuen in the accustomed place, or else read in such sort that the people might vnderstand vp∣on what occasions they had condemned him. Whereunto when the Inquisitors gaue no great eare, but proceeded as before, there began to be a great tumultamong the people, forasmuch as they could not well brook that iniurie, nor indeede would haue put it vp as it seemed, but that they saw Calderonio somewhat more quicke with the Inquisi∣tours, and to tell them their duties once againe: so that they commanded the Image to be carried into the accusto∣med place, and sentence to be pronounced aloud, to satis∣fie the people withall. The reading whereof, occupied a∣bout an howre and an halfe: and the chiefe matter contai∣ned therein, was that which I haue receited before out of Constantino's booke. Marry, the Inquisitours added more∣ouer, that of purpose and vpon good consideration they had omitted many things that were so horrible, so wicked, and so strange, that it was sore against God commande∣ment to vtter them in common audience. There bee di∣uers of this mans works extant that haue passed the print. First a briefe summe of Christian religion. Also one other discourse in the same argument more at large, but some∣what imperfect, or rather scarcely halfe finished: for he pur∣posed to haue comprehended the whole bodie of Christi∣an religion, in two tomes. In the former hee treated of faith: In the other hee thought to haue handled the Sacra∣ments, and to haue spoken of workes, and generally of the duetie of a Christian man. As for the former part, it was already published some yeares agone: whereby hee
procured to himselfe some displeasure and suspicion of he∣resie among the common sort of learned men, forasmuch as entreating of faith he did not plainly inueigh against the Lutherans, nor attributed any preeminence to the Bish. of Rome, but had written rather in derogation of pardons, of purgatory, of mens merits, and such other like trifles, then in aduancement thereof: vpon the which suspicions being examined, he would answer them, that such matters as they wanted in his workes were more pertinent to his second tome, wherein he purposed to discourse of them somewhat largely. Howbeit this other volume neuer came to light, except perhaps it were that which was hidden in the widows house, and came to the Inquisitors hands, the speciall points whereof they published, as I haue before declared. Moreouer, he set forth a Catechisme, which per∣haps in other places elsewhere of more freedome and li∣bertie was not greatly accounted of, but yet in these pla∣ces of darknesse and ignorance, and vnder such tyranny, it gaue much light to many. There be also extant sixe ser∣mons of this good mans, wch he made vpon six of the first verses of the first Psalme. Wherein the learned may see, as well the profound learning that was in him, as also his sin∣gular art for conueiance. But of all his workes, which surely were as learnedly written and as godly as anie that euer were read in Spaine, the confession of a sinner, not passing two or three sheetes long, exceeded all the rest, both for the zeale, learning, and eloquence vttered therin, most liuely expressing the affections of a Christian man, incident to such an argument. First he bringeth in a man before the iudgement seat of God, making him to see, and liuely o lament his owne filthinesse and abomination, to cast off all whatsoeuer these pharisees flattering themselues with their owne righteousnesse were wont to couer our nakednesse withall, being eyther deuised or established by man, and therein hee peruseth all the ten Commande∣ments orderly, confessing him guiltie of the breach therof,
and therewithall maketh so plaine and absolute an expo∣sition of the whole law, in that short summarie, that in such a breuiat (be it spoken without offence to any) I haue not hitherto seene any so lightsome. In the end hee clo∣theth them with the wedding garment of Christs righte∣ousnesse by faith, wherewith alonely he encourageth and emboldneth man before the face of God, as much as hee discomforted him before when as he brought him to the perfect knowledge of himselfe, & the consideration of his owne case and estate. Finally, there is no one lot that con∣cerneth christian religion, but he hath touched it, referring it to some purpose in that briefe table: nor any affection that can be in a man, from the very first letter of the law til the last end of the Gospel, and the fruition of the heauen∣ly habitation, but he hath most liuely expressed it. Neither had he been euer able to deuise such a peece of worke, not∣withstanding his passing gifts of nature and helps of art, except he had first learned them by often experience in himself. All the which books of his writing, worthie (no doubt) to be reserued for euer, albeit the Inquisitours had a little before vnawares allowed, yet at this time they con∣demned them: not for any thing found in them worthy of condemnation (as they themselues testified in their sen∣tence vpon him) but because there should be nothing ex∣tant that might remaine as a monument or a memoriall sounding any wayes to the commendation of him whom they had holden accursed. Lastly, they shewed their poore spight vpon that good mans dry bones, which they digged out of the earth, & vpon that counterfait Image made to his likenes. Howbeit hee himselfe being exalted aboue the clouds, & taken out of their chains, & deliuered from their vniust iudgements (besides the loss of these notable & wor∣thy monuments mentioned before) hath caused a great number of his familiar friends and acquaintance comfort∣lesse
to sit, lamenting and bewayling the misse of such a man. O detestable tyranny that deseruest a thousand cur∣ses, seeing thou canst not restore them againe, what a∣mends wilt thou bee able to make to the world for the death of so many godly men as thou hast most shamefully slaine and murdered? FINIS.
