14333 99838850 3239
A DEFENCE OF A TREATISE TOV∣CHING THE SVFFERINGS AND VICTORIE OF CHRIST IN THE WORKE OF OVR REDEMPTION. Wherein is confirmed, 1 That Christ suffered for vs, not only Bodily griefe, but also in his Soule an impression of the proper wrath of God, which may be called the paines of Hell. 2 That after his death on the Crosse he went not downe into Hell. For Answere to the late writings of Mr Bilson, L. Bi∣shop of Winchester, which he intitleth, The effect of certaine sermons, &c. Wherein he striueth mightily against the doctrine aforesaid. By HENRY IACOB Minister of the worde of God. Iohn 7. ver. 24. Iudge not according to the appearance, but iudge righteous iudgement. 1600.
To all the godly and religious Magi∣strates, faithfull Pastors, and other Christian brethren in England, Grace and peace be multi∣plied in the true sufferinges and victorie of IESVS CHRIST, our onely and most glorious Redeemer. GIVE me leaue I beseech you (Fathers and Brethren right honorable & beloved in Christ) in so great and necessary a case to reply and Defend my selfe in such wise as becommeth me against the vnseeme∣ly writings of a mā, who indeed, I aknow∣ledg, in the world is far greater then I am. Yet forasmuch as the Cause which heere I maintaine is right and iust, as to any man I hope it shall soone appeare that will simply and soberly trie it by the Scriptures: Againe in regard of mine owne person and poore credit, although meane in the world, yet by Gods mercie such as in conscience I am bound by all honest and Christian meanes to preserue, see∣ing he so strangelie traduceth & accuseth me in his booke as is almost incredible, I am therfore of necessitie (as I take it) to open my mouth at this time, and specially in the be∣halfe of that doctrine, which I am vndoubtly perswaded, for the substance of it, that hither vnto I with infinit mo in England haue truly & faithfully taught. And albeit I finde my selfe very vnequall to try any question with him, who is so high in authoritie, so prompt of witt, so exquisit in learning, my selfe in all things so despised and rejected as I am by him and some others: insomuch that I might iust∣lie be altogeather terrified and wholly turned away (were my cause neuer so good) frō maintayning the same against him: yet surely, God is my witnes, it seemeth to mee so
easy and so plaine to defend, togeather with the necessitie of duetie binding me (as likewise indeed all mē els I think) to stande therevnto, that I could not choose but speake a∣gaine in this matter, and cleere it againe so well as I can from his further weake exceptions, and vnsufficient obie∣ctions against it. Neyther let any man thinke that in thus doing I greatly please my selfe, or seeme vnwilling to let others to vtter their iudgments heerevpon. Nay surely it is the thing that heerein chiefly I desire, even that others, yea many others (if so it may seeme good vnto thē) would declare their mindes touching this new doctrine sprung vp from Winchester, and likely to bring a common cala∣mitie with other errors mo vpon our Churches in Eng∣land, because I feare that not a few among vs, are, & wilbe troubled therewith. And so I doubt not but it will most amply appeare how Holy & true a doctrine this is, which he so disdainfully skoffeth at and reprocheth, beeing well assured that even the most learned and godly Teachers in this land, Defendours of the trueth against Poperie, as wel before time as now at this day vnder our gracious Queene, doe concurre & agree with my opinion herein. This if it shall please God that I may see, it wil far more exceedingly please me to beholde, then whatsoever myne owne vn∣skilfulnes hath or can vtter. In the meane while, I beseech thee, Christian Reader, consider duly with thy selfe, not who speaketh, but what is spoken by eyther of vs. As for me, I am not ashamed to testifie with all duetie, though after my simplicitie, in the behalfe of the Gospell of Christ against mens improbable conjectures: which my trust is that the godly and sober minded will take in good worth vprightly, even as my heart meaneth it (the Lord know∣eth) sincerely. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ bee with you all. Amen. H. I.
A Praeface to the Christian Readers touching our 2. Questions and their Defense following. IT is a iust thing with God (deare brethren) to punish in his dissolute people sinne with sinne: and where one iniquitie is not repented, to binde others there∣vnto. Which thing surely we may to well see is com to passe and befallen vs in England deseruedly at this day. Who after so long, plentifull, and comfortable enioying of the Gospell (the most precious blessing of God in this life) are now all∣most generally com to this, that we haue lost the loue thereof. What remayneth then for vs, when we set so light by this Heauenly grace forgetting our first loue which once wee seemed to beare towards it, and wherein now wee ought to haue abounded, but that God should punish this our hainous and generall sinne with others, and among o∣thers send vs delusions euen strong delusions to broch & beleeue lyes, seeing we shew so small affection and so little pleasure in his truth. The Lord in iustice then (no doubt) doth punish vs with such delusi∣ons of error as are now so rife in our land at this time, more then in times past when as the Gospell hath ben soundlyer preached and bet∣ter beloued among vs, then now it seemeth to bee. Now so much the more dangerous this mischief is, as also it must needes proue yet still, because it is offered vnto vs forsooth by the frendes of the Gospell, and fathers of the Church as they desire to be called, yet being indeed sole Commanders in Religion, very Lords ouer mens cōsciences, com∣pulsiuely ouerruling their brethren and Gods deare flocke; contrary to theMat and 2 2 Cor. 1. Cor. 1. Pet. expresse Scripture, and all well ordred Ancient and present tymes. How needfull then is it that the Lords faithfull Re∣membrancers forget not themselues in these deceiptfull dayes, nor that great charge which the great Pastour of the Flock hath layd vpon them, but to bee watchfull and diligent and for no respect of persons to suffer any part of the gracious truth of God to bee disgraced by men: chiefly that part and point (if we can discerne what it is) which by the corruption thereof raiseth and maintayneth most of our other vaine corrupt and contentious quaestions which now swarme among
vs, yet which easily would bee cut cleane downe if the word of God alone might beare sway, as we see it to be brought to passe this day by the blessing of God in other Reformed Churches of forraine Countryes. For my part, being occasioned at this time more specially to speak of 2. of these foresaid corrupt doctrines, J am not vnwilling (though vne∣qually yoked) to defend the truth in them. It hath pleaseth Mr Bilson the now L. Bishop of Winchester to begin among vs a new matter of faith neuer heard of before in England (but only in the dayes of Po∣pery) touching the All sufficiency of the meere Bodily Sufferings of Christ, and to maintaine an other which was neere worne out, of his going downe to Hell in Soule. In both which because my conscience assured mee that hee was much mistaken, and laboured that others should mistake also, I thought it not besides my duty (the Lord offe∣ring me opportunity) to maintaine the truth, and that in all plainenes and evidence of the Scripture as God inabled me with. This now a while since being published (wherein my trust is I caryed my selfe no otherwise then J ought) the Author and maintayner of the contrary hath so of late intertayned it, as seemeth to mee and to many others wonderfull. Wonderfull, not for strength of reasons nor for exquisit matter such as neuer before was delivered, though his learning J acknowledge and will not but reverence his gifts: but wonderfull his answer is and altogeather extraordinary, considering that such in∣comparable bitternes, disdaine, skoffing, reproch, and furious rage doth so abundantly com from him therein against my poore selfe, be∣ing yet by the mercy of God a true Christian, a Minister of the Gospel, and one (I praise the Lorde) which euer haue bin carefull to bee free from the scandalls of the World. Though heerein J boast not, but rather (with the Apostle) will boast of mine infirmities. Verily this now J haue learned by his writing better then euer I conceaued be∣fore; namely what great oddes he maketh and desireth to be made be∣tweene himselfe a Lord Bishop, and an other being but a Preacher of Gods most holy word. Well: this is the Rhetorike and the orna∣ments of his Conclusion against my treatise. But all this is besides his Matter, which nevertheles may haue peradventure som weight in it. It may peradventure. Wherefore J see a double necessity vrging me to reply therevnto. First to the end that his exceptions and rea∣sons, (that is to say, his wholl matter) may appeare yet better to be so weake and vnsufficient as indeed they are. See: that those vncivill
reproches (I will not say vnchristian revilings) being the bewty and forme of his booke, may appeare to be but the froth of a distempered stomacke, the colour of reason and iust cause which he casteth on it, being taken away. As touching the matter therefore thus I purpose to deale. I will begin with his later writing, which he calleth a Con∣clusion, because he mainly directeth it against mee, taking in by the way also all such places & points in the former Treatise as do right∣ly concerne our matter in hand. Finally, as touching his reproches and cruell words I intend wholy to passe ouer them, seeing for them neither is he any whit the better, nor my selfe the worse. The Defence of the Treatise of Christes suffe∣rings against Maister Bilsons Conclusion. HIs Conclusion (for so he thinketh good to call it) beginneth against me in his page 225. Wherein first he doeth change me in generall termes that I flee from the state of the Chiefe question, and overskip his Authorities,The like saith in E pag. 9. in his reasons I forget and dissemble what pleaseth my self, in the defence of my holy cause (as it pleaseth him to mocke) I roue as I list neither keeping any order, nor bringing any matter of moment, cōfusedly powring out the hasty resolutions of mine own braines spiced euery where with ignorant & absurd positions, proudly despising all authority & antiquitie, &c. Al which words are but wind, as I shal make it evident (God willing) whē we com to view his particulars heerafter insuing. Among wch hePag.  beginneh to iustifie that he mistooke not his Text when hee preached this doctrine. But I wil speak thereof anon, so that first I satisfie him in the most principal point of his challēge against me. Which is this,Epis. that I haue changed the first questiō, that I set not down the state therof fully nor truly: & so, I offer to prove that wch he never denied, I cōfute that which he never affirmed. Let vs ther fore cōsider advisedly this questiō: which I wil set downe again as exactly & as plainly as I can, that we may see how far I erred frō it before. We affirme That Christ in his Soul suffered all Gods proper Wrath and vengeance being paines and punishment for sinne & no sinne, also as touching the essence or nature thereof,The su whole out 1.. and so farre as was due Generally for all mankinde to suffer. His contrary opinion we conceaue thus, That Christ suffered for our sinnes nothing ells but simply andor  his Ho fectiōs ¦tio and meerely a Bodily death: altogither like as the god∣lie
and holy men do often suffer at the handes of persecutors, saving only that God accepted this death of his Sonne as a ransom for sinne, but the death of his servants be doth not. The Opening of the whole stae of this Question. For the better vnderstanding whereof, we must note these prin∣cipall things.taine spe. I things to oted. First that All suffering of Paines in man is frō God: either properly from his Iustice, or from his Holy Love: either frō  him alone, or also from his Instruments and inferior meanes. A∣gaine, Al suffering of Paines is for Sinne either inherent, or impu∣ted: either as Correction, or as Punishment: either immediatly, or  mediatly: as anon we shall further see. Sec: By the Lawe of our Creation as we are men having a Soule besides our Body, so our Soule hath in it a 3. fold faculty of Suffering Paines. First, that which is Proper and immediat iustly so called:ee kindes  Soes ing of . Proper, because it is proper only to reasonable and immortall Spirites: although in  men (if it grow vehement) it affecteth cōsequently the Body also. Immediat 2. wayes: 1. because it can & doth receave an impres∣sion of sorrow and Paines made from God only by and in it selfe, without any outward bodily meanes therevnto. 2. It is also an Immediat Punishment, or els Correction of sinne: it cometh not for any other cause at all. So that thus we meane, when we speake  of the Soules Proper and Immediat Suffering. The Soules second faculty of Suffering paines is not Proper, but Common to vs with Beasts: namely that which is by Sympathy & Communion with and from the Body. For which cause also it is not Immediat: sith it commeth not to the Soule but by externall bodily meanes. A  third kind of painful Suffering the Soule hath: namely, her vehe∣mēt & strong Affectiōs are Painful, whether they be good or evill. As Zeale, Love, Cōpassion, Pity, Care, &c. Neither are these im∣mediatly for Sinne, whether Punishmentes or Corrections: but they com for and by other immediat causes,tions no at or  Punish  5. neither are they Pu∣nishments or Corrections at all Properly in them selves: Acci∣dentally they may be, when they growe so strong that they paine and grieve the Soule. These 2. later kinds of the Soules Suffering you acknowledg to have ben in Christ: the 1. kinde " you vtterly deny.g. 5. 6. 16 . 253.  255. 335 Now I affirme that Christ tasted also the 1st kinde. For how could the Proper and principall Humane Suffering be not in him,br. 2.10. a Man made of God to * Suffer for all our Sinnes? So this (in a maner) is ye point of our Cōtroversie. And verily how you can
deny the same by the Scripture, yet acknowledging withall a true and perfit Humaine Soule in Christ, I cannot see. Namely seeing iust occasion heereof was giuen him from God, as afterward shall further appeare. Youpa. 248. seeme to sticke at those termes which I vse The Soules proper and immediat suffering, & you call thempa. 257. 336. vn∣salted and vnsetled. But any may see how easy they are to bee vn∣derstood, and also that wee must in this quaestion necessarily thus distinguish the same from that which is by sympathy, & is comon to vs with other creatures. Thirdly wee must also note that God  himselfe is alwayes and evermore the principall and proper pu∣nisher then when the Soule suffereth paines after the first maner, that is in her proper and immediat faculty of suffering. And that is alwayes immediatly for sinne also, not for any other cause at all. Gods owne almighty power armed with iustice in burning wrath thus punisheth sinne somtime more somtime lesse, when and how it pleaseth him. Fourthly, God himself therfore was thus the prin∣cipall  and only proper Punisher of Christ as hee sustayned the pu∣nishment of our sinnes. The Divells and wicked men his Persecu∣tours did their parts also indeed for other ends, but yet they were all as Instruments only, & vsed by God vnto his owne end: name∣ly that Christ might pay heereby a iust price and full satisfaction for our sinnes. It was then the Almighty and most iust God him∣selfe in his severe wrath against our sin that principally & proper∣ly inflicted on Christ the paines and punishments which he as our Surety suffered for the paying of our Ransom. As it is written,Isa 53. The Lord laid vpon him the punishment of vs all. Whatsoever you have against this afterward, we shall consider it in due place. Fiftly we meane not that in God was, is, or can be anyAs you serve w pag. 24 perturbatiō  at all, and therefore consequently no Wrath nor Hatred as is in vs. But because Wee painfully afflict others with whom commonly wee are Angry, and we discerne somtime and see paines inflicted on men by God, therefore we say he sheweth his anger and wrath vpon them whom hee punisheth. Nevertheles wee must note especially that to suffer (as the Godly doe) Chastisements and cor∣rections, is not to suffer or feele Gods Wrath nor indeed the pu∣mishment of sinne: except it bee in a very vnproper speach. To suffer the true punishment, satisfaction, proper payment, & wages of sinne, only that is to suffer properly and truly the Wrath and
Curse of God. Now then seeing the paines which Christ for vs did feele, were indeed properly the Punishment and Paiment and ven∣geance for sinn, such as the Godly do in no wise suffer, Christ only having wholly suffered that for vs all: Therefore indeed his suffe∣rings proceeded from Gods proper wrath, and were the true effects of Gods meere Iustice bent to take recompence on him for out offences: the Godly never suffering any thing at all in such respect.  Sixt: These paines which Christ suffered as the proper Punishment and Price of sinne, and inflicted on him even by Gods own hand, did not make smart and anguish only in his flesh, or onely in the sensitive part of the Soule by mutuall coniuction & sympathy with the body, but of necessity must also be deepely conceaved & felt in the vnderstanding and Mind of Christ. Now how deepe this was, as we neither do nor can precisely affirme, so we are well assured that the sense of paine was not lessened nor abated in Christ needlesly: Hee suffered doubtles according as sinne deser∣ved in every point, except only in such respects as were flatly im∣possible.  For the better vnderstanding whereof wee are heere to note another principalll distinction:fering of aines for sin  fold. or sinne in∣eent and puted. that there are 3. divers and severall sortes of suffering paines directly for sinne. 1. As the wic∣ked and damned do: that is by suffering the proper wrath of God truly punishing in them (that is properly in their Soules aswell as in their Bodies) their sinnes, in whom togeather with their paines there is also inherent sinne abiding and imputed, (the cause of all their punishments) with the the adiuncts and consequents there∣of, desperation, induration, blaspheming, reiection, malediction, hatred, and finall dereliction, with such like. These are certain proper and right conditions of the reprobat heere, & of the dam∣ned in Hell,r sinne in∣ent but  imputed. which Christ never tasted. 2. The godly in this world do suffer paines for their sinnes. But these whatsoever they be (yea though death it selfe) are improperly called Punishments, as was before noted,ch. 12.5,  7, 8, 9, 10,  they are * Chastisements of sinne. Yea they are partly remembrances to cause repentance of sinne past & present∣ly inherent, partly Chastisements to humble vs, and to mortifie sinne in vs more and more hereafter. And thus they are in no sort inflicted on vs as very Curses by Gods Wrath and Iustice (properly so called) but properly by Gods Holynes and Love: as after wee shall further see. These are the ordinary wayes of suffering for
sinne, but nothing appertayning to Christ neither. 3.3 Suffering sinne not haerent, yet impu There is an∣other peculiar and extraordinary way belonging onely to Christ, according to which Christ suffered for sinne: distinct and greatly differing from both the former, and yet in some speciall points a∣greeing with both. 1. Christ suffered for sinne being sinles indeed,How Chst sufferings those of th Godly d∣gree. Ho they diffe as the Godly also are sinlesRom. 4. by imputation. Againe their suffe∣rings are temporary, and in this life only: such also were his. But Christes sufferings were exceeding much differing from ours, 1 in that his sufferings were for our sinnes now made his by Gods ac∣coumpt, and ours are for our owne. Also, his were the true and proper Punishment or iust vengeance of God for sinne, ours onely Chastisements and remembrances, which belonged nothing at all to him. His, the true effects of Gods severe and iust Wrath proper∣ly taken, ours are from his iustice & wrath improperly so called. Touching the Reprobats and damned,How the suf∣rings of Ch and of th Damned  differ. 1. their sufferings are for sinnes inhaerent, Christes were for sinnes only imputed: So that Gods Anger was not against Christes owne person, but against the sinnes which by his office in his own person he sustayned, the sor∣row and paines whereof touched his very person. 2. Their punish∣ments are partly in this life, and partly eternall in the life to come: but Christes were temporary and only in this life. 3. Their sinne being inherent not forgiuen and iustly punished, they haue all the properties and Concomitants of sinne inherent, never forgiuen, but in wrapped in eternall punishments: as these, Desperation, the stinge of Conscience, Induration, Reiection, Malediction, Dere∣liction, &c. But in Christ, where no sinne was inhaerent nor eter∣nally punished, there could vtterly be none of these. 4. They are pumished heere, & chiefly in Hell the proper place of the damned heereafter:: but Christ suffered onely heere in this life. Lastly their tormēts though euerlasting deserue nothing at Gods hands. but Christ though suffering but for a while, deserued infinitly fa∣vour and grace for them for whom he suffered. Howbeit as I said the sufferings of the damned are all one with Christes,How the su¦rings of Ch and of th Damned  the same as touch∣ing the Nature of the punishments and as touching the chiefest causes thereof. First God himselfe was the proper and principall Ordayner, Author and Executor of his punishment, Gods owne hand did it to Christ: no lesse then to the damned. Sec: Christ having most horrible sinnes imputed to him as the damned haue
also, therefore he suffered for them from Gods hand euen as the damned do: namely in these points, which are both possible and reasonable, that is, paines inflicted immediatly and properly in the Soule, and not only by outward meanes in the Body. For it is most reasonable and possible that the Soule of Christ should haue our sinne imputed to it, yea principally to it, and not to the Body only, even as wee commit sinne in our wholl manhood, but yet princi∣pally in & by our Soule. Which being true that Christes reasona∣ble Soule had sinne imputed principally to it according to that of the Prophet " He made his Soule sinne,Isa. 53.10. therefore his Soule princi∣pally & peculiarly did suffer for it. Also his Soule by nature being capable of suffering from Gods very hand, & an occasion now ser∣ving therevnto, because of all our sinnes wholly imputed to him, lastly God himselfe standing now disposed to punish and revenge sinne in him so far as he was capable thereof, therefore his punish∣ment for that sinne was a true, proper, & full punishment as theirs is, namely as touching meere paines, and was the effect of Gods proper Wrath, iustice, and vengeance as well on his Soule, as on his Body: & thus for the time, it was even like as the sufferings of the damned are.a. 53.134. For * continuance of time in paines is not of the na∣ture of Hel paines or of Gods Wrath,Pag. 341. nor yet to be in Hell " locally, as you wrongly imagin, but meere circūstances ther of only. Thus the very nature of punishment for sinne being but the feeling of extreamest paines from Gods hand, whether for a time or for ever, whether locally in Hell or ells where, that neither altereth nor les∣seneth the present paines, which Gods owne infinit wrathfull power & iustice can inflict for satisfaction where and how it plea∣seth him. These paines then to this end, and in this very manner inflicted Christ felt: Indeed not being in the locall Hell, yet those being as wee see the self same paines for their nature which are in Hell,ag. 247. yea which are * sharpest in Hell. And he discerned and recea∣ved them properly, yea only in his very Soule; as then was mane∣fest when his body was so brused with sorrowes and sufferings (yet none at all then touching him without) that there strayned out from him much sweat of clotted blood, &c. These things being thus, now let vs see wherein you agree with vs,. 248. and wherein you disagree. We all agree (in termes) That Christ
suffered in soule Gods Wrath: howbeit touching the sense we dis∣agree in 2. maine pointes.The i the q I affirme that Christ suffered Gods Proper Wrath and vengeance: you meane hee suffered only such  afflictions as other godly men do suffer at the handes of the wic∣ked and cruell world. ForPa. 1 you thinke all Afflictions whatsoe∣ver, small or great, & towards whomsoever are the effects of Gods Wrath. But that is not so: except in a most vnproper speach. To the godly their Afflictions both small and great are Gods Fatherly and gracious Chastisements and no effects of his proper Wrath, as shall appeare further heereafter. Howbeit you must observe heere my 3. limitations which I set down in theBefor Quaestion. 1. I meane he suffered only that proper Wrath of God which was meerely Punishment for sinne, and no sinne. 2. This also hee suffered as touching the Substance and Na∣ture of the Paines, not as touching the Circumstances, either of of Place, or Continuance, &c. 3. I meane hee suffered not every particular Punishment of sinne, nor that which every particular sinner meeteth with all: but the Generall Curse and Punishment of God for sinne, namely that which belongeth in Gods Iustice to All men in Common and Generally, who abide in sinne. Now after these necessary limitations, the maine point where∣in  we further disagree is this; I affirme that Christ Suffered All Gods proper Wrath and vengeance for sinne, namely so described and limited as is above said. I say All that which the very Damned doe suffer, Christ thus did suffer for vs: and therefore even a Pro∣per and immediat sense in his Soule of Gods Proper & most pain∣full Wrath, his infinit, and vntolerable burning Wrath. Which what toung is it that can expresse, or hearte conceaue. Yet Christs Humane Soule was apt and able to feele it, though not to sustaine  it. A iust occasion in him was offered therevnto: for then he stood foorth as the only and absolute Ransompayer of all our debt. And Gods vnpartiall Iustice dispenseth not without necessitie: Yea where he cometh to Punish, he layeth it on finding sinne vn∣satisfied, as he doth inhaerent in the wicked, and as he did imputed in Christ our surety, till he had byHeb  Sufferings accomplished & fi∣nished perfitly his Redemptiō for vs.Your A on w ∣gain sa Christ ∣red i only  frō hi But this is far greater then as you hold, that He suffered no more but meere Bodily paines, that is, in his Soule by & frō his Body. This is your drift every where,
but I note these expresse places:g. 16. * Sin which should have wrought in vs an eternall destruction both of Body and Soule could not farther prevaile in him but to the wounding of his flesh and sheding of his bloud for the iust & full satisfactiō of all our sinnes, even in the righ∣teous and syncere iudgment of God. Likewise your generall Title is, The Full redemtion of mankind by the death and bloud of Christ. So you commend " the force and frute of his bodily death as most sufficient.ag. 84. g. 88. And * the bodily death of Christ payeth the price of our Redemption,ag 335. it removeth all the impediments of our salvation " The ioynt sufferings of Christ (the Soule feeling what the Body suffered) were most avaylable for our salvation.g. 336. † The violence was offered to the Body, the sense whereof reached vnto the Soule, and these are the sufferings of the Crosse and of death which the Scriptures attri∣bute to the Sonne of God for our salvation.g. 60. 58. " There is no other sa∣crifice of Christs Soule, which can be neither bodily nor bloudy. * The iustice of God both temporally and eternally punisheth the Soule only by the Body. 254. 255 Nevertheles contrariwise you seeme some where to yeeld whol∣ly so much as we affirme.g. 17. As where you say " The same part might indeed suffer in Christ which sinned in man, J meane the Soule. If you meane as you seeme and as you ought, that as every part and faculty of the Soule is in vs sinfull, so in Christ it suffered for our sinne, then in his Soule he suffered for sinne properly and immedi∣atly, that is, in his very Mind from the immediat hand of God, & not only from and by his Body. 87. 4. Againe you allow in Christ * All those afflictions and passions of the Soule which naturally and neces∣sarily follow paine. This All reacheth vnto mo, and more grievous paines then the meere bodily are: it includeth the Soules porper & immediat paines also. 138. And yet playner: " Smart, paine and grief of body or mind (bee it never so great) will commend his obedience and patience. 286. And * the punishment of sinne which proceedeth from the iustice of God, and is no sinne, that Christ might and did beare: Yea he suffered death " with all painfull, 87. but no sinfull concomitants and consequents. 76. And * nothing might befall the humane nature of Christ which was vnfitting for his Diuine. Whence we gather (vnderstan∣ding you in the best sence) that whatsoeuer was fitting for his Di∣vine nature to admit of in his Humanity, that his humane nature did feele. Consequently then he felt all the paines of the damned
which were no sinnes, neither indeed perpetuall: seeing his Divine nature could admitt this in his Manhood aswell as any suffering at all for sinne. You will say, If hee felt not also desperation as the damned do, then hee felt not all the paines which the damned do feele: For desperation augmenteth their very paines. I answere, we say not that Christ suffered simply All the paines of the dam∣ned; that is, He felt not such as are by their very nature sinnes aswell as paines: as indeed desperation is. But I say Christ suffered none of those paines. All other which are by their nature meere paines and onely painfull Christ did suffer them as sharply for the time, we doubt not, as the very damned do. So that if your L. will stand to that which before we obserued in you, and not clip it, not renounce it, we professe this is all that ever we did or do craue, wee neede no longer to striue, it is the wholl question which you grant vs: viz: That Christ did beare punishment of sinne as great as any is proceeding from the Justice of God, yet being no sinne. Whence it must needes follow that the paines of Christes suffering were the same in nature and altogeather as sharpe and as painfull as they are in Hell it self. And this is the whol summe of the matter about Christes Hellish sorrowes and paines, & thus standeth our quaesti∣on with these differences, according to which we hold and professe that Christ suffered the Wrath of God, or Hell paines. If you set the question otherwise, you go back from that which you found fault withall in your Sermons, & you fully ioyne with the Preachers and Catechismes of England, yea withall other Pro∣testants in the world; and namely with all them, whom at first you reproued and traduced openly for this cause. There is none of them I assure you that euer spake or meant any more then this issue delivereth. If you agree to this, I beseech you what wisedom shewed you in your whot confutations & exclamations, so vehe∣mently to condemne you knewe not what and to reprove you knew not whom. Further, if any do teach that Christ suffered the paines of Hell in a grosse and locall maner, though you most iniuriously do invey at vs for such a matter, yet verily it is neerer your owne assertion then ours, if you be well observed. For seeing you determine simply, that Christ might & did suffer such punish∣ment of sinne which proceeds from the iustice of God and is no sinne, it seemeth by your speech that Christ did suffer Torments
even locally in Hell it selfe: for that had ben a punishment, & that is no sinne,icus: st. Lati∣er. Act. on. & that in deed some learned and godly men did hold, but erroneouslie. As for vs somway we avouch your sentence al∣so, that Christ suffered whatsoeuer punishment of sinne which proceeded from the iustice of God, & is no sinne, but yet with ex∣presse limitation frō Scripture namely in Circūstances, as I shew∣ed, viz. in this world only & not after his crosse at all, nor locally among the damned. So that thus we say, it is not true that Christ suffered the paines of Hell, hold not  at Christ fered sim∣y the par∣s of Hell. which yet those your fore-noted inde∣finit wordes doe import. Nay, speaking exactly, wee vse not this terme of Hell, neither delight we to vse it oftē in any regard about our maine Quaestion: because we finde not this word literally and expreslie applied to Christes sufferinges in the Scripture. Howbeit sometimes we speake so, I graunt, and I thinke that wee may well doe so,As also  ny other nts of Re∣on are yme af∣ned & vt∣ed. when we vnderstand it (by " plaine Consequence frō Scrip∣ture) for the extreame paines of Gods proper wrath & vengeance for sinne, from which euen Hell it selfe is not separated; yea Gods very wrath is a parte, and the greatest parte of Hell paines. Or els Metaphorically, when we haue to set out with an emphasis, the most dolefull and incomparable paines of Christes sufferinges, as they appeared onely to the sense of men, & not otherwise: Which it seemeth " your selfe also liketh well enough. 8.34.9. But howe badly then doe you vrge vpon vs and perswade men that we doe & must say in maintenance of this our Question,imious tation.  1.8.244.7.264.0.34. * that Christ suffered All the sorrowes of Hell, the whole Curse of God, his whole wrath, and All the very Torments of the damned, and that in such sense as you make of those wordes, that is including in them, the Locall Hell, eternall punishment, Diminution of faith, Holines, &c. with Desperation,reat. 1..40. Reiection, vtter darknes, &c? As for " my wordes which you wrest that way, they are cleared by my Opening this Question both before and after. Wherefore wee plainly tell you, that we defie and detest in our heartes (as well as you) all these blasphemous & wicked thoughtes of the Sonne of God, our most glorious and gratious Redeemer. And yet if you had vnderstoode those Phrases, the whole Crse of God, His whole Wrath, All the sorrowes of Hell onely toching the sense of Meere paines, that Christ feeling the proper wrath and Iustice of God punishing him for our sinnes, felt as extreeme sharpnes of paines which had no
mixture of sinne, as may in any possibilitie be endured yea though in Hell it selfe; and so a kinde also ofAs in  place I  hew. forsaking in them, a kinde ofSuch as  self explai pag. 245 And as  Curse is n words, b deeds. pa. Cursing, and hatred, and condemnation, and a sense of bur∣ning wrath, which he being our high Priest and Sacrifice was ap∣pointed vnto, and which payment of ours was by God layed vpon him being our Redeemer, and Ransompayer, & Surety; and that all this he sustayned and suffered for a time in this life so deeply & wofully as was possible for a man any where to suffer which was also wery God. I say if this had ben your meaning, we would not then hold it blasphemous nor erronious, asEpip: you obiect it vnto vs, but the very truth indeed, to say Hee suffered the true paines of Hell, and the wholl wrath of God. Which verily your own words also in some places do imply, yea at least so much, and that mani∣festly enough, it seemeth, as before I haue observed. But to wade further then this, and to particularize, or to specifie the parts of Gods wrath which Christ felt, asPa. 47. you will vs to do; or to shew the manner how, or the certaine measure how deepely he suffered it, what madnes were it in men to attempt, and what folly is it in any to requier. This sufficeth, that we know God is able (aswell out of the locall Hell as in it) to reveale and inflict spiritually this wrath where he findeth sinne vnsatisfied, and in Christ the vnion of his Godhead might admit it in his Manhood, & his Soule was cape∣able & apt to discerne and feele immediatly the impression thereof in it selfe. Now because also God was heere bent to punish all our most horrible sinnes in Christ, and he was ordained to receave the same vpon himselfe, and God was never to punish them truly any more, nor any where ells, and because of the proportion of Gods exact Iustice which dispenseth not where there is no necessi∣tie for dispensation, because also of Christes taking our wholl na∣ture for no needfull purpose at all without this, and lastly by rea∣son of many pregnant texts of Scripture proving by infallible ar∣guments that thus surely it was in this mystery of Christs purcha∣sing our redemption (which you in all your writing have no whit defeated) therefore we are vndoubtedly perswaded that this is the very truth of God: Namely asTreat. 80.81.7 before I taught, as touching the sense of paine and vehemency of sorrow that Christ suffered for vs All and wholly the wrath of God and his bitter Curse: That is, as I said so far asPa. 37. possibillity would admit, so far as he being also very
God and a man not possible to sinne, could suffer. Neither is there any peece of reason on your parte for the contrary. And this is much more I trust then to suffer in Soule by Sympathy only from and by and with the Body,Pag. 13.14 which as " before I shewed, you plain∣ly do make the only & wholl suffering of Christ for our Redemp∣tion: which kind of suffering all Godly men doe suffer also when the wicked in the world do afflict and persecute them. But touch∣ing suffering of Martis and godly men,Pag. 8.11 it is not intruth, (as † be∣fore is shewed) of that kinde as Christes suffering was, and there∣fore this suffering of the Soule onely by Sympathy commeth no∣thing neere to the sorrowes of the suffering of Christ: which hee suffered from the hand of Gods offended Iustice, and pure Holines, and Wrathfull power, infinitly satisfying it selfe on him for our sinnes which by his office he receaved vpon himselfe, to acquite vs from the same. This no Martir nor godly man doth, who suf∣fer only as from the malice and rage of men,d therefore ey are so eerefull at eir Death, hen Christe is extreme∣ sorrowfull. from God there pro∣ceedeth nothing but fatherly chastenings to them, his very wrath indeed for their sinnes appeareth not at all against them, which they know Christ hath once borne and for ever dissolved. You haue wordes in some places, as if you hld this difference with vs of Christes sufferinges compared with the suffering of Martirs: Namely where you say,Pag. 248 " Christ suffered the wrath of God punish∣ing sinne,ag. 257 not * in his Body only, but in his Soule also by some proper punishments of the Soule, as by sorrow, and feare in his Agony, &c. Howbeit, though these wordes seeme plaine, yet I perceave ambi∣guity and fallacy in them, yea also I thinke a great errour. First your fallacy is in that you meane sorrow and feare indeed proper∣ly in his Soule, but not any proper Punishment of sinne nor com∣ming for any paine or smart that he felt inflicted for sinne, but it was meere " Devotion to God,2.14.23.9 144 290 & Love, pity, & compassion towards men: Which say you, could not be without some feare, and zeale, and griefe. That is true: but this is a notable fallacy. For many thinke that you meane, Christ suffered such sorrow and paine as was both proper to the Soule, and was the proper punishment of sinne also. But then had you heerein fully agreed with vs. Nowe that Religious Devotion,godly and tous A∣tions. and Pity are properly partes of Christes Holines and righteousnes, not of his Sufferings for sinne. For these 2. parts of Christes Mediation I trust, you will distinguish. And
surely Christs Agonie, was properly a part of his most bitter Passi∣on, not of his Obedience and Righteousnes: albeit even in suffering also he was perfitly obedient. Thus then you are never the neerer to the truth in this point for all your seeming. Againe considering what you write of the wrathPa. 130 132.246. of God which the Godly generally do suffer, you seeme to me to thinke that every Martis death and all the crosses and griefes both of body and minde in the godly are veryFor yo make G Wrath ¦ferent to men who afflicted. punishments of sinne, and right effects of Gods Iustice and wrath taking properly vengeance on them for sinne in such maner as he doth on the Reprobat, though not in such measure: and that such likewise were Christs sufferings. But then I deny that therein yow have the truth, or have rightly expressed the sufferinges of Christ, or of his Saintes. Because the sufferings of the Saintes are properly not punishmēts for sinnes, nor effects of Gods wrath pro∣perly, but are indeed fatherly & profitable chastisements purpose∣ly inflicted by God for their good, as before is said. But Christes were altogeather of another nature and condition, they were the only true and proper punishment, price, Satisfaction, and Ransom for sinnes, as hath ben also noted before, & after shalbe further shewed. If you vnderstand Christes suffering Gods Wrath to be such as the godly feele, viz: improperly and largely (as the ScripturesIn your 13. there do meane) and not as the very price and punishment for sinne, but only as Chastisements, then that is likewise manefestly vntrue. Also then againe for your words you are ambiguous and deceipt∣full in this issue: which kinde of vanity you commonly vse in all other your handling of controversies since you left writing against the Papistes, as who so looketh shall see. For wee affirming that Christ felt the wrath of God doe meane it properly, as it inflicteth properly the punishment and Wages of sinne;Your Equ∣cation in terme G Wrath. and you tell vs that he suffered Gods wrath as the Saints and Godly men doe suffer it: That is, altogeather vnproperly, beeing sometime so called for a certain seeming that it hath to bee so (as you acknowledge) in the sense of flesh and bloud. Then what is this to our purpose? What ells do you worke heerein but deceipt & mistaking to the Reader through the ambiguity of this word the Wrath of God. Which palpable fallacy of yours is so plaine, that I need not stand to open it any further: and yet I assure my selfe that this is the very ground and refuge of the errour in this Question. Which if a man marke
well & distinguish as he ought and may easily do, he shall quickly drive you either to shift into this " corner,Your Equi∣ocation. or ells to deny much of that which you affirme in your booke elswhere, Therefore lett the wise consider it. Neverthelesse if happily you meane other∣wise, that is,Pas you seeme  me pa∣ 01.105 that Christes very * outward sufferings and bodily death were in a peculiar sort the effects of Gods proper wrath thus truly punishing our sinnes on him, then in effect you come to vs againe, of yow will sticke but to this. For there is no reason in the worlde to make Christes flesh subiect to Gods Curse for sinne, and not his Minde and soule likewise. Also wee must note that such outward bodily sufferings beeing indeede punishments and not chastisements for sinne, that is proper effects of Gods very wrath and iustice comming to take vengeance for sinne, they can∣not be meere bodily sufferings, nor meerly felt by sympathy in the Soule, which is the proper effect of the outward sensitive facultie only, but they must of necessity be conceaved, discerned, & apply∣ed in the inward feeling of the Minde of Christ,d  deny at nce. yt Mens ules haue ny sense in ye he inde, be∣des ye Com∣ sense de∣nding on e Body. and will make a singular and secret impression of sorrow in the Soule far above all meere bodily griefes, beyond all measure and proportion of things in ordinary experience, & so exceedingly differing from all other sufferings in this life. Which therefore may iustly bee termed the proper and immediat sufferings of his Soule. And this sense the Lord doubtles revealeth vpon men somtime more somtime lesse in this life, even as it pleaseth him. Which also befell vnto Christ. Againe,Pag. 257. if the Agonie and sorrow which " you grant Christ suf∣fered simply in his minde, be meant by you to have ben as it were a " foretast of such sufferings and a feare or dread of them (as very iustly it may be) considering the weake disability of a Creature to stand vp against the Creator,Propathia. namely now shooting or preparing to shoote presently the sharpe arrowes of his wrath vpon him for our sinnes, in which case and condition Christ now stood for that while: then I say also I see in effect no difference betwene vs, then againe this Question is (as it were) at an end. For doubtles he suf∣fered at one time or other the same thing which he so feared. Yea such a kind of fearing cannot be but a mighty suffering thereof. Neither doe wee contend to expresse what iust measure of Gods wrath, nor precisely in what manner it was revealed and executed on Christ. Onely wee know that whatsoever it were, Gods very wrath and proper vengeance for sinnes though outwardly execu∣ted
on the Body, yet it could not but sinke in deeper, even into the deapth of the Soule, and be discerned by Christ and conceaved to be such, and so sustayned as proceeding from God, and so wound the Soule properly, yea chiefly, though the anguish thereof brui∣zed his body iointly also. Againe whatsoever you wil call it; All orSuch  as wa nothin whol.  sinfull  rents o part of Gods proper Wrath and vengeance (as it proceeded from him) was incomprehensible, vnspeakeable, infinit, and vntolera∣ble to any creature, & therefore so it was vnto the very Manhood of Christ, namely when the Godhead for a season concealed it self of purpose and with held his wonted supportation and comfort from him, to the end that his bitter Passion ordayned of God and most voluntarily vndertaken by himselfe, might bee in suffering theThe  Paines rowes  sin wer Christ fo time no qualifye  lessened sorrows and paines which were due to vs, nothing qualified, but in all severity accomplished. As indeed when his Hower was come and gon it was. As touching that terme The death of his Soule, which you stumble at, we shall speake thereof heereafter in due place. Thus far I have proceeded in opening the true state of this Quae∣stion: which whether you (who have begon to avouch the con∣trary) will now acknowledge and approve, or not, I know not. Overthrow it, I trust you shall never with all the cunning and strength you have. For vndoubtedly it is, and so will appeare by the word to be a manefest truth, and thereforeAct. 5 will prevaile: be∣sides that it is expresly the doctrine taught and established by au∣thority in England as heereafter God willing I shall plainly shew, notwithstanding all your strange cōtradicting & traducing there∣of. Lastly whether I did set down this very state of the quaestion in full effect in my former Treatise, or whether I changed it (though indeed I graunt I was there much shorter then I am heere) I pray you looke & consider againe in that myPag. 5 33. and first booke. This being well considered and marked, will yeeld vs an easier passage tho∣rough the rest behind. To com then to that which hee firstPag. 2 beginneth with: where he laboureth very much to shew that hee mistooke not his Text wherevpon first he grounded his doctrine. This I say, thatGal.  pag. 1. this Text, whereon hePag. 3 groundeth and setteth downe the doctrine of the wholl meritorious contents of Christes Crosse, as likewise ofPag. 42 those effectes therof which he in his Treatise handleth, I am per∣swaded
is mistaken, and that this place of Scripture intendeth not these things.Gal. 6.12. It is manefest that the Apostle * heere reproveth the false teachers for mingling the pure doctrine of the Gospell be∣cause they were loth to tat persecution, which then followed the true and sincere professors thereof: And so incourageth the godly to beare all Afflictions for this persecuted truth and for Christes sake. Thus the Crosse of Christ here signifieth I grant Christ cru∣cified, Christ afflicted, Christ persecuted: not in his owne person only, but also in his members. Hee doth heere iointly togeather vnderstand by Christs Crosse, the afflictions of the whole mysticall Body of Christ both Head and members, which they commonly have in the world. Which many shunned euen with Shipwracke of sincere Religion, but Paul reioyced therein so much, as in no worldly ioy like to it. For so he meaneth when he saith, God for∣bid that I should reioyce but in the Crosse of Christ: not that hee makes it a thing detestable to reioyce in any thing ells,Pag 227 as " you ima∣gine him to do. It is lawfull to reioyce in other things besides the Crosse of Christ: but it is not lawfull to reioyce in any worldly ioy so much, or we are not to reioyce in comparison of our ioy which we ought to haue in this our shame and afflictions sustained for Christ, for his Servants, and for the purity of the Gospell. Paul had very great cause thus exceedingly to reioyce heerein. For 1. this was a token to men that he walked in the perfit way, and a meanes also to himselfe so to doe. 2. Because this his doing rebu∣ked the corrupters and minglers of the Religion who would su∣staine in the world no disgrace which followed the sincere course: & he thus incouraged also the weake professors to suffer willing∣ly for the same. 3. This indeed Crucified the world vnto him and him vnto the world, as still it doth vs also. These causes are both evident in the text and sufficient for Paul so exceedingly to reioyce in suffering for the pure Gospell. Now hee cannot heere respect the meritorious and propitiatory Contents of Christs Crosse, and so make it detestable to reioyce in any thing ells as propitiatory besides this suffering heere expressed (which is the sense that you give vnto it) I say, this Paul cannot respect in this Word, if hee in∣clude his own & the Godlies afflictions. But it appeareth by that before, that indeed he doth include them: & all the circumstances imediatly following do also declare it. 1. That which I touched
before, By suffering in the world for Christ, for his simple truth, & Church sake, theWhich your p Text v:  world was Cucified to him, and he indeed vnto the world. Also an other reason sheweth it:v: 15. For in Christ Iesus neither circumcision nor vncircumcision avayle any thing but a new Creature. That is a sincere & vpright conversation being the fruit of a sincere and pure faith and profession: which matter hee nameth a little beforeGal. 5. Faith working by loue. So by this Fruit he incourageth men (as I said) though there com shame and trouble therewith. Also in the next place thus,v: 16. And as many as walke according to this rule (both of pure profession and conversation) peace shalbe vpon them &c. howsoever in the world they have shame and trouble. Lastlyv: 17. hee willeth that no good Christian heerafter should put him to busines by seeking resolution of him, whether (for the pretended peace of the Church) vnprofitable Caeremonies should be retayned with the Gospel: for lo saith he my example sheweth you all my minde, J beare about me the markes of the L. Jesus, that is Afflictions for the sincere truths sake, which I could by policy and wisdom avoyd aswell as those corrupters of Religion, if I had no more care of the sincerity of the Gospell then they have. This being thus, it cannot be possibly that the Apostle should heere minde to name the particular kindes and all the me∣ritorious partes or Contents of Christs suffering in this place: but only hee incourageth men (as I said) to indure all afflictions for Christ and his truth sake. Thus you are answered also in thatPag. 22 you deny the Crosse of Christ in Scriptures to be taken for the Af∣flictions of the godly. You see the Apostlever. 17 heere calleth the Af∣flictions of the godly the markes of the Lord Iesus: also the afflicti∣ons of Christ inColl. 1.  another place. And in another2 Cor. . the dying of the Lord Iesus. What are these in truth but the Crosse of Christ, vnlesse you imagin some mysterie in the divers wordes, when apparantly the matter is all one. Also the very worde CrosseGal. 5.1 a litle before signifieth the Shame and hatred of Christ slaine on the Crosse to∣gather with the shame of his Servāts. And thus alsoPag. 22 your maine obiection is answered, where you argue that Paul cannot be vn∣derstoodver. 12. to say that those false teachers would not suffer perse∣cution for the Afflictions of the godly. He may be vnderstood to say, that he would not suffer persecution for commending the Afflicti∣ons and shame of good Christians for Christes sake, which they
ought to have done. Then what sense or reason wanteth this ex∣position? I knowe the roote and originall of their Hatred and dis∣daine was against Christ himselfe, & namely for his ignominious death on the Crosse. But this excludeth not, indeed it includeth in the Crosse of Christ Christs members the faithfull which are his owne Body, and so consequently all their Afflictions for Christes sake. Which the wicked and corrupt professors, I say, wil not com∣mend (as Paul did) by suffering persecution in their own persons, they will not by Suffering win credit and reverence to that way in the world.Pa. 229 The Fathers which " you bring hereabout overthrow not this sense but iustifie it rather. Wherefore you cannot avoyd it yet, but that it is still an oversight in you to vnderstand heere, by the Crosse of Christ, the Contents of his sufferings and to note his wholl and intire Passion in every part thereof as he merited there∣by for vs, which evidently the Apostle intendeth not, neither is he about that in this place. You say,Pa. 226 you drew no reason from these words of your Text, but proposing them for your theme tooke occasi∣on frō them to lay down, first the Contents, then the Effects of Christs Crosse. Indeede such handling of Texts is to vsuall in these dayes, but no good nor commendable vse: that is, to take occasion from any text to speake of any thing. Which practise in you so great a man as you are, and seeme among vs to be, is so much the worse, as there are many younger Divines who are led by example more then reason, that will thinke it a point of learning and wisedome even to do like you. But I for my part do suppose that they are the faithfullest and wisest handlers of Scripture, which make their Text the ground of all they speake, and doe conclude even from their text firmly and first of all, whatsoever they teach after∣wardes further therevpon. Els wherevnto serveth the taking of Texts in Sermons? If choice Texts may be vsed only to take oc∣casion by them to speak of things evidently of an other sute, and to another purpose then in the Text is meant, sure it may then bee iustly charged against vs that we do much wrong to the Scrip∣tures, and do make of them such an instrument as they ought not to be. Lastly it is a strong presumption that you have never a good place in al the Scripture for your opinion, seeing even your choice Text affordeth not any the least reason to helpe it with all; which your selfe heere confesseth, or els why drew you not this reason
(such as it is) from your text to your purpose. But to gratifie you a little, suppose if you will that your Text is not mistaken by you, but that the Apostle intended heere to note the Cōtents of Christs Crosse. We are to remember then how youPag. 4. expresly grant, that also the proper Sufferings of the minde may rightly be in the Con∣tents of his Crosse. But thus canPa. 5. 16 60. 253. ∣bove pa your maine opinion bee good, that Christs Bodily Sufferings alone were the full price of our Re∣demtion▪ Which alsoPag. 33 you would ground generally on all the Fa∣thers: though very vntruly as afterward God willing we shall see. And to shew the absolut fulnes of this only, you sayPag. 6 More wee can not aske or expect; and what more can be required, I verily can∣not coniecture. Howbeit your selfe admitteth more, even the suf∣ferings of the minde simply as I noted: and thus your own selfe by your very Text overthroweth your selfe in the first entrance, as all men may see. And heere mee thinkes also you should not so re∣prove with contempt asPa. 335. you do, that whichIn my Treat. pa I noted, that Christs Soule in a large sense might be said to be Crucified, & not his Bo∣dy only; namely if we suppose this your text to signify the Contents of Christs Crosse. For you know that thePa. 4  257. 248 wholl Contents must bee then signified, not any part of them excluded. Finally where you say,Pag 22 the Apostle heere maketh it a detestable thing to reioyce in any things els but in the Contents of Christes Crosse, in saying God forbid that I should reioyce but in the Crosse of Christ, either this your speach is to lavish, or els you quite overthrow your 2. Question, That Christ after this went down into Hell. For either in Hell Christ hath got vs no purchase, nor wrought vs any further riddance from Sathan then hee had don before, which thing you with great and mighty wordsPa. 35 do proclaime that he did, but alto∣geather without shew of reason or likelyhood. For if he did, were it a detestable thing for vs (thinke you) to reioyce therein? Or els of necessity you must extend the Contents of Christes Crosse that is his bitter sufferings beyond his death, even vnto his being in Hell also among the Divells and Damned spirits, whither hee went as you say. But this sequele I thinke you will not defend. These iarres in your selfe therefore you must reconcile: in the meane time men will thinke that you have not handled your Text in∣deede very rightly. Then proceeding foreward you still shew a bad minde in you
towards me, seeking foorthwith even in the entrance to draw me without cause into hatred for " disdayning the Fathers,Pag. 229. as you sup∣pose. The direct and expresse occasion to speake of this matter commeth not in place till * long after:Pa. 349. but you cannot forbeare to procure me ill will so long, as it seemeth. What then is my con∣tempt and disdaine of the Fathers, which you often report in sun∣dry places, and as odiously as is possible? What is my insolent dea∣ling against them? Surely I beleeve you can not tell. Happily it is, because I follow not their Authorities in som opinions of Reli∣gion, nor in divers expositions of Scripture.Pag. 225.48 pist. 12.6 9. Indeed so " you call the Fathers iudgements many times namely Authorities; that the world might conceave their words to be warrants vnto vs, & good Authorities to rest on in matters of Religion. If you had not this drift in your minde, why give you them such a title, which to mee seemeth somwhat insolent indeed? And why do you so harfully blame me for leaving their opinions somtimes: which so far as I know is never, but when strong reason out of the very Scipture doth lead me from them. And that which I say of the old, I vnder∣stand also of the new Writers. Whom indeed I do equally esteeme, and do iudge them (I meane * many of them) except only in An∣tiquitie,Calvin, cer, Mar∣ Beza, emellius, chius, &c otherwise no way inferiour to the best of the Ancients, yea happily in true learning, soundnes of Religion, cleere interpretati∣ons on the text, many times before them. Which I hope is no sin∣gularity in me so to thinke; but I know it to be that, wherein very many learned and godly Christians do concurre. Of all therefore that are learned men whether new or old thus I esteeme, thus I professe,only true of reading ed men ases of re∣on. that they are to bee reade and reverenced as very good helpes to shew vs som light, and to sharpen our iudgments in the vnderstanding of Scripture, but no further. Their opinions either in opening of Texts or in conclusions of Religion wee ought not to receave without examining. And wherewith must wee examine them, but only with the written word. Gods most holy word is Allsufficient in it selfe for all true Religion, or for any part there∣of for ever. Thus it was before the writings of men were publi∣shed, and thus it is now since they are published, and so shalbe for ever. Even for matter, Abundant, and for giving light to the right conceaving & vnderstanding thereof, Allsufficient. So that mens writings do nothing els but helpe to give a greater measure of ea∣sines
to their vnderstanding, which yet nevertheles being vsed as God hath appointed them to be, are sufficiently easy and lightsom in them selues. I thinke the H. Ghost much commendeth thoseAct. 17 12. men of Beraea, who hearing the Apostle Paul teach, though they were not ill affected towards him, yet they would not believe that he spake touching Religion, till they had examined by the Scrip∣tures & seene, whether the truth were so as he vttered. I trust then no advised Christian will chalenge more authority to the Fathers then was heere given to the Apostle, nor deny indeede to any pri∣vat men, much lesse to a minister, toPhil. 1. psal. 119 1 Cor 2 1 Cor. 1 iudge and discerne in them∣selves not only of the words of men, but euen of the sense & mea∣ning of the Scripture by the Scripture it selfe, which thing heere the Beraeans did, and are commended by the H. Ghosh for it. How vniustly then do you charge me thatPag. 34 I refuse the Fathers to testi∣fy in any cause against my liking. I hope you will not deny me to iudge of thē by the Scripture according to that measure of know∣ledge and diligence which the Lord inableth me with. It is every Christians duety as we haue seene, and you take it vnto your selfe, as we shall see afterwards. Wherefore let others partake with you, I pray, in this common right and Christian liberty. Vnles you thinke so well of your selfe, as to imagine that other men will not be so modest and humble minded in vsing this their freedom, or not so wise, and circumspect as your selfe are. Which conceit if you haue you ought to correct it. Neither yet are the Fathers re∣fused, as you complaine, to testifie in any cause of Religion whatso∣ever. By vttering their opinions they may witnesse what was held and esteemed as true or probable by som godly and wise men in those times, but not by all. Mr Bilson himselfeIn his booke a the Iesu part 2. elswhere saith well heereof; If all the ancient Bishops (such were the Fathers, or most of them which we haue extant) should hold an opinion, yet it followeth not that all Preachers then were of that minde, nor if the Preachers generally thought so, that all the Christians were so perswaded. Thus it is true, they can witnesse what was held by som good men then, as I said, yea perhaps what was commonly thought in the Churches of those places where they lived. But in no wise what was the iudgment of all no not among themselues, much lesse every where and in all ages. Now if you should meane yet further, that they may testifie in causes of Religion, as witnesses
do with vs in Civill matters, that what they affirme and testifie must obtaine a verdict, and so haue sentence and iudgment with it, which in effect you seeme to insinuat by calling their Opinions Authorities, so vsually as you do; then indeede for my part I can not agree that they or any men should be such Witnesses, nor their words (nor shew of reasons) in any matters of Religion to be taken as Authorities. If you or any think otherwise, wee may lawfully deny it. Gods worde only with vs hath indeede Authoritie. The Fathers, all, or som haue none any further, then that their Conclu∣sions, expositions, and reasons, if after examination made by the liuely word they be found currant with the Text, then they are the more ioyfully to be embraced. If otherwise in our conscience they seeme to vary from the text, or from some certaine evident Cir∣cumstance thereof, then is it not indifferent for vs, but our Chri∣stian duty in the presence of God, to leaue them and not to follow them therein: yet still with reverence and loving regard towards their names for the manifold graces of God otherwise in them. More then this whosoever ascribeth vnto them, they verily abuse the Fathers, and not we. For as the Papists do abuse the Saints de∣ceased by Worshipping and praying vnto them, not we who loue them and thinke reverently of them as the blessed Servants of God: So in this case, we who vse the writings of godly Men as good helpes to our knowledge do not despise them, but you who make them Authorities in Religion, by your to much imbracing them do indeede notably abuse them. Nevertheles I well perceave that all this great shew of cleaving to the Fathers iudgments is but coloured in you; you vrge them in som cases so whotly but for advantage. For in other points a∣gaine we see when they speak not to your liking, the case is altered. It is worth the paines to looke a little further in to this your pra∣ctise, because you pursue me with such cruelty for leaving the Fa∣thers in som things. First your generall speeches somwhere of the Scripture and of the expositions of men, are very good. Touching the Scriptures,Ep. pa. 9. ag 41. Booke 1.2 a∣inst the Ie∣s part. 4. g. 360. ag. 301. " Jn Gods causes let Gods booke teach vs what to be∣leeve and what to professe. * What J read in the word of God that I believe, what I read not that I do not believe. Touching men, " If you want the foundation of true faith and religion (the Scripture) in vaine do you seeke to make a shew of Catholicisme &c. * One man
with truth is a warrant against all the world. Againe,In this 3 book Full ed¦tion &c 122. By their patience their expositions must not looke to bee Canonicall in the church of God. If they say any thing well, we take it with their praise, if otherwise as men they misse their marke, we refuse it with their leaves.Gal. 5. God hath called us vnto liberty,1. Cor. not to be servants of men: and to serve erroneous constructions is worse then to beare tyrannous exactions. These are very worthy speaches; but haue a care and conscience (Sir) I pray you in this, that you leave this freedom vn∣to vs, which you take to your selfe. Binde no heavyer burdens on the Church of God, then your selfe professeth to like of. And be∣cause I would haue this sound profession of yours to be wel noted of all men, in as much as I know how wauering and slippery you are for the most part heerein, therefore it is good also that we ob∣serve how your owne practise concurreth heerewith, and ratifieth your profession when and where you list, though when you will, you check and taunt vs for the like Christian liberty. I see in this booke where you forsake the ancient and learned Fathers, that is as you speake in my case, where you contemne and despise them. FirstPag. 21 you reiect Austens opinion, that those who rose to life at Christs  Resurrection, dyed againe. Sec: You reiect his exposition of those  words of Christ to the Theefe This day shalt thou bee with mee in Paradise. Austen vnderstandeth Christ as speaking of the Theeves soule, and his owneAlso E He is re in it, N¦nim ips in celo ¦rus crat ¦mo Chr Iesus. Divine presense in Paradice. But you refuse that, becausePag. 21 wee have no warrant in the word of God to fasten Christs Soule vnto Hell for the time of his Death, that it might not be in Paradise before he descended to Hell. Third: YouPa. 196 renounce Austen and (as he saith) almost all the Church thinking that Christ loosed Adam and som others whom he thought good out of the paines of Hell, wherein till his going thither they were held. Fourth: Against all the FathersPa. 188 200. you affirme it to bee more then manefest that Christ did not fetch the Patriarches out of Limbo  Patrum, a certaine region of rest vnder the earth, as they generally thought. Fift:Pa. 18 You renounce divers Fathers opinion thatNone e Martyrs. tull. none do go into Heaven till after the last Judgment. Thus we observe your liberty in leaving the Fathers when you see cause. Why deny you vnto vs the like? If we bring not as good reason to dissent as you do, whensoever we vary from them, let vs heare of it, and beare the blame iustly. This only we desire that in
any case of Religion the bare custom of times, the opiniō of men, and authority meerely Humane should never barre vs from re∣ceaving the simplicity and evidence of the truth concerning vs which appeareth in the Scripture. But now, that we may proceede, let vs see your speciall examples,pag. 229. wherein you will make it mane∣fest that " J have despised the Fathers First,pag. 229. * where you say out of certaine Fathers, That Christ in his dying gaue vp his Spirite " miraculously,pag. 7. * no violence of Death wresting it from him as it doth ours,pag. 229. but when hee saw his time hee even at an instant laid it downe of himselfe, no paines hastening his death.Heb. 4.15. Contrary to this I alleaged the Scripture, " He was like vs in all things sinne only excepted. To answer this * you reply, Was he like vs in his birth?Pag. 230. Can we lye in the Grave without corruption, as " he lay?Neither yet his flesh ly he Grave hoat possi∣y to cot∣t, otherwise n as his es possibly d not be en. Or raise our selves from death as he did? Which poore answere I wonder to see comming from you. Aswell you might shew further, He was not like vs in that he walked vpon the water, nor in that he fasted 40. dayes, nor in that he knew the secrets of mens hearts, nor in that he turned water into wine, and with a word healed all diseases &c. These things don by his Manhood yet were they the proper effects of his Godhead: they were no naturall but supernaturall thinges. But this text to the Hebrues saith onely of naturall Humane properties and infirmities, that Christ in them was altogeather like vs, sinne excepted. Also this maner of Dying whereof we speake, that is, by sore wounds and blowes, by sharpe outrages, and deadly paines to draw neerer and neerer to Death, is a meere natural infirmity, and incident to all men. Therefore sure∣ly in this very maner did Christ dy also, like as all men vse to do in such case. Againe those Divine effectes which you mention are iustly beleeved to haue bene in Christ. Why? Because of the ex∣presse Scripture that * witnesseth the same. 1.23, 25.1.2.27. n. 1.3, 4..1.10.18. Let mee see expresse words in the text that he Dyed as you say, not naturally, but Mi∣raculously, and then will I beleeue it also. You cite certain places, by which you would prove it,h. 10.18. As " No man taketh my soule from me, but J lay it down of my selfe, &c. Hee meaneth heere that his Death was meere voluntary, freely vndertaken, and willingly of his owne accord perfourmed with such naturall and ordinary in∣firmities as belong to a man. As you confesse somwhere, *So that to dy even in Christ,g. 161. was infirmity, though voluntary. Heere then
Christ denyeth that hee suffered any thing as forced on him by constraint & violence, but he sheweth that himselfe was altogea∣ther willing even to Dy for his people: which alsopag. 11 you plainly see. How will you hence conclude, Ergo He dyed miraculously, & not by any fayling of the strength of nature in him notwithstan∣ding all his most intolerable sorrowes and paines? This is truly a miraculous argument. As for Chrisostom whompag. 3 you cite heere∣vpon, he hath nothing for this point. Though it were new & not ordinary that Christ a man should haue power to lay down his life and power to take it againe, yet why may not his manhood dy na∣turally notwithstanding. But you will conclude this better. If I deny (you say) this that Chrisostom saith, I must remember what God himself saith,Luc. 12. O foole this night shall they fetch away thy soule from thee. I remēber it well. What then? Ergo Christ saying, None taketh my life from me, &c. meant that he would dy miraculously, and not by the fayling of nature in him. If this be the reason, as I take it to bee, verily I grant it is marveylous subtile and past my reach. Furtherpag. 7. you cite, thatIon. 19. When Jesus had tasted the vineger, he said, All is finished, and bowed the head, and gave vp the Ghost. What proveth this? Surely that at last after long and sore anguish of minde and bodily torments his naturall strength fayled him, & therefore he bowed his head and gaue vp the Ghost. What mira∣cle is there in this? But Barnard saith, this proveth plainly an in∣finit power. Which doth? His tasting the vineger, or his saying, it is finished, or his bowing the head, or his giving vp the Ghost. For my part I can not yet see any infinit power in any of these. Wherefore I can not rest on Barnard heere, except you for him do finde out som other point in the text to prove plainly an infinit power shewed openly in the maner of the Death of Christ, which yet I see not. Giue me leaue to refuse the Fathers in such a case, which your selfe doth, as we saw before. Then you alleage thatLuke 23. Iesus cryed with a lowd voyce, a little while before he dyed: to shew himselfpag 7. say you, to be free from any touch of death. How are you sure of that? What Scripture saith so? Or is there absolut necessitie in reason that it must be so? Questionles none at all. Is it a thing not possible that Christ should cry alowd, saying Father into thy hands J commend my Spirit, and even anon after dy; and yet nature to haue ben wea∣ker in him, and so himself neerer to death now at last, then he was
before in the beginning of his Passion. Let all wise men iudge. If this be not possible I will acknowledge mine errour. Adde heere∣vnto that experience sheweth (as Physitians say) how som diseases in the Body bring Death presently after most strong and violent crying: namely in som excessiue torments, as of the Stone, &c. Where in through extreeme paines and torments the vitall Spirits being dissipated will bee vtterly extinct somtimes, before they can recover and gather againe togeather. Thus a man having good strength and force in his Body, when such a disease resteth not neere the principall partes of nature originally, it seemeth hee may notwithstanding by violence of paine onely giue vp the Ghost at a suddaine, yet not miraculously, but by the course of na∣ture only.Pag 7. Ad Hedib. quaest. 8. But * Ierom saith, " this was a great wonder, and that therevpon the Centurion confessed, truly this man was the Sonne of God. I deny not but Christ might shew som strang & vnusuall thing apparantlie to the beholders in vttering his last voice, when he cryed Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Which might also very much move the beholders and hearers. And yet it shall not follow that Death seazed vpon him not naturally, or not by the fayling of natures strength in him. I say, this may be acknow∣ledged: and yet verily there is no necessitie at all to yeeld even this, for any thing that the text noteth. Yet Ierom sayeth the Cen∣turion was moved with this great wonder. It is strange that you should persist to vrge Jerom heerein against the plaine text in ano∣ther place:Mat. 27.54. which saith " When the Centurion saw the Earth quake and the thinges that were don, he said, Truly this was the Sonne of God.er. 51. Heere it is expresly noted, that the * Earthquake chiefly with other apparant miracles there mentioned, or els the Earthquake with the the iniuries of the Persecutours and the innocency and partience of Christ persecuted, compared togeather, did move the Centurion to confesse and say, Truly this was the Sonne of God. Heere it is plaine then that not Christes crying in those tor∣mentes was such a wonder, or that the Centurion was by reason thereof moved to acknowledge Christ to be the Sonne of God, as Ierom collecteth I know not from what ground, but those other sights before said. Last of all Austin is " brought to prove this matter,Pag 8. but with no more strength of reason by the Scripture then the former. Neither can his words indeed being granted, necessa∣rily
conclude any thing for your purpose; which as semeth do shew nothing but Christes voluntary dying, and that at his death he hewd great power and not infirmity only. Who denyeth thse things. Thn he proceedeth to shew my disdaine to the Fathers further: namly for suchpag 2 insolent reiecting all their opinions touching the causes of Christs Agonie in the Garden, and of his complaint on the Crosse. These supposed causes are alleaged and amplifid in thepag 1 former parte. For answere, first I dsie to know whether you allow of all these causes, or not, you sme to fuse thempag 13 heere: for heerein you shewed not your owne opinion, but he iudg∣ments of the Fathers. Elswhere,pag 29 yourselfe are resolute for som of these causes, and against other som. And yet before,pag 37 All these in∣terpretations (you say) are sound, and stand well with the rules of Christian piety. Thus variable you are, in that wherein you seeme most resolut. Howbit in my minde, where you deny these to bee your opinions, there you are in the best opinion. Neither indeede to tell you plaine can I be of opinion that those their iudgements are true." pag  The reasons of my dissenting were touched in † my for∣mer Treatise, and are maintayned further heereafter, as very suffi∣cient and iust. How then I pray you do I insolently reiect the Fa∣thers if heerein I dissent from them iustly, which even your selfe also doth in sundry of them? But my maner of speach is insolent perhaps, because I say such collections are absurd and vnlikely. I answer, these my words are purposely meant of those in these dayes that delight to vaunt of the Fathers, and chiefly in their errours. For seeing these opinions themselues are vntrue, though some of the Fathers inclined after them, yet such in our time as vrge them cannot but bee absurd and strang teachers. Who having so many helpes and meanes to discerne where the Fathers mistook, which they vtterly wanted and we abound with all, yet do so littl profit by them, that even great Doctours as they desire to bee thought, see not so much in the truth of the Gospel as many younger men now pecave: and in the Fathers they make themselves so cun∣ning that commonly their sound doctrine they little regard, their faults only they admire. Such I meant and tooke for absurd ga∣therers from this Scripture. Whom heere I noted by the nam of our Contraryes: The Fathers I call not so. Now that this inded
may be also seene even in your expounding heere. Consider first, how you wavered and spake cōtrarily in these " supposed Causes,Christs sub∣ssion e lewes re∣ction. e Churches spersion  pa 17 & . 2. 37. Treat 1. ag 68. as I noted a litle before. Again, these agree not with any Cicum∣stances of the Passion, and so are meerely of Humane coniecture without all Scripture: also they agree not togeather among them∣selves. One of them crosseth another; one overthroweth another. Will you then avouch them, as you do, to be * all sound and to stand well with the rules of Christian piety? Howbeit absolutely " I dny not, but that thse or some of these reasons were in Christ at his Passion, as namely his Care for his Church; his love of his enemies, &c. For these holy affections hee never wanted all his life long. But this rather confuteth then proveth these to bee the very cause or causes that † in the hower of his dreadfull Passion wrought in him such Agonies and consternation of minde.ag. 6. But these things heere I omit, beeing heereafter more fully discussed. Lastly you cast a needles rebuke vpon me for " confounding the Causes of the Agonie and of the Complaint togeather. 230.231. Forsooth that was done not without reason, I thinke: Every reasonable man, I beleeve, will say, that the same cause was of them both in Christ. His Agonie and his Complaint are not so contrary nor so divers, but that they might, yea verily did proceed from the same cause and ground. Yea Ambrose, 20. one of your Authours doeth * plainly ioine thē both togeather. 231. Yea your selfe doth also, as by comparing † your cause of the Agonie, 34. with your 1. or 2. of the ‡ Complaint, will appeare. You have much cause then, have you not, to make such outyes vpon me, that I am strangely amazed, confounded, and forgetfull in my writing? Good wordes I pray you. I did but ioyne them togea∣ther whom your selfe & others do make all one. But I have stood too long on these tryfles. Now you will shew some examples of my mistaking or perver∣ting your owne reasons. 31. For these hitherto were not his, but the Fathers opinions, as before I noted. I marveyle then why he trou∣bleth him selfe and vs with them, if they be not his; specially if he propound them not to be receaved? Why laboureth hee so to di∣stract vs with such varieties? And then to tell vs they are not his, but other mens. Yet such mens he telleth vs they are, as that it must not be for our Credit to refuse them. Thus the poore people are strangely taught: thus the world shalbe filled full of ambigui∣ties,
doubtfulnes, variety of opinion in matters of Religion: and withall forbidden to rest vpon any certaine and particular reason, as also he dealeth in other cases. But I omit to prosecute this any further. For we shall now see some of his owne matters, which I have ignorantly or purposely perverted. Firstpag. 2 he telleth vs, that In the Effectes of Christes Crosse he no∣ted out of the Apostle to the Hebrues, three properties of the true propitiatorie Sacrifice which tooke away the sinne of the worlde. It was a Bodily, a Bloudy, and a Deadly Sacrifice, for so you speake. This is one of your reasons, yea almost the greatest, to proove the Quaestion against vs: because Christes Bodily Sufferings & bloud∣shed were the true propitiatiō of our sinnes. But what a reason is this? How diffreth it frō our Assertion? That the true Sacrifice for sinne, must be indeed bodily, bloudy, & dead we doubt not: we vnfayned∣ly & heartily doe imbrace it The Patriarkes beleeved it, the Iewes sacrifices of beastes figured it, the new Testament confirmeth it. But how will it follow then, Ergo Christes Bodily death onely & meer∣lie was the wholl ransom and price of sinne. For we must note that this is the very Question in deed; this is the point of our Contro∣versy, asPag. 8. I have shewed, if you will deale plainly. If you speake not to this point, your words are Ambiguous and deceitfull: and that notable fault is in your selfe most true, whichPag. 2.301. you wrongully charge me with: you dally with generall and doubtful termes, which according as they are expounded, may eyther make with you or a∣gainst you. And most rightly of your wholl booke being indeed a huge volume for so litle matter, I may say that which you obiect most vnaptly against my smal pamphletPa. 24 Three lines directly to the purpose had ben more worth thē so many leves thus wastfully spent. Wherefore, if you meane these wordes directly to the purpose in deed, and doe intend to conclude that which we plainly deny, and as now at this time we will vnderstand your meaning to bee, that the meere Bodily Sufferings of Christ, without any proper sufferings of his Soule, are the intier and whole ransom for sinne: then I af∣firme expresly there is no piece of reason, nor likenes of any argu∣ment in thse wordes. This will not follow by any meanes from yourHeere  the Heb Your me is and m in this Q That Ch meere bo & bloud ∣ferings a whole  texte. Againe, if the Sacrifice, as it is onely Bodily, Bloudy, and Deadly, doth wholly purge sinne, then although Christs Bo∣dily
death and bloudshed wanted not the sympathy of the Soule, yet it followeth that no action or passion of his Soule, neither this by sympathy nor any other, I say none at all as being in the Soule, was regarded as propiciatory and meritorious. Which if you once affirme plainly, then we will seeke no further for your drift, wee may know your meaning well enough. Christs Soule shall haue no place, no merit, no respect at all in the matter of Propitiation. Howbeit elswhere I see in you manifest Contrariety heerevnto. For sundry times you teach that Christ did suffer peculiarly and severally som * proper punishments (which I hope were propitiatory & meritorious) in his Soule,g 4. 257. 8 23. 8. 245. besides his Bodily suffering: Yea that this was a part of his Crosse & the effect of Gods wrath on his Soule as wel as the suffering in his Body. Now how can this be true, if our wholl Ransom & propitiation be only Bodily, bloudy, and deadly: which is the point that heere * you stand on.so pa. 253 But you have rea∣sons " you say to cōfirm your maine matter,ag. 232. 3. among many these 2: The Jewish Sacrifices, and the Sacramentes of Christians. The 1st. shaddowing and foreshewing, the 2. testifying and confirming that the true sacrifice for sinne was Bodily and bloudy. Still what trifling is this? Doth any in the World deny it, that the true Sacrifice for sin was the Body, bloud, and death of the Redeemer? Wherefore the * Proposition must be as I " did set it in your behalfe:ereof  speake : 233. at. 1.10. 31. . 8. &c. 44. &c. The Iewish Sacrifices were shaddowes or Figures, and our * Sacramentes were signes of our wholl and absolute redemption by Christ. I say of the wholl and intire propitiatory Sacrifice, or els you shrinke and leave the Question. As for your paines of Hell in such sense as " you vn∣derstand them, that is including the locall punishment among the Damned, Desperation, finall retection, and such like, so there was never any that thought Christe Suffered Hell paines, as before is declared. 6 Where you say, that I expound these Figures of our wholl and absolut redemption to bee of all the fruits and causes of our re∣demption, why do you vntruly charge me with that which I have not. I haue no such word nor meaning as fruits. Indeed I named thē Figures of * Effects in Christ, 14. I meane Acts don by Christ: but I never thought them any where fruits of our redemption, but either causes or meanes or other necessary adioints. This therefore which indeed is the true Proposition, & being set as it ought to be I grant not, as you also vntruly charge me; I do still deny it in such maner,
as I did before:Pag. 1 Generally All the Iewes Sacrifices did notI mean the propo of their ∣ward app∣rance, the not expre the whole Figure and shaddow our wholl redemption in Christ. The inward and in∣visible things they all did not signifie. And yet I grant indeed, that they signified what they were apt to teach and signifie: namely the outward and Bodily sufferings only. This I say, many of the Iewes Sacrifices did represent and signifie, yea most of them, but not All. Therefore thePag. 23 Assumption also I may well deny, asTreat. 1 pag. 12. I did before: affirming that certaine Jewish Sacrifices set foorth the sufferings even of the Soule of Christ, and not of his Body onely. As 1. thatLev. 1 Sacrifice consisting of 2. Goates, a slaine & a Scapegoat.Pag. 23. You ob∣iect heere against: 1. that I abuse the Text. That were a great fault: but let vs view the text. Thus are the very expresse wordes which you also recite:ver. 5: Aaron shall take of the people 2. Goats for a Sinne-offering. Surely you must bring very good reason to frustrat so plaine a speach: That is, you say, to make a Sinne-offering of one of them. Nay, the very words are, take 2. Goats for a Sinne-offering: it saith not, take 2. Goats that one of them may be a Sinne-offering. But this sheweth so much, you thinke, where the text saith, Lottes were cast over the 2: Goates one lot for the Lorde, the other for the Scapegoat. And Aaron shall offer the Goat on which the Lordes lot shall fall, and make him a Sinne-offering. These wordes prove not that the Scapegoat was no Sinne-offering at all: Vnlesse this were true, that no Sinne offering can possibly bee but by kil∣ling and slaying and sheadding of bloud. Although theHeb. 9. Scrip∣ture say, Without sheadding of bloud is no remission, yet it meaneth that Allmost all things are in the Law purged with bloud. That is, many Offerings and sacrifices are bloudy, but not all. I take now sa∣crifice and offering in the largest sense, as signifying any consecra∣ted thing given to God to appease him for sinne. And such vnbloudy Sinne-offerings very many we shall finde inLev. 2.11, 13, 8 13. Nomb. 1 & 18, 11 & 28, 12 14. Moses Law. Where∣fore the Scapegoat may we yet a Sinne-offering, though it were not slaine nor bloudy. And his vtter sending away into the vnknown Deserts, may answer to the consuming of som other Sacrifices by fire. Thus then these wordes of the text which you bring doe not proue the Scapegoate to be no Sinne-offering at all: they proue it to be no bloudy Offering, and therefore not such, but of another kind then the slaine Goat was. It might be consecrated and offe∣red to the Lord, and vtterly sequestred from men, and beare and
take away sinne no lesse then the slaine Goat: wherein verily con∣sisteth the nature and being of a Sacrifice or true Sinne-offering. And in very deede all this the text following expresly avoucheth of the Scape goate.ver. 10. " The Scapegoat shalbe presented alive before the Lord to make reconciliation by him, & to let him go for a Scape∣goat. Heere is his Consecrating vnto the Lord, yea reconciliation also is made by him, though he dyed not as the other did. Againe more plainly,ver. 21, 22. * And Aaron shall put both his handes vpō the head of the live Goat and confesse vpon him all the iniquities of the Chil∣dren of Israell & all their trespasses and all their sinnes putting them vpon the head of the Goat, and shall send him away (alive) into the Wildernes. So the Goat shall beare vpon him all their iniquities in∣to the Wildernes, being let go thither. Can there be any thing in the world more full and strong to prove that the Scapegoat also was a true Sinne-offering, or rather a true parte of this wholl and intire Sinne-offering consisting and being compleat in both these Goats the slaine and the Scapegoat togeather. For as the slaine Goate so this Scapegoat, wee see, was aswell " Consecrated to the Lord, and * heere Offered (though not by killing) and separated from men,ver. 10. ver. 21, 22. & have vpon him all the sinnes of the people and caryed them cleane away. So wee may reade of other Sacrifices consisting and being compleat wholly " of Sacrifices of sundry divers kindes.Nomb. 28.3, &c. The bloudy Sacrifice had conioyned togeather with it, the vnbloudy Sacrifice of the Meat offering, and another of the Drinke offe∣ring &c. Which may very likely represent vnto vs the sundry and divers kindes of Christes meritorious Sufferings in his life time & at his Death, som bloudy, some vnbloudy: but all concurring to∣geather & making the full and persit propitiation for al our sinnes. And even such a Sacrifice or Sinne-offering it seemeth surely these 2. Goats were. Heere then your advisednes may bee noted by all men, which doe reprove me for this assertion, and that with such violent and vncomly termes. Now if it be a Figurative Sinne-offe∣ring, what signified this Figure? Certainly it signified Christ, and his taking away of our sinnes by his death. Have you any colour of reason to maintaine those wide coniectures of the * Ancients,yrill, Am∣ose, Beda. that the Scapegoat signified the Reprobat and castaway people: or ells cursed Barrabas that scaped death when Iesus was slaine. Who but you would defend these palpable mistakinges of those men? And
why? Because they are Ancient. Yet see you not the expresse text against thē? Do damned men, or did Barrabas reconcile vs to God, & take away our sinnes, as the Scapegoat did typically? Nay surely: It must needs be then, that it signified Christ, yea doubtles Christ man. For the Godhead could bee no Sinne-offering neither did it make reconciliation for sinne, neither did the Deity beare our sinnes vpon himselfe properly: all which the ScapegoatTipically. did. Further, if it were Christ man, it could not be his Body: for his body was slaine bloudily, the Scapegoat was not slaine. For the other Goat (a Sa∣crifice to) being slaine, this survived and went away into the land of separation. It must then be of necessity (I thinke) the Humane mortall Soule of Christ which the Scapegoate signified: which was a true Sinne-offering and made propitiation for vs, aswell as the slaine Goat, and bare vpon him our sinnes: though his Soule dyed not bloudily nor by loosing life and sense, as his body and the typi∣call slaine Goat did. You say,Pap. 235. If this Scapegoat do signifie Christs Soule, then it cannot be that Christes Soule Suffered, much lesse dyed any death. This obiection truly you might haue spared: see∣ing my selfTreat. 1.1 before brought it & fully answered it: where against you have said never a word. The effect whereof is this: The esca∣ping of the Goat may lively shew vnto vs that Christs Soule dyed not as the Body dyed by loosing life and sense, but surviving went hence into Hades, the land of separation, the invisible world of the Dead. But in that the Scapegoat did beare and sustaine our sinnes, and was indeede a Sinne-offering to aswell as the slaine Goat, so it may well signifie that Christes Soule properly suffered and sustay∣ned the burden of our sinnes in satisfying for them, no lesse then his body which was bloudily slaine therefore. As for the Dying of Christs Soule we shall answer you for that in due place heereaf∣ter. So that, Now where you say,Pag. 234. I am more bold then wise in af∣firming the Scapegoat to signifie the Soule of Christ. Surely then I were like you, who affirme as boldly, that among the Iewes no Sacrifice at all foreshewed any Suffering of the Soule of Christ: which you can never prove. Howbeit this I acknowledge indeed that the Iewish Figures, though they be applyable vnto Christ the substance of those shaddowes, yet wee ought to apply them in the particulars soberly and warily, and not without some plaine pro∣portion of the Figure with the thing Figured. Wherefore my mea∣ning
is none other in these Iewish figures, which the Scripture doth not any where expresly interpret, but to shew what I thinke to be indeed most probable and likely, knowing that yet som such matter, as we aime at, they do signifie without question. And this is sufficient to deny your Assertion, which against our saying that the sufferings of Christes Soule may be signified by the Scapegoat, is but meerely coniecturall and presumed. The very like are * your 3. reasons brought to shew that the " Holocaust cannot signifie the sufferings of whole Christe,Pag. 236. and therefore not of his Soule any way.Lev. 1. & 6. Your former reason is, because the Holocaust was 1. slaine and after burnt: for then if the burning signifieth Christs paines and sufferings, Christ must seeme to suffer after his death. But this is a weake inference. Is there any Figure or similitude concurring in all points and circumstances with the thing signified? Sure there is no man of knowledge so vnexpert or so vnreasonable as to require it. Many times where they agree only but in one principall respect, that sufficeth to make the simi∣litude. Againe many similitudes and Figures there are in the olde Law having as great disparagemēt to the things signified by them as this in the Holocaust which you talke of. The Bodies of beasts first " slaine,Lev. 4.11, 2. & 16, 27 Heb 13.11.12. ver. 13. Lev. 1.9. were after caryed out of the Host. Now these signi∣fied Christs going out of Jerusalem * to be slaine, but being yet alive. Againe the beasts carying out by others after they were slaine "is likened to our voluntary and free leaving of the world in this life. Lastly the * burning of the beastes after they were dead, was a sa∣crifice of a sweet favour vnto God. Which in truth is Christs very " death,Fphe. 5.2. and nothing don by him afterward, whereby Gods anger is fully pacified towarde vs. Wherefore your first exception is very vaine. The 2. is like to it. The Holocaust was consumed in one & the same sire. But Christ was tormented wholly not with one kind of suffering (as we maintaine) but with 2. kindes, that is with bodyly & spirituall sorrowes. First I say, this also, if it were true, is as weake an exception as the former, and altogeather like it. See: Though Christ indeed suffered divers and sundry kindes of sorrowes yea even of those which were meerely outward and bodily,Even that meerely in the Soule viz. when it grew vehe∣ment. as also of those that were meerely Spirituall and inward, yet we plainely af∣firme that one & " the same torment afflicted his whole manhood by sympathy. For his Soule also was sore grieved I doubt not even
with his proper Bodily torments: likewise his Body, when his trickling sweat was clots of bloud, was crushed and broken vn∣spekeably with his inward and spirituall sorrowes, though his flesh then felt outwardly no paine. So your 2. exception is also nothing. The 3. is no better: where you argue fromTrea pag. 1 my words, that the Bodyes of beastes could not prefigure the immortall & rea∣sonable Soule of Christ. And it is like to that whichpag.  afterward you cite from my words about the Sacraments, Earthly Elements cannot set out spirituall and invisible effectes in Christ. Hence you thinke that I cannot defend that the firy consuming of the Holo∣caust may signifie the sorrows both of the Soule and Body of Christ. You shall see that I can full easily, and without any trisling. It is evident that I meane in those former places, that bodily thinges generally and for the most part doe-represent the meere bodily & externall parts of Christes sufferings: but not alwayes and alto∣geather. Which you might haue easily seene by my answere to theTrea pag.  Assumption and by the instances which there I give to this pur∣pose. Againe the very instances which I give, viz: the Scapegoat, the Holocaust, & afterward the bread broken in the communion, these I say doe not in that respect as they are Bodily things repre∣sent the Soule of Christ or any matter pertayning to it. But the peculiar vsage and maner of action about them doth lively repre∣sent the suffering of his soule and not of his body only. As, not the Goat representeth Christes soule, vnles only in respect of the esca∣ping of it whē the other Goat dyed, & also in respect of the sustay∣ning and bearing vpon himself of our sinnes. And not the body of the Holocaust, but the vtter consuming by fire of the whole, signifi∣eth the sufferings of whole Christ. Lastly the bread may signifie the whole Christ who is the intire and perfit bread of life: but the Breaking thereof into pieces representeth more lively the breaking & crushing in pieces (as it were) of the soul rather thē of the body. Which was pierced through, but was not in case of being broken in pieces, so likely as the Soul was. Yet you will say) the Hol: may sig∣nifie that whole Christe suffered but some bodily afflictions, the Soul feeling the griefs & paines of the Body. For how wil it follow that the proper and immediat sufferings of Christs Soule might be signified by the Holocaust? Surely according to the proportion of the Holocaust so whole Christ, & then his very Soule chiefly, was
as it were chopt or broken into pieces, and as it were quite consumed and swallowed vp in his firy sorrowes: onely the assistance of his Godhead sustained his Soule and withall his body, or els he could not have borne it,reat 1. ag. 8. as a I noted M. Whitakers to have truly taught. This can not bee but the Soules peculiar suffering of Gods very wrath, far beyond all bodily sufferings: and yet not those paines of Hell,ag 8. &c. as b you grosly vtter it. Your other senses that you give heere∣of, the 1. hindreth not mine,ag. 237. that is c the Acceptation of Christes death. The 2. that is Christs fleshes incorruption after death is very hard and far fetcht. And Sacrifices had their respect to Christes death, not to any thing further or afterwards. As for another sense out of Austin that it should signifie our perfection and burning charity, it cannot be true: for the Holocaust-sacrifice out of questi∣on primarily signified the person of Christ, not ours. See: it is vn∣true that any man besides Christ alone is or can bee perfect in this life, that he should bee wholly consumed with Heavenly love, ac∣cording to the proportion of the consuming of the Holocaust. Also you both heere do seeme double, vnderstanding by the Ho∣locaust both incorruption after death, & a perfect burning Love in vs now in this life. Which things are farre distant asonder and can∣not stand togeather. But all thse are so vnlikely, that I will leave them to the consideration of the godly wise. Then d you come to your next reason about the Sacramentes,g. 238. wherein you thinke to touch me. First you reprove mee for saying,at. 1. . 14. e Sacraments are Earthly elementes, they cannot set out the spirituall and invisible effects in Christ. This say you is against the definitiō of a Sacrament, which is, Avisible signe of invisible grace. I answer, first you rather overthrow your self in vrging this against me: for your owne main assertion is that neither the Iewish Sacri∣fices nor Christian Sacraments do signifie any more then the bodi∣ly and bloudy death of Christ. Then it is your selfe Sir indeed that denyeth the very definition of Sacraments, that they are visible sig∣nes of invisible graces. For I hope the Bodily and bloudy death of Christ, and the renting of his flesh with whips, nayles, and speares were visible and not invisible things. As for me I can easily defend my self although you fayle in this. For I holde that Sacraments are indeede visible signes of invisible graces wrought in vs by Christ: and yet vsually they represent not spirituall and invisible
Effects or Acts in Christ himselfe, butAlbei conseq & imp I deny but al Passion be vn¦stood it only the externall and visi∣ble partes of his Passion. Can you not reconcile these two? Any bginner in Christianitie will easily do it. NextPag. 2 you make me to crosse the Justitution of the Lords Table, becauseTreat.  pag. 14 I said the Cere∣mony of breaking the bread cannot properly belong to Christes body. But even heere doe not I say expresly, that it sheweth foorth how Christes body was broken for vs? Which you say is the Insti∣tution and this I plainly acknowledge: where then is mine errour, and what is it? Indeed I meane that the breaking of the bread into many pieces doth not set out primarily the breaking of his body, but of his soule first and immediatly, and then of his Body iointly and consequentlie. Againe, that it doth not set out properly the pearcing or boring through of Christs body with the spear or nayles nor his lashing with the whip: because1 Cor. 1 Klòmenon is broken to pieces properly, andIsa. 53 Meducca in the Prophet is also Broken to pieces properlie, or crushed and broken to powder. As theseNom.  Isa 19. Deut. 2 Likewise ther wor very same ¦ture. 2 C 34.7 2  23.6, 15.16.12. Isa 21, and 2 and 41.1 Mic 4. Scrip∣ture do vse this word likewise, and also all Lexicons do confirme. YourPsal. 14 Ior. 44. Except Io 2. wher ye portiō ma kept of yt per sense  breake m pieces wt words A Psal. 34 51.17. allegatiōs therfore about the vse of Dacha otherwise, shew not the proper, but the vse thereof altered. Thus then still I say our former places are not to be meant principallie of Christs Body, for it was not properly broken: which also my other place sheweth suf∣fficientlie where it is said,Ioh 1 Not a bone of him was broken. Seeing it is manefest that none of his flesh was separated from his bones. But of necessitie it must have ben so, if his flesh had ben properlie broken into pieces, and yet his bones not broken.Pag. 23 You say, From a part the whole may and doth properly take denomination. First you must shew that some parte of him was properly broken into pieces: which hitherto is proved to the contrary. That fable whichPag. 6 you bring of the Nayles being so great that Constantine of them made him a Bridle and a Helmet, will not helpe to prove that his Body was properly broken. Neither is cutting or tearing, or pear∣ching through which onely indeed the Scripture warranteth, that Breaking properly whichDach. that word in the Prophet bfore noted doth properly signifie. And I pray is that true, that from a part the whole may and doth properly take denomination. Doth it proper∣ly? From a part to the whole is a Figure of speach. Is a Figurative speach a proper speach wth you? Vainly you charge me I know not how often against my expresse words, that I call Hell Heaven, and Descending Ascending. But heere it is no wrong to charge you
with such an absurdity indeed, who expresly do make that whi∣che you say is Figurative to bee a proper denomination. I am sure your Grammar was better, before you were as you are. But to pro∣ceede if you aske mee,Cor. 11.24  53 10. whether doe I thinke that a those places, of the Apostle and the Prophet doe signifie at all the pearcing of his body. I aunswere they may by a generall and vnproper speach, as piercing may be an vnproper kind of breaking. For seeing the H. Ghost by those wordes intendeth to shew the whole outward vio∣lence and destruction of his flesh also, and not onely the breaking & bruizing of his Soule, therefore I deny not but heerein so much may be signified, yet in no wise not that alone, nor by a proper sig∣nification, as I have said. Nowe where you catch at an advantage in me as you thinke,Treat 1. g. 14. in that I said, b The Caeremony of breaking the bread (or that breaking to pieces in I say) cannot belong pro∣perly to Christes body, but to his soule. I grant taking my wordes at the worst, and thinking me to be a senseles foole (as indeed you do in your whole writing) so you may construe them as if I had said, The Soule might be properly broken to pieces. But other men (not inferior to your L. in learning, none dispraysed) who have read this Treatise, have cōceaved me thus. This breaking to pieces cannot be properly said of Christs body, nor in any sense proporti∣onable to the property of the c words. But his Soule may rather & more truly be said to have ben broken and bruized to pieces in such wise as souls may be broken with sorrows & extraordinary anguish,omenon educca. and so was his Body likewise by sympathy with his Soule. Where I deny not but Broken applyed to the Soule is Figurative: yet kee∣ping a iust and full proportion with the proper sense of Breaking to pieces, which we cannot keepe referring it to his Body. So that thus it is neerer and better applyed to the Soule then to the Body of Christ, which was only pierced or bored through. Then you rehearse another of your reasons tending to the very same effect as that last before.g. 240. You will prove (d you say) that the bloud of our Saviour is the true price of our redemption, and that aswel of our Soules as of our Bodyes. Still you deale fraudulently: for who denyeth this as your wordes runne. But wee know you meane,s heere g. 16. e that no more but the shedding of his bloud onely and meerely is the iust and full satisfaction of all our sinnes even in the righteous and sincere iudgment of God. Then we absolutly deny
your Assertion, as before we haue don the like. As for your1 Pet. 1 Rev. 5. allea∣ged Scriptures we answer them as we did generallyTreat. pag. 8.9 before: that they meane not the meere bloud of Christ nor only the body sing∣ly and simply considered but, that togeather with the proper suf∣ferings of his Soule also they were the iust and full satisfaction, and redemption. Against which you have nothing any where. And likewise our advised and resolut answere is topag. 58, 60, 61, 7. &c. all the rest of your scriptures which most tediously and vainly you heape vp & scat∣ter every wherein your former treatise to this effect, as if they con∣tayned somwhat for your purpose, when as indeed there is not one text any where that hath any meaning of your strange conceit. So that wee shall have no need to trouble our selves any more heere∣after about any of them. Yetpag. 24 heere you vrge a reason against vs: Jf our Soules be not redeemed by the bloud of Christ our bodyes have no benefit of redemption (you meane) from death. But we1. Pet. 1 Rev. 5.9. are re∣deemed, not we shalbe. Ergo it is our Soules which are redeemed, our bodyes are not redeemed as yet in this life. Wherein we have to note 3. things. 1. Your Proposition is vaine and illogicall having no consequence in it at all. Which maketh mee to thinke that I hit your meaning right and mistooke you not in my former booke. Howbeit to try this your sentence heere, what if our Soules were not at all redeemed by Christes bloud but some other way, or not by his bloud meerely and onely (which indeede is our quaestion) will it follow that therefore our bodyes are still mortall, and there∣fore not redeemed from death? Or what if our Soules be redeemed by his bloud, as indeed they are, though not wholly nor only there∣by. What followeth then from this? Nay what if our Soules and Bodyes were redeemed wholly and only by Christs bloud? Is these any consequence that therefore our bodyes should now be redeemed from death, and never dy. Truly I cannot discerne, but that your proposition meaneth some such consequence as this, which is to me a vey strang reason. Yet that which you adPag. 2 afterward is more strang: Jf our Soules be not redeemed (wholly) by the (meere) bloud of Christ, (For thus still I say you must make your wordes, or ells you aske the very Quaestion) then our bodyes have vtterly no good, even no good at all by the death of Christ. In which sequele verily I can see neither head nor taile. Chose you now, whether you will that you speake this sophistically, or absurdly. For I cannot dis∣cerne
it: I leave it therefore to your self to determine. But perhaps you will yet againe go backe to that you excused your selfe with∣all before. You will meane that our bodies in this life have no be∣nefit of redemption from death, even no more then the bodies of In∣fidels. And this plainly you avouch for truth. Is this true, Are not our bodies now already freed from the curse & the sting of death, from all the hurt & harme that properly and naturally is in death? Is it not made vnto vs a quiet sleepe and a peaceable rest, an en∣trance for our Soules into Heaven, a putting off of sin to our bo∣dies, in such wise that Christ taketh from it the a name of Death and calleth it but b a passage?oh. 8.51. Or have the Jnfidels also thus much benefit in death,oh. 5.2. as wee have in it by our redemption in Christe? I know not therefore how to terme this your assertion, I forbeare to name it as it deserveth: it is more then strange that Infidels bodies should have as much benefit of nedemption from death, as our bo∣dies have by Christ. Dy I grant, or cease to breath we must and do still even as they do. And this death by the naturall property of it is a part of Gods Curse: but to the faithful there are great benefits ioyned even in death by the gracious dealing of God peculiarly to∣wardes his children, which also their bodies are partakers of tho∣rough the death of Christ. The naturall sting is taken out of it for the godly, yet it remayneth to the Infidells and hurteth them by retayning even their bodies (though dead) in & vnder Gods dread∣full Curse. Wherefore it makes many to thinke that indeed you vttered this matter somewhat otherwise in your Sermons, then heere you doe now publish it: and it perswadeth mee still that c I mistooke you not,eat. 1. g. 11. seeing this your turning & setting of it is so vn∣hansom. For every one may see by this your handling of it, that then you said more then heere you expresse: and heere you would faine fashion it to somwhat, but you cannot. Yea your own words bewray som alteration frō that which so confidently you preach∣ed, where you say, Whatsoever the wordes were that you might vse, which you do not acknowledge to be these that I bring.ag. 240. Lastly, d you grant that you vsed this reason in handling the power of Christes death: that is, when you preached it. For now in this Treatise you have cleane left it out, for ought that e I can see. which bewrayeth that it was such,. 88.113 as your selfe saw was not to be maintayned, how∣soever heere you strive to set some colour vpon it, though yet still in vaine.
Before we depart from this point, That not the bloud of Christ nor his flesh meerely and only without respect to the merit of his whole Soule was the full price of Redemption, heere is fit place to shew how sundry of the Ancient Fathers do agree with vs suffici∣ently in this matter: although afterward in your booke you seeme to bring them against vs. But indeed so they seeme onely: for in truth they are with vs as by these following we may see. FirstIre. 5. Ire∣naeus, The Lord bought vs with his owne bloud, and gave his soule for our soules, & his flesh for our flesh.Cyr. de  fid. ad T Cyrill, He bestowed his flesh as a ransome for our flesh, and made his Soule likewise a price of re∣demption for our Soules, although he lived againe, being by nature life it selfe.Naz. in tr 49. ad Cl Nazianzen maketh every part of man to be sanctified by the like in Christ, our condemned flesh by his flesh, our soule by his soule, our vnderstanding by his vnderstanding.Ambr.  Luc. 22.  trist. dolo &c. Ambrose saith Maerorem animae nostrae suae animae maerore abolevit: He abolished the sorrow of our Soule by the sorrow of his Soule. AndDe inca Sacr. cap.  Hoc in se obtulit Christus quod induit &c. Christ offered in sacrifice all that which he assumed: that is all & every whit that was in him besides his Godhead.Fulgent.  Thrasym  lib. 3. Fulgentius, He shewed in himselfe the sufferinges of a whole man in verity & truth, quicquid fuit infirmitatis animae sine peccato suscepit & pertulit: Hee tooke vpon him and suffered whatsoever infirmity may be in the soule without sinne. It is not pos∣sible that wee our selues should speake a more effectuall sentence for our purpose then this is. Say as Fulgentius heere saith, and we aske no more. All thatPag. 86. you except, that by these Fathers Christe dyed only the death of the flesh, is lesse then heere they affirme. And we shall answer to that in due place. Now marke well, how these Fathers do not say that Christ gave his life for a ransom onely, (asPag. 70.  you would construe it) but even his very Soule to for our Soules. They strive to expresse an exact proportion so far as was possible betwene Christ and vs. First in the parts of Christ who suffered, & of vs who were saved. So that as we are saved not in our bodies on∣ly, nor only in the externall sensitiue parte of our soules (wherein standeth that suffering with and by our bodies) but wee are saved redeemed and sanctified in our whole Spirite and Ʋnderstanding also: even so (by their verdict) Christ suffered for vs not the bo∣dily and outward sufferinges by Sympathy onely, but hee suffe∣red for vs even in his Minde also. Now this is directly against
your present a Assertion which we have in hand. 132.240 eere p. 14 Also heere they observe an exact proportion in the Obiects so far as was possible, viz: in that which he suffered for vs, & that which we are saved frō thereby. Thus that sorrow of the immortall parte of the Soule & not of body only, which we are saved from, the same he suffered. Yea I say all and every whit of those passions & sorrowes where∣vnto mans nature is b subiect and capable of, nature we e subject to fer in the nde pro∣erly for sin: nd not only y Sympathy rom ye Body Cyrill. Thes∣ur. 10 3 Barnard. de ass. Dom. ap. 41. Pag. 7. Terul. cout. Prax. Amb in Luc. 2. De trist. olor. &c. and from which we are saved, all the same he tasted and suffered for vs. Thus it is also that Cyrill elswhere saith, c Omnia perpessus est vt nos ab om∣nibus liberaret: He suffered all things throughly, that hee might ac∣quit vs from all, which els we should have suffered. And thus I take Barnards meaning to be, d He spared not him selfe who know∣eth how to spare his. Wherevpon you collect well, if you meane so e He suffered and indured All to the vttermost with exact obe∣dience and patience. To which end Tertullian also, f Sic reliquit, dum non parcit. This was Gods forsaking of him in his passion, that in nothing he spared him. And thus Ambrose g Minus contulerat mihi nisi meum suscepisset affectum. He had don lesse for me▪ if he had not ben (altogeather) affected as I should haue ben. And thus Ierom,erom. in sa. 53. h Quod nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere, ille pro nobis passus est, pacificans &c, That wich we should have borne for our sinnes, the same hee suffered for vs. Wherefore by the Fa∣thers Christ suffered exactly i All & whatsoever sorrowes & paines which we should have suffered,All kindes: : both in irit & Body. ot all parti∣lars in thē. as well Spirituall as Corporall as well in all the powers of the Soule subiect to suffering, as in that which suffered allwayes with and from the body. Only they ex∣cept 2. pointes which of simple necessity indeed must be excepted in the Sonne of God,Pag. 10. 12. 3. which before k I have also acknowledged: 1. Sinne,Pag. 87. and all sinfull concomitantes and consequentes as l you speake. And that is it which Cyprian exactly noteth, That in him there was m Similitudo paenae non Culpae,Cypr. de pass. the very like punishmēt as should have ben in vs: only there was no sinne nor fault in him as is in vs. The 2. point excepted is, that he suffered not eternally, but for a while: for he that was life it selfe could not but live againe, saith n Cyrill.In the place above cited. Where he seemeth to acknowledge a kind of death even of the soule, from which Christ revived againe. But of that in due place heereafter. Nowe heere it is manifest that even the Fathers, of whom you doe so exceedingly boast, are cleane
against you and for vs in the 1. and chiefest point of this question: shewing that Christ suffered not only bodly, or in the soule by Sym∣phaty only, but in the Minde also distinctly, even as we may suffer in minde distinctly frō our bodily suffering, that is when we suffer somwhatAs I  Treat.  pag. 4. imediatly from God. Yea he suffered (say these Fathers) all the paines which els we should haue suffered: no materiall thing excepted but only sinne, otherwise he was spared by dispensa∣tion in nothing. Against this cleere and plaine sense of the FathersPa. 35. you take no exception, neither can you. Thus having hitherto manefestly defended my selfe, that I have not abused any way the Fathers nor yet your selfe, as you vniustly charge me inPa. 22 your entrance: Now I am to doe the like againstPag. 2 your vnsufficient refusing of my Reasons. Where by, I hope, it shall appeare that you have not weakened any one of them. And First you begin with rehearsing my wordes, wherein I briefly no∣ted the very Question betweene vs,Treat.  pag. 4. That Christ suffered for vs the Wrath of God. Which youPag. 24 exclame at without measure, as being not the point which you preached against. Howbeit I sup∣pose these wordes do rightly and fitly set out the matter, both which then you preached, & which now you write. I havePag. 8 heere before truly & fully declared the whole state of this controversy, I trust. Yet because we can never opē this point to much for many good vses that it hath, I will not thinke it tedious nor labour lost ne to rip vp this question a litle againe in this place, that so we may proceede with more ease. Your generall cariage in your booke declareth, that you abuse the Reader exceedingly by the ambiguous and equivocall taking of this terme Gods Wrath, as before in the entrance I have shew∣ed. It is not I that abuse them, as youNam 243.24 every where very bitterly and vnreasonably do charge me. For according to the most vsuall and common sense of Gods wrath, so in my wholl Treatise I take it for Gods perfit Holynes, Iustice, & PowerIoh. 3 Psal. 2 2. Cor▪ 9. properly executing ven∣geance & punishment (whether little or great) due to them on whom sinne lyeth. But you generally do so cary this phrase, as signifying any punishment of sinne whatsoever: and namely the Afflictions which the very Godly do suffer, which is altogeather an vnproper speach. This I observe most specially in one place of your booke above others. Where you say,Pag. 1 All kindes of troubles, paines, and griefes in our states, bodyes, and mindes, which shorten or sower this
present life are degrees of Gods wrath, and chasticements of out transgression & corruption. Which presently you prove by many needeles Scriptures. And from this sense of his Fathers wrath you do not exempt the Lord Christ. You meane that this he suffered indeed, and that this is all in your opinion. It is true All troubles paines & griefes in their first Ordinance a were the effects of Gods proper wrath.ou doe  right∣ 275. & But in their state and condition now, they are b not: namely, as the Godly do suffer them. Which we must heere note and consider well.at. 1.14..132. You say right also: This, † because it see∣meth grievous for the present and not ioyous is called (somtymes) in the Scriptures the rodde and wrath of God. True; it seemeth. But indeed it is not so, or it ought not so to be. For c it seemeth otherwise to the iudgment of faith and knowledg. 1.2..2.28,  & 2 Cor. 0. efore pa. . 19. Then Gods wrath in this sense is very vnproperly taken: as I have often said. Wherfore spea∣king properly & exactly as in this Cōtroversy we ought according to the revealed minde of the Holy Ghost, it is Chasticement & cor∣rection: it is not in any wise Wrath, or punishment properly meant. Neyther may it be said properly that his Iustice leadeth him to in∣flict it on vs (as e you affirme) but it is his Holynes and Love to∣wards his children which chasteneth them.. 132. According to the Scripture which saith, 12.10. f God chasteneth vs for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holynes. And g whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth: 6.7.  11.32 he scourgeth every Soune that he receaveth. If we indure chastening, God offereth himselfe vnto vs as vnto sonnes: for what sonne is it whom the Father chasteneth not. Therefore to speake properly not Gods Iustice, but his Holynes and Fatherly Love doth move him to lay whatsoever Crosses and troubles vpon his children. He is not vnto them a Iudge or Revenger, but a Fa∣ther: Neyther is it Wrath that cometh from him or Vengeance for sinne properly,r. 11. but h amendment in Love towards the godly. Now the case with Christ was cleane otherwise. He needed no Amendement, but that which he suffered was right Punishment. He was neyther in case as the wicked, nor yet simply as the godly. He differed from them both, and yet in som pointes did partake of both their conditions. He was like the godly, in that he was highly beloved of God, and had no maner of sinne of his own laid to his charge. He was like the wicked and differed from the case of the godly greatly, because he was laden & charged with sinnes, yea with all maner of sinnes, & sustayned their due punishment,
there being also none other at all to indure the vengeance of God for them but himselfe. As we haue largely shewed before in ope∣ning the state of our Question. Thus then whatsoever Christ suffered (and specially at his death) was very wrath and vengeance from God properly taken, true punishment and iustice executed a∣gainst sinne & for sinne, to the which he was in som sort condem∣ned and appointed, also this was the true Curse of the Law which thus he sustayned for vs. Nevertheles in all this his Case was ex∣traordinary, his condition in the like punishments vtterly vnlike to the wicked. For his owne nature was still for all this most holy, faithfull, stedfast, loving the Lord, and beloved of him, albeit in his office of Redeeming vs and suretyship for vs he did sustaine truly, and not vnproperly, (as the Godly do) the Lordes very wrath against sinne which he tooke vpon him. Heere is now the Power of God to be deepely considered, togeather with his vnspeakeable Iustice, and Love and Holines. Even one of the greatest mysteries of Christian Religion: which to vnfolde what toung is able, yea what heart can conceave it? And yet most necessary & most com∣fortable to be vnderstood of all men. Namely how the Lord hath assigned to his sonne in the worke of Redemptiō 2. personnes as it were, or countenances, or cōditions. His owne naturally, which God ever deerely loved: & our countenance, or person, or cōdition which he sustayned by his office, which condition the Lord trulyAs yo Gods C pag. 26 in deeds in word ac∣cursed and punished. Only the sense of the paine of Gods Ven∣geance came indeede vnto his most holy nature: the Curse the Hatred, the wrath, and iudgment of God being quenched there∣with. His owne nature felt the sorrow and paine of the Curse and Hatred. But the Hatred & Curse was bent against the load of our sinne wherein he stood forth as guilty before God, and appeared as it were clothed therewith. This was Love and mercy to vs, this was Iustice vpon Christ having vndertaken for vs, this was infinit power and wisdom both wayes in God to bring it to passe, which no creature can comprehend: his Holynes and Love still chaste∣ning his Redeemed ones, but laying no part of true Punishment or proper Vengeance for sinne vpon them, which Christ only did for them wholly sustayne. Thus also seeing Christ indeed had no sinne in him (as the godly have) to be corrected: neyther could be correctted & chasticed for nothing: therefore properly he was not
chastised nor corrected at all, but his Afflictions every one both small and great were true and proper punishments, and the effects of Gods very wrath for our sinne lying vpō him.. 245. Som where a you say, Christ might suffer the wrath of God in his body, yea in his soule he might suffer it, and yet not the paines of the Damned, or of Hell. We grant you say true, Christ suffered not the paines of the dam∣ned nor of Hell vnderstanding this for the very same condition & state alltogeather b as the Damned are in. you de∣e it pag. 0.49.50. We abhorre such blas∣phemy as much as you that Christ so suffered Hell paines. Yea al∣beit I know you are far from thinking so, yet I say your words do com neerer vnto it then ours do,g. 15.16. as is c before noted. But I aske, do you graunt that Christ suffered Gods wrath in Spirit, as the A∣postle d somwhere distinguisheth the Spirit & Soul? If you meane not thus,. The. 5.23 then you againe vse sophistry deceaving vs with the worde Soule. For wee meane thereby in this Question onely the Spirit or Minde, as it is also called in exact and distinct speach. Howbeit speaking vulgarly and ordinarily we calle it the Soule: Which yet sometime is vnderstood onely for the Sensitive parts quickning the body and depending thereon. But this indeede is not it which we haue heere in quaestion. If you meane in Soule, to be properly and immediatly in his immortall Spirit, as the ordinary phrase intendeth: and that so he suffered directly punishment for sin in his Soule, & not Devotion & Piety & zealous Care only (as I doubt e you meane) then you differ not frō vs, observe . 18. but we al agree. And thus my wordes shalbe true, Christ suffered a sense of Gods wrath f equall to Hell it selfe, and all the torments thereof. For as touching Gods wrath punishing his Spirite,Which you  s;o blame: . 244.247. who can say but that this was as hoat and skorching as Hell fire it selfe? Who can limit or mea∣sure the fury of Gods severe Iustice when he cometh in iudgment against sinne, as now he did vnto Christ? This therefore being well pondered, we may preceave that Christs sorrow & anguish which he indured for sinne, might very well be and was no doubt infinit: yea even in those bodily stripes, woundes, and bloudshed, whose paines otherwise were finite. His soule not only discerning sensi∣tively the bodily paine & smart, but chiefly in the vnderstanding he conceaved, and in his faculty of immediat suffering he felt the fury of that hand which principally strooke those blowes vpon his Humane nature: not Pilats, nor the Iewes, who were but instru∣ments, but the originall and chiefe imploying them, which was
Gods Justice armed with vengeance for his sinne (His I may call it, for he paid for it.) Now this could not but make an vnspeake∣able impression of paine & sorrowes, wch stacke in the depth of his soule. Who then can say how litle or how small this was? Nay, who can declare or comprehend the infinit greatnes of it? Finally your self doth grant expresly thatPag. 2. the Wrath of God is Hell: indeed only itIsa. 30 causeth Hell to be cruell. Yea you grant it to be sharper then Hell. So that we see heereby how vainly you say,Pag. 2. Out of this proposition, Christ suffered for vs the wrath of God for sinne, I shall never conclude: Ergo he suffered the true paines of Hell. I have heere shewed you I trust that this followeth well, seeing the wrath of God which Christ felt in his Spirit was his right and proper wrath, albeit he suffered not all nor the wholl wrath of God, nor Hell locally, nor every part thereof iust as the Damned do. Which you without all colour of reason or likelyhood, would make men imagine to be the question betweene vs. YouPag. 24 would make a Contradition in my wordes for sayingTreat. 1. Christ suffered in his wholl manhood, and afterwardTreat. 1. Christ suf∣fered Gods wrath properly and immediatly in his Soule. Where I say not as you vntruly charge me, that, He suffered all that he suf∣fered in his whole manhood. Wherefore this is a niew contrariety. Againe, granting him to suffer all that he suffered in his wholl manhood, yet he must suffer Gods wrath (as God wrath) properly and immediatly in his Soule, in his Body mediatly and by coniun∣ction only with his Soule. And thus my reasonTreat. 1. there framed is yet still wholly good and sound. Then I am charged with absurdityes, I know not how many, nor how great. 1.Pag. 34 Because I say,Treat. . pag. 17. Christ assumed not our nature, nor any part of it but only to suffer in it properly and immediatly. As if I had meant heere, that he became man not to reveale to vs by his owne mouth his Fathers will, not to worke righteousnes for vs, not to quicken and sanctify vs, but only to suffer for vs, and nothing els. Wherein who would have shewed himselfe so vniust an Ad∣versary, & so vnreasonable? Were it not reason and iust dealing to consider whereof we dispute, and so weighing the whole matter of our talke not to stretch and racke my words further then that. All men may see it to be manefest, thatTreat.  pag. 16. heere I speake only of Christs suffering for our redemptiō, having not one word about his other
benefits which he wrought for vs.Pag. 17. a And after speaking of Christs Soules suffering, I shew that although there were 2 sortes thereof, one immediat and proper, an other by Sympathy from and with the flesh, yet Christ tooke our Humane Soule only to suffer in it pro∣perly & immediatly: that is, his maine end was not that he should suffer in it by Sympathy from and with the body, and onely so, which you very strangely affirme. So that my meaning is no more but to exclude that which you affirme, That Christ tooke his Humane Soule to suffer in it only from and by his Body. This heere I denyed, and nothing els. For I grant that Christ intended that his Humane Soule should suffer by Sympathy: but yet also this he intended not directly nor primarily in taking the 2 distinct partes of our Humane nature our Soule and our Body. He intended it by consequence, because Natures right state was such in vs: therefore determining to be in nature like vs, he would also that his Soule should feele the Bodyes outward harmes, as it doth with vs. How∣beit in comparison of the Soules most principall disposition, & of that which is proper to Reasonable Creatures, he did not respect the inferiour part, that which is common to vs with Beastes, even this sensitive suffering by Sympathy with and from the Body. I say in comparison of the other Christ respected not this, yet he did re∣spect this also, as I said, secondarily & consequently: that is because he intended to have our nature in whole and full perfection, as we have it, only except sinne. Now I beseech you would any vpright adversary obiect against me, that in this speach I exclude Christes doing righteousnes in his Soule for vs &c. I appeale to all indifferent Readers. Rather hence we are to gather & to conclude, that each part in Christ ought to have the proper and immediat vse as is in∣cident to the nature thereof, aswell in suffering, as it is cleere that it hath in working righteousnes. In Christes working of righte∣ousnes and obedience to God, his Soule had a proper and imme∣diat part to do which it executed without the Body: as to conceave & meditate on the will of God revealed to him, to love and wholly to imbrace it, and to purpose the full performing of it, &c. His Body also had a proper and externall vse, not onely to follow the holy thoughts and purposes of his minde, but also to minister many outward occasions, & to derive them to the minde, whereby Christ wrought righteousnes compleatly, and in his whole man.
That which was by cooperation and mutuall cohaerence only of one part with the other, as it was a distinct kinde of working in the Soule and in the body also, so it was respected secondarily, and only because the true constitution of our nature requireth so: wch Christ meant wholly and perfitly to take vpon him. Whence now we may well argue, As it was with him touching his faculty of do∣ing righteousnes and Obedience, so it was and ought to bee touching his suffering Gods punishments for vs. There is no reason in the world, nor likelyhood, that the natural faculty in Christs Soule of proper and immediat suffering for our sinnes should have no vse, and a Suffering of paines onely by and from the body should be sufficient, when in his doing of righteousnes for vs his Soules ioint Obedience and mutually knit togeather in & with his Body was not alone sufficient. But there was further obedience found in the Soule of Christ, even that which was proper and immediat in it, as before I said. Seeing then such a kind of Obedience was necessa∣ry for vs in Christs Soule, therefore such a Suffering also even in the same kinde was necessary likewise. This must needs be a perfit rea∣son for vs against you, except you could by expresse Scripture dis∣prove this proportion of like necessity betweene the operation of the proper faculties of Christes Humane Soule, that is betweene his Doing & Suffering for vs: which you shall never be able to do. And thus it appeareth I hope, that you had no cause so cruelly to rage at me for this as you do. Nor yet for the next: where your charge me thatPag. 250. I conclude Christs flesh to be needles for our redemption. A horrible Haeresie. But how do I say so much? Because I say, His Soules suffering by Sympathy did not make properly to our redemption. Ergo his Flesh was needles. I deny this sequele: how can that follow? Touching the sense of my speach, you may remember how I have largly de∣claredPag. 8. before that the Soules proper suffering is greatly and iust∣ly distinguished from the Cōmon suffering that is by sympathy: And that the Soules suffering by Sympathy in Christ was inten∣ded by God, by reason that our naturall constitution doth require it so to be in every true and perfit man, which Christ also was. And thus it did make to our redemption, even as likewise his Infirmi∣ties, and Affections: as his Wearines, Hunger, Sleepe, Feare, Love, Ioy, &c. These doe make to our redemption, not as intended in
Christs incarnation principally and primarily, but secondarily and by consequent; because that Humane nature which God ordayned vnto him, and intended to be perfit in him, could not otherwise be throughly perfit as it is in vs; but with these common Affections & infirmities wch other mortall Creatures have to, & not Man only. Also in Christ these Infirmities and Affections wrought not im∣mediatly for sinne: but vsually for other particular causes and oc∣casions immediatly. Nevertheles they were all even for sin in him consequently, that is because the perfection of Humane nature, which he assumed for sinne, and was in every point in him, as be∣fore I noted, required so. Even thus likewise in Christ: I say his Soules suffering by sympathy wrought in him immediatly & pro∣perly for some other particular cause stirring that faculty, that is by reason of the Bodily paine & smart, which this sensitive power of the Soule apprehended & felt and caused the flesh also to feele. This suffering then of his Soule only by sympathy was immediat∣ly and properly not for our redemption from sin, but for the sensi∣tive apprehending of the smart, woundes, and blowes, which the Iewes gave his body: & yet as before I said consequently even this was for our sinne also, namely because these woundes were given him for our sinne. And thus, though it made for our redemption in such maner as it wrought in Christ because of our sinne, and as it was intended by Christ in taking both partes of our Nature, the Soule & the Body, yet this was not in a direct or immediat respect, and so not properly but by consequent as I have shewed. After a you charge me sorely,Pag. 252. that I falsifie your Argument a∣bout receaving pollution from Adam. For where b I frame your reason as grounded on that opinion that onely our flesh is derived from Adam and not our soule,Treat. 1. pag. 19.Pag. 252. c you renounce it vtterly and say, you grounded no reason vpon that difficulty: & so you made no such argument as heere I pretend. Which whether it be true or no, I re∣port me to them that heard you. But then, what is your reason now? is it any otherwise grounded? No certainly, if you make any reason at all. Who trifleth then? and why doe you vpbraid me so much with trifling? Let vs see what is your reason now: Christes flesh is as able to redeeme vs, as Adams to condemne vs. But we in∣herit pollution from Adams flesh. Ergo. Doe we inherit pollution from Adams flesh, and is it not by Generation? How ells do we in∣herit
pollution & cōdemnatiō from him. If there be no otherway, why doe you then seeme to refuse the difficult question of our Ge∣neration, and yet vrge the sequele thoreof? For if our soules arise in Generation from Adam as well as our flesh, how can your reason be good by any possiblity? It is best therefore vtterly to omit this reason, which you grant hath no ground but a great difficulty & doubtfull question. ITreatis pag. 21. have shewed herefore at large that your ar∣gument (which heere is your Minor) is nothing true: For pollution, that is, sin & reall iniquity is not in our flesh without a Soule. But Ambrose saith, We are defiled before we haue life, I pray, omit mens Authorities in this case, & prove by sound reason that which you would. Neither is it cleere, as you say it is, that we heri pollution frō Adams flesh only. (This word only you must add, or els you say nothing against vs.) Our parents Soules are in cause as wel as their flesh, that sin is derived vnto vs. But you draw me to talke of these intricat things, which I would in no wise meddle with. I pray, kepepag. 10. your promise better, not to medle with this difficultie, neither to make it any groūd of your reason: which yet you do here notwith∣standing. Again you with one breath overthrow your self. For you say, we have pollution before the Soule commeth whence soever it cōmeth. Yea, whence soever? What if the Soule doe come in & by generation? You see how you crosse your self, who do so taunt me for this fault, I hope, altogither vniustly. ThenPag. 25 you will disproveTreat.  pag. 19. my Proposition: which is, whereby Adam first sinned by the same Christ satisfied for sinne. You deny this, because the Scripture ac∣knowledgeth no satisfaction but by death: where still we must note that you meane only by the Bodily death. Now how proove you that? Because the iudge in prohibiting Adam to transgresse, threat∣ned death:Ocn. 2. Jn the day that thou catest thereof, thou shalt dye the death. Which it seemethPa. 100. 64. you avouch againe and againe. And are you sure that Death heere is but the bodily death only, & no more? Then surely the wicked should satisfie easilie for their sinnes. Far be it from me to vtter such a sentence. Neverthelesse, you must give me leave to shew you also your contradiction in this point. First in that where you acknowledge,Pag. 42. the Iudges revenge for sinne is Death both of body and soule. Againe where youPag. 18. agree with Athanasius shewing expresly that this text intendeth even both these: Anima dixit, Morte morieris, He saide to the Soule,
Thou shalt dy the death. But you would prove your matter againe by this;Hebr. 9.15. a Through death, which was for our redemption, we receaue the promise: Yet he saith not, Through his bodily death meerely and alone, and by nothing els togeather therewith, which is your intent. He excludeth not the Soules proper sufferings, as b I have often said:Treat. 1. the contrarie heereof you never come neere to proove. And it must not be forgotten,Pag. 8, 9. that c heere ou renounce all satis∣faction for sinne in respect of merit as from Christes soule vtterly.Pag. 253. Therefore that absurd speech and worse which you d vniustly cast on me,Pa. 250. &c. proveth in very deed to be your owne: that Christes suffe∣ring in Soule by Sympathy makes not to our redemption. Your own place in Barnard maketh Christes whole Soule that is the Minde, and the part depending on the Body also, to have place and part in the meritorious sacrifice,Pag. 84. as well as the Body. e Ʋt totum hominem salvum fecit, sic de Toto se hostiam fecit salutarem. Which suteth not with your wordes, The Soule of Christ which could not dye, could not pay the satisfaction: and nothing might satisfie for sinne, but death.Pag. 85, 86, 8. &c. Yea all your f other places of Contradiction herevnto must be taken in good part. As for your reason, That nothing may sa∣tisfie for sinne but death, it is not sound. The Scriptures doe shew in deed that Christ should not satisfie without Death: but they deny not that there are other partes of Christes Satisfaction, which dif∣fer from Death: As his bloudshed, and besides that Christs Pover∣tie, his hunger, his wearines, his shame, his reproches, his apprehen∣sion, his buffeting, &c. These doubtles, yea all other suffringes of Christ whatsoever, small or great, are satisfactorie & meritorious. You will say, you vnderstand all these and such like in the Death of Christ. You may vnderstand what you list: but who will grant in proper speech that these are his Death, or that his death is any or all these. And if you take Christes death by the Figure Synecdo∣che, a part of Christes sufferings for the whole,Pag. 41. &c. then why doe g you so much abhorre that Figure heere, and why may not the Soules proper sufferings be admitted also into the worke of Christes Sa∣tisfaction, although it can not properly dye? Where you nippe me also for saying that the Soule of Christ in some kinde of sense dy∣ed: I hope in due place you shall have a reasonable answer to that matter. Till then have patience, I pray. And thus h you come to skan my Assumption also,Pag. 253. that Adam committed sinne most pro∣perly
in his Soule. Which you graunt in one sense is true, but dire∣ctly repugnant to my Conclusion. How I pray?Pag. 25 If I meane that Adams Soule transgressed the Cōmandement with her body and by her body, that is, the Soule as agent, the Body as the Instrument, thē the conclusion will follow in spite of my heart, Ergo in satisfiing for sinne Christs Soule must be punished with her body and by her body: which is the thing I labour to overthrow with all the wits I have. Nay, then the Conclusion will follow that the immortall part the Minde was punished peculiarly, and not by and from the Body onely: seeing in all even outward sinnes the Soule sinneth, both principally, and also in a proper and peculiar maner by it selfe, yea before the body sinneth. Albeit the Body sinneth also secōdarily, and in a maner proper to it selfe: even as the Instrument, as you say. Yea further I meane that some sinnes the Soule acteth in and by it selfe meerely: and therefore it suffereth likewise some punish∣ments meerely in it selfe, which touch not the Body at all, vnlesse by Sympathy only, and that only when they grow vehement. But all this you heere deny:Very stran doctrine. teaching that the Soule properly commit∣teth no sinne but by and with the body: that is, the Soule in it self & by it selfe alone sinneth not. And so consequently that God tempo∣rally and eternally punnisheth the Soule only by the Body. This is the true effect of your discourse heere. For proofe of the first you say,Pag. 25 God did not say to Adam, thou shalt not likeThe so∣den frui it, or desire it which the Soule of Adam did, but thou shalt not eat thereof, which could not be performed but by the hand and mouth of Adam. And there∣fore Adam transgressed the Commandment not by his Soule, but by his Body, even as in murder, theft, and adultery: these factes men commit by their Bodies and not by their Soules. And after, All pro∣vocations and pleasures of sinnes the Soule taketh from her 'Body: all actes of sinne she committeth by her body. Both which speeches are exceeding vntrue and hurtfull. For even in these sinnes the Soule as I said sinneth principally and peculiarly before that the Body sinneth at all. Yea the Desiring and Liking of evell is sinne, before the outward Act is cōsummat and finished. This PaulRom.  vn∣derstood at length when he became a Christian, though a long while being a Pharisee, he knew it not. And it seemeth, this was in Christs time the Haeresie of the Pharisees: against whom he shew∣eth, that not only the outward fact of Bodily sinne was sinne, but
alsoat. 5.22.28 even the very thoughts and liking towards sinne. Wherefore Adam was as well forbidden to desire or like that fruit, as to eat it, which you deny. The Commandement was naturally ingraven in Adams hearte in his Creation. Which since, Moses maketh di∣stinct and diverse from all the rest, which concerne the outward acte. Therefore distinctly he saith, Thou shalt not desire or covet. So that to desire the forbidden fruit was sinne, even without and before the acte of eating. Moreover other foule sinnes, Haeresies, Turcisme, and Atheisme are committed and determined simply in the minde, without any necessary imployment of any partes of the Body. As touching Haeresies, to hold Two first causes of thinges a Good and a Bad, God and the Divell with Manichee: also that Christ the Redeemer was not God with Arrius: that the Holy Ghost is not God with Eunomius &c: that Christ had no Soul with Apol∣linaris: that Christes Manhood was confounded and changed into his Godhead with Eutyches, or divided from his Godhead with Nestorius: or the opinion of Vbiquity or of Transubstantiation. Finally that there never was nor shalbe any Christ a Redeemer as the Turkes hold, that there is no God as the Atheists. Nowe are there not many provocations to hatch and to conclude these opi∣nions meerely in the minde & soule of man? Are there not many pleasures even in these impieties meerely in the minde? Yea it is evident to all that the meere Thoughts, the Vnderstanding & de∣termination of the only Soule of man doth act them & resolveth on them in it self, without any concurrence or cooperation of the body therein. Happily you will say, The Soule takes occasion so to thinke by some outward bodily thinges before seene or heard. I deny not but the Soule taketh occasion to thinke many things by the bodily senses. How be it not all thinges simply. And so are the Fathersprian and  10. in your g. 255. heere to be vnderstood. If any will stumble on that of Aristotle, Nihil est in intellectû quod non fuit prius in sensu, it is not absolutly nor vniversally true. My reason is, because Philosophers thought the minde to be as it were Tabula abrasa when we come into the world first. They knew not the naturall Pride, the impie∣tie, and perversity of mans soule, which may yeeld many and sun∣dry Thoughts and Determinations to sinne, yea provocations and pleasures in sin which the Body ministreth not, neither could the Heathen vnderstand them. And to say that this pride, impiety, and
perversitie was taken by contagion from the meere flesh originally in Generation, is not to be proved. Bud yet were that so, notwith∣standing the Soule afterward can acte many sinnes meerely in it selfe and without the cooperation of the body. Further, as the Angells sinned in the beginning by their meere spirituall conceit against God, so nothing letteth but that man in his Angell-like nature (the reasonable Soule) may sinne likewise without any Bodily meanes therevnto. Also, as we can thinke well without vsing our body, God so inspiring vs: so may we thinke ill (which is sinne) our owne inborne corrupt vnderstanding and reason and will moving vs only. Moreover if I grant you this point of Heathē Philosophy, that the Soule taketh occasion to thinke all thinges which she thinketh vniversally from the body & bodily obiectes: yet it followeth not that she taketh occasion to misthinke from thence alwayes. The proper provocations and pleasures of sinne are oftentimes not outward at all: but the meere perversitie and mali∣gnity of our evill minde is vsually the very cause of ill thoughts & ill determinations. I grant also that the occasion is often taken frō the outward senses. But it is meerely taken, not given: taken by the corrupt and perverse minde, not given by the senses. Which though they be also otherwise corrupt, yet simply in seeing natu∣rall things they sinne not, nor yet in hearing, nor in tasting, save as the minde which is properly, and principally, and first sinfull, a∣buseth their operation. And as touching those wretchedHaeret Turkes theists. men & opinions before rehearsed, doubtles their presumptuous and per∣verse wit only so reasoning and concluding falsly without any o∣ther proper inducementes frō without, was the very cause of those spirituall impieties in many impes of Sathan. Wherefore for you to affirme that the Soule committeth all acts of sinne by the body, & that God did not forbid Adam to like or desire that fruit, is more then strange doctrine. Somewhere most iniuriouslyPag. 3 you reproch purity: I dare say heere you have no colour of purity in this point. NotwithstandingPag. 2 you resolutly set your self to prove your opini∣on, not by Scripture, but by Fathers: who are answered before, sa∣ving Tertullian, whoPag. 2 you say pointeth to a place of Scripture for it:Mat.  out of the heart come evill thoughts. But this place being con∣sidered will rather prove the contrary. For Christ heere meaneth not by Heart any parte of the Body, but meerely the Minde or
Soule of man, and that with opposition to the body in this case of sinning. For thus in effect hee saith, Not the Body sinneth by ta∣king in, but the Soule by sending out. That is to say, The Soule only sinneth properly, & not the body at all no not in grosse facts, except as the body is the Instrument, the Soule being the Agent, as your selfe doe speake. Otherwise the body sinneth not at all, much lesse in such thoughts as are meere spirituall, vnles wee meane by society, & for coniunctions sake in one person with the Soule, wch indeed is it that sinneth. And thus some have thought, those places of Tertullian whichag. 255. you cite may be vnderstood. But indeed Tertullian you vse not well, and bring these his wordes a∣gainst his own meaning, as anon we shall further see. That which you ad of Bodily infirmities letting the operation of the Soule (for so I thinke you meane) as in Lethargies, 256. Apoplexies, Sleepe, Phrensy, &c. Peradventure, then it thinketh and cōsidereth more freely in it selfe and by it selfe, then when the body setteth it on worke otherwise at other times. Howsoever, it can never be pro∣ved that the Soule then vtterly ceaseth operation, and can do no∣thing: for it seemeth that only our memory and sensitive faculties are stopped, whereby it commeth to passe that we know nothing afterwards what the minde contemplateth and thinketh in such cases. It is very rare when we remember something, and by some extraordinary loosing of those obstructions it is, which common∣ly doe possesse our senses wholy in such occasions. Yet even those small remnants of such operations of our Soule beeing in such state, doe evidently convince that the Soules operations hang not necessarily on the body, neither is it idle when the body is hin∣dred, though commonly and for the most part we remember litle thereof. Lastly, if the Soules operations were so necessarily tyed to the faculties and instrumentes of the body as you doe avouch, I greatly doubt howe the Soules immortalitie will bee defended a∣gainst the effect of your assertion.oul hath ion nor meere∣ mply in  without dy. 54.255 Surely it bringeth in with it the Haeresie of Pope Iohn the 22. and of certaine Anabaptistes, that the Soule hath no being till when it shall resume hir body at the last day. And hence also it is that you say, Gods iustice punisheth the soule (only) by the body, that is, not till the Resurrection. This (only) the effect of you speach contayneth plainly and fully. Yea in truth thus you must needs affirme and hold: you can not avoid
it, if you will hold vour maine Question. Only except you deny that Christe had a Humane Soule perfit in all the powers and fa∣cultyes thereof, like ours: or els that God did not properly pu∣nish Christ for our sinnes. Of necessitie you must fall into one of these dangerous evills, for ought that I yet see. Wherefore this point is notPag  so easie nor so evident to the simple as you pretend: and I thinke you had neede of better reasons then hitherto I see any you have, before the Godly and Learned will beleeve you. The rather for that in deed heere you committ further 2. grievous faultes. 1. Tertullian your owne authour, & the principall ground which you have for your opinion heere, is wonderfully ill vsed. 2. You are strangely contrary to your selfe in your very winding vp of the matter. As for Tertullian, he resolveth directly contrary to the wordes whichDe R carn. c Animas  torquers  rique pe ros &c you cite from him. Saith he, The example of Lazarus in the Gospell proveth that Mens Soules though alone and without their bodyes, are punished, and comforted, in the world of the dead. The Soule shall lacke the revniting of the flesh with it, not for that it can not feele any thing without the flesh, but for that it must needes heereafter feele also with the flesh. For as much as it suf∣ficeth by it selfe to doe somewhat, so much, or so farre also it sufficeth to suffer. It sufficeth indeed to doe lesse by it selfe. For it is able of it selfe only, to Thinke, to Will, to Desire, to Dispose: but to accomplish, it looketh for the vse of the body. So therefore it also looketh for the societie of the body, that by it the Soule may aswell suffer absolutely, as without it she could not doe things compleatly. And therefore for what actions it sufficed by it selfe, the iudgement of the same it re∣ceaveth (now) that is, Of the Desire, of the Thoughtes, of the Will, that it had. Thus Tertullian directly answereth to thatPag.  Conclu∣sion andPag. 2 reasons which you gather out of him, proving contra∣rie to the same that the Soule now without the flesh receaveth iudge∣ment for such actions as of it selfe it was sufficient to doe: and it is suf∣ficient to doe certaine actions of it selfe, as To thinke, to Will, to Desire, to Order, and dispose things; but to accomplish, it is not able (namely outward actions) the iudgment of which actions indeed the Soule shall tary for till the revniting againe of the flesh there∣with. It seemeth that Tertullian cited before the reasons of theSuch a fore not  Pope L Heretkes, holding that the Soules slept till the last iudgement, and receaved no reward at all in the meane time, for want of the
societie of their flesh, which till then lieth rotten in the Grave: but heere Tertullian answereth and renounceth all this same.s after∣ard. & the nhapilies,  now . And so those were the Heretikes wordes against Tertullian, which you al∣leage out of him in steed of Catholike. Which dealing what it is, I leave to be considered. Next your owne contradictorie dea∣ling in this place, is also not to be forgotten. For your selfe shut∣teth vp with an excellent reason against your self, almost the same that I observed presently before in Tertullian against your collec∣tion. Thus you say,Pag. 257. Doe I denie then that the Soule hath any suf∣ferings in this life and the next, which come not by the body? By no meanes. The Soule hath some proper punishments in this life, as sor∣rowe and feare when the body hath no hurt, from which Christ was not free, as appeareth by his Agonie: and so in the next the Soules of the wicked have griefe & remorse, besides the paine of fire, &c. Yes surely: I suppose you denied before the Soules punishment with∣out the Body. But now you seeme to graunt it. And seeing you graunt also, thatPag. 25. nothing is more proportionable to Gods iustice, thē to retayne the same order in punishing which they kept in offending. Therefore it foloweth by your owne words, that the wicked som∣times sinned meerely in and by their Soules, and not onely togea∣ther with and by their Bodies: seeing they are punished simply in and by their soules, and not onely with and by their bodyes. Also, how sound this is, I wot notPag. 257. where you yeeld some punishment now to the Damned: how beit none other reall and positive pu∣nishment but remorse and remembrance of sinne onely, as it see∣meth, Againe in saying that Christ was not free from some proper punishments to the soule, as Sorrow and Feare in his agonie: if you meane as you speak, that these were proper punishmentes inflicted on him by Gods very Wrath, (and not to be onely his holy affec∣tions Devotion to God, and compassion to men, which yetesoe g. 18. I feare is your meaning) then it foloweth evidently from your own words, that Christ suffered proper punishment in his Soule from the verie wrath of God, more then the Bodily sufferings only on by Sympa∣thy in the Soule which in a word is the graūting of our whol que∣stion. All the rest that you adde out of the Fathers, touching Hell and Hell paines, is to no purpose. If. 258.259 you cite them to proove that Christ had no naturall feare of Death and Hell, youg. 22 gainsay that your selfe further then we doe, or then the trueth is.
ThenPag. you come to my other Reasons which I called Speciall, not for more excellency in them then in the other, except onely that I take these to bee not so Generall as the former, but more neerely to touch our Quaestion. Which you might perceave well enough to have ben my meaning, by the expresse Opposition thatTreat pag. 3. I make of Generall and Speciall. But it appeareth you had rather take my wordes so as that you may make them to serve your vn∣seemely iesting and better inveying humour: which yet in the end will helpe your cause but little. Against b my 1. Reason out of I say, that Christ suffered those paines and sorrowes for sinne which els we should have borne: you except that I expresse not whether I meane All or Some. I answer, All and every whit I meane so far as possibllity will admit: and na∣mely as touching the very sorrowes and paine. Nothing was aba∣ted in the nature and vehemency of the paine which hee suffered, any more then is abated in the paine and sorrows of the Damned. This the very text heere expresseth with greatWhich faint int∣tations  261. do fully  vnto. emphasis,Isa. 53 Hee susteyned our very sorrows, or our sorrowes themselves. And this we conclude the rather, because the sense of paines and sorrowsHeb. 2 only was the Ransom ordayned and consecrated by God in Christ, that by them his sufferings should be accomplished, & our sinnes satis∣fied. Whatsoever therefore in this life might be painfull & was due to mankind generally for sin, & in it owne nature was no sin, that Christ suffered wholly and alltogeather for vs, even the same which els we should. Which is your ownpa. 28 plaine confession also. I grant indeed it vtterly impossible that he who was vncapable of sinne, yea God himselfe, should be really separated from God, or Hated, or weakened in faith, or punished externally. Yet it was possible that even he on whom our sinne was laid should feele both pro∣perly in Soule, and also in Body all the whole vehemency of our due paine, and the sharpenes of our smart. Paine, affliction, & sor∣row is not sinne be it small or great: it is indeed properly and ori∣ginally the Punishment of sinne either in vs or in others. Christe suffered Punishment for sinne not in himselfe, as others do, but by Gods ordinance he suffered punishment extraordinarily for sinne in vs. When God smot him, it was possible for him to feele it, yea vnpossible it was that he should not feele it, and of necessitie his Soule peculiarly, properly, & infinitly did feele the stroke of Gods
wrathful iustice. The vehemency whereof may wound and pierce no lesse even in this life where God will, then in the locall Hell it selfe. All these our due sorrowes therefore, and all this our shar∣pest deserved paine, even Gods owne immediat hand smiting the Soule for sinne, (which far exceedeth and comprehendeth as it were all other paine) Christ without any dispensation or qualifi∣cation whatsoever, indured for vs. This is that which we say: and thus Ierom also expoundeth this very text:trom. in  53. Saith hee a Quod nos pro nostris debebamus sceleribus sustinere ille pro nobis' passus est. Turne nowe your vaine and frivolous insultation against Ierom for his indefinit speech, to whom it pertayneth in this case aswell as to me,Pag. 26. if you be not a respecter of persons. Say to him, b You may do well (St Ierom) to go to the Ʋniversitie againe, whence you came afore you were wise, and there learne to put quantity to your propositions, that we may know when you speak of any thing whether you meane All or Some. But Jerom would be wise enough to an∣swer you (if he were alive) that (whersoever he studied) he knew so much, that in learning and reason an indefinit proposition is to be taken as Vniversall in a necessary matter, special∣ Satisfying Gods vn∣all Iustice . * as the vndertaking of a Surety is in his stead whom he is surety for: and yet namely but so far as knowen possibility admitteth, and indeed no further. Now this is apparant in this case of Christes suretyship and suffering in our steed: Hee suffered all the whole punishent of sinne due to mankinde, whatsoever was possible for him being a sinles man, & also very God, to suffer. And further then this none will imagin or thinke that any (vnles mad men) do affirme. You charge me c heereafter that I falsify this place of Ierom,. 350. reat. 1. . 85. Curse.  I put it hus (Ma∣ctum)  a pa∣nthesis. nod enim. al. 3.13. because d I did put in e maledictum with his wordes. Which is a silly devise to turne of Jerom without answer. For by it I expresse Ieroms meaning: f his words have plaine reference to Maledictum in the g Apostle, whō he cited immediatly before. This is thē none other but an honest falsifying of mine Authour. Now that this place of Isay, and the whole doctrine wch I avovch touching these sufferinges of Christ for vs, may the better be receaved, let vs note that the publike do∣ctrine appointed by h Authority to be taught through our England expresseth the very same.Which Au∣tie I have ged & ex∣sed Treat.  88.89. he answe∣reth to i a word. Namely Nowells Catechisme, where it is thus taught. He paid and suffered the paine due to vs, and by this meanes delivered vs from the same. Neither is it vnvsed among mē,
ne to promise, and to be surety, yea sometime to suffer for an other. But with Christe as our Surety so suffering for vs, God dealt as it were with extremity of law: but to vs whose sinnes, deserved punish∣ments, & due paines he laid on Christ, he vsed singular lenity, gent∣lenes, clemency, and mercy. Christ therefore suffered, and in suffe∣ring overcame death, the paine appointed by the everliving God for mens offense. Againe, His will was to suffer All extremitie for vs, who had deserved all extremitie. All these things being taken vpon himselfe he destroyed them all. Where marke also what doctrine the Law of this Realme consonantly publisheth and commandeth in the Homilies of Christs Passion. See whether it misliketh yours, or no. TheHom. . Hom: maketh Christs putting himselfe betweene Gods deserved Wrath and our sinne the extreamest part of his Passion. If this were the extreamest part of his Passion, then it was a further feeling then the sense of Bodily paine only, it cannot be any other then his feeling of Gods proper Wrath spiritually, which our sinne deserved. Therefore by the Homily hee felt Gods proper Wrath spiritually which our sinne deserved. Againe, he bare All our sinnes, sores and infirmities vpon his owne backe. No paine did he refuse to suffer in his owne body. But as he felt All this in his Body, so hee must feele the greatest part primarily and much more deeply in his Soule. Ergo hee refused not to suffer All the paines of the Wrath of God both in Body and Soule.Hom.  Hee tooke vpon him the reward of our sinnes, the iust reward of sinne. But this same Homily saith, The reward of our sin was the iust wrath and indignation of God, the death both of Body and Soule. Therefore by the Homily, Christ tooke on him for vs the iust wrath & indignation of God, the death both of body & soule. And thus also1. Treat. pag. 34. my text of Scrip∣ture is iustified, That2. Tim.  Christ gave himselfe the price of redemption for vs, which we els should have paid. WherePa. 261. you except against this text in Timoth: that I say, The Scripture speaketh heere after the common vse & custom of redeeming captives taken in warre: whē a captive being not able, som other friend payeth Antilytron the same price for the captive which els he should. You aske, who told me that the Scripture speaketh after the common vse of ene∣mies? I answer, The nature of the word Antilytron a Ransom im∣porteth so much, which is properly vsed in such cases. Where also youPa. 261. seeme to inferre, that I forsooth doe hold with your opinion
that a Christ paid the price of our Redemption (properly) to the Divell,Pag. 261, 62. and not to God. For this is it that heere you meane: & this, though now in print you deliver it nothing so largly and empha∣tically as you preached it, yet this still in effect you maintaine in certain b words out of Ambrose, which is passing strange to heare: But how do I ioyne to your opinion heerein?Pag. 68. 69. because I vrge that the enemy must haue a price for his Captive. I pray, who is that ennemy which must bee satisfied? The Divell? GOD forbid. Though I see that c you over earnestly do thus professe:Pag. 68. Treat. 1. ag. 45. at. 5.25. yet God knoweth it is far from d my heart so to thinke. Gods Iustice only is that e offended enemy, to whō our Ransom was paid: it was not paid to the Divell who was but Gods slave & executioner. Against which what reason have you? Surely not the shaddow of any. As for the names of Ambrose or Austin they are of no waight to warrant such a doctrine as those words pretend. And I am out of doubt that the Fathers in following an Allegory, do but play with the Figure, as there vse is oftentimes: they speak not exactly heere as meaning indeed to teach such a doctrine. Or if they did, then we are to learne by their good leaves how to speake and thinke more wholesomly (then they do) out of the Scripture. If they or an Angell from Heaven should teach so in earnest as they pretend, we ought to forsake them. As for the point whether it draw any thing neere to Manichisme or no, let other iudge. Then f you would shew that this similitude of a Captives paying his Ransom by his friend,ag. 262. is not like to Christes Redeeming vs: because Cap∣tives themselves are appointed to perpetuall imprisonment or ser∣vitude vnles a sufficient Ransom be paid for them, and then the Ransomer is not bound to be prisoner himselfe for them, but sa∣tisfieth the enemy in money or otherwise. Wherein verily you fit this similitude to my desire further then my selfe at first did ex∣presse. For thus wee may now plainly see how it is possible that Christ our Ransomer might pay that whole price for vs which we els should have paid but could never discharge: and yet that hee neede not in such Redeeming of vs enter into our whole conditi∣on absolutly & to become a perpetuall prisonner in our steed, see∣ing we see that this is not exacted by enemies for their Captives at the Ransomers hand.Wherein on∣y this simili∣ude may, & oth stand. Only that *price of money wch the Captive should but cannot pay, the very same is paid by the Rāsomer: and it obtayneth.
Then you let drive at my a Reason out of the Apostle:Gal. 3. Christ redeemed vs from the Curse of the Lawe, being made a Curse for vs. Because I say, What Curse can this be meant but the Curse of the Law, that is even Gods Curse against sinne, whereof the Apostle hath altogeather spoken heere before. Yea therefore indeed I demand againe, what reason or likelyhoood is there by the text to take this Curse to be in nature an other from the former, both being so closely and ioyntly mentioned togeather?Pag. 26. 263. You make a very maine difference betweene them, by comparing this Curse laid on Christ wth those Curses wherewith God somtimes is said to Curse his senseles Creatures for wicked mens sake. But this is verily far fetcht, it is altogeather another thing, very incomparable to the Curse wch Christ suffered. This is a most improper curse, not felt at all by the things accursed: yet called a Curse by similitude on∣ly, as the image of a man is called a man. There is no colour to make the Curse which Christe suffered for our sinnes like to the Curse which senseles creatures doe sometimes beare for mans cause. But you make a reasonPag. 27. to prove Moses particular Curse inDeut. 2. Deuteron: Cursed is he that is hanged, (which Paul also applyeth to his purpose saying, Christ was made a Curse for vs to redeeme vs from the Curse of the Law,) to be not all one with this Curse of the Law in Paul. Neither yet did I, neither do I say, that it was all one. This I said and say still, that they are both of one & the same nature: that is true and proper Curses of God, not any improper Curse, nor onely esteemed a Curse by men. One was the whole, the other a part: but both of them the true & proper Curses of God. To vnder∣stand this more plainly, Paul saith not as you affirme, that Christ was made that Curse, only, that Iudiciall Curse whereof only Moses speaketh: Paul doth not vnderstand it in the same measure that Moses mentioneth and no further. But this hee doeth; handling before generally Gods Curse and the punishment of the Law a∣gainst sinne, and shewing that we are redeemed from it by Christs being made the same for vs, he confirmeth it by applying Moses Iudiciall punishment against certaine transgressours (As o who v execu other ∣ments  Law,  not. beeing it seemeth a Figure of Christ heerein,) That all they were accursed, which were hanged: that is they which were hanged by the iust sen∣tence of the law, they were heerein Accursed, that is they heerein sustayned the Lawes true and deserved punishment. Now by ap∣plying
this text of Moses in this sense, & in this respect, to Christes being made the Curse of God for vs, it is well confirmed to be in nature and veritie the true and proper Curse of the Lawe which Christ was made for vs: for such also indeed was the nature of that Iudiciall Curse of Moses, though but a part of the whole. And so as before I said the Apostle applying that which was but a parte, he may soundly and well shew what was the nature of that Curse in Christ, though in him it were the whole. For a parte and the whole of any thing differ not in nature, but in quantitie. Now vn∣derstand a Chrysostome thus,a. 94. 274. ag. 11. &c. as b before we have distinguished the punishment of Christ and of the Damned, and then we differ not. Where he saieth they were divers Curses in Christ & in the Dam∣ned, take him to signifie divers maners of one and the same Curse in Nature, or Christes Death and Moses Iudiciall hanging on the tree, to be only divers degrees, or measures of one & the same Curse in nature, & so he saith the same altogeather that we do. For these in their proper nature be all one, that is proper Punishments from God for sin, yet either in the measure & degree, or in the maner & condition of their suffering, they are very divers & exceeding far a sunder.g. 268. Austin on whom d you triumph, is stretched beyond his meaning. He dealeth against a Manichee who denyed that Christ had true Humane flesh: likewise l the rest ur Fathers ken for ost part.  sayings ther a∣ the Ma∣es, or the s, &c.  strove bout our ion. wch yet notwithstanding is manefest, be∣cause Christ truly dyed. Now he proveth that Christ truly dyed, be∣cause the Apostle saith, He was made a Curse for vs in that he hanged on the tree. And where it is said Cursed is every one that hangeth on the tree, this was saith he to shew that Christ was not exempted, but was like other men truly accursed and truly dead. So that his meaning is not to shew that Christes whole Curse and his bodily death were iust all one without any differēce, which you vrge him for: nay he hath no such meaning. Only he proveth by this that he being made truly a Curse, did also truly Dy, which the Manichee denyed. For in saying, Christ was dead, & accursed for vs, is the same, he meaneth it is the same for his purpose, the one very well pro∣veth the other: but not that they were simply all one. The rest of e your Fathers are alltogeather idly cited:. 95. no man denyeth that which they say. Where f you mislike me for saying,. 26. at. 1. . 38. g The Curse laid vpon Christ was not onely the ignominie of his death, & the shame of the world:
you have nothing against it, but much for it. Austin whom you boast of is against you in this, saying:Pag.  Christ heere tooke on him our punishment without sinne. But our punishment, which is with∣out sinne, doubtles was a great deale more then only the disho∣nour and shame of the world. Austin therefore is manifestly a∣gainst you in this: yea alsoPag. 2 your owne selfe is in saying likewise. Austin and Chrysostome, andPag. 9 other doe say that Christ suffered this ignominie: but that this was all or the whole Curse which hee suffered, I see none that affirmeth. Your many Scriptures inPag. 2 this place, what doe they? Forsooth they prove that it is light at Mid∣day. For who ever made quaestion, but that shame and reproch in their simple Nature, were a parte of the true Curse of God? Yet all this sheweth not that Shame was the whole Curse which Christ indured.Pag. 2 You mislike thatTreat. pag. 45. I said Christes dying simply,That is Christ ha∣ed simply which in  he did no as the godly dy, may in no sort be called a Curse or Accursed: Because as I affirme also,Pag. 44. Death to the godly is no Curse properly nor punish∣ment of sinne, but a benefit and advantage. Nay, therefore Christes Death was properly a Curse, because his Death wasAs befo Pag. 11. 49, 59, 5 not like theirs. You say, I am too young a Doctor to controll St Austin here∣in. And I say, you are a Doctor not old enough to prove AustinYour self teth him  me herein 49. Corp mors b bona, m mala. contrary to me in this point. Death in it owne nature and in the originall propertie of it, is a part of the Curse, and so Christ suffe∣red it: but in the Godly it is not properly a Curse, nor the proper punishment or revenge of sinne, which Christ once & alone hath wholely sustayned and cleane freed vs of for ever. ThisPag. 90. your selfe (as well asPag. 43 I) can tell, saying: The vengeance of the Lawe once executed on our Surety, can no more in Gods iustice be executed on vs. And this ourNowell techis. H suffered ∣der, &c. publike doctrine in England set forth by Mas∣ster Nowell confirmeth: By Christes death it is come to passe that to the faith full Death is now not a Destruction, but as it were a remo∣ving and changing of life, and a very short and sure passage to hea∣ven. Who also inHis she Catechis An. 157 another place expresseth it thus, Death of the body, which without Christ was the gate to Hell, is nowe by Christ made to all that beleeve in him the gate and passage to Heaven: So that death which before was a Punishment, is now by Christ become a vantage. Wherein you are notably contradicted, who doe callPag. 15 216. Death in the godly, the gate of Hell: a strange and most vntrue translation. Againe, you arePag. 268 269. gainsaide in this place, where you
reprove me for affirming, that Death to the godly and faithfull is a benefitt and advantage. Then you say, If I will reason what death is in it selfe, I must resolve it to be a part of Gods Curse. Which is no answer. For our quaestion is not, what death is in it selfe. Who ever denied it to be in it selfe, as you say, a part of Gods Curse for sinne: but my expresse wordes are, Death to the godly is no Curse proper∣ly, but a vantage.Pag. 270. Where a you adde, If Death were a gaine to the godly, as I would have it, by what meanes, I pray you, came it so to be? If you know not, why did you not marke better the publike Catechisme before rehearsed, where all England is taught that it came by meanes of the death and resurrection of Christ. You say, Jf by the resurrection of Christ conquering Death and changing the nature of it, then till Christ was rison, Death was a punishment to the faithfull themselves. I wonder what meaning there is in this argument. As well you may say, There were none saved til Christ was risen. For salvation also and forgivenes of sinnes to all men, came only by the death and resurrection of Iesus Christ. So that thus, till Christ came in the flesh, none of the holy Patriarkes, A∣braham, David, and the rest, obtayned eternall life. And what became of them then? But I am perswaded, that Abraham, Da∣vid, and all the Prophetes dying before Christ was exhibited in the flesh, yet by their faith in Gods sure ordinance and promise, they had and enioyed Christ truely incarnat, slaine, and risen againe: and this to them was as effectuall then, as it is now to vs since the actual performance of these things. Whereby even as we by faith, so they by the same faith (differing onely in the circumstance of time) were truely and throughly saved. Likewise to the faithfull then, by the efficacie of their holy faith, Death was properly no punishment but a gaine, even as to vs nowe it is. Further, b you except against me touching innocentes and Martyrs executions,Pag. 175. who c I say, are most blessed.Treat. 1. Pag. 38. You reply, Their Martyrdomes are shamefull deaths, and that is a kinde of Corporall Curse. A kinde of Curse? Who denyeth that? We know all shame & affliction to all men is a kinde of Curse. But neither shame nor Death to the ho∣ly Martyrs are d accounted by God nor by his servauntes as proper and true Curses,Before pag. 9. 50. but the holy men are in trueth most glorious and blessed in them. Againe, the Saints and Martyrs can not bee pro∣perly Cursed and properly Blessed too, in any measure. Neither
their Soules blessed, vnles their bodyes be blessed also, & free from the true Curse: although you seeme to denie this point. Which strange and vncouth assertiō, both heere and in many places mo, you doe at least insinuat: that is, that the godly in their Soules are blessed, but in their bodyes they still retaine Gods true & proper Curse, till the resurrection. Which I leave to the consideration of the godly. You say, We must call things by those Names which God first allotted them. That I deny, If God since evidently have altered them, and disposed of them otherwise. But he hath so don in this case. The afflictions and death which originally and natu∣rally were punishments for sinne, and are so still to the wicked, the same to the godly (as I have often said) are since changed, & now are properly Chastisements of sinne, and not Punishmentes nor Curses. Only Christ hath suffered the whole proper punishment, and true Curse or Vengeance of our sinnes: and therefore on vs it is not, it can not be laid againe in any part thereof. YouPag. 96. avouch some that denie Christ to have bene made a Curse or sinne. But you must rememberPag. 92. your owne place of Austin Maledictum est omne peccatum, sive ipsum quod fit, sive ipsum supplicium: The Curse is all sinne, which is twofold, either that which we commit against Gods law, or els the very Punishment of that sinne. NowePag. 96. your testimonies do meane, Christ was not made a Curse, or sin the first way, that is, he was not in him selfe sinfull nor hated: they deny not the second, that he was made the proper punishment or Sacrifice for our sinne. And thus though you lust not to see it, yet myTre. pag. 45. speach was sound and true, If Christ dyed simply but as the Godly dye, it might in no sortGal. 3. heere be called a Curse. The reason is evident; because the text heere doeth speak & treat of the Curse of the Law against sinne: such therefore was Christes Curse which he sulayned. To conclude then, his afflictions and death was neither Wages nor Chastisement, nor Curse nor Consequent of any sinne in him. Yet as God made him sinne for vs, so he truely, properly, and in very deed, laid the paine of his Curse vpon his body and Soule. Which Curse of God vpon Christ (as youPag 26 say truly) was not in words but in deedes. Wherefore my wordesPag. 2 you openly pervert, affirming that I say, Death heere (that is Christes death, noted Galat. 3.13.) ay in no sorte be called a Curse, when I expresly even there, and
every where doe say the contrary.Pag. 263. But a your greatest exception is, that this Curse laid on Christ cannot be vnderstood of the whole Curse of God or of the Law:Pag. 264. and therefore b you spare me not for c saying that Paul heere in his application out of Moses nameth a part of the iust Curse of the Law for sinne,Treat. 1. pag. 40. thereby meaning (and in∣ferring to his purpose) the whole. Where you must be so good as to vnderstand me by mine own words in other places.Pag 290. For thus d you know e I limited my speach els where, As touching the vehemency of paine Christ was as sharply touched as the very reprobats.Treat. 1. pag 81. And, Christes sufferings were equall to the very Hellish torments in vehe∣mency of paine and sharpnes. Againe, f This price equally in Justice must be kept so far as it is possible.Pag. 26. And,Pag. 37. Because there was no im∣possibility, no necessitie, no reason, but he might feele the full smart of our sinnes, (as there was that he should not feele the full continuance thereof) and seeing Gods strict iustice requireth it to be so, therefore it was so, he suffered all the smart, but not all the continuance of our punishment. Also Pa. 23. Heee Pa. 13 Thus then plainly h I signified i those 3 Limitations which now are expressed, that Christ suffered our whole Curse on∣ly so far as the possibilitie of thinges could admit, wherein nothing was dispensed nor pardoned to him (for there was no cause) as I have often said. Which doctrine how vnworthy it is of your strang contempt and outcryes against me, I leave it to the godly Wise to consider.Nowell. Catechis. Only marke if our k publike doctrine be not the same. Vltima omnia pati voluir pro nobis, qui vltima omnia commeriti su∣mus. Diram execrationē suscepit: cōtumelias etiā omnes, omnia pro∣bra, atque supplicia: &c. But you will say, thus we make it not the whole Curse of the Law. Yes: we cal it rightly the whole Curse, for as much as Christ suffered it in his whole manhood,See before pag 8. 1. The. 5.28.  pa. 48. 52 even in l All the powers of his m Spirit, & Soule, & Body. where that Curse in Deu∣tero. being a part, was suffered only in the Body quickned by the Soul. Also in other respectes this suffering of Christ may bee well called the whole Curse or Punishmēt of sin,Pag. 11, 12. n 16.17. Pa. 27. 280 as n before is declared. After this o you thinke it strange that I say, Christ suffered & dyed iustly, and was hanged on the tree by the iust sentence of the Law: & that so hee was by imputation of our state and condition vnto him, sinfull, before . 51.11. defiled, hatefull, and accursed. All the which I avouch, be∣cause he vndertooke by Gods ordinance as our Surety to receave our whole condemnation vpon himselfe so far as his owne nature
and condicion could possibly admit,Christ suffe iustly. to the ende that hee might wholly acquit vs. In regard whereof I aske, Is it wrong for the Law to lay the penalty on the surety, when the debtour can not discharge it? Against this my assertion you say,Pag. 27 By no sentence of the Law he hanged on a tree. And a reason you give,Pag. 273 because to be hanged on a tree was no necessary part of the generall Curse of God vpon all sinners. I answer, to Dy for sinne was a necessary part of the generall Curse vpon all sinners. What say you then to his Death? Did he dy iustly? Sure if Christ dyed by the rule of Gods iustice, then he dyed iustly. If he dyed not by Gods iustice, then Wo, and thrice Wo to vs. For it cannot be but Gods IusticeLuc. 16.1 Deut. 10.1 Rom. 8.32 See before pag. 66. must be executed: it cannot be made voyd. So that if Christ in Gods proper iustice dyed not for vs, then in his Iustice without mercy we must, and shall dy. Which God forbid. But Christ therefore indeed suffered & dyed most iust∣ly, according to the rule of Gods strict Iustice in all points possible. Yet you say, His hanging on a tree was no necessary part of the ge∣nerall Curse of God vpon all sinners. What if that were no necessary part of the generall Curse? It was nevertheles iust from God vpon him, aswell as his Death. No particular Punishments are necessa∣ry, but accidentall in their own nature. The generall CurseGen. 2.1 Thou shalt dy the Death, comprehending them all not as necessary, but as accidentall parts. Yet wheresoever by Gods providence they happen, they are iust Punishmentes, no lesse then the Generall Curse. And thus Christ answering for sinne not only Dyed gene∣rally, but also was hanged on the tree particularly by the iust sen∣tence of the Law. Still I meane iustly in respect of God alone: for men vsed meere violence, wrong, and no Law towards him. For they persecuted him as a malefactour (as they said) yet indeed hee being in himselfe altogeather faultles and without blame. You seeme to mislike that Christ should suffer iustly, because he suffe∣red willingly for vs. Which hindereth not at all: for the voluntary surety beareth his penaltie iustly, when he sustayneth that which the debtour by Law should sustaine. You sayPag. 27. No Lawe, you are sure not Gods Law, alloweth that when a murderer or such like offendour transgresseth he should be spared, and an other that is willing hanged in his steed. And therefore you mislike the simili∣tude of a Surety in the worke of Christes Redemption. I answere in Gods Law that is not true, which you say. Vnderstanding heere
by Gods revealed Will and his most holy and gracious Ordinance for vs. Though indeed this is not his Law properly, but his Gospel, & the most blessed glad tydings of peace and health to our Soules. Now by this Law of God I am sure, that Murderers, Adulterers, Theeves (and worse then these) are spared in Gods presense, and an other that is their most willing surety executed by the iustice of God in their steed.Pag. 280. But a no similitude can prove Christ in taking ou person on him to be sinfull, defiled, hatefull, and accursed. I deny this saying vtterly. b How could he be by God properly and truly punished and Cursed for sinne,Fee 18.20 Gen. 18.25. but that he was sinfull and hatefull. And it is written, c God sent his Sonne in the likenes and forme of sinfull flesh for sinne,Rom 8.3. Synac. bebsich. and condemned sinne in d (his) flesh. In which likenes he stood before God indeed: before the world he was reputed so,2. Cor. 5.21. but falsly. And e God made him sinne for vs that we might be made the righteousnes of God in him. As also he was made f a Curse for vs.Gal 3.13. Though you y nay: p 280 Calv in Gal. .13. Heb. 9. vlt. Pag. 11, 12. d 50.51. Wherevpon Mr Calvin g warily enough saith, h Vt personam nostram suscepit, peccator erat & maledictionis reus. And ye i Apostle saith, Ek deutérou The second time he shall appeare with∣out sinne: meaning that the first time he appeared with sin. Yet this is k not inhaerently, but by imputation: the Lorde translating by his ordinance the sinne of men vpon him, & reckoning them vn∣to him. Even as by Gods true and reall imputation, not by any in∣haesion we now in this life are iust holy and blameles before God: so was he sinnefull and defiled by imputation, not inhraenetly. Thus by this reckoning he suffered at Gods hands iustly: yet in his own nature, & in respect meerely thereof, he suffered both at the Iewes handes and before God the iust for the vniust.Pag. 280. l You say, where the Apostle saith m he was made sin for vs,2. Cor. 5.21 the Fathers have 2 good and approved senses differing frō ours. 1 That God made him a sacrifice for sinne: 2 that he vsed him as he doth sinners. What is there in both these that wee acknowledge not? Yea what is this later but the very same point which we vrge? It is nothing els in all this quaestion that we hold, but that God vsed Christ our Redeemer and Surety as he doth sinners, so far as possibilitie ad∣mitteth that he could and might be so vsed. And for this the Fa∣thers are not silent, if I were so ambitious as you in producing multitudes of men.Cypr. de Pas. Only Cyprian, and Athanasius, and Austin shall content me in this. The first, n He sustayned & suffered him∣self
to be called Sinne and a Curse by Moses and the Apostle, be∣cause he had the like punishment as we should have had, but not the like fault.Pag. Your slight answere that it was like in part, not in all, salveth not the matter. For Cyprian meaneth Christs punishment for vs was so like ours, as was possible: and that sufficeth vs. Also by this your weake answer you are contrary to your selfe heere, in that you acknowledge that God in punishing Christ making him sinne for vs, hee vsed him as he doth sinners. Athanasius saith,Pag.  De nea Ipse per se sententiam solvit sub specie condemnati: Hee himselfe satis fied and abrogated the sentence of the Law vnder the appearance of a Damned man. Did not God then vse him as he doth sinners in all extremity of punishment so far as was possible? And that it was al∣togeather possible to inflict the sense of his wrath immediatly and properly in his Soul, aswel as in his Body, no reasonable man cāde∣ny. Aust. we saw a littleBefore 71.73. before. Thus also your former good sense of this that Christ was made sinne, that is a sacrifice or punishment for sinne: how differeth it from your second, as you seeme to make them to differ? Or how differ they both from our maine Assertion, that Christ in himselfe sinlesse, was by God reputed sinfull in our steed. Nay this directly and necessarily proveth thesame. For as I said, how could he be truly punished for sinne by God, but that he must be indeede sinfull by imputation? The Iewes Sacrifices the expresse figures of Christe doe also most lively set out this thing. When they wereLev.  brought vnto God, the people must lay on their hands vpon the heads of the Beastes: shewing thereby that theirLev.  sinnes were put vpon the sacrifice, & that God so accounted them indeed to be. Wherefore what cause have you so to exclame as you do, against this comparison of Christ our Redeemer with a Surety:Christe truely Surety who among men by the ordinance of Lawe and iustice must and doth pay the debt when the debtour cannot. It is neither a simple similitude asPag. 2 you simply call it: neither is itPag. 2 vncleane, nor irreve∣rent, nor irreligious, but a holy & most fit representation of Christs paying our debt for vs, and of our acquitting from the iustice of God by him. The very word is vsed in Scripture it selfe,Heb.  Hee was made a Surety of a better covenant. Which also expresly you grant:Pag.  That Christe is made a Surety wee finde it once mentioned in the Scripture. Is not that sufficient then to warrant the goodnesse and aptnes of the similitude against your vndutyfull reproofes of it?
But you say he was not as a Surety bound to the Law, but of a better Covenant, even of grace. Verily a Surety to vs, of both. Yea this lat∣ter implyeth necessarily the former, vnles you imagine Gods Iu∣stice needed not exact satisfaction so far as was possible: or that there might be 2 Sureties to bring vs into grace and favour with God. For he could not assure vs of remission of sinnes, but by assu∣ring vs that he had exactly paid all our debts. Yea none could pay them for vs throughly & acquit himself also, but only he. There∣fore by being a Surety to vs of grace, it must needes bee also that he, and none other, was our Surety to the Law and to the iustice of God.. 4.4. Thus also it is written that a He was made hyponomon sub∣iect to the Law,. 277. or vnder the Law. Which b you mightily deny a∣gainst expresse Scripture. But by what reason? Because he was a Mediatour to God for vs.ns hone∣vtia st. con∣. 14.6. Now Sureties that stand bound & must pay the debt, may not looke to be Mediatours. Yes forsooth, such a Surety as he was might worthily be a gracious Mediatour also. Though he were a Surety, and stood bound, yet he was no ordina∣ry Surety. Though the debt were infinit, yet hee was more infinit in grace and power both to pay it, and to overcome it: and by his obedience and righteousnes to merit for vs, yea even in his suffe∣ring. What letteth then that such a person as he, might be a Me∣diatour to purchase also grace and favour, even in and besides his satisfaction for vs. c You say, he could not be bound to the Law, be∣cause he was above the Law. 276. He was above the Lawe in his God∣head, but in his Manhood hee became for vs d vnder the Law. Againe, 4 4. he was not of him self in his Manhood bound to the Law for us, but freely and voluntarily vndertaking, and by Gods gra∣cious eternall Decree appointing him, so he became bound to the Law. Wherefore, though e he, who ordinarily redeemeth a priso∣ner from the enemie, 77. be not bound, but content so to doe: yet a Suretie being content, became ye Law, unde to w for vs ds De∣d Ordi∣ and by ne free will. becommeth bound. And so Christ our Re∣deemer became bound as a Surety to pay our debt for vs by the most stedfast and immutable Decree of God, and yet also by his owne most free good will. Yea Gods Decree, and his owne good will was, that he should satisfie and pay none otherwise for vs, then so as hee did: Therefore those Sentences of f your Au∣thours Gregorie, Augustin and Ambrose, if they bee spoken simply, 277. seeme very harsh, where they saye, That Christ could
have saved vs otherwayes, then by suffering and dying for vs. For heerein they oppose Gods absolut Omnipotencie against his expresse and revealed will. Which how it may be liked in Divini∣tie, I know not. Wherefore still all these similitudes of Mediator, Redeemer, and Suretie, may stand very well togeather in the Offi∣ce of Christ, thoughPag. you would perswade vs the contrary, yea ra∣ther they confirme each other. Certainly, these Similitudes of a Suertie and a Mediatour, are very approved & excellent to set out most heavenly his great Grace and Iustice, by earthly things. Our publike Churches doctrine also avoncheth that hee wasNow techis. fore pa our Suretie. With Christ, as our Suretie, so suffering, God dealt as it were in extremitie of Law, &c. Also Cyprian,Cypri passio In saying, why hast thou for saken me, he sheweth the sorrowes of that his complayning to be the wordes, Delictorum suorum, or Dilectorum suorum, of his sinnes: or if you so thinke rather, of his beloved ones, whose person & case he tooke vpon him. And this he would have vs to know that it was for them, or in their steed, who by reason of their sinnes deserved to be for saken of God. YouPag. 3 answer that these wordes of Cyprian I neyther vnderstand nor like. I pray why so? Because Augustin saieth, Illa vox membrorumerat non capitis, That Cry was of his Members, not of the Head. Whatsoever Austins meaning is here∣in, yet Cyprians wordes are plaine and can not beare any other sense then as I make of them, that Christ was a very Surety for his people, and suffered such a forsaking of God touching sense of paine and want of present feeling of comfort in the paines, as the damned doe. And touching Austin also, I suppose you mis-vn∣derstand him: but of his minde touching this speach of Christ on the Crosse, we shall see further heereafter. I adde vnto all this last of all your owne grant, where you fully yeeld and acknowledge that Christ was our very Suertie to the Law, and that he did suf∣fer iustly, or in Gods iustice. The vengeance of the Law (sayPag. 9 you) once executed on our Suretie, can no more in Gods iustice be exacted on vs.Pag. 13 Elswhere also you allow of this Similitude: which yetPag. 27 276. 279. ma∣nie times you reiect most disdainfully. Yea in that your sentence you overthrowPag. 27 your owne chiefe exception which you make a∣gainst it, that he was not our Surety to the Law to pay our debtes. If the vengeance of the Lawe lighted on him as on a Suretie, then he was our Suretie to the Law: and if this vengeance of the Law cā
not now in Gods iustice be exacted on vs, then he as our Suretie to the Law by suffering it hath cleered vs from it. And to conclude, that which he suffered as being our Suertie, the same before God he suffered in iustice, as is before proved. And in vaine you ex∣claime, that this is a against the Scriptures,Pag. 272. against the faith, against the Fathers, against the Consciences of Gods people: seeing it ap∣peareth not to be against,Pag. 182. but with all these. b Your Similitude of a Kings sonne intreating for his Fathers Rebells, is very weake, and overthroweth (if it were good) a confessed point of Christes Re∣demption. For by this similitude Christ should not have suffered bodily death for vs: seeing no King hath lawfull power by anie meanes to lay bodily death on any such Surety, much lsse to make his Sonne, or his Sonne to make him selfe any such Suretie or Redeemer of Rebells: as Christ was made and might be made of God for vs. So that also where you would have it to serve, that we might perceave by this how Christ was not defiled, nor hatefull, nor guilty by imputation of our treason, it is evidently to weak. For you have not shewed, neither can shew, that this Kings Sonne was or ought to have bene such a Suretie & Redeemer as Christ was, that is vnto bodily death. Therefore this Similitude cannot bee good. We have other maner of warrant that Christ was by impu∣tation made Sinne for vs, and the Curse for vs: and that this ordi∣nance was holy and right, and above all reproofe. Which you can not bring for your Kings Sōnes Suretiship, nor for the Kings fact: who kept not the order of iustice when he spared abominable Re∣bells without their bloudshed; or when he slew his guiltles Sonne for them, that they might be spared. After this c he impugneth another reason of myne with mar∣veylous skorne and detestation.Pa. 183.284. That seeing Christ d on the Crosse spoyled principalities and powers,Col. 2.15. and made a shew of them open∣ly triumphing over them. Therfore I collected, that Christ there discerned and felt the Powers of darknes (Sathan and his Com∣plices) as very instrumentes working the effectes of Gods wrath vpon him selfe. Which as I conceave, is no such foolish nor im∣pious reason as he vainly pretendeth. For doth not the very phrase and maner of speach import some such mightie contention and violent opposition, where yet at length an absolut & glorious tri∣umphant victorie was obtayned? Surely it doeth. This then must
be conceaved and felt by Christ: neither could these be other ef∣fectes but onely of Gods proper wrath, severitie, and indignation against the sinne of the world, which was matter ofOf som paine a tormen opposition against Christ at that season; it could not be the revealing of anie glorie or comfort, which such instruments procured vnto him & wrought vpon him. Against this you bring not a word. Never∣theles your high disdaine towards me, breaketh out touching the maner how this might be. But what is that to the purpose? What if no toung can expresse the maner, as neither have I once indea∣voured to expresse it: shall not therefore the testimonie of the H. Ghost be true, that on the Crosse Christ obtayned such a victorie against the Divells, which implyeth also such a Conflict first, as I have observed? Yet because you will needes examine the maner howe possibly this might be, let vs see what you make of it. The Divells (saye you) have nothing to doe with the Soules of men, but eyther to tempt them or torment them. First, before I answer you directly, this wee may consider: Christ might and no doubt he did in his Soule dis∣cerne, conceave, and applie to him selfe all the rage, malice,How Ch might be faulted by than on Crosse. and violence of the Iewes tormenting him to death, as set on fire by Sathan him selfe, and by all the powers of Hell: and these also as set on worke by the Iustice and severe Wrath of God now purpo∣sely laying punishment on his Sonne, thereby to take satisfaction and recompence for all our sinnes. Now this feeling and suffering in the Soule of Christ, made an other kinde of impression in him, and was infinitly more greevous and dolefull as touching the pre∣sent sense then otherwise the meere outward stripes and woundes of men were or could be. These conflictes of Christ on the crosse with Satans rage & malice, laboring if he could possibly by these meanes to have quēched the light of our Salvatio, may wel be vn¦derstood by the Apostle in this place: & yet none of your excepti∣ons do touch this argument. Elswhere in your book you speak di∣rectly against ye maine groūd of it: affirming that God himself did nothing to Christ, that is, he did not pperly punish him. Thus you say,Pag. 3 God did not any thing vnto him. And,Pag. 32. who did Crucifie him, I pray you, God, or the Jewes? And,Pag. 7 He was indeed cōdemned by man that gave wrongful sentence of death against him: but he was acquit∣ed of God. AndPag. Christ was no more a Curse then he was Sin: who in∣deed
and with God was neither:roper∣ hed st. or 5 21 but with men he was reputed both wicked and accursed. Notwithstanding the very trueth and Gods word it selfe is flat contrary to you. For it is written: a Hes made him Sinne for vs which knew no sinne, that we should be made the righteousnes of God in him. Yea, b he made his Soule sinne. Which is nothing els but that c the Lord layd vpon him or inflicted vpon him the iniquitie of vs all. 53 10. . 6.5.10. rem. in . 8. . 4 28. m. 8.3. Yea, d the Lord delighted to bruise him, and afflicted him or slew him. And the Apostles doe acknowledge that e both the counsell and the Hand of God was in Christs punish∣ment. Finally, f God sending his Sonne in the similitude of sinfull flesh and for sinne,iac. condemned sinne in (* his) flesh. His Cōdemning of sinne in Christ was in deeds, and not in words. Gods own hand then did smite Christ, and inflicted on him whatsoever he suffe∣red as the condemnation of sinne. Where yet we imagine not that God was moved with any affection or perturbation,g. 245. but (as f you ac∣knowledge) the punishment or dayned for sin by the Iustice of God, and inflicted by the hand of God (whatsoever meane it pleased him to vse) is called the wrath of God. And then howe may we thinke Gods infinite Iustice & power punished Christ? Surely in all such respectes as he was capable of paines and punishments as from God. Wherefore in his spirit certainly he suffered spirituall and incomprehensible punishmentes being no sinnes, such as Mens soules are subiect vnto as from God. In his Body also he felt bodi∣ly afflictions, wch our bodyes can apprehend. Some God himselfe immediatlie inflicted, some hee inflicted by meanes and instru∣mentes: but still it was his Hand principally which did what soe∣ver was done vnto him. Neither can you say that Christs punish∣ment was Gods meere and bare permission only. Nay his punish∣ment was his revealed and written will, his expresse and publike ordinance, and most holy appointment from the beginning of the world: and now at last effected by his owne hand, and by other meanes, when the fulnes of time was come. Wherefore the whole suffering of Christ was Gods owne and most proper action: The wicked Iewes and Divells were only his instruments to doe that which he set them on worke to doe, though they thought not so. Now we come to answer you more directlie touching the text in hand. Where you would intimate that Christ on the Crosse was not tempted by the powers of Hell, because Christ could not b
tempted by Satans inward suggestion, but onely by the care re∣ceaving an outward voyce: This I suppose also is a singular con∣ceit of your owne without any title of Scripture to proove it by. Yea what reason can you give that where the minde conceaveth any temptation, there of necessitie must be Concupiscence, Ori∣ginall sinne,Pag. 1 Corruption of the flesh, &c. In vs men it is so, you say. I grant in vs it is so. But that of necessitie in nature it must be so, or that Adam was tempted by voyce of necessitie, and not ac∣cidentally; I see no reason in the world: or that Christ might not be sometime inwardly assaulted & tempted also without heaving any voyce. Nay I suppose you have no reason to affirme (asPag▪ 1 you doe) that Christ in the Wildernes was tempted by Sathan by out∣ward voyce only. It seemeth rather to be manifest that his tempta∣tion was meerely in cogitation and in the thoughts of his heart so mooved by theOr els b such out obiects t¦ther, wt  work tha¦rituall c¦tion in C As Satā  well kno how. spirituall suggestion of the Divell. First, because the text saith, that SatanMat. . set him vpon a pinnacle of the temple in Ierusalem, and mooved him to cast him selfe downe. Which was within the time of his fasting, and hee fasted but fourty dayes and fourty nights: and so long continually hee wasMarc. in the wildernes. Seeing then Christ was in the Wildernes all the while that hee was thus tempted, Howe could that bee really and actuallie done? This was therefore in a spirituall Cogitation. But chieflie, when theMat. 4. Divell shewed him all the kingdomes of the worlde and the glorie of them, andLuc. 4. that in the twinkling of an eye, how could thatYea, sibly it  be don ∣ally &c ficell a you. But onles it  be. Ergo possibly be done really, actually, and externally? Wherefore I must needs think that as Satan was a subtil Spirit, so he could & did sometime spiritually suggest temptations into Christes heart, and Christ could in Soule conceave them, and yet vtterly without all sin: which we at no hand now can doe, because we are all natu∣rally apt and inclining to evill, as Christ was not. Yea the text to the Hebr. seemeth to prove it also, Christ was tempted in all things like vs, without sinne. Then he was tempted both outwardly and also meerely within: (for so are we) and this was meerely by con∣ceaving and considering of Satans wicked spirituall motion in his Spirit, which it was possible that he might doe without any yeelding to it, though we by reason of our inborne corruptiō can not possibly doe it. Thus then it was possible, and most likely it is also that Christ was assaulted, and wrastled withall by the Divels
spirituall suggestions now when in most bitter Agonic he hanged on the Crosse. Howbeit to goe further, such grievous and bitter assaultes of the Divel he might receave outwardly also by his sen∣ses other wayes: though not by Satans own voyce, yet by Satans members meanes. And soag. 283. you say he was tempted of Satan all the tyme of his abode on earth. Then so you denie not, but now e∣ven on the Crosse Christ might be and was tempted and assaulted by Satan, that is by Satans instrumentes, moved and inraged by him. And this is none other indeed, but that which in the entrāce ofPag. 77. this question heere I observed: which as I have before shewed sufficeth to prove Christes Combating, as it were, and wrastling with the powers of Hell on the Crosse. ButPag. 284. you obiect against this, that Outward temptation by the mouthes and handes of the wicked, is no effect of Gods wrath. No is? Here you are cleane con∣trary to your self and the truth. ElswherePag. 243.63.275. you truly acknowdge that all outward crosses and afflictions small or great are in their nature punishments of sin and effects of Gods wrath. Now those doubtles are temptations. Then sure these outward temptations by the mouths and hands of the wicked such as Christ indured, are effects of Gods wrath, viz. his revilings, his shame, his poverty, his stripes, his woundes, and death it selfe, &c. You say outward temptation is rather a try all of Gods gifts and graces bestowed vpon vs. And is not inward temptation in the Godly so to? I pray what oddes is this, that you make betweene the inward and outward temptations? It is true, this is one good vse of both these fortes in the godly, in whom Christ hath sanctified all afflictions, & death it selfe. Yet in their very nature they all are none other but partes of Gods Curse for sin, very punishments of sinne, and true effects of Gods wrath: as in Christ they were all. Further Satan might spiritually and extraordinarily worke togeather with these his in∣struments outwardly afflicting his body, I say, by these bodily oc∣casions thus the rather working an impression of his malice and spirituall fury mixed with subtilty against Christ: and Christ like∣wise extraordinarily might apprehend the same, that is the rather by the concurrence and cooperation of those outward occasions with these spirituall incursions. And thus might Christ suffer most strange temptations, and incomprehensible sorrowes, as very pu∣nishmentes of sinne from the furious rage of Satan and malice of wicked men, whatsoever other vses they might have besides in
him. Heere now we may seed row vniustly you conclude that Sa∣tan could no other way assault Christ as an instrument of Gods wrath, butThe ve wrastlings assaults of ¦tan may b ritual orn though  such as ar ecuted in locall He only by executing tormentes on his Soule even in such wise as he tormenth damned soules in Hell: and that cā be, say you, no other way then by Satans very possessing of those soules. Which grosse and infernall speculations of yours (for truthes you can not make them) I vtterly leave to your owne discussing. For my parte I have spoken no word of them in all my treatise. Notwith∣standing this heere I avouch, that howsoever the meanes or ma∣ner was of Satans and his furious bandes assaulting of Christ on the Crosse, it made certainly an impression of most doleful sorrow and torment in his Soule, as feeling & discerning by that meanes the very stroke of Gods owne hand vpon him, and receaving the sting of his wrath and indignation therein, which then wrought, and was revealed chiefty then vpō him for all our sinnes. Neither say you any thing whereby you doe or can overthrow this asserti∣on. Our authorised doctrine in England agreeth with me, saying,Nowe Catech. He fought and wrastled as it were hand to hand with the whole army of Hell. Finally heere where you skornfully reiect and de∣test this my sense of the Apostle in this place, yet you give no ink∣ling of any other sense at all which these wordes might seeme ra∣ther to admit. Wherefore this is more then halfe a conclusion a∣gainst you, that my interpretation and application of it is vniustly by you reproved. ThenPag. 2 you come to confute my fourth Reason: but the mainest points thereof you have not so much as touched. 1 ITreat pa. 45. shewed that the Godly sometimes in this life doe feele a tast of Gods infinit Wrath, and even of Hellish sorrowes. 2. That Christ our Redee∣mer suffered for vs as deeply, yea deeper then ever any of vs heere do suffer or can suffer. But all this you can heere cleanly passe over without any worde to it. Wherevpon it followeth soundly, that Christ indeed suffered in Spirit the true effects of Gods wrath, and even the sense of Hellish sorrowes. Howbeit in an other reason of mine not vnlike to that, you thinke you can picke more advan∣tage against some wordes. I shewed out of the Hebrues that Christ succoureth vs not but wherein he had experience of our temptations and infirmities. Now he succoureth vs even in the feeling of the ter∣rours of God and sorrowes of Hell in our Soules. Therfore he himselfe
had experience of the same:pa 66. & I meaue c alwayes so far as was possible: that is in the extremitie of the sorrow & paine thereof, no further: Where note that the wordes of this Proposition are not any whit more generall, neither include they any thing lesse tolerable then the text it selfe doth,eb. 2.17. thus: d Wherefore in all things it behooved him (or he ought) to be made like vnto his brethren,ebr. 4.15. om. 8.19. ch. 20.2 e like in temptations, infirmities, and f afflictions, only except sinne: that he might be a mer∣cifull and faithfull Highpriest in things concerning God. For in that which himselfe suffered and was tempted (in) he is able to succour  them which are tempted. First, en hó in that which himselfe suffered, signifieth either the matter wherein Christ is able to succour vs, or  the meanes whereby he becommeth able, that is to say, ready and  sit to succour vs, or els the occasion and reason why hee is the rea∣dier to succour vs: even in that himself suffered and was tempted, he is able to succour them who are tempted. As if hee should say, were it not that himselfe by his owne feeling knew the misery of our sufferings and temptations, he had not ben so ready to succour vs in all ours, not with such compassion, as now he is. Which way soever of these 3 we take these words, yet they plainly inferre that Christ himselfe felt all the misery and smart of our sufferings and temptations which we at any time do feele, & wherein we are suc∣coured. Thus as I have shewed (neither do you gainsay) The godly sometimes feeling an infinit paine of Gods * wrath and of Hellish sorrows in this life:o their e it see∣h well. ch. Christ therfore felt the same indeed to succour vs thereby. Wherevnto serveth our publike doctrine, g Diram exe∣crationem quâ scelera nos nostra de vinxerat in se suscepit, vt eâ nos hoc pacto exolveret. Albeit heere the first way seemeth to mee not the vnlikelyest, that the Apostle should signifie All the matter na∣mely that kind of paine wherin he succoureth vs, even that which himselfe also had experience of. And this also those wordes kata panta in all things doe fully import. But indeed all; are but one & the same in effect as I said. Sec: we must note that in these words Christ was like vs in All temptations and afflictions, we are to vn∣derstand h All that are incident to Mankind generally: before . 48. &c not which happen to any man particularly. All the particular Crosses in the world, neither could nor can possibly come to any man. Also, that he suffered not only in one or in some partes of our nature, but in All and every parte, even in Spirit, and Soule and Body, like as we
are apt & able to suffer. Againe, all the particulars which by Gods providence he suffered not, were farre lesse in paine & terrour then the generall paines were, which he did suffer. And thus right well is Christ said to be like vs in all our temptations and sufferinges: that is, at least like vs, indeed beyonde vs in all the extremity and violence of them, and exceeding much more deepely plunged therein. As well therefore you might have given a good sense of my wordes (if you had had any minde thereto) as of these generall and large wordes of the Scripture wherevpon I ground my selfe. But very chariritably you can inferre vpō my reason, Then Christ had his eyes put out for so had Sampson he was swallowed vp by a Whall, for so was Ionas: he was cast into a burning furnace, for so were Sidrac, Mishac, & Abednego he was stoned to death, for so were Naboth and Steven. In deed I had bene as foolish and as doltish as you doe make me, if I had treamed so. Care vs therfore I pray that indifferencie which all reason and vse of speach permitteth: namely that general termes be vnderstood according to the possi∣bilitie and propabilitie of the matter. That is, that the Apostle and I both doe speake of All the sufferinges of Mankinde in gene∣rall, and of each parte of Humane Nature apt to suffer but not of every particular in each of them, or which each mā meeteth with all. Then wherePag 287 you examine me, what I mane whether Christ be not able or not willing to succour vs in other thinges then hee him selfe did suffer. Mine answer is; Aske the Apostle what hee meaneth in saying kata panta, in all things it behoued him to be like his brethren, that he might be a mercifull and faith full Highpriest: and dyna as he is (thus) able to succour vs, as if he should say; Hee was not any otherway able, then in that him selfe hath also suffe∣red being tempted in all things kata, homotótet a like vnto vs. How be it I vnderstand him not to speake heere of Christs absolu: Om∣nipotency; what he could have done (as God) if he would: But of his ability by dispensation receaved in his Manhood by the Ordi∣nance and appointment of God. As if he should saye, Thus hath God appointed him & inabled him to succour vs, and not other∣wise. Where we will not sticke to grant you your sense, that hee might be the better able to have compassion on vs. In effect these ex∣positions differ not much. And thus this Scriptured trust is clee∣red, and my Reason iustified, Christ succoureth vs not in any ex∣treamer
kinde of paine them him selfe had experience of.Which also ough All ge∣rally feele t, yet gene∣lly it is due  All in re∣ect of sinne. But he suc∣coureth vs in the  feeling of the terrours of God, hee releaseth vs of the paines and sorrowes vnmeasurable that rise thereof. Therefore him selfe had experience of them. This same also sundry of the Fa∣thers avouch with vs most fully: and even those which your selfe brings for a your selfe.Pag. 25. Cyrills wordes before touched are most large,Cyrill. The∣ur. 10.3. Omnia Christus perpessus est, vt nos ab omnibus liberaret: Christ throughly suffered all such passions (which men doe suffer) that he might deliver vs from all.Humane ature. All the passions of † fleshe were stirred in Christ yet without sinne, and so that vnles he had dyed we had not bene delivered from death, vnles he had feared and sorrow∣ed we had not ben quitt from feare and sorrowe. Heere he saith, all our passions were stirred in Christes humane nature, even so farre as we are cured, and so farre as might bee without sinne in him. Then I hope by Cyrills iudgement the sense of the true curse and proper wrath of God for sinne was in Christes Soule; so faire as it might be painfull and not sinfull: seeing Men are subiect to this suffering as the most sharpest among others. Lastly by Cyrill here we see that vnles Christ had felt the same suffrings which we feele and are cured of, we had not bene delivered of them. This also I am sure fitteth not your opinion, That one drop of Christes bloud was sufficient for our whole redemption. Which was one of your principles in your preaching, but in your book you skip it cleane, I know not how.ag. 25. 26. Next we may see that c your place of d Ambros is also fully to the same effect.Luc. de tic. dol. . A litle after his e former words he saith The ioy of the eternall Godhead being parted away from him, Christ was affected with the rediosnes of my infirmity.fore pa. 48 He tooke vpon him my sorrow, that he might give mee his ioy, and he abased himselfe to the sorrow of death in our manner, that by the same meanes in him he might bring vs to life. He ought therfore to take sorrow that he might overcome sorrow, and not exempt himselfe from it, & that we might learne in Christ to ouercom the sorrow of death approching. Where∣fore Christ exempted himselfe from nothing in his Passion that we haue experience of as touching Paines and sorrowes. And by the same sufferings in him selfe for vs, he healeth vs, wherevnto we are subiect by reason of sinne. So that thus (in his agonie) hee wrought with a deepe effect, that because in his flesh hee killed our sinnes, he might also with the sorrow of his Soul extinguish the sorrow
of our Soules. To this very purpose alsoPag. 47.4 Naanz. Fulgent. Barnard. Tertull. Ierom. many others before re∣hearsed do affirme most fully. Neither is this taking of their sen∣tences any whit to abuse the Fathers, wch youPag. 86. are afraid of. You greatly abuse them which take them otherwise: namely as if they meant that by the flesh and bloudshed of Christ meerely & alone without the merit of his Soules and Mindes proper suffering, our whole Ransom were paid. As for our comparing the paines of Christs suffering with the paines even of the Reprobats in this life, I see not that you nor any man living can finde fault therewith: onely set aside their sinfull suffering, which alwayes I testifie that Christ was most free from. Yea I doubt not but we may compare Christes sufferings in his Agonies touching vehemency of paines even with those of the Damned in hell.What the o is between Christes Su∣fering &  Damned. Only I conceave betweene Christs, and theirs this odds: 1 They suffer sinfully, 2 Perpetually, 3 Locally in Hell. All which being excepted▪ otherwise Christ suf∣fered altogither as bitterly & as sharpely (yea I may say in nature the very same) as the Damned doe: which therefore may well be called the paines of Hell, although yet Hell indeed doeth differ in some great and waighty circumstances, as is aforesaid. If you say, the extreamest paines of punishment cānot be where sinne is not. That is true: neither in deed can the least paines be where there is no sinne: and that no more in the Body then in the Soule, though this please not you. Marke what I say, The extreamest paines of al may as possibly be inflicted where no sinne is, as the very least, & that as well in the Spirit as in the Body. But in trueth neither the one nor the other is possible. Neither the greatest nor the least paines of Gods proper vengeance for sinne can be inflicted or suf∣fered at all in Soule or in Body, but only where sinne is. That is to say, either imputed or inhaerent. Ordinarily the Reprobat are thus punished, where sinne is inhaerent. Extraordinarily and singularly by Gods owne speciall ordinance Christ was even thus punished, yet where sin was but imputed. And thus therefore Christes Soule for meere paine might suffer the extreamest spiritual punishments (altogeather as well as his body might suffer any at all) without inhaerent sinne. But you graunt his body suffered truely punish∣ments for sinne. Therefore his soule might suffer also, even those of the extreamest degree. YourSee be pag. 14. selfe also granteth that Christ both might and did suffer the extreamest paines that might bee,
without his owne sinne. But it was possible for him to conceave and feele in his a minde farre greater sorrowes and paines for our sinne from Gods wrath,at. .  26. then hee could feele meerely in his body outwardly. And the greatest was no more sinne then the least, though both were properly for sin. Therefore by your own grant, Christ might and did feele and indure the greatest sorrowes of the minde and soule as well as the lesser in the body, being all the very effectes of the wrath of God against sinne.ag. 102. b You bring a reason a∣gainst this, that God spiritually punisheth no man but for his own vncleannes: which is a thing meerely vntrue. For though no o∣ther man was ever punished without his owne vncleannes, neither spiritually nor corporally, yet Christ our Saviour was: who in this case was not in the ordinarie state of men. But I pray shewe me this mysterie how it is that God cānot punish Spiritually where there is no inhaerent sinne, but can and may Corporally where there is none: All the rest of your assertions c heere are altogeather of this sute.a 101, 102 03, 105. 66. 94. By this one reason I weakened all yours, but you could passe that by,To this ef∣ct. Treat. 1 ag. 41, 43. answering vnto it not a word. Ʋiz: d If Christes body hanging on the Crosse, and held by Death in the grave, was punished by God where yet he found no sinne, and which he still intierly loved and was never separated frō, then so hee might & did punish pro∣perly his Soule also, & yet never divide his Godhead nor his love from it. But thus he did to his body: therefore even so hee might doe, and did to his soule properly also. For the one standeth with Gods iustice, and with the Nature of man in Christ, aswell as the other. So farre for this. Then e you addresse your selfe against another,ag. 289. even one of the chiefest reasons of mine: which I make from the straunge and in∣comparable Agoies of Christ in the tyme of his Passion. These invaded him, as we read, principally at 3. times: 1. in the foretast of his Passion, shewed vs in the 12. of Iohn. 2. In the Garden a little before his apprehension. 3. In his very extreame Passion it selfe on the Crosse. The Scriptures f heeretofore I rehearsed at full,Treat. . ag. 49. 50. oh. 12.27. Mat. 26.39. and 44. Mark. 14.33 uk. 22.44. and 43. Mat. 27.46. eb 5.7. & whence these piteous and vnspeakeable Agonies of his are noti∣fied vnto vs. Whereby to all (that duely consider) it appeareth so cleare as the Sunne at noone day, that The paines of his Passion which plainly now he felt, and feared, (because he knew he was to feele them further vnto death) were the proper and direct cause of
those Agonies. But we assume, that such straunge and lamentable things and behaviour in Christ were not the effectes only and meere∣lie of his bodily paines and death, or of the feare of them. Therefore Christ felt and indured more then his meere bodily paine and death, by the testimonie of the Scriptures, which thingBefore 14.25.5 you deny. In your whole discourse you gainsayPag. 17 22. 23. 2 34. &c. the Proposition, that the paines of Christes Passion, or the naturall feare of them, was the proper and direct cause of those Agonies: or that these Scriptures doe imply so much. The Assumption you graunt and acknowledge, that the meere bodily paines and death of Christ or the feare thereof, were not the only, nor the proper and direct Cause of these Agonies in him. ForPag. 29 you are resolved that the cause of Christes Agonie could not proceede but from his Submission to God or Compassion to men, or frō both. These you name elswhere aPag. 23.  religious Feare,Pag. 124. 20, 21. Devotion and Pietie to God, pitie to men, &c. And thus you resolutely denie my Proposition. For you meane it seemeth that Christ suffered paines in his Soule by reason of the strength and zeale of these his Holy Affections: and that these were the proper and maine Causes of that his most wofull and miraculous Agonie & Complaint. Ther∣fore not any extraordinarie Paines inflicted vpon him by way of proper punishment, as my Proposition intendeth. But this your Assertion I simply denie, that Christes Holy Affections, his Piety and his Pity were the proper and maine Causes of that his most wofull and miraculous Agonie & Complaint. And then my Pro∣position standeth firme, that his Paines inflicted on him by way of proper Punishment and Ʋengeance for sinne were the proper and maine Cause thereof. Wherefore let vs try your proofes for it, and then mine against it. But before we com to them, you must know that this your Resolution, as you call it, is first most vaine, also di∣rectly contrary to your selfe, and then altogeather vntrue and pre∣sumed by wide coniecture; as God willing presently I shall shew. For the first; I hartily intreat the Christian Reader to marke wel & to consider, how your L. doth contrive 3. notable Equivocations in these few wordes, Christ suffered in his Soule the wrath of God:Notable S phistrie. wch youPa 243, 24 245. 248. seeme to grant, but in truth you do not: and if we ad also the paines of Hell, then hee opposeth a fourth fallacie against vs. And these 3. or 4. are the only Pillars of his Doctrine. For the 3. former, your first Equivocation is in this word Christ Suffered:
and about it wee deale in this place now. The common and ordi∣nary phrase of men vnderstandeth heerein, His feeling of paines inflicted on him by way of proper punishment and satisfaction for sinne,t Christes fering or lion is pro∣ly. which he vndertooke for vs. Only this in the ordinarie and vsuall maner of speach is signified by Christes suffering or his Pas∣sion: and so doe we alwayes vnderstand by it. But you cunninglie take another rare sense of this word, as it signifieth the Affections of the Minde in Christ wholly bent to Holines, Righteousnes, & Obedience of God, that so he might exactly & perfitly keep his iust Law. Which 2. partes of Christes Mediation, are greatly diffe∣ring,e before pa. 18. 52. 64. and ought not both in trueth to be called His Passion or Sa∣tisfaction for sinne. Therefore speake plainly I beseech you, and deceave vs not? call not this His Soules suffering, but his Soules Holines & Righteousnes. And seeing you meane, This was the pro∣per & maine cause of Christs Passion & Suffering whē he wrought his satisfactiō for sin now at the last end of his life chiefly, I simply denie it: Treat. 1. pag. 68. 69. all Reason reclaimeth against it: and to that which " I al∣leaged for further reproofe thereof, you answere nothing. Your next Equivocation is in this,See before pag 52. Hee suffered † in Soule: your next in " Gods wrath. Both which I have plainly shewed before. As also your 4.Before pa. 49. 19. * Fallacy, which may be called Fallacia Accidentis. But Sit I hope you will not thinke to beare downe all afore you with no∣thing but with cunning,Before pag. 16. 53. yet vaine deceipt, countenanced out with cruell and hatefull wordes. Further, you are in this your Resolution directly contrary to your owne selfe:Before pa. 36. 64. as " before I have briefly, yet sufficiently shewed. Againe, where you censure your selfe very sharply for your resolutnes in this cause,Pag. 17. * It is curiosity to examine, presumption to determine, impossibility to conclude certainly what was the true cause therof. Thirdly,Pag. 290. where you make but 2. causes submission to God, Compassion to men: elswhere but onePag. 23. Religious feare. ButPa. 17. &c. before you very precisely made 6. If you agree no better wth your self, I have small hope that you will agree with vs. Last of al, this your resolution, making Christs Piety & Pity to be the only proper & maine Cause of all his wofull Passion, is vtterly false and vntrue, having no groūd but meere coniectures. But before I vn my reasons against your Assertion,Your. 6. Causes of Chr. Agonie vntrue. let vs view all your particul Causes, & see if any one of the can be good,Pag. 18. Your 1. Cause is S∣mission to the Maiesty of God sitting in iudgemēt. Against whom
in what cause sate he now in iudgment, when Christ was thus asto∣nished & Agonized therewith? Of necessity it must be one of these three wayes. 1. Gods Maiesty & great iustice now at this time might sit in iudgement against vs, & so consequently yea chiefly against Christ him selfe as our Ransom-payer and Surety in our steed. If you meane, that thus Christ with Submissiō beholding his Father in iudgement at this time was cast into this Agonie, it is the verie trueth, and the same that we maintayne. For this denyeth not, but that he had real paines inflicted frō the Father as from a iust iudge against vs in him, who were thus acquitted by him. And thus if Aust. and othersPag. 3 sentences be vnderstood, that the Compaint on the Crosse was not Christs in respect of him selfe but in respect of his Church for whom then & there he answered before God com∣ming now to execute iudgement for their sinne, so they are wel & rightly vnderstood: otherwise there is no trueth in them, namely as you seeme to vse them. Second: God might be considered now as iudging Satan the prince of this world, and overcomming him for vs by the victorie of Christes sufferings which he was nowe a∣bout to vndergoe: that thus the Divell (asPag. you note out ofAug. Au∣stin) might be vanquished in our Cause not by Gods absolut and meere power, but also by doeing iustice, & so we deliuered. Thus wherePag. you apply,Ioh. 32. Now (even at hand) is the iudgement of this world: Now (evē shortly) shall the prince of this world be cast out. and I, if I were lift vp from the earth, will draw all men vnto me. If you meane it in this sense (as you seeme to doe) it serveth well. But that in this respect, as God proceeded against Satan, and for this cause Christ should bee cast into these dreadfull scates, sor∣rowes, and bloudy Agonies, what man of iudgement would ima∣gine? What colour of likelihood is there in it? Rather this were properly cause of great ioy and triumph indeed: as sufficiently I have shewed in myPh. 5. former treatise, wherevnto you answere not. Your testimonies touchingIoel Heb. Psal. men sinfull, wherevnto may be adioy∣nedLuc an other of the like, somewhat opening those places, make nothing to the purpose at al. For these could not by reason of their Sinnes induce the very presence of Gods Maiesty, beeing in anie measure revealed vnto them: but Christ in him selfe being free from all sinne, could be in no such case. No better also isIsa.  that of the Angells (meere Creatures) vayling their faces at the glorious
presence of God the Creatour of all: but Christ the Mediator was not a meere Creature, but alwayes personally vnited with a greater power then the Angells were, and alwayes sustayned by it: vnles only in case of his Iudgement and Passion proceeding vpon him from God, as is before noted, when purposely the Godhead hid him selfe as it were, and withdrew his wonted Comfort, that the manhood might be subiect o full Punishment for vs, as was ap∣pointed by God. Although even nowe also the Godhead did su∣staine his manhood thus being overloaden with paines: otherwise it could notefore .42. but have ben quite overwhelmed. Third: Gods Ma∣iestie and iustice may be considered sitting in iudgement meerely against sinfull men. If you meane heere against the sinnes of the Elect, Christ knew the eternall and sure decree of God which had turned the Cup of vengeance alreadie from them vpon himselfe, as being their Suretie: so that this commeth to our Assertion, as is aforesaid. Or touching the Reprobates doe you think that Christ heere so vehemently wished them better, whom he knew God ha∣ted: or that for pity of them he fell into this Agonie and sorrowful prayers? First Christ saith a little 17. . before, He would not so much as pray for them. Yea it is certaine Christ rather would have great∣ly reioyced to see the due execution of Gods most holy and deser∣ved iustice, which is a speciall part of his high glory. According to that which is written: 58.10, The righteous shall reioyce when he seeth the vengeance, he shal wash his feet in the bloud of the wicked: And men shall say, verily there is fruit for the righteous, doubtles there is a God that iudgeth the earth. Againe if Christes mournfull prayers were to wish better to the Reprobat, how can that stand where he saith, Let this Cup passe from me: he should have saide from them. Neither this also might he say, from them: as knowing perfectly his Fathers and his owne will directly to the contrary. Your next supposed Cause290. Compassion towards men cōtayneth 3. severall causes18.19 heere: 1. for the Reiection of the Iewes: 2. for the Dispersion of his Church: 3. His zealous griefe generally for the sins of the world. All these I grant were alwayes in Christ, and caused no doubt alwayes heavines in him: yet no more then a godly and heavenly minde could and would cheerefully digest and beare. Wherefore you strangely deceave your selfe if you thinke that these, any, or all of them, did so far exceede in him as
to procure his most dreadfull and bloudy Agonie. For the Reiec∣tion of the Iewes what reasons bring you.Luke  Christ wept over their City: Ergo Now at his Passion he was driven into his dreadfull A∣gonie for this cause: and that rather now, then when hee so wept ex∣presly for them. I deny this argument: how will you doe to prove it? ITreat.  pa. 6.7. have shewed from hence the contrary: wherevnto nothing is answered: that seeing when a little before hee throughly inten∣ded & expressed his affection about that matter, yet therby he fell into no such Agonie, but only wept and mourned for them, there∣fore now in his Passion where he speaketh not a worde of them, it is strange to say, that his Pity of his Coūtry men the Iewes should drive him to sweat bloud, and thrice to pray with teares and strong cryes, that this Cup of grief might passe from him, and thrice to yeeld him selfe againe to Gods will, saying: Not my will, but thy will be done. This verily cannot stand with any reason. Again, that his expresse Compassion towardes the Iewes a littleLuk. 19. Mat. 24. before he pre∣pared him to his Passion, plainly sheweth, that now in the Garden and so still forward, he gave him selfe wholy to other thoughtes & matters, Namely such as cōcerned his great work in hand: that is, to be are the Paines which now chiefly he was to suffer for mans redemption at Gods hands. Wherefore this work of Christ at this time performed and wrought by him,Note. is by a proper and peculiar Name iustly called his Passion, not not his Compassion. Againe you say, For their sakes Moses desired to be wiped out of Gods booke, and Paul could have wished him selfe to bee separated from Christ for his brethren the Israelites. Ergo Christ at his Passion was cast into that strange Agonie for the griefe of their reiection. This also hath no shape of any reason in it. It proveth that Christ surely had very great pity and commiseration of them, but nothing els in the worlde. Besides Christ might have far greater pity of them, then Moses or Paul had, and yet hee was able to cary his affection far more patiently and quietly then they were able: which would ra∣ther keepe him from such an outwarde distemper as was even in them. Also Christ knew exactly Gods Counsell and purpose for their reiectiō, which those holy men were not so particularly sure of. Wherfore Christ might better stay the vehemency & breaking out of this affection, which in such a case must needs tend against the knowen will of God. In those holy men it might better break
foorth very strongly, as it did, seeing they knewe not particularly Gods decree heerein, so as Christ knew. Lastly those holy men (it seemeth) having their thoughtes wholly defixed on their vehe∣ment pity towardes the Iewes earnestly and " constantly wished, that the Cup of Gods eternall wrath might come vpō them selves that the Iewes who deserved it,pecially ul; who vedly proveth ye th. Rom. 1. might scape. But Christ in his Pas∣sion contrariwise desired that the Cup which hee tasted to be too bitter and too violent for him, might passe away from him selfe. Thus here is no semblance of reason in this for your purpose. But against you heere are 4. worthie things to be noted. If we consider this first, that these most servent desires of these rare men, were holy and not sinful. Because their thoughts being wholly & alto∣geather for the time defixed on their love to their Brethren in the flesh that they might be saved, and that Gods glory might be infi∣nitly more ample, if he saved so many hundred thousands (which now almost seemed to them as lost) then it would be in their own particular salvation onely: and thus for the tyme not thinking (it seemeth) vpon their own immutable Election and Salvation not any thing els, saving only that they could desire their brethrens salvation yea though it were with their owne damnation for their sakes, if so it might stand with Gods will, which no doubt alwayes they implyed, though expressed nor: thus I take it plaine enough that these sinned not in this their desire, and I suppose you take it so too, in that you alleage them & ground your reason of Compa∣rison vpon them. Nowe from hence I observe these 4. notable pointes.e. 1. That, if God Omuipotent and only Soveraigne Lord will, he may inflict Damnation and the paines of Hel vpon meere men, not for them selves but for others, not for their own sins but for the imputed Sinnes of other men: much rather then may hee doe thus to Christ, whom God sent indeed and ordayned for that purpose.g. 76. Flatly contrary to " your Assertion. That which there you mention is the ordinary & common rule, The Soule that sin∣neth it shall Dy. But in Christ this was eatraordinary and singular that The iust dyed for the vniust. 2. Wee see heere that there may be possibly a Death of the Soule, a Curse and Separation frō God which is in it selfe neither Sinne, nor conioyned with sinne neces∣sarily: but meerely a Suffering of Punishment from God for the sinnes of others imputed. 73.310. Contrarie to you also: yea generally
every where. Third: That extraordinarily there is greater love e∣ven  among meere men, then only to dy bodily one for another, though vsually and ordinarily a greater can not be found among men: which is it, thatIoh. 13.1 Christ meaneth. But how much more the may the love of Christ towards his Elect be farre greater. Con∣trary toPa. 107.1 your assertion. Fourth: Wee see here that these holy men without feeling any paines inflicted by Gods wrath, but onely  through an earnest and mighty Compassion of lovePag. 293. have their mindes drawen so wholly to thinke on this speciall thing above their reach, that during the time they turne not themselves to any other co∣gitation. Even as the eye, being bent intētively to behold any thing, for that present discerneth nothing els. Whereby it cōmeth to passe that these wishes of these holy men ravished with Pity and Zeale, are not reckoned sinfull in thē, though they were directly against their owne Salvatiō, which otherwise they knew was immutable with God and certainly reserved for them in Heaven. This youPag. 293. acknowledge may be in men, & yet you will not skoffe at them asPag. 144. cast into a traunce by it, nor reproch them withPag. 299. infernall con∣fusion. How much lesse ought you so to deale with Christ: but spe∣cially to acknowledge that his marveylous perplexity may well be a meanes that his suddainwishes against his own constant pur∣pose & Gods will, were yet no sinnes. And that much rather even for this, because Christ had infinitly more cause by his Paines (thē felt and feared to be in his minde both more amuzed and also a∣mazed, then those men had by their affections. Thus far of this. As for theAmbro leom A & Bde. Fathers whichPag. 19. you cite, if they meane as they seeme to do that now at his Passion among other causes of sorrow there wāted not this, even his great Pity towards his forlorn Coūtrymē, thē we ioyne with them. If they meane (as you would have them) that this was the maine and chiefe cause of his extreame sorrows and amazednes, therein I vtterly leave them. Howbeit this heere note in them, that these Fathers avouch Christ feared not his (bo∣dily) Death and Passion: for thereof only they speake heere que∣stionles. You contrariwise say that Christ feared (bodily) death, for thereof alsoPag. 26,  you discourse, and had more cause (as you thinke) so to do, then any of his members haue. Third: touchingPag. 19,  his regard of his Church, generally the same answer serveth, as is given to the last point before. If you vrge that
these Fathers are so resolute for these Causes as their wordes heere pretend, then your self abuseth them more thē ever I did or meane to do,ag. 17. where you say, a it is curiosity to examine, presumption to de∣termine, impossibility to conclude (as these doe) what was the true cause of Christs Agonie. Fourth:Pag. 20. b you alleage his inward sorrow and zealous grief for the sinnes of the world, to be the maine and chiefe cause of his Agonie. Surely even to rehearse these your argumēts is refutation of them enough. All these are proper parts of his Holines & Righteousnes, as I have said, but no proper partes or causes of his bloudy & most dreadfull Agonie, that is of his Sacrifice satisfying for sinne. Only his Heb. 2.10. Paines were, which then he felt and feared. Neither in respect of these your supposed causes could he say, Save me frō this hower, nor Let this Cup passe from me: as in respect of his infinit paines he might.Mar. 14.35. c This hower can not be referred to his Holy and Righ∣teous affections, which were at all howers and seasons in him with∣out measure Holy, yet now at his death did not so expresly break out & shew thēselves,Nor as his aines did peare. "as they did at divers times before. There∣fore this Hower can not be these his Holy affections: his Paines & afflictions they d may be and must bee.oh. 12.27. mpar. with  33. Neither thus standeth it with his piety to wish that his strong and vehement affections of Holynes should passe from him, or bee weakened in him. For my part I can see no sense nor sap in these assertions. Even so likewise in that,ag. 21. where you ascribe to this his c deepe sorrow of zeale for mens sinnes his sweating bloud in his agonie aboue nature after a strange and marvelous maner. I dare say, you deliver strange mer∣vayles in Divinity. The Fift Cause f you say,ag. 21. might be the Cup of Gods wrath tempe∣red & made ready for the sinnes of men: which you interpret to be g Eternall Malediction.Pag. 22. Touching which you say, Christ know∣ing what our sinnes deserved might intentively pray to have that Cup passe frō him, which was prepared for vs. For vs, whom meane you? The Elect, or the Reprobat? What malediction? The whole & absolut Paines thereof only, or the Eternity of the continuance thereof also? For so the Reprobats do suffer it. If you meane the Elect,As you af∣me most angely, pa. 2. 133. 144 93. 294. Christ knew, that he must not only h see & contemplat, but feele & suffer all the whole Paines of that Punishment which our sinnes deserved: and this was prepared for himselfe our Ransom-payer
and not for vs. Wherefore the truth is he could not by any meanes pray against that nor decline that, onely vnles he were for the time in some astonishment & perturbation of his senses, which by the infinitnes of that Paine he might well bee in, yea he could not but be (in his Humane weake nature) and yet still remayning vtterly sinlesse, as is afore shewed to have happened in Moses and Paul in a far lesse perturbation then this was in Christ. Now this is the very point of our Defense: affirme this, and you affirme with vs all that we hold & professe. Otherwise if you meane that Christ prayed intentively to have the whole and intire Cup of eternall Malediction and death passe from him, which both the Elect de∣serve, and the Reprobats sustaine, that, as it is passing strange do∣ctrine, so it is also simply impossible. For he could not intentive∣ly pray against that, not feare that, which hee most perfitly knew concerned him not at all, and by no meanes could ever possibly come neere him. But indeed all this is nothing els in effect then your 1 Cause, His submission to Gods maiesty sitting in iudgment. Wherefore you might have lessened your number, and so your answer to this might have ben thesame which is made to your formost. But heere furthermore you knit in with thisAs you kon the geathe 27. 4 other severall causes of Christs Agony. 1. His taking of our infirmities in his flesh to cure them: 2. His breaking the knot betwixt (bodily) death and Hell, which none but hee was able to do: 3. Gods anger which might be executed on his body, but was mitigated by him: 4. The desire he had to continue the seeling & inioying of Gods pre∣sense with his body. The of these maketh in my minde much  for vs. For vnderstanding that Christ tooke all the infirmities and passions wherevnto mens nature is subiect to the ende that hee might cure all and every kinde of them in vs; then it followeth that he wanted not the proper & immediat sufferings of paines in∣flicted by Gods own hād in his Soule. For these are our Soules sub∣iect vnto and capeable of, yea and tormēted with, & finally we are by this apt and proportionable medicine of Christ throughly cu∣red of thē. And this is the very same matter wch our 4 ArgumentPag 8 87. before concluded: that Christe had experince of thesame infir∣mities & passions generally whatsoever, wherof he hath cured vs. And this your owne Authours here doe fully affirme, Cyrill Am∣brose, and others, asPag. 88 before we have observed. It is then most vn∣reasonable
which heere c you doe (if you doe as you seeme) to vn∣derstand them of meere Bodily death,a. 25, 26, 27 & of the infirmities meerly of his Flesh.Before pag 1. Wherein then you deny our d Assumption also, & are againe Contrarie to your selfe and to f your owne Authours. Cy∣rill nameth flesh heere,Pag. 10.  Ieom. Pde. meaning not Christes Deitie, but his whole Humane nature, as the Scripture doeth in a multitude of places: and so not his Body onely. Thus then it is that he saith, as you ob∣serue,Pag. 25. that g Christ as a man abhorred and feared death: not the bo∣dily death only, but as it was conioyned with the sorrowes of the 2. death. He would not, he could not so feare and be afrighted, yea and pitiously astonished with such sorrowe oppressing him, as to sweat droppes of bloud only for feare of his bodily death: neyther would he pray at all, much lesse so vehemently and so oftenty mes as he did against that which he perfectly knew was Gods will and his own most willing purpose to vndergoe. Or els Cyrill meaneth no more but that he naturally misliked & shunned (evē as all flesh doth) all bodily paine & death. This we alwayes yeeld, and it ma∣keth nothing against vs. For nevertheles he cōstantly imbraced & suffered with ioy whatsoever bodily grief he knew did come vnto him by his owne most free wil, and by the holy ordinance of God: yea he could & would beare it with ioy far beyond all the ioy and constancie of h men in their sufferings.Who yet rink not at  neither for dily paines r for Reli∣ous fear of ll. Only he might faile of the outward appearance and vse of this cōstancie and ioyfull patience (as now he did) without taint of sinne, if his Humane nature were overwhelmed with other infinit paynes, and his minde and senses disturbed with more horrour then naturally it could beare. Ther∣fore I conclude he thus feared not his meere bodily death, but it was the Paines of the 2. death which he felt and so feared. But you say i The sorrow and feare of death which it pleased our Saviour to feele in our nature,ag. 26. came not for want of strength, but of purpose to quench and abolish those affections in vs. I say it came from both: as your selfe also doe avouch cleane contrarily in an other place: k To dy even in Christ was infirmitie,ag. 161. though voluntary. And ge∣nerally in another place;ag. 289. l Naturall infirmitie was cōmon to Christ with all the godly in like cases. Wherfore Austins sentence will not helpe you heere,Pag. 25. m that Christ was troubled not by infirmitie, but by (his owne) power. For he meaneth, not only by infirmitie, but also by his owne will and power: or els you cōfute him yourselfe. Nei∣ther
ther is this any reproch to Christ, asPag.  you most iniustly insinuat. But as it was glorious to him so to debase his Maiestie for our sakes to take our true and perfit Nature, yea to bee humbled therein to the most shamefull death of the Crosse, so was it also glorious to him to take all the true weaknesses of our nature togeather: and so it was his singular good-will towards vs to become throughly like vs, and feelingly subiect to all our Calamities, paines and mi∣series, to heale vs of them. Only in him the guilt and corruption of sinne it selfe was excepted. Faine you wouldPag. 2 wipe away that Argumēt of ours which sticketh neerer to you the you will seeme. In Malefactors there is a quiet and contented suffering of most ex∣quisit and extraordinary torments oftentimes,The cou and st of Ma∣ctours ments. which they indure only by a naturall strength and courage of minde. Howe much more likely is it then that Christ the very rock of all strength and fountaine of patience, would not thus seeme affrighted and asto∣nished and so wofully behaving him selfe for his meere bodily death, and that before it came vnto him. All your answer is, that this is no fit comparison for the Sonne of God: for they are despe∣rate, not having any feare or care of God till they feele the force of his wrath in Hell fyre. What an answer is this? They have no feare nor care of God. What then? Yet naturally they have feare and care of most bitter paines, and namely then when they feele them. If you say, before they feele them they are so desperate and so hardened by Satan, that they care not for any tormentes: that in deed is commonly true. But what will you or can you alleage to hinder their full and most dreadfull sense of them, when they are in them? Satan wisheth them not so much good as to benumme them now in their senses, so that the cruell paines of death should not trouble them in the time of their death, which hee would ra∣ther make more fearfull and intollerable vnto them. Let them be then in their life time as desperat as they will, yet in death and in the middest of most horrible tortures which oftentimes very qui∣etly they indure, surely they cannot choose but feele as liuely and as perfitely as other men doe. Only it is a naturall boldnes and strength of minde (in it selfe no discommendable propertie) that sustayneth them in such extreme paines: One instance for all may serve in this kinde, even that wretched Murderer of the Prince of Orange in Netherland. What strange quietnes did he shew in suf∣fering
most wonderfull and rare tormentes vntill death. Nowe to make our Saviour Christ lesse able or willing to suffer quietly out∣ward tormentes no greater then that wretch and many other such have suffered, I suppose is a bad indeavour. And it is no vnfit mat∣ter for you to thinke more vpon, before you skip it over with si∣lence. We compare not the Sonne of God with them, but are sure that his Humane nature had beyond all comparison more com∣mendable courage, boldnes, strength of minde, patience, and con∣tentment even in the middest of his extreamest paines (were they but meere bodily) then such caytifs had, or possibly could seeme to have. This that I say, pertaineth alike to the Theeves that were Crucified with Christ. Of whom the H. Ghost saith, a They were togeather in one and the same Condemnation with Christ.. 23.40. That is they suffered from men all one and the like tormentes of death adiudged them by the Magistrate: except happily Christ suffered lesse then they, because they indured them longer then hee did. Yet we finde in none of them any such piteous and strange Com∣plaintes and Cryes and Teares, as we finde in Christ. But to leave these, and to come to the patience of Martyrs in their sufferings. That also is admirable, what ioy, what peace, what triumph they shew, yea how they sing in the middest of frying flames, in their rosting on gridirons, in their fleaing off their skinnes, and tearing of their fleshe by piece-meales, with a thousande other of most strange and butcherly torments, no lesse, if no greater in outward shewe, then the sufferings of our Saviour Christ. To this you an∣swer:  If death be not fearfull to the Servants of Christ, they are the more bound to their Lord and Maister. Who knoweth not that? But what answer is this to our argument? And you will also give a reason of your saying: Because he was the first that by death disar∣med death, and severed Death and Hell. He was surely both the first and the last: both α and ω. For he ly, and none with him, nor before nor since him conquered Death and Hell. Yet what is this to our Reason? The effect that Christ wrought is not our quaestion,he matter  or Ob∣, and the iect of his ffering are  question. but " the maner and kinde of suffering whereby hee wrought it. You tell vs of the effect which he perfourmed which we gladly acknowledge: viz. that Christ did this in deed by his death, he made our death since to be no Cursed death, but a bles∣sed death. But how did he this, by suffering nothing but his meere
bodily death only, or also a Religious feare of Hell? All which o∣ther godly men doe also suffer and feele, which they take passing ioyfully and quietly. But thus Christ did not seeme to doe, ney∣ther indeed did he in his Agonie. Or did Christ suffer some grea∣ter sorrow? You say, The death which Christ suffered when it ap∣proched came fast clasped with Hell. What meane you by that? meane you, that Death and Hell both alike came iointly vpon Christ, and that both iointly were ordayned of God to seaze vpon him? Then it is thesame that wee affirme. Otherwise how came they clasped togeather against him? By breaking the knot betwixt Death and Hell, he could not be so wofully affected and afflicted above measure as he was, if he did not suffer by them somewhat extraordinarily. Vnto this you have nothing to answer. Only you say, he severed them, and none ells but only the Sonne of God could dissolve them. Which we deny not. Neither can we see how Death by Gods ordinance might seaze vpon Christ, and not the paines of Hel: seeing neither of them is in themselves sin, but both alike are the due vengeance of sinne which he was ordayned to suffer so far as was possible. Why then did he suffer the one, and not touch the other. Neither yet do you shew that wch you take in hand heere, how bodily death is contemptible to the Godly which was not con∣temptible to God himselfe by your assertiō. It was not therefore that onely, but some other death farre more dreadful and intollerable, which made Christ man (being also God) in such wise to tremble and quake. In deed Christ had farre greater cause (as you say) to feare even his bodily death, then any of his Members have. For it was therefore because death approched vnto him clasped fast with Hell, so that he could not by the ordinance of God meddle with one but he must feele the other. And thus he did not contemplate and looke on them a farre of, nor had to doe with one more then the other, but by suffering one, he felt both: and by induring one, he indured both. And thus in deed Christ was left by God to the full naturall sense of his bodily torments. But the Godly and the Martyrs deale only with bodily Death; the paines of Hell, or of Gods wrath they feare not, because they know by Christes suffe∣ring the same they are abolished, & removed farre from them. Sin stādeth not threatning thē in the prefence of God, as it stood now at this time against Christ our Suertie and Ransom-payer. Nay,
they deale not with Bodily death wholely and naturally: for they have Gods comfort with them to mitigate it, which Christ nowe felt not. Yea they mind not their paines very much for their great hope and ioy presenly following: but this was all overclowded in Christ at this instant. Therefore he had exceeding great cause to be affrighted and terrifyed & to cry out with bitter teares, though the godly have cause to triumph & sing in Death. Thus also you forget * my argumēt:. 1.51. that Christ alwayes charged his Disciples not to take their bodily Death heavily for righteousnes sake: Ergo, He him selfe would never be so dismayed with the feare of it. Heere you have a notable sayinge in the margen, whiche must not be forgotten: we must preferre Christes suffering before all Martyrs * not for his paines,. 26. but for his patience. Not for his paines, but for his patience? A rare distinction: If you could make vs be∣lieve that the greatest patience is tryed and discerned where the smallest paines are, then you said somewhat. I know Christes pa∣tience was perfit in all his paines both small & great: and so is not the patience of his servants in their paines neither small nor great. But what is this to our purpose? We speake not of his inward ha∣bit of patience which our faith beleeveth to be in him: but of the outward triall and discerning thereof by naturall meanes & signes wherevnto it pleased him now to submit his patience after the ve∣rie course and operation of Nature. Wherefore as Christ had in him indeed farre more patience then we have, so it is out of doubt when he came to the chiefest trial thereof in his Passion he would not in any wise (as he did) shewe lesse in vse then many men doe, vnles the trial & encoūtring thereof in him were infinitly greater. By this also we may see how vaine your next coniecture is, that he feared in his Agonie " Corporall castigation above his strength.. 22.24. For why may not Martyrs and others feare as much cruelty & ex∣traordinarie torments at the handes of men, as Christ had cause to doe? Againe, why should the feare of any whatsoever meere bo∣dily paines so overcome his patience, as outwardly it seemed at this time? Why should he not be able to beare it quietly? And principally seeing he knew well enough before what his death should be, and that God had vnchangeably appointed it for him. Wherefore in no wise ought he so to shunne and shrinke from his meere bodily paines, if they were no greater, which hee suffered.
IfPag. 2 you meane that he felt greater concurring in and with his bo∣dily punishment inflicted by the wrathfull hand of God,Pag. 2 armed with infinit vengeance, then you say well, and we acknowledge it. Your otherPag. 2. 27. Cause is, for that by death his body should want a  while the feeling of Gods presence. But did not Christ perfitly know that this was Gods decree and certaine appointment; yea his owne most free will & purpose? And shall we imagine that Christ would expreslie pray against that knowen will of his Father, yea against his owne? Call you thisPag. 2 greater perfection in him then was in other men? Againe, could this thing in any reason be such a horrible griefe vnto him, to have his flesh ly dead without paine for a day and a few howers, yet his Soule cōtinually living and in∣ioying the cōfort of God: and that for such an occasion as to pro∣cure thereby the Salvation of mankinde, would the thought of this make him sweat bloud for grief, and to need an Angell from, heaven to comfort him, and to pray 3. times vehemently that this Cup might passe from him? verily it is vnreasonable to thinke so. Which Cause also, if it were true, is flatly contrary to yourPag. 29 owne resolution. But of all these I wonder where you have found anie inkling, that any of these may be beleeved to bee the true and ef∣fectuall cause of Christes most dreadfull Agonie. You say excel∣lentAs be  have n pag. 28. well, but by your practise in all matters so farre as I see, you never meane to observe it:Epist pa in Gods cause let Gods booke teach vs what to beleeve and what to professe:Pag. 91 I love to followe and not to lead the holy Ghost. In matters of so great depth I dare not wade without or before my guide. AgainePag. 41. what I reade in Gods worde, that I beleeve: what J read not, that I doe not beleeve. Shewe mee then where you read in Gods word any or all these to be effectuall Causes of this strange Agonie, or some sure grounde whence evi∣dently we may gather so much: or els for my part I shall never be∣ver beleeve you. Your Sixt andPag. 27. &c. last maine Cause is, that Christ by this his blou∣dy sweat and vehement prayers did nothing but voluntarily per∣forme that true bloudy Offering and Priesthood prefigured in the Law. This we simply grant: it hindreth not our Assertion. Except you meane voluntarily in such sense that hee was not also vrged therevnto by any violence of paines or feare procuring it in him naturally. Wherein you seeme to labour by bringing some Fa∣thers,
and misapplying some Scriptures,ag 29. and doe say that a you are content to admit also (this) exposition, and of this, with all the rest you pronoūce that b they are sound and well agreeing with Christian pietie.ag 37. Yet is it contrary to c your resolution also: yea it is contrary to the Scripture,ag 290. expressing his d feare and vehement sorrowes and e discomfort to have caused his Agonie.h 14. . 4. b 5.7. Againe if you meane that all this was voluntary in him and not felt indeede according to the outwarde semblance and as men beholding him would iudg,Luc. 22.43 then belike you make him to have counterfayted. Which thought God for bid should ever come into any Christians heart. For no cause you say f I iest and iybe with the Apostles wordes:Pag. 302. but I feare this is to iest and iybe in deed with the most dreadfull and bitter sorrowes of our Saviour in working for vs our Salvati∣on. And heere why say you not aswell that his Death and bloud∣shed on the Crosse shewed in him no paines nor infirmitie, but only that voluntarily he made him selfe there the true Priest, and pe formed the prefigured bloudy and deadly Sacrifice for the sins of the world. As good reason altogeather you have to say so, as to affirme it of his Agonie.ag. 29. As for the Scriptures which g you cite, they prove in deed that Christ nowe executed his office of Priest∣hoode: but will you "divide & exempt his Death on the Crosse frō his Priesthood?Or his ines and fit mity frō ther? The sanctifying of him self doeth it not as well in∣tend and comprehende that Sacrifice on the Crosse, as that of his Prayers in the Garden? To thinke otherwife is without all shewe of trueth or reason, yet I see not why you should cite these textes, vnles you meant so: neither can I see what els you meane, where you conclude, saying, Christs Agonie being alleaged by the Apostle to demonstrat Christs Priesthood, must not rise frō the ter∣ror of his own death.ag. 27. And yet h a little before you openly doe con∣fesse and grant, that his Agonie did rise from the feare of his death, and that Christ had farre greater cause then any of his members to feare it. Also it is contrary to your citing of Cyrill pag. 25. And heere why should i Hilary deny that Christes bloudy sweat came of infirmitie?ag. 28. Or k Austin, that his feare and perturbatiō was of in∣firmitie?ag. 25. Surely there is no cause. For though it be against the cō∣mon course of our Nature, for any paines or feare to sweat bloud: yet the Divine power with and through paines and feares might wring out of his body that trickling bloudy sweat. As it is plaine
that it did by the wordes next before in the text,Luk. 2 44. An Angell came to give him some comfort, that is, least hee should have bene over∣whelmed quite in his sorrow and discomfort: but still he was in his Agonie, and swet like droppes of bloud trickling to the ground: and presently saieth, My Soule is full of sorrowes even to death, and thrice he prayed that this Cup, and this Hower might passe from him. It cannot be therefore but that by Sorrowes and Paines this sweat came: though also Gods power caused it by laying vpon his Soule and body invisible, supernaturall, & vnspeakeable sorrowes and horrors, and by making his fleshe visibly to expresse in some sort this spirituall and extraordinary torment of paine and feare which he suffered. And in deed where they say,Not Infir∣ty but Po did this. Nec infirmitas, quod potestas gessit, that proveth the cleane cōtrary: For Jdeo & in∣firmitas, quia potestas gessit.2 Therfor there wa firmity, ∣cause th was Pow For the working of his Power in him argueth the suffering of his Infirmitie: The power of God is pefi∣ted in infirmítie. And because it was aboue the course of nature, therefore nature was herein oppressed, not exempted from paines. Thus these speak fully for vs and against you, that heere appea∣red, not Christes infirmity only in suffering, but his Divine power also in punishing. And this I iudge in deed to bee their very mea∣ning. But those other mysticall and figuratiue sayings of Austin,Pag 28. Bede, & Bernard, howe shall we admit them without better war∣rant? That Christes bloudshead was to signifie that Martyrs should shead their bloud, what reason have we so to thinke? Or that his bloud head should signifie the purging of his Disciples hearts frō sinne, yea or of all his Church in the whole world? It did not signi∣fie this, but it did it in deed. Lastly, if it had thse significations in it, yet withall his Agonie might rise from his very Paines & Feare comming from the present sense of Gods iustice and wrath nowe reveald and working vpon him. Hitherto we have made it manifest that in trueth you have no∣thing in all these wordes against our doctrine, that Paines and sor∣rowes were the true and proper cause of Christes dreadfull Agonie: nor to prove that his meere bodily paines or death was the whole Cause. Now we are to shew the like in his most we full Complaint on the Crosse: where he saith My God, my God,Math 27. why hast thou forsaken me? You will aske me heere, what kinde of Forsaking may this be? I shewed you plainlyTreat 1. 6, 65, 6 before, if you had regardd it.
Namely, that Christ being also now (yea specially) in the feeling of infinit Paines inflicted on him sundry wayes,w Christ on  Crosse was saken of d. See also g. 112.113 and that directly frō Gods proper Wrath for our sinnes, he felt his whole Humane nature for the time left all comfortles and alone without any ioy∣ous assistance of his Deitie. I say not, that he wanted now all assi∣stanc of his Deitie: for it surely would then have quite overwhel∣med him with this intollerable burdē. But his Godhead, as it were withdrawing and hiding it selfe from him for that season of his Passion, gave him no sense nor feeling of ease, comfort, or ioy, but all the sense of sorrowes and paines as well in spirit, as in soule and body, that might bee: all the sense of his ioy and comfort for the while being cleane gone and wholy swallowed vp in that huge & bottomles gulfe of sorrowes and paynes issuing vpon him out from the fierce Wrath of God. Howbeit yet even nowe he wanted not sufficient assistance of the Deitie to sustayne him in life heere∣in, as I said.Phil. 2.7. Rom. 8.32. eut. 10 17. c. 16.17. This was that extreeme humiliation and " exinaniti∣on of nature, wherein † God spared not his Sonne, and wherein also Christ spared not him selfe. For hee vndertooke all this most wil∣lingly: and yet being in it naturally grieved and sorrowed for it, & at some moments being astonished with it, suddenly and natural∣ly desired ease and release from it. This forsaking or dereliction be∣seemeth the time, place, person, and case of Christ our Ransom∣payer, and Purchaser of salvation with the price of his owne most direfull paines.Pag. 24. &c r 6. Expo∣ions of hristes Cō∣aint, are all isse. Not any other farre fet, or hardly applyed, or strangely devised by the braynes of men. As in trueth all those o∣ther senses heereof are, which " you rather imbrace. They are 6.  in number. The 1. is, that when Christ on the Crosse cryed out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me, by this word me, he should meane His Church. For the which you have no reason in the world, but the bare names of Austin, Leo, Athanasius. Shew me their reasons,See before ag. 28.29. presse not their authorities. Which " your selfe also reiecteth, when you list: though when you list againe they must be your best, yea your only reason. But even these Fathers if they be vnderstood,Pag 79. as * before I have shewed Cyprians meaning to be: that Christ spake these wordes, as doing now the part of the Suretie of his Church, and as standing in the case of his Children whom now by his suffering paines he saved: then they agree iust with our minde herein. For then doubtles it was for the infinite
paines which now he felt in our steed, that he so cryed out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Otherwise if you thinke they meant that Christ spake this by some strange Metonimy, na∣ming him selfe but meaning his Church: that can have no good sense. For how can it be that we were forsaken of God when Christ was on the Crosse. Nay, even there and then were weAct. 20 purchased vnto God, not forsaken by God. Againe your owne rule is, which I like well, that no Figure is to bee admitted in Scripture where there is no ill nor hurtfull sense following literally. But I have shewed a little before a plaine, easie, and Christian sense heereof, taking it literally: that me signifieth Christes owne person name∣ly his Manhood bearing nowe, as our Suretie, intollerable paines inflicted by Gods wrath vpon him: and so he may mourne & sor∣rowe that he was forsaken, that is left in vnmeasurable paines with out feeling of any comfort or succour for the tyme. Wherefore nei∣ther you nor any of the Fathers ought to conceave that me heere should signifie not Christ properly, but the Church Figurativelie. What other construction you can make heereof, I can not dis∣cerne. Finally, this 1. sense is contrary to your 2. and 3. follow∣ing: also to your 5. and 6. senses. If eyther of these be taken as the true meaning of this place, it cannot possibly stande with the rest: although you allow them all, as by and by we shall manifestly see. Now then your sense, what is it? Even this, that Christs humane  nature was left helples to the rage of the Iewes; which is a kinde of forsaking. This seemeth to come neerest indeed to your liking, by that which I observe inPag. 13 you. But as I said, this is directly contrary to your 1. sense, & to the rest following. AlsoHeere 11.50. before we saw how greatly Christes sufferinges specially on the Crosse differed from such, as the godly doe also suffer. Yea there is surely no reason nor shew of reason, that Christ heere should so mournfully and so vn∣comfortably complaine that God had forsaken him, if it were only but for such distresses as the godly also doe equally suffer at the hands of evill men. Seeing most of thē at the hower of their mar∣tyrdoms doe never vtter any such shew (as Christ heere did) of a minde vncomforted. Where also note this well, that no godly man not Martyr did ever ascribe this forsaking of themselves to God in the time of their martyrdomes. For though then they are op∣pressed with greater violence of bodily enemies, yet they are as∣sisted
with far greater abundance of heavenly comfort, even in the middest of the paines of death. So that they never mourne nor complaine at such extreme dealing, as Christ now did, when hee said my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Wherefore it is a great shame to imagine that Christ was lesse able to indure such a dereliction, or that he would thus complaine and mourne for it only.Pag. 35. The bare names againe of c Austin, Ambrose, Hierom doe heere likewise no good. This is but a weake kind of reasoning for so learned a Divine as you are. Although also these very sentences of the Fathers I can easily admit, if they import no more then they seeme: namely that these outward afflictions on the Crosse were some cause (and that not small) of his complaint, alwayes remem∣bring that some greater cause also did concurre & was conioyned  with them. Your 3. sense if I conceave it a right is, that his being lft to bodily death caused him thus to mourne which is but as the last before. And yet you seeme to meane not onely that, but al∣so because his d flesh now should want all feeling of his heavenly comfort for that while,n that you , His God∣ad depar∣ nowe frō  body, &c. that it should remaine dead. A marvelous exquisit & far fet cause. Yet me thinks, as this crosseth your other expositions heere, so it is flat contrary to the Scripture also: which giveth after a sort to Christs dead Flesh this lively affection,. 2.26.27 e my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou wilt not leave my soule to re∣maine as all other flesh dying doth, in the vnseene worlde of the dead, neither wilt suffer thy holy one to see corruptiō. Is it likely is it possible that he should so dolefully mourne that either he should bodily dy, or that his body should want the sense of his divine pre∣sence so little a while, when as in his mind hee speaketh so trium∣phantly of his constant and continuall ioy in God: yea not exclu∣ding even his body though dead from participating in some sort therein: as we read in the former place at large. I beheld the Lord always before me, for he is at my right hand that I should not be sha∣ken. Therefore did my heart reioyce & my toung was glad, & more∣over my Flesh shallrest in hope, &c. Now can a man in this excee∣ding generall and constant ioy so vncomfortably mourne, in that sense as you vrge, My God my God, why forsakest thou my flesh? It cannot be. Many thinges more may be strongly alleaged against this opiniō. As first: seeing he perfitly knew thath as his flesh now should quietly rest, and have a present ende of all his most bitter
sorrowes, so even all that while & continually after, his soul (which was his best part) should inioy perfit glory and comfort more then before it did: Also seeing this senseles rest of his flesh was to be but for a very little while, & then presently to receave a most glorious and eternall felicity iointly with his Soul and with his Deity, who can imagine that Christ would (now ready to dy) so extreamely mourne and complaine only for this cause, as your fancy impor∣teth? Further he knew perfitly that this was the very appointment of God, and for the fulfilling of Prophesies, for the obtayning of his most desired purchase of our health, for the more advancing of Gods glory, yea and for the more advancing of his very manhood also after so low humiliation. Finally it was his own most free and fore determined will. Would hee then so mournfully grieve and complaine thereat? It hath no reason, nor likelyhood in it.Iohn 1 Laza∣rus when he was returned from the ioyes of heaven to take againe his rotten carcase ofter it stanke having lyen 4. dayes dead in the grave, yet he grieved not at it, neither ought he so to have don. Much lesse ought Christ so to grieve and mourne, for a lesser want and for a shorter season (as we may thinke) then that was to Laza∣rus. But this matter is not worth the speaking ofSee b to this pu pag. 10 any further. Neither doe your Fathers prove any such improbable, yea vnlaw∣full mourning & complayning in Christ. If they prove any thing towardes your meaning, it is this, that he complayned because of his bodily dying. Howbeit they say not that he thus complayned only and meerely for that: neither I thinke will you plainly hold this, neither doe wee deny the other. The truth is they meane he suffered in his whole Humane nature:How the ¦thers are  taken. & namely that he suffered not as God. They strove heere with Haeretikes, whose controver∣sies were far from this our questionHilar.  Trin▪ li.  Hilary andEpiph.  Arioma  Epiphanius wrot against Arius, to prove that Christ in this complaint shewed right∣ly a humane infirmity, and that this was not the voice of a Deity inferiour to the Father, as Arius blasphemed. These Fathers then had no purpose heere to exclude the sufferings of Christes Soule, but only to deny that his Godhead suffered & complayned as be∣ing left to punishment by his Father, when the sorrowes of death began to prevayle against him. The very same dothIn Ma can. 33.  Hilary also where he saith that this in Christ was Corporis vox, the outcry of his body. He plainly meaneth it of his whole manhood, the opposition
being betweene it and his Godhead:reat. 1. g 9. as the Scripture † often doth. And where he saith, he was morte peragendus, to be cōsummated by death: he meaneth that death ended all his suffering, not that hee suffered nothing els but meerely death. And if their words do any where come neere to our question,ertul. cont. ax. ila in Mat. au. 33. as it is very likely that h Tertu∣lian and the one place of i Hilary doth, then surely they are plain∣ly for vs and against you. Tertullian pointeth in this place at cer∣taine Haeresies maintained in his time wherwth it seemeth Praxeas was infected. 1 That the Father suffered aswell as the Sonne when Christ suffered: 2 That the Deity suffered: 3 That Christ was no true nor perfit man. All these pointes Tertullian overthroweth heere, Quid de isto quaeris, &c. What inquire you of Christ? You heere him crying out in his Passion, My God my God why hast thou forsaken me? The Sonne therefore suffered, being forsaken of his Father: but this is meant of the Flesh and of the Soule, that is of the Man, not of the Word nor of the Spirit. Heere it is plaine that Ter∣tullian sheweth besides the rest, this point exactly, that Christ was a very man, in that he had a proper Body and a Soule, and that this his suffering on the Crosse was in both these partes, and so in his whole & intire manhood. Also that he suffered in both these parts even frō his Father.eere pag. 63. at 1. pa 4 But he could not suffer in his Soule frō † God, if he felt only and meerely but a bodily death, as you hold. And to suffer the stroke of Gods hand in his Soule as the proper venge∣ance of sin, is farre more then to feele in Soule by sympathy only the bodies smart. Neither had Tertull. overthrowē but confirmed that Haeresie of Christs being no true natural man, if he had said, that in this case he suffered in Soule only by symphathy with and from the Body. But this is absurd to thinke in Tertullian. There∣fore in this place he is flatly against you. And this Derelictiō of his Father which he speaketh of, is Death indeed to the Sonne. But what death? Forsooth more then the separation of the Soule and Body.at Death e Soule in ist wee ne. Even the seperation of the Deity from the whole manhood: which is the death of the Soule. I speake heere nothing but the Fathers words, yea the Scriptures. Your owne place of Epiphanius saith that nowe his Deity departed from his manhood. So saith your owne Hilary also, Corporis vox contestata recedentis a se Dei dissidium. So saith Ambrose, Clamavit Homo Divinitatis separa∣tione moriturus: The man Christ did cry being about to dy by the se∣paration
of his Godhead. Againe Sequestrata delectatione Divini∣tatis aternae taedio meae infirmitatis afficitur. The ioy of his eternall Godhead being parted away, hee was afflicted with the tediousnis of my infirmitie. Heere the Fathers doe shewe in deed that Christ dyed, but more then a meere bodily death: even the death of the Soule also. For what is the Separation of the Deitie from his Soule els, but the death of the Soule. Howbeit note, I pray, that neither the Fathers, nor I do meane any Separating 1 of the vnion ofThe D & Hum both natures in Christ, nor the Separating 2 of any Holynes or habitu∣all grace of God from his Soule, 3 nor the Separating of Gods love from him,See befo pag. 10 but the Separatiō of all comfortable feeling & assistance of the Godhead, in that he felt not any supporting of his Soule and Body now pierced thorow with the Paines which he felt inflicted by God. This Separatiō is meant, and itThoug haps th thers d this ph rarely. may be called the Death of the Soule. For as it isPsal  life to the Soule to feele and to enioy the glorie of God: So it is death to feele the want and absence thereof vtterly, and the rather being also then overwhelmed with incom∣parable paines. That heavenly life Christ tasted a litle while in his Transfiguratiō: this Hellish Death he felt besides his bodily death vpon the Crosse. And thus Tertull. meaneth heere that not Christs bodily death only made him now thus to cry out, but that death also which was the Separation of his Godhead from both his body & Soule; which is the death of the Soule. And so he saith true: the Dereliction of the Father, is Death to the Sonne. YourPag.  4. Exposi∣tion  for any thing I see may be granted: for it seemeth to bee the same in effect that wee holde. Your place of Cyrill seemeth also to concurre: that Christes words of complaint were the removing of the dereliction which had fallen on vs. Was it removed from vs? then surely it was laid vpon some body els. Now that must needes be vpon him selfe. Where you obiect Athanasius,Cont. A Serm. that He could not be forsaken of his Father, who was alwayes in his Father. It is meerely wrested: Athanasius speaketh against Arius also, that Christes Deitie could not be forsaken of his Father, seeing it is al∣wayes in his Father: and so was not inferior to the Father, which was Arius haeresy. Touching his humanity he denyeth not but God might forsake it: For the Scripture saith so. And in deed he forsooke it by causing in it the feeling of all Paines for sinne, and by leaving it therin for a while all comfortles. Your 5. Exposition
is Leos conceit without warrant, far fetcht, hardly applyed: tha heere Christ putteth vs in minde why God doth often not heare our prayers, but provideth better for vs then if our wils were satisfied: & that this is a mysticall sense.g. 37. a Origen also is heere as weake: that Christ meaneth nothing ells but that hee was abased lower then his divine maiesty.  Also these senses be contrary to all the rest heere observed. Your 6. and last also is likewise as contrary to the rest, and as improbable in it self (or more) then the former. That Christ heere should cite the beginning of that b Psalme,al. 22. only to shew the Iewes that their wrongs towardes him were Prophesied of before. ThisTreat. 1. g 66. already I fully answered, which you refute not. Likewise where you say,g. 65. 66. He sung the whole Psalme: it is d answered. Whein moreover this is to be noted, that surely hee now vttered no more of this Psalme but the 1. verse, Eli, Eli, Lamma sabachtham, For heereby the standers by imagined that he called for Elias. There∣fore he sung not the Psalme. Your authorities are bare arguments. Ierom bringeth no reason but his own word. Chrysostom, I see not what he saith to your purpose at all. Finally those kindes of Dere∣liction which you mention c besides,g 32. 33. &c are nothing fitter then the former. Thus far I have waded in examing your sundry and va∣riable expositions of one poore little plaine sentence of Scripture. At least 6. or 7. divers, yea contrary senses you have brought of a few wordes: 14. & of them all you say, They are f all godly expositions, and † All these interpretations are sound,g 37. and stand well with the rules of Christian pietie. How sound and fit they are, it hath ben seene. But verily you have a good head if you can reconcile all these: and make them stand togeather: and a very bad opinion of the holy Scriptures you seeme to have, if you thinke they may be handled by interpretations and expositions thus, that a man may take them in 6. or 7. divers senses and all iustifiable. Your saying therefore,g. 113. that g you have spoken before asmuch (to this matter) as may content any man that is not fastened to his fancies more then to to the truth, I omit as vaine and frivolous. Now it resteth that I gather some reasons from the expresse Scripture,s for vs to shew you that indeed very paines and the vehemency of sorrowes, namely which hee now sustayned by way of yeelding. Satisfaction and Sacrifice for sinne, were the principall and onely proper Cause of his most dreadfull Agonies & Complaint. Which
truly though it neede no reason for proofe of it, (the matter being so cleere in it selfe) yet your vnreasonablenes is such that it draw∣eth somewhat from me about it. First, No Christian doubteth (I  suppose) much lesse denyeth that Christs most wofull Agonies & Complaining belonged properly and directly to his Passion and Sacrifice: and that they expressed a parte thereof, yea as I thinke not the least parte. But his whole Sacrifice consisted in Afflictions, The Prince of our Salvation was consecrated through Afflictions. Therefore Afflictions Sorrowes and Paines were the Cause of his Agonies and Complaint: not his religious feare, not his Piety or Pity. If you say, These were Afflictions vnto him. I answer, they properly belonged to his Holynes as partes thereof, and were notBefore p See alo  91.9. immediatly directly nor properly in him as the Wages & Price of sinne: as his whole Passion was, and every part thereof. Againe that these should, or could afflict Christe so much above his strength and patience, it is more then strange. Yea also it were no vertu but sinne in any, to give way to our Affections (though a∣bout good thinges) immoderatly beyond our patience & strength of nature. Lastly though they somwhat molest the minde, yet in truth they are most pleasing and delightfull to good men, not te∣dious, much lesse painfull vnto death. Therefore you do very ill to make these partes of Christs Holines to be proper partes of his sa∣tisfaction, and the maine Causes of his Agonie and Complaint. And worse you doe if you ascribe themPag. 27 & 115. not to any Paines in him at all. Secondly, The summe of thesePag 90. forenoted Texts must be  considered: namely that Christe expresly wished sundry times in his dreadfull astonishment suddainly even against Gods knowen will in one respect, though allwayes after his knowen will in ano∣ther respect, as afterward wee shall see. And heere are expressed (with his strange Astonishment) his mighty Sorrowes, and Feare of them, partly felt and partly further to come. YouPag. 9. skip this Feare when you reckon but 4. kindes: For this was neither a reli∣gious care, nor doubtfull feare, nor desperat nor damned feare, but a right Naturall feare in Christ. Which was as I said for the infinit∣nes of his sorrowes partly now revealed, and partly further to bee laid vpon him afterward. Whence also his sweating drops of bloud trickling downe from him, and his intolerable Agonie, and his com∣fort receaved by an Angell from heaven that now in this his wofull
discomfort ministred vnto him: and his complaying on the Crosse that his Father had forsaken him: finally all his prayers and suppli∣cations with teares and strong cryes against that death which he fea∣red. Now all these things we see in Christ, came because of his sor∣rowes and Paines in his Passion, not for his zealous Holines and Sanctification.l 51.11.2.8. David wāted somtime the present feeling of Gods comfortable spirit, and mourned dolefully for the want of it, albe∣it yet hee were not destitute of his spirit indeed: which also him∣selfe knew well enough. And thus did Christ even in his greatest plunge of wo: for then he called God his God resolutly. Neverthe∣les, he being infinitly more punished then David, nature could not but suddainly cast out that affection (which yet was meerely naturall in him) to wish ease, and release of his vnmeasurable and  intollerable paines. Third: Adde heere vnto, Christs own expresse words,Ioh. 12.27. ark 14.35 when in this season he prayeth, that a this Hower and This Cup may passe from him. That which This Hower and This Cup do signifie, the same is the proper & principall cause of his Agonie. But what can bee meant by This Hower, vnles the Paines of his suffering set and appointed by God for him to beare at this deter∣mined time from Gods Iustice for sinne? What is this Cup, but the bitter tast of the same Paines aforesaid? This I hope was not his Holines and sanctification which so troubled and molested him:  not his Piety nor his Pity. Nay, finally he himselfe expresseth the true Cause, even his excessive Paines, his overabounding Sorrowes and anguish: saying, My Soule is full of paines or full of sorrowes even vnto death. Heere hee nameth the Cause. For which Cause also, even of intolerable and vnsupportable sorrowes and paines it must needes be that he cryed at his end, My God, my God, why hast thou for saken me? This then manefestly was the only proper and principall cause of Christes most dreadfull Agonies and per∣plexity in his Passion, even excessive Paines, and the intire want of feeling of Gods comfort,Pag. 17. and nothing els. How hard soever b you make it (I c know not why) to shew the proper & principall cause thereof.Treat. 1. Pag. 72. And heere wee will remember againe what is taught by Authority in England. The rather for that you take on as a man impatient, because I doe affirme that our doctrine, (not yours) hath the publike Authorie for it.Pag. 334. You d call it an egregiously, an insolent and impudent speach, well becomming an alehouse. &c.
And yet in the verie nextPag.  page in plaine termes you graunt the same to bee taught in our Homily of Christes Passion: for you say thus the Hom: teacheth, The Justice of God pursu∣ed Christe with most paynefull smart and anguish even vnto death: and forced the weaknes of his humane flesh to cry, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Heere I am sure you think not that our Homelie maketh Christs Pietie or Pitie, nor yet his meere Bodily paine to force him thus farre. Nor in those wordes next following there,Hom  Pass. 2. O that Mankinde should put the everlasting Sonne of God in such paines for the grievousnes of our sinnes. And in trueth that the Homily is farre from both these your meanings, I have plainly shewedPag. 6 before. Adde heerevnto the full and large declaration heereof in the authorised Catechisme:Nowe techis Christ suffe∣red not only a common death in sight of men, but àlso was thorough∣ly touched with the horror of eternall death: he fought and wrastled as it were hand to hand with the whole army of Hell: before Gods iudgement seat he put him selfe vnder the heavy and grievous seve∣ritie of Gods punishment: he was driven to most hard straights: hee suffered for vs and went through horrible feares, and moct bitter sor∣rowes of the minde that he might in all things satisfye the iust iudge∣ment of God & appease his wrath. For to sinners whose person Christ did heere beare, not only the sorrowes and tormentes of present death are due, but also of death to come and everlasting: So when hee did take vpon him and beare both the guiltines and iust paine of Man∣kinde damned and lost, he was affected with so grievous feare, trou∣ble and sorrowe of the minde or soule, that he cryed out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Finally the Annotation of our greatBibl. 1591. &  Bible authorized and appointed to be read in our Churches, iustifyeth all this saying,Anno Luk. 2 Christ here felt the horror of Gods wrath and iudgement against sinne. I pray, who is that Egregious lyar now? I hope for my part I have spoken the truth in avouching my doctrine & that forenoted Proposition & Assumption also, by you denyed, to be our publike doctrine and fully authorized in En∣gland. Wherefore you may meane some other to bePag.  a giddy Spi∣rit lately buzzing in the peoples eares the cōtrary: I hope I am clear from it. And thus it remayneth that we conclude even our whole Reason to be firme & true, which isPag. 9 before delivered. The paines of Christes Passion which now he felt and feared, were the principall
and proper cause of those his Agonies. But his meere Bodily Paines and death, or the feare of them, caused no such things and lamenta∣ble effectes in Christ: much lesse did his Pietie and Pitie. There∣fore Christ felt and feared Paines more, and infinitly greater, then meere Bodily paine and death: which were the principall and pro∣per Cause of this strange plight in him. Which consequently can be none other by necessary reason, then the Paines and sense of Gods wrath in his spirite properly. Therefore Christ suffered that also: and not only in Body, as you hold. Howbeit you have yet heere and there some exceptions against this our doctrine which are not to be cleane neglected. First, you say,ag. 290. a I extend Chistes Agonie too farre: because I will have it proceed from b the intollerable sorrowes and horrors of Gods fyrie wrath equall to Hell.Treat. 1. g 80. I shew not there the Cause of Christes Ago∣nie and Feare: I shewed it of purpose in the c beginning. Why did you not refuse that?Treat. 1. ag 6 7 You ought to have dealt directly against that which I expresly mention to have ben the cause. Thus I said, His Sorrowes and sufferings for the redemptiō of sinnes, The Cup of Af∣fliction and sorrowe which now he felt and was to feele yet further, Caused him to mourne and feare. Say then plainly, that this Cause is mistaken, and too farre extended: or els you say nothing to vs, but by indirect and paeposterous collectiō. Now if this Cause which we gave and doe give, be true and right, (as I hope it is before pro∣ved more then sufficiently) then I doubt not it is as true also by invincible reason, that Christ suffered the intollerable sorrowes & horrors of Gods fyrie wrath equall to Hell. Which I hope also is as fully proved:g. 91. 117 being the effect of our d Assumption before. Seeing it could not be his meere Bodily paines (much lesse his Holy Af∣fections, as you hold) that brought him to this miraculous mise∣rie and distresse, wherein wee see by the Text hee was. Therefore they were the intollerable and incomprehensible dolours of his Spirit (questionles) which wrought the same. There is no other sorrow in the world to be found which can be imagined to be the Cause possibly.ag. 290. And then my other wordes also which e heere you cruelly cōdemne, shall stand well enough, * That Christ as touch∣ing the vehemency of paine was as sharply touched as the Reprobats themselves,reat. 1. g. 81. yea if it may be more extraordinarily. Though you la∣bour with might and maine to make them amount to Haeresie &
open blasphemie. But why do you not bend your odious outcryes and accusations against that Authority before truly cited, whiche maintayneth the same so fully and amply as I deliver it? You doe wisely to dissemble your enmitie to all them, and yet never∣theles by me to smite and wounde them. Howbeit what reason have you against our Assertion? Verily onely this you oppose, becausePag. 29 292. all the sorrowes of the Reprobat are but sinfull guiltines of conscience or feares of iudgement for seene, which is executedPag. 14 only in the next life: you meane onely in the definit and locall Hell. Which yet is no refutation of my assertiō, that Christ was as sharply touched with paine as the very Reprobats. For though the wicked in this world did never suffer any reall effect of God burning wrath working actuall vengeance on their Soules for sinne, but only some guilty remorse or feare and nothing els, yet this letteth not but that Christ whom God ordayned extraordinarily, & alone, to be in this life a whole and absolut burnt Sacrifice for all sin, did feele and suffer the same truly, properly, and perfitly. Sec: How I have alwayes expresly excluded fromAs being Extraoro¦ry sufferer ChristLikewise  those your  thinges  Hell pag. 49. The Rept bats doe so¦time here  a reall tast  Hell paines all sinful adherēts or consequents in paines and feares, which are in the wicked: and doe resemble his to theirs only and meerely in sharpnes and vehe∣mency of paine, I have often declared before. Thirdly, the case is cleere enough that the Reprobat many times in this life doe not only feare the iudgment to come, but also do feele some reall and actuall impression of Gods burning wrath, and even of Hell tor∣ments, though not being yet in the locall Hell. For proofe where∣of, that which beforeTreat 1. pag 46. I alleaged out ofIob 6.4. Iob, andEph. e. 6.  16. Ion. 2. others, that even the godly heere want not experience of the sorrowes of Hell sometimes, you passe over answering nothing therevnto. Which yet being so in the godly, it must needes be in Cain, Iudas, and the Reprobats, far more direful & intollerable somtimes. As also their own confession, and behaviour do sundry times testifie in this life: Againe the Divels are many timesMat. 8 2 32. Eph. 2. & 6.12. out of the locall Hell, as when they are in this world. But the Divells are2 Pet. 2.4 never released of Hell sorrows. Therefore the true sorrows of Hell are even in this world: and then possibly may be inflicted on wicked men as they are on the Divells which are sometime out of the locall Hell. Lastly the true ioyes of Heaven may be out of the local Heaven: as when the glorious Angells have ben and taryed some while heere on earth
with men. Yet did they never for a moment want the ioyes and glory of Heaven. And if Angells may inioy Heaven really beeing in this world,e Godly ay have a t heere som nes of Hea∣nly ioyes. then is it possible by Gods goodnes to communicat some reall foretast thereof even vnto some blessed men also. Fur∣ther that God doth thus indeed i reveale som reall tast of his Hea∣venly ioyes to his chirdren even in this life, I have k shewed alrea∣dy, but am not answered.Cor. 2.9.10. Treat. 1. pag. 80 Yea the Transfiguration of Christ on the Mount declareth that some reall part of Heavenly glory may bee heere on earth,Pag. 115. which your selfe l somewhere confesseth cleane m against your self.Pag. 337. 338. Only this n you have to obiect touching men, that we heere doe but hope and ioyfully beleeve.Pag 338. Nowe faith and hope is the o evidence of thinges not seene:Hebr. 11.1. neither are our grea∣test ioyes the same nor equal to them which we shal possesse in the next world. I answere, our Reasons before doe prove more then onely Hope in the faithfull somtimes. Sec: It is true the Apostle saith that heere wee walke by faith and live by hope.Cor. 5.7. This is the general state of the godly in this life: also it is spoken in Cōparison of the life to come, which in truth infinitly exceedeth, & lasteth. Yet some rare exceptions doe not overthrow the generall course: and heere may be notwithstanding some particular instant times when some reall sense may be revealed to the godly.esame in ature, not in easure, wt albe heere∣ter. As there was vnto Christ in the mount, which was to him not onely a ioyfull hope, but a reall tast of his very Heavenly ioyes. Likewise the god∣ly somtime may tast of it in their measure, & yet they may gene∣rally in the course of their whole life walke by faith, without that actual sense which I speak of, saving still a most ioyfull remēbrāce of it. Again, though we are not to doubt but that the reall sense of Heavenly ioyes heere and heerafter are the very same in nature (as in the examples before we have seene) yet I say heereafter we shall receave vnspeakeable increase farther and above this that we tast heere. 1. When we shall have all darknes & corruption taken from vs, wherwith now we are compassed and clogged all this life long. 2 When the fullnes of Gods appointed time shall come for it, then will he of purpose reveale himselfe and his glory vnto vs as it were with open face, which heere is don but vnder a vayle: and specally then when our bodies also in the Resurrection shalbe conioyned with our soules in glorie. 3 When we shall eternally in∣ioy and possesse the same, which heere in this life is but now and
then revealed vnto vs, in such persons, times, maner, and measure as the Lord shall thinke good. Thus we graunt the ioyes of Hea∣uen heere, are nothing equall to those heereafter: only we say the very same in nature may be and are by the effectuall working of Gods gracious spirit in his elect revealed in some measure, & som∣time, evē in this world. Neither is this (as your charitie speaketh) any lewd or wicked error. Now then if more then Hope only, evē Heavenly ioyes may be on earth, surely it followeth; that like wise more then Feare, even Hellish paynes them selues may be in men on earth also, and not in the locall Hell onely. And if Hell paynes in this world may be in any, much rather may they haue bene in Christ: whom God purposely sentHebr. 2. through paynes and afflictions (the extreamest that might be) to be consecrated the Prince of our salvation. If you saye, yet thus it will followe that the extreamest paines of Hell are not to be foūd in this world, as the highest ioyes of Heaven are not likewise, by my confession. Wherefore Christ could not bee so extreamely punished (any thing neare) as the damned be in Hell, no not for any moment: which yet my, conceit (as you call it) doeth reach vnto. I aunswer, I knowe not, neither meane I to determine the measure and depth of sorrowes which Christ in his Passion suffered: as also it is not possible to define that glorie which hee tasted of (for the time) in the mount. Only graunt this plainly, that Christ suffered in his soule the true effects of Gods proper Iustice or wrath: and we seeke no more. Graunt this I say, and then we will see further (if you will make it a que∣stion) whether the sense of payne in Christ was lesser for the time, then that which is eternall in the damned: and whether the true and proper wrath of God taking full vengeance of sinne heere in this world, might not be as sharpe and violent as the sharpest tor∣ment in Hell, yea the very shame which is in Hell the sharpest. Truely, though Christ suffered all (which hee did suffer) heere in this world, yet for any thing I can see, there is cause why Christ should be an Extraordinarie person in the case of Suffering for sinne in this life: and that therfore, as touching sorrow and paine, he might feele more then ever any els hath or could feele for the time. You seeme to graunt vnto ChristPag. 2 all naturall sorrowe and feare. Neither doe wee seeke any more. But you trust the payne of the Damned is more then a naturall oppressing and afflicting of the
heart with humane feare & sorrow. Forsooth it is not. It is no more then a very natural humane sorrow & feare. It proceedeth imme∣diatly and principally from God him selfe: who is the Nature of natures. Also Humane nature is apt to receyue such sorrow & fear from him. Thus the very paynes of the Damnedare meerely na∣turall. Yet supernaturall I graunt they are, if we meane this, that they are aboue our natures state to beare or to cōprehend them. This therefore hitherto is a very slight exception against our do∣ctrine before delivered. The next is as vaine,Pag. 296. where a you thinke it not tolerable that I say,Treat 1. ag 59. Christ b in playne words prayed contrary to Gods knowen will. I pray haue patience: I saye no harme, nor meane no ill. Did not Christ in plaine wordes pray,aek. 14.35 c That, if it were possible this Hower might passe from him:Ioh. 1.27. and before, d Father; save me frō this hower. By this Hower he meaneth this his paine & punishment appoin∣ted him by God for to suffer at that time. And this Christe knew well, seeing he saith presently, But therfore I came into this hower. Doeth he not then pray in plaine words cōtrary to Gods knowne will? Therefore never skoffe at it, nor reproch it, nor wrest it. We ought not to bee ashamed to acknowledge that weaknes of Humane nature in Christ, which Christ was not ashamed of for our sakes to vndergo. If this could not be possibly in Christes Manhood without sin, then I were a wretch to affirme so much of him; especially stil to affirm it. But if it be possible by any means, thorow the meere instinct of mans Nature, (as it is Gods creature and free from all sinne) thus to speake and to wish suddainly, and suddainly to controll it againe, as Christ did: then what minde beare you, and how may we iudge of this your striving, which is not to cleare Christ from all sinne in his Agonie. For that we doe all, and Nature it selfe witnesseth with vs that in such a case as he now was in, this was nothing strang to be thus perplexed, & mo∣ved. But your striving seemeth to be altogither to exempt Christ∣man from our meere naturall affections and infirmities: and to give him Humane flesh indeed, but not such as ours is in all and every point, except onely sinne. You will say, If hee knew it to be Gods will and prayed against it, how could he want sinne? I an∣swer, He knew it; but at this instāt he cōsidered it not, he thought not on it: and so his suddaine desire may bee cleere from sinne. But why thought hee not on it? or how could hee choose but
think on that which he well knew, and did so greatly concerne him? I answer, His Paines and sorrowes being so great and so in∣finit as they were, not in his Body onely but chiefly in his very Spirit and Minde, and these more extreamely revealed vpon him now at these instant times, then they were otherwise or continu∣ally, as by the effects of them in him we may perceave. I say, these things acknowledged & wel wayghed as they ought to be, then it is easy to shew why, & how Christ came thus affected, & yet with∣out sin. First, he was nowEkthamb istha, is to astonished v eare. Ma. 1.33. astonished as the text saith: and youPag 124. ac∣knowledge that he might be. Sec: these incōprehensible sorrowes & incomparable paines astonished him: yea impossible it was but his meere humane nature must be astonished with them. And it is vtterly vntrue which you say,Pag. 196. Many things might astonish our Saviour for the time besides such paines. In these instant times of his Passion, nothing could astonish him but Paines and Sorrowes. Wch beforePa. 115.1 I have proved, or at least that Paines & Sorrowes now did chiefly: & that nothing could possibly without such Sorrowes and Paines as these, which I speake of: even spirituall, and infi∣nit, and incomprehensible paines, proceeding from Gods Iustice vpon him for our sinnes. Thirdly, Adde heerevnto that which you rightly grant,Pag. 12. It is true that a mighty feare may so affect a man for the time, that it shall hinder the senses from recovering themselves, and stop the faculties from informing one the other. But this must be some suddain obiect astonishing the heart, and so terrible, that it suffereth vs not presently to gather our wits togither, and to consider of it. Likewise very fully afterward,Pag. 29. Astonish∣ment draweth the minde so wholy to think on some speciall thing a∣bove our reach, that during the time we turne not our selves to any other cogitation. Even as the eye, if it be bent intentively to behold any thing, for that present it discerneth nothing els: So fareth it with the Soule, if she wholy addict her selfe to think on any matter, she is amused; if it be more them she conceaveth, or more fearfull then she well indureth, she is amazed or astonished: but not of necessity so, that she looseth either sense or memorie: only for that time she con∣verteth neither to any other obiect. Now thus Christ being asto∣nished with sorrows and feare lost not either sense, memory, or vn∣derstanding, much lesse his vertues and graces, being cast into an infernall confusion, as you vntrulyPag. 289. charg me that I say. But I say,
as you say, He now on the suddaine might turne neither sense nor memory to any other obiect, and so not think on any thing ells, but only on this terrible and mighty sorrow & feare, which now smote him & bruized him to pieces. And thus for the very suddaine he might not think at all vpon Gods will, and his owne certaine pur∣pose to suffer this very same, or that he was to suffer it longer: but only on the intolerablenes of the paines and wo, which instantly he felt. Now Natures very instinct is, in such dolours to wish and desire ease, and the more vehemently it is pinched, the more ear∣nestly it desireth: and this is Gods owne gift and workmanship in nature, and simply thus to desire, is in this respect truly to be rec∣koned Gods owne expresse will. And thus for the suddaine not remembring, nor thinking on Gods particular will otherwise, but feeling the instinct of nature in such a case only wishing ease to it self, he prayeth rightly That this Hower & This Cup might passe frō him. Wherein yet I say he prayeth in one respect against Gods known wil, but in an other respect even according to his will. Ac∣cording to his wil which now he had sense of, even to wish release & ease frō such deadly sorrows and feare: contrary to his particu∣lar wil being this that he must yet further suffer them. Which (as I said) suddenly being astonished he remēbred not, he thought not vpon it. Lastly it was contrary in the outward words, & in the par∣ticular affection of his minde now wanting this remembrance: but it was fully and wholy according to Gods will in the generall disposition of his minde and whole man. As appeared by his pre∣sent applying himselfe with all readines even to this most dolo∣rous obedience of Gods will, foorthwith so soone as hee recolle∣cted himself: saying Not my will, but thy will be don. Where even this also sheweth, that before Gods will and his in some respect were contrary, but absolutly now they agree. If you abhorre this in me, yet see what Chrisostom taught, a These wordes (Not as I will, but as thou wilt) do signifie 2. Wills, (saith he) one of the Father another of the Sonne,Ioan Con∣stantinop in Theodoret. Dial. 3. contrary the one to the other. Igraunt M. Beza vseth som termes differing from ours, yet his sense is the selfsame with ours.Bez. Annot.  mat. 26. He said b Christ corrected not his speach as if he had be∣fore spoken amisse. I say, He did correct his speach: not mending it as being any whit amisse, but making it being good to be better. That is by shewing his generall conformitie to Gods will now more particu∣larly,
and distinctly. Which sentenses in effect and indeed do not differ: and this latter, I think, may well be called a correcting, no lesse then the former. Also he saith, The Humane and Divine will are not Contrary, but Divers. I vnderstand even Differing from Gods will, to be Contrary. Namely in that particular respect wherin the difference is. For otherwise now there may be a general perfit conformitie to Gods will, as is before said. Neither is this particu∣lar contrariety to Gods will any sinne, namely when by Gods own ordinance we know not what Gods special will is, so that we alwayes remaine apt & ready therevnto when we know it. So did David2 Sam. 1 16. desire the life of his Child. It was contrary to Gods wil one way: as the event shewed, for the Child dyed. Yet he prayed well and rightly according to God will in natures affection, seeing hee knew not Gods secret will to the contrary, neither was to have knowne it before the event. And thus likewise stood the case with Christe at this season. His suddaine Not remembring Gods particular will (by reason of his fearfull astonishment) was all one as if he had not known it at all (yea thus also he ought not to haue knowen it) for that instant. Namely, seeing this Not remē∣bring and not thinking thereon came not of any negligence or de∣fault in him, but only and meerely by Natures infirmitie (Gods own ordinance) which could not possibly but faile vnder such in∣finit violence of paines. This M. Beza calleth Divers rather then Contrarie to Gods will: but in effect it is the same, and he plain∣ly meaneth even there all one with vs. You sayPag.  I am captious a∣gainst Christ in not supplying one Evangelist with another. For so Christes desire wil appeare to be but Conditionall, therefore not Contrary to Gods will. Yes, nevertheles; as touching the desire it selfe and his particular present inclination cōpared to Gods parti∣cular determination heerein. And so was also Davids forenoted desire for his childs life: yea BalaamsNumb 19. bad desire was such in this point. These were all Conditionall, yet contrarie to Gods particu∣lar will. Heerein stood the difference: Balaam then knewe Gods will was otherwise, at that tyme when he inclined after his owne minde. David simply knew not, Christ also knew not (that is, he remembred not) at that instant the contrary. Therefore Ba∣laams desire though Conditionall and with reservation (as it see∣med) of God will, was nevertheles wicked and against God: his
conditionall words excused not the opposition of his Will against Gods Wil. Yea, in this case when we perfitly know and remember Gods certaine will, every light affection and suddaine wishing to the contrary, (howsoever conditionally) is no lesse then manefest sinne against God. But in David and Christ heere the case is not so, as before I noted. Their desires indeed were, & ought to haue ben conditionall: for who knoweth not, that all good prayers and desires for temporall things must bee conditionall, that is with re∣servation of Gods will alwayes implyed, though not alwayes ex∣pressed? And albeit they were conditionall yet they might be and were contrary, as also I have shewed. Yea the very nature of all Cōditional desires is such, that it includeth evermore a possibili∣ty (at least) of being cōtrary to his wil, whom we desire. And there∣fore we vse somtime expresly to qualifie our desire, saying, Jf thou wilt, and Jf it please thee, &c. Now thus was Davids and Christs: yea not only possible to be contrary, but contrary indeede, as the sequele shewed. Howbeit both their desires were nevertheles holy,ag. 298. † made in faith, assured to receaue, (as cōdicional desires may be) directed aright, prepared sufficiently: yet onely for this cause, seeing David simply knew not Gods contrary wil: Christ knew it not at that instant. Howbeit the truth is, Christ could not but now know and remember it very well, if hee were not at this in∣stant grievously astonished. Neither could he be so astonished and wofully distressed in his Soule, without that intolerable and infinit waight of sorrowes before spoken of. Therefore briefly, so it was doubtlesse with him at that season. All in vaine then you charge mee that I " streth the Scriptures beyond their wordes and the trueth,g. 289. when in my discourse I shew that Christ in the garden was astonished & grievously perplexed: the text ha∣ving onely, He began to be astonished and grievously perplexed. I graunt the text is so. But thinke you, that phrase in Scripture sig∣nifieth a begging only, & no further proceeding at all? It is writ∣ten,rk. 6.34. a He began to teach them many things. Also, b And Iesus aun∣swered them and began to say,. 13.5. Take heede least any man deceave you,. 10.45. &c. And c He began to cast out them that solde in the Temple, 1.1. &c. And d All that which Iesus began to doe and teach.. 24.2 And, e Ter∣tullus began to accuse Paul, saying, &c. It were very simple to say that the Scripture meaneth these things were only begun, and
no more. Nay verily, they were heere don to the full. Againe, as Christ was indeed astonished & grievouslie perplexed, so he did at the first but begin to be thus, and then afterwards grew to the full. Now these degrees and proceedings of Christ in his sorrorwes, & that they were not at the highest at once, this worde heere he be∣gan may very well signifie. For the text following doth invincibly shew that he did fully come to the extreamity of astonishment, & began not only. For did he but begin when hee swet clotted bloud trickling from his body to the ground? Also when an Angell was sent from Heaven to refresh and comfort him: did he then but begin to be heavy? Againe when most moornfully he complained that his Soule abounded with sorrowes even vnto death: Finally when he 3. severall tymes prayed to his Father with strong crying, teares, and feare, that the Cup of Gods punishments now given him to drinke, might passe from him if it were possible, which at other tymes he most perfectly knew that it neyther could nor should escape him: wherevnto may be added that at last when he so dole∣fully complayned that his God had forsaken him; was hee now all this while but begining to be troubled and sad? You would have mademe ashamed of it, if I had had any such thought in my minde. Wherfore the text is no way abused as you pretend in that after he began, I shew frō these places that he grew to be mightily astonished & grievously perplexed. As for Ierom, if he deny this, I must crave leaue to dissent from him. I bring (you say)Pag. 29 a fardell of phrases to expresse his Agonie, he was amazed, astonished, for∣getfull, distempered, overwhelmed, and all confounded in the powers of his soule, and senses of his body? Yea, and I thinke all to little sufficiētly to expresse our Lords sufferings for vs. All those words wch I vsed and many mo cannot shew all that vnspekeable vehe∣mēcy of Sorrow, which now cast him into such a plight. So far of it is, thatPag. 28 I do the Lord of glory wrong: when I labour but to shew how he loved vs, and to what basenes of our nature he submitted him self for our sake. For al these are but meere effects of natures infirmitie, if it be oppressed with any infinit sorrow & feare. See∣ing then Christ might be and was nowe thus infinitly afflicted (as we have shewed) why should we feare to acknowledge extreame Effectes in him, where we have extreame Causes. Nay, God for∣bid that we should reioyce in any thing so much, neither can wee
praise & magnify him for any thing so highly, as we may & ought for this extreame " abasing of Christe for vs. Pilip. 2.. Remember your owne wordes out of Austin: that there is in som men Insipiens ho∣norisicentia, a fond intent of honoring Christ. If there be any such, surely this is one point thereof which you maintaine. Mr Calvin, a worthy Minister of Christ,alvin ath. 6. and a pillar of the Church, is bolde and saith: Fatemur certe hanc esse crucis stultitiam quae scandalo∣est superbis hominibus. We consesse indeed such is the basenes and folly of Christes Crosse, that proud men cannot away with it. In an∣other place where I shewed from the more to the lesse,eat. . pa. 57 howe Christe might have (for the suddain) the powers of his minde astonished, and yet no decay in him of faith, nor of obedience, nor of patience, nor of loue; like as there is not in a man benummed & bound in his senses more then Christ was; namely in a man a sleepe or amazed with a violent blow on the head. For thus any rea∣sonable man would haue conceaved me: seeing who would ima∣gine that I thought Christ now to be altogeather so without sense as one that sleepeth or that lyeth in a swoune? Heerevpon you aske me skoffingly,Pag. 299. a was Christ a sleepe, or in a swoune? b cast in∣to a traunce,Pag. 120. or c in a fit of a Lethargie. But what I doe thinke of Christs Agonie I haue said before.Pag. 121. Indeed, as d you grant that A∣mazednes and Astonishment commeth naturally from sorrowes and feares: and that,Pag. 293. both in these causes and effects there be divers degrees: so I thinke in Christ both the one and the other was in the extreamest and most violent degree that might be. And there∣fore no marvaile though his Astonishmēt were far greater, then is to be seene in any man ells that ever was or shalbee. The Lorde made Solomon to excell all others in e wisedome,1. Chro. 1.12. and riches, and treasures, and honour, so, that there hath not ben the like among the Kings which were before him, neither after him shall there bee the like. Of Christ (I iudge) we may altogither as truly and as fully say, that the Lord made him so subiect to infirmities & to suffering of sorrows that there hath not ben the like among mē which were be∣fore him, neither after him shall there be the like. And yet none of those your former imputations are true.Pag. 300. But f for my life I cannot answer this that followeth, All that Christ suffered was and must be meritorious with God. The suffering of Hell paines which a∣stonish and confound all the powers of the Soule and senses of the
Body, neither was, nor could be meritorious with God. Therefore Christ suffered not such paines as did astonish and confound his bo∣dily senses, and powers of his Soule. I deny your Assumption. Not only all Christs paines were meritorious, but even all his very in∣firmities also: his wearines, his hunger, his sleepe, and so his asto∣nishment & amazednes (being in him but a meere natural weak∣nes and infirmity) was exceeding meritorious in him and highly accepted with God. Man hath his meere infirmities all agree∣able to Gods will: but Christ directly and properly glorified God in and by them more then can bee vttered, I say, in every point whatsoever of his Humane infirmity and basenes, wherevnto hee humbled himselfe. If it seeme a hard phrase which in my former Treatise I vsed, saying Christ at this instant became forgetfull of that which before he knew: my meaning is (and so still I speake now) he remembred not, he considered not. Which many times wee vse to name forgetting: but indeed strictly and properly it is rather not remembring. Where you wouldPag. 296. wring out a contrariety in my wordes, as if I had said: That Christ being in the depth of his astonishment did then perfitly know that the dominion of death should not hold him: you doe mee wrong, I say not so. In that place I argue from your suppositiō, that if Christ were now not a∣stonished, but in his perfit memory and full considering of such thinges (as you seeme to affirme, but I deny) which otherwise hee knew well, then it could not be the Dominion of death that hee thus feared, sith in his firme estate he knew perfitly that it should not prevaile over him. To conclude this matter: thus we may see how without colour of reasonPag. 297. you wrest a plaine text, which o∣therwise taken (as it lyeth) maketh strongly against you. They are our Saviours Christs owne words,Ioh. 12. Now is my soule troubled: & what shall I say? Father save me from this hower: but therfore came J vnto this hower. You say these words do import a Deliberation of 2. partes. But you speak against all reason, considering the nature and frame of the very words. A Deliberation must needes bee set interrogatively in both clauses, thus: What shall I say? Father, save me from this hower? Now the text is not so: it pretendeth a plaine resolution, or at least a great inclining toward resolution, thus: Father, save me frō this hower. It can not be a Deliberation. Chrysostom and Epiphanius do descant about it, trying how the
text may beare such a meaning: but it cannot stand being so evi∣dently against the course of the text.Chrysost. b; Lacet turbatio dee  serva contrari∣ tamen o. You say, S. Iohn beere spea∣keth of another time and place. What then? Yet he may speake of the same matter, namely of his Passion, or of a Foretast thereof. Which indeed the text it selfe m sheweth that he did speake of. Wherefore neither can we deny,oh. 12.31..33. & all titers heer∣pon. but this place of Scripture (even as the other about his Praying in the Garden) doth surely con∣firme that his Passion was more then meere bodily, which did so miraculously terrifie him. It could be no lesse then the paines of the infinit wrath of God vpon his Soule. Hence also I reasoned ef∣fectually n before,Treat. 1. pa. 1. 63. but no where you answer it; If Christs such suf∣feringes in his Soule were ordayned of God for him, then most certainly indeede he did suffer the same. Nowe we see such suffe∣rings were ordained for him: seeing he saith, but therefore came I vnto this hower. Therefore most certainly indeed hee did suffer them, at one time or other. Yet further you except,Pa. 22 23. oo, &c where you avouch that this was a Feare of Eternall death and Euerlasting damnation which caused in Christ this Agonie: and from his feare he was deliuered. Ergo, hee suffered not that which he feared. First I graunt indeed this was the 2. Death, the death of the soule, or Hell tormentes which Christ heere b feared: neither can this by any meanes be denied, as anon we shall see. Howbeit to say (as you do) that it was Eternall death and Euerlasting malediction which heere Christ thus woefully & distresfully feared, is the strangest speach in Divinitie that ever I heard. See: you can not helpe youe selfe in making Christes feare of this Death to be onely a c religious feare,Pag. 23. & d a feare for others. These imaginations I haue removed e before.Pag 304. Every Reader will easily see in his owne iudgemēt that these affections so vehement were not likely at this season,Pag 93 94. &c. nor likely in him at all, much lesse likely to be Causes of such Effectes. Againe these are not Feare properly: they ought rather to bee called (as they are) a religious Care, Commiseraetion and pitie. Which differ greatly from the na∣ture of Feare properly taken, such as we ought to cōceave in this place.Pag. 305. You thinke the f nature of eulabia will not admit any pro∣per Feare, & namely no perplexed Feare, as I take it heere to sig∣nifie: but a carefull & diligent regard to beware and decline that which we mislike or doubt. What say you? Did Christ doubt Eter∣nall
Damnation, and therefore Feared it? you speak so darklie, that I know not how to take you. But it may be you meane hee him selfe misliked it only, and was sorry for others who ran head∣long into it. But all this still is nothing els save Piety in him pro∣perlie: yea and so you say this cometh nearest to the signification of the Greek word. I graunt it doeth touching Eulabia: but in Mark thelktham bertha. word doth import properly Feare, and that in extreamitie. Againe touching Eulabia; my reason that heere it signifieth Feare properly, yea a perplexed feare, and not not only a religious devo∣tion as you say, is groūded not so much on the nature of the word, as on the Circumstances and the other words of this Text:Heb. 5.7 Christ in the dayes of his flesh offered vp prayers and supplications with strong crying and teares vnto him that was able to save him from Death, and was heard in that which he feared. Heere these other words doe shewe that this Feare was more then a carefull regard to beware that which he misliked: it was no lesse in deed then a per∣plexed and troubled feare wofully dreading that which he was to suffer. Which also the strange and wonderfull signes thereof in the Garden do more then cōfirme: as I haue shewedPag. 11 116. 127 often. Thus my meaning is that the nature of eulabia admitting the sense som time of Feare properly, admitteth heere this sense, yea of neces∣sitie it must admit it for the reason noted aboue. Howbeit I grant the Apostle may intend this also by the nature of this worde, that Christ notwitstanding all this dreadfull feare, yet (being meerely naturall in him) it declined not a jot from Piety nor from a most reverend regard of obedience to God, which still in all this his perplexitie he kept firme and safe. This he may withall (I grant) insinuat: yet the other proper feare & grievous dread must needs be admitted. To like effect this worde signifieth in that place of theAct. 23. Actes: as the Circūstances there also will cōfirme. Now then this being in Christ a proper and most vehement feare: where you argue Christ was delivered from his feare of Hell torments or the Death of the Soule. Ergo he suffered them not. I deny your se∣quele. This proveth directly the contrary. He feared the Death of the Soule; specially he thus feared it. Ergo hee did suffer it. For Feare being of that which is to come, asPag. 30 you well observe. Ergo seeing Christ feared (yea in such maner) the Death of the Soule, it surely came vnto him: namely either now, or before he dyed in
the flesh, or both now & then also. For he might well suffer it evē now, and yet feare it more ensuing. Yea such a maner & measure of Feare, as this manifestly was, could not be but a very Suffering of these spirituall sorrowes. Which also that sheweth where hee saith, My Soule is full of (actuall) sorrowes even vnto death, &c. Neither is there in this any a doubt full word,Pag. 304. which is your maner of writing:Pag. 296. nor b device vnfit for Divinity, but your Cōparisons of c fearing Captivitie,Pag. 301. loosing a purse, &c. are very vnfit to be mat∣ched with this feare in Christ.Pag. 302. You thinke this was but a d iest, if God be said to have heard Christ and deliuered him from that he feared, and yet to let him suffer it. Forsooth no iest: for he doubt∣les suffered it as before we haue seene. Nowe nevertheles GOD might well heare him 2. wayes: 1. by sufficient sustayning him in it: 2. by delivering him out of it in due time: In one place you seeme to observe a point both strange, and very contrary to your selfe,Pa. 118. 119 in saying, e Feare is more intollerable in Christ thē doubting. Is feare so intollerable a thing for him, when as you haue so often and so earnestly affirmed that he feared,Pa. 22. 124. and for f feare became thus astonished?Pag. 303. Where * you seeke a weake advantage in that I said eisakoustheis may seeme to shew that Christ was heard being in that which he was saved from: you see I challenge no certaine but a seeming reason from that worde. But your selfe maketh a stranger cōclusion. Ergo the Active referred to God importeth that God being in the same Paines did heare him. Lastly you say, g Indeed but in the Garden Christ never prayed with strong cryes & teares to be saved frō Death,Pag. 22: that we read in the Scriptures. I hope neither doe you read expreslie in the Scriptures at all, that thus he prayed in the Garden. You may soundly gather it from the Scrip∣tures, I graunt,Ioh. 12.27. and so you may, that his praying h before was of the self same nature and maner, also after in that most dolefull complaint on the Crosse, when he cryed My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me. Where the very like request is plainlie im∣plyed, as he made in the Garden when he saide; Let this Cup passe from.Ieb. 5.7. So that the i Apostle in all reason may bee vnderstoode to have respect to all these tymes and wofull cryes of our Saviour Christ.Pag. 30. And thus it is without all reason that you say k his Ago∣nie ended in the Garden:Pa. 115. 116 and that on the Crosse hee had l alwayes persistance in ioy without obscuration or intermission. Likewise also
that otherwise his astonishment mustPag.  continue 18. howers from his entering into the Garden after supper to the ending of his life the next day at 3. of the clocke after noone. Howe vaine is this conse∣quence? how false are these sayings, and contrary to Scripture in all the circumstances. But you say,Pa. 30. the cause cōtinuing, the effect could not cease. The Cause was, Gods leaving his weake nature in these sorrowes at somtimes more, at sometimes lesse: also he is to be thought to reveale and inflict the very sorrowes not alwayes in one tenor, but sometime more sometime lesse: finally his Man∣hood apprehended these arrowes of Gods wrath sometime more suddainly, then at other times. These were the true causes of his Astonishment: but these continued not 18. howers togeather, therefore the effect was not to cōtinue still in that maner on him. Then youPag. 29 say, in the vttering of these wordes the Cup did passe from him, by my owne confession. I cōfesse it not. But I confesse his extreame astonishment did even quickly passe from him: yet the sense and tast of that Cup might continue longer, in such a maner and measure, as he was better inabled by his Deitie to su∣staine it. Now what ill is there in these conceites, I pray you. What folly is there in them? Against vs heerein you doe nothing els al∣moste in your large Treatise,Iniuriou seache but heape vp many and most false imputarions: That we thinke Christ was inPag.  116. 1 doubt and feare of Gods favour,Pag. 1 destitute of faith, hope, love, ioy, forsaken of Gods favour, grace, Spirit: thatPag.  he continued 18. howres togeather ama∣zed as it were in a trance: that hePag.  vehemently and often strugled and strived in his prayers against the knowen will of God, & sought by all meanes to decline the worke for which he came into the world: His flesh feared death, though his Spirit submitted it self to the will of his heavenly Father:Pag.  We put Christ besides him selfe when it pleaseth vs, that he knew not what he prayed, nor prayed in faith. Your L. if you had reasons but any thing probable, wanteth not outward meanes enough to commend your cause: you neede not to devise against vs such grosse and base vntruths. But it bewray∣eth how desperat your matter is, which can not come foorth nor make any shew to the world, without such proppes to leane on. Besides that which heere in severall places wee haue declared to the cōtrary, in ourPag. 5 70. 71. former Treatise we shewed our minde though briefly, yet sufficientlie against these iniurious speaches. How you
seeme to avouch that Christ was by God forsaken in a Body, 114.116.2.103. ore . but not in b Soule, let them declare that can. For my part I know not your secret therein. I am sure no man can in trueth maintaine it. As for c Ambros,114. e pag. 113. 128. 10 . 1. of ye ion See re pag. you wrest him as you did Hilary, &c d before. After this you are bold, and aske if e any dare doubt of your doc∣trine? Yea surely, I dare not but doubt of it. Also we have seene that the publike f authorised doctrine in England dareth to doubt of it. Which maketh Christes putting him selfe betweene Gods Wrath and our sinnes a parte divers from his bodily death on the Crosse,ore pag. . yet the extreamest part of his Passion. See also other g au∣thorised testimonies heereof. But why may not any dare doubt of your doctrine?Pet. 2. Because the Scripture saith, h Christ suffered for vs. leaving vs an example that we should followe his steppes, &c. And this is very true also: the godly doe followe his steppes heere∣in (many times) as I i shewed you before.at. 1. pa. & heere 120.129. Some are conformable in some measure with Christe even in these his sufferings. Then k you say, we ought to be glad and reioyce thereof. I answer, we ought to turne them to ioy & gladnes, though not properly to be glad of them. Nay we ought most instantly to pray against them. No affliction at all is good in it owne nature: and the greatest of all is good to Gods children by his grace. So that touching this vse of them, therein wee are to reioyce: even when we are most bruized and pearced in our soules with the terrours of God. Last∣lie, 134. l you frame an obiection against your selfe, which you neither doe nor can answer: Christs soule might feele the tormentes of Hell for the time without any distrust or doubting of his salvation, or our redemption. You pretend thïs answer: The essentiall tormentes of Hell are the absolute losse of Gods kingdom everlastingly, and that m Eternall continuance is of the nature and substance of Hell. But we shew you,.53. although the damned are in Hell torments everla∣stingly, and of necessitie so must bee: yet eternall continuance in them, and to feele them but for a time, are indeed but Circum∣stances, not of the essence or nature of Hell tormentes. Gods pro∣per and extreame wrath only and his sharpest vengeance for sinne is the essence or nature of Hell paines. Which (against the Dam∣ned indeed is eternall, and vnsatisfyable: but lighting on Christ it was not eternall, because it was satisfyable. Wherefore it is plaine that you have answered in effect nothing to your owne obiectiō.
Thus far we have gone, shewing that wePag. 2 neither extende the cause of Christes Agonie to far in affirming it to have com of most bitter & extreame Paines which he suffred properly for our sinns: neither that we cōtinue it to long in affirming that he felt the same most extreamely on the Crosse. Contrariwise that you curtaile it to short, when you say it was no more butPag. 1 290. Devotion to God and Compassion to men: also that Christes Agonie touched himPa. 11 not at all on the Crosse. So thatBefore 90.91.116. our Maine argument which you would haue frustrated, standeth firme and good still: that seeing his Agonies, Paines, and Feares were such & so great (as the Scrip∣ture by the effects & signes sheweth that they were) both before his death and at his death, therefore they were more then meere bodily paines and more then meere bodily death: much lesse were his Holy and Religious affections the proper and speciall Cause thereof. But (of necessity) they were the Paines proceeding from the infinit and sharpe Iustice of God which Christ truly suffered in his Spirit, and Soule and Body. After thisPag 3 Touchi Death o Soule. you set vehemently against my last argument, That Christ suffered in some sorte the death of the Soule. First if wee should speake strictly after the maner of Death in the Body, then no man is so mad or foolish as to say that any mans Soul can dye at all: that is, want life and sense, as a dead body doth. Thus the very damned soules in Hell suffer not death. But such a death as immortall soules are subiect subiect vnto, is Gods separation frō them. And this is 2. folde. The 1. death and the 2. death, as the Scripture speaketh. The 1. is the separation of them from Gods grace, which is in this life by sinne raigning in them. The 2. death is Gods leaving them in the feeling of the most sharpe and most vehemēt paines inflicted by Gods iustice for sinne. This last kind of death is so called and named in many places ofEzek. Gen. 2 Rom. 6 2. Cor. & 3.7.5.20. a 1. Ioh. 17. Scripture. It hath also a double consideration. First, ordinarily and commonly it belongeth only to the Damned for their owne inherent sinne, where withall are the ordinary Accidents and cōcomitants togea∣ther, Desperation, induration, blaspheming, vtter darkenes, &c. with Perpetuitie of punishment, and that locally in Hell. In this sense the Fathers generally do take it, where they deny that Christ suffered the death of the Soule: and so likewise do we. Secondly, The death of the soule, or the 2. death may be extraordinarily and
singularly considered, namely to imply no more but simply the very nature and essense of it. Death the Soule rist tasted That is, the feeling of most deadly infinit paines inflicted by God himselfe in his proper iustice for sinne, all sense also of his comfortable presense being taken away. This is a Death to the Soul,g. 113. ag. 135. 6. ag. 112. 3. as * before we have shewed: according to this sense the " Scriptures & † Fathers before noted may rightly be vnderstood not to deny it in Christ: so that this kind of Death in the soule (but none other) we may safely say, Christ did suffer for our sinne imputed to him. Moreover, let it be observed: that if wee had no proofes at all in Scripture for this point, yet our Que∣stion is fully proved & cōfirmed notwithstanding by those other sufficient & pregnant proofes alleaged & iustified before. For it is be to noted, that no man setteth the questiō in these termes, That Christ dyed in his soule, neither doe we at all vse them very much in speaking of this matter. We do, only when some speciall occa∣sion draweth it from vs: neither then do we vtter it in those termes but with vsing some further declaration of our minde. The rea∣son of this warynes is, because we are not ignorant how ambigu∣ous the phrase is, and how apt to be mistaken, specially where men list to cavill. Also people vntaught and vnsetled in constru∣ing the scriptures sense do quickly take offense at thinges, which they ought better to digest. So that you doe very iniuriously to grate still one this phrase of speach and to straine it to the worst, as you do: as if by no meanes it could beare any good sense, and as if we built our maine Assertion onely heerevpon. Which in truth is nothing so. The same also doe we affirme touching our vsing (in this matter) the phrase of Christs suffering Hell paines. Both these phrases are but seldome and respectively vsed by vs. Howbeit we deny not, but that both these phrases may be well and rightly ap∣plyed vnto Christ on occasion,g 16. 52. . & 113. as * before is observed: & may both serve truly and most emphatically to expresse the infinitnes of the paines and sorrowes of his suffering for vs. Yea this very phrase of death extended in Christ further then to his meere bodily dying, hath (I doubt not) expresse ground in the Scripture: and therefore may the better be vsed soberly, & admitted charitably. You will aske where is there any scripture,Proofes. that Christe suffered any other death  then that meerely of his body? I answer, First, consider well that to the c Hebr.ebr. 5.7. Hee offered vp prayers and supplications with
strong crying & teares to him that was able to save him from death. It is not possible that this Death heere should be his meere bodily Death, which he so wofully and impotently feared: as I haue be∣fore sufficiently cōfirmed. Therefore it was the death of the soule, the 2. Death which heere is vnderstood to have thus mightily af∣flicted Christ. Which also your own selfe doPag.  fully grant and af∣firme with me. Yea you affirme further then we doe, or then the truth is, or possibly can be. You say Christ heere thus feared Eter∣nall death and Everlasting damnation. What a speach is this? Christ could not possibly feare in such wofull maner that, which he perfitly knew should never come neere him. But he perfitly knew that eternall Death, and the Cup of Gods everlasting male∣diction should never touch him. He knew and saw that this by Gods almighty and vnchangeable Decree was set further from him then the East is from the West, yea then Hell is from Heavē. Therefore he could not by any meanes possibly feare eternall death, nor pray in such sort against it. Againe, that which he fea∣red, and so pitifully prayed against was that, which he knew was by GodIohn 12 ordayned for him. Yea Feare alwayes is of that which is to come. But Eternall death was not by God ordayned for him: that wasWhich Christ  right w not to come vnto him. Therfore it was not Eternall death which he so feared. Finally when in the Garden he prayed against that Cup which he feared, that it might passe from him, there he yeeldeth and submitteth himselfe presently to the vnder∣going of it. But it were, I know not what, to say, that Christ did ever yeeld and submit himselfe to vndergo Eternall death, or to tast the Cup of Gods everlasting malediction. Therefore it was not this, that he feared & heere prayed against. And yet it was I grant the Death of the Soule, or the 2. Death: that is simply the essense thereof, Gods withdrawing himselfe from him in the Paines and torments thereof. This onely it was,He suffer that deat which he feared. not the eternity thereof nor sinfull concomitants, which he thus feared. And this (for the infi∣nitnes of it) naturally he could not but feare, yea and that so ex∣treamely: also he fearedôzein for him selfe, as knowing it to be orday∣ned for him. So that hence it followeth invincibly, that Christ in deed suffered (sith he thus feared) more then the meere bodily Death, even the Death of the soule. For he could not (I say) thusMuch yeeld to i he did: s∣ing, Thy ∣don. feare, but he must needs know that it was to come or might com
vnto him:wed fur∣ before 131.132 if he but knew that it might come, then it * certainly did come vnto him, at one time or other in his Passion before he  left the world. See: to the Hebr. g Christ abolished through death him that had the power of death that is the Divell, and so delivered all them which for feare of death were all their life time subiect to bondage.b. 2.14. Heere I see no reason in the world but that the Apostle by his often repeating of death, and by mutuall referring of it in one place (as it were) to the other, doth vnderstand & signifie one and the same death altogeather. But it is the death of the Soule which the Divell hath the power and execution of, also the death of the soule chiefly sinful men were held in feare of all their life long. It followeth then (I suppose) that even through this death of the Soule Christ abolished the Divell, and deliveted his children. Specially seeing there is no enormity nor impossibilitie heerein. Against this you haue no reason at all but wordes and wrestings, and vaine ostentation of Fathers; none of them all de∣nying  our sense. Third: it seemeth also, that Peter teacheth this same,Pet. 3.18. saying, k Christ in his suffering was don to death in the Flesh, but made alive by the Spirit. Where Death may be very well refer∣red both to the Soule and Body of Christ. Because the text heere speaketh (as I iudge) of the whole and entire sufferings of Christ. And it is manifest by that before, that Christ did suffer not in his body only but properly and immediatly also in his Soule: we haue seene also that the * phrase of Death, 135.136 or Dying, may in a good sense be applyed even to Christes Soule. Againe, this word Flesh (it see∣meth) can not heere in this place be vnderstood to signifie onely the Body of Christ, but even both partes of his Humane nature, thar is the reasonable Soule and the body. My reason is, because wheresoever in scripture the Flesh and the Spirit are noted oppo∣sitly togeather in Christ,m. 1.3, 4. im. 3.16 oh 4.2.  1.14. or. 5.7. & 4 & 1.4.1. g. 320. there the i Flesh signifieth alwayes his whole Humanity, even both partes thereof, the Soule also & not the Body only: the Spirit signifieth his Deity, or Divine power. Now what have you against this? Nothing of waight but floutes and mockes, that k this observation is made out of the hinder part of my head, &c. But what pretend you against it? Some Scripture palpably abused. First " Mathew, where Christ speaketh of his Disciples that their Spirit (their inward regenerat man) was ready to watch,ath. 26. but their Flesh (their corrupt nature) was weak & slug∣gish.
What is this to Christes Flesh and Spirit. Thinke you that Christs Soule was willing to suffer as God had appointed, but that his Flesh resisted? Verily so you seeme heere to vnderstand:An vntr conceit and it is as likely, as your applying of Flesh and Spirit to Christ in your pag. 104. ThenLuk. 2. Luke; where both Spirit and Flesh are not inten∣ded of Christ (as our observation before requireth) but only the Flesh. Then the Romanes: where I affirme thatRom. Flesh signifieth the whole Manhood of Christ according to the which he came from David even as well as Salomō or Nathan did, who were Da∣vids sonnes in their entire and perfit nature. So likewise Christe was kinne to the Iewes according to hisRom. 9 whole Humanitie, aswel asver. 3. Paul was. And heere Paul meaneth him selfe to be kinne to them according to Nature wholly, & that only by Regeneration in the Gospell he was differing from them. Now Nature opposed to Grace and regeneration, hath reference both to Soule and Body in a man. Howsoever the Soule cometh in Generation, that is not heere considered; neither is it necessarily to the purpose. Which difficulty also your selfe haue vtterlyPag. 2 renoūced before, to make it any argument for you in this matter. Thus yet the Flesh and the Spirit thus opposed heere in Christ, shall signifie the whole Man∣hood and Godhead in him. Further, that whichPa. 32 you bring out of the2. Cor Corinthians compared with this in Peter, doeth most fitlie and clearely open and confirme the same: Hee was crucified tou∣ching his infirmitie, but liveth by the power of God. His infirmitie the text heere nameth Metonimically vnderstanding in Christ that, in which his infirmities were. Now his Soule had infirmities of suffering in it, as well as his body. Therefore his Soule also is vnderstood heere that it was Crucifyed and dyed, that is according to the condicion thereof, as likewise his body according to the condicion thereof. And thus that which Paul calleth infirmitie, Peter calleth Flesh; and that which Paul calleth the power of God, Peter calleth the Spirit. That is, his Deitie is set oppositly in both these places to his whole Humanitie, even to body and soule.Aug. de 4.13. To which purpose that place also to theRom. Romanes doth serve, where the like opposition is found (as I have shewed) betwene the Flesh and the Spirit in Christ, that is his Manhood and Godhead. Other reasons alsoTreat 137.1 I haue noted serving well heerevnto (as the 4, 5, and 6.) but I omit to rehearse them againe. For it seemeth your selfe
agreeth with vs in them:g. 324. holding a expresly that the Spirit heere in Peter is the Deitie of Christ according to Austins iudgement. Now this being granted and acknowledged, that the Spirit heere signifieth Christes Godhead, how can it be likely but that the o∣ther opposit part the Flesh, must needes import his whole and in∣tire Manhood. Verily thus it seemeth most plaine that Peter heere distributeth the whole and absolute person (both God and Man) into these Natures, the Flesh and the Spirit. Wherfore I can not thinke, but that the Apostle heere vnderstandeth by Flesh the whole and intire Manhood of Christ, even his Soule and his bo∣dy. Now this being so, then it followeth by the text that Christ in his Passion was don to death both in Soule,Pag. 320. & body. Heere " you obiect, that thus I make all the attributes of the body common to the Soule. Nay forsooth, that I doe not. Nor yet this attribute of Dying vnderstood in such sort and maner, as the Body properly dyeth: that is to become without life and sense. I ascribe Death to both, but yet according to the divers condicion and state of both.reat. 1. Pg. 78. And thus you might vnderstand my b meaning to be, where I say it is absurd & false that Christ was made aliue in his Humane Soule: that is, it neither lost nor recovered life and sense, so as his body did.e before  135, 136 Howbeit as Death is oftentymes attributed to mens soules in the c Scripture, that is the feeling of the extreame wrath of God and the punishment for sinne, so d I make Death commō both to Christes Soule and body,eat. 1. g. 79. even to his whole and intire hu∣mane Nature. Which if you do not acknowledge, the shame of ab surditirie and cōtrarietie which in your fancy e you accuse me of, that Christes Soule dyed and dyed not,g. 322. 3. will sit neerer to you thē to me. Also in such a sense I deny not but Christ may be said, that he was quickened in the Spirit, that is refreshed and comforted a∣gaine in his Soule, and restored from that bottomles gulfe of sor∣rowes to the lively feeling of heavenly ioyes and glory, which for a season he had no sense of at all. Howbeit though this sense bee a true quickening in his Soule, yet I deny that heere in this place of Peter it can be translated quickened in the Spirit meaning the Soule, because Spirit heere in this opposition is set indeed for the Deitie of Christ,d you with stin doe sent. * as before I have shewed. Thus the matter I hope is cleere to reasonable men, that Christes Soule even according to the Scripture phrase may be said in some sorte to have tasted and
suffered Death, that is the extreamest feelings of Gods wrath for sinne, and the most vehement paines of the damned, though not as the damned doe in respect of the Accidents and concomitants of their ordinary damnation, but in a singular maner and extraor∣dinarie way as became the sonne of God and a sinles man (yet a very mā being our Redeemer. Now besides the matter youPag. 3 gird at me in divers places: as where I say, The Death of the Soule is such Paines and sufferings of Gods wrath, as allwayes accompa∣nie them that are separated from the grace and love of God. For∣footh it is true, they are alwayes wicked whom these Paines doe accompanie ordinarily. They came vpon Christ extraordinarilie: as inTreat.  pag. 77. this place I expresly noted. That was therfore my meaning here, if you would haue seene it. In another place alsoPag. 33. you know that I say, Hell as I take it (that is such paines of Gods wrath) isTreat. 1 pag. 80. sometime found in this life. Thus then you might haue vnder∣stood my former wordes: and not that the tormentes of Hell doe alwayes accompanie the wicked in this life. I pray conceave not my meaning, against my expresse wordes. AgainePag 31 you pretende to haue much against me where I say, The feeling of the sorrowes of Gods wrath due to sinne in a broken and contrite heart, is indeed the only true and perfitly accepted sacrifice to God. True, so I said, and againe I say it. What see you amisse in it? Then vnhappy men are the godly which are at any time free from the paines of the dam∣ned. To what purpose is this? I speake of Christs Sacrifice. I pray, is any other Sacrifice perfitly accepted? or a Sacrifice at all, but Se∣condarily, that is in and by Christes Sacrifice? They are not. His Sacrifice then is the onely true Sacrifice, and perfitly accepted to God. All others are imperfit, and accepted not in them selues but only in and by Christ. Thus your triumphes before the victorie, come to nothing but blastes of vanitie. But AugustinPag. 32 doth flatly deny that this text can be thus vnderstood, or that Christes Soule might dy. AustinEpist. 9 denyeth that Christ suffied any paines of dam∣nation locally in Hell after his death, as it seemeth some helde a∣bout his time whō here he laboureth to confute. So that he mea∣neth to reprove onely theSee bes pag 139 1st sense of the Death of the Soule in him, viz. that he suffred it not Ordinarily after the maner of other men, nor any way locally. H hath no ncessarie cause to speak of the 2. sense thereof how the Soule may be said to suffer death Ex∣traordinarily
for sinne imputed only, neither doeth he speake a∣gainst that in Christ. Nay according to Austins owne Definition of the Soules Dying it will easily appeare that Christes Soule may be said to have suffered some kinde of Death.de verh . Ser 0.  Trin. 4. Saith he a Moritur anima si recedit Deus: and b Mors est spiritûs deseri à Deo. The Death of the Soule is Gods Forsaking of it.fore pag. . 113. . 108. 113 . 134. But the Scripture saith God did leave him, or forsake him for a season: yea the Fathers also c agree fully therevnto: the maner how d I have shewed before. Therefore by Austins definition largly and rightly taken, Christ may be said in some sense to haue dyed in Soule. Howbeit though the Fathers doe graunt the thing in effect (as I have shewed) yet I acknowledge they doe deny this phrase generally, and so doeth Austin in this place. But thereabout we never made question: this is no parte of our matter. It may bee even for the same cause they shunned it, for which we also doe vse it very rarely and wari∣ly, as " before I observed.Pag 136. And let this be the Answere touching all your Fathers and Councells, which you bring aboundantlie (heere and there) about this point of the Soules death. Though peradventure some of them may seeme to insinuat even this very phrase touching Christ sometyme, as in some I touched before. Where you say,g. 317. † Aske the simplest child that is Catechized in my charge if I have any, what death Christ dyed for vs, and hee will answer me out of his Creed, Christ was Crucified, Dead, & Buried. It is true: But our authorized Catechisme published by M. Nowel, and the Homily i sheweth the meaning heereof to be, before . 67.117. that Christ suffered far more sharply thē meere bodily Death, even the infinit paines of Gods wrath in his soul. Wch I pointed you vnto k before, but you fairly leape it over,eat. 1. pa. . as also the Archb. speciall allowance (with others) of M. Now. Catechisme as being fully grounded on the word of God & contayning the very doctrine of the Church of England. Now to this effect the youths in my charge being asked would have answered surely. For indeed such a charge in London I had I thank God, wherin I hope I was faithfull according to my power, & might have cōtinued, had not your il seasoned teaching so contrary to the established doctrine in Englande burst foorth. a You say,ag. 325. a. 53.12. r hee pow∣ . I should have don well to have laid that downe for a shew, which is written in Esay, b He c laid downe his Soule vnto death; verily if I had, it would have made som shew. Considering
thatPa. 6 you earnestly affirme that this word signifieth Soule (or Spi∣rit) in a proper sense. Also how resolute you are forbidding toPag. 1 divert from the native & proper significations of words, but when the letter impugneth the groundes of Christian faith and charity. This considered, surely that in Esay maketh some shew indeede, that Christ submitted, and humbled, and afflicted, even his Soule to Death. The rather if we note that which followeth: He was coun∣ted with the sinners, and bare the sinne of many. That is, he was pu∣nished by God as the sinners areSee bes pag. 76. punished, and was not by the Iewes onely counted among Theeves. But chiefly considering withall that also before,Isa. 53. He made his soule a sinne offering. Heere you must remember,Your pa.  we shall leave nothing sound & sure in Gods word, if we may avoid all thinges by figures, that please not our hu∣mours. Therefore you must needes grant that Gods worde heere maketh Christs Soule to be † sacrificed for our sinne. And we desire no other death of the Soule. We deny not but this phrase Animā pnere is to lay downe the life, and in divers places signifieth no more then simply to Dy, both concerning Christ and other men: as you observe pag. 70. Yet this is no necessary reason, that heere in J say the Soule should be taken figuratively, for the Life onely: the rather seeing heere the text precisely setteth down the great & perfit worke of our Redemptiō. And to take it as we do literally, impugneth no ground at all of faith or Charity. The like perad∣venture may bee affirmed also of that in Mathew,Mar 2 The sonne of man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his soule a ran∣som for many: although the translatours commonly turne it, his life. But I wil not strive about these phrases. Aust. hath not a word against vs in that great place whichPag. 32 you cite: his whole argumēt there being to another purpose. The Iewes slew only the flesh of Christ: and yet it is true that they slew Christ. Who doubteth this? Also, where you thinke those words to be soPag. 327 plaine and expresse as may be spoken, so effectuall as Pauls heart could invent or his toung vtter, that Christ reconciled vs to God in the body of his flesh through death, we have answered youPag. 45. before. As for al your other discourse heere against me, it is as every where almost nothing but revilings, and reproches, and bitter skoffes. Yet you say,Pag 108.  you have not learned, nor vsed to give reviling speaches. Have you not learned it? Is it then naturall vnto you? Nay you meanePag. 264 these
are Fatherly Warnings and admonitions. If your Fatherly admo∣nitions are such, what are your Lordly rebukes? If these bee your Bishoply blessinges, what are your Cursings? But I am to blame, heerein standeth not the tryall of our quaestion. As for all thse hogepots (as n 38. you call them) which you make of my wordes, they are nothing but your owne either wilfull writhings, or vnchari∣table surmises: as by every particular in then places may be seene. Finally that is not true where you say,. 330. Flesh doth often signifie the soule in vs. It signifieth often the whole Manhood togither in vs, and so it may and doth in Christ aswell. Also it signifieth in vs many times our whole and intire corrupt nature both in body and soule: so it never signifieth in Christ. And heere I desire the reader to change a word or two in my former Treatise:Note. reat. 1. pa. 6 lin. 2. d. lin 7.  Cor. 7.1. for p all∣wayes to set vsually, and for q a man to set Christ. Because since I find that Flesh and Spirit togeather applyed vnto men doe r once signifie meerely the Body and Soule: which then I thought every where did signifie in vs our corrupt and regenerat man. Which o∣versight the Bishop spyeth not, but in this place cōfirmeth indeed. Finally to make an ende with your Fathers and Councels: it is strang that you thus vainly boast of them,. 135.327 saying they are a all wholy for you for this 1400. yeares space. I have shewed before that your large claime proveth a very short gaine. For in sub∣stance and full effect they are evidētly and generally against you, and for vs. As for their denying that Christ Dyed in his Soule, I b have answered to that before.ag. 135. 6. 142. Further where you bring them in many places saying, by his bloud only he redeemed vs, and he suf∣fered only in his Body:Fathers  handled. they are abused by you wonderfully. Not in their words, but in their meaning. For they striving against A∣rians and such other Haeretikes who would have Christs Deity to take part in his sufferings for our redemption,ee before . 111.113 4 &c. & so consequently would prove it inferior to the Father, " the godly Ancient Writers do heerevpon say, he suffered & satisfyed for vs only in his body, in his flesh, &c: not excluding the proper & immediat sufferinges of his Spirit, nor any passible part of his Manhood, but onely his Godhead against those Haeretikes: shewing thus also, that no o∣ther Creatue besides him or with him satisfyed any way for vs: altogeather after the Apostles like phrase in many places. Let the Authors themselves be viewed, if you thinke I affirme of them
falsly. Tertullian and Cyrill will give a tast heereof for all the rest. TertulliansPag. 3  wordesContr.  id est carnem, thas is to say Christs flesh, are expresly opposed to his Deity, not to his Soul: so that evidently he meaneth thereby his whole and intire passible Manhood. If hee had meant to exclude any parte or faculty of his Soule from suf∣fering, as he doth his Godhead, he had confirmed that Haeresy a∣gainst wch he striveth, as f before I noted.Pag. 1 Also it seemes he yeel∣deth the name of Death to this suffering of Christes whole Man∣hood, in saying Quod vnctum est mortuum ostendit: that Dyed which receaved the Annoynting. For I hope his spirit was Annoin∣ted with the Holy Ghost, aswell as his Flesh. And he saith thus, as indefinitly, so also by way of oppositiō to his Deity, as I said: there∣fore he meaneth the whole Manhood dyed. Howbeit in what sort this might be, I shewedpag. 113 135. 136 before. My false trāslating of him which you note, is not worth the noting. But you doe worse in false pla∣cing those his last rehearsed words for advantage: in Tertull. they are vsed more generally in their owne place coming long before those words, after which you set them. As for that Denique posuit spiritū, &c. it sheweth that Christs bodily death also (but not on∣ly) came by reason of Gods forsaking and separating from him. For before we saw how Tertull. expresly attributeth Gods Dere∣lectiō both to hisHaec v animae & poris. soule & body on the Crosse: though you grudg thereat. Thus (I say) he excepteth only his Godhead from Dere∣liction and Suffering &c. Cyrill also even in that book which you cite for you, sheweth that he excludeth but Christs Deity, though he mention only his suffering in Flesh:Ad Reg lib. 1. Carne passum dicit, docens patiendi ineffabilem naturam a passionibus alienam. Deus igitur Christus Divinè quidem impassibilis, passibilis secundum carnem. He excludeth only the Deity from suffering, when he saith, hee suffered in his Flesh. In a word, so do all the rest, asPag. 1 before is part∣ly noted. Against NestoriusPag. 33 they affirme the vnion of Christes Natures, with preserving the properties of each. They therefore hold not his only bodily sufferings. Is this then your great boast of all the Fathers and Councells? Nay, are they well vsed at your hands, to be thus drawn cleane from their purpose to an opinion which they never thought of? Is this good dealing towards Gods people, to tell them that the Fathers generally teach the only bodi∣ly sufferings of Christ, and deny our Assertion of his Soules pecu∣liar
suffering,efore 47.48.66.71.88.112. which * they iustifie & confirme indeed? Yea, this  the profit that comes by ordinary slanting with Fathers, which vse many do frequent in these dayes. Think they, if the scriptures alone suffice not for all thinges in Religion, that the Fathers will suffice? Or if the Fathers make a sense vpon some text, that there∣fore this must be the right meaning alwayes? Or if the Scriptures may be wrested by subtile heades, that yet the Fathers cannot? Or that Gods people may sooner see and finde when the Fathers are abused, then when the Scriptures are? It is great pity that men are, yea wilbe so deceaved with vaine shews. Let vs in Gods name content our selves (in handling matters of Religion) onely with Gods al sufficient worde: vnles where the importunity of an Ad∣versary forceth vs. Otherwise let vs spare the Authority of men in Gods matters, to them that make an Idoll of it. Finally if in this case we were to looke after any man, surely we have more cause to regard our later faithfull Teachers, rather then those of old. Who being equall with the best of them in any of the excellent graces of Gods spirit which hee vseth to bestow on his servants for the edifying of the Church, yet heerein these have advantage of the former, that they were directly provoked & occasioned to study and sift out this question against the Papists, which the Ancients were not occasioned to do. After,ag 341. a you set your self to prove that in Hell there is materiall fire. But it seemeth you are now almost afraid so to call it: yet b you call it true fire.ag. 343. Which also we vtterly deny. All your proofes (such as they are) runne to prove corporall and materiall fire: yet eternall. Except your Scriptures, which vtterly prove nothing at all: for they shew no more any corporall, or materiall, or true fire to be now in Hell, then a corporall worme, materiall brimston, and much wood, & true chaines. Which you say is a sleeveles obiection, but neither your selfe, nor Austin whom you cite against it, doth any where answer it. Yea Austin thinketh that incorporall spi∣rits shalbe fastened to corporall fire. But he saith not that now they are: which only is our question or, els nothing. For my parte I see no reason to believe that now there is corporall fire in Hell, what∣soever there shalbe heereafter when Bodies also shalbe there vni∣ted and tormented with the Soules. Againe Austin heere doth not prove that there shalbe such fire: hee only sheweth the maner
how it may be so heereafter, if God will. Now if all your reason be the power of God only, then aswel you may prove that the sky is fallen. For as touching Gods will heerein, you name it indeed, but you shew it no where, nor seeme to shew it. All the rest say no∣thing further, nor indeed so far as Austin. Yet you thinke it may be calledPag.  a true created fire. That no Christian ever doubted of, if you meane that it is a true creature. If you meane simply, that it is true fire, that still we deny. And me thinks you should not care for corporall fire now in Hell, seeing you seeme to belieue no tor∣ments for Damned soules save only at the Resurrection. For thus you reason,Pag. 25 As the Body hath ben the instrument of the Soules pleasure (in sinne) so it shalbe of hir paine.Pag. 20 But all provocations and pleasures of sinne the soule taketh from her body, all acts of sinne she committeth by her body. Therefore the iustice of God both tem∣porally and eternally punisheth the Soule (only) by the Body. Or Therefore all the Soules paine for sinne both temporally & eternally is by the Body. This is your owne reason: which being true, why should you care for corporall fire in Hell, before the last iudg∣ment? Your striving toPag. 34 confute my allegations of Fathers, I hope I have refuted sufficiently before. And thenPag. 35 Sir Refuter endeth as be began with egregious lyes. What lyes began he with, and with what doth he end? In the begining our lyes have proved tales of truth, and in the end your wordes will prove iniurious at least. I said, that not som, or the most, or best, but even all & every one both Churches & Writers in the world who are Protestants, teach as we do: except only your selfe, or happily som after you, since the year 1597. What ly is there in al this? Why name you not in al ye world one man (of those whom we call Protestants) of your minde? that it may appeare who deserveth such rebukes. Nay in this, being the very point of the matter you are silent: in revilings, outcryes, and accusations you exceed. Where I avouch thatTreat. . pag 8. only the hoatest and cunningest Papists, Iesuits, Priests, & Fryars have alwayes vntill this day had this con∣troversie with all Protestants, and all Protestants against them: & namely Bellarmin, Campian, English Rhemists, &c. To al this scan∣alous & suspicious argument you reply not a syllable. What shall we thinke of such doctrine, which in this learned age hath none
but such defenders. And yet among the Papists I noted 2, Cusa∣nus and Ferus as liking of the Protestants doctrine heerein, which also they do in some other matters. Now these 2. and only these (though more there are) c you cite at large:. 140.141 whose wordes indeede (especially the Fryars) seeme excessive. But our owne most wor∣thy and learned Teachers d M. Fulke,rea. 1. p. 88 M. Deering, M. Whita∣kers which against you I alleaged, you vouchsafe not a looke to∣wards them. Nor to M. Nowels Catechisme, nor to the Synod authorising it,efore pag. 42. nor to the Archb: great * approbation thereof: Not to our Common Bibles note authorised publikly to be read tho∣rough out England. Only against my alleaging of our Homilyes e you take exception:Pag 355. but I trust I have before fully and cleerely defended them to bee for vs, and against you. Neither doeth any such matter appeare in them as f you avouch.Pag. 136. Thus then I end our 1. Question: being sorry that I have ben so long. But I trust the friendly Reader will pardon me, considering how I have ben occasioned therevnto. A brief Collection containing the whole effect of our Doctrine before delivered: brought into 4. Assertions. God himselfe in his Iustice properly punished Christ for our sinnes. See pag. 8. 9. 75. 82. Christ (even as other men) consisted of a perfit Humane immortall Spirit, and a mortall li∣ving Body: and so was by nature capable of suffering sorrows for sinne from Gods hand aswell in his Spirit peculiarly and properly, as also in his Soule and Body togeather: sith other men do thus suffer for sinne. pag. 8. 48 52. 61. 74. Gods exact and immutable Iustice spared his Sonne in nothing: but did punish him in all severity as he punisheth sinners. I meane, Hee punished him in All his partes of nature apt to suffer: that is, in his Spirit peculiarly and properly, and in his Soule and Body togeather also. Againe God punished him with all the Whole Generall Curse not with all the particular Curses and punishments: with the Generall Curse in all the whole Nature and substance of it, not with all the Circumstances: with all the meere Paine and Sorrow thereof, not with the sinfull Adherents and concomitants in it. pag. 8 13 74 86. Gods exact & immutable Iustice spared not Christe in these Circumstances of Punishment wt he suffered not. For either in exact Iustice he could not, or necessarily hee needed not to punish him so. In exact Iustice he could not punish Christ in such respects as were simply and absolutly impossible. It was simply impossible that any touch of Sinne should once come neere his per∣son, or Eternall suffering, or all the Particular punishments in the world: All which come not to any one man (though Damned,) neither can come. Finally that Christ should necessarily have suffered after this life, or locally in Hell, there was no cause: seeing these are but meer Circumstances of Gods Iust Punishmēt of sinne, whether now, or then, whether heere or there. These alter not ye nature of Gods wrath, which is the strength of Hell. The whole substance & nature of that Punishment he might feele in this life aswell as any parte: God is able to inflict it aswel heere, as heereafter. The rather seeing Christ came and was sent of God Extraordina∣rily of purpose to suffer for sin all that he might suffer. Thus then only in this life Christ might, and did suffer all. For so was Gods ordinance and will, as it is plainly expressed vnto vs in his word. Therefore so we professe, and so we believe by the certaine rule of Gods word and the proportion of faith: Christ shunned for our sake nothing (which the Damned suffer) except only Circumstances and Accidents, impossible or vnnecessary, not any Substantiall point of Gods Punishment decreed against sinue. pag 13. 14. 16. 43. 66. 75. 87. 134. 135.
That Christ after his death on the Crosse went not downe into Hell in his Soule. THe 2. part of our Controversie is this, That Christ after his death on the Crosse went not downe into Hell in his Soule. Where note first,Notes that we vnderstand Hell properly and locally (as our common speach in English doth vsually take it) for the very place of the Damned after this life. Now against them that be∣lieue Christes Soule did go down locally into Hell, thus I reason.Reasons gainst Ch Descendi locally is Hell. First, If there be a good and sound generall reason in Christian faith that Christes Soule leaving his Body ascended vp to Heaven and there remained till his Resurrection, and if there be no speciall reason  of authority to the contrary that his Soul now descended downward: then surely every good Christian ought to believe that his Soule as∣cended to Heaven, and descended not locally into Hell.Two ma points to noted. But both those former pointes are most true: First, There is a good sound ge∣nerall reason in Christian faith that Christes Soule after death As∣cended  to Heaven, & remayned there till his Resurrection. Name∣ly the Analogy of faith requireth that the Head should bee there where the members were: and where they remaine till their Re∣surrection, that there he tary till his Resurrection. It seemeth also these texts wil prove itIoh. 1 Where J am, there also shall my servant be.cap. 17 I will that where I am, there they also shall be with me. I see not but that he promiseth heere his servants even a locall accōpanying of him after this life, & that also generally whither soever he went. Moreover this the FathersOnly A wavereth where afming, fo where dting. all with one voyce (I may truly af∣firme) do teach and believe: even that Christ after death went no whither, but where his faithfull and holy servants were: yea and there remayned till his Resurrection. To which consent of men somewhere you ascribe exceeding much, so thatPerpevern epis 10. you plainly a∣vouch the cōtrary alwayes to be a notorious, if not a pernicious no∣velty. To which purpose also other Scriptures doe make very much: as where Christ, being in the paines of death and present∣ly about to end his life, saith Father into thy hands I commend my Soule. This being spoken at such a time, in the depth of such wo∣full sorrowes, and by such a person, in all good reason Gods hands
whereinto he commendeth his Soule (according to our common vse of speach) must be Gods ioyfull peace, and Heavenly glory. which is also suteable to the scripture phrase, as " already I have shewed:reat. 1. g. 151. g. 361. neither shew * you any thing against this. For what if Gods hands on other occasions do signifie his Power, and generall pro∣tection only. Doth it follow that therefore Holy men (oppressed with paines, and now about to Dy) when they say, Father into thy handes I commend my Soule, they meane not the ioyes of Heavē? You aske was David dying when he spake those words? He might bee in deadly sorrowes or dangers, for any thing you know to the contrary. But suppose he were not thē in danger to dy. Yet the Prophets generall sentence may fitly be applyed to this more spe∣ciall case of Christ: as all men know. Howsoever then David were when he spake thus, yet Christ (now dying, & ready to come out of most wofull paines) doth surely meane when he said so, (as o∣ther holy men do in like case) namely, to go to Heavn. To like purpose serveth that comfort, given to the Theefe and common to himselfe: This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. As touching † Austius divers opinion and yours,our p. 360 ag 29. see "before. Be you reconciled vnto him, and then let him speake for you. Lastlie, where the eternal and generall Ordinance of God is shewed to be such,k. 16.26. that * none can goe out of Heaven downe to Hell, nor come from Hell vp to Heaven. The text excepteth heere not one. This therefore I doubt not is in truth a cleere point (against which wee shall find not a worde in scripture) that Christes Soule after death was there where the holy Patriarkes deceased were, & there remay∣ned till his Resurrection. So that how you will doe to maintaine that Christ c went indeed vnto them,. 220.361. but presently left them that hee might go to Hell, I know not. In this I doubt you walke f without your guide.g. 91. But to proceed, I adde that which is a cleere and certaine:. 189.193 . 219. yea that which g your selfe rightly beleeveth and professeth with vs, though against the opinion of the Fathers, That the Soules of the holy Patriarkes dead before Christ were not beneath, but above; not in Limbo, but with God in peace, ioy, & blissee even in Paradice,. 192.203. that is h Heaven. The which to be a doctrine most true (against the Popish errour heerein) I have briefly i heer∣to fore,eat. 1. g. 131. yet (I hope) sufficiently proved. Therefore hence I con∣clude, that Christs Soule after his death Ascended indeede, and
descended not downward beneath vs heere. 2. Only except there  be some speciall reason of good authority to the contrary: which is the second point of importance heere to be considered. Touch∣ing which this I say, without expresse and evident Scripture there is in the worlde no sound nor meet authority to disprove our for∣mer Reason, and Conclusion. This also Austin himselfe avouch∣eth well and faithfully: that is, supposing there is no expresse nor plaine Scripture for Christs Descending, then (saith he)Epist.  Miror si quam ad ros cum d diss asser auderet. it were marvailous bouldnes that any should dare say he went down to Hel. And againeSerm. ∣temp. 14 Nemo de Christo credat nisi quod de se credi voluit Christus. No man ought to believe any thing concerning Christ, but what himself (in his word) would have vs to believe. Now I assume this, and by Gods helpe shall make it manefest,No Scrip at al yt Ch Soule as death d soended. That there is in all the Scripture no one place whereby it may bee proved by any shew of reason that Christs Soul after this life went locally downward from hence, or diversly from the Soules of all good men deceased besides. Yea whatsoever is pretended from the Scripture expresly to prove that he did Descend, is but very little, and exceeding weake.Script. pr∣ded. Only there are 2. or 3. places sensibly wrested and drawen to this pur∣pose.  1.Your pa 212. That, where Christ is said to haveph. 4. come downe into the lowest partes of the earth.Treat.  pag. 14 But I have largely and plainly shewed that this place speaketh not a whit neither of Hell, nor of Christs Soule descending locally; neither before his death, nor after. It noteth only Christs sensible and apparant Humiliation to the last and lowest point, that is to the Grave. According to the Hebrue phrase, which the Apostles frequented in their Greeke writings very much. So that no reason appeareth why or how this place may shew that his Soule after death went downward. The rather seeing you, will have Christes going downePag 41 to Hell the first, and that a notable part of his exaltation and triumph. But this was manefestly (as I said) his lowest abasement. Therefore this touch∣eth not his going down to Hell. WherePag. 2 you expound the text, & say, He descended to the lowest and ascended to the highest that he might fill all places with the presence of his Manhood: you speake bothIn respe vbiquita inconveniently, and far from the Apostles meaning. Who signifieth only Christes fillingEphe. 1. & .19. all his Church with the giftes of his Spirit, which by his Ascending heIoh. 16.7 Luck. 24.4 promised to doe, andAct. 2.33. so did indeed. Heere is nothing about his filling all (places) with the
presence of his manhood. Much lesse is there expresly in the text that which k you adde to it (with his presence) very deceitfully in a differing letter like the text and togeather with the text.g. 212. What censure this deserveth the godly doe knowe. Wherefore yet wee must be so scrupulous still, as to stick at the phrase of Christs Des∣cending in Soule: for as yet wee see no worde in all the whole  Scripture any thinge neere, much lesse equivalent therevnto. If you will vrge that, where Christ is said to have a ben 3. dayes & 3. nightes in the heart of the earth,at. 12.40. there is nothing els then as before,ag. 21. even his Buriall. Your exception that b Christes sepulchre was in the higher partes of the earth frustrateth not the maner of the Hebrue phrase, after which the Scripture speaketh both here, and in the last before: as I c have declared plainly in my 1. Trea∣tise. It seemeth,. 144.146 your not considering (or not caring for) the vse and maner of the Hebrue toung causeth your mistaking as in these places, so likewise in all, or most of the rest: yea indeed it causeth your errour in this maine questiō, as after it will more ap∣peare . Third. you d make much of that,ag. 213. which doeth you not a pinnes worth of good: where it is asked e who shall descend into the deepe?om. 10.7. that is, to bring Christ againe from the dead. If the deepe heere did signifie Hell, (which yet certainly it doeth not) but sup∣pose it doeth: Howe will that follow (which you presume) that Christ dying descēded into the deepe. The text saith no such thing. It saith he was with the dead, and that from thence he came: and therfore by this I rather conclude, it was thither only that he des∣cended. Which also is signified elswhere in the same words,ph. 1.20. f frō the dead. Thus I say the dead heere importeth the generall condi∣tion and state of all the Dead, as it is opposed to the state of the Living, and so it sheweth Christes lowest and last Humiliation, as the other places did before: saving that before his Grave particu∣larly is intended, heere the state of death may bee applyed to his whole humane Person, and to both partes thereof dissolved. Yea it is not vnlikely that the former word g the deepe is vsed also heere by the Apostle to signifie (not Hell,Abyssus. but) even this condition and state of death which is as a Gulfe bottomles, never satisfied, & vn∣recoverable. Like as Sheol in Hebrue doth likewise properly sig∣nifie: as after we shall further declare. This meaning the Syriak Translator (an ancient writer, of no small credit) seemeth to have,
sith he turneth it Abyssum Sepulchri, the deepe of the Grave. And then the deepe signifying heere the state and condicion of Death, the Apostle seemeth to expresse his meaning to that effect more clearely in these next words, this is to bring Christ againe from the dead: that is, to frustrate Christes Death, wherevnto he descended for our sakes. We may consider also that this word heere the deepe many times is referred to the vast Gulfes & deepe pits of the earth, and likewise to the vnknowen, deepe, and furthest partes of the sea. Now the Apostle may seeme to vse this large signifying word of purpose to expresse the infinit searching about of an incredu∣lous and comfortles minde which seeketh iustice before God by the keeping of the Lawe. Who indeed thereby getteth nothing, but maketh void vnto it selfe the Gospell and all Christes bene∣fits therein; His Death and Resurrection, his Ascention, &c. The Apostle then may insinuat in this word all these senses and signifi∣cations thereof: namely I say, (with other) even such a seeking to the deepest and farthest partes of the Sea, to learne somewhere (if it might be) among all the Creatures of God how to fulfill and keepe the Law. For so Moses (whom heere he doeth cite)Deu. 30 13. expres∣lie signifieth: then so the Apostle also signifieth the very same. For these 3. things the Apostle delivereth heere togeathet: 1. That the Law and the Gospell do greatly differ, & namely in that the Law doeth not save vs, but the Gospell doeth. 2. He sheweth the cause heereof, for that no flesh can keepe the Law, nor ever could: as he confirmeth by this out of Moses, where men thinking to live by the Law, are noted to seeke and search every where far and neere, by all wayes & meanes, that they might satisfie their own hearts, and finde how to keepe it: which proveth that their owne heartes beare witnes that they keepe it not, neither can keepe it. 3. Hee sheweth that thus by seeking to live by the Law, they loose the life of God coming by Christes Death and Resurrection in the Gospell. Thus the Apostle rightly keepeth him selfe to the whole matter and meaning of Moses, whose wordes (though shortened) he citeth and discourseth vpon. But then it is not possible that the deepe heere should have any reference at all to Hell. For what colour is there to make a man pensive about keeping the Law to aske, who shall goe downe for him among the Divells and damned spirtis to bring it thence vnto him? or to imagine that the keeping
of the Law might be rather there, then in his owne heart? or that any meanes might be got from thence to helpe men, that they might keepe it? There is no likelilyhood for this out of doubt. Therefore also the deepe heere signifieth not Hell any way: seeing the Apostle doubtles retayneth Moses sense, as is aforesaid. Lastly I may not omit to shew how you deale heere againe with the text. You alleage it a He descended into the deepe,ag. 220. all with speciall let∣ters differing from the rest of purpose, to shew that Christs descent into Hell (for so you take the deepe) is found written in the very Scripture. But He is cūningly added to the text: neither are these words meant of Him, but of a Pharisaical Meritmōger, searching everywhere for righteousnes by works,ag. 153. b as is before declared. The like practise c you vse againe in the Psalme:ag. 147. sa. 139.8. where the d text hath only veatsignah Sheol, If J lodge, or, if J spread my couch in Sheol, thou art there. There is no word to expresse beneath, which you put into the text of your own head. The same also I noted in e you before.ag. 152. fore pa. 66 Somewhere you charge me (but f vainly) with falsifying of Ierom. If I had by oversight don so, yet that were not like this falsifying: which is not of men, but of Gods owne word; not by oversight, but of purpose for advantage. These are all the Scriptures that can be brought, to make anie shewe of Christes Soule descending locally after his death. Which being abused to this purpose so palpably, as before we haue seene, I must in earnest say, I marvaile that any will beleeve it as an arti∣cle of faith, that Christes Soule descended: Specially considering our next reason which followeth. Our 2. and most principall Reason is this:ason. 2 If there bee not one place of Scripture to prove that Christes Soule was in Hell, then you ought to deny that opinion. But you have not indeed any one place that proveth it. Therefore it ought to be denyed. Against this Argument you " say you have one place,Pag. 167. Act 2: 27. Euen onely one, where you thinke it is plaine that Christ saith, He reioyceth because God would not leaue his soule in Hell.r one only e neede e passing re, and be∣ all ex∣ion: as this t. For so you must haue it heere translated (in Hell) even because you will. But if men with reason resist your will, and proue vnto you that it ought not to bee taken heere for Hell, then I pray take it patiently, and vse not such raging & despitefull termes as against me you do: as if I were not worthy to speake of those matters that
you speake of, vnlesse I would be bound to say your words. How be it I beseech you giue vs leave. This sentence taken out of Da∣vidsPsal  Psalmes & alleadged in the Actes, signifieth the veryPag.  same thing in both places. The Hebrew word controversed is Sheol, the Greeke Hades. Now must the word Sheol and Hades needes signifie Hell, being applied to soules departed hence? So indeede youPa. 1 02. avouch more confidently then truly: and heerevpon it see∣meth youPa. 1 pawne the triall of this Question, saying; Till we bring you some one good proofe out of the Scriptures that the Soules of the righteous before Christes comming were in Sheol or Hades, you will rest in your opinion, that by this only plaine place Christes Soule was in Hell. We hope then, when this proofe (which you asko for against your opinion) is shewed, you will correct your opinion in this point. Let it therefore bee considered, I pray, which the Psalmist also hath elswhere of this matter.Sheol & attribut the Soul iust after Let vs interpret the Psalmes by the Psalmes. First this we observe in them, howe it is writtenPsa.  What man liveth and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soule from the hande of Sheol? Heere now the Soule attributed to every man living, must be properly taken as well as in the for∣mer place, where you take it for Christs very Soul. For,Pag. 1 This rule must be heldeMuch in one a same W in one a same ma and ma speach. thoughout the Scriptures, that we divert not frō the native and proper significations of the wordes, but when the letter impugneth the grounds of Christian faith and charitie. Otherwise we shall leave nothing sound & sure in Gods word, if we may avoid all things by figures that please not our humours. So long then as the proper sense of the Scriptures may stand with the Analogie of faith and direction of charitie, we offer violence to the word of God if we wrest it to a figurative vnderstanding. Now then it is apparant that heere the soules of all mē living, both good & bad (after death) are appointed to Sheol. For there is none whosoever that can possibly escape it, saith ye text. Yet many good men there are & then were, who could & did escape Hell. Therefore in the Script. Sheol and hades applied to departed soules, is not always Hell, but the Cōdi∣tion or place, aswell where the iust mens soules are after death, as that where the dāned are. Wherefore we hope that you wil keepe your word, that is, to acknowledge Sheol and Hades may be ap∣plyed to the Soules of iust and blessed men deceased. And withall that Christs Soule after his death (having Sheol applyed to it by
the Psalmist, who applyeth the very same also to all iust mens Soules in the worlde when they dy) ought not therefore in any wise to be thought to have ben in Hell: even because he was the iustest and holyest man that ever was. Vnles some other scripture (more plaine then this) doe affirme it. Which because there is vt∣terly none, I say not one, that doeth leane any thing towards such a sense; therefore you ought not stifly to maintayne that Christes Soule was locally in Hell, as hitherto you haue done. But Austin a collecteth this opinion from this place in the Actes.g. 253. Oh, then this point of faith is groūded on Austin: it is his collection (not the text it self without him) that serves your turne. Certainly so it is. But this thē agreeth not to your worthy protestations noted b be∣fore:ag 28. 29. r pag 91  this becometh not such good wordes. I beseech you, be not you of them qui virtutē verba putāt. Then touching Austins au∣thoritie,fore pag  c you know how you leave him, when you think good: & regard not his d scant probable proofes, & coniecturall inclinations. Finally,r pa. 169  that heere Austin hath no better then scant probable proofes and meere coniectures, we shall plainly declare (God wil∣ling) after we have shewed a generall consent and correspondence of all Authors for our sense of Sheol & Hades: which I hope pre∣sently you shall see. But first you must note that we goe not about to prove Sheol & Hades to be Heaven. We never thought it, neither need we so to thinke. The more is your iniurie, when you haue nothing to re∣prove, yet with skoffes, and floutes, & bitter reproches to disgrace me as you doe, and that even for this your owne meere conceit. Neither yet can your e witty reason prove,g. 146. that Limbus heereby can not be avoided. Consider a word of like vse in Latin: Defun∣cti signifying the Dead, may be applyed generally to the Soules of men deceased. Yet notwithstanding this, I hope Limbus may be easily avoyded. Also I pray, are Defuncti none other but the Damned onely in Hell? The blessed in Heaven may be likewise called Defuncti, I suppose. Howbeit not in respect of their being in Heaven:Note. but only in respect that they haue done with this life, and are gone hence. The word is properly generall: signifying by it selfe neither the Blessed nor the Damned, neither to be in Hell nor in Heaven. Yet restrained by Circūstances (such as they may be) it signifyeth either. Certainly so doth hades, & also Sheol▪ All
these (the Latin, the Greeke,The prope sense of Sh and Hades and the Hebrew) wordes are indiffe∣rent and common in them selves; signifying in deed no positive thing properly, but a meere privation of this life, and of a former visible being heere sometime. And so it is, that the Psalme saith, Even the iust mens Soules, and all, must come to Hades & Sheol. Moreover, thus in effect they are all one with Thanatos, Death: but that Thanatos belongeth properly to Bodyes. Hades & Sheol sometimes to Bodyes, sometime to Soules of Men indifferently. Yea sometime these 2. are applyed (though more rarely) to other things also which are in this visible world, namely whē they com to Destruction, and No being any more: as anon we shall better vnderstande. Now let vs proceed, and shew further even by the Scriptures first, that Sheol and Hades are (as I say) more then once vsed for the generall condition of death wherein even iust mens soules are held, or the mansion of soules departed aswell good as bad. Then afterward the common consent of others will availe the more. ThatPsalm. 4 Psalme which intreateth wholy of Death, of the impos∣sibility to escape it, of the power which it hath over the wicked whose ioy and pompe is only in this world, in that it cutteth of all their hopes, it endeth their pleasure, and marreth all their bewty. I say in this Psalme, where all expresse circumstances do shew that the Prophet speaketh of this death, not of Hell, yet David heere saith:verse. 1 notwithstanding God shall deliver my soule from the power of Sheol (that is death, or the state of death) when hee shall reoeave mee most mightily. So Tremelius turneth it, noting heere Da∣vids hope of the Resurrection, which I think he hath well vnder∣stood in this place. Otherwise David might heere comfort him∣selfe in this, that hee knew God would save him alive from this common death, not alwayes as you friuolously obiect, but often∣times: yea alwayes till he should enioy the Kingdome, which in∣deed God did for him when he was neere death not seldome, and when his enemies & the wicked were caught therewith. Againe, thatPsal. 8 Psalme sheweth it also where it is thus written, My Soule is filled with sorrowes, and my life draweth neere to Sheol. By his life he meaneth his soule the proper cause and fountayne of life in him, which also in the first parte of the sentence hee expresly na∣med. As the manner of phrase in the Psalmes is; in the 2. parte of
the sentence commonly to speake of the same things that are vt∣tered in the former, but varying the termes. That life heere should signifie the body distinctly from the soule, there is no such likely∣hood nor reason. Indeed I deny not but life may signifie heere the whole person of man,As in these esaide Psal. , 48. & 49,  & 10, 16. al 116, 8. & in y many aces of scrip∣e besides. and so may c nephesh the soule also very wel: and then Sheol and Hades signifie not peculiarly and distinctly the Grave which only is for the carcase, but the condition of the Whole mā after he hath no being in this world. In which regard, chose what sense you will, either that nephesh and chai shall in all these places of the Psalmes before handled signifie strictly the soul, as very fitly it may, or the whole person of man consisting both of a soule and of a living body, contrary to which estate Sheol and Hades is very often taken,g That is, if it re not strictly d peculiarly e habitation sy Souls, yet s the condi∣ur of ye whole son, that is, h of Soul & dy separa∣ by Death. ob. 30.23. and d peradventure so it is vnderstood heere in these places. In which sense Sheol & Hades are far from signifying hell, yea or heaven either, yea or only and meerely the Grave: but it signifieth destruction from out of this world, & no-being here any more as afore time to the whole person, that is, both to the Soule and to the Body. And thus Sheol and Hades Iob re∣sembleth to a house or Habitation, where he nameth it † Beth m∣gned lecol chai: the habitation (after this world) appointed for every person, or (if you will) for all living things. The same also Iob wish∣eth and desireth of God to himselfe, that God would hide him " Bisheol in this world of the deceased,ob. 14.13. & would give him terme till his wrath was overpast. In another place he comforteth himselfe thinking quickly to enioye it, saying, † Jf I have any hope, Sheol or Hades,ob. 17.13. the world of the deceased shalbe my habitation. He ioyneth therevnto also particularly the grave: but as touching Sheol see∣ng Iob speaketh of it as his continuall habitation till the worldes end, it cannot be meant only of the Grave for his body, which in∣dured but a very short time; neither had his flesh any being at all after it was turned to very earth and wormes. He speaketh heere therefore also of his soules continuing habitatiō, or mansion in an∣other world.Gen. 37.35 because they ch dy, their ons do fall vne, accor∣ding to ye Latin tase, cadere, idere, occū∣, to Dy. And in greatest reason this is that which Iaacob mea∣neth, when he saith, " He will goe downe mourning to his sonne i Sheol. That is, He will mourne till he dy: for this he meaneth by * going downe heere speaking of death. And then he hopeth to enioye the societie of his deare sonne in soule. For his body hee thought was devoured and digested in the bellies of wilde beasts,
therefore he would goe to the soule of his sonne in Sheol. Or els vnderstanding heere the dissolution & passage of his Whole per∣son, he may meane partly his going downe to the graue as touch∣ing his body, and yet also the enioying of the societie of his deare sonne in Sheol, which surely (as J said) could not bee in body but in soule. Thus Sheol heere hath respect to the changed estate of Iacobs whole person dissolved, and not to one parte thereof only, his body, but to his soule also: and it hath respect likewise to the estate of his dead sonnes soule, where this loving Father hoped a∣gaine to haue society with him (not any where els) without which he could not be comforted. Albeit in another place it seemes hee limiteth Sheol to the graue only: but that we doe so vnderstand by reason of the Circumstances,Gen. 42. you will bring my Gray Head with sorrow to the Grave. But againe to follow our purpose: Good Hezekiah also looked for Sheol to be his habitation likewise af∣ter this life. I said (saithIsay. 38.  11, 12. he) I shall goe to the gates of Sheol (the Land of the dead:) I shall not see the Lord in the Land of the living; I shall see Man no more among the inhabitāts of the world: My ha∣bitation, or Mansion is translated and removed from me as a sheap∣heards tent, &c. This heere cannot be the Grave, nor Hell which he describeth. For he thought he should thē have dyed: and thus his habitation he thought should haue ben removed and transla∣ted from him: that is, I take it, his body should be remoued from his soule, which was the mansion or habitation of his soule while he lived, but now he should haue another age,Dr  age, my co∣nuance, or during, o my māsiō, or induring, or Mansion, and be remoued to another place. This can not be vn∣derstood of his Carcase, rotting and wasting away to nothing in the graue, and therefore indureth not as the word signifieth: ther∣fore he meaneth it of his Soules removing and abiding elswhere. Also he expresly opposeth the land of the living to Sheol: therfore Sheol is the land of the dead, not the graue only, nor Hell only,Which al to be collec of that in Prophet to∣ing Christ, scinditur râ viventi Isai. 53.8. but as large and as generall to the dead, and as fit to receaue both the partes of men, yea both good and bad men, (but separated, and dissolved) as the land of the living is to receave both those partes vnited and knit togeather. Againe Hezekiah was a godly man, therefore hell was not for him: also though hee should not see the Lord in the land of the living, which was the thing he desired, yet thereby hee seemeth to insinuate that in the land of the dead hee
might see him, whither he was about to go: and that must needes be the place of blessed Soules, even that which heere is noted by the word Sheol.g. 150. It is a most vaine reason that you give, that "sheol heere is to be taken for Hell and so to be translated because death to the wicked is the passage to Hel, which death Hezekiah was now neere vnto. It is vntrue that Hezekiah was neere vnto that death which the wicked dy, or that he feared that kind of death, or that there is no sound differēce betwene the death of the godly & the death of the wicked, or that by any meanes according to sound divinity the death of the godly may be named or taken for Hell. This is so vaine that I will not stand any longer to answere it. Another obiection of yours a is as weake,Pag. 400. where you say Sheol heere must be the Grave, because it is said b afterward,ver. 18. Sheol doth not confesse the, death cannot praise thee &c. Though I grant that the Grave is not heere excluded especially in the words next after, They that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth: yet I affirme that Sheol namely in the former place vers. 10. cannot exclude the mansion of good mens soules departed hence, & that for the reasons aboue noted. Neither heere doth this circumstance limite it to the Grave onely, because it is said Sheol confesseth not thee. For it is evident that He Zekiah meaneth not absolutly that there is no praising of God in Sheol, but onely hee vnderstandeth that which c hee so greatly desired,hich was yt inary great re of the lly gene∣y: psal. 42. & 84.1. the outward frequenting of the Temple, the holy Ceremonies and Sacrifices, & ioyning to the visible congregation, and publishing of Gods goodnes to others. Which hee expresseth immediatly to be that praising of God that he meaneth & cannot be in Sheol, by knitting close to the former these words, d The living,sa. 38.19. the living, he shall confesse thee, as I do this day: the Father to the Children shall declare the truth. This is that which he denieth of sheol: that none there doe praise God to the example and edifying of others. He denyeth not simply nor absolutly that there is none in sheol at all, in any respect, that praise God. The very same David expresseth also very plainly,Psal. 116.9. saing, e I shall walke before the Lord in the land of the living,Psal. 118.17 and f I shall not dye but live and declare the workes of the Lord. Where vnlesse they meant only this visible praysing of God to others edifying, other∣wise these holy men had no cause so greatly to desire to praise God heere, for they knew very wel, how that (for their own parts)
they should prayse him much better, and more perfitly in the next world. The Se∣gint vse  in ye fan.To the very same purpose the Septuagint vse hades in other places also, besides in their translating of these aforesaid. For it is truly and well acknowledged by you,Pag 4 that both these wordes Sheol and Hades are iust all one. Now the Septuagint I say in o∣ther places do shew thus much also.Psal. 9  after the ∣tuagint. Jf the Lord had not holpen me, my soule had almost dwelt in Hados: in Hebrue it is in silence. Which is not meant of hell for there is weeping, and wayling, and gnashing of teeth: but of the state of death. Nor yet of the Grave, onely, because heere it is named to bee the Habitation of the Pro∣phets soule, whither it was almost come when he was like to have dyed. Againe,Psal. 7 My soule was filled with sorrowes, and my life drew neere to hades. How my soule and my lift heere, are taken for the selfe same, I have shewed before. As also in that of Iob,Iob. 3 his life (or soule) is in hades, in the world of the Dead. Againe, it suffiseth for our purpose, that Hades and Sheol are often vsed even indifferently forSheoll  Hades a sed often  only Dea effect. Thana∣mors. Death and as being in effect the same, or for the state and Condicion of Death, or the Power of Death. Which also sometime we may likewise conceave of the Latin Inferi: which is by the Translatours and other writers vsed for Sheol and Hades, though (I deny not) very daungerously and corruptly in deed. First, forPro. 2 misheol, the Greeke hath ek thaná∣tou from death, reckoning Death and Sheol to be all one. So in EcclesiastesEccle. Sheol andves Hammethim the dead are in effect all one. And the very same doeth Esai callIsa. 3 Shagnare Sheol, the gates of sheol, which thePsa. 9..107.18. Psalmes andIob. 3 Iob doe call Shagnare maueth, the gates of Death. In thePo. 3 and 27 Proverbes he meaneth Death, not Hell nor the Grave strictly taken; where, by an excellencie the greedines of it is noted for being Neuer satisfied. For Death generally craeth more then either Hell or the Grave strictly taken, do. So likewise Abakuk coupleth them togeather as being in effect alone,Aba Like sheoll and Death it will not be satisfied. Thus also it will appeare that that whichPsal.  David reioyseth for, the very same in effectPsal.  Christ heere reioyseth for. Only with this difference, David re∣ioyseth that God had delivered his soule from death thē, when he was likely to have dyed: Christ reioyseth because God would de∣liuer his soule from the Condicion of Death (sheol) after he was
in it, & speedily even before his flesh should corrupt. This might be evidētly shewed in infinit places mo, but that it is vtterly need∣les. In this sense it is that the Reprobates and the Elect after death are said to be togither.n. 28.19 a To morrow thou & thy sons shalbe with vs, saith the supposed Samuel to Saul. Not that there is any positive thing common to the Elect and Reprobates after death (which b you observe wel:g. 396.  Simpli. qaest. 3. g. 209.) but only that they be alike dead, and alike re∣main in death. Yet I say, they are not like any further. This c Aust. very well sheweth whom you d bring: saith he, mortuus mortem vivo proenuntiabat:Fathers  it me our  of Hadea that is, being dead he foreshewed death to him that yet lived. So that it was the same condition of death both to Saul and Samuell, but not the same fruition of happines. Thus the old Latin Translatour vseth Infernum, as cōmonly for Hades, so sometimes for e Thanatos death,ct. 2.24.  Cor. 15.55  Act. 2.24. piph. in nacephal:  Anchor. ustin. In yph. and sometimes f Mors death for Hades. Epiphanius readeth the g Text indifferently h Thaná∣tou or i Hadou, as reckoning thē in effect all one. Justin Martyr long before, saith, k Christ a little before his death noted the folly of those men tôn nomizónton me êinai auton Christon all hegon∣ménon thanatôsein auton, kai hós koinon ánthropon en hadou me∣nein: that thought him not to be Christ, but that he should dy and re∣maine in Hades as a common man. Hee meaneth not heere as a wicked man in Hell, but as any common man (whether good or bad) dying abideth in Death, or in the Dominion of Death, or in the world of the Dead. Irenaeus saith, l Heerein Christ (legem mor∣tuorum servavit) did but as others do that Dy,nae. lib. 5. . vlt. & conversed 3. dayes vbi erant Mortui (sancti) where the dead (Saintes) were. And this hee calleth Locum invisibilem the vnseene World. What meaneth this but Hades,es an invi¦ place of ye ed Soules. as we take it? Yea a little before he expresly calleth it Paradise. Nevertheles I grant that he thought this vnseene world was indeed beneath in the earth: wherein his proofes do vn∣terly faile him, as your selfe do fully grant, and professe in that point aswell as wee. Againe m hee further sheweth: that in the n Scripture he taketh Hades to be all one with Death,ib. 5.13.3.38.  Cor. 15.55 or the Do∣minion of Death, where he readeth the Text thus, Absorpta est mors in victoriâ, vbi est mors aculeus tuus? vbi est o mors victoria tua? Greek. des. Death is swallowed vp in victorie, Death where is thy sting? Death where is thy victory? And he addeth, Haec autem iustè di∣centur tunc, &c. These thinges shall truly be spoken then, when this
mortall and corruptible flesh, (about which Death is, and which is holden down by a certaine Dominion of Death) arising vp into life shall put on incorruption and immortality. Then verily shall death be overcome, when the flesh which is holden by it, shall come foorth out of the Dominion thereof. Thus he taketh heere Thanatos and Hades for one and the same thing in effect, that is for Death, and the power of death, and nothing els. Tertulian doth likewise: forTerrul Anima.  speaking of Inferi, which he taketh for the same that Hades is, hee noteth it as the place Quò vniversa Humanitas trahitur, whither all mankind must go. And therefore of Christs going thi∣ther he saith,Cap. 5 Quia & homo, mortuus secundum Scripturas & se∣pultus secundum easdem, hic quo{que} legi satisfecit formâ humanae mortis apud inferos functus: Because also he was a man (therefore) he dyed according to the Scriptures & was buryed according to the same, also heere he satisfied the common law (of nature) by following the forme of mens Dying (and going) to the world of the Dead, Tertullian is for vs yet further. Hee taketh Hades in the1 Cor.  Newe Testament meerely for Death, or the Dominion of Death, even as Irenaeus before did. Thus he readeth the Text & that often times,De R¦carn c. 4 54. Vbi est mors aculeus tuus? Vbi estHade mors contentio tua? Aculeus autem mortis delinquentia: virtus autem delinquentiae Lex. O Death where is thy sting? O Death where is thy force? The sting of Death is sinne: the force of sinne is the Law. And againe,Adver∣cion. 5. Scriptum est apudHose. Creatorem, Vbi estSheol  Hades. mors victoria, vel contentio tua? Vbi est mors aculeus tuus? Verbum autem hoc Creatoris est apud Pro∣phetam. It is written by the Creatour, Death where is thy victory, or thy force, or strife? Death where is thy sting? This is the worde of the Lord God by the Prophet Ozee. Still he maketh Hades & Sheol nothing els but Death in these places. And saith he, Deo gratias dicit (1 Cor.  Apostolus) quod nobis victoriam vti{que} de morte prestitit. The Apostle in the New Testament applying words of the Prophet to the Resurrection, giveth thanks to God because he causeth vs to get a victory indeed of Death. So still he maketh Hades to be Death and not Hell. Which yet is further most cleerely to be seene:De Ido cap. 13  See also  before p Lazarus apud inferos in sinû Abrahae refrigerium consecutus, &c. Lazarus in the world of the Dead inioyeth comfort in Abrahams bosom, contrariwise the Rich man is in the torments of fire, both of them (there) receaving their divers rewardes. How cleere is this,
that he maketh Hades and Inferos even in a Luke also,e 16.23 to be no∣thing but the common state and world of the Dead. Wherevpon the learned Junius noteth thus, Observandum autem quod ait Apud Jnferos etiam de Lazaro. Nam inferos Latini Patres (vt Graeci Haden) pro omni loco aut statû mortuorum dixerunt promiscuè. At{que} in hunc sensum Lazarus & Dives apud inferos collocantur. before g 162. m de it.  anima, . 55. Quomodo b Irenaeus, & c Chrysostomus ex verbis Luc. 16.23. locuti sunt, & Tertullíanus locis quamplurimis. This therefore it is that Tertullian saith in another place, d Constitui∣mus omnem animam apud inferos sequestrari in diem iudicij: We determine that every mans Soule is kept apart in the worlde of the dead til the day of iudgment. And, Are all soules thē in the power of the kingdom of Death, penes inferos? Will you nill you, there you shall finde punishments and comfortes, as in Lazarus and the Rich man. For why should you not thinke that the Soule may be both pu∣nished and comforted in inferis, in the Worlde of the dead? Neither doth he c Montanize in this (as f you obiect) but consenteth with Irenaeus before and with others after him as shall appeare, Innius  on this chap. 188. who were no Montanists. Notwithstanding it is true, that somewhere he taketh inferos, pro locali determinatione (as he speaketh) for the peculiar and determinat place of the wicked deceased, that is, Hell strictly and properly.. 4. Thus he doth in that g against Marcion, wth you cite pag. 201. Also in that h obiection of certaine Haeretikes whom hee confuteth, anima 55. not the true Christians, as i: you k miscon∣ceave. They argued thus (as you do) in hoc Christus Jnfiros adiit, ne nos adiremus.188.  title of ooke in elius & s editiō. Christ therefore went to Hell, to the ende that wee might never come there. He aunswereth them that it is false that Christe went to Jnferos in that sense, that is to Hell: for then what difference is there betweene the wicked Heathens and the godly Christians, if one & the same prison after death were for them both. Taking it for a thing generally granted in the church, that Christ being dead went onely thither where the godly Dead were, and therefore that it were a wicked and Haereticall thing to thinke he went where the Damned were, that is into Hell. And so he quite overthroweth your opinion togeather with the reason thereof, as an opinion, whiche if any helde, they were ill thought of in those dayes. 99. De es. ad lit. . 33. Thus also is Augustin well l vnderstood, where he denyeth that the Patriarkes were apud inferos, in Hell, namely the place of the Damned, because they were in Abrahas bosom.
Which yetEpist. 5 De civi.  20.15. elswhere he graunteth vnto, that they might be apud inferos in the world of the Dead, & namely where the Godly dead should be. So that thus if you had but distinguished these and o∣ther Fathers like words as you ought to haue done, there needed no such folly of Contradiction to be imputed vnto them, asPag. 18 200. 204 you doe lay to their charge in this point, altogeather vndeservedly. Which being well observed you shall see that all the Fathers (as Mr Iunius saith) both Greeke & Latin, do take Hades and inferosPromis indifferētly for the state of the Dead, as wel pertayning to yt Soules of the Godly, as to the Damned likewise. Athanasius also say∣ingAthanas. incar. Ch vbi tenebatur anima humana in morte, ibi exhibuit humanam suam animam: Where Humane Soules were held by Death, there he brought his humane Soule, Meaneth nothing els but that his humane Soule came vnder the same condicion of death, as other mens Soules did: not that he went to the place of the Dāned. Nei∣ter must he be vnderstood afterPag. 179 186. 214. your partiall translatiō, but after his owne language the Greek. When you say ex Orco, out of Hell, him selfe saith exhadou, out of the power of Death. So thatDe salu vent. Ch hee saith not a word that Christ was in Hell, but onely that his Soule was in Hades, in the Dominion of Death, asAd no similitud other good mens Soules were also: whence he by his victorious returne conquering DeathDe salut advent. C∣st. brought vs immortalitie, and wrought resurrection for vs. Heere Hades being ennemy and opposit to the Immortalitie and Resurrection of mens persons, cannot by any meanes be Hell: For Hell agreeth with Immortalitie and Resurrection, & in Hell shal∣be immortalitie and resurrection as well as in Heavē. But it is the common Death and dissolution of our persons, which is contra∣rie to the immortalitie and resurrection of them. For as Resurre∣ction is nothing els but a restoring and revniting of the Soule to the Body, so the contrarie is nothing els but meerely the dissolu∣tion and separation of the Soule from the Body: which is Death, and not Hell. Now in this death (saieth Athanasius) Christ was held till he spoyled and conquered it; thereby giving vs resurrec∣tion and immortalitie. This can not be Hell out of questiō. Hila∣rius verily hath this meaning also, saying;Hilar.  Psal. 13 This is the Law of hu∣mane necessitie, that their bodyes goe down to the Grave, their Soules to the world of the Dead, ad inferos. Which descent the Lorde did not refuse, that he might prove him selfe in every point to bee a true
man. His going to Hell proveth him not to be a true man: but his Soul to com vnder the power of Death, as well as his body to com to the Grave, koino ôpos, em mor∣ serva∣ that right well proveth him in deed to have bene a true man, and wholy in nature like all other men. Also this was indeed the Lawe of humane necessitie, (after the like phrase as a Iustin,gi satisfa∣ forma hu∣ mortis us. ag 157. efore.  Death & es ae v∣or ye same. b Irenaeus, and c Tertullian also speake:) but not to goe to Hell. Now this Death properly belōgeth to the Body of Men; d as it is left without life. Also no lesse properly it belōgeth to the whole Person of men, as it is dissolved and destroyed thereby. Thirdly, by consequence it belōgeth to both the dissolved partes: yea even to the immortall Soule (though blessed; not as it is in blessednes, but) as it remayneth held from the Body by the force of Death. And so all these last named are very excellent places to prove (which afterward I shall further shew) that all those arti∣cles of the Creed He Dyed, was Buryed, and descended to Hades do indeed signifie but one thing in effect, that he was a true man: see∣ing thus it befell him as it doeth all other men by the Law of our Nature: that is, to Dye. And therefore that it was cleane left out in all ancient Creedes, (where both those other clauses are specified) as being no divers point in effect from Dead and Buryed. Which Creedes nevertheles are worthily deemed to be absolute and per∣fit touching Christes workes of Redemption which hee hath wrought for vs. Since perhaps, when it came into the Com∣mon Creed, they signified heereby Christes going to Limbus. Which opinion indeed men generally inclined vnto (though er∣roneously) for many yeares: yet that the Ancients put this Des∣cending to hades, (meaning Limbus, or howsoever) into the vul∣gar Creed distinctly from both the other foresaid clauses, I beleue not. The contrary is proved afterwardes: as anon we shall see. But to proceed heere:rys. Hom. ivit & de  bol Tom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 40. asil. in  48. mbr. de  mort.  10. rom. in  1.14. uffin. in bol. . 413.414 c Chrysostom and d Basill likewise (with the rest of the Greeks) may be noted, how they yeeld Hades to the Soules of the godly and iust men deceased remayning in ioyes. Also Am∣brose is to be considered, who right according to all the rest, saith, e Soules departed from their Bodyes did go to Hades, that is, to an invisible place, which in Latin we call Infernum. And Ierome, f In∣fernus is a place where the Soules are included, either in rest or paines. And Ruffinus vpō g Descendit ad inferna giveth this sense Descendit in Mortem, He submitted vnto Death. All the rest which h you cite (or can cite) haue nothing contrary, but rather
consenting heerewith. So that it is certaine by all the Fathers ge∣nerally, 1. That Hades and Sheol are taken for Death,No. the Cōmon state of Death, or the invisible world of the dead common to the Souls both of good and bad, though their particular places were far separat and distinct. 2. That Christ went not into Hell the place of the Damned, as you holde: but to the Habitation of the blessed deceased (called also by them Abrahams bosome:) which we knowe (and you also) was indeed Heaven: according to that worde of Christ,Ioh. 16 16. I leave the Worlde, and goe to the Fa∣ther. Which I have prooued further before, pag. 149. 150. I doubt not but they erred generally (asPag. 21 your selfe also holdeth) in thinking that this Habitation of the blessed Souls was beneath in the earth, or that it was not heaven: nevertheles this is the point wherein we agree, and wherein they erred not, and which I cite them for, and which is directly against you, that hades (which also is sheol) belonged to the Blessed soules deceased, aswell as to the Damned: and namely that Christes going to Hades was to go to be Blessed deceased. Which in Latin also they called Jnfernū, but so vnproperly and so vnaptly in respect of the truth, that even this ill terme surely both sprang from error, and began in them their error, or confirmed and spread farther this error. Now thus your vaine boasting ofPag. 41 all the Fathers is but a bub∣ble: and that All the Fathers without exception do touch and teach Christes locall Descent to hell. So that if you bee content (asPag. 41 you say) to be tryed by all the Fathers Greeke and Latin, they quite overthrow you, notwithstanding your great words. For the truth is, they are all against you: and with vs, in such sort as I said. Only Austin doubtingly and waveringly differeth from all the rest: who somwhere seemeth to think that Inferi cannot be attributed to iust mens Soules departed. For thus doubtingly he speaketh,Aug de  ad liter. ca. Illud me nondum invenisse confiteor &c. I confesse I haue not yet found that Inferi are named where the iust mens Souls are at peace. Yes surely the Ancientes named the places for all the deceased both good & bad Inferos, like as they named (where both wicked and good do live in the world)Arnob. Psal 137. Superos. And Austin (if hee had marked it well) might have founde even this (which he saith hee found not) in the Latin translation of the Scripture:Psa. 88. Lat. edit. Quis est homo, qui vivet, &c. What man is there that (ever) shall live and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his Soule from the hande of Inferi,
that is Death. For he can not heere vnderstand Inferi to bee the Grave, because then the Soule must signifie the dead body: which a you say is more then absurd.g 168. Wherefore the Soule heere being taken properly for the Soule, then Inferi is found applyed to iust mens Soules deceased, as well as to the wicked: which Augustin might have observed.pist 57.  civit Dei, .15. Yea he him selfe b elswhere graunteth also that the iust in peace might be in inferis after death. And heere he denyeth it but coldly & waveringly, Proinde vt dixi nondum in∣veni, & adhuc quaero, nec mihi occurrit inferos alicubi in bono po∣suisse Scripturam. Now this is Austins difference heerein: let the Reader iudge,Pag. 363. Before pa. 56. Pag. 175. if you say truely that c Austin iudicially and reso∣lutely affirmeth it. Or is it not rather (as I call it) his † Cōiecturall in∣clination: yea his only. For d Fulgentius denyeth not inferos to the godly deceased, nor that Christ was locally with them onely in in∣feris. So that in saying, He was where the wicked are tormented, he meaneth that in respect of the Cōmon place; which in whole hee calleth infernum. Thus then we may see that Austins differing heerein is to little purpose. 1. Because it is contrary to all the auncient Fathers before him, with him, and since him. 2. Be∣cause we must not esteeme his saying by the Latin Inferi, but by the originall Sheol and Hades, which are more against him: as be∣fore I have shewed. 3. Because it is waveringly delivered, & with doubt in him selfe; yea contrary to him selfe, as I have shewed. 4. Because he secketh to maintaine it erroneously. For he giveth this reason and end of Christes going to Hell (the place of the Damned) that he might deliver some of the damned sinners out of Hell torments, quos esse solvendos occultâ suá iusticiâ iudica∣bat. Which most strange conceit of his your selfe e doe confute rightly.Pag. 199. But either graunt this end and reason to be true, or els say his maine opinion is false also, that Christ went thither: feeing he maketh that the reason of this. And why may not Austin erre as well in saying that he went to Hell after death, as in saying that he went thither to loose out of paines such and such? It seemeth Au∣stin was carried into this conceit,Vt ne{que} fru∣trà illc de∣cendisse exi∣stimetur nulli orum prosu∣urus qui ibi erant. Epist. 99. because hee could not imagine what f els Christ should doe in Hell: and that he was there in deed he thought, because he ghessed (contrary to all antiquity besides) that the meaning of inferi and hades could not be applyed to the estate of blessed soules after this life. Which mistaking of his (as
also yours with him) is plentifully convinced (I hope) before. Wherein I desire the learned to iudge. As for Austins opposing against this our sense of Hades, saying: In graecà linguâ origo no∣minis quo appellātur inferi, ex eo quòd nihil suave habeant, resonare perhibetur. It sheweth his mistaking more: yea the very grounde of all his mistaking, as I thinke. First it appeareth by this, that Austin had very litle knowledge in the Greek: seeing hee thin∣keth that Hades should originally signify nihil suave, nothing sweet. I coniecture that he thinketh Hades is made of hedys sweet, and α the Privative. Wherein then he misseth much: for hades in Greeke hath alwayes iôta written vnder,The natur Hades. which sheweth that in the true originall whence hades cometh, there is the letter iôta expressed. But in hedys sweet there is none. The trueth is, it cometh from  to see, and α the privative: as all Graecians (Pla∣to, Plutarch, &c.) yea the Fathers, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Ambrose, &c.) do shewe: and that it signifieth, An invisible state after a vi∣sible being in this world, and somtime Darknes, or a place of dark∣nes. Not that the state of all the Dead generally was thought to be in darknes, but because Death tooke them out of this cheere∣full worlds light, and covered them (as it were) with darknes and oblivion from the worlds sight and knowledge heere. This ety∣mologie of hades was most familiar and frequent with all Greci∣ans, with whom it seemes Austin was not much acquainted: as by this his wide coniecture we may thinke. Neither impute this (I pray) as arrogancie to me, for so iudging of such a man. I think all men will so iudge of him likewise, and yet derogat nothing from his great desert in Gods Church. Him self doth soberly ac∣knowledge it of him selfe, saying,Contr Peil. 2 Ego quidem Graecae linguae per∣parùm assecutus sum, & propè nihil. Truly J have but litle Greck: yea almost none. Neither would he heere have said perhibetur, thus it is reported, touching the Etymologie of Hades: if he had pretē∣ded any skill in that toung. Yea Possidonius in his Life testifieth, that he had no love to the Greeke language. Besides many other argumentes heereof, if it were likely that I wronged him in iud∣ging thus of him. Wherefore seeing it was thus, no marvaile if Austin easily mistooke the proper & right meaning of hades: &c then much sooner of Inferi, for the reasonPag.  Treat. 105. before noted. Thus also he might readily imagin heervpon, that Hades and Inferi (in
Scripture specially) were no where applyed to blessed Soules. Which oversight in him is much more pardonable, then it can be in you: who I doubt not in the languages want no skill, if you would but sincerely iudge according to that you do vnderstand. Yea and in comparison of my selfe, I vnfainedly confesse, that I suppose I haue not seene many bookes in the learned tounges, which you are likely to have read and studied. Nevertheles I am well assured that in the sense of these words Hades and Sheol; you are greatly over hot: and most of all in this vnsavoury opiniō co∣ming therefrom, that Christes soule after death went to Hell. As I hope it hath hitherto well appeared. Yet you will say, Austin speaketh marveilous resolutely,pist. 99. that a None but an infidell will de∣nie that Christes Soule was in inferis. So he may well, vnderstan∣ding heere Jnferos to expresse Hades in Greeke: for that is the Scripture in deed. Which to denie were infidelitie. But hee is no insidell that denieth inferos to be a fit Latin worde for Hades in Greck: some have  t simply  the state  cath. pa. 3. &c.  Graeca ua origo nis, &c. or * admitting the translation, yet denyeth in English that Christ was in Hell. After all, yet I may not forget how Aust. heere "would have in this cōtroversie the very nature & proper Etymo∣logie of Hades to be regarded and precisely followed: notwith∣standing that him self mistooke it much. How then is it, that you skornfully cal this indeavour (touching the Hbrue Sheol) b Rab∣binicall Grammar observations,g. 153. and (touching Hades in Greeke) the Poets fantasticall imaginations? In this therefore Austin also is not a litle against you. Other exceptions of his touching the matter, we shall afterwards consider togeather with yours. Now I come from the Ancients to the later learned Writers: that we may not neglect their iudgment in this question. late De∣ors of the ll con∣ o ex∣ion. Who as they were generally freer from errour then those of olde for the most part, so they testifie this point with me more cleely & more con∣stantly then they. Who were observed * before. Yet because you let them go without (as it were) saluting them, and as if they were not worthie (belike) that you should cast a looke on them: cat. 1. there∣fore they shalbe noted once more, that I may presse you with thē, and that others at least wise, may consider them better. Bucer saith, The " Scripture no where speaketh of Hades or Infernum, but as being common aswell to the blessed as to the damned. in Mat.  50. But Ge∣henna is proper only for the damned. Againe, In that we acknow∣ledge
that the Lord went down to Infernum, we vnderstand that in his Soule he ioyned to the society of the soules of the dead Saints, even as in his body hee was ioyned to their bodyes by Buriall. P. Matyr,P Mart Symbo. That Christ descended to Inferos (or Hades) signifieth nothing els, but that he did vndergoe the same state as other souls do that depart this life. Mollerus, (touching Sheol, Hades, and Infernum ascri∣bed to ChristMoller. Psalm 1 saith, they do signifie but that Christ dyed: and to be no more, then as if he should say in the Psalme, Therefore I re∣ioyce because I know that although I dy yet I shall rise to life againe. Bulinger (speaking of Christ & indifferētly of the godly) shewethBullin D 1.7. & 8. that To go to Inferos, is to go to Abrahams bosom, that is into Hea∣ven, not into Hell: and that Inferi and Hades do make difference only betweene the Living and the Dead, & nothing els. Lavater saith,Lavat. Eech ca 31.18. Hades in Greeke is a generall worde for the condition of the dead both in torments and in peace. Tremellius saith,Annoa Psal. 49. This He∣brew word Sheol doth signifie any station or state of the 'Dead in ge∣nerall in very many places of Scripture: and Hell it may sometime signifie, but by a figure synecdoche. Lastly Iunius in his note vpon TertullianPag. 16 before rehearsed, doth confirme all this most fully. These men I thinke every wise and faithfull Christian will high∣ly esteeme and prefer, for their learning and namely for their skill in the toungs, for their syncerity and soundnes in Religion, for their vnity and consen this point, for their diligence, faithful∣nes, and mdsty in all thinges. The lear Heathen thout cō¦our sense Hades.The rather this sense of Hades we are to acknowledge, because it hath ben the ancient phrase and common vse of speach before Christianity: that this worde should signifie the generall state of Dath applyed even to the Soules both of the Blessed & Damned Which sufficiently I shewedTreat.  97 98. before out of Plato, Homer, and o∣thers. Yea no lesse I shewed also touching the Latin worde Inferi out ofPa. 100 108. Cicero: though this word naturally implyeth an error, wch Hades doth not, as before also I have declared. What is your an∣swer to this? Forsooth (I thinke because you have ben a master of Grammar) you go about to teach Cicero Latin, & for his general phrase implying that al the Deceased both good & bad were apud inferos, vou do so whip him & handle himYour p 387. 3 heere, that it seemeth you forget by whom your selfe hath profited, and that even he in time past hath ben your Teacher. I will not now enter into any
defense of Cicero: his speach and language will defend it selfe. Also that were to leave our maine purpose. But it is the lesso strange that you vse Cicero thus: for others also have had the like correction at your handes with him.g. 310. a Before Torence scaped not. And b heere Plato and Socrates and other Greekes have also their partes,. 374.378 for their vsing and taking of the Greeke worde Hades so largely as the naturall Etymologie thereof doeth beare. But let them defend them selves whether they speake vsuall and right Greeke and Latin, or no: I will leaue them in that. They are elo∣quent enough, they can speake in this case for them selves. Only I will take their wordes at their handes evens as c I finde them, and so I refer the iudgement of all to the learned and wise Reader. also all  forenoted ned W have loud  & vsed  likewise. g 385. Also for that charge against me of d lewd lying, and open falsify∣ing of Plato, I remit all to the indifferent Reader. Yet I can not but smile truly (for offended I will not be) that Mai. Bilson is so strongly perswaded, that c I am of Platoes and Ciceroes religiō tou∣ching Hell,g 370. . 389. Heaven, the Gods, and wicked Spirites: and that I seeke indeed to bring in their fantasticall Hell into our Christian Creed. This fantasticall conceit of his, let him feed him selfe with it: and let him perswade it to whom he can. Thus much the so∣ber and indifferent Reader will consider and acknowledge, that the Holy Apostles doe teach the Heavenly trueth with the very wordes and Grammar of the Heathen men: wherevnto that ser∣veth which is written of them, f We every man heare them speake in our owne tounges and languages wherein we were borne.. 2.8, 11. Then the Apostles surely spake according to the currant speach before their times and in their times, and yet thereby never g Cano∣nized the fables and fancies which the nations implyed in their wordes.g. 368. Whosoever he be that will say otherwise, knoweth not what he saith: neither shall any credit or greatnes which he hath, get him credit in so saying. Yet in a certaine place you most strangly and confidently avouch, h That neither with the ancient Maisters of the Greeke tounge which were Poets,g. 410.  1. Treat. . 97.98. to in done. m. iliad. 1 lutarch. rallel. & nsol. ad  nor with the 70. nor with the Writers of the New Testament, nor with the people of that time Hades did ever signifie the world of Souls without any li∣mitation of state or place. I thought that those fewe allegations which " I brought of * Plato, † Homer, and " Plutarch for the Greeke, and of Latins for the Latin would haue suffised to cause
you not to deny so cleere and manifest a trueth, which heere you denie even against your owne knowledge, as after shall appeare. Wherfore to demonstrat this point a litle further to you, and to al men, if any yet doe believe this your assertion, (which is most vn∣true) I will not thinke it to much to note some more places out of the Heathen authentike Greekes, (for that is the principall con∣troversie) that Hades with thē did signifie the World of Soules, with out any limitation (in the very word it self) either of state or place. But as all men know that by reason of Circumstances it often sig∣nifieth with thē Hell determinatly,Note. so by reason of circūstances al∣so it signifieth with them many times determinatly the Habitatiō of the Soules of good men in ioyes and pleasures, which was to them as their Heaven. And for this I will only put you in minde of some places, which you know well enough already. First note that common epithet or title of Hades:Hades t worlde Soules  ye Auther Greeks.Lycop Hades pandokeus or pan∣docheus. The vnseene worlde or state of Death that receaveth all, both good and bad.Hom.  15. He in The Others imagin Hades a God or mighty power power of Death, & do cal him, eneroisin kataphthimenoisin anassôn, Ruler (not of Hell only, but) of all that 'Dy. And therefore to this place com not the wicked and damned onely, but the noblest and best also, (as Achilles saith being dead and being in Hades)Hom.  λ. Aidós de katélthemen éntha te nékroi: Hither into hades all we that are dead do come. ThisPlato Gorgia Plutarc Consol Apollo Plato and Plutarch do acknowledge in that place whichPa. 37 you cite at large: togeather with a number mo both of the Poëts & Philosophers. And this also it is that Homer shewing how Iupiter cast down his rebellious Angels into Hell (Tártaron, with them the proper place of the Damned) hee describeth it to be so much beneath Hades the place of the other Dead,Hom. hoson ou∣ranos esti apo gaies: as heaven is from the earth. So in regard of this it is thatSopho Aiant. another maketh it to be much better to be in hades, as it is the common place and condicion of the dead (not Hell) then to be sicke vnrecoverably: kreissôn aida keuthôn e nosôn má∣tan. And so Plutarch maketh Hades (not Hel, but) the place of the Dead or the stare of the dead in generall to be a soveraigne com∣fort to the afflicted & miserable in this world,Plutarc swering Aeschy O Thanate paian iatros molois, Limen gar ontôs aidas an' aian: Aiden d'echôn boe∣thon, ou tremo skias. Lastly that whichPag. 37 you bring of Orpheus de∣scribing the true God, that he is King both of the Vnseene world
aithéros ed'aïdou, and also of this present visible worlde ponton gaiéste tyrannos, confirmeth all that is before said. For aither aides heere is to be construed togeather, not separatly; and so he signifi∣eth thereby that the true God indeed is Lord and King not onely over this whole Visible world (which he vnderstandeth by the Sea and Land) but also over the whole Invisible world or ayer, that is over all the Dead both good and bad. I marvaile therefore very much what you meane to speake so plainly contrary to the truth and to your owne knowledge, that Hades did never signifie the world of Soules without any limitation of state or place, no not with the ancient Maisters of the Greeke toung which were the Poets. The rather this your speach is directly against your knowledge because you expresly collect and confesse the contrary, that is the same which I do:ag 403. thus you say. a Hades before (the Apostles time) extended to good and bad.pag. 371. And " within Plutoes kingdom vnder the earth which they call Hades, as well the places and pleasures for the Good,ag 379. d, in Ho∣r, Ʋirgil, istophanes pides and ers you shal the World he Dead, he world of es be they  or bad to in Plutoes gdo which Greek ts call les. as the prisons and punishmentes for the bad are in their con∣ceit prepared and setled. Againe, b Hades with them was the Ruler or place of Soules, were they in rest or paine. Where you make a strange answer, that Christian Religion will assure, that this place must needes be Hell. What? That place where some good mens soules deceased are in rest? Is this Hell? Yea is it Hell in Christian Religion? Who then henceforth will care for Hell, if some soules haue rest and pleasures in Hell? But you say also that those Hea∣then Greekes did thinke that this place of Soules was c vnder the Earth. It is true, they thought so indeed: and it was their "error, as also the very same was the Christian Fathers errour likewise. Which they drew certainly from their acquaintance with those Heathens, 379.381  Hades it fe impor∣g no such ng. but no where at all from the Scriptures. Yet none of these thought this place to be very Hell, where soules were in rest. There is small rest, and few pleasures in Hell. But these Heathens d vnderstood Hades chiefly for Pluto the Ruler of this place vn∣der the earth. 371.374 So that though the place were also called Hades, yet this was but secondarily. I answer: This is questionles vtterly vntrue. For rather the Place or the Estate of the Dead was first & originally called Hades. The God thereof (whom afterward they idolatrously imagined) they did conceave secondarily in respect of the place or thing. Which beside the evidence of the matter, I
am perswaded that Plato & Plutarch do shew also plaine enough, even heere where you cite them. Howsoever: this is not maternal, nor to any purpose, whether the place and state were with thē first and chieflie called Hades, or whether the fayned Power of death, and Ruler of the Dead (as they imagined) were first and princi∣pally so called. This is certaine, that this Power or Ruler which they conceaved to be over the Dead, as they like Idolators made it a God, so their meaning was to esteeme him as the God of the Dead in Generall, and his state and kingdome to be theWhich ∣ing a pri∣pall pom our qua is fully g∣ted by y before. Habitatiō of the Dead in generall, not of the wicked only in Hel, but of the good also in their Elysian happines: which was to them in their estimation and reckoning, that which Heaven indeede is to vs. ButPag. 39 you say, there is no one place in truth common to all soules departed this life, but som are in Hel, and som in Heaven. I doubt not but the blessed in Heaven & the Damned in Hell are both in cōdition & situation seperated a funder exceeding far. Yet never∣theles as they are somwhere wth in the cōpasse of the created world so they are in a cōmon place; opposi indeed to this visible earth & world of the living, but cōmon to al the Dead, namely in this only respect as they are Dead & departed hence, & are vnseene, & vtter∣ly exempted frō all mutual medling togither with vs that do live. Moreover we stande not so much on this, that by Hades must be vnderstood any one place cōmon to all the Dead, but the State and condition of death among the Dead, or the Power and Domi∣nion of Death which very aptly also it serveth for, and fitteth our purpose aswell as to vnderstand there by a common place. But in∣deed all this I doubt not Hades very well may signifie, when it is referred to men, according to the circumstances of the authour where it is read. But this Hades you say in those Heathen authorsPag. 3 378.41 is the very Divell himselfe. Therefore his Kingdome must bee needes nothing but Hell. I answer, The Heathen in their conceit thought him not to be a Divell but aVz yt  or of d wc by  is som signifie God, even the God and Ruler over all the Dead: and so they worshipped this foule Idoll. Therefore his whole kingdome & region they reckoned to be the World of the Dead or Dominion of Death, which also they called Hades: It may bePag. 37 Porphyrie meaneth that they held him to bee Lorde and Ruler over Hell and all the wicked Spirits and Divells therein: yet he saith not but that Hades or Pluto was thought by
them to have power over all the Dead: his rage against men, and the feare that men had of him, signified the vnmercifulnes of Death sparing none, and how it is to the nature of all men a thing most terrible. So that they esteemed a part indeed of his Domini∣on to be Hell peculiarly: but a part also to be the Region of the Happy, which was their Heaven. But you say, this was the Divell. Yea even as the rest of their Gods were also very Divells indeed, & nothing els. So was their Highest Jupiter, and so was Apollo, and so was Mercury, and all the rest of the Goddes and Goddesses which their impiety adored. They were indeede none other, then very Divels illuding the vanity of men. And thus I grant was their Hades or Pluto likewise. Howbeit in their estimation he was not properly the Divell, but a Power or Ruler over the Dead both good and bad: and his Kingdom the Dominion and world of the Dead both good and bad.Pag. 171. But a you remit Poets and Pagans vsing this word to the alleagers. Yet Poets & Pagans are the authentike maisters for Grammar both Greek & Latin. Yea they were yours I doubt not in time past.Before pag. 70. Austin (as we " saw) alloweth the Etymo∣logie and naturall propertie of hades to be regarded. Yea all lear∣ned men in all ages condemne this your reiecting of Pagans and Poets for the Grammaticall vse of wordes: whom still they do re∣gard and follow in this respect. But heere let vs observe, how the holy Apostles doe teach the truths of the Gospell with the very wordes and language of the Heathens.bservations. There are in this point 3. or 4. thinges that must bee  well observed and remembred. 1. The Apostles doe speake of the mysteries of true Religion with the Heathens words (as I said) yet so, as that when the Heathens wordes do imply some errour with truth, then in other expresse places they plentifully refute al their errours implyed in their wordes. Whereby it comes to passe that all the proportion of truth which the Heathen signified by them, is yet fully and rightly signified still in the Apostles vse of them: but nothing further, that is, none of the other fancyes & fictions of the Heathen. As for example, Zeus Iupiter, was among the Heathens their great God, & he only was their highest: of whom besides they held a 1000. fables, and indeed he was none other but a Divell, as is before noted. Nevertheles the Apostle vseth the same for the only true God the author and governour of Heaven
and Earth (passing by all their Fables) when he applyeth the Po∣ets verse,Act. 2 His generation also we are. Tartarus whichPag. 3 you ob∣iect, though rarely & sometime perhaps a Philosopher will note thereby the Ayer, yet indeed vsually and in a maner alwayes they meant Hell by it, with a thousand of dreames thereto belon∣ging. Yet Peter not canonizing nor commending their dreames and fictions of Hell, notwithstanding signifyeth Hell indeed by that worde of theirs according to their common vse thereof, and according to the proportion of truth which therein they held. So Daimonion, which alsoPag. ib you obiect they vsed to signifie by it both good and bad Spirits following and conversing with them: and the good they honoured as Gods. But indeede and in truth seeing these same were all Divels, therefore the Scripture holdeth not the Heathens erroneous meaning in this word: yet it doth re∣tayne that which they vnderstood by it truly, that is to signifie Divells and bad spirits. Againe, Theos the Heathen vsed for to expresse the Nature of God: but so as that they thought it cōmon to many severall Gods. The Apostles vse the word also for the true God, yet not vnderstanding therein a nature common to many: which error they otherwise cleerely and often refute. And thus we might speake of infinit mo the like wordes: as Feare, the pow∣er and strength whereof they also fained to be a God, and of Hope and of Revenge Goddesses, &c. Like wherevnto is Hades, even that which presently we have in hande.The dive applicat of Hade With the Heathē it com∣monly and most vsually signified the state of Dead men: somtime rarely, the Destruction of other things which perish out of this vi∣sible world & haue no more being heere. Whereof anon we shall see further. Howbeit now to consider it as it respecteth men only, thus the Heathens chiefly and commonly by Hades vnderstoode the state I say and Condition of men both good and bad deceased and gone out of this world. And they meant it commonly for the Destruction of their persons from out of this world generally and indifferently. Againe, oftentimes particularly touching their Bo∣dyes buriall: also particularly many things touching their Soules state being parted from the Body. Some of which they believed were in Blessednes, some in Tormentes: although they signified neither of these in the word Hades, but onely (as I said) their state after their departure hence. Also they thought some of the Blessed
Soules to be in the a chiefest Blessednes,Vhich you iect pag. 4. 376. that was in presense with the Gods. Yet they were in Hades also, that is in an other world after they were wiped out from hence. Hither they admitted on∣lie Philosophers,Treat. 1 pa. . Heroês, & such like. Thus hither it is that b Pla∣to assigneth Socrates, and thus Socrates him selfe hopeth to goe to Hades, to the wise and good God. Other Soules of good men they gave Blessednes vnto in the Elysian fieldes vnder the earth: as they fancied, or where els I know not. And these were also in Hades. So that both these estates and condicions of blessed Soules decea∣sed which was their Heaven (though differing very much in pla∣ces) they yeeldd to be in Hades. Whence I thinke some of the Fathers, and after them some Papistes, haue fayned divers places of rest and ioy to the Dead. Heaven presently to the Martyrs, but to other good Christians an other place of rest & ioy (which they called Abrahams bosome) either in the earth, or where they also knew not. Howbeit into the glory of Heauen and the presence of God and of Christ they admit none, save only the Martyrs before the last day. But this errour and all other errors about Hades, the Apostles sufficiently confute in their writings: so that we are not now to respect the same in the vse of Hades. Onely we are there∣fore to note how much and what (besides all errours) may bee truly retayned and meant by the Apostles in applying this worde Hades, as the Heathen did, to both sortes of Soules of Dead men. They might truely vnderstand that both have one common condi∣cion and state as touching their being in another world, as they were dissolved, departed from and wiped out of this visible world, & a they were now in the world of the Dead an opposite estate & con∣dicion to the living. This also the very Natural Etymologie of the word according to Grammar, doeth properly yeeld in that it sig∣nifieth c Vnseene,Hades. The ke may be id of Sheol. or Not seene any more in this world, or an estate not seene heere with vs: topos aîdes, an Ʋnseene place, as Plato cal∣leth it. Where note, it cannot be referred to the estate of Angels, because Hades is the vnseene state of them that once had a visible and ordinary being and conversation heere in this world. So that in very deed it hath properly but a Privative sense, & not any thing positive in it: though this d you can not brooke. All this then the Apostles might well vnderstand & allow in the word Hades,Pag. 396. with∣out any taint of Heathenisme. And therfore also doubtles so they
did. But the heathens further made Hades a Divine power (whom also they called Pluto, as it were the God of Death, or of the Dead) because (as before is shewed) they dreamed that he held all that were Dead, vnder his power, both blessed & damned soules. And because no man that dyeth whether good or bad, doeth ever live heere againe: and because all whosoever without exception must dy, therefore they call him Hades améilichos kai adámastos, impla∣able and vnmastered: and Nélees êtor echôn having a mercilesso beart. In which sense in Latin also they vsed Parca, Destiny: the ende of all, because it spareth none. Certainly this Deifying of such a Power or to make a God of it, the Apostles abhorred: and every where in their writinges they shew what Idolatry and ex∣treame impiety it is. But yet they may and do acknowledg such a power of Death, which worketh this Destruction of all men frō the world, & detayneth them in Death afterward. Wherefore they have in sundry places Prosopopoeas thereof as in the Revelation the Keyes of Death and Hades: Death riding on a pale horse, and Hades following after him: Death and Hades yeelded vp their dead, and both were cast into Hell. Likewise that, O Death where is thy sting, O Power of death where is thy victory. But of these more anon. Hitherto the 1. observation is manefest that the A∣postles vsing the Heathens words, yet need not, nor do nor vnder∣stand in them any of their fancyes and errors, which by their do∣ctrine otherwise they refute; nevertheles they may and do vnder∣stand the generall truth signified in them, whatsoever the Hea∣thens vsed by them to signifie and imply. And thus is our worde in controversy Hades cleered. But to cleere the rest also of those whichPag. 36 you obiect: Sec: we are to observe that the Apostles trans∣fer the Heathens Civill words many times to their Ecclesiasticall  vse: namely keeping yet still the proportion of their former sense. As in these, Apostle, Bishop, Deacon, Gospell, Law, Sinne, Repen∣ance, Hope, Conscience, Concupisence, &c. Which change is small and easy, sith the words have a iust proportion still togeather both in Civill and Ecclesiasticall vse. Onely if any difference or oddes be, it is expresly vttered in some part of the Apostles doctrine be∣sides. There is no such cause, nor matter of difference to be found in Hades. Third. The Apostles do vse some wordes kat' éxochen  by an excellencie, & yet in no point altering the native vse or pro∣perty
of them.a all the  before med, or t o them  e con∣ed also er this e. ag 403. a Thus Scripture is vsed commonly for the Word of God only, Diábolos for the Divell, although sometimes other writings are called also Scripture, and other Accusers and slande∣rers Diaboloi. But neither hath this consideration any place in Hades, that in Scripture it should signifie chiefly Hell: much lesse only. Which thing b you avouch. Lastly, Som think the Apostles altered the worde Faith from the Passive sense of it importing  Faithfulnes and honestie, as the Heathens commonly vsed it, to the Active sense which is True beliefe or Trust vsed in the Scriptures: which you also obiect. But I suppose the Apostles tooke this Active sense of the word Faith frō the Old Testament, meerely translating the Hebrue into Greeke. For I see not what difference at all there is betweene c Pistis,om. 1.17. bac 2.4. and d Emunah whereby the Iewes signified Faith to salvation. Which is reason enough for this vse thereof in Greeke by the Apostles, namely if it bee a Hebraisme, though it bee not very suteable to the Heathens vse thereof. The like I iudge of Elder, Law, Sinne, &c. But Hadès for Hell hath no like reason. Further I think even the Heathens have vsed this word Faith, sometime Actively as the Gospell vsually hath it: likewise the Gospel abhorreth not altogeather the Passive vse of it for Faithfulnes. Lastly, if it were so that the Apostles did follow no other reason, but meerely transferred that word from the Civill passive to the Ecclesiasticall active vse, we say on neces∣sity they might do it. For having some Spirituall doctrine to de∣liver and the ordinary speach wanting some fit word for the same, then they might, yea of necessity they were forced to take some word neerest in nature and sense to their purpose, & so they might give to that word a peculiar Ecclesiasticall vse further then anci∣ently it had. But Hades for Hell hath no help by this reason: they tooke the word Gehenna from the Hebrewes, and vsed it proper∣ly for Hell. Therefore they need not alter hades for that purpose, for which they had another proper word. It is manefest then that the Apostles stil kept the proportion of the sense in all their words translated from the common and vsuall speach of the Heathen so far as any reason of truth might be alike in both, & so they spake indeed still the tounge and language of the Nations: and therefore Hades with the Apostles can not be properly Hell, as even with Heathens also properly it was never.
I suppose yet you will say, The Fathers take Hades for Hell. I answeredPa. 1 before how they sometime take it determinatly and strictly; so they signifie Hell by it. Somtime they take it largely & generally according to the Ancient Heathens vse: and so they signifie by it nothing but the generall state of Death pertayning alike both to good and bad deceased, as I have declared. Thus you get nothing by them: albeit sometime the restraine the worde Hades more then they ought to restraine it. Heere also were place to have added somwhat for iustifying that I said, The Fathers do alter the ancient true vse of som words both Greeke and Latin, from whom (in controversies) we ought to ap∣peale to their authentike vse in Scripture and Classicall authors. But becausePag. 3 you send me about Chirotonía to another place, I am content to examine what you have there to the contrary. Which, seeing it draweth me into further matter therevnto appertaining, I will differre for this time. Hitherto we have tryed the nature and vse of Hades, and have found it to be not properly Hell, asPag. 1. 171. 40 you avouch. No, not when it is applyed to soules of men deceased. And therefore also that it can not be so vnderstood in Act. 2.27. where it is applyed to Christs Soule after he was dead. Which yet is the only place that you have to pretend.How th in Act.  may si and tr vnders Now something more you bring for your purpose from the Circumstances of this Text: which we must consider. But first let vs simply and plainly vnderstād the same, according to our former true declaration of the nature and vse of Hades. Where the text is, Thou wilt not leaue my Soule in Hades, or to  Hades: we may simply take Hades for the invisible state or place of the deceased. And so supplying the defect of a word which must be vnderstood, thus we may say eis ton topon, or chôran hadou: in the place or region of the invisible state orAithér dou. Or before p 173.17. World of the Deceased Otherwise we may take it simply for Deaths force & strength and  power: supplying also the same words eis ton topon, or ten chôran hadou, in that place where the power and strength of Death pre∣vaileth and holdeth the deceased Soules from their Bodyes. This is the World of the Dead, implying nothing ells but ap estate op∣posit to our Visible estate in this world. Thus may hades be fuly taken, sith I have largely proved before how Hades & Thanato Death are in effect all one: and may both be applyed even to iust
mens Soules deceased, but hades more easily & naturally. Last of all we may take hades heere by a Prosopopoea conceaving it to be  (as it were) som Person of vnresistable power taking away & with∣holding from hence al mens Souls departed. Howbeit this power was controlled and loosed by God in Christes Resurrection. And then we may construe it thus: eis ten chóran, topon, or oikian Ha∣dou, in the place, region, or habitation of this mighty power. Or eis to kratos, exousian, dynamin, or epikratian tou Hadou, to the strength, power, or dominion of this Destroyer of life. Thus how∣soever we take it, (though this last way is not the vnlikelyest) Ha∣des heere signifieth in effect nothing els but Death, & that Christs Soul (departed this life) was held therein, but could not be holden fast.g. 166. You obiect, c We must not make a Figurative sense but where manefest need is. Heere is no need of a figurative sense. Therefore heere ought to be no Figure supposed. I answer, First wee grant your Conclusion: whether of the 2. former wayes soever that we take hades, so there is simply no Figure at all therein. Sec: Then your own sense of Hell in this place is cleane overthrown by your selfe. For whensoever hades and sheol do signifie Hell, it is indeed by a Figure: namely Synékdoche, where the Whole is set for a part, Which I have proved at large before:re pag. & particularly by d Tremel∣lius a sufficient man for his Hebrue skill. Wherefore by this rea∣son Hell cannot possibly be meant heere, if no Figure be admit∣ted. Third: it seemeth convenient and also likely to take hades heere by a Prosopopoea, after our 3. sense before noted. Which kind of Figure supposeth (as it were) a Person of that thing which otherwise a word properly signifieth. So that by this figure no∣thing of the wordes native signification is diminished. Thus our word hades is vsed in the Corinthians, O Hades where is thy victo∣ry? Also as it may seeme in the " Revelation Death & Hades were cast into Hell.ther as pa. 17 Thus then it is nothing but emphatically signifying the power of Death. Fourth: Admit that hades and sheol did pro∣perly signifie Hell, as (we see) they do not. Likewise that some∣time they signifie only the Grave, which also you acknowledg: & it is true, when it is applyed to a dead Body. Againe admit that nephesh by a Figure may signifie the whole Person, yea e the dead Body somtimes. doth  21.1. &  & 2.4. Then I affirme, that heere in this place of neces∣sity there ought to be vnderstood a Figurative sense. Heere is
plainly most necessary cause. For take them thus literally (as you doe) and they impugne the groundes of faith and charitie. WhichPag 1 you grant (& that rightly) is sufficient to cause a Figurative sense in Scripture. But how do they impugne faith or charity, being taken as you take them? Verily thus; Your sense implyeth by the way and consequently,Points in Assertion ∣trary to ∣cōmon ∣o Faith  charity. that a good and sinles man (yea the best that ever was) worthy of Paradise and the highest Heavens, yet after death did go to Hell. And further, that being in Heaven, yet he stayed not there (as you say) but immediatly came out againe to go into Hell. Againe, that a Humane soule being in the depth of Hell, yet should feele no paines: and that being locally in hell it should com out thence also. What can be more against the ge∣nerall rules of the Scripture then these things? Yea how doth this impugne our generall charity towards all the iust when they dy? Besides many other disproportions and vnreasonable inconveni∣ences following withall, as anon we shall further see. Wherefore if by any meames possibly a Figure may be heere admitted, certain∣ly it must be so: for these most necessary causes last rehearsed. The rather seeing no other text any where insinuateth any such pecu∣liar matter in Christ, that he should differ in these points from all good men els, as you do vrge. But you say,The Cir¦stances  against y the circumstances heere doe prove that the word must be Hell properly taken. That I would faine see. What are these circumstances. First, this place shewethPag. 1 a special prerogative verified in none but in Christ. I deny it: heere is no such prero∣gative mentioned. Except this, that whereas some other men after death have returned to life againe, it was not by their owne pow∣er, as Christs Resurrectiō was. Againe God in his revealed wil ha∣ving signified by his Prophet long before that he should be resto∣red speedily to life againe: thus it was simply impossible that Christ should be holden fast by the power of Death, although it had got hold of him. And so indeed he had a prerogative before all men ells, which also is heere shewed vs: but no other prerogative in the world neither heere, nor any where els cā be gathered touch∣ing his returne from Hell. You adde, No flesh (dead) was ever free from corruption but only Christes. What then? Ergo his Soule was in Hell? Or ells, why bring you such needles and impertinent matter. Besides, I iudge that not to be true. Were notPag. 1 some be∣ing
dead raised to life againe before their flesh putrified? But non (you say) in the sepulchre. And what then? How will this inferre or prove, that so none but Christs Soul was ever supported in Hel, or that it was ever there. These are simple reasons for so great a conclusion. Then you say, Jf by Hell we vnderstand Paradise it was no privilege to be there not forsaken, but rather a childish absur∣dity to thinke any Soule might be there forsaken. It is a strange ab∣surdity still to abuse your reader calling this word Hel,tio prin∣ . which in∣deed is nothing but Death in effect, the Power of death, or the condition and state of death. Againe to presume that wee take it for Paradise or Heaven, or Hell at any time: when we referre it all∣wayes to the generall state of the Dead, and no further immediat∣ly. Now in this Christ had cause to reioyce that neither his Soule nor Body was left: but so soone raysed vp to perfit life againe, and so sitted to a full receaving of glory, which within few dayes after he had. Also besides this cause (his deliverance from the condition of death) he had an other inestimable cause to reioyce that he was raised to life againe, namely that he might fulfill his whole work for our Salvation, which before his Resurrection, Ascension, &c: he could not accomplish.g. 170. Further b you obiect, that Peter maketh mention that the sorrows of death were broken, that they should not hold Christ nor hinder him from rising againe. But there were none such in the Grave, none in Paradise. Therfore in Hel Christs Soule was, whence he was delivered when he rose againe. I denie vtterly this sequele. Because the text saith not that there were any present sorrowes in Hades where Christ was. Heere is not a word to any such purpose.. 2.24. What saith the text, " God raised him vp, loo∣sing the sorrowes of Death, because it was impossible for him to bee, holden fast of it. Wil you cōclude frō hence: Ergo there were pre∣sent sorrows in that place where Christ was? There is no strength in this reason. The Apostle signifieth heere 2. or 3. things. 1. That God loosed Death frō him; wherein hee was held, but could not be holden fast. 2. That this Death had bene a most sorrowfull & painfull Death: which indeed he tasted to the full vpō the Crosse. As this Hebraisme, the sorrowes of Death (for a sorrowfull Death) may emphatically signifie. Also he may set these 2. the sorrowes of Death thus togeather, as the Cause and the Effect: signifying that by the violence of sorrowes and bitter paines which he suffe∣red
Death came vnto him & tooke hold of him: but it could not hold him fast, because God himselfe loosed and dissolved it. Thus then it can not follow by the text, that there were sorrows now in hades where Christ was. Further the very text implyeth that Christ was holden in this which was loosed from him: I say, he was hol∣den but notKra to b fast, en ctori hold holden fast. Now he was not holden in sorrows, for then he could not but have felt them after death: which you will not affirme. It was therefore Death (wch came by sorrows) where∣of he was holdē, but not held fast. Againe it appeareth that Christ was in that which was loosed and rid from him: Thou wilt notena∣sai. leave my soule in hades. I say, he was now in the same wherein he was not left nor forsaken. But he was in no sorrows at all now, for then I think he should haveBy  Sorrow felt of  who a them. felt them: he was in death and in the power thereof. Therefore it was Death and the power thereof, which was loosed at Christes resurrection: not any present sor∣rowes and paines. Neither is it the nature of Sorrowes to hold and hinder frō Resurrectiō: but it is the strength of Death which doth that. ThusPag. 1 your collection out of Austin is against the true and plaine meaning of the text, where you say that the sorrowes of death (or hel) were brokē before Christ, & so he was never in thē, but as the snares of hunters are broken ne teneant non quia tenue∣runt beforeYou  the ve pa. 17 ting h it. they tooke hold, not after they had taken hold. This is meerely imagined: the text plainly meaneth an other loosing and dissolving, namely of the power of Death (as I said) vnder the which Christs manhood (even the Body also, aswell as the Soule) was now for a while held, but not victoriously holden fast, when Gods will was that he should rise againe. Yet you mightily vrge, how that it isPag. 1 196. Austins collection from this text. I perceave your argument is from Austin, and not from Peter, asPag. 13 170. you pretend. When you cite Scripture it is enough belike, if any learned man do collect and frame an opinion from the text, whether right or wrong. You may easily see by that before, that this collection of Austin hath no ground nor reason in the text, but is indeed dis∣proved by it. Which may the sooner be conceaved, if we note how he missed in his Translation of these words. Thus he readeth-solutis doloribus inferni,August.  99. quia impossible erat teneri eum in illis: whom God raised vp loosing the sorrows of hell, because it was impossible that he should be held in them. But the text hath, Loosing the sorrowes ofThanát not Had which he  staketh fo Hell. death, seeing it was impossible that he
should be g holden fast or strongly holden h of it.teisthai:  is more  Austins ri to bee ply holdē p' atou:  illis, in  sorrows,  hath it. Thus it seemeth Austin looked not to the originall, which he ought to have don: specially nowe inquiring into and sifting out an obscure point of Christian faith, as it appeareth that heere Austin doth. In no wise ought he to have leaned to a faulty Translation, as this is which he followeth. Seeing therefore hee fayled in expressing the text, no marvaile if his Collection frō it were wide. Wherein also he is no where resolut nor perswaded indeed: therfore a weak stay is he alone, for our faith to rest on in this article. Nay in the winding vp of that Epistle his godly modesty is registred for example to you and all Christian Ministers. He gives vs good leave to refuse his collection and opinion heere, so that we bring better reason. Thus he saith, Hec expositio verborum Petri cui displicet, &c. Now whe∣ther we bring reason to dissent from Austin heerein or no, I re∣ferre it (not to you to iudge, who are to partiall, but) to every in∣different learned reader. The rather for that mo Circumstances of this text doe make also affirmatively for vs.. 2.29. First, a Peter plainly granteth all this matter of David aswell as of Christ: except this, that David was left therein even till this day, as Christ was not. But David was never in Hel. Therefore neither Christ was ever there, whose figure David was. Sec: If it be altogeather heere from the purpose of Peter to speake to the ignorant and vnbeleeving Iewes of Christs Souls being in hell, then there is no reason to take these wordes hades and sheol heere for hell. But by the whole b 2. Text it is evident, Peter had no reason nor purpose to speak to the Iewes of Christs Souls being in hell. Therefore I see not how hades & sheol (if they but might signifie otherwise) can heere signifie hell. His whole and direct purpose was to shew them of Christs Soules de∣parture out of this world, and of his Body lying dead in the grave, as is the maner of other men when they dy, and that he was from thence mightily c raysed vp againe to life,. 31. more then other men were, or can be. Heere to speake to them of his Soules being in hell, what were there in it? 1. They being (as I said) ignorant, vn∣beleeving, and stubborne. 2. The thing being invisible strange and vncouth, not subiect to sense, and without all example of the like in the whole Law, & namely no Figure foreshaddowing any such matter to be fulfilled in him. 3. He intending only in all this speach to shew them that this Iesus whom they had slaine was not now dead but risen againe, why should he speake heere of hell?
Christes being there made nothing the more to shew his Resur∣rection, which was thever.  only scope of his speach. But being so dis∣proportioned with then former faith and vnderstanding, it would rather hinder then further them to the Christian faith. Both these Circumstāces I noted before, but I see no answer to them. Where∣fore I hope, they with the rest of my assertions heerein are firme and good. Thus it appeareth that hades doth not every where signifiePa. 17 403. Hell in the New Testament. We have seene that it hath no such meaning in the Actes, which yet is the only Scripture whereon you build. Alas, how litle a shew serveth your turne, when affecti∣on leadeth you. This were sufficient to end this Argument: but yet it shalbe good also to try whether any where els Hades proper∣ly signifieth Hell. Verily it doth so signifie no where at all in the Scripture. Yet I grāt it is & ought to be trāslated Hel inMat. 1 Luc. 16. 2. places. Not that the word it self doth necessarily signifie Hel, but because the circumstances heere doe require that meaning, as the fittest & best for these particular purposes. In the 1. Christ promiseth that ye Gates of Hades shall not prevaile against his Church. He meaneth no destruction nor desolation shall root it out, nor take it away from the world vtterly. Now seeing of the Churches Destroyers Hell is the chiefest, and the malice and tage of Satan is the most violent adversarie: that the Church (being assured against the worst enimie) may be confirmed and comforted against all other whatsoever, therefore kat' exochèn Hades heere signifieth Hell, & for speciall emphasis we are to name it Hell. Which particular is heere intended thus indeed, being alwayes cōtayned otherwise in the compasse of this general word Hades. So that albeit the gates of Hades in their own simple nature & common vse are the same as the gates of Sheol or maveth, (which are no more but the gates of Death) asPag  before I haue showed, and asZuingl Esay 38 Moller.  Psal. 16 others call it, peri∣phrasis moriendi, a phrase or speach signifiing Death: yet I say the circumstances heere in Matthew doe require a greater emphasis in it. Even that Hell should be chiefly and particularly noted as to weake against Gods Church; that so we should much lesse feare al other evills. Likewise inLuk. 1 Luke, I grant Hades is to be translated Hell: yet onely because of the circumstances there. Seeing the wicked miser being nowe in the state of Death, was in tormentes:
now where could this be indeed but in Hel? So that heere also for better emphasis sake it is best to name it Hell, but not for the na∣ture of the word Hades. Wch the worthy M. Bucer noteth wel, say∣ing, Dives non simpliciter scribitur esse in Hade, sed & in Gehen∣na: quia in tormentis & stammis. The Rich man is not saide to bee simply in Hades, but also in Hell: because he is said to be in firy tor∣ments. Thus I grant in 2. places Hell is intended by Hades in the Scripture. But what then? Will you conclude from this, as you do about Abyssus?g 213, In the Revelation, and Luke d Abyssus is vsed to signifie Hell. Therefore it signifieth hell in the * Romans: or there∣fore every where properly it signifieth hel.n 10 7. " Death somtime is the 2. Death.g 170. Ergo it is so, Act. 2.24. If you will argue so about hades also from those 2. places before named, I can easily deny your argument in all. The vntruth whereof hath appeared before in that principall place of the Acts: and likewise shall appeare in all the rest following by Gods helpe.g. 403. Next let vs a consider, b And thou Capernaum, 11.23 which art lift vp to the Heaven, shalt be brought down to Hades, to Destruction. I say Hades heere is not hell, but the Destruction of Capernaum the City. Christ threatneth 1. this proud and lofty City it selfe: also the inhabitants thereof for de∣spising his Gospell. The City it selfe with destruction and razing out from the face of the earth, which is it that hee meaneth by Hades. The inhabitants the wicked people thereof he threatneth with c Damnation in hell. 4. For the 1st. I vnderstand that so Hades somtime may be referred to the Destruction even of vnreasonable things, aswell as of reasonable men. For it seemeth the generalitie of the word Hades is such that it signifieth No visible being heere any more, in the  gene. or Destruction from this world (as the proper Etymolo∣gie thereof admitteth) to any visible Creature perishing frō hence. Though it be certaine, it is not so often applyed to other thinges: but it belongeth most commonly & vsually indeed to Men only. Notwithstanding to other things we may find it applyed: as where Plato (which d you stumble at) saith in Hades were Birds, 4. Beasts, Trees, Flowers, Fruits, &c. I deny not but they had fabulous and toyish conceits about these thinges being in Hades: but wise men may see how their meaning was, these visible creaturs being once brought to Destruction & to have no being any more heere, that then they yeelded hades vnto them also, like as they did vnto mē departed hence.tarch de ult. viv. This may be the meaning also of Plut. where d he
maketh Hades to have the whole contrary part to the Sunne (whō they called also Apollo, & Delius, and Pythius) because al Crea∣tures vnder the Sunne (as we vse to speak) when they perish hence and have no more being in this world, com to Hades. And thus it seemeth Moses also vseth Sheol, when he saith,Numb. 1 30 33. men, women, chil∣dren, and cattell alive, yea howses and riches went to Sheol. There∣fore heere Moses certainly meaneth not Hell, asPag. 1 you think: but he signifieth 2. things. 1. That all these things were taken vtter∣ly away out of this world by an vnrecoverable Destruction: which is the most generall and large sense of Sheol. 2. That they descen∣ded downe into aAs also Ps 86.13. an 88.7. Deut. 32. vast and deepe Gulfe in the earth: which also Sheol doth very often signifie in the Scripture, like to Abyssus in Greek. After which maner also thosePsal. 49. Sheepe in Sheol (whichPag. 399. you turne to the worst) may be vnderstood. Thus I say Sheol may shew the vtter taking away (not of men onely, but) of other things also when they have no being in this world any more. Which Abacuk also meaneth in saying,Abac. 2.2 neither Sheol nor Death can be satisfied, if he make any difference in these. Also in the very like place of thePro. 30.1 Proverbs, Sheol seemeth to bee most rightly vnderstood in the most large signification. To which sense likewise, I take it that phrase in Daniel, en lo, may be compared, though heere it be vsed of Messiah: tikkare Messiah, ve ên lo,Dan 9.26 Messiah shalbe cut of and shall have No being. He meaneth, Not any more as he was before in this world: which in effect is nothing els then that which Sheol signifieth. Yet wee must come neerer. You alleage 2. frivolous proofes of Sheols signifying Hell: viz: when it hathPag. 147. Opposition to Heaven, and Situation as the lowest. For the Situation of Hell, it is a secret which Gods worde hath not revealed at all. Neither ought we to determine, as you very rasly do,Pag. 112. Jf Hel be any where, there can be no doubt but it must be in the lower parts of the earth. You know the Apostle mentioneth theEphe. 2.2. Ayre, and thatcap. 6.12. on high, as being the place of Divels. Notwithstanding far be it from me to affirme that hell certainly is not beneath. Yet your pretended scripturs are meerely forced to prove it. As in the chief I have she∣wed already. In the rest it will appeare likewise anon. Howbeit, wheresoever Hel indeed is, though we do grant in it to be locally in the earth beneath vs; yet every Opposition betwene Shammajim the Heavens or Skyes, and Sheol doth not signifie the opposition
betweene Heaven and Hel. This you shall never be able to prove: Shammajim thus placed signifieth the Skyes, not the very place of Heavenly glory in the presense of God, which in English we call Heaven. And Sheol thus placed signifieth not Hell, the place of torments: but it is taken thus 2. wayes. Somtime for † a vast and deepe Gulfe only or pit in the earth,Abyssus. the bottom wherof we know not.Amos. 9.2. Iob. 11.8. Psa. 139.8. So doe a many of your places meane, which you draw and wrest to signifie Hell. Somtime for Ruine and Destruction or A∣bolishing of any visible Creatures from hence: which seemeth to be the largest & most proper sense of Sheol.heols proper sense. So doth it in Jsay sig∣nifie, where Sheol is threatned to the King of Babel, b Though thou be lifted vp to the Skyes,Isa. 14.15. yet shalt thou bee brought downe to Sheol, that is (in this place) to an inglorious Destruction and No being in this word: and (thy carcase) vnto the sides of the pit, that is the Grave. This the contrariety heere sheweth, Thoug thou be lifted vp to the Skyes. He meaneth not heere, into the glory of the Saints of God in Heaven: but lifted vp in great pomp and worldly glory, as the Latin phrase meaneth also when they say ad sydera tolli. Now saith the Prophet to this King of Babell: Though at this time it be thus with thee, yet surely thou shalt be brought down to the contrary point, to an inglorious Destruction, and a wiping out from the Earth. Which sense of Isay is also very well confirmed by the like matter in Ieremy. c Though Babel should mount vp to the Heavens,er. 51.53.4. and though she should defend her strength on high: yet from me shall her Destroyers come, saith the Lord. A sound of a cry cometh from Babel, and of great Destruction from the Chaldeans, &c. Where that which Isay called Sheol, Ieremy speaking of the very same matter nameth Destruction, vtter lay∣ing wast, and overthrowing of that City and State. And so to come to our purpose,A very He∣raisme. d this is the very same phrase heere in Mathew touching Capernaum: Thou Capernaum which art lift vp to the Heaven shalt be brought down to Hades: that is, to Destruction, & to an inglorious Not being any more in the world as before time it had ben.des Destru∣ctiō, Razing, aking away Which also is confirmed by that which he addeth pre∣sently of Sodom, that if they had had the meanes of repentance as Capernaum had, Sodom might have remayned a City to this day. Inferring by this that Capernaum for their greater contempt of God and his word, deserved more then Sodom to be destroyed &
to becom no City. Hitherto this is the first iudgment threatned to the state of the City; Hades Destruction, or an vtter razing out from the earth. The 2. iudgment heere threatned followeth in the next verse, Moveover I say vnto you that it shalbe easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of iudgment then for these. Heere indeed is Hell threatned to them of Capernaum: yet as touching that before, there was nothing els but the overthrow and destruc∣tion of their Citie signifyed by that worde Hades, applyed to the Citie, as is before declared. And contrary to this you haue not any piece of reason in al thatPa. 147.1 409. you say here about. The world of Souls (whichPag. 403.409. you play withall) Hades may and doeth signifie: but yet then only when it is referred to deceased Soules, & not otherwise. Next, let vs view the CorinthesPag 408. 1. Cor. 1.55 O Death where is thy victorie? O Hades, O Destruction, or, O Power of Death where is thy sting? Heere it is referred to the destruction of the whole and intire Per∣sons of men taken away by death out of this worlde: who in the end by this conquest and triumph over Death & the power ther∣of (at the last day) shalbe restored to life againe in a true and per∣fit Resurrection and restitution. This is the whole scope and drift of the Apostle heere: and you graunt it. But you inferre, that ther∣fore it is meant of Hel. Of Hell, which way? Because since by sinne Hell gat possession of both partes of man aswell of his body as of his Soule, the full deliverance and conquest ouer Hell, is not but in the Resurrection. This is very vntrue. Our full deliverance from Hell and from Satan is obtayned in this life: as it is written,Luke 1.7. We being delivered from our enemies and from the handes of all that hate vs, must serve him without feare all the dayes of our life in bolines and righteousnes before him. That is, we being heere truly iustified by his grace, are fully freed and delivered from all the power of our enemies. Satan isLuke. 11.  Rom 8.33. Ioh. 8.51, 5 & 5.24. conquered, spoyled, bound, and cast out from vs. So that your speach is very bad and scandalous, where you say,Pag. 216. The bodyes of the Saintes lying in their graves are in the Divells walke. For then the Graves where bodyes ly senseles, are a part of Hell, properly taken. At least the Deaths of the Reprobat and of the Children of God, (Answerab to your do∣trine pa. 24 touching the state of their bodyes) till the resurrection, are all one: And men truly iustified are iustified but in their Soules, Sinne remayning stil charged on their Bodies, and therefore in their bodyes they remaine subiect to the power
of Hell, and to the curse of the Law, and to the claime of Satan, till the day of our Resurrection at the last iudgement.You call it  part of the ages of sin. And thus the godly must pay " a part of their own redemption and satisfac∣tion for sinne. And then Christ was not our only and absolut Re∣deemor. If this be good doctrine, let the godly iudge. Your selfe overthroweth this enough,Pag. 156. saying, f He changed the curse of death and made it now a rest from all labours. So that I hope the Bodyes of the dead Saintes are not in the * Divells walke:Nor subiec∣ed to the Rge of Sa∣an much lesse are they g in the possession of Hell,Pag 216. in the handfast of Hell. Further you say vpon the text:Pag. 178 h Through death Christ destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the Divell.Pag. 179. Whereby i it is evident, that Hell is spoyled of all right and claime to the members of Christ, hee brake, &c. I hope in this life the godly are the members of Christ: then in this life they are fully freed from Hell for euer. Wherfore it is very vntrue that Hell properly taken, hath any possession of the iust, and handfast or power on them, or that Hell is not fully subdued for them vntill the Resurrection. I graunt that the com∣mon death heere is called an enemy:Cor. 15.26. but he meaneth not such an Enemy as Hell is, especially as this is spoken touchinge the godly. Yet it is an Enemie even to them, not as any Curse at all, but as a Memoriall & consequent of the old Curse (like as a scarie is where was a deadly wound) also as a peaceable and quiet stopp or stay vnto them,ea & because  is painull o the flesh in  his life. that their whole persons cannot yet enioy their appointed felicitie. Howbeit for all this toward them it hath not the least affinitie with Hell at all. Therfore Hades heere in no sort signifyeth Hell, but only Death, or the power of Death, or the world and kingdom of Death, or something to that effect onely. Yea the very text seemeth thus to expound it selfe, saying, Where is thy sting, O Hades? The sting of Death is sinne. Where the later seemeth a very direct answer and exposition of the former words. Thus, The sting of Death (or Hades) is sinne: noting these 2. wordes (Hades and Death) as Synonimaes for one thing, beeing applyed to men. Or ifPag. 408. you will haue them to differ, He may take Hades for theAs it vtterly aketh away,  witholdeth rom a visible ate. Power & strength of Death (which the brain-sick Idolators made a God) or the Dominion and Kingdome of Death. These respectes Hades might well haue with the Apostle, which differ from Thanatos Death, the meere separation of the Soule from the Body: which yet in effect are all one, and haue no
difference touching our purpose. Like as we sawPa. 1 &c. 1 before howe all Authours have vsed them. Further, The Grave of the Wicked is not to be nmed nor reckoned Hell properly, nor any part there∣of. In Hell there wanteth not sense of paine. If you say, it is an en∣trance to hell, and that which holdeth and reserveth the wicked vnto hell. Yet then it is not Hell: for even thus the Grave and Hell doe greatly differ. Finally, Hades isSee  pag. 1 adversarie to the Resur∣rection. But Hell would not bee adversarie to the Resurrection. Therefore Hades heere is not hell, no not to the wicked. Death in deed and the Dominion of Death is an adversarie to the Resurre∣ction, and at that day it shalbe vanquished and vtterly abolished, when all flesh shall liue againe. As for Hell that shall increase thē and bee advanced, when all the wicked both bodyes and Soules shalbe subdued vnder it for ever. Therfore Hades heere is not hell, but the power of Death, as hath bene saide, or the Dominion of Death or meerely to that effect. Also we are to note, that the Apo∣stle heere plainly alludeth to that of Hoseah:Hose. O Sheol, ò kingdom of death, or power of 'Death, I wilbe thy destruction. Not, o Hell. For the Prophet speaketh this to comfort Israel in their captivitie against their continuall Destructions and razings out from this world, shewing that now the Lord would stay his iudgement that way, & Death (which had consumed them) should now destroy them no more, but they should liue and flourish againe. This the Apostle might notably allude vnto, speaking of the Resurrectiō. As for Hell if the Prophet had meant it (as he doeth not) the A∣postle could make no allusion to it, nor haue any thing to deale wch it in this matter of the Resurrectiō simply. So that where you say, what reason is there to exclude out of these words Christs victo∣rie over Hell, it is very weake. What reason is there to include it, where the Apostle speaketh only of our resurrection from bodily Death, and of nothing els. Next we come to the Revelatiō: First,Rev. I have the Keyes of Hades (that is of Destruction, or of theThe ∣ble w the D king∣dome of death and of Death. Or, we may take them as 2. words for one and the same thing: that is, both of them for Death. For heere Christ sheweth only, that as He was dead, so nowe he hath overcome Death. & hath power to dy no more: as I hauTrea pa 11 heere∣tofore noted. What shew of reason hauePa 17 you then, to bringe in heere Christes power over the Damned Soules in Hell? Because
there is mention lswhere of the Key of hell: Therefore the Key of hdes heer is the same. What color of reasō is there in this? Again a One sitteth on a pale horse whose name was Death,Rev. 6.8. & Hades De∣son the world of the Dead, or the Kingdom of Death follow∣ed ater m. Th in no wise can be Hel: because the text addeth, Power  them to slay with the sword and with samine, and death, and with wilde beasts. Hell slayeth none in that sorte, these are not the weapons of Hell: but of the Dominion and Power of Death thse and such other mo,ag 406. are the proper weapons. b You take it to b the power of the Divell, because the Divell slayeth somtimes the bodyes of men. Which you proue by the bodily slay¦ing and siniting of Iob and his children. This indeed is the thing which we holde. This is not the Torments of Hell in the place of Damned: these be onely bodily harmes and death. So that heere∣by you confirme our purpose: for we denie not but God somtime vseth Satan to punish and to slay the bodies of men. But seeing this is nothing but Death, not Hell which then is inflicted: there∣fore it is bst to take Hades heere most generally as the nature of it is, for the Power of Death, or the world of the Dead. Hell by no meanes it can be.g. 398. You tell me in c one place, that my best skill is in varying phrases. It is better to vary phrases then to vary opi∣nions, as you very often doe. I vary phrases to expresse Hades, which in Authours is not alwayes the same thing: or at least not after the same maner. Whose generall largenes which it properly hath, can not in one word be expressed in English. Wherefore my varying of phases to this purpose (I hope) is pardonable, sith in∣deed it is necessarie. That cōiecture of mine of the 4th part of the worldes not going to Hell at once, I never esteemed it worth the standing on. I he last place is, † Death and Hades (that is the Do∣miniō, or power of Death) were cast into Hell.v. 20.14. I said, it was absurd to say Hell was cast into Hell: You answer, it is more absurd to say the world of Soules was cast into Hell. Where you doe but dally and play with words.t e woe e Dea Aally. For I vse not that terme * the world of soules, though it may be named sometime, in a good sense. Which you will by no meanes conceave: only you delight much to sport your slfe with it. Our answer thē is this; There is no absurditie to say, that at the last (day when the * last enemy shalbe destroyed) then Death,ore pag. 2. and the power of Death, or the Kingdome and Dominion
of Death shalbe cast into Hel: that is eternally dstoyd & abi∣shed, & shall rturn to the Divell wh they came. To say many sot that thē Hell phalbe cast into Hell, soūdeth sensles in my ats. Although you meane the Contayning to b put for the Contayned, Hll for the Divels of Hel: and that the Divels shalb thē cast into hl fire. Yea although one Andreas & eda vnderstand it so like∣wise. For neither you nor they (it meth) do cosidr, that this place assigneth them to Hell then at the last day, who yet are not in Hell, but shalbe then cast into Hell nd destroyed. But the Di∣vels are2 Pet. 2. Id. 6. in Hell already, & reserved in erlasting chmes of dark∣nes. Therefore the Divels cannot be vndstood heere by Hads, that they shalbe then cast into Hel, seeing hey are already cast in to Hell for ever. Death, and the Power thereof being the last ene∣mie that shalbe dstroyed, is not yet, but shalbe indeed at the last day abolihed & swallowed vp of Hell. Lastly eere is shewed the most general & vniversall rendring vp of all the ead whatsoever to iudgment. But Hel plainly hath not all the Dead▪ Death, & the world of the Dead, or th Dominion of Death have all. Therefore Dath & Hades heere do not signifie properly the Divll & Hell: but this only, that Death, and the vniversall Dominion or power of Death yeelded vp to iudgment al the Dead, both great & smal both good and bad to be iudged according to their workes. Thus it is evident and cleere that Hades no where in the ew Testament doth signifie properly Hel, as you say it doth. Thus also that is concluded fully and perfitly which my 2. ReasonPag. 15 before affirmed: that you have not one place at all in the Scripture to prove that Christs Soule was in Hell.Act. .2 One place only you have stood vpon, that Christs Soule was in Hades: but that helpeth you nothing at all, as we have seene. You must prove indeed that Chrits Soule was in Gehenna, if you would perswade any man of knowledg, which you shal never do. Gehenna in the New Testa∣ment is properly Hell: but Hades is never properly so taken, as I hope it is sufficiently before proved. Therefore the Concluion is good, To thinke that Christes Soule was ever in Hell, is a thing that ought to be vterly denyed. Yet, heere we must consider a maine obiection of yours: ven those words of our common Creed,Touching C.  which vsually in English w vtter thus; He descended into Hell: originally  is, He descended
into Hades. And in truth this is all that you have to allage for your opinion.swere. But I answer 2. wayes. First, Admitting, then Deny∣ing the authority of thse words in our Comon Cred. 1. Admit∣ting  the authority of these words, (& yet, Not as sufficient, not as Aposhall, but such, as may be fō godly and sound Christians) w affirme that we can well vnderstand them according to the Scriptures vse of Hades rightly: viz: that Christes whole hu∣mane Person came vnder the power and Dominion of Death, or that he dcaying in this world & * falling down from that state of life wherein a while he flourished, went absoltly from hence into the world of the Dead, before . 153. according to the law of nature which all o∣ther men follow likewise when they d. How this sense doth ful∣ly agree also with the mindes of the ancient Fathers generally, we have at large dclared c before.Pag. 166. Pag. 14. But this serveth not your turne: & therefore you will needes inioyne vs d 3. Rules to be exactly and prcsly kept in the expounding of these words: namely 1. Di∣stinction of matter. 2. Consequence of order. 3. Propriety of words. You must know that we can be no more strict,Note. nor more religious in observing the Cicūstances of matter & order even in the holy Scriptures themselves, then you inioyne heere to be observed in these words of men. Might not these godly men (think you) misse in som such Circumstance or light point, although the Scripture can not? Or if they might, why impose you such strictnes on our consciences about mens words, as if heere were no possibility of any the least missing, or imperfection. How beit we admit your 3. Rules also,3. Rules. and will observe them sufficiently. First these words  He descended to Hades may very well expresse a Distinction of matter differing from all the words heere besides. They naturally and properly signifie (as before we shewed) that Christ came to vtter decay in this world, and being taken hence was gathered in both partes (of his Manhood dissolved) wholy & intirely to those who were departed before him into another world. Or ells thus, that he came vnder the full power &before Pag. 192. Dominion of Death. Now either of these differeth verily from meere and simple Death.vian. ce eah. For to Dy propely is nothing els but the going a sunder of the Soule from the Body. That other is to be wholy razed out from the presence and sight of this world, also a remayning vnder the pos∣session and strength of Death, and a going to the society of them in another world.g. 192. These indeed are f differing points and degrees
in Death: albeit in effect generally they bee all one with Death, that is they be necessaily consequent, & alwayes conioyned vnto Death. Againe if those wordes in the Creed were only but a more emphaticall phrase of through and perfit Dying and Departing hence, if there were in them no further Distinctiō of matter then so, yet this were enough to distinguish them frō the other words, Dead and Buryed. This is cause enough (especially in the Ancient times, when men suppose this Creed was framed, & when Christs Humanity and naturall Death was by al meanes subtilly and vio∣lently oppugned after a short worde signifying his Death and Buriall, yet for more emphasis sake, and for further Viging the same, to add this other short familiar phrase importing (no other maine matter then was before noted, but only) a more effectuall and more absolut signification thereof. Which in trueth these our wordes in question doe well performe, He came vnder the Domi∣nion of Death, or Went to the societie of the Dead, following pre∣sently after these wordes Dead & Buried. And thus your 2. Rule  alse, Consequence of order is rightly kept. For euen in respect of time it is certaine, that Christs whole person perishing frō hence was wholy ioyned to the Dead, after the precise separation of his Soule and body, which was his Death. And his Buriall being the visible part thereof, in good reason may be set before that which signifieth the whole contayning also his Soules invisible going vnto the Dead. Lastly, if there be no more in this but a stronger emphasis meerely, & a more full-signifying phrase, it might well come after termes of lesse emphasis. Your 3.  and last Rule, Pro∣prietie of Wordes is plainly for vs, and against your selfe. For that which we strive for, is thePa. 157 169 17 native and proper sense of Hades, even according to the etymologie of it, and according to common vse. You, if you vrge it to signifie Hel, do indeed make aPa. 171. Figure in it, viz. Synecdoche, a part for the whole, as before we haue shewed. As for the other word heere in the Creed katébe or katélthe, Hee descended, or came vnder, it is not necessarie to take it alwayes to signifie a locall going downe, specially thus ioyned with Hades. For thus it may aptly & lively shew the fall or whole casting down of a mans person from the state of life, to death and vtter destruc∣tion out of this world: as also men are said to stand vp and spring vp when they live. Or it may serue to expresse the Force and Do∣minion
of Death which Christ came vnder when he dyed. Or the abasement and humiliation of Christ yeelding & submitting him selfe so farre, that is not onely to Dy, but also to come vnder the strength and force of death by lying held, & subdued (as it were) for so long time in it. All this the very property of the word katebe admitteth very easilie: and Ruffinus liketh it where he interpreteth this phraseuffin. in mb. " Descendit in mortem, He descended vnto Death. If any thinke this to be somewhat figurative, yet it is verily so fami∣liar and easie to all people as that other word in this Creed is, He sitteth at the right hand of God: yea it is farie easier indeed. And heerein all the later famous, learned and godly Restorers of Reli∣gion in a maner doe ioyne with vs, as Mat. Bucer, P. Martyr, Bulinger,slitut. Olevia, &c. Yea M. Calvin "liked this also wel enough: though yet he seemeth to leane more to another sense (viz. Chri∣stes Hellish sufferings) which indeed is a true doctrine, as before is declared, though to this place of the Creed (I thinke) not so fit. Now these men your L. ought not to skorne nor reproch, though you have leave to deale so with me. Their pietie, learning, and au∣thoritie is such with all that love the Gospell, as will overwaigh your big wordes and high lookes, and whatsoever els you are lif∣ted vp withal aboue our mediocritie. Hitherto we haue answered, admitting the authoritie of these wordes He descended to Hades. But wee are in truth to know,ere. that (as you cite them and vige them) they have no such authoritie & credit, as hitherto we have yeelded vnto them. And that for 3. causes. First, for that your Trā∣slating and terming them, He descended into Hel, is corrupt, par∣tiall, and vntrue. Which I trust is manifest by that which I have shewed before touching the true property & natural vse of Hades. If you say among vs all men do so speak heere and translate hades Hel. I pray you cōsider that this article (as also I think this whole Creed) was at first written in Greek, and not in English. Where∣fore the English terme (how comon so ever) must not preiudice vs, nor the truth in this matter, as very vnreasonably a you indea∣vour to make it to do.g. 420. Convince vs evidently and soundly by Greek authoritie, that Hades is alwayes Hell, or that Hades is ne∣ver applyed to the condicion and state of the godly deceased and then I will yeeld: or els my sufficient proofes before to the con∣trary will convince the vntrue and partiall translation. Another
reason to deny vtterly the authority and credit of these wordes (He descended to hades,) & so to hold them vnable to make any argument as from our Creed, is because this speciall clause of Christs descending to Hades or to Infernum is new, and lately put into our vulgar Creed called the Apostles Creed.Ruffin Symb. Ruffinus wit∣nesseth (who lived about 500. yeeres after Christ) that it was not at all in the Creed in his time. I say not at all neither in the Ro∣mane Creed, nor yet in the Creed of the Easterne Churches. His words are these, Sciendum sanè est quod in Ecclesiae Romanae sym∣bolo non habetur additum, Deseendit ad inferna: sed nee in Orien∣tis Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo. Will you say, Ruffinus lyeth? Or can you bring to the contrarie any proofe? I think not: yea I am sure you can not. Then if there were no such Article as this, nor anie such wordes any where in the Creed for the space of 500. yeres af∣ter Christ, I mervaile what authoritie they haue now to be taken necessarily for a distinct article in our Creed, and as differing ma∣terially from Dead and Buried. Sure, it isNamely Desle. Hades. to new to be receaved for doctrine, whichPag. 13 sprang vp so late. Yea, thusErasm.  Symb. Ca 4. Erasmus may seeme to haue some colour for his coniecture, that about Thomas Aquinas time they might (peradventure) be put into this Creed. Third: we can not see, but that whensoever whosoever put it first into this place, they signified heereby it seemeth, that Christ went to Limbus, a place vnder the earth, where they imagined the blessed Patriarkes rested. For this was indeed the opinion gene∣rally of the ancient Christians even forLimbus inter tay before Ch descendin bades wa our set c o the Cr a long time, and stil is re∣tayned among the Papistes, though now growen much worse thē it was of old. But this you iustly cōdemne as an error as wel as we, how generall and how ancient soever it be. Now also though this were the 1st meaning of this Article, whensoever it fifte tooke place in the common Creed, yet this was not Hell: this giveth no furtherance to your assertion, that Christ went into the place of the Damned in tormentes. But Thaddaeus, Jgnatius, Athanasius, haue these very words. Yet they say not any where that they were in that set forme of the Apostles CreedWhich ∣deed they  had not. which we now have. Also they are cleane against your opinion heere, as presently wee shall see. You will say, yet even Ruffinus in his exposition of the Creed alleageth this article, and he alloweth the doctrine thereof. I an∣swere, He alleageth truly these wordes Descendit ad inferna, but
not out of any example of the Apostles Creed: yea he expresly de∣nieth it to be therein any where at that time, as before we shew∣ed. Only it being his owne and the common opinion then, hee groundeth it vpon other reasons (namely certaine misaken scri∣ptures) yet such as he was content to like of, and so holdeth in∣deed that Christ went downe to Infernum, that is to Limbus Pa∣trum, as an opinion then common among men, and worthy (as he thought) to be beleeued, and to be applyed to this place of the Creed touching the Death of Christ,asin. in mb. Ca∣h. 4. although as yet no such matter was contayned in the common Creed. Erasmus sayeth, The Fathers would not be so rash as to put it into the articles of their Creed, seeing their opinions heereabout were so varying and doubtfull. Now this you know was all mistaken, wrongfully ga∣thered from the Scriptures, as badly applyed to the Creed, & no∣thing els indeed but the common error of those tymes. Yet then hitherto all this is farre from iustifying your opinion, nerer may you alleage the Creed for your warrant. Where note also that Ruffinus heere vnderstandeth the very matter it self (precisely sig∣nified by these words Descendit ad inferna) to be immediatly but this, that He dyed like other good men, and was buried. For hee saith, Vis verbadem videtur esse in eo quod Sepultus dicitur: The effect of this phrase He descended to Infernum, seemeth to be all one and the same with this, He was Buried. And afterwarde going a∣but to prove by the Scripture that Christ descended to Jnfernū, he sheweth that hee meaneth his death heereby and his buriall: Quod in infernum descendit evidenter praenūtiatur in Psalmis, vbi dicit: Et in pulverem mortis deduxisti me. Et iterum, Quae vtli∣tas in sanguine meo dum descendo in Corruptionem. And before vpon those wordes: He was Crucified vnder Pon. Pilate, and des∣cended to infernum h giveth this sense among other wordes, Di∣vina natura in mortem per carnem descendit. The Divine nature humbled it selfe evē vnto Death in respect of the flesh. Howsoever then he thinketh consequently that Christ descending to infernū did after Death goe to a place beneath vnto the godly Soules de∣parted before, & then set them free from thence and caried them with him, yet it appeareth that immediatly by this phrase and properly he meant no more, but that he Dyed and was Buied: all the rest was consequent as an effect after this, according as he and
most others of the Ancients did think. Lastly heer we see that Ruf∣finus extendeth this his Descending to the Divine nature: but he meaneth it improperly and in a certaine sorte, according to that also in the Philippains,Phil.  He being in the forme of God,Verse humbled himselfe & became obedient vnto death. So that properly he mea∣neth it of the very death of his Manhood, and nothing els. Which is our very minde and iudgment, agreeing also generally with the Fathers heereinPa. 162 before rehearsed. But IgnatiusPag. 1 you thinke, † is clearely yours: likewise onePag 17 Thaddaeus, by Eusebius report one of the 70. Disciples which the Evangelist Luke speakes of: alsoPag 41 Athanasius Creed. Ignatius saying, Christ descended to Hades alone, but rose again with many,Ignaus. meaneth evidently his Buriall and going downe into his Grave: as you acknowledge thatPag. 14. Ha∣des many times may well signifie. Which is the plainer to be his meaning, for as much as he noteth his Buryall heere in no other wordes besides. And sure he alludeth to that in Mathew,Math 27 53. The Graves did open, and many bodyes of the Saintes which slept, arose▪ And came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City and appeared to many. This is touching the Resur∣rection of their bodyes out of their Graves, not of their Soules a∣nsing vp from Hell. Neither in Ignatius is there any shew of rea∣son that he meant Hades for Hell. He may meane, I grant, (that which is in effect all one) the restoring of their whole Persons taken away hence by Death, or their comming from vnder the Dominion and power of Death: which indeed is according to the proper largenes of this word. Also that Christ (katélthe) came vn∣der the same. Not that he went locally downeward, except in his Buriall; but touching his whole manhood that hee was humbled and abased even vnder the Dominion and strength of Death. And thus it is true, thatAs Ruffi also vnd stood t.  200. Christ by his Death (including also togea∣ther his Buriall) came downe or Descended. But only this you vrge and stand vpon for your claime to Ignatius, because it is said. He brake downe the wall or stop, which was never brokē before. Where you may know that the meaning is this: The power of the Grave, or the strength and force of Death was now by Christes Death & Resurrection vtterly overcome and dissolved, which remayned in deed from the beginning of the world (till Christes death) as a mighty Wall not broken downe. But now the vertue of his death and resurrection brake it cleane downe for ever. So that heereby
Christ is taught to be (as the Apostle also to like effect speaketh) the first fruites of the Dead.Pag. 179. But you say, a Many rose from the dead before Christ, and therefore that partition was often broken by others before him. I aunswer, Though some being dead did rise to life againe before Christes Resurrection (as touching the time) yet the vertue and power of Christes resurrectiō was before them, by which only and meerely they rose againe. Neither yet was Resurrectiō to all the Dead foorth with performed by the Re∣surrection of Christ: neuertheles throughly purchased it was evē then, and by the only power and vertue thereof is & shalbe per∣formed to all in due time. So that thus Christ alone brake that wall and stop, and absolutly he hath broken it downe, which no man before him nor besides him ever brake. The like vnto this is your Thaddaeus sentence:ddaeus. nasius. also Athanasius in his Creed. Whom the rather thus I vnderstand, (as it seemeth, most reasonably and necessarily) because they expresse neither his Death, nor his Buri∣all at all in any other wordes save these, He descended to Hades. Therefore surely this is it, which heere they meane by his descen∣ding to Hades; and this is all that they meane therein, that he was brought vnder the dominion of death and was Buryed.escending plied to ts Soule  Death) ever foūd cripture, in anie cient ed. Consde∣ring also that * no Ancient Creed in the world hath all these 3. divers and distinct Clauses, He 'Dyed, was Buryed, Descended to Hades: not the very Apostles Creed (as we call it) in Ruffinus time had them, as we have seene. But this last clause which is in questi∣on was put in "since that time (to signify Christs going to Limbus, it seemeth) by whomsoever it was put in,t wel ob∣ed: Treat ag. 93. g. 15. as is before said. b Your seeking to prevent this reason, because the Ancient Creeds want sundry other Articles which now are in our vulgar Creed, is to no purpose. For as much as they all do evermore intend to set down persitly the summe of Christs accomplished Redemption & Me∣diation at the least. Not any of those his maine workes are in thē omitted. Now alwayes in the Creeds where they expresse his Dy∣ing and Burying, there is omitted his going to Hades. Where they expresse his Going to Hades,Note. there they omit his Dying, or his Bu∣riall, or both. Therefore I may well conclude, I thinke, that no Ancient Creed in the world ever meant to teach that Christ went to Hades, except in such a sense only as was (in their iudgement) in effect all one as to Dy, or to go among the Dead, and to be Bu∣ried
and no more.Thaddae cone Thus farre of Thaddaeus and Athanasiaes Creeds. Howbeit to speak plainly, your Thaddaeus whomPag 1 179. you so highly esteeme, is a meere coūterfait. You say, This report of him inPag. 1 Eusebius, by som men is coūted fabulous. Nay, who ever since Euseb. (I think) held it for better? Many other like matters are to much allowed by Euseb. in other cases also: notwithstan∣ding his story of the church affaires thē (I grant) is iustly receaved as the best that we have extant. But it is strange that this fable & forgerie of Thaddaeus should so please you. It is all forged, or els fouly corrupted; for these reasons: 1. This writing touching Thad¦daeus brought by Eusebius from Edessa, saith, that Judas the Apo∣stle (who sent this Thaddaeus being one of the 70. Disciples) was the same who is called also Thomas the Apostle. But the Scrip∣ture it selfe sheweth that Iudas and Thomas were 2. divers and se∣uerall Apostles. Therefore this writing is false. 2. Heere also we may probably conceave an other errour; that this Thaddaeus (one of the 70.) seemeth to be mistakē in this Syriā writing for Thad∣daeus one of the 12. Apostles. 3. Further this counterfait Thad∣daeus was content to receave (and did receave) even from a King him selfe, and also (as it seemeth) from one of his Nobles, Ado∣ration and worship. Whereas the true servants of Christ Peter & the Angell refused vtterly the same in such very maner offered vnto them by meaner persons in respect of state. Therefore this Thaddaeus, if he were any, was some false Apostle, and came not by Christes sending, but led by the spirit of errour and seduction: as some were, who went abroad in the name of Disciples and A∣postles, in those dayes. 4. Neither doe I see how it can possibly be true which this Thaddeus saith, that Christ ascended vp to his Father with a great multitude: seeing the Scripture sheweth how after 40. dayes (the tyme that he conversed with his Apostles) hee ascended in all their sightes, alone vp into Heaven. You get nothing therfore by citing these vngainfulNone which  prove  very Ph to be in postles  then: th prove  Matter  witnesses for you. Nor yet by citing the Apostolike Creed: seeing you stand only vpō the precise order of the words He Dyed, was Buryed, descended into Hades. Which how weakely they make for you,Pag. 1 199. before we have shewed. Whervnto this may be added, that verily it seemeth there was no certaine prescript number of Articles in the Creed of olde, much lesse any precise or exact forme of wordes, such as
now we haue, and which is all your hold. This partly by Ruffinus writing vpon it,Wee may inke that ye postles Creed  no exact rm of words ye primitive es. may be vnderstood: who among the words of the Creed then, rehearseth not divers materiall wordes, which our v∣suall forme now hath expresly. The Ancients Ignatius, Irenaeus, Iustin, Tertullian, Origen, &c. in their Creedes doe differ more both for words, and matter also. Yet they all pretend to rehearse the Apostolike Creed, as by Tradition they receaved it, & as they severally conceaved it: at least so far alwayes as concerned Christs maine & distinct works of Redemption wrought for vs. Neither overthrow you this, in saying, that b som of thē want a good many of the Articles which are in the Apostles Creed. For (as I said) they want none (neither ought they) concerning Christes mediati∣on wrought for vs. His going to Hell was a maine & a distinct part thereof, if he went thither indeed. Wherefore they might not in any wise be defective therein. Againe though they want Arti∣cles which are now in our forme of the Apostles Creed, yet how prove you that they want any of that, which with them was vul∣gar and common? Last of all, though some of the Ancients do not perhaps rehearse all the Articles of the Apostolik Creed, (as it was then currant by Tradition in the Churches) yet you have no co∣lour in the world to thinke that none of them all should rehearse it wholy and intirely. But in none of them all is this forme of the Creed found which we now have, and do observe. Yea by the varietie & difference of them all, who still professe that they vtter the Apostolike Creed taught them by Tradition, we may see that the Apostles Creed had not any exact nor precise forme of words at the beginning (as now we have it vsed among vs) but it contay∣ned onely (as we may thinke) certaine Heads of Doctrine funda∣mentall,om the A∣tles (t see∣th) there  receaved rief summe tter, no cise forme words for  common ed. That there is one God, 3. Persons, The Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, That the Sonne Iesus Christ is both God and Man, That as man hee was extreamely humbled for vs even vnto Death, and after that exalted vnto glory in Heaven, whence in due time he shall come to iudgment, &c. This in effect all Creeds do expresse, but in words they differ greatly, & somtimes some have mo articles then these: yet such they seeme to bee as were on some special occasion more particularly and expresly no∣ted, being otherwise either some part or els some proper effect & consequent from these. And so it might come to passe that some
of the Ancient Creeds differed somwhere in some particular arti∣cles from other Creeds, yea all of them in words from each other: and yet in substance and effect they were all one. Seeing then that the Apostles Creed for the precise forme of words was not the same in the primitive Churches which we now have: yea that at first it had no exact forme of words at al. For it is sure that no man can prove by good testimony that there was any, or indeed any other then such as these ancient Fathers thus variably and diffe∣ringly rehearsed. Seeing also it is proved, that this set forme which we now have, specially our article in question was notAs a  the C receaved for many hundred yeares after Christ; some supposing that these words were not put in till neer 1000. years after him. I say, All this being considered, it is evident that your Argument only frō the precise and exact forme of words in the Creed, & from the order & placing of He descended to Hades, namely after Dead & Buryed, is not worth any thing, to induce thereby an Article of faith, That Christs Soule went to Hell. After this it shall not be amisse to consider some other reasons of good moment. Our 3d. Reason is:REAS If there be no certaine benefit to the godly by Christes going to Hell, then doubtles he went not thi∣ther. But there is no certaine benefit to the Godly by Christes going to hell. Therefore doubtles he went not thither. This Reason youPag  call our strongest fort. It is not our strongest, but yet strong in∣deed: for you have made no where any good answer to it, neither can you. I know a number of wordes you have throughout your whole treatise denying the Assumption, but they are nothing in the world but meere presumptions. You say,Pag  Is the subduing of hell powers, and the treading on all their force, and the restraining of all their fury so small a matter with you, that it doth no good to the Godly? And elswhere most tediously and vainly you augment & repeate the marvelous thinges that Christe did by his Humane presence in Hell. I would willingly beleeve it, but alas who saith so besides your self, or only such as can tell no better then you. Where is that become now,Pag  what I read in the worde of God that I beleeve, what J do not reade, that I do not beleeve, &c. It is easy to say, that you will onely hold what the Scripture assureth: but in practise you will slip from this precise order, when you list. I know well that you boldly say that thePag  Purpose of Christs des∣cent
is plainly professed in Scriptures, to be the spoyling of Sathan, and delivering of men from the power of Hell. Is it plainly profes∣sed? I beseech you, where? I wott well what you will faine & de∣vise of the Fathers, when you impute so palpable vntruths to the word of God it self. Shew vs one title, one iot of any benefit which (by the Scriptures) Christ wrought for vs by his locall presense in Hell, and then I will cease to gainsay it forever. Otherwise tell vs never so much of the wonderfull and singular fruite of Christs being there, the more you amplify, the more you hazard your cre∣dit, & the more we shall wonder at your bold avouching matters which are not in the word of God. The benefits all and every one (which you every where rehearse) I most vnfainedly and religi∣ously beleeve: namely that he deserved all good things for vs, and obtayned thē for vs in his Resurrectiō, &c. Ascention: and that fi∣nally and fully he shall in his last iudgment tread downe Satan vnder our feet. But what is this to his locall being in Hell? Shew therefore I say by the expresse word that Christ in Hel did these, or any parte of these good things for vs. If you do not (for as yet I see no title to prove that) surely all your talke is but blasts of vani∣tie. The which I rather beleeve that you never can nor wil do, be∣cause you confesse asmuch somewhere as overturneth all your shew of Christes doing good to vs in Hell.g. 160. For, a This conquest (you say) Christ purchased by his passion, but he did not execute it till his resurrection. If he executed nothing till his Resurrection, and purchased all in his Passion, then he did nothing in Hell. For his Resurrection was distinctly after his supposed being in Hell, whither he never afterwards returned to execute there any thing at all. Nay, Austin your only stay thinketh * he descended in vaine, vnles he did good to som who were even there in Hell in torments.e before g. 168. But this you vtterly renounce. So that every way stil it remayneth good, that seeing there is no certaine benefit that Christ did in Hell, neither to vs, nor to any, therefore we are not to beleeue that he was in Hell. Our 4d. Reason: There is altogeather as great reason and as vr∣gent cause that Christ whole man (both Soule,SON 4. and Body) should be present in Hell to free vs thence wholly, (that is our Souls, & Bodies) as there is that his Soule must be there present to free thence our Soules. But simply it is confessed that his Body was never there,
neither had any cause to be, for the freeing of our Bodies. Therefore it followeth, that neither his Soule was ever there, nor had any cause so to be, for the freeing of our Soules. Heere I wish, you would an∣swer my proposition without Skoffes & taunts and haughty dis∣daine, as your manner is. But bring some evident and cleere dif∣ference that his Soul must go more necessarily thither alone then that his Body also should, and let it be truly grounded on the pro∣portion of faith and Christian Religion, if not on expresse Scrip∣ture. I wot well what you bring from some Fathers,Pag. 17 Fulgentius,Pag. 17.181. Athanasius, & others, That his Soule by being present in Limbo, (that they meane by Hades and Infernum) saved vs from Hell, & by his flesh temporally dying he gave vs life eternall, and by lying in the grave vncorrupted he gave vs incorruptiō. Heere we allow them so far as they meane, that what one parte of him did, that our whole man and every parte received good by. But if they think, his Soul by Divine ordināce had need to be actually pre∣sent elswhere, then only with the godly deceased, to execute his victory gotten before on the Crosse against Satan, to thend that we might be free frō Hell, thē let thē shew vs the Scripture for this Divine ordināce: & so (by Gods grace) we shal forthwith imbrace it. Otherwise at least let them shew vs a reason (or do you so much for them) why both parts ioyntly should not rather have gon thi∣ther by like necessity to execute that togither, which both ioyntly had got and deserved for togeather: the benefit also whereof is to come (not to one parte alone, but) ioyntly to both in vs. Againe, why this going to Hell by our Saviour Christ was not rather after his Resurrection, when he had begun his actuall Triumph in deed by ioyning togeather againe both partes of his manhood, in both which togeather before he had bene humbled. Neither is it likely that he began it before his Resurrection, seeing the Scrip∣tureMath. Luke 2 Act 2 2. & 3.15 40 & 1 17.3. & Rom. 4.6.4. &  Cor. 15  1.20 1 14. 2 T 11. every where noteth this as the first part of his exaltation af∣ter death, and it being strange in Christian reason & against pro∣portion of faith to think, that one parte of Christ (his Soul) should gloriously triumph, the other (his Body) all this while lying in Humiliation, possessed with death in the Grave, which you say is the Divels range, a part of his power, and of the Kingdom of dark∣nes. Yea also seeing it is most likely that he would cleere himselfe first wholy and intirely in both partes, before he would begin to
strip and spoyle Sathan for vs. Lastly seeing it is a greater degree of triumph & victory to spoyle the enemy, to tread him vnder foote, to breake his houses and stronge Holdes, to set free the captiues, to make him and his to bow the knee to the conquerour, then to get perfit life & freedom to himselfe. So that alwayes that, is after this. Wherefore it seemeth that Christe did thus also. If he did actually such thinges in Hell, it was not till after his Resurection; before which time he had not perfit life and deliverance himself. Let vs I pray have some cleere and Christian reason against these strong likelyhoods: and then let vs aske a point or two more, wch we think will follow likewise, if your assertion be true. First, if one part of Christ, viz: his Soul only were in Hel to execute his victo∣ry which before hee had merited on the Crosse, then why in his sufferinges, righteousnes, and obedience might not one parte of Christs manhood have aswell sufficed. I say why might not one parte alone have in this world merited enough (which Appollina∣ris an Haeretick affirmed) aswell as that one parte might serve to triumph for vs in Hell. Againe seeing his Body in the Grave by o∣vercoming corruption which is a part of the Kingdom of Satan as † you say,g. 216. did thereby save our bodies frō that part of Satans walk as you call it, by what reason is it that thereby he destroyed not consequentlie the whole kingdom of Satan, saving thereby our Soules also, in so much that Christs Soule might not have needed to have come into Hell for that purpose. Or if they meane that his flesh being in the Grave, and his Soule being in Hell did se∣verally and distinctly save our flesh and our soules, then how will you be reconciled with them,ur selfe eth it,  all men g a who do deny that point. Further for the actuall stripping of Satan of his spoyles, why was it need∣full that an actuall presence of any parte of his manhood should be in Hell, seeing indeed it is certaine that the whole actuall tri∣umph of Christ over Satan proceedeth not of the proper vertue of the manhood, but onely from the vertue and power of the Godhead of Christ. Therefore that might possibly be as effe∣ctuall and as fully accomplished in the absence of the manhood as in the prsence: all the while that the Godhead and manhood were still vnited and continually togeather in one Person. Last of all, if it were the very humane presence of his soule that so delivered our soules from thence that they shall never come thi∣ther
why did not the presence of his flesh in the Grave keepe ours that it should never come there, or at least that it should never putrifie nor rot, as his flesh did not. All these sequeles and conse∣quences are as good and as likely as your assertion, that Christes Soule (and not his flesh) ought to be locally in Hell for this end, that ours might never come there. Further, I made this Argument in myPa 160 former Treatise, that Christes Descending into Hell (if ever hee did so) could not be iudged any part of his Exaltation or Glorification. To which your reply is, I know not whether more strange, or skornful. But youPa. 416. resolue that these words He descended to Hell, importeth his Exaltation and Triumph. Yet you skoffe at me for the like: as if I had said,Pa His Descending was Ascending: & Hell was Hea∣ven. But heerin you affirme vntruly. 1. I say, Though his Soule leaving his body Ascended: yet this is not meant by that phrase, He descended to Hades. 2. I never said that Hades signified Hea∣ven, although some inIn a∣ble s Hades are in Heaven. 3. Much lesse did I ever say, that Hell is Heaven. Why thē cry you out ofPag  impuden∣cie, facing, ridiculous, and audacious, presumption. &c. Who pre∣sumeth let the advised reader iudge, when you thus confidently avouch as an article of faith that Christes Soule locally descended; and yet bring not one proofe of it from Gods word, nor from any mans opinion, whom you will cleave vnto fully. ThatPa.  you a∣vouchve Phil. 2. for it, is more straunge: where we have not one word of his local being in Hel. And that thever Colossians 2. should proove it, passeth all the rest. Where (though we graunt you your reading) yet the expresse text referreth that triumph to Christes Crosse: which you openly deny. That of the Councells, howe Christ rose againe,Th prove for yo having spoyled Hell, I easily yeeld; seeing that proveth not his locall being there. The same I affirme of that Al∣legorie in Luke; which sheweth ChristesLuk  Overcoming, Binding, and Spoyling of Satan in deed: but not by his locall being in Hel. What if Christ doe set out many pointes of doctrine by Parables? Yet such are those pointes, as are proved otherwise and elswhere. The Parables doe but illustrate them. Howbeit this Parable in question, Christ expresly applyeth to his Dispossessing of Divells out of mens bodyes. Wherefore you ought not to wrest it to ano∣ther thing, whereof there he hath not a word, nor any where els:
that is, to shew how Christ bound the Divell in Hell locally. Ra∣ther remember, I pray, howe God shewed his displeasure against your wresting of his word, by that strange terrour that happened even then, when you were descended into the depth of this vn∣couth doctrine at Paules Crosse. Which for the time so affrighted many 1000. of people, that it will never be forgotten in England while your opinions be remēbred: albeit this grew but of a small occasion, as after it seemed. Where you charge me in the end, arrogantly and absurdly to falsifie the Synod of our Realme, 17. it is but what your selfe doth in effect. I said, Our Synod corrected K. Edwardes Synod. You acknowledge and professe that " in the later words of that for∣mer Synod now left out,. 419. are 3. things that cannot be iustified by the Scriptures. 1. That the Spirites of the iust were in Hell. 2. That Christ there preached vnto them. 3. That he stayed there till his Resurrection. Which our Synod since very profitably hath over∣skipped and suppressed. First then your selfe granteth, that our later Synod corrected the former about this matter: which in my wordes you cannot indure to heare. 2. You charge these words of K. Edw. Synod. with 2. pointes, which are not in them. 1. That it saith, how the Spirits of the iust were in Hell: and that Christ descending thither, stayed there till his resurrection. In me you would make this a great matter, so to misreport the wordes of a Synod, which in deed saith nothing heereof. 3. It is well that you * renounce that of " Peter, 22..3.19 (by Austins direction) as making not at all for any locall being of Christ in Hell. But yet heerein your selfe openly refuseth the minde of all your predecessors, yea of our later Synod, if they believed as you vrge that they did. For if they liked Christs locall being in Hel, they misliked not the ap∣plying of that in Peter therevnto: as by Mai. Nowells Catechisme may appear. Neither misliked they his tarying there till his resur∣rectiō: which Austin also holdeth as firmely, as that he was there. All which you vtterly disclaime, as wel as I. Why then do you ag∣gravat my differing from them, and see not your owne. 4. That our English Cleagie generally did or doe beleeve Christes locall descent into Hell (although they reade and rehearse those words so translated) certainly no man will, nor ought to acknowledge. Every man is assured of the cōtrarie. You can argue nothing then
heerein by our vsuall naming of this word Hell, in this place of the Creed. Which yet is al that youPag.  have heere. So that your con∣clusion is vaine. If Hell in English bee Hell, and going downe bee descending, &c. Likewise is that, You are content to be tryed by all the Fathers both Greeke and Latin. Who all (as hath ben shewed) doe make against your opinion. Also as touching the Scrip∣ture you are vtterly destitute thereof: which yet alone must take place with vs in this matter. All that you bring for your pur∣pose, are meerely mistaken & mistranslated wordes of Scriptures, Creedes, and Fathers: as (I hope) hath plainly bene proved. This therfore may suffice for vs to refuse your doctrine in these points. Wisdome shalbe iustified of all her children. To God only wise be praise through IESVS CHRIST for ever. Rom. 16.17. FINIS. Pagin. Lin. Faultes. Correction. 13. in marg. pag. 8. pag. 7. 23. 37. he they 24. 2. their the 27. 29. will well 36. 22. in marg your you 49. 24. ne   57. 7. herefore heeretofore 65. 28. externally eternally. 65. 8. better buter 77. in marg: b pag. 51.55. b pag 71.73. 103. 33. torments. torments: yet no only to it.
The diverse Significations of the Greeke word Hades; Which is ha according to the Circūstances of the places where it is vsed. See pag. 177. Wherevnto also the Hebrue Sheol may be rightly compared. Hades a meere Priuatiō of this visible Worlde; No visible be∣ing heere any more: pa. 157. &c. 169. 178. applyed Natively Seldom, yet somtime to All visible transitory things when they are Destroyed from out of this World, & are seene heere no more. pag. 188. &c. Often, & chiefly to Dead Men: yea to al dead men, both Good and Bad, Blessed and Dam∣ned. pag. 155 &c. Yet only in respect yt they are Dead, and seene no more in this world pag. 156 162. 166. 169 177. 178. Thus somtime it signifi∣eth cōcerning thē, that which Tooke them away hence, and holdeth them still: pa. 169. 179. 181. 192. either. Death it selfe. pa. 161. 1 The Power, Strength,  Force of death. pag 194. their State and cōdition: pa. 171. 175. 178 viz: of their Whole Person dissolved, and taken away hence. pa. 158. 177. Partes; both Soul. pa. 155. & Body. pa. 201. Place; pa. 173. 181. in respect of the dissolved Pates, so  as they have a Being som∣where in a place after Death. no Positive thing in any place, but meere. Priva∣tion (as is said) from thi Visible World. Figurative¦ly: by a Poeticall fiction; making it sometime (as it were) a Place of things, which in truth have no Being nor Place after they cease to be heere. pag. 188. Prosopo¦poeia, lawfully setting out ye Pow¦er of death, or of destru∣ction from hence, as if it were a Person having this power. pa. 182. 179. 192. Idolatrously making such an imagined Person, a false God. 173. 179. Synécdoche, & so it is somtime Hell: pag. 187. 171. Heaven in Plato. pag. 178. the Grave. pag. 159.
