14735 99857170 22854
A MVSICALL DREAME. OR THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF AYRES. The First part is for the Lute, two Voyces, and the Viole de Gambo; The Second part is for the Lute, the Uiole and foure Uoices to Sing: The Third part is for one Voyce alone, or to the Lute, the Basse Viole, or to both if you please, VVhereof, two are Italian Ayres. Composed by ROBERT IONES. Que prosunt singula, multa iuuant. THOV SHALT LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTIE LONDON Imprinted by IOHN WINDET, and are to be solde by SIMON WATERSON, in Powles Church-yeard, at the Signe of: he Crowne. 1609.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND WOR∣thy Gentleman, Sir IOHN LEVINTHORPE Knight perpetuall Happinesse and Content. IT is not vnknowne vnto your wel deseruing selfe, Right VVorshipfull, that not long since I tooke my Ultimum vale, with a resoluing in my selfe, neuer to publish any workes of the same Nature and Fashion, whereupon I betooke me to the ease of my Pillow, where Somnus hauing taken possession of my eyes, and Morpheus the charge of my senses; it happened mee to fall into a Musical dreame, wherein I chanced to haue many opinions and extrauagant humors of diuers Natures and Conditions, some of modest mirth, some of amorcus Loue, and some of most diuine contemplation; all these I hope, shall not giue any distaste to the eares, or dislike to the mind, eyther in their words, or in their se∣uer all sounds, although it is not necessarie to relate or diuulge all Dreames or Phantasies that Opinion begets in sleepe, or happeneth to the mindes apparti∣on. And continuing long in this my dreaming slumber, I began to awake, and vpon my eyes vnclosing, I bethought my selfe, being full awaked, aduising in my mind, whome to elect and chuse as a Patrone for the same, I was easily in∣uited to make choice of your VVorship, as one to whome I necessarily ought both loue and duety, And howsoeuer I might feare that you wil not acknow∣ledge it, yet in that Nature hath inriched you with more then ordinarie know∣ledge in this Art, beeing a witnes of that Loue which you haue alwayes affor∣ded to Musicke, I emboldened my selfe the rather to present it vnto you. Accept it then (good Sir) as a Token of vnfained Loue, and a debt worthily due vnto you for your many fauours done to him that is At your Worships commaund. ROBERT IONES.
To all Musicall Murmurers, This Greeting. THou, whose eare itches with the varietie of opinion, hearing thine owne sound, as the Ecchoe reuerberating others substance, and vnprofitable in it selfe, shewes to the World comfortable noyse, though to thy owne vse little pleasure, by reason of vncharitable censure. I speake to thee musicall Mo∣mus, thou from whose nicetie, numbers as easily passe, as drops fall in the showre, but with lesse profite. I compare thee to the hie way dust that flies into mens eyes, and will not thence without much trouble, for thou in thy dispersed iudgement, not onely art of∣fensiue to seeing knowledge, but most faulty false to deseruing industry, picking moates out of the most pure Bisse, and smoothing the plainest veluet, when onely thine owne opi∣nion is more wrinckled and more vitious in it selfe, then grosser soyle, so that as a brush in∣fected with filth, thou rather soylest then makest perfect any way. I haue stood at thine elbow, and heard thee prophane euen Musickes best Note, and with thy vntunde rel∣lish Sol Fade most ignobly. I am assured, and I care not greatly, that thou wilt lay to my charge, my whilome vow, Neuer againe, because I promised as much: but vnderstand me thou vns kilfull descanter, deriue from that Note of Plaine Song charitable num∣bers, and thou shalt find harsh voices are often a Note aboue Ela reduced by truer iudgement, which I bereaue thee of, knowing thy Rules, are as our new come Lutes, be∣ing of many stringes, not easily vsed, vnlesse in aduenture, till practise put forward into deseruing Diuision. This my aduenture is no deed but a dreame, and what are dreames, but airie possessions, and seuerall ayres, breathing harmonious whisperings, though to thee discord, yet to others indifferent, I will not say excellent, because it is an others office not mine, but let them be as they are, others profites and my paines, set forth for pleasure, not for purposed poyson to infect imagination, no, but as a showre falling in a needfull season, so I flatter my selfe at least, and will say so euer by any other, whose labour shall vplift Musicall meditation, the onely wing of true courage, being the most pleasing voice of man, whose sweetenes reacheth vnto heauen it selfe. It is hard if al this paines reape not good commendations, and it is water wrung out of a Flint in thee, sith thou neuer thinkst well of any, and wert in thy selfe so vnskilfull euer, as thy Tutor from the first howre could neuer make thee sing in Tune; be as thou art a lumpe of deformity without fashion, bredde in the bowels of disdaine, and brought forth by bewitcht Me∣gaera, the fatall Widwife to all true merite. Giue me leaue to depart, or if not, without it I am gone, carelesse of thy censuring, and fully perswaded thou canst not thinke well, and therefore art curst in thy Cradle, neuer to be but cruell, and being borne with teeth in thy head, bitst euery one harmeles in this or what else honest industry, makes thy earegossip too. Farewell if thou wilt in kindnesse, or hold thy selfe from further carping.
A TABLE CON∣taining all the Songes in this Booke. THough your strangenes frets my heart, 1 Sweet Kate of lateranne away, 2 Once did I serue a cruell heart 3 Will said to his Mammy, that he would goe woe 4 Harke, harke, wot you what 5 My complayning is but faining 6 On a time in summers season, 7 Farewel fond youth, if thou hadst not beene blind 8 How should I shew my loue vnto my loue 9 O he is gone and I am here 10 And is it night, are they thine eyes that shine 11 She hath an eye, aye me, 12 I know not what, yet that I feele is much, 13 Griefe of my best loues absenting 14 If in this flesh where thou indrencht dost lie, 15 O thred of life when thou art spent 16 When I sit reading all alone. 17 Faine would I speake, but feare to giue offence 18 In Sherwood liude stout Robin Hood, 19 Ite Caldi sospiri, 20 Samor non è che dunque. 21
I. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. THough your strangenes frets my heart, yet must I not com plaine, You perswade me tis but Art which secret loue must faine,   If another you af fect, tis but a toy to a uoide suspect, Is this faire excusing,   O no O no .ii. .ii. O no no no no no all is abu sing. 2 When your wisht sight I desire, Suspition you pretend, Causlesse you your selfe retire, Whilst I in vaine attend, Thus a louer as you say, Still made more eager by delay, Is this faire excusing. O no, all is abusing. 3 When another holds your hand, Youle sweare I hold your heart, Whilst my riuall close doth stand, And I sit farre apart, I am neerer yet then they, Hid in your bosome as you say, Is this faire excusing, O no all is abusing. 4 Would a riuall then I were, Some else your secret friend, So much lesser should I feare, And not so much attend, They enioy you euery one, Yet must I seeme your friend alone, Is this faire excusing, O no all is abusing,
BASSVS. THough yout strangenesse ALTVS. THough your strangenesse frets my heart, yet must I not complaine. You perswade mee tis but art, which secret loue must faine. If an other you affect, tis but a toy to  auoide suspect, Is this faire excusing O no O no, .ii. .ii. .ii. no, no no no no all is a busing,  O no O no .ii. .ii. no no no no no all is a busing.
II. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. SSweete Kate of late ran away and left me playning. A bide I cride or I die with thy dis dayning.   Te hee hee quoth shee gladly would I see any man to die with louing Neuer any yet died of such a   fitte: Neither haue I feare of prouing. 2 Vnkind, I find, Thy delight is in tormenting, Abide, I cride, Or I die with thy consenting. Te hee hee quoth she, Make no foole of me, Men I know haue oathes at pleasure, But their hopes attaind, They bewray they faind, And their oathes are kept at leasure. 3 Her words Like swords, Cut my sorry heart in sunder, Her floutes, VVith doubts, Kept my heart affections vnder. Te hee hee quoth shee, What a foole is he, Stands in awe of once denying, Cause I had inough, To become more rough, So I did, O happy trying.
BSASVS. SWeet Kate. ALTVS. SWeete Kate of late, ranne away and left me playning, A bide I cride, or I die with thy disdayning, He hee hee quoth shee gladly  would I see, any man to die with louing: Neuer any yet, died of such a fitte, Neuer haue I feare of  prouing.
III. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. ONce did I serue a cruell hart with faith vn  fainde I still importune her piersing lookes that wrought my smart, she laughes .ii, .ii.  and smiles at my misfortune and sayes perhaps .ii. you  may at last by true desart, ii. loues fauour taste.
BASSVS. ONnce Did Iserue a cruell heart. ALTVS. ONce did I serue a cruell heart, once .ii. with saith vnfainde, I still importune her smiling lookes that wrought my smart, my smart, Shee laughes .ii. .ii. smiles at my misfortune, and sayes perhaps .ii. you may at last, at last by true desert loue fa- uour taste and saies, perhaps .ii. you may at last at last by true desert loues fa- uour taste.
IIII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. WIll saide to his manmmy that hee woulde goe woo, faine would he Soft a while my lammy stay, and yet a- bide, hee like a  wed but he wot not who In faith chil haue a wife .ii. .ti. O what a foole as he was replide,  life do I lead for a wife in my bed I may not tell you, O there to haue a wife .ii. .ii. O tis a  smart to my hart, tis a racke to my backe and to my belly. 2 Scarcely was hee wedded, Full a fortnights space, But that he was in a heauie case, Largely was he headded, And his cheekes lookt thinne: And to repent he did thus beginne; A figge for such a wife, a wife, a wife, O what a life doe I lead, With a wife in my bedde, I may not tell you? There to haue a wife, a wife, a wife, O tis a smart to my heart, Tis a racke to my backe, And to my belly. 3 All you that are Batchelers, Be learnd by crying will, VVhen you are well to remaine so still, Better for to tarry, And alone to lie, Then like a foole with a foole to crie. A figge for such a wife, a wife, a wife, O what a life doe I leade, VVith a wife in my bed, I may not tell you, There to haue a wife, a wife, a wife, O tis a smart to my heart, Tis a racke to my backe, And to my belly.
BASSVS. WIll said to his Mammy. ALTVS. WIll saide to his mammy that hee woulde goe woo, faine would he wed but he wot not who Soft a while my lammy stay, and yet a- bide, hee like a foole as he was replide, In faith chil haue a wife .ii. .ii. O what a life doe I lead for a wife in my bed, I may not tell you, O there to haue a wife a wife, .ii. .ii. O tis a smart to my heart, tis a racke to my backe and to my belly.
V. ROBERT IONES CANTVS HArke harke wotyee what .ii. nay faith and shall  I tell I am afraide .ii. to die to die to die a maid and then lead  Apes in hell O it makes me sigh sigh .ii. ii. & sob with inward griefe, but if I can but  get a man a man hele yeeld me some reliefe .ii. some reliefe. 2 O it is strange how nature works with me, My body is spent and I lament mine owne great folly, O it makes me sigh and powre forth flouds of teares, Alas poore elfe none but thy selfe would liue, hauing such cares 3 O now I see that fortune frownes on me By this good light I haue beene ripe, O it makes me sigh and sure it will me kill, When I should sleepe I lie and weepe, feeding on sorrowes still. 4 I must confesse as maides haue vertue store, Liue honest still against our wils, more fooles we are therefore: O it makes me sigh, yet hope doth still me good, For if I can but get a man, with him ile spend my blood.
BASSVS. HArke wot you what. ALTVS. HArke, hatke wot you what .ii. nay faith and shall I tell I am afraide afraide, I .ii. .ii. to die to dle, I am afraide to die a maid, and so leade Apes in hell, Oh it makes me sigh, sigh, .ii. .ii. and sob with inward griefe, but if I can but get a man, heele yeelde me some reliefe, .ii. heele yeeld me some reliefe,
VI. ROBERT IONES CANTVS MY complayning is but faining, all my loue is but in iest, fa, la, la, fa, la, la.  fa, la, la, fa, la, la, la, la, fa, la la la la la fa la, la, la, And my Courting is but sporting in most  shewing meaning, least fa la la .ii. .ii. .ii, fa la fa la la la fa la la la. 2 Outward sadnesse inward gladnesse, Representeth in my mind, fa la la, In most faining most obtaining, Such good faith in loue I find. fa la la. 3 Toward, Ladies this my trade is, Two minds in one breast I were, fa la la, And my measure at my pleasure, Ice and flame my face doth beare. Fa la la.
BASSVS. MY complayning. ALTVS. MY complaining is but faining, all my loue is but in iest, fa la fa la fa la la fa la la fa la la fa la fa la fa la la la la la. And my courting is but sporting in most shewing meaning, least fa la la .ii. .ii. .ii. fa la la la la la fa la la.
VII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. ON a time in summer season, Iocky late with Ienny walking like a lout   made loue with talking, when he should be doing, Reason still he cries, when he should dally, dally dally,   dally .ii. when he should dally, Ienny sweet Ienny sweet shal I .ii.   sweet Ienny sweet shall I shall I, shall I. 2 Ienny as most women vse it, Who say nay when they would haue it, VVith a bolde face seemed to craue it, With a faint looke did refuse it, Iocky lost his time to dally, Still he cries, sweete shall I, shall I. 3 She who knew that backward dealing, was a foe to forward longing, To auoide her owne hearts wronging, with a sigh loues sute reuealing. Said locky sweet when you would dally, Doe you cry sweet, shall I shal I. 4 Iocky knew by her replying, That a no is I in wooing, That an asking without doing, Is the way to loues denying. Now he knowes when he would dally How to spare sweet shall I shall I.
BASSVS. ON a time in summers seafon. ALTVS. ON a time in summers season, Iocky late with Ienny walking, like a lout made loue with talking, when he  should be doing, Reason still he cries, when he should dally, dally .ii. .ii. when he should dally, .ii. .ii. when he  should dally, Ienny sweet .ii. sweet sweet sweet Ienny, sweet shall I, shall I Ienny .ii. shall I.
VIII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. FArewell fond youth, if thou hadst not bin blind out of my eye thou mightst haue read   my minde, but now I plainely see how thou wouldst faine leaue me; sure I was a curst, not to goe at first   sure I was acurst O fie fie no, sweete stay & I will tell thee why no, sure I was accurst not to goe at   first, sure I was ac curst O fie fie no, sweet stay and I will tell thee why no. 2 Once more farewell, since first I heard thee speake, And had but sung farewell, my heart would breake, But now since I doe find thy loue is like the wind, What a foole was I To be like to die. What a foole was I, I was not, Yet say I was a foole I passe not. 3 Woes me alasse, why did I let him goe, These be the fruites of idle saying no, Now that he can disproue me, how shall he euer loue me, Nay but is he gone, Then I am vndone, Nay but is he gone, O hold him, Fie, forty things are yet vnt old him
BASSVS. FArewell fond youth. ALTVS. FArewell fond youth if theu hadst not beene blind, out of mine eyes thou mightst haue read my mind,  but now I plainely see how thou wouldst faine leaue me, sure I was accurst not to goe at first, sure I was accurst, O fie  fie, fie, no sweet stay and I will tell thee, why no, sure I was accurst not to goe at first, sure I was accurst, O sie no, sweet  stay and I will tell thee why no.
IX. ROBERT IONES CANTVS HOw should I shew my loue vnto my loue but The way by pen or tong I dare not proue their  hide but hide it from all eyes saue my loues eyes: Lookes are more safe, yet ouer them are drifts their drifts are oft discouered by the wisee,  spies, Then whats the way to cosen iealousie  which martyrs loue, .ii. .ii. by marking narrowly. 2 By all these wayes may thy affections walke, VVithout suspition of the iealous guarde: Thy whispering tong to her closde care shall talke, And be importunate till it be harde, Papers shall passe lookes shall not be debarde, To looke for loues young infants in her eyes, Be franke and bold as she is kind and wise. 3 O who can be so francke as she is kind, VVhose kindnesse merites more then Monarchies, Boldnesse with her milde grace, grace cannot find, Onely her wit ouer that doth tyrannize, Then let her worth and thy loue simpathize, Sith her worth to thy loue cannot be knowne, Nor thy loue to her worthinesse be showne.
TENOR. HOw should I shew my loue vnto my loue .ii. but hide, but hide it from all eyes saue my loues eies. The way by pen or tongbe I dare not proue, .ii. their drifts, their drifts are oft discouered by the wise Lookes are more safe, yet ouer them are spies, yet .ii. then whats the way to cosen iealousie to .ii. .ii. iealousie which Martyrs loue .ii. by marking narrowly. BASSVS. HOw should I shew .ii. my loue vnto my The way by pen .ii. or tong I daren loue vnto my loue but hide but hide it from all eyes saue proue .ii. their drifts their .ii. are oft discouered my loues eyes Lookes are more safe, yet ouer them are by the wise, spies, are spies, then whats the way to cosen iealousie, to .ii. which martyrs loue .ii. .ii. .ii. by marking narrowly. ALTVS. HOw should I shew my loue vnto my loue vn .ii. but hide it from all eyes saue my loues eyes, The way by pen or tongue I dare not proue .ii. their drifts are oft discouered by the wise, Lookes are more safe, yet ouer them are spies, then whats the way, .ii, whats the way, then whats .ii. .ii. to cosen iealousie, which martyrs loue .ii. .ii. by marking narrowly.
X. ROBERT IONES CANTVS O He is gone, O he is gone  O he is gone and I am here aye me aye me why are wee thus deui∣ded,  My sight in his eyes, did appeare my soule .ii. .ii. by his soules  thought was guided then come againe .ii. .ii. my all my life, my be∣ing,  soules, zeale, harts ioy, eares gester, eyes onely seeing. 2 Come sable care sease on my heart, Take vp the roomes that ioyes once filled, Natures sweet blisse is slaine by Art, A sence blacke frost liues spring hath killed Then come againe, my loue, my deere, my treasure, My blisse, my fate, my end, my hopes full measure.
TENOR. O O he is gone, and I am here .ii. I am O .ii. ah me .ii. why are we thus deuided, my sight by his soules thought was guided did appeare my soule .ii. by his soules thought was guided then come againe my all my life, beeing, soule, zeale, hearts ioy, eares guest, eyes onely seeing, onely seeing. BASSVS. O He is gone, .ii. .ii. and I am here O .ii. is gone and I am here, aye me, aye me, why are we thus deui ded, my sight in his eyes did appeare, did appeare, my soule .ii. by his soules thought was guided, then come againe, O then .ii. .ii. my al my life, my beeing, soules, zeale, harts ioy, eares guest, eyes onely seeing. ALTVS. O He is gone, .ii. .ii. and I am here, O .ii. he is gone, O hee .ii. ah me, ah me, why are we thus deuided, my sight in his eyes did appeare, did ap peare, my soule, .ii. .ii. by his soules thought was guided, then come again, .ii. my all my life, my being, soule, zeale, harts ioy, eares guest eyes onlie seeing.
XI. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. ANd is it night, are they thine eyes that shine, are we a-   lone and here and here and here alone may I come neere may I. ii. but touch, ii. but touch thy   shrine is Ielousie a sleepe, and is he gone, O Gods no more, silence my lippes with thine,   lippes kisses Ioyes haue blessings most diuine. 2 O come my deare our griefes are turnde to night, And night to ioyes, night blinds pale enuies eyes, Silence and sleepe prepare vs our delight, O ease we then our woes, our griefes, our cries, O vanish words, words doe but passions moue, O deerest life, ioyes sweet, O sweetest loue.
TENOR. ANd is it night are they thy eyes that shine, are we▪ alone, and here alone, and here a lone may I  come neere, may I, may I, but touch and touch .ii. .ii. thy shrine is iealousie a sleepe, and is he gone, O Gods  no more, silence my lips with thine, lips, kisses, ioyes, happe, blessing most diuine. BASSVS. ANd is it night, are they thine eyes that shine,  Are we alone and here alone, and here a lone; may  I come neere may I but touch .ii. thy shrine, is  iealousie a sleepe; and is he gone: O Gods no more  silence my lips with thine with thine lips, kisses, ioyes,  hap, O blessing m ost diuine. ALTVS. ANd is it night, are they thy eyes that shine that shine, are wee alone .ii. and here alone .ii.  may I come neare, may I but touch, but touch but touch thy shrine, Is iealousie a sleepe, and is he gone, O Gods no more  silence my lips with thine lips, kisses, ioyes, happe, blessing most diuine.
XII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. SHe hath an eye ah me, ah me shee .ii.   an eye to see .ii. ah me that shee hath too which makes me sigh as   louers doe, hey hoe hey hoe hey hoe .ii. .ii. ah me   that an eye .ii. .ii. should make her liue and mee to die, wise mens eyes are   in their mind but louers eyes are euer blind. 2 She hath a lippe, ah, ah alas, Two lippes which doe themselues surpasse, Alasse two lips for kisses, Of earthly loue the heauenly blisses, hey hoe, hey hoe Alasse, oh woe that a heauen, Should make vs ods that make all euen, Ladies kisses are a charme, That kill vs ere they doe vs harme. 3 She hath a heart ah me, ah me, A heart she hath which none can see, Ah me that I haue none, Which makes me sigh, yea sighing grone, hey hoe, hey hoe Hey hoe aye me that I part, And liue, yet leaue wich her my heart. Hartlesse men may liue by loue. This she doth know, and this I proue.
TENOR. SHe hath an eye .ii. nye me, aye me, she hath an eye .ii. an eye to see .ii. aye me, that she hath two  .ii. which makes me sigh as louers doe .ii. as louers doe, with hey hoe .ii. with hey  hoe alasse, that an eye should make her liue, and me to die, should .ii. to die, for wise mens eyes are in the mind,  but louers eyes are euer blind. BASSVS. SHe hath an eye .ii. ah me, .ii.  she hath an eye, an eye to see, shee .ii. ah mee, that  she hath too, which makes me sigh as louers doe, to sigh as  louers doe, with hey hoe, with hey hoe hey hoe,  .ii. hey ho, O that an eye should make her liue and  me to die, Ladies kisses are a charme,  .ii. that kill vs ere they doe vs harme. ALTVS. SHe hath an eye, hath an eye, ah me, ah me she .ii. to see an eye, to see ah me, that she  hath too, which makes me sigh as louers doe, as .ii. .ii. hey hoe, hey hoe, hey hoe, aye me, aye me, that an eye  that an eye .ii. .ii. should make her liue and me to die, .ii. Ladies kisses are a charme .ii. that kill  vs ere they doe vs harme.
XIII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS I Know not what. ii. yet that I  feele is much, it came I know not when, it was not euer yet  hurtes I know not how, yet is it such as I am pleasd .ii. .ii. though  it be cured neuer It is a wound .ii. that wasteth  still in woe and yet I would not, that it were not so. 2 Pleasde with a thought that endeth with a sigh, Sometimes I smile when teares stand in my eyes, Yet then and there such sweet contentment lieth, Both when and where my sweet sower torment lies, O out alas, I cannot long endure it, And yet alasse I care not when I cure it. 3 But well away, me thinks I am not shee, That wonted was these fits as soule to scorne. One and the same, euen so I seeme to be, As lost I liue, yet of my selfe forlorne, What may this be that thus my mind doth moue, Alasse I feare, God shield it be not loue.
TENOR. I Know not with .ii. .ii. .ii. yet that I feele is much, is much, it came I know not when, it was not euer, it hurts I know now how it is, it such yet is it, such as I am pleasde, .ii. .ii. though it be cured neuer .ii, it is a wound that wasteth still in woe, still in woe, and I yet I would not, I wold not that it were not so. BASSVS. I Know not what .ii. .ii. yet that I feele is much .ii. it came I know not when .ii. it was not euer it hurts, I know not how, yet is it such, .ii. as I am pleasde though it be cured though .ii. neuer, It is a wound .ii. that wasteth still in woe and yet I would not that it were not so. ALTVS. I Know not what .ii. .ii. yet that I feele is much, ii came I know not when, I know not when .ii. it came I know not when .ii. yet is it such .ii. as I am pleasd .ii. .ii. though it be cured, neuer .ii. it is a wound .ii. .ii. that wasteth still in woe, & yet I would not that it were not so.
XIIII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS GRiefe, griefe of my best loues absenting: Now O now wilt thou as∣sayle  mee I had rather life should fayle mee then endure thy slow for menting,  life our griefes and vs doe seuer once for euer absence griefe haue no relenting. 2 Well, be it foule absence spights me, So far of it cannot send her, As my heart should not attend her. O how this thoughts thought delights me Absence doe thy worst and spare not, Know I care not When thou wrongst me, my thoughts right me. 3 O but such thoughts proue illusions, Shadowes of a substance banisht, Dreames of pleasure too soone vanisht, Reasons maimde of their conclusions, Then since thoughts and all deceiue me, O life leaue me, End of life ends loues confusions.
TENOR. GRiefe griefe, of my best loues absenting, Now O now wilt thou assayle me, I had rather life should fayle me then endure thy slow tormenting, life our griefes and vs doe seuer once for euer, Absence, griefe haue no relenting. BASSVS. GRiefe griefe of my best loues absenting Now O now wilt thou assayle me, I had rather life should fayle me, then endure thy slow tormenting: Life our griefes and vs doe seuer, once, for euer ab∣sence griefe haue no relenting. ALTVS. GRiefe, griefe of my best loues absenting, Now O now wilt thou assayle me, I had rather life should fayle, me then endure thy slow tormenting. life our griefe and vs doe seuer, doe seuer, once for euer, absence griefes haue no relenting.
XV. ROBERT IONES CANTVS IF in this flesh where thou in drencht dost lie   poore soule thou canst reare vp .ii. .ii. thy limed wings, carry my thoughts   vp to the sacred skie .ii. and wash them in those heauenly hallowed springs, where ioy and requi∣um   & requium The holy Angels sings whilst all heauens vault .ii. with blessed Ecchoes   .ii. .ii. .ii. blessed Echoes rings. 2 Awaked with this harmony diuine, O how my soule mounts vp her throned head, And giues again with natiue glory shine, Wash with repentance then thy dayes missed, Then ioyes with requium mayest thou with Angels sing, Whilest all heauens vault with blessed Ecchoes ring.
TENOR. IF in the flesh the flesh, If in .ii. thou dost lie poore soule. thou caust reare vp thou .ii.  carry my thoughts vp to the sacred skie, vp .ii. and wash them in those heauenly hallowed springs  where ioy and requium .ii. the holy Angels sings, whilst all heauens vault .ii. .ii. with blessed  Ecchoe .ii. .ii. ring Ecchoering. BASSVS. IF in this flesh .ii. where thou in∣drencht  dost lie, poore soule thou canst reare vp thou  .ii. thy limed wings, carry my thoughts vp to vp  to the sacred skie, .ii. and wash them in those  heauenly hallowed springs, where ioy and requium and  .ii. the holy Angels sings, whilst all heauens vault  .ii. with blessed Ecchoe rings .ii. rings. ALTVS. IF in the flesh where thou indrencht dost lie poore soule, poore soule, shou canst reare vp thy limed .ii. wings  thou canst .ii. wings carry my thoughts vp to the sacred skies, vp to .ii. and wash them in those heaue∣ly  hallowed springs, where ioyes & requium and requium the holy angels sing, the .ii. whilst all heauens vault  .ii. .ii. with blessed Ecchoe, .ii. .ii. with blessed Ecchoes Ring.
XVI. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. OThred of life when thou art spēt how are my sorrowes eased. O earth why tremblest O vaile of flesh whē thou art rent how shal my soule be pleased:   thou at death that did re ceiue both heate and breath by bargain of a second birth, that done .ii, that done again to   be cold earth, Come death .ii. .ii. deere widwife to my life, see sin and ver tue holde at strife,   Make hast away lest thy de lay .ii. bee my decay world of in anity   school house of vanity minion of hell fare well .ii. .ii. farewell. 2 O coward life whose feare doth tie me in distasting sences, Infused part mount vp on hie, life gets on life offences, O flie immortall flie away, Be not immurde in finite clay, Where true loue doth with selfe loue fight, Begetting thoughts that doe affright, Courage faint heart, sound trumpet death, Ile find it wind with all my breath. O case of glasse, Confusions mase, A flouring grasse, Temple of treachery, Soule yoake to misery, Store-house of hell Farewell, farewell.
TENOR. OThred of life when thou art spent, how are my sorrowes eased: O earth why temblest thou at O vaile of flesh when thou art rent, how shall my soule be pleased:  death, that did receiue both heate and breath, by bargaine of a second birth, that done that done, againe to  be cold earth, Come death .ii. .ii. deare widwife to my life, see sine and vertue hold at strife, make hast a∣way  lest thy delay, ii. be my decay, de- cay, world of inanity, .ii.  schoole-house of vanity, vanity, minion of hell farewell, minion .ii. farewell farewell .ii. BSASVS. OThred of life when thou art spent, how are my O vale of flesh when thou art rent, how shal my  sorrowes eased, O earth why tremblest thou at death soule be pleased,  that did receiue both heat & breath, by bargain of a second  birth, that done .ii. again to be cold earth, come death .ii  .ii. deere midwife to my life, see sinne & vertue hold at strife,  Make hast away lest thy delay, ii. be my decay  world of inanity, schoole-house of vanity, O minion of hell  farewell, ii. minion ofhel farewell, farewell, farewell. ALTVS. OThred of life when thou art spent, how are my sorrowes eased, O earth why trem-blest thou at death, O vayle of flesh when thou art rent, how shall my soule be pleased:  that did receiue both heate and breath, by bargaine of a second birth, that done, .ii. again .ii.  come death, .ii. deere midwife to my life, see sin and vertue hold at strife, make hast away, lest thy delay .ii.  be my de- cay, world of inanity, anity .ii. school-house of vanity, .ii. minion of hell farewell  .ii. farewell, fare well.
XVII. ROBERT IONES CANTVS. WHen I sit reading all alone that secret booke where- in I   sigh, I sigh I .ii. I sigh to looke how many spots there bee, I wish I could not see,   I wish I could not see or from my selfe might flee. 2 Mine eyes for refuge then with zeale befixe the skies, My teares doe cloude those eyes, My sighes doe blow them drie, And yet I liue to die, My selfe I cannot flie, 3 Heauens I implore, that knowes my fault, what shall I doe, To hell I dare not goe, The world first made me rue, My selfe my griefes renew, To whome then shall I sue. 4 Alasse; my soule doth faint to draw this doubtfull breath, Is thereno hope in death, Oyes, death ende my woes: Death me from me will lose, My selfe am all my foes.
TENOR. WHen I sit reading all alone that secret booke wherein I sigh, I sigh to looke how  many spottes there bee .ii. there be I wish I could not see .ii. or from my selfe  might flee. BSASVS. WHen I sit reading all alone, that secret  booke wherein I sigh, I sigh to looke, how many  spots there be there bee, I wish I could not see  .ii. .ii I wish I could not see,  or from my selfemight flee. ALTVS. WHen I sit reading all alone. that secret booke wherein I sigh, I sigh to looke to looke,  how many spots there be, I wish I could not see .ii. ii. or from my selfe  might flee.
XVIII. ROBERT IONES. CANTVS. FAine would I speake but feare to giue offence, makes mee tetire:   .ii. and in amasement stand, still breathing forth, .ii. my   woes in fruitlesse silence, whilst my poore hart is slaine by her faire hands:   faire hands indeed the guiders of the dart that from her eyes .ii. were   leueldat my heart. 2 Those eyes two pointed Diamonds did engraue, VVithin my heart the true and liuely forme, Of that sweet Saint whose pitty most I craue, VVhose absence makes me comfortlesse to mourne, And sighing say (Sweet) would she knew my loue, My plaints perhaps her mind may somewhat moue. 3 But if she knew, what if she did reiect, Yet better twere by her sweet doome to die, That she might know my deare loues true effect, Then thus to liue in vnknowne misery, Yet after death it may be she would say, His too much loue did worke his liues decay.
TENOR. FAin would I speak but feare to giue offence offence, makes mee retire .ii.  and in amazement stand, still breathing forth .ii. my woes in fruitlesse silence whilst my poore heart  is slame by her fairehand, by her faire hand Faire hands indeed the guiders of the darr, of the dart, that from her  eyes, that .iii were leuelde at my heart. BSASVS. FAin wold I speake but feare to giue offence,  makes mee retire .ii. and in amazement stand  and .ii. still breathing forth my woes in fruitlesse  silence, whilst my poore heart is slaine, is slaine by her  faire hand, Faire hand indeed the guiders of the  dart, the guider of the dart, that from her eyes  were leueld at my heart. ALTVS. FAine would I speake, .ii. but feare to giue offence makes me retire, and in amasement  stand, still breathing forth, .ii. .ii. forth, whilst my poore heart is slaine by her faire hand, by  .ii. faire hands indeed the guiders of the dart that from her eyes, that .ii. .ii. were  leueld at my heart.
XIX. ROBERT IONES. CANTVS. IN Sherwood liude stout Robin Hood an Archer great none greater, His bow &   shafts were sure & good, yet Cupids were much beter Robin could shoot at many a Hart and misse, Cupid at first could   hit a hart of his, hey iolly Robin hoe iolly Robin, hey iolly Robin Hood, loue finds out   me aswell as thee to follow mee .ii. .ii. .ii. to follow me to the green wood. 2 A noble thiefe was Robin Hoode, Wise was he could deceiue him, Yet Marrian in his brauest mood, Could of his heart bereaue him, No greater thiefe lies hidden vnder skies. then beauty closely lodgde in womens eyes. Hey iolly Robin. 3 An Out-law was this Robin Hood, His life free and vnruly, Yet to faire Marrian bound he stood And loues debt payed her duely. Whom curbe of stricktest law could not hold in, Loue with obeyednes and a winke could winne. Hey iolly Robin. 4 Now wend we home stout Robin Hood Leaue we the woods behind vs, Loue passions must not be withstood, Loue euery where will find vs, I liude in field and towne, and so did he, I got me to the woods, loue followed me, Hey iolly Robin.
BASSVS. IN Sherwood.
XIX. ROBERT IONES. CANTVS. IN Sherwood liude stout Robin Hood an Archer great none greater. His bow &   shafts were sure & good, yet Cupids were much beter Robin could shoot at many a Hart and misse, Cupid at first could   hit a hart of his, hey iolly Robin hoe iolly Robin, hey iolly Robin Hood, loue finds out   me aswell as thee to follow mee .ii. .ii. .ii. to follow me to the green wood. 2 A noble thiefe was Robin Hoode, Wise was he could deceiue him, Yet Marrian in his brauest mood, Could of his heart bereaue him, No greater thiefe lies hidden vnder skies. then beauty closely lodgde in womens eyes. Hey iolly Robin. 3 An Out-law was this Robin Hood, His life free and vnruly, Yet to faire Marrian bound he stood And loues debt payed her duely. Whom curbe of stricktest law could not hold in, Loue with obeyednes and a winke could winne. Hey iolly Robin. 4 Now wend we home stout Robin Hood Leaue we the woods behind vs, Loue passions must not be with stood, Loue euery where will find vs, I liude in field and towne, and so did he, I got me to the woods, loue followed me, Hey iolly Robin.
BASSVS. IN Sherwood.
XX. ROBERT IONES. CANTVS. ITe caldi sos pi ri all freddo core, Rompete  il ghiaccio che pieta coontente e se preg, mortale al ci ēl s'in  ten de morte .ii. O mer cè sia fine al mio do lore Morte  .ii. O mercè sie fine al  do lore.
BASSVS. SA' mor non è che dunqne.
XXI. ROBERT IONES. CANTVS. SAmor non è the dun que è quel ch'io sento? Se buona, on- de è effette as- pro mortale?  Ma s eg li è a mor, per dio che cosa è quae le? Sa' mi a vog li a. ar de Se ri a, on de e' fi dolce og ni tor men tk?  on de è il piau to el la men to Sa' mal miogrado, il la men tar che va  la .ii. O viua morte .ii. O diletto se ma  le come puoi tanto in me s'io no'l con sento. FINIS.
BASSVS. ITe Calde Sospiri:
