17445 99855024 20494
The Bee hiue of the Romishe Church: A Cōmentarie vpon the sixe principall pointes of Master Gentian Heruet, a Romish Catholike his booke, which is deuided into sixe partes, as in the Argument doth appeare. And an Epistle made by the Authour of this booke vnto Franciscus Son∣nius, late Bishop of Antwerpe. Translated out of Dutch into English, by George Gylpen the elder. Good Reader be so bountifull, in reading this, to note and viewe, The witte and wisedome wonderfull, of the most learned Louen crewe. 2. Thess. 5. Prooue all things, and keepe that which is good. ¶ Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the vinetree, by Thomas Dawson, for Iohn Stell, dwelling at the Dukes place, by Creechurch. 1579.
Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
To the right Worshipfull, wise, and ver∣tuous Gentleman, Maister Phi∣lippe Sidney, Esquire, the abun∣dance of Gods grace, and all spirituall bles∣singes. IF nota∣ble knowe∣lege (Right Worship∣full,) if per∣fect experi∣ence, if sin∣gular au∣thoritie, if deserued dignitie, finallie, if anie excellent and spirituall orna∣ment of Nature (or rather of God) be sufficient to winne credite, and to purchase praise: then must this be a necessarie consequent, that where many gifts of Gods grace do ioynt∣lie concurre and run together, there
credite hath continuance, and praise possession. Such a one is he, who by no lesse labour then learning, and by no lesse learning then iudgement, not onlie attempted, but also finished (to his no small commendation, be∣ing a worthie Gentleman, & hauing enough in ciuill and politike affaires otherwise to bestowe his studie, & his time,) this most profitable and true christian worke: which, though by reason of the manifoldnesse of the matter it be wearisome to reade, yet with such weight of wisedome, diuerse waies declared, that tedious∣nesse is so attenuated & diminished: that (as a footeman, hauing farre to goe, maketh lesse accompt of his la∣bour, if the way be pleasant: and by the present viewe of cōfortable ob∣iectes, is so rauished with delight, that he thinketh not vpon the length of his iournie:) in this booke, things are so tempered, that (as the best saw∣ces
being made of sweete and sowre, doe please the taste) the reader shall feele him selfe in such sorte affected, that albeit the perusing thereof shall seeme passing painfull, yet (circum∣stances accordinglie considered, and point by point precisely pondered) it shall prooue exceeding fruitefull. Againe (Right worshipfull) as in building, not he which seeketh ra∣ther to be sumptuous then substan∣tiall, but hee which endeuoureth to be both substantiall and sumptuous, deserueth most commendation: so in writing, not he which hunteth af∣ter the finest phrase, & sweetest style, neglecting (in the meane time) sensi∣ble matter, sauouring of iudgement: but hee, which hath the capacitie, both pithilie like a Logician, and pleasantlie like a Rhetorician, to leaue some proofe to the worlde of his witte and knowledge, is to bee had in admiration. In which thing,
because hee is excellent, by whome this booke was written, it importeth more then I am able to vtter: which, (whatsoeuer it be) I leaue to the cē∣sure of the wise. And nowe (Right worshipfull) somewhat superficial∣lie to touch the work it selfe: which I may well resemble to the Anato∣mie of mans bodie: wherein as wee may see the wonderfull wisdome of God, in the creation of mortall man, howe he hath powred life into the principall partes, as it were into cer∣teine vesselles, and couered them with flesh, which I may boldly com∣pare to clay, for the better preserua∣tion and safe keeping of the same▪ howe cunninglie the whole body of man is builded and knitte together, with sinewes, veines, artires, liga∣tures, gristles, bones, muscles, & such like: so in this booke, beeing but a manuell, the verie secrets of the Ro∣mishe Church are so discouered,
(which in the opinion of the Pope and his consistorie, is high treason, and vnpardonable,) that verie babes and sucklings may beholde their ab∣hominations, and spitte at their vil∣lanous practises, to them selues ad∣uantageable, to the church of Christ offensiue, and to the glorie of God nothing more derogatorie. This no∣table booke therefore (Right wor∣shipfull) I haue presumed to publish abroade, vnder your patronage and protection, not doubting that it should want credite, if it were not o∣uershadowed with the countenance of some speciall personage: but for that your disposition being so vertu∣ous, as that you are a mirrour amōg men, & your course of life so praise∣worthie, as that you may bee well thought a blossome of true Nobili∣tie: your worshipfull mind also be∣ing beautified & inriched with such rare ornamentes, as that you among
the rest, glister like a starre: therfore vnto your woorships handes haue I bin encouraged to present this wor∣thie booke, translated and printed at my proper costes and expenses, not in hope of anie extraordinarie pro∣fite, (which howe litle I thinke vp∣pon, let him iudge that knoweth all thinges,) but that the Churche of Christ, being not yet growen to per∣fect age & strength, maie reape some speciall benefite by the same. And thus hauing laide open, verie blunt∣lie, but plainlie, my simple (but yet honest) meaning, I committe your worship to the grace of God, which as it hath hitherto (no doubt) beene your direction, so I hope it shall, & (God graunt) it may be your loades∣man to life euerlasting. Amen. Your worships at commandement Iohn Stell.
To the Reader. GOod Christian Reader, thinke it not lost labour to reade this little booke, which as it beareth the name of a Bee hiue, so it conteineth good stoare of holesome honie. Neuer∣theles, take this short admonition by the way, that in reading the same, thou plaie not the parte of a Spider, which out of sweete and o∣doriferous floures sucketh deadlie poyson: for what is that else but to abuse a benefite, and to make that euill to thy selfe, which by na∣ture is good? I knowe it spites the Papistes, that their iuglings are espied: and I beleeue they will be so farre from singing a Requiem for his soule, by whome it was compiled, or from pitie to purchase him a pardon from the Popes good grace, that they coulde finde in their heartes, to appeale to the Spanishe in∣quisition, and by their tormentes farre pas∣sing the paines of Purgatorie, to constraine both him, and them that shall reade it, to crie Peccaui. O charitable Catholikes. Be they such curst cattel in deede? Alas for pitie: God keepe vs out of their clawes. Will not
Peter pence salue vp the sore? O, yes marie, that is meate for their mouthes. But will they frette and storme in suche sorte? Tut a pointe, they haue had the raine too long, it is time that they bite on the bridle. But farewell Papist: R▪ this pill, ô it will scowre and purge. Thus Gentle Reader (to conclude) thou hast such a booke, as will make thee pri∣uie to all the practises of the Babylonicall beast, (Rome I meane) the denne of Dra∣gons and diuels: which if it were translated into other tongues, by the industrie of the learned, as it is in none, but in Dutch and English, it would increase choler so abundant∣ly in the Pope, the Colledge of Cardinals, Mo∣nasteries of Monkes, Fraternities of Friers, Nestes of Nonnes, and the rest of the Phari∣saical Frie, as whole handfuls of Helleborus, or pounds of Colloquintida can neuer auoide: & (wote you what?) that will pull downe their mother the holie Churche vppon her knees, with thought and sorowe. Well, I leaue the benefite of this booke to thy diligence in rea∣ding. And thus farewell. Thine in Christ, Iohn Stell.
This is a cleare and perfect interpretation of the Epistle of Maister Gentian Haruet, nowe latelie set foorth in French, and in Dutch, and directed to those, that are fallen from the true Christian beliefe. WHerein the full foundation, and profounde establishing of the holie Romishe beliefe is declared: all newe heresies confounded: the might, authoritie, and worthines of the Church of Rome, expounded, and by Scriptures confirmed: all dissentious articles put to silence, and a plaine demonstration, where the right Church is to bee founde. In summe, all the articles of the ho∣lie Catholike Romishe beliefe, are here drawne out of all sortes of flowres in the holie Scripture, olde Fathers, Councelles, Decrees, and Canons, gathered together, and as
in a sweete Bee hiue, brought all in one: and in the last is set forth, the manners, conditions, nature, and es∣sence of Bees, the honie and honie∣combe of this Bee hiue, collected out of the best olde writers, as well Grecians as Latinistes. Made and brought to∣gither by Isaac Rabbotenu of Louen, Licentiate in the Popishe lawes.
To the right worshipful, ho∣lie, profounde, and learned Doctor, and Magister noster, Maister Franciscus Sonnius, nowe most woorthie Bishop of Shertoghenbosch, health and blessing from God,Afterwarde Bishop of Ant∣werpe. and the Pope our most ho∣lie father. RIght worshipfull, louing, and holie father and bi∣shop, when I do well con∣sider, & thinke vppon the noble, commendable, & woorthie deedes, which your honor (with the good helpe of the moste famous and deuoute Cardinall Grandvelle, and other good subiectes of the most holie Apostolicall Catholike Popish church of Rome,) haue (within these niene or ten yeares) taken in hande, and almost brought to passe, touching our ancient and wellnigh ouerthrowen Romish Religion, to proppe and vnder∣set the same with newe pillars, & strong styles▪ binding it with well twisted ropes, and cordes of the Spanish Inquisition: I must needes, and of right (in the name & behalfe of all my countriemen and inha∣bitants
of the base countries of Germa∣nie) geue you worthie thankes, for the great alterations and changes, whiche within these fewe yeares haue happened and chaunced to the proofe, within the said lowe countries. For, had not your Honor, about the yeare 1558. in the time of the most holie Pope Iulie the fourth, stoutlie and diligentlie trauelled and ob∣teined that these our base coūtries might be prouided for with newe Bishops, to serue for Inquisitours and accusers of he∣retikes and Huguenotes. Surelie, the case was such, that the Popes holines, with all his boothes and shoppes, must out of hande haue bene trudging out of these countries, and all by reason of this newe Gospell, which men woulde needes set forth: whereof your Bishops Myter, cro∣sier staffe, and your laudable Inquisition, haue not read much, (considering that your Honor can content your self with your Portesse, & a canne of good rennish wine) whereof if it had so come to passe, a most pitifull case must needes haue fol∣lowed: As especiallie, that a man shoulde scarse afterwardes haue founde anie one, that would haue saide Masse for monie:
yea, the Priestes themselues began to be so ashamed of their shauen crownes that in some places, they woulde haue beene glad to couer them with cowe doung, as in an olde prophesie is declared. The Bishops, the Prelates the holie Monkes and Chanons, the Inquisitoures and all idle officers of the spirituall courtes, shoulde not haue had anie more worke. I omit howe that the famous doctoures of Louen, the Licentiates and Bache∣lers of Diuinitie shoulde drinke no more Vinum Theologicum, or Vinum Cos,Vinum , the  that  do  lie. Vinum Co,  is to  good colo smell, and . that is to say, of the persons fatte: but must haue taken patience with small ale and single beare, whereof they might sooe haue gotten the Collica passio. And where (I pray you) shoulde the foure holie beg∣ging orders haue become. And especial∣ly the deuout Franciscanes? should they not all (in generall) haue gone and han∣ged their cowles vpon the hedge? And then what should haue become of all the godlie ornamentes of the Churche, as braue altars, gylte christes, holie reliques, braue images, Copes of gold, siluer, and silke, and other moe suche like iewels, wherewith all the Churches and holie
Saints as well As well shee Saintes, as hee Saintes. Feminine, as Masculine, are decked vp and trimmed, which all the Byshops haue promised by solemne othe to mainteine and defend, to the vt∣termost of their powers. But what is all this to the purpose? The Masse, the Masse (I saie) yea, the holie blessed masse laie so extreemely sicke, that men began al∣readie to sing a Requiem ouer her, the holie Saintes, did not get anie more libe∣rall offrings, more sensinges, nor more pilgrimages. Yea, the people began al∣readie to pul downe images from the al∣ters. No man would geue any thing for pardons, nor for the Popes bulles: Yea, the hole staple of pardons, especially pur∣gatorie, beganne to waxe coulde. The Pope himselfe was esteemed for an how∣lieglasse: The Decrees, and Decretals, the Sophisticall gloses, the sentences, the Quotlibets, and suche like toyes of the schollers and doctours of Louen, were cast behinde the benche: Satisfaction, and ful recompence were no more made anie accounte of: Auriculer confession was almost murdered: Shroue tuesday, and Iacke a lent had almost broken their neckes: all the holie and goodlie Proces∣sions
with the stately stations, Perambu∣lations & going about the streetes, were esteemed for boyes plaie: the holie Sa∣crament was no more deuoutlie caried vp and downe with fiffes and drummes. In conclusion, all the holinesse, of the Catholike Church of Rome beganne to fall in the ashes: and in place thereof you should heare nothing else, neither in the townes nor without, yea, nothing was read but the Byble, or Saint Paule. The people would pray to none other, but to GOD alone, neither woulde haue anie other mediatour, but Christe Iesus, no put their trust and confidence in anie o∣ther thinges, but in his merites: No re∣ioycinges but in his Crosse, death, and passion. They did onely esteeme for Sa∣cramentes, Baptisme, & the Lords Sup∣per, yea, and did vse the same very simply without anie stately station or ceremoni∣all brauerie, without coniuringes of the diuell, without spittle, without salt, with∣out greasinges, & also without albes, sur∣pleses, or coapes, without singing of Per omnia saecula saeculorum, or Dominus vobis∣cum. They would go no more to shrifte vnde their ghostlie Father, but to God a∣boue
or else before the whole congrega∣tion: They did not passe anie more for absolution, they woulde not praie anie more for the sillie soules, whiche lie in Purgatorie, but euerie one would groūd his praier vpon the holie scripture: They woulde acknowledge but one supreme heade of the Churche, namely, Iesus Christe the Sonne of God: They woulde haue Bishops, renouncing the name & of∣fice of tyrannical Inquisitors, to preache the gospell, to leaue of their trapt Horses and Mules, and goe on foote: They did esteeme all manner of meates, good and lawfull, first saying grace in their mother tongues: neither did they much regarde the eating of fleshe in Lent, no, not euen on Good Friday: In Summe, they went wholy about to bring in a new reforma∣tion of religion and discipline ecclesiasti∣call, the like whereof was neuer seene of the holie Churche of Rome, nor of our forefathers: They tooke in hande to re∣store all againe, to the olde and former state of the Apostles and Euangelistes. what pitie, what care, what sorowe, had this bene to our dearly beloued mother the holie Catholike Churche of Rome,
and to all her good subiectes? But prai∣sed be our blessed Ladie of Antwerpe, your honour did well foresee, and in time diligently withstand that inconuenience, in that you haue placed the inquisition in the lande, driuen away the Gewses or He∣retikes, laide the Magistrates in prison,They were cal∣led Geses,  of , a∣gainst the Pa∣pistes. banished and brought to the Butchers stall the Gentlemen and good subiectes, made a way and open passage for the Spaniardes into the lande, set vp fire and swoorde in token of victorie, and in eue∣rie corner reared vp gallowes, and plen∣tifully shed the blood of those newe E∣uangelistes: In Summe, your diligence, your quicke expedition, your great zeale, your newe Bishoppes, and your holie In∣quisition, haue so well aduised, counsel∣led, perswaded (or rather forced) our So∣uereign Lord the king his Maiestie much rather to see the destruction of his Patri∣moniall lande, the ruine of his Subiectes: yea, the imprisonment, and death of his owne onelie sonne, then to permit the holie Catholike Church of Rome to suf∣fer suche shame: and that in place of the Popes decrees and decretals of the Masse booke Hortulus animae, and suche other
seruice bookes, the Gospel, & holy Scrip∣ture, onelie should succeed, & take posses∣sion. Therefore your Honour is highly to be praised for such noble actes: And eue∣rie man is duely bound herein, to assist & further you in your enterprise, to the vt∣termost of his knowledge & abilitie. This (Right Honorable and blessed Bishop) is the cause, which hath moued me poore & vnworthie brother of Saint Frauncis order, to dedicate and sende this my simple present to your honour, to the ende that I (with this my small gifte of good will) may somewhat (though but a little) helpe to strengthen & repaire the decaied walles of the Romishe Church, and establish againe the right & perfect foundation of our most holie father, the Pope. Therefore hauing a while agoe: seene & marked that in the Citie of Ant∣werpe was a small booke sette foorth in French & Flemish, intituled & named A Letter Missiue: Or, An Epistle directed vnto the Apostates & Backsliders, from the true Christian beleefe, compiled and made by Maister Gentian Heruet, &c: And for that the same booke was greatly desired, and verie much esteemed of all good and Ca∣tholike
hearts: I haue (with all diligence and circumspection) perused and read o∣uer the same: wherein I haue founde in effect, that in the same is briefly declared and set foorth the whole grounde and foundation of the holie Romish religion, which your Honour, euen with fire and swoorde, to the subuersion and vtter ru∣ine of the whole land, doth seke most zea∣lously to mainteine. And I am thereby persuaded, that the same booke was most worthie to be read ouer of all men, to the ende that all startbackes from the faith, might returne into the right way: and the good faithfull Catholikes there∣by strengthened & confirmed. But nowe considering the saide booke to bee verie shorte, and something darke for a matter of suche importaunce, and like∣wise had either none or verie few proofes out of the Scriptures, Councels, holie Fa∣thers, and Decrees of the Popes: there∣fore I haue thought good to set penne to Paper, and to set foorth and declare the same at large, that nothing needefull should be lacking. Moreouer cōsidering that it is most necessarie, to declare some∣thing more at large, especially touching
the woorthines, and authoritie of the holie Churche of Rome, and the true ex∣position of the holie Scripture: wherevp∣pon the summe of all our matters doe depende, for that we haue alwayes beene forced to call vpon the Church, & especi∣ally now, when there is none other shield or defence left vnto vs: therefore haue I traueiled brieflie to shew of this matter, where the sure grounde and foundation lies, by what Scriptures, by what holie fa∣thers, by what Councels, & by how many Decrees euerie point is defended: and likewise howe and in what manner the Scripture and the holie Church of Rome are ioyned together, and Catholikelie vnderstoode in suche order, as the same shall in no wise serue the Heretikes anie thing at al to their purpose or aduantage. And forsomuch as this woorke is sucked out of sundrie sortes of flowres gathered together: therefore haue I named it, The Bee hiue of the Romishe Churche, thereby to geue to vnderstande▪ that as the honie Bee, doeth not gather her honie out of one flowre alone, but out of manie and diuerse: So doeth not the Churche of Rome stande vpon one Scripture, Byble,
Councels or bokes of Decrees, but doth catche and snatch out of eche of them, that which best serueth her purpose, as hereafter euerie man may plainelie per∣ceiue, and in the ende of this booke shall vnderstande more at large, whereas the speciall causes are set foorth, why and wherefore we haue christened this booke with such a name. And now, hauing vn∣derstoode that your Honour did a good while agoe set foorth a certaine booke, against the confessiō of the faith of these newe Gospellers, I did verie earnestly trauell to gette the same, trusting that it might (perhaps) haue eased me of this my labour, for that I thought your Ho∣nour shoulde haue set foorth these mat∣ters there at large. But after that I had superficially and lightly reade ouer the saide booke, (not hauing the lucke to kepe the same lōg by me.) I was the more willing to set foorth this my Bee hiue, for that I sawe it shoulde serue verie well, to the opening and more plaine declarati∣on of the foresaide booke, which your Honour hath made and published: con∣sidering that your honour is busie in e∣uerie place with the aucthoritie and dig∣nitie
of the holie Churche, of her ordi∣nances or constitutions, additions, or tra¦ditions, and of the spirituall exposition, which shee hath made vppon the Scrip∣tures: & perceiuing nothing to be clear∣ly set foorth, whereby one may finde out these constitutions and ordinances, whe∣ther in the Scripture, in the Fathers, in the Decrees, or in the Coūcels: so that a sim∣ple man might alway stande in doubt, what you will haue esteemed and holden for the commaundementes ordinances, or traditions of the Churche, and what men shall call the Churche, and likewise what rule or inuiolable order this holie Churche doth commonly keepe and vse in the exposition of the scriptures, but I thinke your Honour did leaue this vn∣done, as our saide Maister Gentian Har∣uet did, especially, because it was to small and slight a matter for you to trouble your mytered head with all. And there∣fore haue I gladlie taken vppon me this paine and trauell, and haue clearely sette forth in this my booke, vpō what ground and foundation all these thinges are buil∣ded: So that the necessarie vse of this booke is vnspeakeable as euerie good
Catholike shall well perceiue of him self. And forsomuch as herein is not written anie thing, but it doeth agree aswell, yea, better with the said booke made by you, thē with Gentians booke, I would gladly haue it set forth, as an Exposition, Glose, or Cōmentarie vpon your foresaid pret∣tie booke: but considering that I had not anie copie of your said booke in my cu∣stodie, and fearing also least your Honor might haue bene offended, that any man should take vppon him to expounde or comment vpon your writings, which are as cleare as hellishe sunne, euen as your owne name Sonnius doth signifie: so that I haue proceeded with my first determi∣nation, thinking it sufficient for me, if I might hide this my trauell vnder the winges of your Honor, like as vnder the same, all our newe Bishops haue beene hatched. Most humblie beseeching your Honor, to accept this my simple gifte in good parte, and as becommeth such a worthie Bishop to do, trusting yet (with∣in short time) to set foorth more such woorkes, and thereby so preciselie to expounde all the bookes that are set out
by your Honour, and other doctoures of Louen your companions, that a blinde man may feele them with his handes: yea, and without spectacles or candle, conceiue what greate holines lies hid in such coafers. You may (if it please you) in the meane space accept this my woorke, as an explanation and commentarie, vp∣on your booke, which to doe resteth at your pleasure and good will. And herein I commende your Byshopps Myter and crosyers staffe vnto the tuition of our holie Father the Pope, who preserue and keepe your Honour with all your bre∣thren our new Byshoppes, in prosperous estate and proceedinges against all He∣retikes. Datum in our Musaeo, the v. of Ianuarie, being the euen of the three Kings of Collen, at which time all good Catholikes make merie, and crie, The King drinkes, in anno 1569. Your Honours welwilling seruant in all that lies in my simple power, Isaac Rabbotenu of Louen.
The argumēt of this booke: Wherein the Epistle or Letter mis∣siue of Maister Gentian Heruet, is deui∣ded into sixe partes, and the mea∣ning of the same brieslie de∣clared. THis deepe grounded and most lear∣ned Epistle of the right worshipfull Doctour, Maister Gentian Heruet, directed to those, that are declined & fallen from the holie Romishe Catholike Church, is deuided into sixe speciall and principall partes: whereof the first is: 1 That the Heretikes and Huguenotes cannot repute them selues for faithfull peo∣ple, so farre forth as they do not beleeue all things, which our louing mother the holie Church beleeueth, without whom no salua∣tion can be obteined: & especiallie, for that they will not beleeue the Transubstantiati∣on of the breade into the verie bodie of Christ. 2 The second is knitte to the first: name∣lie: They mainteine iniuriouslie, that wee ought to allowe nothing, but what is main∣teined by Scripture. 3 Thirdlie: They doe not beleeue nor
allowe of seuen Sacramentes, especiallie▪ Auricular confession, the sacrament of Ma∣trimonie, and the holie ointment of Vnc∣tion. 4 Fourthlie: They doe the Catholikes great iniurie: insomuch as they repute them for idolaters and worshippers of idols. 5 Fifthlie: They seeke nothing else, but fleshlie libertie, and their owne appe∣tites. 6 Sixthlie & lastlie: Their Preachers are vnlearned Doultes, and leade a lewde, loathsome, and wicked life. In these sixe pointes is brieflie rehearsed the whole grounde and foundation of the holie Catholike doctrine, taught by the Ro∣mishe Church▪ and is so gallantlie establi∣shed: yea, and all the Heretikes so finelie fetche ouer the coales, that there remaineth not a iotte to be spoken of anie further. Yet, seeing the ground and meaning of this E∣pistles Authour, did stretch chieflie to chal∣lenge the Heretikes foorth into the fielde, and then Championlike, to combate with them: (like as hee sheweth that not long since the noble Knight, Maister Nicholas Villegaignon, who by his writing thought
to egge foorth Maister Iohn Caluine, and by that meane to haue wonne a perpetuall fame, and euerlasting memorie.) It is e∣uen in like sorte fallen out with this good fellowe, as it did with the saide Villegaig∣non. For his happe was, the better to fitte his purpose, to set downe (as hee before mencioned) manie doubtfull partes, verie darke and obscure reasons, yea, and some somewhat grose, supposing herewithall (as with a baight) to drawe the fishe into his net. Whereby (alas) it came to passe, that his good and godlie meaning was spelde and construed a wrong waie, and the Here∣tikes did seeme to make a mocke of it, as though he were vnworthie to haue an an∣swere to the same, considering that hee did shewe verie litle scripture or authoritie to affirme his matter: Euen in like manner as they had in times past iested with the foresaid Villegaignon. Therefore it hath seemed both good and necessarie vnto vs, and for the preferre∣ment of the holie Romishe Church, most auaylable, that this present Epistle shoulde be at large declared: and verie strong and apte authorities to be brought in, for euerie part and parcell of the same, collected as∣well
out of the Scripture, as out of the bes and fittest bookes of the auncient Fathers, Councels, and Decrees, wherewithall our louing mother the holie Churche is most supported: to the ende wee should the better conceiue the costlie hidden treasures, which are comprehended in this short Epistle: and that eache might vse the same to his most aduantage, and for a publike instruction, ho∣ping (thorough this holie and meritori∣ous worke) to purchase heauen, and withall to redeeme and set free two or three soules out of Purgatorie.
¶ Here followeth the de∣claration of the first parte of the Epistle of Gentian Haruet: wherein is treated, what the holy Church of Rome is: wherein her power and authoritie doeth consist: and how farr the same extendeth: then is cōcluded, That the Lutherans & Huguenotes can not be estee∣med or taken for true beleeuers: but must be banished and burnt for Heretikes. The first Chapter. VVherein is plainly declared, that the Luthera and Huguenotes are Heretikes, and ought to be burnt: notvvithstanding, that as vvell by Scrip∣ture, as by many examples, they shevve them∣selues to be the very Church of God. AND to the intent that wee maye orderly deale,Lutheran & Hugue∣notes are Heretikes▪ begin∣ning first with one piece, and after proceeding with an o∣ther: our Maister Gentia∣nus doeth here in his  charge, set forth such a noble grounded and sharpe wittie reason, to founde and builde his argumentes vpon, that the Heretikes and Huguenotes stand alreadie so amazed and ashamed, as a horse that hath ouer∣throwen his carre.
You poore Heretikes (saieth he) howe can you be of a true beleefe, if you do not first accept the twelfe articles of the faith? And how should you accept them, seeing you will not beleeue the holy Catholike Church? For consider this, he doeth take to serue his turne, a most certeine and vndoubted point, That no man can beleeue the holie Church, but hee must ioyntly withall re∣ceiue and accept all, whatsoeuer the saide Church doth set forth and beleeue. And this is greatly to be cōsidered: seeing here∣vpon doth rest the most speial ground and strongest bulwarke of the holy Church of Rome. For these Heretikes can very sted∣fastly say,Church of God and Heretikes. that they thēselues are the church of God. And to  that, they introduce and bring in many goodly textes out of the Scripture: but they alledge them only ac∣cording to the letter: euen as though the Church were nothing els, but an assemblie or congregation of holy men, that is to say, of such as through faith or beleefe are by the bloud of Iesus Christ blessed and cho∣sen to be the sheepefolde of Iesus Christe the true and only sheepheard of our soules:Ioh. 10.3, 4, , 14, 25. into which fold none are receiued, but such
alone as will hearken to the onely voyce of that onely shepheard, and followe and goe after him onely, forsaking and not know∣ing the voyce of any straunger. Whereby they will nowe conclude, that our great Maister the Pope, with all the right honourable Bishops and Prelates, (which haue of them selues set forth manie goodly ordinances,Iohn 10.1 whereof Christ neuer knewe word) should be those very straun∣gers and hirelings, which seeke onely the wooll of the sheepe, and haue serued God feignedly, setting forth and teaching the commandements and doctrine of men: yea,Mat. 15.9. that they shuld be the theeues and murthe∣rers, that haue not entred in at the right doore which is Iesus Christ,Ioh. 10.9. but are crept in a wrong way, to steale, kill and destroye. And therfore do they cut vs cleane off, not∣withstanding what soeuer wee alleadge of the Church of God, and of her authoritie, power and woorthines. But they alledge out of the Prophet Ieremie, That al is but lyes and deceyt whervpon we establish our selues, crying with ye Iewes,Iere. 7.4. The Church of God, The Church of God, The Church of God. And herevpon doe they bring vs forth and alledge their Paul, saying,Ephes. 2.20. That
the only true ground and foundation of the Church of God is established onely vppon the doctrine of the Prophetes & Apostles: so that who soeuer he be that falleth from the same, can not be accompted for a true member of Christs Church. And then they bring forth an Esaie out of a corner, and an Ezechiel, an Oseas, with diuers other out of the olde Testament, which they set al together on a heape, and will defend them∣selues therewith, that the stedfast successiō and that long continued race of the Popes, Cardinals, Bishoppes, and Archbishops, are in no wise that right token, and that vncounterfeyt marke of the Church, but ye onely the sincere worde of God: when as that is in our mouthes and in our heartes, and in the mouthes and heartes of our chil∣dren,Esai. 59.21. accompanied with the right vse of the Sacraments, according to the perfit ordei∣ning of Christ Iesus, who is the only head of the Church and congregation: in whom all people are ioyntly vnited, euery one ac∣cording to the measure of the gift which he hath receiued of the head,Ephe. 4.15, 16. to the ful growth of the whole body in loue. Well, well: when they haue done all their prating,Colo. 1.18. and 2.19. yet must this needes be true: That they are but He∣retikes,
and smel after the fagot, the good yere and all, the cause why: For that they doe not beleeue all that the holy Church doth beleeue, and without the Church is no saluation: but all such as fall from her, must be burnt like fagottes: for to that end haue we a plaine text of Scripture, which saith thus:Iohn 15.6. which wit∣nes is to this pur∣pose set foorth of Iohn Audre as Panormi¦tanus, Ho∣stiensis, Ber∣nardus Lut∣zenburgen. in the 4. boke of the Heretikes in the 5. part, and by other moe Catholike wrters. Who soeuer doeth not abyde in me, shall be cast out of the vineyarde, as a branche, and there wither: and men ga∣ther those branches, and cast them in the fire, and burne them. And this same is apparent out of the se∣cond point of this Epistle nowe folowing: Whereas Gentianus doeth openly cōfesse, that at al times and for euer, there haue bin some men which haue helde the same opini∣ons, & set forth the like learning, that these Lutheranes and Huguenotes do nowe fol∣lowe. But he answereth the matter thus: That such haue alway bene banished and cursed for heretikes: and all this is verie true.Iohn Patri∣arch of Cō∣stantinople. For euer since that Iohn the Archfa∣ther, Patriarch of Constantinople, began to take vpon him to be the vniuersall Bi∣shop of all Bishops within Christendome: which attempt the Pope of Rome dyd in the beginning stoutly withstande: and that
then afterwardes Boniface the thirde did obteyne that tytle for him selfe,Bonifacus . the first head of ho∣ly Church. Phocas. and was by the Emperour Phocas declared Cheefe or superiour Bishop ouer all Christendome, and ordeined the head of the Church: which thing was brought to passe in the yeere of our Lord 680. From that time forward (I saye) there haue alwayes bene many facti∣ous and busie fellowes stirring abroade, which as well by writing, as preaching, haue withstoode the Pope, and condemned his doctrine, decrees and ordinances, euen by the Scripture: yea, and blazed and set him selfe forth for an Antichrist,Popes ac∣co for Antichrists alledging (euen as our Heretikes nowe do) that men ought to repose themselues and buyld vpon the sincere word of God onely: and further, to holde and esteeme all ordinances of the Popes (not agreeing with the Scripture) for deuilishe doctrine. But, as before is de∣clared, such haue alwayes bin reputed and condemned for Heretikes. Therefore, to the ende that no man shall thinke this to be nowe a new dealing of the holy Church, to condemne these Lutheranes and Hugue∣notes for Heretikes: and likewise, that no man shall suppose, that this their doctrine and Articles, which they set forth are first
growen in their gardens: I will therefe make here a brief discourse of such, as haue here before set forth these matters, as well by mouth, as by writing, to make it plaine∣ly appeare to the worlde, that there is not one Article which they bring forth, but i hath bene long before et a bche openly▪ & that the holy Church of Rome hath both punished, and condemned it for heresie. Then to begin withall, it is plaine, that the Grekes haue alwayes dapely with∣stoode the holy Pope of Rome,The Grekes against the Pope of Rome. and would neuer acknowledge him neither for Pope, nor for the head of the Church: like as yet euen in these dayes they do not: in so much as in the yere of our Lorde 1328. at which tyme Pope Iohn the 23. had written very wisely and sharpely, to the Grekes,Iohannes the 23. pope. and by many wordes defended the cause, That first there was but one only Church, whereof he ought to be the head, vnder whom all Chri∣stendome ought to submit them selues: they dyd againe sende him this answere which followeth.The Grekes do answere pope Iohn. This doth Iohn Man-deuil write of in his 7. booke. We beleeue verely, that thine authori∣tie is great, ouer thine owne subiectes: yet we can not well beare with thy loftines, and vnmeasurable pride: neither allowe
thy vnsatiable couetousnesse. Therefore the deuill be with thee, for God is with vs. Notwithstāding that some of their Em∣bassadours did in the Councell of Ferrara, in the tyme of Pope Eugenius 4. agree therevnto:Egenius 4 but without consent or commis∣sion of their Church, which did afterwards call backe, and adnihilate the same. But long before that time, not onely the cōmon people of the Greekes, but the Emperours them selues likewise, were aduersaries to the Pope of Rome: about the setting vp and praying to Images. For about the yere of our Lord 730. the Emperors Con∣stantine 5. and 6. and Leo Isaurus,Constanti∣us. Leo. did with full aduise and consent of the Councell, as well out of the Scripture, as of the ancient Fathers, conclude: That men should in no wise, for the ser∣uice of God,Images forbidden & despised. neither set vp, nor pray to a∣nie Images: but did likewise vtterly break down & destroy al Images before made and set vp. The cause wherefore the Popes did diuide the EmpireFor which cause the Popes of Rome did conceiue such malice and hatred against them, that from thence forth, they sought al maner of meanes and wayes to diuide and
ouerthrowe the Emperial state: like as in continuance of time they brought it so to passe. And likewise, not only the Greekes,The Grekes and the Ger¦manes did withstande the forbid∣ding of prie∣stes to ma∣rie, il Bo∣niface 8. did set it vp by force. Berthramus but the Germanes also, did long time with∣stand the forbidding of Priestes to marrie, till at length the Popes (and that specially Bonifacius 8.) did by maine force bring it to passe, and establishe the same. In the yere 840. one Berthrame, a stout and a learned man, rose vp, who did man∣fully withstande the Romishe doctrine, as touching their Transubstantiation, dedica∣ting to Charles the French King, brother of Lothorius, a notorious booke made for that purpose: and did likewise in an other booke confirmed by the Scriptures,Nota. and strongly defended by the holy Fathers, set forth the doctrine of Predestination, which these Heretikes do nowe so earnestly stand vpon. And about the yere 869. did Iohan∣nes Scotus followe him,Io. Scotus. writing against Transubstantiation,Berēgarius. euen as Beringarius about the yere 839. had done the like. And in ye yere of our Lord 964.Huldricus Bishop of Auxburge. Huldrike Bishop of Auxburge, by his writing reuoked again the saide commaundement of forbidding Priestes to marrie. After whom, about the yere 1240. Bernard started vp,Bernardus. who wrote
very much of Predestination, and against Freewill: nothing vnlike the doctrine of the Lutheranes and Huguenotes: yea, and did very stoutly striue against the Priestes and Prelates, calling them, The seruantes of Antichrist: and making of the Prelates, Pilates.Iohannes Sarisburien. Whom in the yere 1157. Iohan∣nes of Sarisburie did folowe, and wrote a booke called Obiurgium Clericorum: and another named Polycraticus: wherein hee doeth pull the whole Clergie vengeably o∣uer the coles, and setteth them out for Pha∣riseis and false teachers: calling the Pope, Antichrist: and Rome, The hoore of Baby∣lon. And likewise a litle before that, had Arnolde the Bishop of Brixen set vp ear∣nestly against the Priestes, denying flatly, that the sworde of gouernement should anie whit apperteyne vnto them: yea, euen at the same time was there one Peter Bloix,Petrus Bloix. which wrote openly thus: That Rome was the right Babylō, wher∣of S. Iohn did prophesie: and that the Officialles of the Romish Court were de∣uilish Griphines:Deuilish Griphines. and the Priestes, verie Calues of Bethel, Baals Priests, Aegyptia∣cal idols: and that euery thing was to be solde at Rome for money.
About the same time in the yere 1160. started vp in France a quicke fellowe, and a worshipfull Burgesse of the Towne of Lyons, named Petrus Valdo,Petrus Val∣do. who hauing studied the Scriptures very diligently, be∣gan to set vp a newe doctrine, which did hit as iust vpon the doctrine of these Hugue∣notes, as might be. He left manye Disci∣ples after him, in so much that a remnant is remayning yet to this day. After that came Petrus de Vinea,Petrus de Vinea. Chauncelour to the Emperour Frederike 2. and was in the yere 1240. who went about likewise to robbe our holy father the Pope of his inti∣tuled authoritie and iurisdiction, raying vpon him out of measure. And after came Guilielmus de sancto Amore,Guilielmus de sancto Amore. in the yeere 1260. who layde loade exceedingly vpon the Prelates, Monkes, and Friers: and did reckon them for subiectes of Antichrist. Whose opinions were after in the yeere 1275. by one Laurence an Englishe Doc∣tor at Paris, stoutly defended and cōfirmed. Againe, in the yere 1306. came abroad one Petrus Cassiodorus, a Gentleman,Petrus Cass. and ve∣ry well learned: who did altogether spil the potage. For his writing and doctrine was, euen as though he had studied all the dayes
of his life in the bookes of Luther and Cal∣uin: and he made of the Pope a Nabucho∣donosor. After that, in the yere 1314. did followe one Dulsimus of Nauarra.Dulsimus. And in the yeere 1315. Arnoldus de villa Noua, who caried water all ouer one bridge. And at last, in ye yere 1383. came forth the great Archeheretike Iohn Wiclef,Iohn VVi∣clef. who threw all the spindles of the holy Church of Rome in the ashes: for he was a naturall Zwinglian, or Caluinist: and of him sproong vp Iohn Hus,Iohn Hus. in the yeere 1405. which was the fa∣ther of all Lutheranes. Hee it was which came with Hieronymus of Prage to ye Coū∣cell of Constance,Hieronym. de Praga. there to defende his doc∣trine by scripture: but there he was taught a newe lesson: for in place of disputation, they were both burnt at a stake. And yet that notwithstanding, their doctrine euer since that time hath bene accepted in many places: and by many stout fellowes confir∣med. Like as there was one Nicholaus Clemangis,Nicholaus Clemangis. a Doctor of Paris, and Bishop of Bayone in France: Oldecastell, Lorde Cobham,Oldecastell. and Knight of the order of the Garter: and within a litle while after, one William Wight in Englande:VVight. and Paule Crawe,Paul Cravv with many other, in the countrie of
Rome, Hieronymus Sauanerola in Italie,Hieronym. Sauanerol and a number of other more: all which yet were by the Church of Rome banished and condemned for heretikes: yea, & where they could be gotten, put to death. In summe, all such, as at any time haue taken vpon them, to set forth any like mat∣ter against the Church of Rome, haue al∣way bene of the most holy Popes banished and accursed, together with all them which would by any meanes mainteyne or defend them. In so much, that Emperours and Kings: yea, whole countries haue (for with∣standing the Pope) bene excommunicated and condemned for heretikes: yea, & (which is of greater importance) one Okam,Okam and Dante. and Dante, good Catholike men, were by Pope Benedict 3. condemned for Heretikes: only because they did mainteine, That Empe∣rours holde their Empires of God, and not of the Pope: and yet notwithstanding, that in all other matters they did throughly pro∣fesse the Popes doctrine. I say nothing, what is meete to be done to these new Heretikes, who go about to roote out and destroy the whole founda∣tion of the Romish schole, and take vpon them to face vs out with their Paul, with
their Esaie & their Ieremie. What a mis∣chiefe! Do they not know that those fel∣lowes, whome they alledge and bring vs forth, were likewise esteemed for Here¦tikes, as well as they are themselues? Yea▪ in so much that one of them was hanged, another was burnt, the third clouen tho∣rough the middest with a saw, the fourth set vpon a wheele, &c. And therefore are we no more moued for them, than for a bladder full of beanes. For the holy Church of Rome would ne∣uer accept their doctrine, but vpon this bar∣gaine and condition, to wit, that shee might alway applie the same as she should thinke good, and as might best come to passe for her selfe: and that no reuoking, nor reuol∣ting, nor appellatiō should be made against her doings: no, nor that the name of Iesus Christ should in that case serue: like as shall by vs shortly in the part next folowing be declared at large. For this verely is most true, that if our blessed Lorde him selfe, would haue followed the exposition and cō∣mentarie,The Pha∣riseis glo∣ses. which the Priestes, Phariseis, & Doctours had at that time made vpon the holy Scriptures, in the name of the holye Church, he had neuer bene crucified, or han∣ged
vpon the crosse. But because that hee would (full wisely) go and bring in newe matters, and so set vp a newe reformation, according to the text and doctrine of the Gospell (like as these Heretikes go about nowe to do) therfore did they deale so hard∣ly with him. Notwithstanding that, nowe since the holy Church of Rome hath so fine∣ly handled and set forth this newe religion of Christ, and brought it vnto such a trim frame, that nowe it is very gladly receyued of euery one in a maner: yea, and if it were so, that these Huguenotes would accept the same, setting it forth likewise, surely, men would no more be so readie to bring them to a stake, as heretofore they haue done: yea, and pretend hereafter to do. But nowe, to come to our matter againe, it is necessarie, that we well consider, and substantially declare, wherein the worthi∣nes and authoritie of the holy Church doth specially consist: & what commandements, traditions, and ordinances of the same, men must receyue and accept, without all con∣tradiction or gainsaying. And this (for so much as our Doctors of Louen are troubled with so manye other profounde and deepe questions, that they
haue not the leasure to set out this point ef∣fectually) is notwithstanding, the right ground and foūdation of all their building: yea, and is most needefull to our saluation, and to the extirpation and rooting out of all heresies. For it may be demanded, Whe∣ther men shall holde for commandementes and traditions of the Church, only & alone, that which is plainely set forth in the scrip∣tures of the olde and newe Testamentes? Or els, that which the olde holy Fathers & Doctours, as Augustine, Chrysostome, Hierome, and such like haue left behinde them in their bookes and writings: or a great deale rather, that which hath ben con∣cluded in the holy Councels: either els that which the holy Popes of Rome haue ordei∣ned and enioyned: or, last of all, that which is scraped together out of the one and the other: all layd in one Pastie, and baked in one Cake: and which is nowe in our dayes obserued in the holy Catholike Church of Rome? The 2. Chapter. VVhereby is declared that the Church, vvith her povver and authoritie, can not be inclosed vvith in the pales of the holy Scripture, but that the Church may adde to the Scripture, or take from it, vvhat she thinkes good: and therevpon are many examples, and profoūd reasons alledged.
VPon this demande & profound pro∣position, very much might be saide:The church is aboue the Scrip∣ture. but we will make short of the matter. And to begin withal, we conclude with our Master Gentianus, and with the holy Coū∣cell of Trent, That all they which woulde inclose the power and the authoritie of the Church within the limites & bounds of the holy Scripture, (as though the ho∣ly Catholike church of Rome could reade no further, than is spelled before to her in the Bible) are euill and naughty here∣tikes: yea, they are euen of those Aposta∣taes or backsliders, to whom our Master Gentianus hath written this his Epistle. For as touching that, for the defence of their opinions, they bring forth, howe it is written, That none shall either put to it,Deut. 4.1, 12, 32. Pro. 30.6. Apo. 22.18. This is thus set forth by Ioh. Eckis in his book called En∣chiridium loco. com. Guilielmus Blindasinus or take from it one iote: that is simply spoken to the Iewes Rabbines onely: so that they should not take any such thing vpon them, as to change any words of the texte, and to correct Magnificat, like as they haue presu¦med to do, as mē may see clearly & without a candle, by the honourable Bishop Guili∣elmus Blindasinus, in his booke intituled, De optimo genere interpretandi: wch is to say, Of the best and surest maner of
expounding or interpreting. For therein he doeth shew very plainly, that al Hebrew textes of the Bible are falsified, and emba∣ced, by the Iewes: yea, and the like is done to all the textes in Greeke of the new Te∣stament, by some Heretikes & enemies of the trueth. So that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, nor anie of the olde Doctours, should haue had the right Bible, but onelie our most holy Catholike Church of Rome, which only was borne vnder the right Pla∣net, and shee alone hath shot downe the Po∣pingaie. Therefore must the texte, before specified, be vnderstoode and meant of the Iewes alone, and of such like Heretikes, which haue so falsified the textes of the Bible. But you may not gather by this, that the holy Church of Rome is not licenced to ad vnto the Scripture, whatsoeuer shee doeth marke to be yet lacking, and to innouate, change, and remoue al that tendeth not per∣fectly to her purpose. For you see daily, that she doeth freely take vpon her so to do: and furthermore, she doth punish for ranke He∣retikes, all such as will not allowe and ac∣cept her adding, and changing, for the per∣fite worde of God.
Men do knowe very well,The ten cō¦mādemēts falsified. Look in the Catechisme or the sūme of our be∣leeue, prin∣ted at Ant∣werp by the commande∣ment of the King of Spaine. Item, look in Thomas de Aquino vpō the ten commande∣ments, and vpon al the catholike doctours euerie one of them. All which haue cleane left out the se∣conde com∣mandemēt▪ in the lett∣ting foorth of the ten commandements. Mat. 26.27. Ma. 14.23. Lu. 22.17. 1. Cor. 11.2 Marke, touching this, the Master of the Sentences in the 4. booke the 12. dist. 4. ca. And vpon the Encherid. of Eckius in the booke of Bernard of Luxen. In the 12. part of the 4. booke of Heretikes, and in al other Catholike writers, who do specially treate of this matter. that shee hath finely conueyed out of the Register of ye ten commandements, the seconde commande∣ment, which was, That no Images should be made, nor fashioned: because shee did perceiue, ye Heretiks would alledge ye same, to the hinderance both of he & she Saintes, which stand vpon the altars in the Church. Furthermore, because men shuld not lacke the number of ten, shee hath taken the last commandement, speaking of desire, and di∣uided the same in two, & so made the tailes agree iust. And likewise, notwithstanding that our Lord Iesus Christ had openly cō∣manded, That the Communion should bee ministred, as wel with wine as with bread: yet the holy Catholike Church of Rome, considering the great daunger which was therein, for that the wine might be spilt: or being in the winter, freeze: or be turned into sowre vineger: if it should be long kept in a Pixe, or litle Sacrament Boxe. And especiallye, considering that when they shoulde haue dealte the Wine abroade,
the common people might haue thought, whether that the long racked bodye were without bloud, or at the least, that there could be no right and perfite Transubstan∣tiation and changing of the bread into the very body of our Lorde Iesus Christe. In this behalfe hath she cōsidered further, and hath bene better aduised than our Lord him selfe was: and so hath forbiddē the laie peo∣ple the Chalice.This stan∣deth in the third booke of the Coū∣cels, in the Councell of Constance, in the 14. ses∣sion. For thus the Councel of Constance doeth decree, That notwith∣standing Christ, after supper, did ordeyne and minister vnto his Disciples the most blessed Sacrament vnder both kindes of bread and of wine. And although that in the first ancient Church of the faithfull, the same was alwayes vsed vnder both kindes: neuerthelesse, seeing that the con∣trarie vse & custome is not without great occasion, and willingly now put in vre, for the auoyding and eschewing of some in∣conueniences and perilles: therefore shal all Patriarches, Prelates, Archbishops, & Bishoppes, curse and excommunicate all such, as shall take vpon them to minister vnto the common people the Sacrament in that maner. And so far forth as such do not turne & recant, then they to be deli∣uered
into the handes of the temporall Iudges to be by them arbitrally executed. And herevpon did the President of ye Coun∣cell, named Ostiensis, in the name of all the whole College of Cardinals, and all other Bishops after him, answere, Placet: which is to say, So it pleaseth vs. So that it is e∣uident, that the ancient maner & good mea∣ning of the Church maye cleane alter & vt∣terly abolish the commandement of Christ, & the olde custome of the Apostles, & their Disciples. We do likewise see, yt notwith∣standing S. Paul (by inspiration of the ho∣ly Ghost) cōmanded,1. Cor. 7.9. and 2. That whosoeuer did feele that weakenes in him selfe, that hee could not liue chaste, should take a wife: for that it was better to marrie than to burne. And he did (in a maner by speciall words) command the same to the Bishops and other Ministers of Gods worde, say∣ing: That they should haue their wiues & their children brought vp in the feare of God. And further, That mariage is holy,1. Timo. 3.4. A charge to the bishops Heb. 13.4. 1. Tim. 3.4. and commendable in all men: yea, he did esteeme, The forbidding of mariage, for a doctrine of deuils. And yet, all this notwithstanding, our holy Mother the Church of Rome, seeing
deeper into the matter: and for the eschew∣ing of manie inconueniences,This is set foorth in plain words in the De∣crees of the Popes in the Chap. Proposuisti, in the 82. dist. and in the Chap. Decreminus the 22. dist. and in the chap. Tene. the 31. dist. it is like∣wise in the book of the Sentences, in the 17. dist. n the 4 chap. hath expres∣ly and slatly commaunded Priestes, Bi∣shoppes, and al spiritual persons, that they in no wise shall take vpon them the state of Matrimonie, teaching precisely the con∣trarie to the doctrine before specified, That the state of Matrimonie, is nothing else, but plaine vncleanesse, filthie, and shame∣full: yea, a great and foule spot vnto car∣nall copulation: In so much, that such, as giue themselues therevnto, cannot be ac∣ceptable before God: for that it is writ∣tē: Who so liues after the flesh, cannot be acceptable before God: and haue there∣fore concluded, that it is not decent, that a holy Priest, who is the temple of the ho∣ly Ghost, should become a slaue to the ly∣ing with a woman, and to fleshly lust. Like as in the Popes decrees and Decre∣tales is specially set forth. Moreouer, touching the same point, it is concluded in the saide Decrees,In the 4. Epist. of Pope Cere. in the first book of coū¦cels fol. 422 col. 2. and 423. That the doctrine of the holy Church, is nowe more perfite, than either the doctrine of Iesus, the sonne of God, or of his Apostles, hath bene in times past. For thus the text saith, Before that the Gospell was corrected, a∣mended,
and expounded,This stan∣deth euen thus word for word in the booke of Decrees in the chap. Sors nō est, causa. 26. quaest. 2. there were ma∣nie things permitted, which nowe, since the time is come, that all the doctrine is made perfit, are clearely abolished and ta∣ken away, as especially, notwithstanding that the mariage of Priests was neither by the Lawe, by the Gospell, nor the doc∣trine of the Apostles, forbidden, yet hath the holy Church flatly forbiddē the same. We do likewise plainely see, that Iesus Christ hath streightly forbidden,Math. 5.32.19, 7. Mar. 10.4. Luke 16.18. 1. Cor. 7.10, any dispē∣sation for Matrimonie, & hath specially de∣clared, That who soeuer doeth leaue his wife (except it be for adulterie) and doth marie another, is a whooremonger. Truly, if it were not that our holy mother the Catholike Church of Rome, had full power & authoritie aboue Gods word, and aboue ye special cōmandement of Christ: she would neuer haue takē vpō her to haue chā∣ged nor put down this mariage of priests. Now let vs further see, that the most holy & honorable Popes Iulius, Innocentius, & Colestinus, being with a great number of Bishops & Prelates stately & iudicially as∣sembled in ye holy Ghost, in S. Peters church at Rome, haue cōcluded, iudged, & pronoū∣ced, whatsoeuer Christ notwithstāding had
thereof spoken & saide. That if so be there were anie which were married together,Christning breakes matrimonie of the com∣mon & laye people. and had christened the children at ye fount, the one of the other before should be diuor∣ced: and the woman to haue her marriage good restored backe againe, and within a yeere after, it should be lawfull for her to marie another man: and for him to marrie another woman. Euē as our holy father ye pope of Rome, Deus dedit doth openly testifie in a letter,Deus dedit. which for a perpetuall memorie is written in the booke of Councels, word for worde: and likewise entred in the Register of the Popes decrees and ordinances: yet, ouer & besides this,In the chap. Peruenit, causa 31. quaest. 1. the holy Church hath conclu∣ded, that if any Nonne, Baggine sister, or other, should marie a husbande, the Bishop of that Diocesse, where they dwelt, should diuorce them,Conc. Trib. the 6. chap. & in the de∣crees in the cap. Impu. & in the ca. Si quis sacr. caus. 27. quaest. 1. In the chap. Hac ratione cau. 31. qu. . & cause the Nonne to returne and take vpon her againe her vowe of cha∣stitie. Like as in Concilio Triburino, and by the Popes lawes is concluded & com∣manded. Out of the same authoritie hath the foresaid holy Church likewise cōcluded, That what woman soeuer after the decease of her first husband, should marrie agayne, shee was an open and common harlotte,
not regarding at all that which S. Paule in his time had written directly to the cō∣trarie:Rom. 7.2.3. 1. Cor. 7.9.28. 1. Tim. 5.14. yea, had moreouer straitly charged and commanded the yong widowes, That vnlesse they coulde well liue a continent and chast life, they should marie againe. After this, did not S. Paul, or rather the spirit of God by the mouth of S. Paul, di∣rectly forbid any straunge language to be vsed in the Churches and congregations,Strange languages in the Church. ordeyned for the seruice of God: neither in prayer, nor in thankesgiuing, nor in singing, nor in prophesying? Yea, he did greatly rebuke the Corinthians for so do∣ing in their congregations.1. Cor. 14. the whole chapter thorough. And yet men plainly see, that the holy Church of Rome, doth minister her Masses, her Mattens & Euensong, prayers, and song, al in Latine: and some times therewith doeth mingle, Greeke and Hebrew wordes. In such sort as that, not onely the common people, but the Priestes and Bishops likewise do not vnderstand it. Yet will the holye Church haue it so done, yea, and puniseth such as woulde otherwise vse it, like damned heretikes. Like as out of Eckius, Piggius, Hosius,Elcius in his Enchei∣redion. and other Catholike writers is manifest
and plaine to be seene.Figius in libro cont. Hosius in a certeine boke which he set out of this matter onely. Then hereby of ne∣cessitie must followe, that the Church hath a full and resolute power ouer the expresse worde of God, aboue the cōmandement & ordenāce of Iesus Christ, and aboue all the scriptures of ye Prophets & Apostles. But what neede is it (I pray you) to bring so many and diuerse ensamples one by one, for the deference of this matter? Sithence we see euidently, that shee in all her deuo∣tions, Gods seruices, and ceremonies, doth alter the expresse wordes of the Scripture: yea, doeth openly and wilfully ouertread it, euen as though it were done in spite and anger of the holy Scripture in the Bible. For by the holy Scripture it is open∣ly, and vpon great paynes Deu. 4.2.5 32.12.4, 8.13.32. Iere. 11.4.8. Esai. 1.12.2.13. Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23. Exod. 20.4 5.22. Deu. 12.8.9 Leuit. 26.1 Deut. 4. whole tho∣rough. Deut. 1622 Esai. 40.41 42. whole through. Iere. 10. Abacuk. 2. Ps. 115. and in other in∣numerable places. earnestly for∣bidden, That in the seruing of God, first no commandements, traditions, nor de∣uises of men shall bee vsed, nor take anie place, but to rest wholy and onely vpon the special commandements of God, and to do thereafter: Finally, to turne neither to the right hand or to the left. Secondarily, not to make or haue anie Image or similitude▪ carued or molten, nor shall vse the shape or likenesse of a∣nie
such, thereby to shewe or set forth the spirituall forme and incorporable maie∣stie of God, by earthly things, and dumbe and dead creatures. Thirdely, that no man shall vse anie witchcraft, sorcerie,1. Iohn. 5.21 Leui. 19.26 Det. 18.10, 11. or inchantment of a∣nie creature, to the intent to giue to the creatures that be senselesse and voyde of life, anie might or worthinesse, other then by nature is prescribed vnto them. Which thing is likewise by all Coun∣cels and Synodes, as well Iudiciall as Ca∣nonicall, openly and straytelie forbidden. Here agaynst (notwithstanding) hath it pleased our dearely beloued mother,Con. Lao∣dicen ca 30 Con. Cart. cap. 39. cap. Non opor∣tet. cap. Au∣guris. caus. 26 quaest. 5. L. Vnica co. de thesauris lib. 10 cap. illos. 26. quaest. 2. the ho∣ly Church of Rome, to vse her full and in∣estimable authoritie and power, and so without hauing anie respect at all to that which is aboue written, hath (to beginne withall) sette vp a certaine kinde of ser∣uing of God, which is altogether contra∣rie to the good opinions, traditions, and ordinances of all men. For besides that the blessed Masse, is by diuerse Popes, Cardi∣nals, and Bishops, at sundrie times, and in sundrie places, raked vp in a huge heape, & with many peeces & patches of mens deui∣ses, like to a beggers cloke sowed together
besides so many traditions of idle heades, which the holy Church of Rome hath re∣ceyued for a perfite seruing of God: as fa∣sting dayes, yeares of grace, differences and diuersities of dayes, of meates, of clo∣thing, consecrating of Churches, of altars, of candles, pilgrimages, Letanies, Kyrie∣elesons, Images, Processions, holy ashes, holy Paceegges, and flanes, palmes and palme boughes, Albes, Copes, Maniples, Vestmēts, Miters, Staues, fooles hoods, Shelles, and Belles, Paxes, licking of rotten bones, carying of the Pixe about, and praying to a lumpe of doaw, fasting vpon certaine speciall dayes, creeping vp∣on knees before a Crosse of wood, buying of Bulles and pardons, mumbling of Pa∣ter nosters and Aue Maries, by tale, vpon a paire of Beades, before a dumbe image, shauing of crowne and beard, to giue bles∣sing with two fingers: and ten thousande more such prankes. Yet, aboue al, this is by the holy Church (as it were in spite of God and his word) ordeyned, That euery man being a good Catholike, maye appoint and choose for himselfe a Saint and patrone, erect a new image, and specially build a new chappel,
and an altar, set vp a newe and particular religion, weare a peculiar or special kinde of garment, assume and take a seuerall vse of meates and ceremonies: finally, and to conclude, doe what soeuer his good mea∣ning and intent persuadeth him vnto. Secondarily, it is so, that our deare mo∣ther will not set vp any seruing of God, but shee must of necessitie haue therevnto all sortes of ymages, as well carued as painted: and worship the same by knee∣ling and praying with burning of candles, with kissing and licking, with pilgrima∣ges, and other such like deuotions. And in setting vp the sayde images in all high wayes, in all streetes, and in all corners, e∣uen as for an euident token and protesta∣tion, that they neither do once thinke vpon Gods commandement set forth in the holy Scripture, neither wil be subiect or bounde to the same. Thirdly, all her diuine seruice,Coniuring. all her ceremonies and deuotions, and all her holi∣nesse, is grounded in cōiuring of creatures, and worshipping the same: and in flat sor∣cerie and witchcraft, in working whereof they speake vnto the dumbe creatures, as though they had as much vnderstanding as
the Priests themselues, and so do abuse the blessed name of God, and the textes of the holy Scripture openlye, and without re∣spect. The water is by them exorcised or con∣iured by these wordes:This con∣iuratiō you shall find worde for word in the Masse booke. I coniure thee thou creature of water: In the name of the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost, to the ende thou become a chosen water to take away all the power of the diuell, and that thou mayest driue awaye and con∣founde the diuell him selfe with all his wicked Angels, &c. The oyle and the balme are coniured and bewitched, with much mumbling, blowen vpon with many breathings, with three times crying, All haile holy oyle, three times, All haile holy annoyntment, and three times, All haile holy baulme, And then it is kept for a most holy thing in a fine vessell therefore made, and so caried along the streets by the Priests, with great deuotion and prayer. The salt is coniured in this maner: I do coniure thee thou creature of salt,More con∣iurations. by the liuing God, by the true God, by the holy God, and by the same God, which commanded Helias to cast thee into the
water, to take away the vnwholesomnesse of the water, that thou mayest become an exorcised or coniured salt,Nota. to the saluati∣on of the faythfull, and to worke the pre∣seruation both of bodie and soule, to all them which shall enioy thee: and that all the subtiltie, wilinesse, and filthie in∣tents of the Diuell: and that all wicked spirites maye flee from that place where thou art scattered and cast abrode. And then is this salt mingled with the foresayde water, to be the right purger and sancti∣fier of the people, wherethrough all the po∣wer and might of the diuell is withstood, & our daily sinnes therewith finely cleansed. Nowe, besides all this, shee doeth ex∣orcise and coniure certeine hearbes, vpon certeine dayes, to the health both of bodie and soule, and to driue away all daunge∣rous hurt, all diuelish bewitching, all pesti∣lence, vnwholsomnesse, and corruption of the ayre. Shee doeth coniure and exorcise the candles, the waxe and the tallow, to the qualifying and extinguishment of thunder and lightening. Also she doth exorcise and coniure beads of wood, of stone, of corrall, and of all o∣ther stuffe: whereby they receyue great
power against sinne, the diuell and hel. And (which is more) shee doeth not let these thinges be thus coniured by the Pope and Priests onely, but the Pope may (whenso∣euer it shall please him) giue the like power and authoritie, to whom soeuer he will, be it man or woman. This may well appeare and be perceyued of all men, by the exam∣ple of a worthie matrone of Spaine called Senora Maria Osorio,Senora Maria Osorio. who did obteyne of Pope Paule 3. licence and power, for her selfe and twelue of her bloud, to coniure and holowe such beades: and these beades were of this might, that whensoeuer any person did saye a Pater noster thervpon, although it were done without deuotion, or once thin∣king of the matter: yet did they thereby ob∣teyne forgiuenesse of the thirde part of their sinnes. And for this cause were the balles of these beades made of Copper, and set in the Church, where was set out by them in print, their full might, with all their pro∣perties and nature, as is before declared: so as at this day men may openly see by the common people, which come and say their Pater nosters vpon their beades there, hol∣ding their handes vpon those balles, that thereby they may obteyne the forgiuenesse
of their sinnes. Nowe, ouer and aboue all this,Christning and coniu∣ring of Belles. the Belles are not onely coniured and hallo∣wed, but are also baptized: and haue ap∣poynted for them Godfathers, which holde the rope (wherewith they are tyed) in their handes, and do answere and say, Amen,Bonifa. 8. C. alma ma¦ter F. adijci∣mus, de sen∣ten in sexto And Gre∣gorie 9. Ea permittim, in decreta. 4 de Senten∣tia excom∣municat. Peruse like wise Philip¦pum Fran∣cum vpon the saide Cant. Alma mater. F. ad∣ijcimus nu. 4. & other Canonists. Caldar. in tract de interdictis. in par. un. 7 Iohn Cald. Albert. de Rosat. in dictionario supr verbo Campane. to that which the Suffragane or Bishop doth speake or demaund of the Bell. And then they put a newe cote or garment vpon the Bell, and so coniure it, to the driuing away of all the power, craft, and subtiltie of the diuell, and to the benefite and profite of the soules of them that bee deade (special∣ly, if they bee riche, and can pay the Sex∣ton well:) and for many other like things. In so much that the Belles are so holy, that so long as the Church or the people are (vpon anie occasion) excommunicate, they may not be rong. Like as by Pope Boni∣facius 8. and Gregorie 9. is manifestly ordeined: although yet it is (of speciall grace) permitted, to toll the Aue Maria, as Iohannes Caldarinus hathe trimlie written. And this (I assure you) is no small matter. For Doctour Albericus de Rosato doth declare, that the religious had amōgst
themselues at Rome, a long and weightie dissention, wherevpon great processes were mainteyned,Processes for the knol¦ling of Aue Maria. and all about this: namely, which of all the Orders shoulde first knolle the Aue Maria in the morning▪ which processes did long endure, till at the last it was concluded, and adiudged, that they which were first vp, should first knoll. Euen after the maner of kine, who alway let the formost go before, and the last fol∣lowe after. Why (I praye you,) hath it not bene seene, that the Spaniardes (which are the first sweete and most deare children of the holy Church of Rome, comming nowe of late to Groninghen in Friseland, did there christen, coniure, & hallow theyr Ensignes:Christning of ensignes. naming one Barbara, another Katharine, &c. I saye nothing, howe they coniure the diuell out of yong children, which are brought to be christened: euen as though the yong children (to whome Christ doeth witnesse the kingdome of heauen to belong, and be those which with their fathers are conteyned vnder Gods promises, and made cleane by the bloud of Iesus Christ) were possessed with the Diuell. The Masse (I pray you) what is it, but
a plaine coniuring, sorcerie, or witchcraft▪ Wherein the breade and the wine, which are but dumbe creatures, are (by the brea∣thing of the Priest, and the power of fiue woordes) conuerted into fleshe and bloud. So that it is most apparaunt, that all her Religion, all her diuine Seruice, and ceremonies, are full of witchcraft, sorce∣rie, and coniuring: full of ydolatrie, set∣ting vppe of Images, and giuing them worshippe, full of mennes traditions, in∣stitutions, and deuises: and in conclu∣sion, full of all that, which by the holy scrip∣ture is openly reproued, and plainely for∣bidden. So that (verelie) these Here∣tikes must needes bee verie blinde, if they doe not well perceyue, that the power, the ordinaunce, and authoritie of the ho∣ly Church of Rome, neyther can, nor will bee shutte in, nor hedged about, with the pales and walles of the holy Scrip∣ture. For, see here: this is that, which the steadfast pillar of the Theologie of Louen, Iodocus Tiletanus himselfe hath openly written:Iodocus Tiletanus not conten∣ted with the Gospel. We are not satisfied (sayeth he) with that which the Apostles or the Gospell doe declare: but wee saye, that as
well before as after, there are diuers mat∣ters of importance, and weight accepted and receiued,In his booke writ¦ten agaynst the confessiō of the prea∣chers of Antwerpe. out of a doctrine which is no where set forth in writing. For we do blesse the water, wherewith we baptize, and the oyle, wherewith we anoynt: yea, and besides that, him that is christened. And (I praye you) out of what scripture haue we learned the same? Haue we it out of a secret and vnwritten ordinance? And further. What Scripture hath taught vs to grease with oyle? Yea, (I pray you) from whence commeth it, that wee doe dippe the childe three times in the wa∣ter? Doeth it not come out of this hid∣den and vndisclosed doctrine, which our forefathers haue receyued closely, without any curiositie: and do obserue it still, &c? But what neede haue I to trauell much for the establishing hereof: seeing there is a generall rule in the holy Church of Rome, That the Pope maye frank∣lye This is al¦so specified▪ in ecisio∣nibus rote, in decisio. 1. num. 3. in nouis & Anton. Ma∣ria in addit. 1 decis. rote nouas de Bigamis nu . & is like∣wise defēded by the Iurist Caolo rui∣no in cons. 109. num. 1 in the 5. booke, and of Sigismū∣dus Neapo∣litanus. ordeyne and commaunde contrarie to the writing, doctrine and ordinaunce of the Apostle Paule? Considering likewise in especiall, that (as Eckius in Encherid. Locorum communi, in the chap. Ecclesia. Eckius hath set downe) Christ did neuer commaunde his Apo∣stles
to write: but to preach. True it is that Paule doeth defende, saying:2 Tim. 3.15.16.17. That the blessed woorde of God is set foorth, and is sufficient to instruct, to teache, to punishe, to amende: yea, and wholie apte, and sufficient, to make men wise ynoughe for their saluation, and to in∣struct them sufficientlye to all good workes. And that, who soeuer shall teach any other Gospell, than that which hee hath taught, (though hee were an An∣gel from heauen,) is accursed.1. Gal. 8.9. But all that must bee vnderstoode of the tyme, wherein hee was, whilest the Church was yet in her infancie or childehoode, and laye in the cradle. For it was yet neces∣sarie for her then, to drinke such milke,Cap sos. non est. 26. qust 2. being yet vnable to digest the strong and grosse meates of holy Prelates and Doc∣tours of the holie Church of Rome: For that her stomache was yet too weake and quasie. And in effect, men doe clearely see, that notwithstanding the saying of Paule, That in Christ Iesus,Col. 2.2.3.4 5.6.7.8.9.10. and 20.21.22. and in the knowe∣ledge of him, all the treasure of wisedome and knowledge lyeth hidde: so as the faythfull ought not to receyue any institu∣tions,
or doctrine of men. Yet a long time after the Apostles, yea, aboue seuen or eight hundred yeeres after theyr decease, our mother the holye Catholike Churche hath founde out a wonderful and vnspeake∣able newe hoorde of wisedome and know∣lege, through which a mā may come to per∣fite iustification, and to an angelical life: and aboue that get in store a heape of de∣seruings, and good woorkes, to helpe a good friende withall at a pinche: and yet to release a dozen or twaine of sillie soules out of Purgatorie. And these be they especially:The rules or , Dominike, , & Barnarde. The holie order, and full perfection of Saint Fraunces, Saint Domi∣nicke, Saint Barnarde, Saint William, and many more of the same stampe: which sort men knewe not to speake in the Apostles time, when men were satisfyed with the pure and vnmingled milke of God his woorde,1. Pet. 2.2. Iohn. 14.29 Iohn. 15.15. This is specially written in the 5. booke  dere. in the Bul of Pope Nicholas 4. beginning exiit qui se∣nec his. 1. de verborum signis. like newe borne children (as Pe∣ter doth beare witnes:) yea, for these riche treasures were not reuealed to Iesus Christ him selfe, who taught nothing but that whiche hee had receyued out of the bosome of his father: and the same did hee deliuer fully and wholie ouer to his Apostles. But of this coulde hee saye no∣thing:
for this was too daintie a dishe for his mouth, and therefore must bee kept for the last course, agaynst the time that the holy fathers, of full perfection, and Gods deare friendes Saint Fraunces,This stan∣deth plainly in their Le∣gends▪ and in the booke made of the might of our Ladie Rosa Crans which Ala∣nus did make by the inspira∣tion of Ma∣rie the E∣gyptian or of Egypt. Saint Do∣minicke, Saint Barnarde, and Saint Alane, (who had sucked our blessed Ladies brests, as well as Christ him selfe, and walked about the towne with her as the bride∣grome with his bride) shoulde appeare. For what needes muche rehearsall of so manie euident visions, which happened to that holie woman Briget? Or of the no∣table miracle of the wilde Marie Aegyp∣tian? who ranne through woodde and wil∣dernesse, ouer hilles and dales, starke na∣ked like a wilde beast? Or of the goodlie and pleasaunt orders of Saint Clara: the which our deare mother the holy Church hath receyued for verie precious Canti∣cles, with great triumph. Well, goe to nowe, reade the whole Bible ouer and ouer, and I will bee bounde to giue the Theologians or diuines of Louen, a pottle of wine, to make mery withal, if thei cā find out there, that either Christ, or his Apo∣stles, did euer knowe, that who soeuer doeth die in a Gray friers cote, shall ney∣ther
come in Purgatorie,To die in a gray friers habite. nor in Hell. And yet notwithstanding, not onely Radulphus Agricola, Albertus Pius, the Prince of Carpi, and Pope Martinus, woulde die in such an habite, and be buried in it: but like∣wise, many other Kings, Dukes, Earles, and Barons: as in the booke of the confor∣mities of Saint Francis is specified, and with the Popes Bulles established:Conformi∣tiies. Con∣formita. 83. Or likewise, what knewe they, that hee that shoulde die in a white Friers Scapularie, shoulde be saued? like as our blessed Ladie did declare to Simon Stocke. In hoc moriens saluabitur. That is to say, Who dies herein, shall be saued. Like as in euery place in their Churches is painted forth. Or what knewe they, that Alanus shoulde make the Rosarie of our Ladie, which must be esteemed as the Gospell? like as the good Catholike men Tarthemius and Leander haue written & witnessed. Well, nowe do we not plainly see, that the holy Church of Rome hath but a while agoe founde out maruellous holinesse of this newe Religion of the Iesuites, neuer heard of before:Iesuits. who haue found out a way of ful perfectiō, which neither prophet, nor
Apostle could neuer spie out before? For this was founde out first in the yeere of our Lord 1537. by a Spaniard, borne in Biskay named Don Egnatio Leguiola,Egnatius Leguiola. who with twelue companions, whom he named to be his Apostles, went vp to Rome, and from thence to Venice, pretēding to go on fourth to Heirusalem: but finding at Venice no shipping readie, he returned backe againe to the holy citie of Rome: where as this costly treasure was then marueilously pub∣lished and set abroade. Notwithstanding that, a litle while before, to wit, in the yeere 1523. one Iohn Peter Guarraffa,Garaffa. then Bis∣shop of Quietta, had found out the stampe or paterne of the same: who afterwardes comming to be Pope him self, did set forth, and by his Bulles established this order of Guiettens, for the most pure order: In so much that, all those which followe this or∣der, do farre passe all Angels in holinesse.This is spe¦cially writē in the 5. booke Sacri Dere in the Bull of pope Nicholas 4 beginning: Exit qui se∣mina. Nec his quis. . de veb. signi. I let alone Angels, for they do farre ex∣ceede Saint Frances, to whom the Angels are nothing to bee compared: as by the holy Church is iudged and determined, ac∣cording to the setting foorth of his Vine∣yard, and golden Legende. And for that he did liue a much more perfit life, than Christ
him selfe as the Decretalles do specifie. And yet are there but three vowes to make in the order of S. Frauncis, to witte, Obedience, Pouertie, and Chastitie. But in this newe order of Iesuiten or Guietinē, ouer and besides these three vowes, before named, they professe yet a fourth vowe, (to the ende to giue a pushe farre beyonde all other Religions) which is: That they are bounde, and shall at all times be readie, to runne and trudge from one countrie into an other, like poore pedlers and rogues, to what part soeuer it shall please the holy fa∣ther the Pope of Rome to sende them: yea, although it were euen to the worldes ende: like as men may see and knowe, that they are alreadie runne to the Indians, and Pir∣ue, therewith to merit heauen. Yet, besides this, the holy Church hath of late founde out another newe perfite or∣der, whereof neither Christe nor his Apo∣stles did euer once dreame: & it is named Pauline,Pauline. Gastaline. or Gastaline, which was firste founde out, about the yeere of our Lorde, 1537. by a certeine Countesse of Mantua in Italie, called Ghastalia, by the good coū∣sell and instructiō of that holy Monke, bro∣ther Baptiste of Cremona, the Preacher of
his order: Which religion doth conteine a newe way and meane, whereby a man may mortifie him selfe and his fleshly lustes: and thus it went to worke: There was an olde wife called Iulia, which would take ye yong men and maydes and (after that they had bene by making proofe and skirmishing a while,Iulia causes the yong men & mai∣dens to lie in one bed together. well trained vppe) laye them then together in a bed. And for that they should not one byte another, nor kicke backe∣wardes with their heeles, shee did laye a Crucifixe betweene them, to keepe them a∣sunder: and there must they set foote to foote, and striue so long, till they had who∣ly mortified their fleshe. And heare nowe what a miracle chaunced: It happened so, that there was an other old wife at Venice, old wife of Venice. which had a great mind to preasse and traine vp yong men to this kinde of warre: who wrought a trim feate, whereby shee did greatly strenghthen this perfect Angelical holines. For shee caused two great bookes to be made, both of e∣quall bignes, & like fashion: wherof the one was a Bible,A subtil fa∣shion of a Bible. and the other was hollowe wtin, as a litle chist, made in all points like a book, wt claspes & al, which she filled with
flat bottles ful of Malmesie, and with good fine Marchpanes, which she her selfe made, of the brawne of Capons and Partridges, with Sugar and Almondes (like a licke∣rous Ladie) and then gather into a prettie Cell, with these two bookes, and there sat prounking and tarying alone in her deuout contemplations, sometime fiue or six dayes together, praying for her Champions, and reading full deuoutly till ye bible was quite emptie: not eating or drinking anie thing else all that while. Was not that well fa∣sted? And was not such a wonderfull mira∣cle sufficient to establishe the strength and worthinesse of this new religion of Cham∣pions? Trueth it is, that she was at the last (when the matter was knowen) banished out of Venice: but that was not done for her holinesse, but specially, because there were a great manie of amorous letters founde about her, which were of great im∣portance. For else (alas) what could haue bene said to her heauie and pitiful penance, whereof the like is daily done? You maye see them sometimes in Italie go alongst the streetes, with a great rope about their neckes, as if they were dropped downe frō the gallowes: and sometimes they weare a
sawsige or a swines pudding in place of a siluer or golden chayne. Is not that suffici∣ent, to deserue heauen by? But, if I should go about to expresse e∣uerie particular religion alone, which our mother the holye Church hath founde out, beside the Scriptures: I should haue work for this seuen yeres. Wherefore, it is not needefull. For all good Catholike men do knowe well ynough, that our holye fathers the Popes haue sufficient authoritie, to bring in and establish newe religions and rules of perfection, as manie as it shall please them: although it be plaine, that the whole Scriptures neuer make mention of anie such: as it is most euident, by so many diuers orders and religions, which haue bene by their holinesse set vp, brought in, & established. As, there are the orders of the Basilians, Augustinians, Benedictines,Names of diuers or∣ders of reli∣gion. Dominicanes, or Iacobines, Carthusians, Carmelites, or Ladie brothers, Seruitours or Seruants, Graie Friers, Obseruantes, Conuentuales, Penitentiaries, Minimers,Of mens cloisters. Capucines, Mendicantes, Cluinares, Ca∣maldulenses, Valembrosences, Cisteri∣enses, Barnardines, Coelestines, Giberte∣nenses, Milicenses, Castellenses, Burfal∣denses,
Mountoliuetes, Castinenses, Ar∣metes, Regulars, Premōstratenses, Whil∣liamites, Lateranes, Georgians, Iohanni∣ans, Trinitaries, Indians, Ambrosiās, Mag¦dalines or Lazarines, red Augustins, Hele∣nians, Sophians, Visitensers, Wincesbate∣rers, Gregorians, Constantinopolitanes, Columbins, Crossed brethrē, Starred bre∣thrē, Fratres Clauorū, Blackfriers, Smoc∣ked friers: Btethrē of the holy Sepulchre, Brethren of the vale of Iosaphat, Brethrē of S. Ioseph, of S. Rusius, & seuen thousande like. Of which number the most part haue their mates and companions in the women Cloisters: of which some be Bagghines, o∣ther close Nonnes:Orders & cloisters of women. other called Sisters, & ye fourth are called Chanonesses: who haue likewise their Patronesses, as S. Clare, S. Bridgit, S. Lucia, S. Agnes, S. Marie Magda¦lene, S. Valdrud, &c. All which haue bene receiued & established by our holy fathers the Popes, for good and holy. Ouer and aboue these, they haue ordeined many sundrie Heremitages & orders of He¦remits, as of S. Anthonie, of S. Hilarie, of S. Makarius, S. Theon, S. Frontinian, S. Ho∣rus, S. Helenus, S. Appellomius, S. Paul the Hermit, S. Martarius, S. Piamōtius, S. Cas∣tomianus,
& many more of the like rabie. Now are there more added to these, ye holy Giides or Confraternities, as The frater∣nities of S. Roche, of S. Hubright, of S. Se∣bastian, of S. Coronne,Brother∣hoods. which go cladde in blew: of S. Anthonie, in blacke: of S. Martin in white: of S. Dominick, in black, &c. And to the ende that the heritage should not be without Rutters or Pensionars, they haue appointed certeine newe religious orders of holy Knights likewise: such as are the knights of the Rodes, or of Malta, Dutch Knights, the Templers,Knight brethren. the Knights of S. Iames, our Ladie Knights, Saint Georges knights, knights of Hierusalem, Calitra∣uenses, Montenienses, Gartarienses, &c. But truly, I had need of vi. hūdred tongues & two hūdred pennes, & a mouth of steele, wt an iron voice, if I should declare all the di∣uersities of orders & religions, which our holy fathers ye Popes haue set vp, not only without, but directly against ye holy Scrip∣ture: and yet without naming of the Popes themselues, or their Cardinals, Prelats, Archbishops, Bishops, Metropolitanes, Suffraganes, Archdeacons, Deacons, and such like strange beastes, whereof nei∣ther Prophet nor Apostle euer heard.
Nay, I dare saye, that if the Apostles had but once seene, or hearde, the hundred part of these new religious orders and pro∣fessions named, they would haue bene a∣fraide of them. For, seeing that S. Paule could not suffer, that amongst the Congre∣gation of the Corinthians, some should call them selues the Disciples of Peter, other of Paule, the thirde of Apollo: howe would he then haue bene afraide, and out of quiet, when he should haue seene or hearde, of such an innumerable companie of newe and di∣uers names, professions, religions, Gods seruices, and rules of perfection: whereof some were clad and apparelled in blacke, some in white, some in gray, some in green, some in blewe, some in red, some in furres, and in all maner of diuers colours: and eue∣rie one of them did esteeme his owne order and rules for the best, and most worthie to be regarded. He would surely haue thought him selfe to haue bene come into a newe world. Therefore it is a great follie, that men will founde them selues onely vpon that, which the Apostles haue taught or written: considering that the world is now chaunged, and that the holy Church hath found out and established newe religions,
newe commandements, and newe articles of our faith, whereof the Apostles neuer knewe. For otherwise (beleeue me) if no∣thing els were estemed but the bare Scrip∣tures and writings of the Prophets and A∣postles, then should all the Decrees & De∣cretalles, all good holy Ordinances of the Church of Rome, all the goodly Councelles which haue bene kept and holden, by the or∣der and commandement of the Popes: yea, all the before specified orders and religion of Friers & Nōnes, the Heremites, Gildes and Knighthoods, be vtterly ouerthrowen: yea, all their merites and supererogations, would not be worth an Oaten cake, if men should begin to esteeme and accept the ho∣ly Scripture alone, for a true and sufficient rule and direction: and then should Luther haue done well, when he caused the decrees and deretals to be burnt. O, no, truely, We must aboue all main∣teine those in reputation: yea, euen in greater estimation,It is sinne against the holye Ghost, to do any thing against the Popes de∣crees. than the woorde of God it selfe: for who soeuer doth sinne a∣gainst the word of God, his sinnes maye be forgiuen him: but he that doth sinne against the Decrees of the Pope, doeth sinne against the holy Ghost, and there∣fore
his offence shall neuer be forgiuen him. Therefore, it is vndoubtedly a great o∣uersight of them, that would compasse and pale in the holy Church with the bounds of the holy Scripture, seeing she may steppe or leape ouer it with a staffe, or without a∣nie feare: and as often as euer she wil. Yet it is true, that sometimes shee doeth helpe her self with the scripture: for if there were no scripture, howe should one knowe whether there must be a Church or no: or wherby should a mā discerne ye true church of God from the church of Antichrist? Yet doth she alway rule the Scripture, & makes therevpon such a glosse, as best serueth her turne: yea, that is more, she is the very oc∣casion that any beleefe or credit is giuen to the scripture: as is pleasantly set foorth by the holy and right honourable Bishoppe Guilielmus Blindasinus, in his booke cal∣led Panoplia:Iohannes Blindasinus wherein he concludeth with strong & inuincible reasons, That mē were not bound to beleeue the word of God, nor to be subiect vnto it, if it were not, that the holy Church hath so commanded. For, what do we thinke, yt the word of God is so strōg of it selfe, as to publishe such thinges tho∣rough
the power of the holy Ghost, if the Church of Rome did not first giue her ver∣dicte in the matter? No marie, I warant you: for so the Heretikes do vnderstand it. For these Heretikes will bring the church of God in subiection vnder the scripture: & therefore do they alledge out of Ieremie, That the word of God is like a fire,Iere. 23.29. & like a hāmer, which breaketh stones in pieces: & that it is liuely, mightie,Hebr. 4.22. & sharper than a two edged sword, & goeth through euen to ye soule, & to the sinewes and ioyntes, & is a searcher of the thoughtes & intentes of the heart: and therefore (saye they) it hath no neede of any mans witnes, as Christ him self hath said: but that those which do ye will of the father,Iohn 5.34. Iohn 7.19. shal lightly know (by inspira∣tion of ye holy Ghost) whether the doctrine be of God. They say likewise, It doth giue light to al things: for it is a lampe to ligh∣ten the feete of the beleeuers: whereby they must walke through the darknesse of this world: & they say, yt mans wisdom & vnder∣standing, how great, howe wise,2. Pet. 2 19. Psa. 119.13 howe holy soeuer the same can be, is plain darkenesse, in comparison thereof. Well then, if it be so, that the darkenesse can not lighten the light, but that the light
it selfe must lighten all things, then in very deede can not the worde of God receiue a∣nie light of the opinion or authoritie of man: but it selfe must be the light, where∣by men may knowe, which is the Church of God, and which is the Synagogue of dis∣semblers. And therefore they conclude ac∣cording to the worde of the Prophet Esaie, That men must followe after the Lawe,Esai. 8.20. and the witnesse, which is, the writtē word of God: and that whosoeuer doth not walke after that, shall neuer see the daye spring. But, as I haue alredy said, all that is plain heresie: for our dearely beloued mother the holy Church of Rome will be chiefe Iudge her selfe ouer the holye Scripture. So that the doctrine of the Prophetes & Apostles, is now no more the foūdation of ye Church, as it was in the time of Paul: but contrari∣wise,Ephe. 2.20. the Church, with the authoritie & the traditions of the same, is the onely founda∣tion of the Scripture. For euen so might the Iewes before time aduance themselues likewise, by the estimation & authoritie of the Church, alledging that the law and the witnes, whereof ye Prophet speakes, could haue bene of no estimation, but by reason, ye same was consented to thē by the Church:
and that men should neuer haue knowen, neither the Lawe, or the witnesse, or Gods worde, if it had not bene by them, and their forefathers set forth & declared, what they should accept for Gods worde: and that the Church with her light hadde lightened the Lawe and the witnesse. And so the Church of Rome doeth nowe also saye, That the worde of God hath no estimation, but that which it hath borrowed of the Church: for otherwise (as shee sayeth, and as all good Catholike writers do declare) howe should we knowe, that the scripture were the word of God, if it were not that the holy Church had so allowed and iudged it? Wherefore should we more beleeue the Gospel of Ma∣thewe, or Marke, than the Gospell of Ni∣chodemus, or Thomas? For there standes plainly written in the Decrees, That nei∣ther the old nor the newe Testament were receiued of mē, for this cause, or that cause:Capitulo. Si Roman. parag. quib. ad hoc. dist. 19. nor for that it must be esteemed for an vn∣doubted rule and perfect knot: but only be∣cause that the holye Father Innocentius, Pope of Rome, had so iudged it, and so would haue it. Therefore yee maye well thinke, that God could not plant and esta∣blishe his holy worde in mens heartes, by
the inspiration of his spirit (as S. Iohn the Apostle would proue) if it were not that ye holy Church had therein holpen him.Iohn 2, 27. So that in this case, God is greatly beholden vnto our deare mother, the holy Church, for her good wil & faithfull seruice. For if shee had accepted the Fables of Aesope, and of Howleglasse, the gospel of the Distaffe, and of Fortunatus purse: the gospel of Nicho∣demus, or the Alcaron of Mahomet, or els the gospel which certein Monkes at Paris, in the yere of our Lord 1220. had made, & set forth, being ful of al filthinesse and blas∣phemie,Euangeliū aeternum at Paris. naming it, Euangelium aeternum, that is to say, An euerlasting gospel, requi∣ring the Pope that it might be by him ca∣nonized: and so set it forth for the eternall word of God,This doth Mat Pas. write being in those dayes a wri¦ter of Histo¦ries. but it ws denied thē, as hap was: but if it had bene so (I say) yt the pope and the holy Church would as wel haue al∣lowed it, as they did ye holy scripture, with the Masse booke, with the seuē Psalmes, & with the Rosarium beatae Mariae, who could haue said, No, to them? And that should then haue bene the worde of God: yea, and therewith must God haue beene content. Wel, go too then, seeing that men did here∣in credit the writing and seale of ye church,
wherfore should they not thē giue as great credit to them in al other matters? For e∣uen so doth the text of the foresaid decrees, argue, saying with plaine wordes: In so much as men do receiue and accept the old and newe Testamentes,In the foresaid ca. Si Roman. dist. 13. because that Pope Innocentius hath ordeined & iud∣ged: so it doth necessarily folow, that the Decretalles of the Popes of Rome, must likewise be receiued & accepted: the ra∣ther, for that Pope Leo hath likewise or∣deined, That whosoeuer doth set him self against them, his sinnes shal neuer be for∣giuen him, &c. It is very true, that by this argumēt it must likewise folow, that all the Iewes Caballes & Talmood, and all their dreames, must as wel be receiued, as ye fiue bookes of Moses, & the bookes of the Pro∣phets. For it is most true, yt as we haue re∣ceiued ye new Testamēt of ye christē church, so hath ye christen church receiued ye bookes of the old Testamēt of ye Iewes Synagogue. And now, euen as our Romish church hath receiued ye writing of ye Apostles, & iudged ye same for true: so likewise hath the Iewish church iudged ye bokes of Moses & of ye pro∣phets for true, & receiued thē for authētike. Nowe then, as men do herein beleeue, and
allowe the Iewes writings, and seale, so must wee also, (following the rule of our Doctours of Louen) beleeue ye said Iewes, in all that they say and teache: and thereby nowe shoulde our Romishe Church come short home. But we do not esteeme such cō∣sequencies: It is but Philosophie: and the Popes of Rome are no Iewes. Therfore, that which they do and ordeine, hath an o∣ther maner of coūtenance, than that which the Iewes haue ordeined. Therefore must our former argument re∣maine fast & vnmoueable: especially consi∣dering, that the Church of Rome is fullye credited in the one: therefore must shee (of necessitie) be as wel beleeued in the other. For truely, this argument is the trimmest and finest stuffe whereof Iohn Blindasinus hath made his Panoplie, which is as muh to say, as his Ful furniture of weapons & harnesse. For by this is proued, yt S. Frācis Vineyarde,In the 3. oke and , be∣ginning: Frascu sublin. ur. The goldē Legend, The booke called, Conform. S. Franc. And the Masse booke, must be as much esteemed (in all re∣spects) as ye very scripture of ye Bible: yea, in ye boke called Confo. S. Fran. (which was made by Barthol. of Pisa, & is alowed for good in ye chap. of Assis. In ye yere 1389.) is
written, That the same booke is better,Confirmi∣tes of Saint Francis bet¦ter than the Gospel: yea S. Francis is set in Lu∣cifers chaire aboue An∣gels. thā ye Gospell: for that Saint Francis is placed in Lucifers seat, aboue all the companies of Angels, at the vpper ende of all. Also there followeth out of the same, that the common sort of people may be as well instructed in the knoweledge of God, by dumbe Images, and mumming represen∣tations, as by the preaching of the Gospel: and that men must as well christen the Belles at the Font, as the children whiche are shapen after the likenesse of God, and bought by the precious bloud of Iesus Christ: that in baptising shall be vsed spit∣tle and oyntment, as well as water: that the holy Sacrament shall bee caried about the streetes in the Procession, with Baners and Pipes, as well as it shall be taken and eaten in the Congregation of the faythfull, in remembrance of the death of the Lorde. In summe, men are as deepely bound, to do that which the holy Church, and the Popes of Rome haue dreamed, set vp, and com∣maunded, as that which by the expresse worde of God, and by the doctrine of the Prophetes and Apostles is specially com∣maunded. Yea, and (I praye you) why should it not be so? Seeing (out of the
same argument it must of necessitie be con∣cluded) that ye word of God cannot be Gods word, but it must first by the church be ther∣to shapen & fashioned. For note well, this word is with special wordes of our learned master Iodocus Tiletanus in writing thus.Iodocus Rauesteyn Tiletanus in his book written a∣gainst the cōfession of the prea∣chers at Antwerpe, printed in Anno. 1567 That the worde of God alone contey∣ned in the holy Scriptures, of the old and the newe Testamentes, together with the three Symbols or Creedes, as of the A∣postles, the Councel of Nice, & of the fa∣ther Athanasius, yea and thereto ioyne the three first Councels, are not the rule & perfite knot of the truth, whereby it is ap∣parant, that in no wise men can perfitely know, whether these be the word of God, or no, without the traditions or setting forth of the Church, which doth assure vs of al this, without any Scripture, &c. In summe, the truth can be no truth, nor the light, light: yea, God can be no God, ex∣cept that the holy Church of Rome, that is to say, the holy Pope of Rome with his bi∣shops & prelates, do consent thervnto. So yt it is no maruel, that they can of a peece of bread make a God & creator of heauen and earth. For if it were so, that they should say: that at noone day it were darke night, wee
must streight wayes beleue the same as an article of the faith, & by and by without de∣lay, get vs to bed. For we say by a certaine cōmon prouerbe, That when all the world doeth affirme that a man (as by example Sōnius, or Blindasinus) is a swine, he must out of doubt trudge vnto the swinestie, and there eat only draffe. How much rather thē, when the holy Church, with that worthie cōpanie of Bishops, Abbats Prelates, and Cardinals (gathered together at Trent, or elswhere) do cōmand any thing, are not we bounde to receiue, beleue, & obey the same wtout any denial, & by and by to say Amen therevnto? And herein may men perceiue a great miracle, which (I do assure you) is greater by ye head thā any miracle that euer was don by the Apostles: to wit, yt the child was borne before the mother: yea, that the mother commes of the child. For it is most certein, and wel knowen, that the worde of God is the seede, whereof the Church of God doth spring & is ingendred, as the A∣postle Peter witnesseth: cōsidering that the Church is nothing else but a Congregati∣on of such,1. Pet. 1.23. as doe faithfully beleeue Gods woorde, and firmely sticke vnto the same: where thorough they are also called,
The Congregation of the liuing God, The pillar and staye of the truth. So that the woorde is the right mother of the Church. Well, nowe see, here goeth the ho∣ly Catholike Church of Rome before the worde of God, and his truth, which is as much to say, the childe goeth before the mo∣ther: yea, the worde can haue no might, no credite, no estimation, nor no being in the worlde, vnlesse it bee by speciall grace bor∣rowed of her daughter the holy Church. As the foresayd Blindasinus,This hath also amōgst other bene openly de∣fended by Siluester Prerias chiefst ard of the popes court in his booke writ∣ten against Martin Lu∣ther. Hosius, Sonnius, Piggius, Eckius, with all other Catholike Doctours haue forceably cōcluded, and ir∣reuocably determined: taking this for a most true & vndoubted article of the faith, yea, for the most speciall ground, whervpon they and all their writing is founded, which is, That men may not beleeue the worde and truth of God, otherwise than by the appoyntment of the holy Church of Rome, which of duetie must alwayes goe before, and lead the daunse, which is as muche to say, that you can not ride to Louen, but you must set the Wagon before the horses.
And therefore whensoeuer the Churche doth ordeine any thing, that is contrarie to the Scripture, (as is before saide) we will giue the Scripture an honest passeport or safe conduct, and a great many of farewels. and clue to the holy Church like a Burre. For the srcipture cannot defend this cause, but the holy Church of Rome can bring a man to the stake. And it helpes not to al∣ledge and bring in Augustinus in the 19. Epistle ad Ianuarium, in the booke of baptisme, against the Donatists in the 3. chapter, it is brought in again the 95. chap. Quis ne∣sciat distin. 9. Item in the booke of the vnity of churches in the 3. chapter. Item in the booke named de Genesi ad litteram. lib. 2. chap. 1. Item in the booke de peccatorum meri∣tis. lb. 1. cap. 22. In the booke de natura & gratia. cap. 51. and in his▪ 19. Epistle to S. Hierom. and is brought in in the cap. Ego solis dist. 29. Item againste Criscouium Grammaticum. lib. 2. cap 32. Item the 21. Epistle to the Bishop Fortunatus, and in the 112. Epistle to Paulinus. Item in the 3. booke agaynst Maximinus in the 3. chapter, and in many other places mo. Augustine here, who hath written in diuerse places. That wee ought to beleeue the holy Scripture only without any contradiction, and to trie & proue all other writinges and doctrines, howe substantiall soeuer they be: yea, all Councels, decrees, and ordinances, by the holy Scripture, as by the onely true & vncounterfeyted touchstone, and abolish and put away vtterly all, whatsoeuer doth not therewithall agree: for that all smel∣leth altogether of heresie. And where as he sayeth further. That when soeuer the Church doeth giue eare to any other voyce beside the onely voyce of her bridegrome, she is then become who∣rish,
and a wedlocke breaker: yea, and that they are all accursed, which go about to seduce the Bride of Christ, from her Bridegrome, to the doctrine and instituti∣ons of men, that is the plaine doctrine of Heretikes. For if that were so, all the be∣fore specified rules, ordinaunces, and de∣crees of the holy Church of Rome, should bee throwne downe, and troden vnder feet: yea, it must needes follow, that the holie Pope is accursed, & a verie Bawde, which hath made of the holy Catholike Church of Rome, a fowle shamelesse whore: Fie, fie, nay we will none of that. August. vpon these wordes of Iohn, who∣soeuer hath the bride. c & Athanasius in the begin¦ning of his booke a∣gainst the infidels. Origene in the 7. ho∣milie or ser¦mon vpon the prophet Ezechiel, and in the 7. homilie vpon Esaias, Hilarius vpon Matthaevv. Irinaeus in his 2. booke Cap. 56. agaynst Valenti∣nus. &c. and in his 72. Epistle. Let Augustine much rather be an Heretike, and all those that are of his opinion, as master Athana∣sius, Origine, Hilarius, Irinaeus, Tertullia∣nus, Cyprianus, Chrysostomus, and Hie∣ronymus: let them rather be burnt euen al vpon a heape. Although it be easie to iudge, that if they were liuing nowe in these dayes, they would be lothe to permitte any such grosse stuffe, either to be vttred with their tōgues, or published by their pennes: or if they did,
they must trudge with other into the fire. Yea, and Tertullian in his boke de Praescrip∣tionibus Haereticorū. Cyprianus in his ser∣mon of the baptising of Christ, and in his 3. Epistle ad Ceii▪ and is brought in in the chap. Siolus. dist. 5. where∣with doeth likewise agree Cap. Si frustra cadem distinct. Chrysostomus in the 4.9. Ser∣mon vpon the 24. chapter of Matthevv. Item vpon the 95. Psalme. Hieronymus vpon Matth. cap. 32. and vpon Esai. cap. Vino. Distinct. 37. and cap. Non adferamus 24. quaest. 1. Ambro∣sius vpon the 4. chap. of the epistle to the Corinthians.Ambrose must recant, and call backe againe, or eate vp with salt, that which he hath openly written, That al doc∣trine whatsoeuer, which hath not bene set forth and taught by the Apostles them∣selues, is▪ full of abhomination and knauerie. Therefore, all helpes not, that they come forth with their writings, thinking thereby to outface our deare mother the ho∣ly Churche of Rome. It is a verie yong woolfe that neuer heard any noyse: shee doeth no more esteeme these bragges, than if it had thundred at Colen: for she will be still on cockehorse, let them tosse and turne it the best they can. The .iii. Chapter VVherein is set foorth, that the Church of Rome hath likevvise povver and authoritie, ouer the auncient fathers, and may receiue, condemne, interpret, & vse them as shall please her holines.
The holy Church is aboue all auncient fathers.ANd now hereby doeth specially ap∣peare, that ye holy Church of Rome hath not power and authoritie onely ouer the scripture of the olde and new Te∣staments: but also ouer all the writing and doctrine of the olde fathers, as there are Irinaeus, Tertullianus, Basilius, Gregorius Nazian. Origin. Cyprian. Albin. Euseb. Arnobi. Ambro. Lactant. Cyril. Epipha∣nius, Theodoretus, Vigilātius, Appollina∣rius, Hieronymus, Chrysostomus, Augu∣stinus, Cedullius, Possidonius, Prosper, Si∣donius, Gelasius, Gregorius, Aluinus, Haymo, Bartramus, and other mo suche like.Bookes of the ancient fathers fal∣sified. For one she acceptes as good & Ca∣tholike, an other shee reiectes as naught & an Heretike: some she allowes with addi∣tions of certaine gloses, and Postils: other she referres to euery mans iudgement. V∣pon some she hath fathered (as their owne) certain straunge bookes, made at the least foure or fiue hundreth yeeres after they were dead: And others shee hath cleane plucked and robbed of their feathers. In summe, she doth tosse them and turne them euen as shee will: and windes them vp as short as a clewe of yarne. And wherefore should she not, I pray you? For she might
haue condemned them all for Heretikes, if she would, and in place of them haue taken in and receyued the writing and doctrine of Nicholaus, of Bion, of Apelles, Seuerus, Montanus, Sabellius, Paulus Samosate∣nus, Manes, Meletius, Aius, Marcellus, Macedonius, Euonius, Eutiches, Nesto∣rius, Donatus, Pelagius: and suche other mates. But now she hath giuen them that honour, that they are taken and counted for Catholik teachers: & these last she hath cō∣demned & banished for diuelish heretikes & false teachers. Not because that ye one had truly set forth the sincere word of God. And the other directly the contrarie: (for so she should againe submit herself vnder ye scrip∣ture:) but because it hath so pleased her. And therefore it is no reason, that those, to whom she hath geuen such honour, should now go about to ouercrow her holines, and force her with their writings, as though she ought to be subiect therevnto, No, no, they must stoope themselues, howe learned or godly soeuer they haue beene: and the holy Church must alway haue the authori∣tie and superioritie. For it is written in the decrees.Cap. Si Ro∣man, dist. . All whatsoeuer any other teachers
haue taught and written, that is to bee re∣ceiued or reiected, according as it shall please and be thought good to the Apo∣stolical seate of Rome. For the Pope is master ouer al, whatsoeuer any man can teach or write. Therefore ye see that ye holy Church may choose, & picke out of the olde fathers, what soeuer she findeth for her purpose: and what soeuer she perceiueth against her, shee may put out finely with a dash of a penne, and so esteeme it for false meant: as for example: Whensoeuer the olde fathers doe (with flo∣rishing reasons, and by a figuratiue maner of speaking) extoll and set forth the Sacra∣ment: out of that will she gather her tran∣substantiation. And whereas they doe no∣minate the Sacrament an holy offring or sacrifice, of that wil she fetch out her Masse with all the appartenances. And whensoe∣uer any thing is set out by them, to the lad and praise of the true seruantes and Prea∣chers of Gods word, thereof doth she make a kingdome of priests, and a popish Monarchy is to say a realme or region, go∣uerned at the wil and discretion of one man onely. Mo∣narchie. And when as they do highly praise the holy Saints & martyrs deceased, there∣vpō commes abrode the praying to saints. And in such places as they do earnestly set
forth and highly prayse good workes, and godly liuing: therevpon can she by and by builde vp the pleasant Palace of free will: and then she sayles with a faire wind. And then are the olde Fathers followed in all points: yea, there is nothing else talked of here nor there, but, The olde fathers, The olde fathers. But now on the contrarie part, whereas Augustine in his boke de Praedesti∣natione sā∣ctorum, in the booke de bona per seuerantia, de natura & gratia, de fide & ope∣ribus. de per¦fectione iu∣stitiae, tho∣roughly. Item in his retrac∣tations. Itē vpon the 70. Psal. and vpō the 31. Psal. and in many other places mo. S. Augustine doth write whole bookes of ye Predestination of saints, of the special & vndeserued mercie of God, through Iesus Christ, that fayth onely iustifieth: of the weakenesse and dulnesse, yea of the dam∣nablenesse of mans free will, and of the ad∣nihilation of our deseruings: all that is no∣thing else but heresie, and going astray. Whereas Ambr. vpon the epistle to the Romanes, and in the booke of Isaac and the soules. Chrysostome in his sermon of adding to the holy Gospell vpon the wordes of Paule to the Philippians. on the first. It is no matter how, so that Christ bee preached. And in the 4. Homilie or Sermon of Penance. Ambrose and Chrysostome do teache, yt we shal not take men or dead crea∣tures for our aduocats before God, but on∣ly Christ. And where Augustine in his booke of true Religion, and in the Booke called Con∣fessiones. In the 10. Booke and 42. chapter. Item in his 4. booke to Boniface in the 4. chapter. August. saith that we
shall not pray vnto Saintes, nor erect for our▪ selues particularly anie Chappels or Altars, nor pray before Tumbes: as the sayde Agustinus in his first book of the vse and pro∣fessiō of holy Church. 34 Chapter, and in the 44. Epi∣stle writen to Maxi∣minus. Augustine and Leo doe beare per∣fect witnesse, that neither the dead, nor de∣seruing of Saints, can any thing helpe vs, to the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, but onely the death and merites of Iesus Christ. And as Augustine vpon Iohn in the 24. treatise. Leo in his fiftenth E∣pistle to the Palestins. Epiphanius doeth esteeme it, for a shamefull heresie, and an abhominable blasphemie of God, that men shoulde praye eyther to Marie Gods mother, or to anie other Saint: but that must be co∣uered with some blewe glose for a cloake. As also the sayde Epipha∣nius in the the thirde part of the thirde Booke of Heresies, in fiftie and one Heresie. This doeth Epiphanius set foorth, in the Epi∣stle written to Iohn Bishop of Hierusalem, which Epistle is set forth by Saint Hierome, like as appeareth in the third volume of his Bookes. Theophilactus vpon the twentie and fiue Chapter of Matthew. Epiphanius doeth vt∣terlie chace the images, as well of Christ, as of anie other Saint, out of the Church, and breakes them in peeces, forbidding men plainely to suffer anie such abhomi∣nations.
And as Ambros. vpon the e∣pistle to the Romanes, the 1. chap. of the death of the Em∣peror Theo¦dosius, in the 3 part of his bokes August. in his 49 epis. to Deo gra∣tias presb. & vpon the 113 Psal and whole tho∣rough in his booke de ciuit. dei. Lactantius whole tho∣rough in al his bokes and special∣ly in the 2. chap of his 2. booke, and in the 5. booke of Gods iustice in the 8 chap. Origen in his 4. booke against Celsus. Athanasius in his booke against infidels. Clem. in the 6. booke Stromaton, and in the booke called Protrepticos. Hieronymus in the explana∣tion of the 65. chapter of the prophet Esai. Chrysostome in his sermon vpon the 2. and 11. chap to the Hebr. and in his 2. sermon of Lazarus. August. in his 54. epist. to Maced. & in his 66 serm. of the time, and Hypog. the 9. booke against Pelagius.Ambrosius, Augustinus, Lac∣tantius, Origenes, Athanasius, Clemens Alexandrinus, with many other, do teache plainly, that God will not bee worshipped with any likenesses or images, either pain∣ted or carued. The holy Church is deafe at this, & wil in no wise vnderstand it. Where as Cyprianus, Hieronymus, Chrysostom. and Augustinus, doe say and defende, that after this life is neither any more time nor place to make amendes for our sinnes, or obteine any mercy or forgiuenes at Gods hands: there she shrinks backe into her shel, and lettes her hoode hearken to that. And where as the said Cyp in tract de simplicitate praelat. and is rehersed. cap. loquī. dom. 24. quaest. 1. Hier. vpō the epist of Tit. 1. cap. Chrysost. hom. 35. and the 20. chapter of Matthew, and standes cap. vlt. dom. 40. Cyprianus and Hiero∣nymus do stoutly teach, That al Ministers & true Preachers of Gods worde haue like power, in what place soeuer they be, whe∣ther it be at Rome, or at Naples, or amōg the Indies, or in Tartaria: all that is ped∣lers
French to our holy mother the church of Rome, whereas Gregorius doth plain∣ly write, and in diuerse places sayeth, That whatsoeuer he be, that names him∣selfe a general Bishop, or The chiefe head and principall of all Bishops, he is the very messenger of Antichrist, and the Gregorius in the epist. ad Eulogiū Patriarch of Alexan∣dria, and in the 35. epis. to Iohn Bi¦shop of Cō∣stantinople, and in the 6 booke of the epistle to Maurice. ca. 94. Pelagius ca. nullus dist 99. Gregorius in the 4. booke of letters. cap. 80. Col. 2. against the Bishop of Constantinople, wherewith Augustine doth likewise agree in his thirde booke against Do∣tius, in the thirde chapter, saying▪ Let no man take vpon him to be bishop of bishops. Tertullian in the 4. booke agaynst Merio Augustinus. against Amantius, in his first booke 12. chapter Cy∣prian in his 2 epistle vnto Pope Cornelius. Augustinus in the Booke sententiarum. of Prosperus and is set foorth cap. dum frangitur de consecra. dist. 2. and in his 26. treatie vpon Iohn. Hieronymus in the ▪3. chapter vpon Sophanius. Gelasius in the cap. compeimus de consecra. dist 2. and many other mo. sonne of the diuell, for that neither hee nor no man liuing, can beare the name of a gene∣rall Bishop, without the vtter defacing of the seruice of the Church. But that must be vnderstood with a prouiso, to wit, The Pope of Rome alwayes excepted. Nowe, whereas k Tertulianus, Augusti∣nus, Theodoretus, and many other moe, doe expounde these wordes of the Sacra∣ment This is my bodie, sacramentally, and say, that it is a figure, a signe, and a seale of the bodie of Christ that was offred vp and broken for vs: then is there nothing to say,
but God helpe you. There is no bodie at home. Whereas they doe generallie with one consent teache and stoutely main∣teine, that the Supper of the Lorde ought to bee ministred vnto all men vnder both kindes: that smelles of a Ratte, the Cow is broken loose. Whereas Irinaeus in his 5. booke against he∣resies, which is of Areas, and Andreas, bi∣shops of e¦saraea after∣wards fol∣lowed. Tertullian. in his boke against the Iewes, in the 3 booke agaynst Merchio Hierony∣mus, in his epistle to Marcellus. Irinaeus, who wrote that (about a hundred yeres af∣ter saint Iohn the Apostle) the number of the beast whereof Saint Iohn speaketh in his Reuelation or vision, doeth meane by this word Latinos, the Romish or the La∣tine Church and regiment: and ye Tertul. & Hieronymus, do expound the beast wt seuen hornes for the citie of Rome: that is al bib∣ble babble. In summe, whensoeuer they set forth or teach any thing that soūds not wel in the eares of our deare mother the holy Church, she lettes them be packing, with∣out any mention making of them: or else she correctes them throughly, considering yt they are but men, and may erre. And wher∣fore? For that she is not subiect to the wri∣tings of the fathers, neither can her autho∣ritie be subiect to their iudgement: but she (as wee haue saide before) is aboue the fa∣thers, and gouerneth them, turnes and winds them as she will, & forceth them euē
as she thinkes good. And whatsoeuer they haue written, must bee sifted through her sie, to picke out thereof the finest flowre. For otherwise (seeing that the olde fathers do oftentimes differ amongst themselues, and other whiles write contrarie to that which they haue set downe before: and al∣wayes (for the most part) haue done direct∣ly agaynst the opinion and dealing of the holie Church of Rome,) howe should: yea, howe shoulde men make good cloth of such yarne, if it were not that the holy Church of Rome did giue her iudgement and sen∣tence on their dooings, and did chewe the pappe before in her owne mouth, to put the same with more facilitie and easinesse into ours her sucking babes, as it were with a Spoone, giuing vs that which she alloweth for good, and casting the rest a∣way which tastes not well in her mouth, in∣to a corner. The summe of all is, that we maye not make anie foundation of our faith vpon the writings of the olde fathers, vnles they haue first bene vnder the hands of the holie Catholike Church of Rome, and be by her ouerseene, and set forth, as shall seeme good to her holinesse.
The iiii. Chapter. VVherein is set foorth, that the Church of Rome is not subiect to anie Councell: but maye ap∣proue, or disanull them, according as shee shall thinke best for her ovvne benefite: And this is confirmed by many examples and profounde reasons. BVt nowe are there some such grosse fellowes,The Holy Church a∣boue all Councels. which notwithstanding they do see, that the Church is aboue the Scriptures, and aboue all the doctrine and Writinges of the olde Fathers, yet they thinke, that her power and authoritie maye be (as it were) compassed in, and paled a∣bout by the Councels: So that there should be nothing receiued for a commaundement of the church, but it must first be concluded by a Councell. And what soeuer were once there cōcluded and agreed vpon, with that, neither the church of Rome should medle, nor the Pope haue anie thing to doe. Yea, mary, these good felowes, O they come in due season: they might a great deale better haue tarried at home. For consider, seeing that all the Prophetes and Apostles, and likewise the old Fathers altogether: yea, & Iesus Christ the very Sonne and trueth of God himself, could neuer so binde nor make subiect the holy church, that she should yeeld
and submit her selfe to their writing and doctrine onely: howe doe these felowes thinke then, that the Councels should haue greater power to bring her within their parke and pases, considering that they are men which haue so often times erred: yea, and swarued cleane from the trueth? Wee know well ynough, that the Councel Ari∣minense, Sirmiense, and Seleucense, did in the time of Constantine the great, fortifie the heresie of the Arrians, with their De∣crees. The seconde Councel of Ephesus, did cleue vnto the Heretike Eutyches, and did blasphemously and confusedly mingle the two natures of Christe together. The councel of Carthago, in the time of Cypri∣an, which was holden before the first coun∣cel of Nicene, did conclude, That heretikes ought to be christened againe? But what needeth al this? Was not Christ him selfe iudged & cōdemned in a generall councel at Hierusalem, which was the chosen citie of God? And yt the councels haue often times erred, & may lightly erre, it appereth plain∣ly inough, by ye witnessing of Gregorie Na∣zianzene,Generall councel ne∣uer came to any good ende. who was accustomed to say, That he neuer saw coūcell that tēded to a good end. Yea, do we not see, how there haue bin many coūcels, whose proceedings haue bin
flat against the doctrine & institutions set forth by our holy mother ye church: and yet would defend their doings by ye holy scrip∣ture? But what a good yere! Can ye coūcels preuaile against ye church of Rome, they ha∣uing no power nor authoritie at all, other thā is giuē them by our holy father ye pope? How (I pray you) should yt then hang toge∣ther, yt they should be placed at ye vpper end, not only aboue ye pope, but aboue the whole church? Is it not written in ye booke of the decretals,Cap signifi. ffaiunt, & de electione & electi po∣stea. That no coūcel can in any thing forbid the holy church, nor set any com∣mandment ouer her: considering that all coūcels haue bin at her appointment, and receiued their power & authoritie frō her holinesse? And that in al statutes, ordinan∣ces & decrees of the coūcels, the authori∣tie of the Pope is excepted & exempted? See we not likewise, yt in the councel of La∣teran, it was cōcluded,In the coū¦cel of Late∣ran holden at Rome, an. 1519. & 20. in the end of the 2. ses. and 1. councell of Trent in the 2. decree of the 4. sessiō. & likewise in the last coūcel at Trent cōfirmed, That the Pope is aboue al coūcels, & the statute & ordināce of the coūcel of Basil (afore time made to ye cō∣trary) was cleane taken away, & abolished: Notwithstanding, Pope Nicholas con∣sented & was willing to the making of the same. In this behalfe, it was verie wisely
considered of the holy Fathers, assembled in the said Councel of Trent,Councel of Trent. whereas be∣fore they would fully conclude vpon any ar∣ticle, they did send all that they had deter∣mined vpon, in a sacke, or small packe to Rome, to haue of the Pope a Bull of com∣firmation therevnto. For, out of that proce∣ded a wonderful braue and pleasant melo∣die: because that therein our holy father the Pope did coūterfeit the personage of God the Father. And the holy councel of spiritu∣al fathers there assembled together, were likened to the holy Ghost: so that the com∣mō people were wont to say, that whē they sent their stuffe towards Rome, The holye ghost was shut vp in a male:The holy Ghost shut in a male. as the Poet Homer writes, that in elder dayes Aeolus the king of winds, did giue vnto his good friend Vlysses, a male, wherein al the winds were shut & packt vp together, ye Westerne wind only excepted, which he must needes occupie him selfe, to bring him home. And euen so went the matter betwene the holye ghost & the wind of ye holy fathers of Trent, And nowe, when the father and the holy Ghost were agreed in one, and that the bulles were sealed, they sent them with ex∣pedition and hast to their dearely beloued
sonnes, the Kings of Fraunce and Spaine, and required of them by a Spanishe In∣quisition, to procure the saide Bulles and Decrees to be thoroughly obserued & kept in their Countries. So that the father,"Or, Ty∣rannicall torture. the sonne, & the holy Ghost, were all one heart and one soule: And haue iointly receiued & established all the Decrees of the said coū∣cel. And how (I pray you) could it come to passe otherwise: considering that the Bi∣shops and Cardinals, are created by their holy father the Pope, and haue promised, & are bounde by a strong and speciall othe, not to take vpon them, nor to conclude anie thing, without hauing first the counsell and consent of their Creator: As it is well and precisely set forth and concluded of our holy father Calixtus, writing, That it is not in any wise permitted to the Bishoppes,Capi. Non decet. dist. 1 to withstand the Church of Rome in anie point, or to do, or attempt anie thing a∣gainst the same. Yea (saith he) as the sonne did come to fulfill the will of his Father: euen so are all Christian people bounde to followe and fulfill the will of their deare mother the Churche of Rome, whereof the Pope (without all doubte) is the heade.
And this was the reason & occasion which moued ye right honourable Cardinal Reig∣nold Poole,In the Booke of the Coun∣cel in the 14 15. and 16. quest. one of the three Lieutenāts of the Pope, in the said councel, to write with great discretion and authoritie, That the whole conuocation of the people, or comon sorte, gathered together, haue no authoritie in the world to conclude, determine, or de∣cide vpō any matter, or matters, presented before the councel: but that the same belōgs properly to the Pope, who onely is Gods Lieutenant or Deputie, & shepheard of the lost and straying sheepe. Vpon this intent alone (saith he) is a councell called free, cō∣mon,Loke in the leafe follow¦ing. or general: and not that therefore eue∣rie one in general is free and licensed there to set forth his or their owne opinion, or to determine or conclude any thing: for that is specially forbiden by the Councell of Con∣stance, in special and plaine wordes: That no man,In the coū¦cel of Con∣stāce, in the 15. session. of what state & condition soeuer he be: yea, although hee were an Empe∣rour, a King, Bishop, or Cardinall, shall presume, or take vpon him to speake or dispute against anie matter which the ho∣ly Fathers (by the inspiration of the holy Ghost) are purposed and intēded to esta∣blishe, vpon paine to be excommunicated
and banished: yea, to bee cast into a don∣geon. Vpon these considerations, was Iohn Hus and Hieronymus of Prage also burnt: because they would dispute by the Scrip∣tures, vpon those matters, which the holie Fathers had in hand to reason and cōclude vpon. It is a common saying, Hee doeth wisely, that is warned by another mannes harme. And yet, notwithstanding this ex∣ample of Iohn Hus, there was in the last councell of Trent, a Bishop so stout, that he presumed boldly to say, That we ought not to call the Pope, The most holie Father: but simplie, The holy Father: considering that Christ did not name his heauenly Father any otherwise, thā holy Father:Iohn 17. & for that the Pope can not be greater than God, whose vicar in earth he nameth him selfe to be. But if ye same Bishop had not quickly stop∣ped his mouth, that word would haue bin a deere word to him. For they were about to haue put him straight way in a hole, where he should haue learned to know ye popes au∣thority better. And likewise,Read here∣of Pet. Pau. Ver. who was a gret while in that coūcell him selfe. had not Petrus Paul. Verge. bishop, wt other brablers, pac∣ked away betimes, they would haue played
the like parte with euerie one of them, as they did with Iohn Hus at Constance. For although hee was a Bishop: yea, and had before bene a Legate, and the Popes Deputie, yet he must haue lerned to know, that the Bishops,That is, Touch not the head: Prelates, and Cardi∣nals, were not called thither to control and take vp with taunts their holy Father and creatour,That is, For so it pleaseth vs the Pope of Rome: much lesse to correct Magnificat, out of Paules writing: but rather simplie, Inclinato capite, to say, Placet, vnto that, which in the name of the holy fathers might be proponed to them: and then further, to helpe to keepe ye breade from moulding, like as a great while agoe, by a Poet was prophesied vppon them, saying: Nos numeri sumus, & fruges consu∣mere nati, &c. That is so say: We are a great number, And bellie gods borne: Deuourers of victuals, Consumers of corne. Nowe, seeing that the Bishops & Pre∣lates, haue no other voyces in the Councel, but bare woordes, accounted for syphers, to increase the heape: how much lesse shall
anie thing be permitted or graunted to the Laie men, which are not there receiued nor seene, neither in the Brew house, nor Bake house. In summe, the Councell is not cal∣led Oicomenicum, or General;Wherefore the Coun∣cell is called General. as though euerie man might come & thrust in his nose there. Wherefore then? Because it is as an image or pageant vnto vs, and as a demon∣stratiō or shew of a play or enterlude, which doeth represent & set out before our eyes the common & generall Church of God, which hearken fully and wholy vnto the voyce of their shepheard, namely, ye Pope of Rome: as was well noted and marked by the fore∣said Cardinal Reignold Poole. And it was likewise openly set foorth, in the Bull of the said Councell of Trent, that it is, and ought to be of right, named a General or common Councel, for this occasion, because all christendome generally are bounde to holde,In the Bull De editio. of the coun∣sels which begin thus, quum prop. and was set forth an. 1545 the 6. of De¦cemb. in the name of pope Paul the third. and to celebrate ye same with deuoute prayers. And to that ende, they are by the Pope earnestlie put in remembrance, that they goe to shrift, and fast vppon the Wednes∣day, Frydaye, and Saturdaye: And then on the Sunday be howseled, and go prun∣king in the Procession, and deale their al∣mes:
or at the least say fiue Pater nosters, & fiue Aue Maries: by the vertue whereof, they shall receiue a sufficient pardon of all their sinnes, &c. What can they desire more? For as touching the sitting in the Chapter house, and there Sententiam sub∣verbo placet proferre: that is, To saye A∣men,These are the words of the Buls of Indictiō and to nodde at that, which is pro∣nounced vnto them: that is permitted on∣ly to such, as of right ought to doe it, or to whom it is graunted by special priuiledge: as chiefly to the right honourable, the bre∣thren of the Pope, to witte, the Bishops & Archbishops, and his deare sonnes the Ab∣bats, and other such like, as hee him selfe doeth set it foorth in the Bull Indictio∣nis.Bulla Indi∣ctionis. Therefore truely were the Dukes of Germanie, & the Protestantes in a wrong boxe, when they said, That it was no Free, and Generall, or Common Councell. For a sheepe with one eye, would haue marked that, that it was neither forbidden them, nor no man else in the worlde, to come to Trent, there to spende their money, to holde the Councell, and celebrate it, with hearing of Masses, with Fasting, and with the saying of fiue Pater nosters, and
fiue Aue Maries: yea, the whole pardon was as well graunted vnto them, as to anie Bishoppe or Prelate, or other that was there. But that was not the place where the muscles laye: They would glad∣lie haue had manie voyces in the Chap∣ter house, and not to haue declared their meaning with that woorde (Placet) one∣lie: but that they might likewise haue dis∣puted freelie, and brought in, and alled∣ged the Scriptures of God: yea, they would haue had it flatlie graunted, that the Pope of Rome should not haue bene head and President of the Councell: but that euerie thing should bee concluded out of the woorde of God. But (beleeue me) the holy fathers, and the Pope, were not so foolishe: they did see more deepely into the matter. For, if they hadde once taken and put that horsse heame or collar about their neckes, then were all the fatte in the fire, and so the whole Church of Rome would not after∣wardes haue bene worth the paring of a rotten apple. No, no, I warraunt you. They will take heede of that. For there is one point whiche you shall neuer wrest nor wring out of their handes, which is,
That all Councelles are lame, maymed, creeple, and blinde: yea, vtterly voyde of a∣nie power, vnles the holy Pope of Rome be their President, directing and gouer∣ning the same, as he thinketh good. For he is the verie eye, and the fiue wittes of the Councelles: Therefore was it in the sayde Councel of Laterane,Read the Bull of the Councell of Laterane, set forth in an. 1512. in name of Pope Iul. 2. verie circumspectly concluded, That though all Cardinalles, Bishoppes, and Prelates were assembled, although they were barrelled vp together like herring: yet can they not holde anie Councell without the authoritie, will, con∣sent and commaundement of the Pope, if they should otherwise doe, they should bee playne heretikes, and vngodly men: yea, they should be esteemed, thought, and taken as Chore, Dathan, and Abiram. The same was also before that, forespoken and cōclu∣ded by the holy Father Pelagius 2. who did openly set forth,This is written in the book of Councels in the 2. booke and in the De∣crees chap. multis den. dist. 17▪ That all Councels, which were holden without the Popes consent, and commandement, are not to be repu∣ted or accompted for Councels, but for Conciliables, that is to say, for Riots, and vnlawfull assemblies. And that is the same which the Popes, Marcellus, Iulius, Damasus, Gregorius, &
other mo, did likewise iointly ordeyne and determine, as is plainly to be seene in the book of Decrees, in ye 17. distinctiō:Chap Imo dum, in the 17. dist. where it is in like maner by the Scriptures▪ con∣firmed: As for exāple, out of the 81. psalme, where it is written, I haue saide, you are Goddes. Againe, What soeuer you binde in earth, that is bound in heauen, &c. And it is also established & made sure with strōg reasons: For that worshipful brother Tho∣mas Vio, did openly declare in the said coū∣cel of Laterane, That those which goe a∣bout to make the Pope subiect to the coū∣cels, do euen like vnto them,Looke in the fosaid Councell Lateranen. in the 2. ses. that woulde make the father obedient to the childe: the head inferior to the foote: the captein seruant to his soldiers: & the shepeheard vnderling to his sheepe. So yt now, Christ is no more made any accōpt of in ye coūcels, nor his word any whit estemed: but ye pope hath al the charge & authoritie alone: he on∣ly is enseigne bearer, & he doth set al in or∣der. And vpon that occasion it was determi¦ned, That ye coūsel of Pisa, being assembled without ye Popes cōsent, was no assemblie of Hierusalem, but of the towre of Babylō, yt is to say, A curse & confusion. In sūme, it is apparant, yt al coūcels & ordinances in ye
worlde, and do nothing against the Popes might, nor against the authoritie of the Church: for she hath ouergrowen the rod: She cares neither for scriptures nor Coū∣celles: shee hath the holy Ghost pinned on her sleeue, and may doe euen what so euer shee will. And therefore it is, that when soeuer the Pope doeth set forth anie Bulles, then doth he commonly adde this clause or conclusion to the same: Non obstantibus constituti∣onibus, & ordinationibus Apostolicis, coeterisq́ue contrarijs quibuscunque, that is to saye: Notwithstanding all constitu∣tions, ordinances or commandements A∣postolicall, nor any other thing what soe∣uer, contrarie herevnto. Like as doeth specially appeare by the Bull of Pope Paule 3. set forth at the Coū∣cell of Trent, in the yeere 1544. the 23. of Februarie. So that he will not giue to all the Apostles, to all the holy fathers, nor all the Councelles, scarse one good worde: yea, rather, he mockes, & playes bo peepe with them all, and so goes on forwards with his busines: For otherwise, if the matter were not thus handled, I would not giue a pud∣ding, for all the power and authoritie of
the holy Church of Rome. For, to beginne withall, these Heretikes would giue her a rappe vpon the pate with the Councel of Mantua,The Coū∣cell of Man∣tua. which was holden vnder Pope Alexander the seconde, in the tyme of the Emperour Henrie the fourth: where was concluded: That all those, which by Simonie, that is to say, by bribe∣rie or giftes had obteyned anie spirituall promotion, or office, should be depriued.Simonie of the Clergie Aha, the mother of God: where can you finde, nowe a dayes, any Chaplein or bene∣ficed man, Bishop, or Cardinall, that clim∣beth to that preferment, without moneie or rewardes? Secondarily, they would come & plague vs with the Councel of Rome,Councell of Rome. which was holdē in the time of the Emperour Phocas, where was ordeined irreuocably, & neuer to be called backe againe, That all such, as with anie giftes or rewardes, or other like promises, were mounted vp,Simonie of Bishops to weare mi∣ters, should be banished and excommuni∣cated. Yea marie syr, it were better that ye Councels were al at the gallowes, thā the holy church should be subiect to that order. Then after this might they come in, and dashe vs in the teeth, with the Councell
of Triburine,Triburine. which did forbid any money to be takē for buryings:Burying. what a gods name, who could digest that morsel? And to this they would adde the Councel of Basil,Coū. of Ba∣sil the 21 ses. where was plainely and sharpely ordeined, That he Court of Rome shall not take any money for any Dispensati∣ons, Elections, Postulations, Presentatiōs, nor any other Ecclesiastical offices, autho¦rities, benefices, hallowings, blessings, no not for the very Pallium, or Bishops man∣tle: neither to be paid vnder the colour of bulles, seales, nor ānuales, by what colour or pretence soeuer they might be done. Aha, friend: What an Eclipse would that breede in the Popes purse? They would also come forth with ye Coun∣cel of Mentz,Councel of Mentz. which was holden in the time of Carolus Magnus, where was ordeyned, That there should bee giuen againe, and restitution made of al the goods & lands, which by bequest, last will, or testament, had bene left to anie of the Spiritualtie, tending to anie losse or hinderance of the right heires. Goddes populorum! That were too bitter a Pill to swallowe and digest. Then would they assaulte vs, with the
Councell of Laterane,Con. of La∣terane. whereat by Pope Nicholas 2. and fourteene Bishops, was verie solemnly, and irreuocably concluded. That the Pope of Rome should be chosen by nomination, the whole common peo∣ple assembled together, the spiritualtie, with the Colledge of Cardinalles pre∣sent. And if it shoulde bee prooued, that any man should by rewardes, giftes, bribes, or any other indirect meanes, at∣taine to the same roome, the same should not onely be banished,The Pope an heretike and Apo∣stata. but should likewise be taken for a shamelesse heretike, a back∣slider from Christ, and an Apostata. So that it should be lawfull to pull him out of his seat, &c. Aha, my masters, what a piece of worke were that? By that meanes they might ouerthrowe, and cleane roote out the holy Church of Rome. Moreouer & besides, they would proue, ye pope Eugenius was by ye councel of Basil, iudicially condemned for an horrible Here∣tike, and a shamelesse knaue: and was de∣posed from his seate, as a wicked vile vil∣leyne, who yet notwithstanding was after, by fine handling and prettie practises of si∣monie, and also with force holpen againe into his seate: and of him euer since, vntill
this our time are al Bishops, Cardinals, & Popes, yea, and all priests in general, bred and sprung vp like a litter of pigges farro∣wed of a fruitful sow. Al which, one with an other, head & taile, should be banished, and esteemed for heretikes, & vngodly knaues, if it were so, that the Councels might beare any swinge, against the authoritie and esti∣mation of the sea of Rome, and our mother the holy Church: but yt I assure you woulde be to feareful a matter. And therefore must we (of necessitie) conclude, That the Coū∣cels can in no wise ouerrule ye Church, nor by their cōmandments or ordinances cōpel her to any thing, no more than a Spiders web can hold or kepe fast a Pie, or a Crow. But al Councels must be subiect to the ho∣ly Church, euen as an obedient child is sub∣iect to his mother: yea, and they must al∣wayes daunse after her Pype. Therefore, when as these Heretikes and Huguenotes, do bring in a great heape of these Councels, to strēgthen their doctrine withal, agaynst the Romish Church, they do but breake their braines in vaine. They may well  auace,In the▪ 36. chapter of the councell Eliberi. that the Councell E∣liberinum in Spaine, which was holden a∣bout the yeere 300. in the time of Constan∣tine
the great, did plainely ordeine, That there should bee no Images in the Chur∣ches, nor in no wise to paint,Images forbidden. or carue any thing to be prayed vnto. And they may alledge, that in the twelfe Councell of Toledo, in two Councels of Constantinople, the one vnder Constan∣tius the fift, the other vnder Constanti∣nus the sixt: and likewise, in a Councell in Fraunce, vnder Carolus Magnus, did all with one voyce, consent in the same. But we can not heare on that side. They may likewise bring in apace,In the first booke of Councels. oli. 627. chap 3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. and so fol∣lowing to 25. Con Affric. can. 81 82.83. Mileuitano can. 3.4.5. and in the decrees, can placuit vt quicun{que} ca. quisquis dixerit gra∣tiam de cō∣secra. dist. 4. and alledge, That the Concilium Auristanum, did clearly ouerthrow mans free will, and iustification by workes: teaching that all our righteousnes, all the good works that we can do, and al that is in vs, must be im∣puted to the only goodnes & vndeserued mercye of God: that it is not in our na∣tural power to prepare our selues to mer∣cie: but that we must receiue al euē as beg¦gers by mere gift through meeknes of the spirit. But in all this they do but loose their labour: and it is euen as much, as if they would cut the aire in twaine: for we do not esteeme al they can say worth a rushe. That being done, they may bring in
apace for witnesses, the Councels Affrica∣num, and Mileteranum, wherin saint Au∣gustine did set forth such stuffe, as were y∣nough to shame them, all praying to saints vtterly ouerthrowen: for that there was by perfect proofe and expresse Scriptures proued and concluded, That neither is, nor euer hathe beene on the earth so holie a man, (Christ onely excepted) which hath not bene spotted with sinne himselfe, and had neede continually to pray for remis∣sion and forgiuenesse of his owne sinnes. So farre doth it differ from that then, that the Saintes should haue any sparkle of de∣seruings remaining ouerplus. But al these authorities are not worth a nut shell: nei∣ther will we receiue their witnesses. Moreouer, whereas they make much a doe with vs, that the first councel of Read the Churchly historie of Socrates, the 11. Cap. of the first booke▪ and Sozomen. in the 22. chap. of the 2. booke, & the decrees Cap. Nicena Syno dist. 1. & Con. Nicen did consent, That it was lawfull for priests to marie, and that the Councel of Gan. Can. 1.4.9.10.14. and in the decrees Si quis discernit. Diincti. 28 ca. Si quis nuptias. cap Si quis vel virginitatem. cap. si quis proprer Deum. dist. 30. & cap. Si quis vitupera. dist. 31. Gan∣gren did curse and banish all such, as vn∣der the colour of any cloyster, religion, or spirituall state should forsake their wiues,
or deface the state of matrimonie,Read the decrees▪ ca. quoniam in Romano. Dist. 31. Wher∣vnto the Councell called sexta Synodus, cō∣senting, did further and aboue that ordeine, That no man should require of any priest, to make the vowe of chastitie, vnles they of themselues were willing so to do. But all this is euen as much as to knocke at a deafe mans doore. And if that they also (out of the sayde Councell of Con. Gā. can. 2. and in the decrees. can. Si quis car∣nem dist. 30 Gangrensis,) and out of the Councell of Con. An∣cyrano. 27. Ancerano) kept about the same time of the Councell of Nicene, will go about to perswade vs, that they that eat flesh vpō the Fryday, or in the Lent, should not be punished nor condemned: yea, and that in matters of Con. Grā. in the con∣clusiō of the Councel. mariage, and eating of meates, we may not charge mens consci∣ences, by the vertue of any newe lawe or bond: al that is of Dauie Duttons dreame, and wee  wise giue anye eare vn∣to it. Furthermore, they will bragge muche, vpon the first Councels of Con. Nice. in the▪ 6. Ca¦non, like as Ruffi▪ doth set it forth in his hy∣storie. Nicene, and of Con. Cō∣stt. can. 2. beginning Qui vl a quamque Diocsim sunt Epis∣copi &c. Constantinople, for that they did or∣deine, That the Bishop of Rome shall not haue any authoritie or irisdiction out of his owne borders, (to witte, the landes nigh adioyning to Rome.) And againe,
vpon the Councel of And per∣use the coū∣cel of Affri∣ca, in the first booke of the coun∣cels thee you haue these orders can. 92. and at the end of the coūcels, are the let∣ters of the coūcel writ¦ten to the Popes, Bo∣nifacius and Celetinus. Affrica, whereas the craft and falshoode of the Popes of Rome, Sosimus, Bonefacius, & Coelestinus, were knowen and declared, (who had sought by falsifying of the Councell of Nicene, to mainteine their authorities.) Wherevpon it was ordeyned, That no man shoulde for any matter of difference appeale to Rome, or ouer the Sea. Which was also establi∣shed in the Councell Mileetano. Wee haue runne to long before the dogges, to be afrayde of these matters. Therefore they may go shooe the goose, and make children afrayde with that, which they bring forth out of the third Councel of Con. Can.  Can. . Carthago,In the cō. of Mil. ca. 21. Read also can. prisb. 11. quaest. 4. and can. psal. 4. vt presb. 2. quaest. . and of the Councell of Con. Aff. can.  and in the decrees ca. 1. dist. 9. Cap. Con. di 10. ca nul∣fas est dist. 1. Affrica: As that no man might take vpon him to be called The chiefest of the Bishops: or, The chiefe Bi∣shop: or, High Priest: yea by the Roode, well sayde: wee haue our aunswere readie ynough for that matter, which is, That men maye in no wise take vpon them to keepe or holde anie Councell at all: yea, though they were neuer so well defended, both by the▪ Scriptures in the Bible: and by the holie fathers: vnlesse they doe well and fully agree with the holy Church of Rome: for she hath full power and au∣thoritie
to alter all Councels, and to make them voyde, of no value, nor effect: euen as shee shall thinke good: and to ex∣plane them as shall serue best for her pur∣pose: yea, to tumble and tosse them top∣sie turuie, euen as shall best serue her turne. And therefore, where as menne pre∣sume so muche to alledge and bring in, the ordinaunces of the Popes, Gelasius,Ca. Consi∣dimus 25. quaest. 1. ca∣nulli. 25. quaest. 1. and Hilarius, whiche saye, that the Sea of Rome is more subiect and obedient to the Councels, than anie other man: ey∣ther the Councell of Basile,The coun∣cel of Basil aboue the Pope. wherein was determined and concluded, That the Councell is aboue the Pope: yea, and that the Councell maye depose the Pope: All that is not woorth a strawe. For all the Balles that are serued on that syde the Tenise Court, are easilye smitten backe and turned at the rebounde, with halfe a woorde speaking: to witte: Sal∣uo in omnibus iure Romanae Eccle∣siae: Which is too saye, The right and authoritie of the Churche of Rome, in all pointes reserued. For this is the verie taie of euerie Councell, wherewith
they are turned about as with a rudder, e∣euen whither the Pope will haue them. The v. Chapter. VVherein is taught, that the canons and decrees of Popes, can not binde the Romish Churche, but that she is sill aboue all decrees, and maye breake and adnihilate the same,The Ro∣mish church & the Pope aboue aca∣nons and decrees. Cap. 4. Cap. viola∣tores. 25. quaest. 1. ca. nemini. 17. quaest. 4. ca. de libelis. dist. 20. cap. nul. fas est. dist 19. This is set foorth with plaine wordes in the chapter Ideo permt tente ff. his ia. 25. quaes. 1. Read like wise cap. preceptis. dis 12. & ca. Si quis. 17. quaest 4. so as shee shall thinke good. THis same must be vnderstoode of all the former decrees, and canons of all the Popes deceased. For although it be cleare, that they are inspirattons of the holy ghost, against which it is not lawful for any man to speake: so as whosoeuer doeth despise them, is voide of the Catholike and Apostolike beliefe: yet that notwithstan∣ding, they cannot therefore by any meanes close or shut vp ye authoritie of the Church. And wherfore? For that there is one com∣mon rule of the holy Church set foorth, for an vndoubted article of our fayth, which is, That the Romish church is she, which doth giue to all Popes decrees, their full power and might: prouided alwayes, that she her selfe, is not in any wise subiect to ye same, by reason that she hath a ful power always to make such decrees and ordinances, when
soeuer it shall please her, as hauing power, and being heade ouer all Churches, from which poynt no man maye dissent. So, after this manner, doeth shee giue and graunt to the decrees,Popes a∣gainst their owne de∣crees. full power and au∣thoritie, with this exception, That she her selfe will in no wise, incline or yeelde to the same: but that she may do any thing agaynst the same, whensoeuer it shall please her. Euen like as Christ did teach the people, as hauing might, authoritie, and power of himselfe, and not like vnto the Theologians, or Phariseis, whiche durst neither put to nor diminishe or take from the same. And euen after this maner it followeth with the Popes. They giue the decrees their authoritie, and yet not∣withstanding this may they do (as masters and Doctours of the lawe) euen when they list, agaynst their owne lawes and decrees▪ and therefore the decrees and Canons doe not conclude anie thing at all, without this exception, That the Churche of Rome may alway vnderstande, interprete, and expound the same, as she shal think good. And herevpon it commes to passe, that in all decrees, one of these tales is ioyned, to wit, Reseruing alway the right and title
of the Church of Rome: or, So farre forth as the Church of Rome doeth thereof al∣lowe▪ And so hath the high and renowmed Iurist or Lawyer Philippus Decius writ∣ten:Philip. De∣cius in ca. 1. no▪ 49. de constit. namely, That all decrees and Canons are (by Gods appointment) subiect vnto the Pope of Rome. It is verie true, that the holy Fathers and Popes, Gelasius, Fe∣lix,Cap. confi∣dimus. 25. quaest. 1. ca. constit. dist. 10 ca. con∣tra statut. ca. sunt qui∣dā 25. quaes. 1. ca. ideo permittente 25. quaest. 1. ca. Iusticiae. 25. quaest. 1. Sosimus, Vrbanus, and Leo 4. haue concluded, That all the decrees and ordi∣naunces of the Pope, beeing contrarie to the olde and former decrees and Canons, shoulde bee voyde and of none effecte. And whereas Gregorie hath likewise ordey∣ned, That whensoeuer any Pope wil haue his Decrees obserued, then must he è con∣trà, obserue the decrees of the Popes his predecessours. But vpon that ye glose saith, Hoc non credo:Vpon the before writ¦ten chapter, const. dist. 10. which is, I doe not be∣leeue that. And is not that answere groun∣ded vpon good reason? So that wee may boldely conclude, That the holie Church will not be bounde nor pend in by any De∣crees. Shee is like vnto a Catte, shee can not bee forced or compelled. For else might these Heretikes, and Huguenotes choke the holie Church with her owne de∣crees. For they woulde bring foorth this
Canon, Vt quid Canon:De consecr. dist. 2. prima quidem Canon: Non hoc corpus: and such other like. Thereby to teache, that there is but one ghostly or spiritual food set forth in the Sacrament, which is receyued onelie by fayth,The sacra∣ment a spi∣rituall food. and not eaten nor swallowed vp with the teeth. Further, they would come out with the decree in the chapter, Leginus: ff. Quid enim, dist. 93. thereby to prooue, That all Bishops haue like authoritie,Bishops like in au∣thoritie. in what place soeuer they bee, whether at Rome, or at Canterburie: and by that meanes shoulde all the authoritie of the Pope become creeple and lame: whiche were a pitifull case.By this the lay peo∣ple ought to receiue in both kinds. They woulde goe a∣bout to teache out of the Chapter Vbinam. distinct. 96. that they ought likewise to come into the Councelles, and to haue their voyces in the Consistorie:Cap. cōpe∣rimus de const. dis. 2. Fra Petrus ca. lacrimae. ca. sacrifici ca. dici ca. magna pi∣tas. ca. faci∣lius. ca. con∣uertimin. & mo other de penis tent. dist. 2. euen as well as the annoynted Priestes: whiche might bring in a great cōfusion & disorder. They would mainteine by ye decree of pope Gelasius, That the cup in the Sacrament, ought likewise to be ministred to the Lay people, according to the institution & ordi∣nance of Christ: for ye Gela. doth esteme thē for terrible blasphemers of God, & robbers of ye church, which in that case do not folow
the speciall commaundement of Christ. They woulde with the decree in the chap∣ter Placuit de consecra. dist. 4. bring free∣will to the gallowes.Ca. Si quis docuerit. ca. Si quis discernit. dist. 28. & ca. Si quis nu∣ptias. dist. 1▪ ca. Nicaena. ca. Si quis vituperat. dist. 31. ca. deliciae. ca. quisquis ca. quod dicte dist. 41 cap. Si quis carnem. & cap. Si quis presb. dist. 30. ca cleric. cap. pastor. ca. viduas. 1. qu. 2. ca. glo∣ria episcopi. ca. concesso 12. quaest. 2. & cap. duo sunt genera ca. cleric. 13. quaest. 1. They woulde rid Au∣ricular confession out of the way, and vtter∣ly confounde the defending of Priestes to marrie, and quite abolish the forbearing of flesh: yea, they would throw downe fastens euen, and Iacke a Lent, and breake both their neckes. Besides all this, they woulde plucke downe all Bishops and Prelates, all Ab∣bas, Monkes, and Chanons, from their riches, welthinesse, and merie dayes. And would make of them poore beggers with Pokes: because it is ordeyned by speciall woordes in the Decrees, That spirituall persons shall not enjoy any landes or pos∣sessions. And euen so woulde they dispos∣sesse the holy father the Pope, of all his pa∣trimoniall goodes and heretage, whereof Saint Peter (by his testament) hath put him in plentifull and peaceable possession: and would leaue him nothing but this bare deuise or prouerbe: Aurum & argentum non est mecum, That is to say, I haue neither golde nor siluer by mee. And so, where he is nowe a riche God, they woulde
in steade thereof, make of him a poore de∣uill: and then they would driue all Priests and Parsonnes, Monkes, Friers, and Nonnes, into their Churches and Cloy∣sters, euen as men woulde driue a heard of swine into their Styes▪ and that by force of the decree: Cap. Clerici. causa. 14. quaest. 4. and cap. peruenit. dist. 86. and more such like, which are written in the 86. di∣stinction. And nowe note another thing, which is worst of all: they would mainteyne, that all Priestes, Monkes, and Chanons, with all the hellish, shorne, and greasie swarme, are exable and shameles heretikes: yea, accursed and false theeues▪ and that al Car∣dinals, Bishops, and Popes, haue effectu∣ally and Ipso facto, forfeyted all their offi∣ces, authorities, benefices, & prebendes, ac∣cording to the decree: Si quis: dist. 69. cap. Null. cap. Baptisando. 1. cap. Quicquid cap. Placuit. and an innumerable compa∣nie and, too long to rehearse. So that here∣withall shoulde our deare mother the holie Church of Rome be cleane rooted out, and spoyled of all her goodly treasures, riches, possessions, and gouernments: and in the ende should vtterly loose her credite & coun∣tenance:
and being forced to play the bank∣rupt, should be driuē into an hospital, there to ende her sorowfull and miserable dayes. Therefore let euery man, which will pretende to be a good and faythfull mem∣ber of the holy Church, looke well about him, that he in no maner of wise, for any thing that may be, do extoll the decrees so high, that the holy Church of Rome should be subiect vnto them: but let our holy mo∣ther alwayes remaine vnhindered, at liber∣tie and free, that shee may freely, as tou∣ching all Decrees, Canons, writings, and ordinances, dispense, ordeine, iudge, dis∣pose, order and reserue: and in summe, bind the diuel vpon a cushen: for she neither may nor will be constreyned in any matter: con∣sidering that shee is like vnto these olde Foxes, which can not bee taken in anie trappe: She can leape ouer all gates, and hedges, ouer all ditches & quagmires, ouer al parkes & pales, and she hath no other or∣der nor rule, but what she thinkes good, e∣uen her owne deuotion, her good intent, &c. And to conclude, that which shee percey∣ueth to tende most vnto her pleasure and profite.
The vi. Chapter. VVherin is concluded, out of that vvhich is afore∣sayd, that the benefite and profite of the Church of Rome, is the onely rule and direction of all scriptures, decrees and Councels. HErevpon may wee boldly conclude, and out of that which is sayde before make a most true and infallible gene∣rall rule,The holy Church of Rome the verie knot of all wri∣tings de∣crees & coū¦cels. That neither the holy Scripture of the olde and newe Testaments, nor the writings and doctrine of the olde fathers, nor Councels, nor Decrees, nor any other institution or ordinance in the world, can be specially holden for the certein rule of fayth, wherevnto the Church is bounde: nor yet for the traditions and institutions of the holy Church, which all Catholike men are bound to beleeue, vpon paine of damnation. But the estimation and bene∣fite of the holy Church of Rome, is the only principal & most sure rule & directiō whereby all Scriptures, councels, ordi∣nances and decrees must bee guided and gouerned. Yea, it is the verie pricke, the white and the but, whreat all good Ca∣tholike christē people must shoot al their arrowes, and lay their iust leuel. Therfore, whensoeuer the holy Scripture will serue, the turne of our deare mother the Churche
of Rome, shee may accordingly vse it: and wherein so euer the Councels can doe her any seruice, she may commaunde them: and when the olde Fathers say any thing, that can further her cause, shee may allowe it and let the rest goe. Also, wherein soeuer the decrees may further her purpose, she may haue them in reputation, and make them equall with Gods worde. But whensoeuer the Scrip∣ture doth make against her, she may finde a glose, or an Allegorie vpon it, and so couer the matter with a blewe mantle. And when the olde Fathers write any thing, which soundes against her holines, she may thrust them out of the doores, and send them pac∣king. And wherein soeuer she doeth mislike of the Councels, she may admit & approue other councels against them, and so driue one thunder away with another. And when soeuer the decrees tend any thing against ye maintenāce of her honorable state, she may boldly deface thē, & set an earmarke on thē, which shee calles Palea, yt is to say, Chaffe, or Strawe: or else she may saue them with something, & adde vnto them a glose of Ac∣cursius▪ or Panormitanus: or of Iohn An∣draeas, which will bring ye matter in frame.
As for example: Whereas almightie God doth by his holy worde commaunde, That no man shall make anie image or likenesse, This is so set forth in the coūcell of Nice in actione 4. and is like∣wise set out by Eckius in his Man. that is spoken onely for the Iewes. And as the Councel of Africa (on∣ly because of the ambition of the Popes of Rome, who would haue questions & suites to come before them, and there be determi∣ned) did ordeine, This for¦bidding stā¦deth in the first booke of the oun∣celles Con. Afric. can. 2 and the let∣ters of the popes whi∣che had pro¦cured to haue all ap∣peales sent to Rome, are set out in the end of the coūcels. That no man shoulde transport anie matter ouer Sea, by appel∣lation, and such like. Therevpon shall her Ca. Plac. vt Pres. 2.4.6. Gratianus gratiouslie glosse, excepting onely, such as shall appeale to Rome. And whereas Pope Ca. Comperimus de con. dist. 2. & the glosse vppon the worde aut integra. Gelasius doth command, that euerie one (which will not shamefullie separate the Sacrament of Christe) shall minister the supper of the Lord, vnder both kindes, to witte, of breade and wine. That must be vnderstoode onely, vpon al priests: and so like vpon all other. And when as they can finde no good glose to couer the matter withall, then it is suffi∣cient to say,Euen so doth the glosse answere vpon the demaunde in the Cap. Constitutio∣nis, dist. 10. whereas is saide, That no Decrees are of value, which dissent from the good seede. Non credo: I do not beleue
it: or, These by∣textes doth the glosse bring vpon the decrees, That euery man shall receiue the Lords sup∣per inconti∣nent as the consecratiō is done, cap. peracta de consecrati∣one. dist. . Hoc antiquum est, This is ancient, & happened In illo tēpore, In that time, &c. In summe, she will vse the matter so handsomely, as shal make most for her own aduantage. Then you may perceiue well y∣nough, that she is like the honie Bee, which wil sit vpon euery flowre, and fetch out of e∣uerie one of them yt which serues her turne, to fill her hiue with pleasant and sweete ho∣nie: and what soeuer is not appliable or a∣greeing to her purpose, that she leaues vn∣touched. Therefore, the foundation of the holy Church of Rome may very wel be cal∣led, A Bee hiue, hauing the propertie of a tubbe, wherein al maner of pleasant things are put. The vii. Chapter. VVherin is declared, that the Church of Rome can likevvise helpe her selfe vvith the opinions and doctrine of the olde Heretikes, in follovving the same, vvhen it serues for her purpose. NOwe, so farre it is from our deare mother the holy Church, to be afraid to spring ouer the pales of the holie Scripture,holy church helpes her selfe with the opini∣ons of here∣tikes. auncient Fathers, Councelles, and Decrees: that often times she will go and solace her self in the pleasant medowes and greene fieldes of the olde heretikes, which haue alwayes bin extreeme enemies
and directly contrarie to the holy scripture and the Fathers: and of them doeth she bor∣rowe very many goodly iewelles,Reade Au∣gut. in the boke of He∣resies, and where he writes a∣gainst the Pelagians Ephes .8. Phil. 2.13. too fur∣nishe & beautiefie her Gabanet, or bee Hiue withall, For it is wel knowen and euident, that she hath learned of the Heretike Pela∣gius, That we (notwithstanding the fall of Adam) do still possesse a free will, and haue power to Iustifie our selues, and to fulfil al the commaundementes of God, if we our selues will: and That it is not the onelye grace of God, whereby we are iustified,Rom. 3.24. as Paule doth teache: but an helper only, after that we of our selues haue prepared our sel∣ues therevnto. Also,In the coū¦cel of Trent in the 7. sess. Can. 10. & in the 14. ses. can 8. That Christ did by his death merit: for original sinne onely: and that for all other our daily sinnes, we our selues must answere and make sufficient amendes. Of the Messalians, or Euchites: & likewise of the Pelagians,Theodoret. in the 4. boke of the Heretikes. she hath gathe∣red, that baptisme alone, doth not make vs perfect Christians: but is onely necessarie to washe away our originall sin, & to helpe vs out of our first shipwracke.Cap. omnes fideles. dis. 3. cap. . de poe¦nit. dis▪ and in the 4. boke of the Sent. in the 14. dist. ca. 1 But if we fal againe, & so run in danger of a second ship∣wracke, thē we must seke for another plāke to helpe vs out of hazard. Shee hath like∣wise sucked out of ye breasts of ye Messaliās,
to mumble out her Mattines, The seuen Psalmes, and the Pater noster by▪ number vpon a paire of beades, and with a bur∣ning candle: pretending thereby to ob∣teine great pardones, and to doe vnto God great seruice. Also, whereas she doeth vse spittle in baptizing after that the diuell is coniured:Theodoret. in his 4. booke cont. haeret. that shee tooke of the Messalians, who did teache, That men might driue a∣way the diuel with spitting. Of the Satur∣nialles, Ebeonites, Tatians, and Encra∣tites; shee hath learned, That the state of Mariage is vncleane and spotted: and that such as wil please God, and be cleane puri∣fied, must wholy refraine them selues from it. Also, That there is great holinesse in absteining from eating of fleshe, and vsing of certeine other meates: although she hath set the things out vnder another colour, to the ende men might not knowe frō whence they come. Besides this, she hath borrow∣ed of the Montanistes manie newe fasting dayes,Apolloni∣us in his booke a∣gainst the Montanis. and Euseb. in his 5. boke, cha. 1 which she hath commaunded and cō∣firmed, to be obserued, vpon pane of great punishment: and beside that, on or cemēts. In the schoole of the Coloredlanes, shee hath learned to praye to the holye Virgine Marie,Theodor. in the 3. booke Epipha. in the seconde part of 3. boke in the 51. Heresie. Theodor in the 1. booke and to immolate or offer vp her ob∣lations.
Of Marcus the sorcerer and Here∣tike, she hath learned to vse in her seruice, & sacrifices, certeine strange wordes, in He∣brewe, and other languages. Of the An∣thropomorphites, to painte God the Fa∣ther in the forme of a man, wt a gray beard. Of the Gnostikes, and Carpocratians, to set vp images of Christ, and other Saints,Irinaeus in the 1. booke against He∣resies in the 24. Chap. and to worship the same with censing, and other maner of deuotions: vnlesse men will say (as Eusebius in ye 7. booke of histories in the 18. chap. doth declare) that this erec∣ting of images did first spring from ye Hea∣then. And last of all, she hath learned of Si∣mon the sorcerer, & father of al Heretikes,Act. 8.19. to giue Bishoprikes, & Benefices, Masse, Mattius, and Sacraments for money, and yet not to sell them. For it is but a simple bargaine or contract, which the Lawyers call, Do, vt des: I giue, that thou mayest giue againe: Euen like to Simon, who would giue money, to receiue ye holy ghost. So that it is very plaine & apparaunt, that shee can helpe her selfe well ynough with the doctrines and opinions of Heretikes: and sucke out of them, what shee thinkes good, to carie into her Bee hiue. Yea, shee doeth in manie things agree with the Alca∣ron
of Mahomet, and with the Turkes re∣ligion:Azoar. 1. as specially, in many pilgrimages, in praying vnto dead Saints, in the obser∣uing of fasting dayes, in diuers sortes & orders of Monkes, and particularly, in the doctrine of Freewill, and iustification by workes. Now, whether they haue borrow∣ed that of Mahomet, or he receiued it from them, by reason he had a holy Monke, one Sergius, for an assistent & companion: I re∣ferre that to the iudgement of the Doctors of Louen. Thus much once by the waye, that it is easie to be noted, that it is all one per dominum, and all diet in one fatte: and that she is like to a cunning spinner, which can make good thred of all sortes of flaxe. The viii. Chapter. Declaring that the Church of Rome hath like∣vvise borrovved manye things of the levves, vvhich shee doeth set forth and holde as articles of the faith. The holy Ro. church borrowes many thīgs of the Iew¦es.NOwe, as touching the Iewes, shee hath not forgotten to followe them sundrie wayes: and that is apparant ynough, in that which our master Gentia∣nus hath declared in this worke. For hee will mainteine, that the Transubstantiati∣on of the bread into the very body of Christ,
and the changing or turning of the substāce of the wine into his verie blood, maye bee proued by the testimonies of the Iewishe Rabbines. And that is without doubt: for one of their Rabbines named, Rabbi Mo∣ses Hazardan, writing vppon the 136. Psalme, where the Prophet saith, O Lord thou giuest all fleshe their foode, saieth thus: This texte doth fully and wholy a∣gree with that which is saide in the 34. Psalme: Taste, and see howe pleasant the Lord is. For the bread or meate which he giues to euery man, is his fleshe: and with the tasting, or with the eating, it is turned into flesh Out of this hath a good Monke & a Catholike writer concluded, That this Iewish Rabbin did well vnderstand Tran∣substantiation:Petrus Ga∣latinus in his booke Of the Se∣crets of the Catholike truth. in the 6. chap. of the 10. boke which he doth yet againe cō∣firme by another, named Rabbie Cahana, who vttereth maruelous & wōderful specu∣lations, vpō that texte of Moses, where Ia∣cob did promise to his sonne Iuda, an vn∣speakable & vnmesurable quantitie of wine & milke, by these wordes: He shal binde his foales to the vinetree, and his asses to the noble vine branches: he shal wash his clo∣thing in wine, & his mantle in the bloud of grapes: his teeth are whiter than milk.
For out of these woordes of Iacob, doeth the foresaid Rabbi conclude, That the asse doeth here signifie Messias, into whose bo∣die and bloud the wine shal be changed. See nowe, is not this a strong & an inuincible foundation, against which the gates of hell can not preuayle? For that agrees euen as well together, as a fiste in Gentianus nose. Besides this, are established out of these Rabbines, the suburbes of hel, and by them declared, That ye holy Fathers are lodged there, against the comming of Messias. For that could the Rabbines finely fish out of that, which is written in the book of Ec∣clesiastes: This you shall de written in one of their bookes cal∣led Midiaschlt, which is▪ to say, The ex¦planation of the Eccle¦siasts, or sen¦tences of Salomon. Eccle. 7.13. There are some iust, which are killed in their righteousnesse. Doeth not this serue wel for the purpose? Furthermore, out of the Thalmoode is proued, that Marie, our Lorde IESUS Christes mother, was conceyued without original sinne. For one of their Rabbines called Rabbi Iudas, Simons sonne, doth so speculate, saying, That the In the boke called Galirasepa, which is to say, The ex¦planer of the hidde or secret thīgs matter wher∣of the mother of the Messias should bee ge∣nerate, was formed before that Adam fell, and so preserued from generation to gene∣ration, without polluting. And this doth he teache out of the Psalme, wherein is writ∣ten:
O Lorde, seeke out the plante which thy right hand hath planted. Is not that merueously well alledged, & the naile hit right on the head? Verily, it may verie well be compared with an other doctrine of theirs, where they saye, That God in the beginning did make two Whale fishes, a male and a female, and fearing least they should bring forth a monstruous generati∣on, he killed the one, and so laid him in pic∣kle against the comming of Messias:Reade Munster in his Hebrewe Dialogue of Messias. at which time he will kill the other likewise: and then shall the Iewes make a banket thereof, and haue noble cheare: for the one Whale fishe they shall eate freshe, and the other well powdred. And I maruell, whe∣ther they will not bid our deare mother the holy Church of Rome to their banket. But in that they may well inough beare one with another: it is inough for vs to kow, that they haue likewise established the foū∣dation of their beleefe and doctrine vppon the Thalmoode of the Iewes: which is a meruelous great booke, wherein all their Caballes, that is to say, all the doctrines & monumentes of their Rabbines, all their dreames and visions, al their profound and bothomles speculations, & strange iestes,
are heaped vp together like a dunghill. But nowe, for that we shall not neede to re∣hearse euery thing particularly, it is most true, that the nation and Caballa of the Iewes is the best grounde, and the truest well spring of all the ceremonies of the ho∣lie church of Rome. For that is specially set forth & noted in the booke of Decees, where it is written. That she hath borow∣ed her Ember dayes of the Iewes,Cap. Ieiunio. dist. 76. whose order and māner (saith the text) is the o∣riginal spring whervnto the holy church must sticke fast. Yea (I pray you) who is so grosse and dull of witte, that can not conceiue of him selfe, that shee hath had of the Iewes the verie example or paterne, wherby she hath made and counterfeited, so manie faire & goodly ordinances, statutes and ceremo∣nies? Whereby shee hath workmanlie wrought all her silken, gilce, and embrode∣red copes, vestementes, and myters, euen as with a fine needle: & al the riche relikes, prounking iewels, altars, candlestickes, candles, and torches: and to be short, al the goodly ornaments, which you may see in the church, were made by the exāple & pa∣terne of them. And their Sancta Sanctorū,
that is to saye, The Holie of Holiest, or The most Holie place vpon earth, which she hath pacte vp at Rome, in a corner of a chappell, at S Iohn de Laterane: whereof hath she gotten that, but onely of the Iew∣es, in whose Temple at Hierusalem, the innermost & most secret place where God did sometimes appeare, called in their lan∣guage, Roodes radaschim, that is to saye The holie of holiest? For in place of that, they had there the Arke of the promise, with the couering, called The Mercie seat, or Propitiatorium: wherein was kept a viole with Manna, and the florishing rod of Moses: which thinges our deare mother the holy church of Rome can not come by: and therefore hath she set vp another chest, with relikes in it, wherein she doeth keepe very gingerly and deuoutly, the foreskinne or Circumcision of our Lord Iesus Christ, with his slippers, and his nauell skinne, as plainly appeareth by the verses, which stand written before the same place, which are these vnder written: Circumcisa caro Christi, sandalia clara: Ac vmbilici, viget hîc praecisio chara.
That is to say: The foreskinne of Christ, And his slippers likewise: With the skinne of his nauell, In this cofine lies. Read ouer and peruse the de∣crees through∣ly in the 1. dist. de cosecrat. and speciall the 2. chap. Item the dist. 21.23.77. throughly, and many other mo. Item peruse throughly the booke of Du∣randus, and spe∣cially where he speakes of sa∣crifices and altars.Now, after all this, haue we not borro∣wed of the Iewes, euen our holie father the Pope, and all our Priestes and Dea∣cons: yea, all our Temples, Churches, offerings and sacrifices? ye marie haue we: or else all the holy fathers and Popes haue falsly lied in their heartes, which haue scraped together the bookes of the decrees: yea, and then must Durandus, What? doe I speake of Durandus? yea, (I say) all our stoute Catholike doctours haue dallied with vs, whereas they giue vs to vnderstande, that they haue borrowed all that of the Iewes. But what is this to the purpose? Trulie we haue learned in their Phariseis seate and Synagogue, That such must bee hanged, which breake the Emperours placarde: and will rather de∣pende vpon Iesus Christ, than vpon the or∣dinance of the Church. Haue not the Doc∣tors of Louen likewise borrowed of them the name of Rabbottenu,Touching this loke vpon the scripture. Iohn. 12.12. Matth. 23.7. or Rabbini, that is to say, Magistri nostri, which soundeth in our mother tongue, as much as Our
masters: prouided alwayes, that men may not say Nostri magistri, for that were he∣risie, but we pronounce it after the Iewish phrase, setting Nostri after Magistri, as if we should say, Masters ours, and not Our masters. Item, that men must set them at the vpper ende of the table? and the killing of Prophetes and Martyrs, and thn make them goodlie tumbes? for there∣fore it is that they do mainteine the shrines of the Martyrs in such praier and worship, in witnes (as Christ himselfe said) that they are the children of them which haue mur∣thered the Prophets of God,Mat. 27.6.29.31.32. and the mar∣tyrs or witnesses of Christ Iesus, and wil follow the steppes of their forefathers, but it is not needfull to rehearse all things par∣ticularly, considering that the holie Church hath set forth a generall rule hereof in the booke of decrees. For in the same text, where it is sayde, That they haue learned of the Iewes to annoynt their altars, and to trimme them with many proper things, is argumented and reasoned thus:Cap. consecrat. Si qualiter ergo de consec. dist. 1. Seeing that the Iewes which did but serue in a shadowe and darke figure, did notwith∣standing all those things: howe much more ought we being by dutie bound to
doe the like: to whom the verie truth is manifestly reuealed. Whereby men may plainly perceiue, that is verie lawful for the holy Church: yea, and that of duetie she ought to doe all things, whatsoeuer the Iewes haue done heretofore. So that it is no maruell, that she hath of her selfe set vp so many newe ceremonies, and sacrifices, and brought in so many Patrones & Baa∣lims,Baalim, is as much to say in Hebrew as a Capteine, a defender, a master, or such like: and there∣fore they did name dead per∣sons and other creaturs which the people did choose to be ther patrones or capteines, and aduocates, Baalim. builded altars, and erected chappels in all high places and wayes: and that she doth daily kill the Prophetes, and doeth crucifie Christ again in his members. For seeing the Iewes haue done so, she is much more bounde to do it. And vpon this point is the before alledged text verie plaine and cleare, saying thus: Hereby it doeth ap∣peare, that men may alledge and bring in good arguments and instructions vpon the examples of the Infidels. Which doth serue our purpose verie well, to the setting forth of this our purpose, considering that hereby is apparaunt, that matter which we haue in hand, to wit, that our mother the holy Church, is not subiect to anie Bible or woorde of God: and muche lesse to anie Councels or Popes decrees: but may dongue her grounde with all kinde
of dyrte, and may make her Bee hiue fatte. The ix. Chapter. VVherein is declared, that the holie Church of Rome hath gathered manie things of the doctrine & examples of the Heathen, which she hath conuerted and turned to her owne commoditie and profite. YEa, here it is plainlie to be seene,The holie Ro∣mish Church doth followe many examples of the heathen. that she doth not helpe her selfe with the Iewes onely: but likewise with all sorts of false doctrine, religion, and examples. So that it is euident, that she hath followed the steppes and Religion of the godlesse Infi∣dels, as well Romanes as other, whereso∣euer the same might serue her turne. For out of the rounde Temple at Rome, which is called La Rotunda, which was in those dayes by the Heathen dedicated to all the Gods, and to that ende was named by a Greeke worde Pantheon: thereof hath she made (following the saide Heathen) a Temple for our Ladie, and all the Saints.All Saints in place of all heathen gods. But is were mere foolish to stand vpon one example, thereby to proue a matter, whereof all the bookes, and the whole Theologie of the Catholike men is full e∣uen to the toppe. For the verie foundation
it self of their doctrine & diuinitie, is much more deepely grounded and built vpon the doctrine of Aristotle, than vpon any, either Prophete or Apostle: by this same token, that at this present, a Doctours hoode, or the Caputium of a Theologian or Diuine at Louen, is called Aristotles breeche or Codpeece. Yea, and moreouer, the most part of all our Scotistes, Thomistes, Al∣bertistes, Occamistes, Realistes, Nomi∣nalistes, and other Doctours, are sprong vp, of Aristotle, of Plato, of Porphyrius, Auerroes, Abeupace, and such other like Saintes, euen as out of their head spring and principall well. In so much also, that the Doctours and Theologians of Colen haue very wittily concludd: That Aristotle hath bene Prae∣cursor Dei in naturalibus, sicut Iohānes Baptista in diuinis: that is to saye, Aristo∣tle was the forerunner of God in al things naturall, as Iohn Baptist was in thinges diuine and supernaturall. And for this cause,This doeth P. Barnardo of Luxenburgh witnes in the booke called Catalogus Hae∣veticorum. amongst other, hath the holy Church condemned Martin Luther, for that the do∣ctrine of Aristotle (which is the verie mo∣ther of the diuinitie of the Louanistes, Sor∣bonistes, and Colenars) was by him re∣iected,
and nothing set by. After this doth the worthie Bishop Durādus testifie,Durandus in the booke called Rationale diuino∣rum oficior▪ in the first booke in the Rubrike De Dedicatione Eccle. That the holy church did learne of Nabucho∣donozor, to halowe their churches, and altars, euen like as he caused his golden image to be halowed and consecrated, which he would haue all people and na∣tions to pray vnto. So that it ought not to seeme straunge to anie man, that the Church (according to his example) doeth likewise cause Here∣tikes to be burnt, which will not praye to her images, considering that he caused the three yong men of the Hebrewes, Si∣drach, Misach, and Abednago, to be throw∣en into the hoate burning ouen, because they denied to praye vnto his consecrated golden image. But what neede I to trou∣ble my self much with these matters? The children in the streetes doe knowe well i∣nough, that a great many of the ceremonies of the holy Church of Rome, are gathered out of the ordinances and religion of Nu∣ma Pompilius king of Rome. For the de∣crees,You may reade this in the boke of Decrees cap. Clericos ff. pont. dist. 21. and the booke of Sentences do very cunningly set forth, that from thence they proceede: and that, in these dayes, men call the Pope in Latin, Pontifex, because Nu∣ma
Pompilius caused his high Priestes so to be named.In the 4. booke of the Sente. etri Lombardi in cap 10. From thence likewise the ge∣neration of Priestes hath issue. For like as Numa Pompilius had his Flamines,Numa Pompilius. Ar∣chesamines, and Protosamines appoin∣ted: euen so nowe hath the holy church her Sacerdotes, that is, her Priests, her Archi∣presbyteros, that is, her high Priests: and her Protonotaries:In the 7 booke of the  at , an 54 cap. 2. dist. 21. as by plaine wordes is to be seene in the booke of decrees. So that Eberardus Bishop of Saltzburgh, a∣bout 200. yeres ago, at a general assemblie (called a Riix day) did verie wel & right∣ly, in naming the Priestes of Rome, Fla∣mines Babyloniae,Petras de natali. lib. 7. ap 3. Dran  di∣uino of. b 7. Rubr. de festo S. Petri. that is to say, Babylo∣nish Priestes. And hath not our beare mo∣ther the holy Church ordeined the bonefire of Peter ad Vincula, in place of a holy day, whereon at the same time the Heathen did make bonefires to the honour of the Em∣perour Augustus?Iohannes de Vo∣ragine in hstor. ombari, cap. 105. Bapti. man∣uan. fast. 8. And likewise the other saint Peters day, which is commonly cal∣les Saint Peters Seate: is not that come in place of another bonefire daye,Durand. rational diuino ofi. lib. 7 Rubr. de caed. Petrus de catho. lib. 3. ca. 140. Bap. Mant. ft. 414.2. which the Heathen did obserue at the same time? And Cādlemasse▪ (I pray you) what is that els, but a kind of Candlemasse which the Hea∣then did vse, whereon they, euen at the same
time of the yeare, vsed fire with burning of torches and candels, in the worship of Ce∣res, Proserpina, and Flora? And of whome haue they learned (I pray you) that euerie man must serue God, according to the v∣sage of his owne countrie, & as his fathers haue done before him, but only of Pythago∣ras, and of Plato?Pythagoras in the first verse of his golden ver∣ses, or aureorum carminum. Plato in his boke called Ti∣meus, whom manie as well Greekes as La∣tines haue here in followed. Ezech. 20.18.19. A thing directly contra∣rie to the cōmandement of God, who saith by the mouth of his Prophete Ezechiel: You shall not liue after the commande∣ments of your fathers, neither obserue their statutes, neither pollute your selues with their idols: for I am the Lorde your God. You shall liue after my com∣mandements, and you shall obserue my statutes, and followe them. Where haue they fished out the Legende of Saint Mar∣garete, but only out of the fable of Andro∣meda, or Hesiona, the daughter of Lao∣medon? And what is their S. George,S. George. but a dumbe or mumming Perseus, or an Her∣cules on horseback?Chrystopherus. And her Chrystopher is a newe Polyphemus or Nessus. And her seuen Sleepers, are not they of the kin∣red of Endymion? After al this, what doth this meane, that they haue so specially cō∣manded, That all their altars shoulde bee
set toward the East, but that they will di∣rectly herein followe the example of the Heathen, who in honour of the Sunne, whom they named Apollo, did in all their prayers and offrings turne them selues to∣warde the East? Considering especially, that God had for the same cause forbidden the Iewes, to be like vnto the Heathen in that point, as to turne their faces towards the East. But the holy Church (as tou∣ching this matter) was much wiser tha God:This doth Gui∣do de monte Ro∣cheri write in his boke called Encheiid. sacer∣dot im, that is to say, The Ma¦nuel of priestes in titulo de Sacra¦mentis Eucharist. for shee wll hereby giue to vnder∣stande that Christ is risen or sprong from the highest: and that afer the doctrine of Aristotle & other Philosophers, the East is on the right side of heauen, where as Christ, at the day of iudgement, will place his elect. Is not this a deepe speculation? Who would euer haue thought, that such doltish Asses, could haue founde out such a great and profound secret, which God him selfe did neuer thinke on? The x. Chapter. VVhich concludeth, that the Church of Rome hath gathe∣red all these before named pieces together, and taken out of them, what shee hah thought good, which are called [Traditiones Romanae Ecclesiae] that is to saye, The traditions of the church of Rome, and the foun∣dation of our beleef.
BVt if I should now bring in all things particularly, to proe,Traditions of the holy church hwe that our deare mother hath (verie finely and subti∣ly) brought in & mingled the Philosophie and Poetrie of the Ethnikes, with her Re∣ligion, and Gods seruice: I should haue worke inough for seuen yeeres. Therefore this is sufficient for vs, that by this it may well bee perceiued, that she hath gathered her holines and ceremonies, as well out of the Heathen authours, as of the Iewes, & olde Heretikes, and brewed the same all to∣gether so cunningly, that it is a maruellous pleasant cup of drinke, to swallow downe without anie chewing. So that nowe wee may stoutly conclude vpon the former que∣stion, what that is for a beast, which men call Traditiones Ecclesiae, The traditions of the Church of Rome. Seeing we now well perceiue, that her foundation & ground stands not vpon the writings of the Pro∣phetes and Apostles,Ephe. 2.10. (like as Paul would in his time haue mainteined:) much lesse then vpon the Councels, Fathers, and de∣crees: but it is partly founded vpon the Scripture, being first well glosed and so∣phistically handled: partly out of the chie∣fest writings of the olde fathers: partly out
of the scomme of the Councels and decrees: partly out of the fine flower of olde Here∣tikes: partly out of the Caballa of the Iewes Rabbines: and lastly, out of the Theologie of Numa Pompilius, the Phi∣losophie of Aristotle, and out of the exam∣ples of the Heathen. This was euen thus concluded at the last coun∣cell of Trent, in the 3. session. where as the determination of the Church was made e∣quall with the Scripture.Now all gathered together on a heape, and baked in a cake, are called Traditiones sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, The traditions or commandements of the holy Church of Rome. Which vpon paine of damna∣tion of the soule, and the body, to be burnt in fire, must of necessitie be beleued of al men, and holden in as great reputation, as the worde of God it selfe, which is written in the holie Scriptures. Therefore it is, that the bookes of the holy Catholike subiectes of the Church,The Indians haue in one part of the coun¦trie a maner of garment made of the feathers of Popingates of all colours, & the more fanta∣stical & change∣able that their garment is, the more it is esteemed. as Eckius, Piggius, Hosius, Bunderius, Aso∣tus, Ruardus Tapparde, Iohannes La∣tomus, Iohannes a Louanio Franciscus Sonnius, Gulielmus Blindasinus, Iodo∣cus Rauestein a Tileto, and other more, are finely set forth and brauely decked with feathers of all colours after the Indian fa∣shion, and trimmed vp with all costly stuffe, euen like Saint Iames wih his shelles:
and sometime they fetch a witnesse or au∣thoritie out of the Scripture by the necke, sometime out of the fathers: then a Coun∣cel out of a corner, & a decree of some Pope or Bishop: sometimes they bring out an example from the Iewes, and an allegorie, or some trile out of the Thalmoode: and nowe and then a sylogisme out of Aristotle or Porphyrius, or else a verse out of Virgil, or Ouid, and such other like, skipping and leaping like Monkies, from one place to another, & so helpe themselues with handes and feete, and with all the mes of their bodie. Prouided alwayes, that they hang still as fast on their principall foundation, as a theefe on the gallowes: to wit, That the holy Church cannot erre, nor by anie meanes go out of the right way. For as long as they holde that end fast, they can neuer loose the threede. And it is but follie to talke: the Heretikes must needes be ta∣ken in the trappe: for if by chaunce they scape out at one hole, they are by and by caught in another. After this, they brewe you a noble and pleasant drinke, iumbling the olde fathers and the newe together, the true with the false. And if they can once catche an Augustine, or an Ambrose, by
the necke, then will they after that bring in a trimme toy, of the fine letters of Cle∣mens, and Anacletus, which a dronken Monke, and vnlearned buffell, did babble out somewhere on a Saint Martins euen, and mingle therewithall the goodly fables of one Dionysius, whom they call Areopa∣gita, which one of the seuen sleepers haue found (I wote not where) behinde a banke: then also come they lustily foorth with a Thomas de Aquino, or a Scotus, & ioyne with him a Bricot, or a Holcot, or a Pe∣ter de Broda, to keepe him companie. And lastly, for a sawce, they bring in vpon that their Legendum Aureum, and then Dor∣mi secure, and so make thereof a Compost, or, as it is called at Louen, a Brodium, such as the Heretikes must needes bur, if they taste but one spoonefull of it. And this is the inuincible Panoplia, or Stratagēma, that is, The defensible furniture & figh∣ting weapons of warre, which the right honourable Bishop Guilielmus Blinda∣sinus vseth. This is the Verbum nō scrip∣tum, the vnwritten worde or veritie, which all Catholike writers doe alwayes stande vpon: this is Consuetudo sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, that is to say, The v∣sage
and old custome of the holy church of Rome, whereon they boast them∣selues a great deale more, than anie towne doeth of their priuiledges. This is Tradi∣tiones patrum, The traditions of the fa∣thers, of which the children do boldly boast and bragge: In summe, this is the ground and foundation of the hellish Catholike Ro∣mish beliefe, wherevpon our dearely belo∣ued mother the holy Church doth stande so fast, as it will be verie harde for all the di∣uels of hell to blowe her off with all their bellowes. The xi. Chapter. VVhich teacheth, how that vpon this foundation, Here∣tikes must be examined. And what questions are to be proponed vnto them in the inquisition. THerefore the order and maner to dis∣pute with Heretikes nowe adayes,The examina∣tion of Here∣tikes. is no more to bring in many Scriptures or Councels against them, for therein woulde they be too readie and ripe reasoners: but we must onely lay before them the good in∣tents, ordinances, and statutes of the holie Church. And it is sufficient to prooue that, by any one of the argumentes before
specified: for whensoeuer men can alledge only one, whether it be out of the Fathers, Councels, Decrees, or out of Aristotle, or Virgil, then it is cocke on our side, and the battell is wonne. But now contrariwise, whensoeuer the Heretikes goe about to o∣uerthrow any article of the beliefe by the holy Church brought in and established, it is not therefore sufficient, that they proue it to be contrarie to the Scripture: for that is but one witnes. And it is a common pro∣uerbe: Vnus testis, nullus testis, One wit∣nes, no witnes: but they must proue it to be directly against all these before rehear∣sed, or else they remaine in the sacke: and by this meanes shall we (without doubt) get the victorie and vpper hande ouer all our enimies. For by this foundation are al the Lutheranes, and Huguenotes, con∣demned, banished, and accursed. Vpon this grounde they are deliuered ouer into the hands of temporal officers, as ranke Here∣tikes. Vpon this foundation are they at the last pitifully murthered & burnt. And wher∣fore? For this is the verie foote wherevpon men do condemne for Heretikes, all such as do not beleue al, whatsoeuer the holy church beleeueth. It skils not out of what grounde
they haue fetcht this: whether out of S. Francis vineyard, or out of the goldē Le∣gend, & liues of the ancient Fathers, or out of the Decrees & Decretals: that is all one, so that it tend to the benefie & esta∣blishment of the holy Church of Rome. For as it is before declared, that is onelie the foundation of the holy Catholike and Ro∣mish Christen faith. Therefore whatsoeuer dependeth therevpon, must (of necessitie) be esteemed, receiued, and taken for a special article of our beliefe: and whosoe∣uer will not so accept it, they are damned without mercie: yea, although they had both Paul and Peter ten times for their ad∣uocates: and ten dozen of Bibles on their side will not serue: for they shall neuer be demaunded, whether they do beleeue the Scripture and the Bible? or whether they holde the writing of Paule for the woord of God? or whether they doe not acknow∣ledge themselues to be poore, miserable, lost, and condemned creatures, by the fall of Adam, and the children of wrath and damnation? And that God of his meere mercie and pitie (without any desertes) hath loosed and redeemed them? For all this is but brabbling, it shall not be deman∣ded
of them, whether they do not stedfast∣ly beleeue, that they onely (through the one∣ly oblation of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ, once offered vpon the crosse) are iu∣stified before the face and iudgement seate of God? For that is of no importance. And much lesse shall it bee demaunded of them, whether in time of their neede, they do call onely vpon the onely liuing God, through the mediation and intercession of our onely mediatour and intercessour Iesus Christ? For that is altogether Lutherall. What shall be demaunded of them then? Howe men shall examine He∣retikes.First, and before all, whether they doe not beleeue that the holy Church of Rome, is the Ladie and Queene ouer all Chur∣ches, and that the Pope of Rome is the heade of the same? And whether they doe not beleeue all, whatsoeuer this Church beleeueth? After that, if they do not beleue in the holy Masse, in Purgatorie, in the mi∣racles of men Saints, and women Saints? Also, what they doe thinke of the holy Re∣liques? As for example, If they do not be∣leeue in the foreskinne of our Lord Iesus, which is at Antwerpe? in a second, which is at Rome: in a thirde, which is at Be∣zancon: in a fourth, which an Angel
brought once from Hierusalem, into the towne of Aken: and lastly; in one whiche is seene and worshipped in an Abbay at Poytears in Fraunce? Item, whether they do not beleeue in the Cribbe which is at Rome in our Ladies Church, and in our Lordes shooes, which are likewise at Rome, in the holy place called Sancta Sanctorum? Item, in the Dice wherewith they did play vpon his coate, whereof some are at Triers, and some at S. Sauiours in Spaine? In the Sponge wherewith they gaue him vinegre to drinke, which is at Rome at S. Iohns de Laterane? And in the tayle of the Asse, whereon hee rode, which is set foorth with great deuotion at the town of Genuen in Italie, &c? What accompt they make of the three Kings which lie at Colen: & yet are likewise at Milane in Italie: of S. Iohn head, which is to be seene at Ghent: notwithstanding that they of Ameens con∣ende, that they haue it? Item, what they esteme of Iosephs bree∣ches which are at Aken, with our Ladies smocke? And further, what they thinke of our deare Ladies needles, her sowing thred, and her workebasket, which lie in
her siluer chist at Halle, where many good∣ly miracles haue bene shewed: and of her girdle, which is there likewise: by vertue whereof so many women haue conceiued with child: & of her milke which is so plen∣tifull in manie places, that seuen of the best kine in Holland are not able to giue so much milke in ten yeres. Of the holye bloud at Bridges, of the holy Sacrament, of miracles at Bruxols, at Saint Goels church, which is a prete litle round thing made of very bone of iuorie: and yet our deare mother beleeues, that it is very flesh and bloud. After this shalbe demaunded of them, what they do beleeue, of all the glori∣ous Saintes. As Saint Lieuen, S. Gom∣er, S▪ Rombol, S. Goele, S. Iob of Wsemale, S. Ioyce in Flanders, where men get children, and mo such other like Saintes and Patrones of the holy church▪ which haue wrought so manie miracles, as in very deede no man can tell. And if the doe not beleeue al this, then the matter is cleare, that they beare the whole burden on their backes. And wherefore? Because they do not beleeue al that the holy church doeth beleeue, and therefore they can be no good christen men. Therefore is Maister
Gentianus, worthie to be shrined in golde, and set vpon an altar, seeing that hee hath with fewe wordes so substantially taught the very right way to bridle and bring vn∣der these heretikes, and to put them all in a cloake bagge: specially those which doe not beleeue whatsoeuer the Church beleeues: all such are vnbeleeuing and damned He∣retikes. The xii Chap. VVherein is declared, that the Lutheranes are with this foundation so valiantly assalted on all sides, that it is not possible for them to escape any way: and what is the last argument to be obiected against them: is, de∣clared and proued by the example of Transubstantia∣tion. WHat maruel is it then, that a sim∣ple yong man, whom hee calleth Brother Ligier, durst not dispute against Master Gentianus? For who dare bee so bold as to looke such a stout Goliah in the face? I let alone speaking to him: no, and I would not counsell the Huguenotes to take vpon them so to do. For whereas they thinke perhaps, with a sling to hit this Gi∣ant in the forehead with the corner stone of Gods worde, and to fell him downe to the grounde: yet must they knowe, that all the matter is not ended there. For in place of
one, there will starte vp by and by, and innu∣merable companie of stout and valian: Champions, which will assault them on all sides. For besides all the holy fathers, the Popes of Rome, besides all the noble and right honourable Cardinals, all forkehea∣ded Bishops, all fatte Abbats, and proude praing Prelates, there will yet come (as Gentianus here doeth bragge) a great companie of men Saintes, and women Saintes, glorious Martyrs, comlie Con∣fessours, and excellent Doctours of the Church, which the Pope him selfe hath ca∣nonized, and bestowed places vppon them in heauen. These surely (in consideration of the benefites they haue receiued at his hands) will (for the mainteining of his doctrine) hazard both cappe and cowle: Then siwher, there will come such a com∣panie of goodly miracles, which surely are so perfectly and also vnreproueably regi∣stred in the golden Legend, that the Here∣tikes must nodes be packing away, if they will do wisely, and followe good counsell. For if it were se, that this could not yet helpe, then should come in the Doctours of Louen with their great coppintankes, and Doctours hattes, with their Aristotles
breech on their heads, and his Liripipium about their necks,Sortes currit, is as much to say, Argumentes: & wordes called also, for that Pe¦trus Hispanus & other writers of the Louens Sophistrie doe for the most part vse those exāples in their Dialectica, and are alway busie therewith. and they will bring in al their Syllogismes, their Sortes currit, their Quidditats, Realitates, Formalitates, Ecceitates, Identitates, Secundas inten∣tiones, Instantias, and manie more of like learning, which they will quickly shoote vp in the aire, in such sort, that the multitude of their arrowes wil darken the Sunne: And at the last, they wil plucke out of their qui∣uer, a strong and a swift bolte or argument, which the scholemen cal This is an ar∣gument or pro∣phesie of fag∣gots. Argumentum a fasciculis, that neither Bible nor Testa∣ment, neither Peter nor Paul,Sortes currit in these are all fei∣nid names, which the di∣uines alway vse in their subtile disputations, to the end no man shall vnderstād them, but their owne scholers. shal be able to helpe the poore heretikes: & so they must altogether daunse into the fire, and be burn to ashes. This is most true and apparant, and needes no proofe or witnesse. Notwith∣standing, seeing that Gentianus him selfe▪ to shewe his stoutnesse and noble courage, doeth alledge and bring forth a certeine ex∣ample▪ as it were for an attempt or skir∣mishe: therefore will I take the same vpon me, and explane it further: o the ende, that euerie man may see, with what strong wea∣pons our deare mother with all her souldi∣ers, horsemen and footemen, is furnished. And thus saith Maister Gentianus here,
That the Lutheranes and Huguenotes can in no wise be reputed and taken for right beleeuers, so long as they doe not beleeue, that the breade and the wine in the blessed Sacrament of the altar (as soone as euer the fiue wordes are spoken ouer them) are no more bread & wine,Thom. de Aquin. in the 3. patte Summar. Item, in the 4. booke of the Senten. and in the Extrauaga▪ in titulo de cons. missar. all tho∣rough. And ca. Ego ereng. through the cō. dist. 2. & in the Clementines, de reliq. & vene∣ratione Sanctor. and by all Ca∣tholike doctors but by and by become the verie perfecte bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ, as long, and as broade as it was hanging vppon the crosse. Nowe then, who dares once kicke or winche against this? Or howe can these Heretikes wrestle against this? whereas, to begin withal, generally the holy Catho∣like, Apostolicall, Papisticall, Romishe Church, with her Pontificall seate and crowne, with all her Cardinals hates, Bi∣shops myters, Abbats slaues, Priestes crownes, Monkes cowles, and Doctours hoodes, doe not onely beleeue so, but like∣wise do specially commande, & will so haue it in dede: that al other persons shal so like∣wise beleeue, and that vpon paine of deadly sinne? Wel then, it is a sealed loth▪ there is no more to saye to the matter▪ For Io∣hannes Scotus hath him selfe said abso∣lutely, That if those fiue woordes should
be spoken in a market place,Ihannes Scotus in the 4. booke of sentences. or in a Ba∣kers house, where much breade were: or in a seller, where much wine were: the said bread would by and by bee turned into flesh, and the wine into bloud. Yea, this hath bene proued by manie wonderful tokens, as you may see,The sacrament of miracles at Bruxels. and heare at Brux∣els, in Saint Goels Church, where the Iewes stand painted, which did sticke the holy Sacrament there through with dag∣gers, and the red bloud came running out. For you may yet see red spottes painted vpon it.At Padua. And at Padua in Italie in Saint Anthonies Church, standes grauen vpon an altar, Saint Anthonie of Padua, going alongest the streete with the Sacrament: and some Iewes that were there did mock it, and would not kneele downe, and by and by there came an Asse alongest the streete, which seeing that it was verie flesh and bloud,This doeth Thomas de A∣quino set forth: and the Legend of Gregorie, and Vincentius Liri∣nensis, and all other Catho∣like writers. did fall verie deuoutely vpon his knees, and did open his mouth so wide, that Saint Anthonie of Padua did esteme the same for such a great miracle, as doth who∣ly confound these Heretikes with hide and haire thrust in their throtes: as is in his Legend set forth more at large▪ Was not that a goodly and wonderfull miracle?
What will these Heretikes say to this, when that Asses do beleeue it, and yet they esteeme it not? We read likewise of Saint Gregorie: howe he being busie at Masse, and hauing spoken the fiue wordes, the holy Sacrament was soudeinly (through his prayer) conuerted and turned into a fleshly and visible finger: and that for a good Gen∣tlewomans sake, which could not well be∣leeue that it was fleshe. Likewise, it is written,A miracle of the fiue words. that there was a good and a deuout woman, which had heard in secret of her Curate the fiue wordes: and being with her Gossep kneeding of doaw, to make bread, she rehearsed by chaunce to her Gossep the secretes of the Masse, which she had lear∣ned of the Priest: and soudenly all the doaw was turned into flesh: and the water, wher∣with she had wrought the doaw, into verie bloud: in so much that the poore women were maruellously affraide, and were so bloudie as though they had lien ten yeares in the butchers slaughter house. It is verie true, that it will not frame so well with beggers, who hauing vnderstood this mat∣ter, would gladly haue plaed the like pael to the intent to haue made of the crates of bread which they had begged, with the say∣ing
of these fiue wordes, a good flesh hotch∣potch or gallemawfrie:This he writes in his booke called the de∣scription of I∣talie. in the 184 leafe▪ the copie whereof was printed Anno 1550. and the same booke is priuiledged by the Pope of Rome. but it woulde not fadge, because they had not the good intent, which the Priestes haue, when they say Masse: which intent, the Curate had surely put into that good Gossep secretely, in shri∣uing her. Now is it not plainly written in the booke of that holy Monke Leander Al∣berte of Bullein, that beside the lake called Lago de Bolsena, as a Priest was saying his Masse, that holy Offertorie or oblation did droppe a great many droppes of bloud vpon the altar, and vppon the white piece of cloth called the Corporall: after this, it skipt and leapt out of the handes of the sacrifising Priest, & away it went, swiftly fleeing all about the Church like a birde, still dropping droppes of bloud vpon the Marble stones, which are seene there yet to this day. Men may finde a hundred thousand such like miracles set foorth in manie goodly, laudable, and praise worthie Histories, and golden Legendes, and specially in the Historie of the notable, learned, wise and discrete man Lipomani, who (I dare say) would not willingly lie, if he could hit vpon the truth. Then all these miracles, and all
the foresaid Saints, & iolly roysters, would euen ioyntly together, be vpon the bones of these heretikes. After all this, the Iewes Rabbines would march forwarde into the field, with their Caballa, & with their Thal∣mood, & stoutly defend our transubstantia∣tion. The Ethnik poets (& specially Ouid) would likewise follow all a flant to help vs: for they will neuer suffer their cunning (whereby they caused their Hecate & their Iupiter, Elicius with certeine woordes in their sacrifice to come out of heauen in spite of their teeth) to be plucked frō them. And beside that, they would likewise ioyne with vs, to defend their Metamorphosis, that is, their Transubstantiation. And they would bring at their tailes, a band and noble sup∣plie of 113. Bishops, who altogether in a Councel at Rome, haue concluded, That it must be so: And that it is the verie flesh of Christ, not onely sacramentally, but the verie bodie in deede, and as they terme it, Sensualiter, that it to say, That men may feele and taste it. It is broken with handes, and with teeth torne, eaten and digested. Herevpon they haue accur∣sed all those that doe not so beleeue. And with them should be coupled all the great,
wise, and profound Doctours, and senten∣tious writers, to wit, Paschasius, Lācfran∣cus, Thomas de Aquino, Scotus, Inno∣centius, Comestor, Amarcanus, Gerson, Gabriel Biel, Durandus, Alexander de Ales, Occan, Petrus Hispanus, Albertus Magnus, Raimundus Lullius, Petrus Lō∣bardus, Petrus de Aliaco, Petrus de Bella pertica, Rabanus, Panormitanus, Bricot and Halcot. And these would drawe forth with them, al the good Catholike men, that haue bene in our time. And these noble Cardinals specially would make a great stirre in the field, as Thomas Caritanus, Reginaldus Polus, Stanislaus, Hosius: and these deepe Doctours, Master Sylue∣ster Prierias, Thomas Radinus, Ambro∣sius Catharinus, Iacobus Hoochstrata∣nus, Iohannes Cochleus, Iohannes Ecki∣us, Iacobus Latomus, Magister noster de Quercu, Iohānes a Louanio▪ Iodocus Ti∣letanus, Ruardus Tappard ab Enchusia. In summe, all the Doctours of Paris, of Louen, of Collen: yea, all the Licentiates and Bacchelers, all these would set so stout∣ly on euerie side vpon these Heretikes, that they may thanke God, if they get frō them without leauing a limme behinde them:
For they would (vndoubtedly) teare them in pieces, with their teeth, and swallowe them vp whole haire and hide, euen as they do with their god: Or if it were so, that they could not well bring that to passe, by rea∣son that the Heretikes are more heauie to digest, than their god in the Masse is, then there would come to helpe them, Maister Deane Romist, the Procurour Generall, with a great companie of Catchpolles, & hangmen, with staues and stakes, with fire and sworde, with strawe and fagottes, and would set them on fire, and so burne them vp by clusters: and then their disputing were at an end. Then also were S. Paule packt vp in a male with all his Prophets & Apostles. Would not the matter go well then with these Heretikes & Lutheranes? No, no, it is much better for them to tarie at home with their Paule, than to deliuer him againe a freshe into the handes of the Iewes. In summe, our Maister Genti∣anus hath great reson, that he, like a strong and inuincible Goliah, doeth so stoutly o∣uerbragge and outface all the whole heape of these Caluinistes, Zwinglians, and Hu∣guenotes: yea, so couragiously, that they dare neuer be so bolde, as to come againe
in their sights, to dispute against the fa∣gots. So that nowe his conclusion & knit∣ting vp of the matter, ramaines fst and vnremoueable, as specially, That they are misbeleeuing Heretikes, seeing they do not beleeue all what soeuer the holie Church beleeues, and so consequently do denie the xii. Articles of the faith. The second parte. Now doeth followe the exposition vpon the second parte of the Epistle of Gen∣tian Hauet, wherein is discosed the ight and suf∣ficiencie of the Scriptures, and specially of the exposition of the same. And fuher, al the points of the Romish beleefe, are approued by the Scripture. The Preface, wherein this treatie is diuided in two partes. NOw followeth in order the second part of this epistle which Master Gentianus doth  be a fastidi∣ous srupse, that is to say, A morse which he can not wel swallowe without chewing, as speci∣ally,
that the Heretikes will mainteine, That we ought not to receiue any doctrine besides the worde of God, set foorth in the holie Scriptures. But nowe there resteth no more difficultie in this matter: for wee haue prepared for him in the former arti∣cle such a pill, that he will lightly slappe it vp, considering what a wide throte he hath. For wee haue substantially and stedfastly herevpon concluded, and also pronounced sentence irreuocable, That the Scripture cannot ouerrule our deare mother the holie Church, nor bring her vnder subiection. And therefore we wil not breake our heads about this matter, but will referre & leaue it to the iudgement of our Maisters of Lo∣uen: intending now to intreate of the vn∣derstanding and meaning of the scripture: wherein we haue two principall pointes to set forth and determine vpon. The first, that we declare what is the power & authoritie of the holie church, in setting forth the Scripture, and to applie it to her aduantage. The seconde, That we by plaine examples declare, and proue, that she hath finely set foorth this power and authoritie, in the establishing of all the commaundements of her doc∣trine,
ceremonies, and all manner of de∣uotions: so that she doeth not enioy in her seruice anie one thing great or small, but she knoweth finely to fetch the foun∣dation of them out of the plaine texte of the holy scripture, & out of that to make the matter so cleare & manifest, that you may see it euen as well in the darke, as with a candle. These two pointes wee will set forth plainly before the eyes of all men, with the helpe and assistance of the sweet deare Ladie of Halle, & al the sweete hee Saints & shee Saintes at Antwerpe, being there placed vpon the hie altar: and thereto we will call for the helpe of the ho∣lie Ghost, deuoutly saying an Aue Maria. Oremus. Aue Maria, &c. The first Chapter. That the holy Church of Rome onely hath power to ex∣pound and set forth the Scripture after her will, and as shee doth vnderstand it. And of the keyes and key∣bands which shee hath receiued to that end: and that euerie man ought to be content with her exposition. NOwe, as concerning the first part, our famous Doctours and Licentiates of Louen & Paris, do ioyntly teach,This did the Catholike doc∣tours set forth openly at VVorms, anno 1557. That the holy scripture is a dūmbe teacher, a boke of dissentiō, a dark, vncertein, doutful, & dead letter, a nose of wax, & a leaden rule.
Which is as much to say,The holy scrip∣ture a booke of brabling, and a nose of waxe. that a man may pull it, bow it, winde it, and turne it which way it shall please him. And therefore they conclude thus, Ergo, the ground and letter of the Scripture is no direction or guide, but that office belongeth only to the right vnderstāding & meaning ther∣of. Now, the interpretations of them ap∣pertein to our deare mother the holy church of Rome onely: And because she hath it in deede, euery man shall be contented with her interpretation, wihout anie further canusing, iting, or examining of that which is written: yea, shee doeth plainly fobid the common sorte and Laie peo∣ple, to reade the scriptures in their mother tongue. For consider this, they haue found in effect, and by experience, that the Here∣tikes and Huguenotes haue alwayes the Scripture in their mouth, and take vppon them to defende and iustifie by plaine and euident textes, all that they say or beleeue. And they passe not a pinne for all the hidde and profound interpretations, which the holy Church of Rome hath finely founde out, and profoundly set downe, concerning the same. Nowe, that spites them out of measure:
and to saye trueth, howe can they tolerate or suffer such a thing? yea, when al is said, what mischiefe do these Heretikes meane, that they thinke them selues wiser than all the holy Fathers, the Popes of Rome? with so manie Cardinals of excellent re∣nowme, and honourable Bishops, with such innumerable bandes of learned men of Louen and Paris? Or if so be likewise, that they doe not passe for all their My∣ters, Staues, Hattes, Crownes, Cowles Capes, and Liripippes: yet must they needes remember them selues, that holie Pope Pius the fourth, nowe lately dead, did in the confession of the faith, which he with the consent of the whole Councell of Trent published and set foorth, euen as a watche woorde or speciall marke, where∣by men might discerne true Catholikes from false Heretikes: as in plaine and ex∣presse wordes is written. And first: I acknowledge the holie Catholicall, A∣postolicall Church of Rome, to bee the true mother of all Churches and Con∣gregations. And after that:The Diuines of Trent. I beleeue the holie Scripture, according to such vn∣derstanding, interpretation, meaning & signification, as our mother the holie
Church hath alway allowed for good, & at this present doth allow: to whom on∣ly of right doth apperteine to giue vn∣to the Scripture, a right vnderstanding, sense, & interpretation. And herevpon I do promise, that I wil neuer vnderstand, nor interprete the same otherwise, than according to the interpretatiō of the Fa∣thers. This same haue the holie fathers at Trent irreuocably concluded: cōmanding, That no man shall otherwise vnderstande, nor interpret the Scriptures, than our mo∣ther the holy church hath in times past, and doth at this present vnderstand them. Now here you haue a full decision, a setled deter∣mination, & an irreuocable sentence, vppon our question: by vertue whereof, neither delay nor appeale can follow. For you doe heare, to beginne withal, that the worde of God is not of such value or dignitie, that it is of it self worthie to be beleeued: vnlesse it be deckte and set forth with the glosses and interpretation of the holie Fathers of Rome: So that hereof is to be gathered, as all Catholike Doctours also haue writ∣ten: That the Scripture and word of God is obscure, darke, variable, vncertein, vn∣eeuen, rawe, vnfurnished, and vnhand∣some:
but the glosses and interpretati∣ons of the holy father of Rome, and of the great Clerkes of Louen are cleare, lightsome, stedfast, sure, true, euen, plain, fullie furnished, and in all pointes verie handsome and sufficient. It is true, that the pretence of Christ & of his Disciples, was to vtter & declare to euerie man, their doctrine (or at least so much of it, as doeth apperteine to the saluation of man) in all plainesse, simplicitie, & trueth, without any dissimulation or darknesse. For to that end & purpose did Christ chuse simple fishers, and other plaine dealing laie people for A∣postles and Euangelistes: and did therfore thanke his heauenly father, that he had re∣uealed his heauenly wisdome & knowledge to simple & plain mening men,Mat. 11.25. & not to the sharpwitted & deeply learned philosophers of this world.2. Cor. 4.2.8. 1. Cor. 1.17. and .2.1.2.3.4. Chrysostomus in the▪ 4. homilie of Lasarus. In the preface of the Gospell of Matthew. and Augustine in his 2. and .3. Epis∣to Volusian. In like maner also did Paule set forth his doctrine before the simple peo∣ple, in al simplicitie & plainesse: yea, he glo∣ried of his simplenesse. Wherevpon the chiefe of the old Fathers, were prouoked diligently to put the laie people in mind, that they should be diligent & readie to pervse & search the holy scriptures, & not to thinke that they did perteine onely to the learned.
And yet notwithstanding, we must now either say, that their intent and meaning was not well grounded: or else, that the chaunce is now changed. For we see, that nowe in these dayes the Scripture is hid frō the Laie people, as a thing dark, dout∣full, & of no sufficient foundation: in place wherof is intruded, & thrust in the peoples hands, glosses, & interpretations, decisions, and determinations of the holie Church: so that thereby it is good to consider, that the scripture is not only darke, but also rough, vneeuen, hard, & stonie: in so much that the Catholike children of the church of Rome might lightly stumble vpon it, and breake their shinnes: or else perhaps be seduced & drawne awry from their right Catholike beleefe. But the foresaid decisions, & glosses are as eeuen,Gloses as plain as rockes. smooth & plaine, as the rockes of S. Goddardes mountaine: yea, they are the very Planers, wherwith the roughnes of the Bible scriptures is shauen off, in such sorte, that they may serue for all pur∣poses of work, to the building vp & pulling downe of the Catholike faith. Therefore, a∣boue all things, we must sticke fast to their glosings, & cleaue close to their interpreta∣tions, & haue litle regard what the plaine &
cleare textes of the scripture bring with them. Now this is the first point that you haue to consider, out of the rule before spe∣cified. The second you may likewise ga∣ther out of this: That no man in the world hath power to interprete the Scripture a∣nie otherwise than as hitherto it hath bene interpreted, by the holie Popes and Bi∣shops, and by the Theologians & Bache∣lers of Louen: for else to what purpose were it, that men should bestow such cost on those same Magistri nostri, in making them pleasant bankets, to proceed Bachelers or Licentiats, if it were not that thereby they had free graunt and licence,Tssing and turning of holy Scripture. to winde and writh the textes of the Scripture with so phisticall arguments, euen as they them∣selues thinke good? Then we may thereby well perceiue, that suche as are neither Bacchelers, Licentiates, nor Doctours, presuming of their owne wit and will to set out the Scripture, according to the letter, that is to say, after the single and profound ground of the plaine text, & so applie them to the detrimēt of the holy Romish church, are all ranke Heretikes: seeing they goe about to rob the holie Church of Rome, of her power & authoritie: which is a thing in
no wise tollerable. For it is most true, and without doubt: yea, as true as the holie Gospell of the Distaffe: as is plainely to be proued out of the bookes of all Catho∣like writers, That when our Lorde Iesus Christ did deliuer into the handes of the holie Church of Rome,The keyes of the kingdome of heauen. the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, he did yet giue her beside those an other string of sixe keyes, wherewith shee might open and shutte all the Cupbordes of the Scripture, euen as it pleased her, and as shee thought good for her owne aduauntage. And when as one key will not serue, she may proue another: In summe, and for a finall conclusion, so tra∣uell in that behalfe, that she get the locke open. Foure of these keyes, most chiefe and principall are called Imperatrices, because they will open all the lockes in the house. The first is called Expositio literalis, that is,Expositio lite∣ralis. An interpretation according to the letter: which key our mother the holie Church hath least of all occupied: but ra∣ther had left it lying a long time behinde the Chest: insomuch that it was all rustie in a maner, and cleane marred. At last the Lutherans gat it into their handes,The Luthe∣rans haue found one key. and set∣ting it before them as a paterne, made o∣ther
like it: insomuch that they haue opened all the lockes, and by that meanes haue brought all the secretes of the holy Church to light, and so haue of their owne priuate motion and accorde taken vpon them, to al∣ledge the scripture to their furtherance, and to the holy church of Rome her hinderance: so that she hath now quite lost that key. The other key is called Expositio mo∣ralis, That is,Expositio moralis. A legall or morall inter∣pretation: or, An interpretation accor∣ding to the Law: with which key they haue locked vp fast all the Chestes and treasures of mercifull iustification through beliefe in Iesus Christ: and in place thereof, haue vn∣locked & set open the maledictions, cursses, and threatnings of the law of Moses. The thirde is called Expositio Tropo∣logica, or Allegorica, that is to say,Expositio allegorica. An hidde and allegoricall vnderstanding or interpretation, with which key, they lightly wreste all the Scriptures, that the Heretikes can bring in against them: for that therewith they finde out straight way, some figure or allegorie, wherewith they deck & set out the matter finely, & so couer it with a course carpet. And further likewise wt this key she hath brought abrode the most
part of the Scripture, wherewith she hath fortified and made strong all her Catholike ceremonies, beautifull prunkings, & plea∣sant ordinaunces, as by proceeding from piece to piece we will declare. The fourth key is verie like vnto this, but it is of more strength, and is called Ex∣positio Anagogica,Expositio, Anagogica. that is to say, An in∣terpretation which drawes the Scripture by the necke, euen whither a man will: and it is the best and most beneficiall key, that the Church doth occupie for her ad∣uantage: for with this key she makes of the Scripture a Weathercocke,The scripture made a wea∣thercocke, and a nose of waxe. which turnes about with euerie winde: and a nose of waxe, which shee can bow euerie way: as by the examples hereafter set forth you shal plainly perceiue. Now hath she besides these, two other keyes, which are not right Imperatrices, but do serue particularly, either of them to his owne seuerall locke: whereof the one is called Typica, and the other Physica, that is to say,Typica. Physica. figuratiue and naturall. For these two keyes shee doth vse most in the Scholes and Cloysters: and therewith she fetcheth (out of a corner) wonderfull sharpe witted Ppilosophies, & deepe speculations
wherewith she mountes aloft so hie into the aire, that shee neither toucheth hauen nor earth. And with these, she hath (for the most part) opened all the Almeries of the Ca∣balla, & Thalmood of the Iewes, and out of them fetched all sorts of delicate meates and daintie iunckets, as (without doubt) there were wonderfull iestes and straunge mysteries shut vp in them. All these same keyes (except the first,The fiue keyes are  with sophistrie. which lay behinde the Chest, being now in the handes of Heretikes, and in their custo∣die) she hath tied fast together with a paire of Keybands, which she calles Sophistica, that is to say, Sophistrie or babling, wher∣on they are so fast bound, that without that Keyband it were vnpossible to make them tarie together, nor to do the church of Rome any seruice: but would by and by fall a sun∣der, and so bee vtterly lost: for this Key∣bande is verie cunningly wrought, and of strong Buffe leather knotted together with manie subtile snarles and buttons, so that it is not possible to be vndone: which snarles and buttons the chiefe workemen of that art call Syllogismes, and Quotlibets, and they stand so thicke and so strongly fastened together, that manie cunning masters in
braiding of snarles and buttons, as well of Louen as of Paris, haue gone about, with all the wit they had, to vndo them, to the ende they might vse the keyes as they would: but they could neuer bring it to passe. For the holie Church of Rome, doubting least the Heretikes might yet catche from her anie more keyes, as they did once, causeth more newe knottes and buttons daily to bee made to them: yea, and giueth the maisters of that science great wages. For he that can best braide and make them vp, hee gettes for his re∣warde a Doctours hood, or a fat Prebend: and sometimes a Bishops miter, or a Cardinals hatte: so that it is a great o∣uersight of these Huguenotes, and Lu∣therans, that they thinke to make all thinges cleare, with their one key, and will with that onelie expounde the Scrip∣ture, all care and regarde of the other keyes put by and neglected. Yea, they make no accounte at all of this Keybande: but will vnderstande euerie thing as they are learned by the letter, none otherwise than they are sette foorth in the Scripture: rightly and agreeably to the sinceritie of the faith:1. Cor. 3.6. and according to the iudge∣ment
of Paule. Where yet notwithstan∣ding is plainly written by the said Paule, That the letter doeth kill, but the spi∣rite quickeneth. Neuerthelesse it is true, that they bring in this testimonie of Paule against vs, saying, That Paule did there, by the letter, vnderstande nothing else but the Lawe, and the curssings of the Lawe: and by the Spirite, nothing else, but that by the mercie of God, we are quic∣kened and made aliue through faith in Ie∣sus Christ, which is in the Gospel by Paul and by all other faithfull ministers of the worde (plainely and without anie obscure and darke meaning, or hidde allegorie) set forth, and preached openly before all men, as Paule him selfe doeth giue plainely to vnderstande, saying,2. Cor. 3.6. That hee was made able to bee a Minister of the new Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirite: and that the ministration of Mo∣ses was a ministration, of death and of the Letter: but his ministration was a speciall ministration of life and of the Spirite. But wee care not for all this. For the holie Churche will haue it to bee vnderstoode otherwise: as to say, That by the Letter is to bee vnderstoode,
the speciall, bare, and plaine text of the Scripture, euen as it doeth sounde in the naturall ground and setting forth literally vnderstoode, according to the sinceritie of our beliefe: and as by the Lutherans and Huguenotes it is alledged against vs. For this letter doeth kill, as you may well see,The letter  the . that those which will so vnderstand and sette forth the Scripture, are killed. But The spirit, that is to say, The ghostly, hid, and sharp witted interpretation, which our louing mother the holy Church hath made vpon it, (let it bee allegoricall, or anago∣gicall, or what it will,) this is onelie that which makes mightie and liuing: because this alone both agree with the iudgement of the holy Church of Rome. And all they which doe truely follow her, those are per∣mitted to liue in all libertie and wealth: yea, although they do not beleue that there is a God. Therefore, whosoeuer will not accept this interpretation of the holie church, and vnderstand the scripture ghost∣ly or spiritually as the Catholikes doe vn∣derstande and interprete the same, he is a damned Heretike, and his processe is at an ende, although he had all the textes of the scripture verie plaine, & the whole volume
of the Bible on his side: for the textes can not helpe him without the glasses, hee is but a dead man: yea, though he had an hun∣dred liues lying in a Chest: especially, if he come once in the handes of the holie In∣quisition, hee must abie for it: it is but lost labour to talke further thereof. And for this cause I doe maruell, that our good master Gentian, will breake his head about this matter: namely to proue, That the Scripture alone is not sufficient for our mother the holie Church, as though that matter were not plaine and euident i∣nough, sithence we may daily both see and feele it. And yet notwithstanding commes he out here with his profounde speculation, in such sort as he hath almost therein for∣gotten himselfe. I cannot iudge otherwise, but that the vnmeasurable zeale which hee beares to the welfare of his deare mother the holy Church, must haue perforce tum∣bled him topsie uruie ouerthwart the field, that he did not well see what he said: he is like to kine, which are stung and chaced with a waspe or horseflie, they runne on fol∣lowing their noses like mad beasts, & shun neither stock nor stone. For here it seemes that his wittes be rauished. For where hee
doth say, That the doctrine of the holy Tri∣nitie,Gentian doth blaspheme the Trinitie. cannot be proued by the Scripture: that is farre too grosse. Otherwise, wee must condemne the foure first Councels of falshoode, who did by approbation con∣clude vpon the same out of the holie Scrip∣tures, verie strongly, and with vndoubted testimonies of truth: yea, and if we could as well defend the Masse with plaine textes of the Scripture, as the blessed Trinitie may thereby be confirme: a great manie priests (no doubt) shoulde not eate so leane brewes as now they do. It is true, that this worde Trinitie, neither this worde Consubstan∣tiall,The holy Tri∣nitie approued by the scrip∣ture. that is to say, Euangelicall, in being & substance, is not so printed in the scripture. But the Huguenots say plainly, that they will not make anie brabbling about these wordes, but will simply followe the true ground, meaning, & substance of the Scrip∣ture. Now it is plainly writen, That there are three in heauen which giue witnes,1. Iohn. 5.7. Mat. 28.19. Ephe. 4.5. to wit, the father, the worde, and the holie ghost: & that these three are al one. There is likewise written, That there is but one Baptisme, and one God: and yet notwith∣standing, we are cōmanded that we shall be baptised, In the name of the father, & of
the sonne, and of the holie ghost. So that it is apparant, that the doctrine or appro∣bation of the Trinitie, was not sowed out of the Popes thumbe, as purgatorie & the ho∣lie Masse were, but are plainly alledged in the scripture after the letter. The like is to be said touching the two sacramēts of Bap∣tisme, & of the Supper of the Lord. For al∣though this worde Sacrament is not found in the scripture: yet the substance, the being, and the ground of the doctrine is (without exception) cōcluded out of the scripture, ac∣cording to the letter & plaine wordes of the text.Gen. 17.10.11.13. Exo. 12 13.27. Rom. 4.11. Col. 2.11.12. For the Circumcision and the Pascall lambe, are openly called, The promises of God, and doe signifie the promises of God left in liuely remembrance of his mercie, & to the cōfirming of our iustificatiō by faith. And now doth Paul teach,1. Cor. 21.25.26. that Circumci∣sion is signified in Baptisme: and that the sacrament of the Lords supper is likewise appointed by Christ, in remembrance of his death & passion. Whervpon it is called The new promise in the bloud of Christ,1. Cor. 7.5. and ministred in place of the Pascall lamb. In∣somuch that heretikes (out of that) do teach, That baptisme, & the supper of our Lord, are onely sacraments, that is, holy tokens
of Gods promises, made in the bloud and passion of Iesus Christ.Confirming of more value than bap∣tisme. Which we cannot say of that holy oyle, nor of their holy con∣firmation, and other Sacraments which our deare mother the holie Church hath in∣stituted of great deuotion, and ioyned them to the two first for an help or assistance: yea, and the same likewise established and de∣fended, That Confirmation by her insti∣tuted,Cap. nouissimo de consecrat. dist. ca. de his vero de consecrati. dist. 5 in the fourth booke of sen∣tences, in the .7. dist in the 1. & . chap. is much more worthie than bap∣tisme, which Christ himselfe cōmanded: And why? Forsooth because it cannot be ministred or executed by any simple or common Priest, as baptisme may: but only by a Suffragane or Bishop, and that it makes one ful christned, and doth giue the holy ghost more plentifully & effec∣tually, than baptism doth, which was in∣stituted by Christ. As in her decrees and booke of Sentences is in plaine wordes written. Now, besides all this, the heretikes doe also say, That wee are not able to alledge or bring out of the holie Scripture, so much as one worde, which speakes of the Masse, nor of annoynting of priests, nor of their sinne offrings, of their priests office, of their pardons, & Popes bulles, no nor of
the Pope himselfe, nor of the praying to Saints, & images of our Ladie, nor al those saints, which do so many goodly miracles, nor of their purgatorie, nor of their auricu∣lar confession, nor of their whorish chastitie of Priests, Monks, & Nonnes. In summe, they will say, it is nothing else, but mens inuentions, and deuises of diuels, which the priests haue called to remēbrance, to bring in monie by heapes, and to pamper their panches with daintie dishes: but is not this a spiteful matter? And yet our master Gen∣tian letteth that slippe vntouched, where he should haue proued, That all these pointes, are aswell concluded out of the scripture, as the twelue articles of the faith. He saith in deed, that Ieremie had said before,Ierem. 31.33. That the new lawe of the Gospell should bee written in mens hearts: whereby we will conclude, that men ought not to seeke them in the scripture, but in the head and heart of the Pope of Rome, & of his holy Prelates: for that the Pope hath all lawes, both of God & man, shut vp in his bosome & breast, as hereafter shalbe declared more at large. But this serues to no purpose against the Heretikes: for they are so lustie, that they would make M. Gentian ashamed hereof,
if he had anie shame in his bodie. Which I do not iudge of anie such great doctor, who hath long ago put off his shamefast shooes, and laid them aside: nay ast them cleane a∣way. But yet in verie deed, they will proue out of Paule,Iere. 31.33. Heb. 10.17. 2. Cor. 3.3.8.9 11. Act. 20.26.27. Ephe. 3. 4.8.9.10. Col. 1.2. Gl. 1.9.10.11 12. 2. Tit. 2.2. & 3.14.15.16.17. that this new law of the Gos∣pell, whereof Ieremie doth speake, is no∣thing else but the ministration of the Gos∣pell, which Paul did minister in his prea∣ching, and set forth aboundantly in his wri∣ting, which remaines & continues for euer. And that did Paul openly witnes, That he had neither forgotten nor kept secret a∣nie thing, of that, which might serue to saluation: but that he hath vttered & tru∣ly set forth all the same before the Con∣gregations ioyntly together. Insomuch that he, before the holy Pope, which came afterwards, should not haue left one iot be∣hinde. Wherevpon should follow, that the law of the Gospel, which the Pope doth ca∣rie in his bosome, is altogether of an other Gospell, much differing frō the law of that Gospel which Paul did preach, or whereof Ieremie did speake: & then should the Pope be accurssed, by the saying of Paule to the Galathians:Gal. 1.8.9. Whosoeuer doth preach any other Gospell than that which I haue preached vnto you▪ let him be accurssed:
yea, although hee were an Angel out of heauen. But yet the Pope of Rome doeth not thinke, that this doth touch him: for that he is something greater than an Angel of heauen, as we shall giue you to vnderstand in due time & fit place. Now, that which he brings forth out of Iohn, to wit, that Christ said▪ That the Apostles could not yet vn∣derstand all,Iohn. 16.12.13 Ihn. 14.16.17.26. & that the holy ghost should descend and instruct them further: is somewhat more apparant. But yet for all this, he is neuer the neare. For he cannot with this stop the mouthes of Heretikes, by reason that they wil stil obiect & say, that this was spoken before the Apostles had re∣ceiued the holy ghost: but after they had re∣ceiued him, then did they put al the instruc∣tions which they had learned of the holie ghost, in writing, to the end that through that which is written, all men might bee sa∣ued, by faith in Iesus Christ (as by the said Iohn is precisely written) wtout this addi∣tion,Iohn. 20.31. that they shoulde haue neede to watch anie longer after the Popes Buls, or Mas∣ses of Requiem. But it is euen as I haue told you, our master Gentian hath bene so wildely prickt forwarde with that zealous spirite, that hee did not see well what
he said. For he is a man that hath whole dri∣fattes full of wit: marie the bottoms are out. And therfore will we helpe him againe out of his dreame, omitting all such vnpro∣fitable tittle tattle, and purposing for the se∣cond part of this matter which we haue in hand to teach, That whatsoeuer our mother the holy Church hath brought to light, stu∣died, inuented, or found out, since the Apo∣stles time, is altogether so surely & substan∣tially grounded, timbred, bricked & walled vpon the plaine text of the holy scripture, (so farre as they be spiritually vnderstood, according to the interpretation of our mo∣ther the holy Church) that it were not pos∣sible to erect any castle or tower more sure∣ly vpon the highest sandhill in all Hol∣lande. And this (I assure you) will bee a goodly peece of woorke, whereby I shall deserue muche, and bee partaker of a great manie goodly pardons and indulgencies: and shal besides that become verie necessarie and seruiceable to the com∣forting of our sorrowfull mother the holie Church, and to the extirpation and roo∣ting out of all erronious opinions of newely vpstart Sectaries and Heretikes, whiche doe yet thinke, that they haue
the Scripture on their side. But they will haue but foolishe countenances, when they shall see, that the whole Scripture, with the interpretations of the holie Fathers, doeth at the least close vp as well with our doctrine, as a ring in a Swines snowt. The ii. Chapter. Declaring, that the sonne offring of the Masse, and the or∣der and office of Priestes, and Masse Priestes, is gathe∣red out of the Scripture, if it be rightlie vnderstoode, according to the interpretation of the Church of Rome. THen, to begin withall,Offering vp the Sonne in the masse. we will digge the holie sonne offering of the Masse, out of the holie Scripture, and proue, that shee hath thereon a deepe and sure founda∣tion. Consider nowe, it is plainly written, That when Christ had broken the bread, & giuen it to his disciples, he spake thus, and saide: Take, Eate, This is my bodie,Math. 26.26. 1. Cor. 11.2. This woorde is set fourth by all catholike wri∣ters to this purpose, as you may see in the councell of Sen. holden against Luther in the .xi. decree in the Intim of the Emperour Charles, in titulo, De saci. Missae. and generally by all the Doc∣tours of uen, of Colen, and of Paris, as Ekius, Pigus, Bunder. Rurdus, with other mo. which shall be broken for you: Do this in re∣membrance of me. Do you wel perceiue nowe (yee poore Heretikes) that Christ doeth here commande to singe Masse? for that same worde, Doe this, is iust as much as if he had saide, Offer my bodie in the Masse to God my Father, for the liuing and for the dead. And that is first strong∣lie
set forth by the Poet Virgil, who saieth thus: Cum faciam vitula, that is to say, When I shall doe it with a calfe. Looke nowe by this worde Doe, he vnderstandeth nothing else, but onelie To do or offer a sa∣crifice and sonneoffring: Ergo, it must needes folowe, That Christ did vnderstand it no otherwise, than the worshipful Catho∣like Doctours of Louen & Paris haue very well declared, and irreuocablie concluded. For our deare mother the holy church hath receiued, approued, & strongly established their doctrine, institution, and prescript for an article of our faith. So that it appeares, that the Masse is verie ancient, seeing it was vsed in Vir∣gils time:Masse vsed in Virgils time. sauing onely that they did offer either Calues fleshe, or Oxe flesh: whereas nowe our Priestes doe celebrate their Masse with mans fleshe and bloud. And herevpon you may note further, that these short and sweete wordes, (Doe this is re∣membrance of me) hath a wonderful em∣phasis or force: For out of the grounde of the same hath the holie Catholike Church of Rome fished, That the Apostles were Priests or Prelates with shorne crownes, and did sing Masse: and thereof it is,
that all our Priestes are created. For, Doe this, is as much to say in their language, as, Become Priestes: and see that your fingers bee annoynted, with holie oyle, that you may deuoutly say Masse. And for this hath the holie Church of Rome commaunded, That none of the Lae people shall receiue the Chalice, because our Lorde did not here speake to anie of the Laie or common people, as the Apostle Saint Paule did in his time, when hee willed the whole Congregati∣on and Church of the Corinthians, to doe as Christ Iesus had done. But the A∣postle Paule did meane simplie, and onelie those, which were able to sing the holie Masse, as our Priestes and Prelates are, who onelie ought and may drinke out of the Chalice: as you may more perfectly and plainlie perceiue, by the writers vpon the booke of Sentences, and by all the be∣fore named Doctours of Louen, of Paris, and of Colen. Moreouer and besides this, wee can stronglie confirme the Masse offering, out of the Prophete Malachie, who (in the 1. Chapter, and 11. verse) saith thus:
From the rising of the Sunne,Mala. 1.11. Looke prouinci∣ale Concl. Seno∣nens. in the 11. decree, where this scripture is alledged vpō that purpose. Looke likewise vpon Ecki. Bun∣der. Pigium, La∣tomum, Rardum and such other like. 1. Pet. 2.5.19. vnto the setting of the same, is my name honou∣red amongest the Heathen, and in all places is my name sacrificed, & a pleasant offering offered vp: that is to say, The of∣fering and sacrifice of the holy Masse. For that can not faile, so long as it pleaseth our mother the holy Church to haue (and will haue it) thus vnderstoode. And although it be so, that Peter hath otherwise interpre∣ted it, saying, That all faithfull are that holy Priesthood, to offer vp spiritual off∣rings, wherwith God is pleased, through Iesus Christ: yea, they are the chosen ge∣neration, the kingly Priesthoode, & the holie and elect people, to set foorth the worthines of him,Apoca. 1.6. Apoca. 8.4. which hath called thē out of darkenesse vnto his wonderfull light: Wherewith Iohn the Apostle doeth also accorde, saying, That Iesus Christ hath made all faithfull Christians, kings and Priestes to God his father: and ap∣plies this sacrifice to their prayers, and Psalmes: And although it be so, tha the Apostle had so saide to the Iewes,Heb. 13.15. That we should offer vp vnto God the offring of thankesgiuing, which is the fruites of our lippes and tongues: yet notwithstan∣ding,
the holie Church is not therewith sa∣tisfied, because greate disorder might followe: for that then there shoulde be no mo priests which could serue in the Masse: & therfore she hath strongly concluded, that this place of the prophesie of Malachie, may not any otherwise be vnderstood, than by the second councell of Nice, the coun∣cell of Constance, the councell of Trent: & further, as by al Catholike men, as Tho∣mas de Aquino, Scotus, Durandus, and by all the Doctours of Louen, it hath bene vnderstoode, & interpreted. Iudging with∣out doubt, that all these profounde learned Doctours, together on a cluster, as hauing greater measure of wisedome and learning than the rest, did vnderstande Malachie farre better than Peter and Iohn, who were but simple fishers,In the .4. booke of Sentences in the .24. dist. cap. 1. and had neuer bene Studentes in the famous and renowmed Vniuersitie of Louen. And yet, if it were so, that Peter were not content, yet hath the holie Church giuen him to vnderstand, that his foresaide reason must bee vnder∣stoode & meant of the Priests only: and not of the generall congregation of Christ. Moreouer, and beside all this, these wordes of Paule, where he saith,Roma. 10.12. That we
should deliuer or offer vp our bodies, a liuing, holie, and an acceptable sacrifice vnto God, which is our dutiefull seruing of God, &c. hath she violently & forceably wresled to the Masse, and the offering of the Priestes: cōmanding, that those words should do dailie read in the Canon of the Masse▪ & that at euerie word, a crosse should be made, to the ende that they, by the power and vertue of the crosse, might altogether transforme and change their naturall vsa∣ges, and so serue the turne of the holie Masse. For, if men will vnderstande them, according to their nature, after the letter: to wit, That all perfite Christians must of∣fer vp to God, their bodies, in all holinesse, by that it should seeme, that Paul hath o∣therwise vnderstoode Malachie, than the holie Church doth vnderstande him. And then should S. Peter haue done euill, when he soung his first Masse at Rome, vpon the altar, which is yet there to bee seene in the holie place at Saint Iohns de Laterane. And nowe our Lord hath saide, Oraui pro te Petre, ne deficeret sides tua▪ O Peter, I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith shuld not faile: So that Peter then can not haue done amisse, when he did sing Masse. And
herevpon is to be concluded, that the Masse is founded & grounded vpon the scripture. And yet we see further, That in the scrip∣ture there are two sortes of Priesthoodes spoken of:In the foresaid Councell of Senon, decree II and in the Em∣perours Interim and in summa fi∣dei Chstanae, set forth by the cōmandement of king Philip, an further by all Catholike Doctours, who do all generally addict the two authorities & offces of priest¦hoode to our Priestes. The one is the order of Mel∣chisedech, and the other is, The order of Aaron, who came of the tribe of Leui. Nowe, both these two orders seeme to haue bene a figure of our Priestes. Which doth appeare by this: That our Priestes haue in their Masse (by vertue of the fiue wordes) changed the bread into the bo∣die of Iesus Christ: then they go and of∣fer him vp to God the Father: praying and beseeching him, that he (with a mer¦cifull and pleasant countenance) will be∣holde the offring vp of his onely begot∣ten and liuing Sonne Christ Iesus: and that he will accept the same, euen as hee accepted Abels offring,These are in a maner the pro∣per wordes v∣sd in the masse after the conse∣cration. and the sacrifice of Abraham, & of the hie Priest Melchi∣sedech. Who will nowe cast in any more doubts, whether they be the right Priests, placed in the roomes & seates of Melchise∣dech & Aaron? Nay, they do far passe both Melchisedech & Aaron: seeing that they do pray for the Sonne of God him selfe, & are a meane, not only betweene God and man:
but also betweene God the Father, and Christ Iesus his Sonne, which in an E∣uangelical degree, they do resemble to the sheepe and the lambes. So that by this it is apparant, that the meaning of our mo∣ther the holie church, is, That Christ is to be accounted for nothing els, but the sheepe which Melchisedech did offer vp: Contra∣riwise, the Priestes are the true Melchise∣dechs, which do offer vp Christ, & pray for him. For when all is said, what other thing did Melchisedech (I pray you) foreshewe, but onelie the figure of the holie Pope of Rome? who is the chiefe Priest, the Sum∣mus Pontifex,Ca. cleros ponti∣fex. dist. 21. and in the .4. booke of Sentences. dist. 24. De vsu pallii ad honorem. The high Bishop, which doeth create all Priestes and Deacons, & set vp all spirituall orders, giuing and ap∣pointing to euery one of them their charge what they shall doe. Then must he needes be the right Melchisedech, whose Priest∣hoode is not to bee resembled to other priestes. For this is set forth in the Decre∣talles, euen thus in plaine wordes: & Du∣randus hath set out the same at large, in his booke called Rationale diuinorū of∣ficiorū. Therefore, that which the Apostle would say to the Hebrewes,Rubic. de mini∣sterio & ordine Ecclesiae. Heb. 7.14.17. That as Mel∣chisedech was a figure of Christ: And
accordingly,Hebr. 8.4. and 9.25.26.27. & 10.1.2.12.13.14.15.16.17. as Melchisedech hath neither had anie successour nor lieftenant, that e∣uen so Christ had neither successour nor lieftenant, but should him selfe in his owne person exercise his euerlasting Priesthood, being once entred into that heauenlie holi∣nesse, through the power of that one offe∣ring, to witte, his owne bodie and bloud: which offering being once fully accompli∣shed for the remission of our sinnes, can ne∣uer be renewed nor done againe. But all this doeth not serue the purpose, touching out matter: for if that were true, then the Masse would be nothing worth, and our Priestes might go with emptie stomachs, and in the end be glad to get them into some hospitall for a refuge, or at least to gette their liuing with painfull labour: which would be a pitifull case, considering that they haue neuer bene vsed to anie labour, but simplie to say Masse, sing Euensong, and to mumble ouer their Mattens, and therewith to deserue first a liuing here on earth, and afterwardes heauen for them∣selues, their pretie wenches, and their yong bastardes. Therefore doeth our mo∣ther the holie Church conclude, that the Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrewes,
did not well consider the pith and ground of the matter: for otherwise, if he had well knowen, howe that Melchisedech had offe∣red vp bread and wine, he would then with∣out doubt therevpon haue concluded with the Church of Rome, That there must bee Priests to sing Masse, and to offer vp Ie∣sus Christ in fourme of bread and wine, vn∣to God the Father. For if this were not (as the Doctours of Louen doe teache) then could not the offering of Christ Iesus endure and last for euer,Looke on the foresaid Coun∣cell Sinonense, in the 11. decree, in the Empe∣rours Inerim. In the councell of Trent, and in all Catholike bookes. All which do de∣fende, that the order or office of Priesthoode could not en∣dure eternallie, if it were not that the priests follow in the sam office▪ and do daily offr vp his bodie to the Father in the Masse. after the order of Melchisedech: as our Maister Gentianus hath verie wittilie here noted. Consider (I pray you) if Christ had no Vicar nor Liefe∣tenant, as the saide Apostle pretendes, how could he be an euerlasting Priest, and con∣tinue his Priesthoode euermore, in the person of the most holy Pope of Rome? Howe could he offer vp his bodie a newe dailie in the Masse? Therefore, hee may thanke the Priestes greatly, that they, af∣ter his departure hence, haue taken vppon them his place. And for so much as his offe∣ring could not of it selfe sufficiently serue the turne: therefore haue they founde out another sonne offering of the Masse, where∣by they applie or ioyne his offering to men
as with a plaister: notwithstanding, they doe not name it onelie Sacrificium propi∣tiatorium, that is, A sacrifice of mercie: but also, Sacrificium applicatorium,Heb. 7 8.9.10. Chapters. that is, An offring plaistered, or put to. Was not that a great ouersight of our Lorde, that he had suffered such paines, and yet al his suffering could not haue helped vs, if the Priestes would not haue giuen vs that same addition by their Masse offering?Peruse tho∣roughly the chap. 7.24. and 27. cap. 8.4. & cap. 9 25.26.27.28. and ca. 10.1.2.12.13 14.15.16. &c. Therefore must the Apostle needes haue bene much ouerseene in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, when hee tooke vppon him so earnestly to prooue, that Christ had no neede of anie Deputie, and that his sacri∣fice or oblation could not bee renewed nor offered againe: but that it is giuen to vs, & made ours through faith: or perhaps hee was so busily occupied with the Hebrewes & Iewes, that he did not once thinke vpon our holie Masse, no nor had not the leasure to reade ouer the bookes of the Catholike Doctours of Louen, nor the ordinances of the holie fathers of Rome. For if hee had read those, he should haue lerned something else: as speciallie, that the principal point of the priesthoode of Melchisedech, did rest in the bread and wine which hee set before
Abraham and his Souldiers, to stake their hunger and thirst. For of this bread, and of this wine, hath our deare mother the holie Church of Rome made a sacri∣fice: and out of that concluded, that the Priestes must likewise haue bread and wine to chaunge the same into fleshe and bloud, and so to offer it vp. But the Apo∣stle had neuer heard anie such newes: and therfore he is to be borne withall: but these Heretikes, who haue read ouer all these things, with our Doctours: yea, they haue it at their fingers ends: and yet they make but a mocke at it: those felowes truelie, are worthie to be looked at vnder the browes, and to haue their heades set betwixt two eares. Proceeding now, as touching the order of Aaron,Aarons Priest∣hoode, dist. 21. cap. 1. in lib. 7. dist. 14 cap. 8. In the 2. chap. of Councell. he (without doubte) was a figure likewise, not of Christ, but of our Priestes. For there is written in the Decrees, and in the booke of Sentences, That as well the hie Priestes, as the Pater noster priestes, were all ordeined by Moses, when as he, by the commaundement of God, did in∣stitute Aaron an high Priest, and did an∣noint his sonnes vnder priests. The coun∣cel of Aken, or Aquisgrain, hath also plain∣lie
concluded out of Isidore: That the or∣der of Priestes haue their beginning of Aarons children:Councell of Aquisgraine▪ and that those which in the old Testament were called offring Priestes, are the verie same which nowe are called Masse priests. And those which at that time were called Hie priestes, are nowe our Bishops. So that it is easie to be noted,The Priestes of Caiphas race. that they are all of Caiphas his progenie. For as touching that, which the Apo∣stle doeth say to the Hebrewes:Hebr 7.11. and 8.7. That by the comming of Christ, the order of Le∣uie was cleane taken awaye: that can not be true: considering that yet at this day, the holie Church hath her Leuites: as out of the 7. Chapter of the said Councell,This appeares also in the boke of Sentences, dist. 24. cap. 1. and out of the 2. Chapter of the 21. Distinction doeth plainlie appeare: where it is saide, That the Leuites are in Greeke called Diaconi, and in Latin Ministri. And now these must needes bee our Deacons. And therefore in the third Councell of Braca∣ren, it was concluded in the 5. Chapter of the saide Councell: That onelie the Le∣uites,Leuites are Deacons and pardoners. and not the Priestes, might be par∣doners, and carrie about with them on their shoulders, the reliques of Saint An∣thonies
swine, and such other like, ha∣uing on their Albe, which is to witte, a long shirt aboue vpon their coates, as was permitted to the Leuites only, in the olde testament, to carie or driue the Ark of the promise. Is not this a sufficient proofe? you are welcome home.Dist. 21. ca. 1. And likewise, that the other Priestes are also come out of the order of Leui, doth sufficiently appeare out of that which is before rehearsed. Therefore is the Apostle much ouerseene in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, where hee will take vpon him, to mainteine, that the order and succession of the Leuites should be wholy taken away and adnihilated, or at least, he must be thus vnderstoode, as that the order of Leui is not taken away, anie otherwise, but that in place of the Iewish Leuites are entred in the Priestes & Par∣doners: & in place of their sacrifices, is the Masse crept in. For consider, that which he doth write in his 5. and 8. Chapter,Heb. 5.1.8. con∣cerning the Leuite priestes, saying, That euerie hie Priest is ordeined to offer gifts & sacrifices: pretending thereby to proue, that then Christ must also haue something to offer: that the holie Church of Rome
vnderstandeth to be her Priests,Looke in the foresaid Coun∣cell Sinonen. de. 11. and the Emperours In∣terim, and like∣wise vpon Eck. atm. and o∣ther Catholike writers. as though the Apostle would haue saide flatlie, That the Romish Priestes are ordeined to offer giftes and sacrifices. And for that cause the catholike Doctours haue that text con∣tinually in their mouth, for the verifying of their Priesthoode. So that it is euident, that the Leuitical Priestes are risen vp a∣gaine in our Priestes. And although the Heretikes do mocke at al such allegations, saying, that that text is directly against vs, because the Apostle wil thereby proue,Heb. 8.4. that by the offering and Priesthoode of Christ Iesus, all other offerings and Priesthoods are taken away and adnihilated, conside∣ring that Christ could not be a Priest, so farre as there were anie other Priest that did represent & patronize him: yea, and al∣though he were now here on earth, we passe not for that. For we will by and by bring out against them the plaine texte of the de∣crees, out of the Councell called, Sexta Sy∣nodus, where it is said, That Iames, the brother of Christ, after the flesh:In Canon. Iaco frater dom. de consecra. dist. 1. & Basi∣lius the Bishop of Caesarea, did ioyntly bring in the Masse, and ioyned it to the scripture. Surely, if Iames the lords bro∣ther did establish the masse, thē it appereth,
that it is come from the Apostles: & there∣fore neede we not anie more testimonies of scripture or other authorities. For where∣as the Heretikes wil seeme to ouerthrowe this, saying: That it is an euident and de∣testable lie: considering that Basilius was Bishop of Caesarea,Iames & Ba∣silius knew not of the Masse. wel nigh three hundred yeares, or there about, after the death of S. Iames: so that by reason thereof, he cannot haue established the Masse with S. Iames: Vnto that we answere, That they are too much nosewise for vs: our deare mother the holy church goeth not so preciselie to work. An inch breakes no square: It skilles not for three or foure hundred yeeres, more or lesse, when otherwise it serueth her turne. Notwithstanding that, she hath two diuers wayes to answere their demaund. For shee may ay, that there fortuned a great mira∣cle, to wit, that S. Iames the Lords brother, did rise againe frō death, about 300. yeres after he was buried, to come & helpe Basili∣us to sing Masse: or she may likewise say, That Iames did in his time establishe the Masse: but because there were no altars to be found, by reson there was not yet as then any reliques of Saints, which had wroght miracles: and that men might not without
being furnished with certein reliques,Placuit vt altaria de consecra. dist.  erect anie altars to serue Masse vpon: it may be, that the Masse knitt vp in an Atturnies bagge hanged vp vpon a pinne in some cor∣ner, till the cōming of Basilius, which was about 300. yeres after: like as otherwhiles they hang vp some processes at Machelin vpon a naile a hundred yeares or two. In summe, let it be as it wil, it is all one. Once we cōclude hereby, that the Masse was or∣deined by Iames the apostle. And it is to be thought, that Iames had learned it of Cle∣ment pope of Rome,These letters are written word for worde in the begin∣ning of the first booke of coun∣cels. who had written two pleasant letters vnto him, wherein he doth specially treat of the seat of the B. of Rome: and that Peter through his desertes or me∣rites, was become the foundation of the Church: and so forth declares at large, how the Masse shall be deuoutly done, what ap∣parell, what hallowing, and what other ne∣cessaries shall be vsed in the doing of it, in what clothes the Sacrament shall be laid, that it may bee kept cleane from Mouse dongue, and that no wormes nor mothes come at it: as in the first part of the coun∣cels, in the second letter of Clement, is by expresse wordes specified. Whereby may be noted, what great and heauie troubles
this good Clement had, and what maner of Prophet he was, considering that hee set out in writing, all the ceremonies of the ho∣lie Church, which were not founde yet in 700. or 800. yeares after Clements time. And therefore it is, that our deare mother the holy Church doth make so high an ho∣liday of these decretall letters of Clement, and of other his companions, that she hth out of the same established a great manie of her ordinances and holy ceremonies. In summe, it is plaine and euident, that the ho∣lie Masse hath her ground and foundation without the Scripture. The .iii. Chapter. That the name and Ceremonies of the Masse are fished out of the holie Scripture. The name of the Masse is out of holie Scripture.NOwe, as touching the name of the Masse, that hath likewise her begin∣ning, vndoubtedly out of the holy scripture: notwithstanding, that there are manie and diuerse opinions of the same. For it is not verie long ago, that certeine great doctours of the Soronish schole at Paris, did (out of that, that is alway written at the end of all the Epistles which Saint Paule hath
written, from whence they were sent, soun∣ding in the Latine tongue, Missa est,Missa est. &c.) conclude, saying, That Paule did thereby giue to vnderstande, whither men should goe to heare high Masse on the Sun∣day. And nowe besides this, there was a Magister noster, which said, that the Apo∣stle Andrew had a Masse booke, and had spoken of the Masse: for Iohn reherseth that Andrew said to Peter his brother,Iohn. 1.42. That he had found the Messias, or the annointed Christ, of whom Moses doth beare wit∣nesse. And this soundes in the cōmon trans∣lation in Latin thus, Inuenimus Messiam quod dicitur Christus: which wordes this wise doctour did expounde thus,Mossias is Missa. We haue founde out the Masse which Christ hath done. Is not that well hit? God helpe vs. Who dare now from henceforth be so stout, as to say, That the Masse standeth not in the scripture? But now, bycause that these Heretikes will needes be so nosewise, & wil vnderstand all languages: insomuch that they do mocke hereat, saying,Petrus Lombard. in the 4. booke of Sentences, dist. 13. chap. 1 & dist. 24. cap. 3 that Messias doth not signifie a Masse▪ but The Messias, that is to say, The annointed: Now Peter Lombard, the writer of the sentences doth
set downe another opinion and iudgement, saying: That this name Missa, is as much to say, as Sending: & is so named, for that at all times there is an Angel sent out of heauen, to consecrate the Corpus domini, that is, The Lordes bodie, by whom the Priest doth send his consecrated God for∣wardes towardes heauen, at such time as he hath vsed these wordes following in the Masse: Omnipotens Deus, iube haec per∣ferri per manus sancti Angeli tui, in sub∣lime altare tuum, &c. that is to say: O al∣mightie God commande that this may by the handes of thy holie Angel, be ca∣ried vp to thy high holy altar, &c. And out of this he doth further conclude, that whersoeuer that Angel doth not come, it cannot be said that there is a Masse. But truely this must be but meere dalliance, for if that were true, that they must tarie for the Angel, there woulde not be one Masse to be founde in the whole world: where not∣withstanding there are Masses soung daily by heapes. And therfore hath our deare mo∣ther the holy church driuen in another naile here, and concluded in the Councell of Senona,Missa is an He∣brew worde, and vncerteine what. that Missa is an Hebrewe worde: now, what it doth signifie is vncertein. For,
notwithstanding that the same Councell saith, that it betokeneth a cleane offering: yet doth not that well agree with the He∣brewe tongue, vnlesse it were so that it were named Nisset.Missa after the Hebrew is Nisset. But it appeares much ra∣ther, to haue come of Massah, which in the Hebrewe doeth signifie Heauinesse, or Curssing: or else of an other Massah,Missa of Massah▪ a curssing. which is interpreted, Seeking: bycause the Priestes doe with fiue wordes seeke God, to see if hee will come into the bread. Euen as the children of Israel did seeke God in the wildernesse Raphidim,Exod. 17.7. to know also whether he were with them, or no: by reason whereof the place was cal∣led Massah, that is say, Seeking: notwith∣standing, that it may be much more strong∣ly founded out of Daniel,Dan. 11.38. who speaking of the Romish Empire, saith, That they shall haue a newe God Maosim, to whom they shall pray, and do worship, with golde, sil∣uer, and precious stones, that is to say, A God of strength, and of force.Missa, is Maos. Wherein without doubt, he doth speake of the Masse-God, which is a God of such power, that he causeth all them that will not honour him, to be burnt. In summe, it is apparant, that the name of the Masse is fetched out of
the Scripture. Ca. altaria si non fuein. de conse. dist. 1. Masse to bee done vpon a fore cornered stone.Nowe further, whereas the Masse may not be long, but vpon a foure cornered stone well foreseene with crosses, and coniured with holie wordes: all that is likewise fet∣ched out of the scripture. For Paule spea∣king to the Corinthians, saieth, That they ought not so to glorie in themselues for the sacrament: cōsidering that the people of Is∣rael, (who notwithstanding were pitifully destroied by the hand of God) had also euen the like sacrament in the beginning,1. Cor. 10.4. Psal. 114.22. Ese. 28.19. Mat. 21.42. Mark. 12.10. Luke. 20.17. Act. 4.11. Rom. 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.6.8. Mat. 15 4▪6. This is euen so concded and estlished vpō the glosse in the ecree, in the chap. altaria si non de consecrat. dist 1. and in the booke called Enheiidion sa∣cerotum of Guido de monte Rocheri. & were also baptised, and had likewise receiued the spirituall meat, to wit, Manna, and dranke the spiritual drinke, which did flow out of the Rocke: and saith further there, in most plaine wordes: And the stone was Christ, that is to say (after the spirituall interpre∣tation of the holie Church) That the Masse must be soung vpon a stone. Item Christ is also called A corner stone: and (which is more) his graue was hewen out of a stone, as Marke doeth winesse: Ergo, it must needes follow, that no Mase may be soung without a stone. And because he was wound in white linnen clothes, therefore must white linnen be vsed in the Masse. And so forth, concerning all such Cere∣monies
as are vsed in the Masse: you may (touching these) read the booke of Duran∣dus, or of Innocentius, de officio Missae, or the booke of Guido de monte Rocherii, called Encheiridion Sacerdotum, that is to say▪ the manuel of Priests. For there you you shall finde plainly set forth, that all the partes of the Masse are finely founded and established vpon the scripture. And to begin withall,At what houre Masse must be saide. you shall find the times appointed for the Masse, that it must be done at three of the clocke: because it is written, that the Iewes did at three of the clock crie, Cruci∣fie him, crucifie him: or at sixe of the clock: for that at sixe of the clocke they did crucifie him: or at nine, because that then he gaue vp the ghost. For although it be so, that the Iewes at that time did reckon their houres otherwise than we do now: so that three of the clocke was with them, as viii. or ix. of the clock before noone, is with vs: and their sixe, as our xii. at noone: and their ix, as our three, at after noone: yet notwithstanding, our deare mother the holie Church doth not ge so narrowly to worke with her recko∣nings. It is sufficient that simplie the names do agree, and then she lettes the rest go where it will.
After this now as touching the apparel, and other consecrated or hallowed stuffe,Albe▪ you shall finde her Albe, or long white gar∣ment in the Scripture, specially where it is written: But he that continueth to the end shall bee saued.Mat. 10.12.24.13. For that long gar∣ment doth signifie long lasting, or long con∣tinuance. Concerning the girdle, where it is written: He that feareth God, shall pre∣pare his heart,Eccle. 2.20. &c. By the girdle which doth tucke vp the clothes, is ment the feare of God. Item, the Maniples are fetched out of that saying, in the Psalme: Those that sowe with tears,Psal. 126.5.6. shall reape with ioy, and bring home their sheaues with glad∣nesse, &c. For the sheaues are called in the Latine tongue Manipuli, so that Dauid did there speake of the Priests maniples. And the stole which they haue about their neckes, commes out of the saying of Paule: Beare in your bodies the dying of our Lord Iesus Christ,2. Cor. 4.10. And last of all the head is founded out of the saying of Peter:1. Pet. 4. But aboue all things haue perfite loue among you. Let vs liue a perfite life. Which is as much to say, ac∣cording to the exposition of the holy church: Let vs put on a Cassuffle,Cassuffle▪ when wee sing
Masse. And yet, besides all this, you shall per∣ceiue, that the most part of all that which is read in the Masse, is fetched out of the Psalmes, and other places of holie Scrip∣ture, here and there, by patches and peeces swept together, and trimly tied on a heape, as if a man of a great manie peeces of golde, as of Ducates, Crownes, Roseno∣bles, and Portagues, glued together with dirt, woulde make a goodly doore for a Swinestie: yet it is most true, that e∣uerie particular peece, hath a particular Pope, whiche did ioyne it to the rest, and so were sewed together, insomuche, that it is a right beggers cloake: as is well knowne to all men, and as may easi∣ly be proued by the Decrees and Catho∣like Histories. And to be plaine, there is not anie thing, great or small, but they are able to bring in Scripture for it: as wee can lightly proue by the foresaid Au∣thours, if neede were. But wee had ra∣ther, that those that long for such meate, shoulde goe to the Market themselues, and buy that they like best, and let it bee dressed at the Tauerne, or Tippling house, according to their owne dit. It is y∣nough
for vs, that wee haue giuen them to vnderstand, who can serue them of such vitaile, and then further as the case shall re∣quire, to proue plainely, that the Masse is founded wholie on high, euen vpon the flat Scripture. The .iiii. Chapter. Teaching that the transubstantiation of chaunging of the bread into the verie bodie of Christ, and the wine into his bloud, is grounded vpon the Scripture, after the in∣terpretation of the Church of Rome. The transub∣stantiation anno 1168. confirmed for an article of our beliefe.NOw, as touching transubstantiation, that is to say, the plaine chaunging of the bread into the verie bodie of Christ, notwithstanding the same was by the holie father Pope Innocentius 3. first set forth for an article of our beliefe, about the yere of our Lord 1198. as by the Decretals is apparant: yet haue we plaine proofes ther∣of in the Scripture. For first, Christ in the sixt Chap. of Iohn saieth thus: 6.55. My flesh is verie meat, and my bloud is verie drinke: that is to say (after the interpretation of our deare mother the holie Church) My flesh is truely, sensibly, and bodily taken and eaten, vnder the accident of the
bread: and my bloud is certeinly recei∣ued and dronken vnder the accident of the wine.The explana∣tion of the Sacrament. For although Christ indeede doe otherwise interpret it, teaching that this eating and drinking, is to be vnderstoode, of comming to him, and of beleuing in him:Iohn. 6.35. I am (saieth he) the liuely bread: Who∣soeuer cōmeth to me, shall not hunger, and whosoeuer doth beleeue in me, shall neuer be athirst. Againe, It is the spirite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth no∣thing: The wordes which I speake vnto you are spirite and life. Yet all this not∣withstanding, so long as the holie Church of Rome will haue it to be vnderstoode of her transubstantiation, as Syluester Prie∣rias high Steward of the palace of Rome, hath specially noted in his golden Rosarie, wherein hee hath gathered all the pleasant Roses and floures of the Catholike inter∣preters together vpon one heape: and con∣sidering that the holy Church cannot erre: Christ must haue patience, & transubstan∣tiation must take place. But we haue yet a much clearer text, to witte, where Christ himselfe saieth: This is my bodie: for by those wordes doeth the holie Church of Rome plainely vnderstand, that the same
which before was breade, is nowe no more breade, although Paule woulde call it breade a thousande times: but is chaun∣ged into the verie bodie of Iesus Christ, as long, and as broade, as it was han∣ging vpon the Crosse. And for that cause it is, that shee doeth disallowe all the expositions and interpretations, which Basilius, Tertullianus, Theodoretus, Au∣gustinus, and other holie Fathers haue sette foorth vpon the same: saying, That those woordes must bee figuratiuely and sacramentally vnderstoode, as Christ himselfe hath plainely saide: I am the vine: or, as Paule saieth: The stone was Christ: and as GOD spake to Abraham, saying: This is my promise, Cut off the fore skinne, &c. Which is as muche to say, that the breade shoulde not chaunge his nature, nor the verie bo∣die of Christ bee there present, but one∣lie that it shoulde bee a true and holie to∣ken, a Sacrament, a warrant and pledge, a Seale and assuraunce, whereby wee are assured and fullie certified, that hee hath giuen vppe his bodie and bloud for our saluation. And for this cause doe they call it, a figure, or token, and in the
Greeke Typus, and Antitypa, that is to say, Speciall tokens. But I doe tell you, that the holie Church of Rome will not al∣lowe anie such interpretations: vnlesse it were so, that men woulde vnderstand them as Damascenus doeth interprete them, and as was in the seconde Councell of Nice concluded by the Fathers: to witte, That the breade shoulde bee such a seale, pledge, figure, and holie token, onely before it be consecrated: which is to say, It should be a Sacrament, before it is become a Sa∣crament. For, that this is their conceite and meaning, it is apparaunt out of this, That long before the breade and the wine bee consecrated, or made a holie Sacra∣ment: they doe offer vppe the same vnto God, for remission of sinnes, as well of the liuing, as of the dead.The Canon of the Masse. For in the Ca∣non of the Masse: yea, before the bread bee turned into fleshe, or the fiue holy wordes of consecration be heard, the Priest doeth pray, That God will accept that offe∣ring of breade,Looke in the Masse booke in the Canon of the Masse. and through that deli∣uer him from eternall death: And then, That hee will blesse the saide offering of breade in all pointes, and make the
same, holie, profitable meate, and ac∣ceptable: That is, may become the bo∣die and bloud of Iesus Christ. Yea, and before hee hath yet put the wine into the Chalice, immediately after the Offertorie, he saith thus: The prayer of the priest at the eleuation and consecration of the Offertorie.O holie Father, almightie and euer∣lasting God, take and receiue this vn∣spotted sacrifice, which thine vnworthie seruaunt doeth offer vppe vnto thee for my sinnes, and innumerable misdeedes, for my forgetfulnesse and vnthankeful∣nesse: yea, and for all these which are here present, and for all faithfull Christi∣ans, as well those that be liuing, as those that be dead, that it may bee acceptable, auailable, and effectuall vnto the salua∣tion both of me, and of them, vnto eter∣nall life, Amen. And in one of the secretes which is commonly read vpon the 24. Sunday after Trinitie Sunday, he saith thus: O Lord, take and receiue mercifully this offering,Another praier to the same effect. through which thou art pleased, contented, and pacified, and hast receiued vs againe vnto saluation, through the almightinesse and vnspeak∣ablenesse of thy mercie, &c.
Consider now, here doeth our deare mo∣ther the holie Church, ascribe vnto this bread, all things which may be attributed vnto our Lorde Iesus Christ, the onely be∣gotten sonne of God: as to say, That God is become mercifull to vs, for the bread sake, and hath pardoned vs our sinnes: and that before the bread bee consecra∣ted, or in anie point transubstantiated or changed. What maruell is it then, that they doe make a God of it, after the fiue wordes be spoken ouer it, and yet make a Sacrament of it, before it can be a Sa∣crament? For as they can of a peece of breade make God himselfe, and of nothing create something: wherfore should not they likewise be able to make of no Sacrament a Sacrament: and of a Sacrament, no Sa∣crament? That is to say, that a simple peece of bread shoulde bee a holie token and seale of the bloud of Iesus Christ, euen before it bee made holie and consecrated. And then Econtra, that the Sacrament of the bodie of Christ, shall bee no more ei∣ther a Sacrament, or token, but euen the verie bodie of Christ it selfe? So that the holie Fathers must needes haue vnder∣stoode it so, especially, when they say that
this Sacrament is but a token, a seale, and a pledge, specialy before it is become a Sa∣crament. For after that it is once a Sacra∣ment, then (no remedie) our deare mothers will is, that it shall bee fleshe and bloud, and not anie longer neither bread nor wine, to signifie the fleshe and the bloud. And therefore doeth she not make anie account of the exposition of Christ Iesus himselfe, who (after he had saide of the bread) This is my bodie: and afterward of the Cha∣lice of Cuppe: This is the new Testament in my bloud: thereby declaring, that those words, This is my bodie, must be so vnder∣stoode, as if hee had saide:Luke, 22.20. 1. Cor. 11.25. This breade is the new promise in my bodie, which shall bee broken for you. For of that shoulde followe, that the breade, after the consecration, and likewise after the spea∣king of the fiue wordes, should still remaine breade, and so bee but simplie a Sacra∣ment, and true token of the bodie of Iesus Christ: as shewing vnto vs the promise of God, made in the breaking of the bodie, and shedding of the bloud of Christ Ie∣sus our Sauiour, as was saide of the Circumcision: This is my couenant which I doe make with you, to witte, for that
the Circumcision is a sure and holie pro∣mise, a pledge, and seale, through which the promise of God is verie stronglie and sub∣stantiallie made vnto the faithfull. No, no, I assure you: that liketh the holie Church of Rome nothing at all. She will lay fast holde vpon the first wordes of Christ, and not seek after anie exposition or glosse, how necessarie soeuer they bee. And for that cause shall Paule go without anie Audi∣uit, when he commeth in with his inter∣pretation, and saith, That the bread which we do breake, is the communion of the bodie of Christ. For thereby it should also seeme, that it remaineth bread still after the consecration: and that it is not the bodie it self, but a remembrance of the bodie▪ which thing the holie Church in no wise admit∣teth nor alloweth, for life nor death. But es∣peciallie, she will not accept nor like of the interpretation following, wherein Paule proceeding doeth declare, how and where∣fore the bread is the communion of the bo∣die of Christ, saying, For al we which eate of one bread, become one bodie. Nowe truelie, that soundeth not well: for we do not al becom one bodie in substance, as the holie Church will haue the bread be∣come
the verie body of Christ in substance. But then the similitude, which after that he introduceth or bringeth in, is to farre out of the way. For hee saieth, That those which feede of the altar, are partakers of the altar: and that those that offer vp to idols, are partakers with the diuell. And so making a comparison of the table of the Lord, and the table of the diuell: as though the Priestes could not eate vp that bodie of Christ otherwise, than as idolaters eate vp the diuels: and as though these wordes, Eate that bodie of Christ, did signifie no∣thing else, but this, through the power of the holie Ghost to be made one bodie ioynt∣lie with the bodie of Christ, as the vngodly idolaters, by power of the wicked spirite are vnited with the diuell: That is to hey∣nous an heresie: and therefore wee may not stande vpon this similitude: for it soun∣deth diectlie against our Transubstan∣tiation. But when you will haue a substantiall similitude, you must search and seeke it out of Scotus, and Thomas de Aquino, or Panormitanus, and such like. For they bring in for this purpose, a goodlie si∣militude of a Tauerne, or common Inne,
where they sell wine: For as there is com∣monlie a potte, a garlande,The Sacra∣ment compa∣red to a wine Tauerne. or Iuie bush hanged out, betokening that to be a Ta∣uerne: and the Tauerne doeth signifie, that there is wine plentie: So likewise you see here the outward accidentes of bread, to witte, the roundnesse and the whitenesse, which doe signifie, that vnder the same is conteined the verie bodie of Christ, which is to bee resem∣bled to the Tauerne. And this bodie of Christ doeth further signifie the holie Church of Rome, which is made one with the bodie of Christ, which they call Mysticum corpus Christi, that is to say, The spiritual or mystical bodie of Christ: and this is that sweete wine which the Priestes drinke in that Inne or Tauerne. And after this they doe likewise bring for a similitude, the water which in Cana of Ga∣lilie was plainlie turned into wine: which similitude doeth so wonderfull well serue for this purpose, as to set a fift wheele in a wagon. But it is pitie that the Priestes haue not other fiue wordes, whereby they might do that too. For then should the si∣militude serue their turne much better, if that they might (when they woulde)
conuerte and turne the water into good wine: for that they might therewith the better scoure and refresh their drie throtes, when they are become verie hoarse with singing of their seruice. And it is verie true, that they doe what they can for that purpose: for on Saturday, being Easter eeuen, they praye vnto God, that hee will also do so much as to turne their Beere, say∣ing,This is the ve∣rie praier of the priest ouer the Beere, from worde to word, as it standeth in the Masse, & as Munst. saith O Lord, holie Father, almightie and eternal God, which hast made both hea∣uen and earth, wherein the water is con∣teined: I pray thee, and instantly beseech thee, in the name of Iesus Christ thy on∣lie begotten Sonne, that thou (of thy goodnesse) wilt blesse and make holie this Beere, as thou diddest blesse the din∣ner of Abraham and Isaak: and as thou diddest blesse the sixe pottes in Cana of Galilie, which were chaunged from wa∣ter into good wine: euen so change (for thy seruantes sake, which do beleeue in the Catholike faith) this substance of Beere into pleasantnesse and mirth,The changing of the Beere. tho∣rough the same, &c. But alas, what can all this helpe, when it will not so come to passe? For they haue not this cunning: and therefore they must
needes haue bene deceiued, and so drinke vp the bloud vppon rawe fleshe. For men may say all what they will, and Paule: yea, Christ him selfe, may bring forth what interpretation they list, but the holy church will stande to the first wordes, This is my. bodie: and vpon that will she liue and die The texte is plaine ynough for her, shee hath no neede, either of glosse, or inter∣pretation. And therefore vnto all the inter∣pretations which these Heretikes bring in, whether it be out of the Scriptures, or out of the auncient Fathers, wee will an∣swere, This is my bodie: and sticke as sure to that, as the Cuckoe to her song. The v. Chapter. Treating of the great stife and difference which is amongst the Romishe Doctours, concerning the words of the Sacrament: and yet all they agree and stande fast touching the Transubstantiation. Herein are like∣wise set forth some textes of Scripture, whereby Tran∣substantiation is established. IT is verie true, that our Catholike Doc∣tours and subtile maisters of Diuinitie,Difference a∣mong the Ca∣tholike Doctors touching the Sacrament▪ can not (euen they them selues) finde anie good resolution of these words, neither can make them serue the turne well, touching their Transubstantiation, but that there
doeth alway fall great difficultie and disor∣der therin. The bookes sticke out in euery side like a spindle in a bagge: in so much that they snarre and iarre amongst them∣selues in this matter,Of the great trouble and dis¦agreement a∣mong the catho¦like Doctours, as touching the wordes of the Consecration, reade Syluester Pririas in his golden Rose▪ in tract. 2. di pa∣asceues. like dogges & cattes: yea, Quot capita, tot sensus: How many heads, so manie opinions. And yet not∣withstāding, they all ioyntly crie together, This is my bodie. The text is cleare, and needes no glosse: yea, they cleaue as close to Transubstantiation, as claye to the cart wheele. Although they can not tell which way to frame this plaine text. For to begin withal, they all flatly flie from that which was concluded in the foresaid Councell of Rome, that is, That the verie bodie of Christ shuld be Sensualiter, that is to say, Sensiblie, and visiblie eaten, and with the teeth chewed in morsels. For to that they all affirme flatlie, No: and that it is a false lie, notwithstanding it is set out in the De∣crees verie substantially. For (say they) the bodie of Christ can no more bee bitten, eaten, nor digested: he can not now die nor suffer anie more, nor bee broken in pieces: he doth liue eternally. Which is apparant by this token, that yeerelie vpon Corpus Christi day, our deare mother the
holie church doeth in her vsuall Hymne or Sacramental Carroll sing these words fo∣lowing: Sub diuersis speciebus, Signis tantùm & non rebus▪ Latent res eximiae: Caro cibus, sanguis potus, Manet homo Christus totus▪ Sub vtraqué specie: A sumente non concisus, Non confractus nec diuisus▪ Integer accipitur: Sumit vnus, sumunt mille, Quantum isti, tantum ille, Nec sumptus absumitur, &c. That is to say: Vnder signes most plaine to see, Substance none which seeme to be, Things lie hid most excellent: The flesh is meate, the bloud is wine▪ A perfect Christ in either signe, Remaineth of the Sacrament. He is not dealt in morsels small, Diuided, cutte, nor hurt at all, But whole he is receiued: A thousand taste, a thousand eate, And all alike feede of one meate, He wastes not though digested.
Nowe see here, thus do they deface their owne Councels and Decrees, and make al the holie Fathers of the Councel of Rome liers. After this, come in Scotus and In∣nocentius the fourth, and they will defend (a Gods name) That it consisteth not in the fiue wordes, to hang the vell about the cattes necke: but that it is much rather done through the benediction or blessing that goeth before. So as the Transubstan∣tiation and verie changing doeth not pro∣ceede through these wordes, Hoc est cor∣pus meum, This is my bodie: but through the benediction or blessing which went be∣fore. Petrus de Aliaco vpon the 4.  of Sen. qu. 5.And Peter de Aliaco saith likewise verie plainlie, That if it were so, that the con∣secration should be by vertue of these fiue wordes (as the holie Church of Rome doeth say and beleeue) then should not Christ Iesus haue spoken the truth, when he said: This is my bodie: considering that it was not yet his bodie, but must first become his bodie. The other are ear∣nestlie against this.Armacanu in the 9. boke ca. 5 Nowe Armacanus verie willing to please both parties, saieth, that they both haue reason, namelie, That our Lorde should not haue spoken the
trueth, and yet that it should be euen so as he had spoken and said. Occam in his Quodlibet questions, hath found out won∣derfull sharpewittie testimonies and au∣thorities, which a blinde man should hard∣lie haue sene without a paire of spectacles: for he saith, That when Christ said: This is my bodie, he ment then to speake the same of his bodie: yet notwithstanding vpon certeine exceptions & conditions, to wit, That the Priest which should vtter and speake such wordes after him, as soone as he had said the first pretie word (This) should then immediatlie vpon a sodeine thinke vpon two things at once: the first, This is my bodie, which now at this present shalbe secretly hid vnder the substance of bread, shall become mine owne bodie hereafter: the seconde, This bodie which is nowe hid vnder the sub∣stance of bread, that is my bodie, euen now at this present time. And this onely should proue true, after he had thought vpon these two propositions both at one instant. And it seemeth, that Armacanus was also of the same opinion. Petrus de A∣liaco, hauing first verie subtilie pratled of the matter, doth notwithstāding yet at last
fall out of the cart, and findeth faulte with the opinion of Scotus, grounding him selfe fast vppon this pointe and purpose, That the fiue wordes are those which make the sporte, and transubstantiateth or turneth the bread. Alas (saith hee) it is a sentence which is not true,The explana∣tion of Petrus de Aliaco. and yet notwithstanding it is no lie: but is neither fishe nor fleshe. In summe, it is as much to say, as, Giue the Doues drinke.Thom. de Aquin. 5. part, qest. 78. article 5. Thomas de Aquino saith, That our Lord, by that first worde, Hoc, This, did not teache anie thing cer∣teinlie: but meant to say simplie & in a grosse maner thus: That which is here vnder the substāce of bred, let it be what it can, it is my bodie. And whereas some will withstand this, saying, That the same is nothing else, but bread, till such time as it be transubstantiated or chaunged, vnto that hee answereth, Not so. For this sen∣tence (saieth hee) is not fullie conclu∣ded, till the last syllable, to witte, Vm, be pronounced.Vm, the last syl∣lable of these fiue words, Hoc est corpus mem And therefore no iudge∣ment can be geuen of the veritie or falsitie, till such time as the fiue woordes be fullie pronounced. For then is the matter first cleare, and the bread perfectlie chaunged
into the bodie of Christ. Richardus de sancto Amore saieth,In his booke of the Trinitie. That these wordes, This is my bodie, is iust as much as to say thus, The thing, whereinto this bread and wine shall bee chaunged, is my bodie. Other againe will saie, that Christ did not by this worde Hoc, This, meane the bread: but simplie, the accidentes or qualities of the bread, to witte, The whitenesse, The thicknesse, & The roundnesse: and that these words, This is my bodie, is as much to say, as, My bodie is here hidde vnder the acci∣dentes or qualities of the bread. The holie Bishop Durandus is of ano∣ther opinion, namelie,Durandus, reade the 16. chap. of the second part That Iesus Christ did once consecrate, by his secret pow∣er, which is hidde and vnkowen vnto vs, and not by power of these woordes. But yet should hee (notwithstanding) af∣ter that haue set foorth by the fiue wordes, the fourme and manner that men should vse to plaie this parte of Transubstantia∣tion after him. In so much that the Priestes should nowe consecrate by an o∣ther power and vertue, than Christ Ie∣sus did. Contrarie to this, Comestor is of opiniō,Comestor▪
That Christ consecrated with the same words, but that he did first whisper them out secretlie betweene the teeth, and so changed the bread into his bodie, & the wine into his bloud, which being done, he spake the same wordes alowde to his Apostles. Nowe let see what good Beere you can brewe of this, and ioyne al these wise heads together, to trie which of them is the wi∣sest of all, and who hath shotte downe the Popingaie. Truelie, for my parte, I be∣leeue neuer a one of them all. For the Ca∣tholike Doctours of our time, haue bene forced nowe againe a freshe to fetch out of a corner, other newe, and vengeance wise fetches and strange trickes wherewith to mainteine the matter and make it good a∣gainst these Heretikes: and yet are not at this present agreed amongst them selues: neither can they tell wherevpon to settle & ground them selues.Bishop Gardi∣ner of VVinche∣ter. For that good Gar∣diner (a Goliah amongst the Catholikes) did set forth a great booke vppon this mat∣ter, & hath found out manie quickwittie re∣sons, saying, That our Lorde, when hee spake these woordes▪ did meane a thing which is not to be found: and he doeth
name it, Indiuiduum vagum, that is to say, A litle incomprehensible winde, or moth, which flieth hence awaye in the aire. In summe, it is euen as much as a litle nothing, hanging by a small silke thred. And then hee saieth further, That this worde, Hoc, must bee vnderstoode of such an Indiuiduum vagum, or flying moth. I beleeue verelie, that hee hath drawne this out of Democritus well, who saieth, That trueth lay buried in a deepe hole: and so in the meane space doth teache for a veritie, That there are manie litle waue∣ring things, alwayes shaking and flying in the aire, which he doeth call in Greeke A∣tomi, signifying Indiuiduum, or Inseca∣bile in Latin. And out of these flying or wild vesekens shuld the world, by operatiō of it selfe, be made and brought together. Which fantasie that good man Epicurus, and all Epicuristes haue likewise follow∣ed, and stoutlie defended. And euen so will our Gardiner likewise mainteine, That this holie breadgod should bee made of an Indiuiduum vagum,Gods bread made of an In∣diuiduum vagum or wild veseken and that Christ knewe well to speake of that matter: al∣though the Bakers might verie well
protest against that, and say, That they haue made it of good wheate meale: yea, of the finest wheate flower with dogges grease, and not of a wild veseken, which is no where to be found. But Iohannes de Louanio, that woorthie and profounde learned Magister noster,Iohannes de Louanio. who hath so long caried the wisedome of Louen in his head, that in the ende his braine did waxe feeble, and he starke madde, that man in his booke which hee did write vppon this matter, saieth, That herein chaunced a great mi∣racle, to witte, that the bread is no more bread: but that there doeth remaine onelie the qualities of the bread hanging in the aire, without grounde or bottome, as if a Cow should hang vpon a cherie tree: and that yet likewise there remaines amongst these qualities a perfect substance of bread: so that it is still bread, and yet not∣withstanding it is no bread. In summe, you shall finde as manie peares as plummes. Yea, is no: and No is yea. Chickens eate haie, and with them horse turdes and good sweete figges are all one. There are manie both hie and lowe spe∣culations, amongest our Doctours, who
yet trauell continuallie (like Asses) to vn∣do this knotte, and yet can not bring it to passe: For the deeper they wade in the matter, the more they are wrapped and entangled therein. For they perceiue verie well, that it will not come to anie good per∣fection, so that the bread should become the verie bodie of Christ: for that then it must needes followe, That the bread died for vs, and that a dead and liuelesse creature should be our God and Sauiour: and yet would they verie faine bring the matter to passe, so that they would seeme to sticke to the word of God: and yet for all that, main∣teine and vpholde their Transubstantiati∣on also. They do well consider, that they can not iustifie the wordes, vnlesse they do expound them sacramentallie, and figu∣ratiuelie, as the Heretikes doe, who make no great matter of vengeance wittie que∣stions. But our Doctours and faithfull Ca∣tholikes wil neuer come to that baite, they will rather spend both hide and haire, than they will recant & giue ouer their opinion: yea, it were also an eternal slaunder for our deare mother the holy church, and a meane wherby she shuld susteine to great damage. For Transubstantiation is the verie best
fisheponde and shambles that belongeth to her kitchen: and therefore will shee de∣fende that with tooth and naile, and in no wise suffer it to bee plucked out of her handes. Wherefore it is no maruell, that our Doctours had rather inuent newe mi∣racles one vpon another, and make newe and straunge glosses neuer hearde of be∣fore: yea, turne all topsie turuie, neither touching the heauen, nor the earth, and brall and chide one against another like whoores, knaues, and cutpurses, than they would consent and agree to doe such a spite∣full displeasure to their entirelie beloued mother the holy Church of Rome, as to ioyne with the Heretikes, her mortall eni∣mies, to fetch out of Paule, or out of the old Fathers, a sacramentall exposition, and thereby to doe iniurie to the worthie Tran∣substantiation. They are yet besides this, in great difference & dissention about ma∣nie questions depending vpō the same mat∣ter:These questi∣ons you shall haue in the wri¦ters of the Sen¦en. vpon the 1. & 2. cap. of the 12. dist. & vpon the 1. cap. of the 13 dist. in the 4 booke of the Sentences. for they cannot conceiue whervpon the qualities of the bread are founded or groun∣ded, considering that it is no more bread: & then, that it cannot be said, that the bodie of Christ it self shuld be round, white, sauour, & weigh, as bred: then, whether this weight,
this roundnesse, and this colour remaine hanging in the aire without anie prop, or that they are cleane consumed, or where they remaine? Item, when the offertorie or Oste is broken, what is there broken, whether the accidents and substance of the breade, or the verie bodie of Christ it selfe? Item, whether this transubstantiated body is so quickly gone,Whether a rat or a mouse do eate the bodie of Christ. when there commeth a Mouse or a Ratte to gnawe vpon it, or when Mothes or wormes do breede in it? Thereof they dispute a pace, whether the substance of the bread doeth then, with his accidentes and qualities, get him home a∣gaine, or that the Rattes or Mice do gnaw vpon nothing else, but onely vpon the acci∣dents and qualities, without touching the bread. It is verie true, that the maister of the Sentences did leaue off this point very slenderly. For these are his wordes: Verelie it may well be said, that vnrea∣sonable beastes do not eate the bodie of Christ, although it seemeth they doe so:In the booke of Sentences the 1. chap. dist. 11. but then, what is it that the Mouse ta∣keth, or what is it that shee eateth? That doth God knowe. Yet notwithstanding, those other doc∣tours, which haue written vpon the booke
of Sentences, are not therwithall satisfied, but will yet haue a further consideration of the matter: especially considering, that the glosse of Henricus de Vrimaria,A mouse and a sinner in the 1. chap. of the 9. dist. in the 4. booke of the Sentences. writ∣ten vpon that text, saieth thus: That the mouth of a Mouse is not so vncleane, as the mouth of a sinner, And all they ge∣nerally doe teache, that the sinners doe without doubt eate the verie bodie of Christ: Ergo Potlid. Nowe besides this, yet can they not a∣gree amongest themselues, to knowe whe∣ther all the woordes which they of them∣selues haue added, which are not writ∣ten by the Euangelistes, doe serue neces∣sarily to the Transubstantiation, or no? For Thomas de Aquino, will stoutely de∣fende, That they are most necessarie there∣vnto, and that without them the Tarte cannot bee well baked. Now against this, Bonauentura, and maister Henricus de Gandauo, with diuerse other, writing vp∣on the fourth Booke of the Sentences, say that these wordes serue onely to beau∣tifie and set foorth the other for comelinesse sake: but it is needlesse for Scotus to write his opinion, considering that it cannot bee certeinly knowne, whether they bee verie
needfull or no. And yet notwithstanding, he doth conclude, that the Priest is bounde to say them, neither more nor lesse, than as if they were most necessarie to the framing or making of the Transubstantiation. And Guido de monte Rocherii, doeth flatly confesse, That he knowes not what to say to the matter. Then further they are in contention,Wine with wa∣ter transub∣stantiated. whether the water which they doe mingle with the wine in the Chalice, is first chaun∣ged into wine, and after that into bloud: so that there shoulde be two transubstantia∣tions at once? Or that it is incontinent and by and by turned into bloud, as well as the wine? And if it become bloud, as ap∣peareth it shoulde, by the example of the two Gosseps, of whome I spake before, by what power that can bee so, seeing Christ did not meddle with anie water, nor the Euangelistes doe not write anie thing thereof? And then, if the Priest shoulde putte more water into it, than wine, (whiche they doe not gladly,This question you shal haue in the writers of the Sentences, in the 5. chap. the 11. dist. in the 4. booke. or willingly:) whether then the Transub∣stantiation shoulde take full effect, or that it would stay, for doubt of drowning in the water?
Item, if by chance, after that the wine be consecrated, & turned into bloud, one should put into the Chalice as much wine more, whether then the first wine shoulde bee no more bloud, but become wine again, or that it should be bloud and wine mingled toge∣ther: either that it shoulde all together bee turned into bloud? Item, whether a Priest may say and serue Masse with vinegre, or veriuce, or with must, or whether for neede with beere: and whether that the beere (af∣ter the fiue wordes spoken,Looke in the booke called Encheiridion sa∣cerdotum, in the 3. chap. de sa∣cramento Euchar. and all parts of the transubstantiation well plaid) could doe his office as well as the wine, and leape soudeinly out of one substance into ano∣ther? Item, if there were thirtene or four∣tene Offertories, Ostes, or singing cakes, laid vpon the altar, and that the priest could tell no better than my maide, and so tolde but twelue, and vppon that intent doe pro∣nounce the fiue wordes, thinking that there were but twelue: then whether all the thirtene should be consecrated and transub∣stantiated: considering that the intent and meaning of the Priest, is wholie necessarie to the transubstantiation: or that neuer one of them should be transubstantiated, cōside∣ring that the one hath as much vantage as
the other, and not any one of them more base or bastard than an other, seeing that they all did heare and vnderstand the wordes of the Transubstantiation indifferently, one as well as another. There are yet (besides these) manie o∣ther like difficulties, sufficient to make de∣uout catholike men to doubt, touching this foresaid article of transubstantiation: for (I assure you) they trouble the heades euen of our masters of Louen, and are oftimes oc∣casion that they must drinke two or three quartes of wine the more, and sometimes be so dronke, that they fall from the benche, and catch a redde nose: yea, and sometime that they dispute the haire from their heads, through the great zeale wherewith they are warmed, whereby they often fall into dron∣ken diseases, and sometime into Plurisies, whereof diuerse times they die: and so the Church of Rome doth faile of her best pil∣lars. And yet for all this, as concerning the highest and most principall article of tran∣substantiation, they al danse after one pipe, and agree as well in one, as Herode and Pilate. And as touching the rest, they re∣mit that to God, to take care for: for after that they haue brought forth many cunning
trickes, and deepe wittie speculations, and bralled about those a long time, and in v∣tramque partem, that is to say, pro & cō∣tra, to and fro, haue reasoned on both sides verie Magistraliter, that is, Maisterly in deed. In the end they make this cōclusion: Sed quomodo hoc fit,In the 4. booke of the sentences in the before named dist. nescio, Deus scit: that is, I cannot tell what to say to the matter, I cannot conceiue how that may come to passe, God knoweth all: And yet notwithstanding, they doe alway conclude this to be an article of the faith, whereof no man must doubt. For our deare mother the holy Church will haue it so. And yet in the meane space, for the better stay of deuout cō∣sciences, & somthing to establish these great doubts, they haue ioyntly found out a newe practise to prop vp their generall building of Transubstantiation, to wit, first a great beame which they call Concomitantiae: & then a long rib, called, The stedfast intenti∣on of the holy Church: wherewith they do so strongly prop vp this building, that not only Christs bodie,Whether a Priest being halfe dronken, & in a dream, can make the bodie of Christ, &c. but the whole Godhead may sand vpon it without falling. And if it were so, that the priest did dreame, & had no regard to his Masse: yet haue they a reme∣die for that. For the good intent of the holie
Church is so sure and vnremoueable, that the intent of the Priest is not greatly to be accounted of, but may well inough go walk abrode, and see if there be anie good cheare toward, and that his maid keepe good rule at home, which is a iolly matter. For other∣wise, if the priest were yet half dronke with good cheare the eeuen before, or that his maid had chafed him, or that but only a flie did come & sit vpon his nose, he might per∣haps therby forget his good intent, euen as he was speaking the holy wordes, and then should not that bread becme a God: which were a perilous matter. For the simple peo∣ple should then pray to a peece of bread, in place of their God & creator. Therefore cō∣meth the holy Church now in for a helpe, & doth set forth for a perfit article of our faith, that it is likewise sufficient for euerie one to beleue, whatsoeuer the Church beleues, al∣though they know not what it is.Guido de monte Rocherii. And again it is sufficient that the holy church haue ge∣nerally a perfite determination, that where∣soeuer Masse is don, there is the bred chan∣ged into God, although it were so that the priest did thinke onely vpon his maid, or on his kitchen. In summe, there is not a hole, but the hellish Church hath a peg to stop it
withall, she can turne euerie thing to the best: so that there is no more difficultie. And if the Doctours and Licentiates, doe chide and brall among themselues, that makes no great matter: we ought to com∣mit all these weightie causes, to the iudge∣ment of the holie Catholike Church, and must simplie and ioyntly beleeue, That as soone as the fiue wordes are spoken, that which the Priest hath in his handes is tur∣ned into God, let it then be what it will, ei∣ther verie bread, or the accidents of bread, or an Indiuiduum vagum, that is, a wilde veseken. That is no matter at all to vs, it is sufficient that wee knowe it is our God, which we must pray vnto in the Masse. For the text is plaine: This is my bodie, there needes no glosse vpon it. And although it be so, that all the Doctours of Louen, of Paris, and of Colen, cannot vnderstand it: yet it is sufficient for vs, that we haue fetcht our transubstantiation out of it, and sette it forth irreuocably. Although we haue yet manie mo other plaine textes, whereby to defend it: which are verie plentifully sette forth by the worshipfull Eckius, and other worthie pillars of the holie Catholike Church: as specially that which is written
in Ieremie, That when the vngodly Iew∣ish Priests and false Prophets went about to bring Ieremie to death, because hee did earnestly condemne their vngodli∣nesse, they said thus one to another: Let vs marre his bread with wood, or let vs destroy the fruite together with the tree, & roote him out of the kingdome of the liuing. For this now hath our deare mo∣ther the holie Church turned for the best vnto our Masse priests, as though they had holden this Councel together, and saide: Mittamus lignum in panem eius,Iere. 11.1 that is to say, Let vs cast wood into his bread, vnderstanding thereby, that they will coun∣terfeit (in their Masse) the passion & death of Iesu Christ, who suffred vpon the crosse, with a peece of bread. And to this end doe they cause these woordes to be soung yere∣ly in the Passion: wherevpon shee hath re∣solutely concluded, That the bread is chaunged into the verie bodie of Christ Ie∣sus: as is to bee seene in the foresaid booke of Eckius, and of other stoute Champions of the Romish Church. Yea, and likewise to proue that this Transubstantiation is neither so wonderfull, nor vnnatural, as the Heretikes exclaime, that doeth Eckius
teach out of the Scripture, where the diuel said to Christ:Mat. 4.3. If thou be the son of God, commande that these stones bee made bread. Consider now, is not that a plain de∣claration, wherto no answer is to be made? And by this it is wel to be thought, that the diuell woulde gladly haue had a Masse in the wildernesse, but onely that it could not be for lacke of bread. And this may possi∣bly be the cause, wherefore our mother the holie Church doth (vpon all the altars, and in all thee bookes, where this storie is in hand and dealt withall) clothe the diuell in a friers cowle, to the end men may knowe, that he was an holie Heremit,The diuell did Masse in the wildernesse. or an Anker, which did verie deuoutly say Masse in the wildernesse, and therefore doth looke out so Masselike. But when he saw he did lacke bread, then he sought and made meanes to our Lorde, to see if he would erect a newe transubstantiation. And now, because this temptation of the diuell is in the Hebrewe tongue called Massah, (as is before rehear∣sed) therefore it is not to be thought vnlike,Massah is Missa. that our Masse hath thereof borrowed her name. For as Satan said: Commaunde that these stones be made bread: so say the priests in their Masse: Command that
this bread be made a bodie, or flesh. Wherein the Priestes are something more likerish, than their maister was: for that they will not bee contented with drie bread▪ but that hath his vnderstanding and meaning. Howbeit thus much it is in ef∣fect, That our dere mother the holy church, hath out of this Massah, or temptatiō of the diuell, verie strongly established her Tran∣substantiation. The vi. Chapter. Establishing the sufficiencie of the Sacrament vnder the substance of bread alone. WE haue heretofore set forth, that the holie Church of Rome hath directly against the cōmandment of Christ against the vse of the Apostles, and against the long continued custome & maner of the primatiue Church commanded, That the Lay people should not receiue the Sacra∣ment of the Lordes Supper, but vnder one kind only, to wit, of the bread: as it is plain∣ly set foorth in the decree at the Councel of Constance, here before declared. But now because it shal not seeme that she hath much a do to wrest a text or twaine of the Scrip∣ture, & to bring them in to serue her turne, she doth therfore allege here manifest texts
wherewith she doth set all things net, fine, and in perfect frame. This word be∣ng thus alled∣ged  in his manuel in the  chap. of Iohn, and all whatsoeuer is betwne both of the drinkng of his bloud, he hath left in the penne.To begin withall, it is written in the 6. of Iohn, This is that bread which com∣meth from heauen, that he which eateth thereof should not die. I am that liuing bread which came downe from heauen: if anie man eate of this bread, he shal liue for euer. And the bread that I will giue, is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the world, &c. Note here, now doth he meddle but with the bread (saith Eckius) Ergo the Lay peo∣ple neede not the wine. That soundes as well, as if a man shoulde make this argu∣ment: Christ saith in the 15. of Iohn, I am the true vine,Iohn. 15.1.5. you are the braunches, &c. Here he speakes onely of the vine, and not of the bread: Ergo the Lay people need not receiue the Sacrament vnder the sub∣stance of bread, but only vnder the substance of a vine. Is not that verie well reasoned, to catch the Heretikes in a trap? After that we read, that Christ was known in Emaus vnto two of his disciples,Luk. 24.30.31. by breaking of bread: & there is not one word of drinking: Ergo the Lay people may not drink out of the Chalice. And if anie man thinke that
Christ should not there haue ministred a sa∣crament (as the Heretikes will say) that is a lie: for our deare mother the holie church hath determined otherwise, declaring that he did minister the Sacrament two times, once at Hierusalem, for the Priests,In his manuel or ncheidion  commu∣nium, in the cap. of Cardinals, thre he saith that 27 of Christs disci∣ples were all Cardinals. at his last supper: & another time at Emaus, for the Lay people, after his resurrection. And although it is certeine, that these two dis∣ciples were Cardinals, & not Lay men, as Eckius in deede doth finely mainteine in a certein place: yet what is that to the pur∣pose? Did you neuer see Cardinals that were no Priests? That is no newes. There are now a dayes that are but young chil∣dren, & newly crept out of the shelles. And when all this is saide, there is no where written,Looke in the foresaide booke of Eckius, and vpon other Ca∣tholikes which do found vpon this argument. that these two disciples had shauen crownes, or the priestly character or cogni∣sance: Ergo then must they needes be Lay people. Now thirdly, we pray thus in the Pater noster, Giue vs this day our daily bread, and we do not speake of anie wine: wherfore then should the Lay people desire to drinke wine in the Communion? And al∣though the priests thēselues sing the same wordes in their Masse, & yet notwithstan∣ding are not content with drie bread: that
cannot serue the turne. For the prrests must needes haue some prerogatiue, because they are the beloued children of our mother the holy Church. Fourthly, uke in the Acts of the Apostles writeth: That those which beleeued,Act. 2.42. continued in the Apostles doc∣trine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer: which streight-way after he setteth out more amplie, say∣ing: And sold their possessions & goods, and parted them to al men,Act. 2.45.46 as euery man had neede. And they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, & brake bread in euerie house, and did eate their meate together with gladnes and single∣nes of heart, praysing God. Out of this doth our deare mother the holie Church cō∣clude, That the cup ought not to be mini∣stred vnto the Lay people in the Supper of the Lorde, because that here is no mention made of wine, but onely of bread. For al∣though in manie other places of holy scrip∣ture, all kindes of meates and drinkes are vnderstoode vnder the name of bread and eating: yet that can not take place here, considering that our deare mother the ho∣ly Church hath otherwise interpreted the same. And Paul hath directly written, That
all men should esteeme the Apostles and Preachers as Ministers of Christ,1: Cor. 4.8. and dis∣posers of the secretes of God. For out of this doth our dere mother the holie Church teach,This is set forth by brother Barnard of Luxenburgh, to this end, with the arguments following in the register of He∣retikes, in the 12. part of the 4. booke. That the Priests are to be resembled to God, and are mediators betweene God and the people, and so by this meanes may freely chaunge or alter the Sacraments, as they shall thinke good. Is not this a subtile and double dealing with the Scripture? Wherefore then doe these Heretikes say, That we haue no scriptures wherewith to defend this our doing, whereas we bring in sacks ful of Scripture, as all men may see. And then, touching that they will beate vs with our owne rodde, saying, That the Church her selfe hath alwayes done other∣wise, as may appeare out of the ancient fa∣thers, Councels, and Canons, we care not a point for that: we hang that on the hatch. For all that is past and gone, the worlde is now in another state than it was then. For in those dayes, they were for the most part all readie to shedde their bloud for the chri∣stian beliefe.This is writ∣ten by the fore∣said Barnard Professor of diuinitie in the same place be∣fore written. And for that cause did they drinke the bloud of Christ, as the Catho∣like Doctours haue written, according to the doctrine of Cyprianus, saying,
how can they shed their owne bloud for Christes sake,Cyprianus in his 3. epistle and 2. booke written to Caecilius. if they doe not drinke of Christs bloud? But now there is no more tidings of those matters: for the holy church of Rome wil not lose one drop of her bloud: considering that she hath ynough to do for the defence of the holy Catholike faith, to shed the bloud of the Lutherans and Calui∣nists,Psal. 72.1. like water in the streetes. And there∣fore it is not any more needful that the Lay people should drinke the bloud of Christ out of the Chalice vnder the substance of wine. They can digest it well inough rawe, as it was shed out of the bodie of Christ Iesus: yet for all that, the priests haue this aduan∣tage, that they may drinke the bloud of Christ both waies. And yet is not the bloud of Christ in the Sacrament, taken quite a∣way from the Lay people. For when they do eate the whole body, with flesh & bones, it is certeine, that they gette in the bloud wall. For the before named Bonauentura doth make mention of a certein miracle, of one which would not beleue that there was any bloud in the holy Ost,Dist. 4. quaest. 2. or singing bread, vsed in the holie Masse,Eckis in his Manuel or En∣cheiridion loco∣rum. and sodeinly there came bloud rūning out. And likewise Alex∣ander de Ales doth declare, that vpō a time
when the people would haue receiued the Sacrament vnder both kindes, there was sodenlie before them a platter full of bloud, whereof the good deuoute people being meruellously abashed, were glad to content them selues with the one. And that the bloud (vndoubtedlie) is with the bodie, we haue here before by manie other mira∣cles declared, sufficientlie proued. There∣fore haue the Laie people no occasion to complaine, as though the bloud of Christ were denied them: for euen the Priestes them selues are contented with one kinde, on the good Fridaie next after the shire Thursday,Eckius and Bar∣nardus in the places before spoken of and named. when they haue had their sops in good Bastard or Romnay. For then the next day, being good. Friday, they sing a drie Masse, and keepe a Mouses banket, as well as the Laie people doe at Easter.A drie Masse on good Friday Before time likewise, in the Iewish church the Laie people had no parte of the drinke offerings, but the Priestes onelie. For al∣though that Chrysostome saith,In the 18. Ho∣mil. or sermon vpon the 2. Epist. to the Corinthians. tou∣ching this matter, that this is now chan∣ged, and that in this Sacrament the Laie people must enioye the like meate and drinke as the Priestes doe,Chrysostomus. so as nowe the one hath no more aduantage than
the other, as they had in the olde Lawe: yet can not the saying of Chrysostome anie thing serue in this place. For against Chrysostome wil we set Brother Barnard of Luxenburgh, professour in Theologie, and Iohn Eckius, with all other good Ca∣tholike writers of our time, who haue o∣therwise written and determined of this matter. And as touching that which the Huguenotes do alledge out of Paule: yea, out of Iesus Christ him selfe, saying, That Paule did command all christen people, to do according as Christ had ordeined, and as Christ had saide: Drinke all of this: We do answere to that, That this was onelie a simple permission,This is the an∣swer of the be∣fore written Bar¦nardus brought vpon this place and not a speciall commandement: as he saith in another place: Destroie this temple, and I will builde it vp againe within three dayes: for that is no commaundement, but onely a permission, as if he said: If it be so in deede, that you will destroie this temple of my bodie, I will not forbidde you, but I will builde him vp againe, &c. In like manner doeth our mother the hlie Church saie, that these woordes, Drinke you all of this: And, As often as you
drinke this, you shall declare the death of the Lord: Those wordes are thus to be vnderstoode, as though he had said: I doe not will you Laie people to doe so, but the Priestes onelie: notwithstanding, if you will doe it, and that the Priestes are contented withall, I will not then bee a∣gainst it. Thus you see the game is won. Nowe let vs to an other matter, tending to the like ende. The vii. Chapter. VVhich doeth treate of full satisfaction for sinnes, of the desertes of good workes: also of the merites of Chri∣stes passion, and of Iustification: of the difference be∣tweene mortall sinnes and veniall sinnes: and of the as∣sured hope of saluation. NOwe,Of merites & iustification. seeing that wee haue suffici∣entlie spoken of the holie Masse, and the Sacrament of the altar, and that our mother the holie Church of Rome doeth moreouer teache and set foorth for an article of the faith, That wee, by desert, hearing a Masse, and receiuing the Sa∣crament, may make full amendes for our offences, and sufficientlie satisfie for our sinnes: therefore it is now verie necessarie,
that we something treate of satisfaction for sinnes, and of deseruing by good works, the rather, because the Heretikes do with their scriptures so trouble vs, touching this point, as they turne both the spit and the rost meat into the ashes: in so much that wee shall loose both the sheepe and the fleece, if wee suffer this to be so plucked from vs. And therefore it is necessarie to put all good Catholike children in remem∣brance, that in no wise they doe giue anie eare to the Heretikes, touching this point, for feare lest therby they should be brought out of the right way, and so by receiuing their goodlie reasons & multitude of scrip∣tures, be persuaded from their due obedi∣ence to the holie Church of Rome. And to the ende that euerie man should be war∣ned, and not by negligence sodenlie taken in a trappe, therefore shall I set out (some∣thing more at large) their meaning tou∣ching this point, to the ende that euery one may see, whether our deare mother the ho∣lie Church haue not iust occasion so bitter∣lie to curse and banish their doctrine. Then, to beginne withall, they do take vpon them to defende and mainteine by Scripture, That all sinnes are deadlie &
mortall,All sinnes are eedle slnes, 1. Iohn 3.4. because that sinne is the brea∣king of Gods commaundements, as S. Iohn saith: And, That who soeuer doeth not obserue all, whatsoeuer God hath commaunded in his Lawe, is accursed.Dut. 27.26. Galat. 2.10. For S. Iames doeth witnesse,Iam. 1.10. That who soeuer transgresseth in one point of the Lawe, is guiltie in the whole: considering that the same God which cmmaunded the one, did also commaunde the other. In so much that all those which commit sinne,Ephes. 4.18. Col. 1.21. Rom. 5.12. 2. Cor. 15.56. are through sinne alienated and estranged from the life which is onelie to bee had at the hand of God, and so must fall into the hand of heath, seeing that The recōpense of sinne is death,Rom. 6.23. according to the saying of S. Paule, whereby all men (without a∣nie exception) which are vnder sinne,Rom. 3.8.9.10.11.12.22. Roma. 5 2. Gala. 3.21. are likewise vnder the bondage of eternall ma∣lediction, death, and damnation: conside∣ring that all haue sinned & are fallen away from that life which is of God, into his wrath, and do thereby become (if the speci∣all mercie of God were not) the children of wrath, of cursing, and of death: yea,Ephe. 2.3. Galat. 1.3. Ephe. 1.5. Colos. 1.21. Roma. 10.2 Ephe. 5.16. & iust∣lie may be called the verie enimies of God. Out of this they conclude, That in the wide world there is no meae, nor counsell
to be found for the payment & accomplish∣ment of our satisfaction,Roma. 3.18. Iohn. 1.29. 1. Pet. 1.19. Esaie. 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Esaie. 53.4.5.6.7 Gala. 4.4. Gala. 3.17. Cor. 5.21. Act. 2.24. 1. Pet. 3.18. Colo. 1.15.16. Iohn. 1.1.2. Iohn. 1.4. Ioh. 3.15.16.18.36.4.14.5 24.6.35.40.7 38. Roma 3.22.26.28 30.4.5.24.5.2. Gala. 2 16.17.20 3. through∣lie. 5.6. Phil 3.9. Colos. 1.12.23. Roma. 3 24. Ephes. 2.8.9. Roma. 4.4. Tim. 1.9. Tit. 3.5. Ephes. 3.12. Rom. 5 1.8.1.32.33.34. Heb. 10.22. but that all must be discharged to the vttermost farthing: which is as much to saie, that all people are vnder the eternall wrath, curse, & dam∣nation of God: considering that the sen∣tence of God being once pronounced, must endure for euer: and a man being dead, and once taken away from life, can neuer restore him selfe againe to life. And thus (say they) there is no more to be said, but al fleshe are debters vnto God. But hereby is the mercie of GOD made manifest, that the punishment of our sinnes, is laide vpon our Sauiour Iesus Christ, the vn∣spotted lambe of God: that he hath suffe∣red for vs, and taken vpon him our sinnes: that hee, being become man, and hauing put on our nature, hath borne the burthen of this curse, this wrath of GOD, this death, and this hell and damnation, and through his diuine and eternall power (for that hee also was the onelie Sonne of God: yea, euen God him selfe, and the verie authour and well spring of eternall life) hath ouer come and clearelie taken a∣way the same, and hath freelie, and with∣out deserte, by his meere mercie, giuen vn∣to
all those which doe faithfullie beleeue in him, life and iustification. In so much that they nowe, in the person of Iesus Christ, as partakers of his bodie,Roma 2.16. Galat. 4.6.7. 1. Iohn. 4.19. Esae. 49.15. Roma. 4.7.8. 2. Cor. 5.19. Roma. 3.25.4.7. Luke. 1.77. Colos. 1.14. Heb. 8.12. Esaie. 43.25. Ezech. 36.22 Psal. 103.12. Iere. 31.34. Esaie. 43.23. Ezech. 36.12. 1 Iohn 2 2. 2 Pet. 1.19. Psalm. 99.5. Esaie 53.5. 1. Timot. 2.5. 1. Iohn. 2.2. 1. Cor. 6.20. Rom. 1.33. Act. 4.12. Colos. 2.10. boldlie appeare before the Diuine Maiestie of GOD, being assured, that God is their good, mercifull, and most louing Father: and doeth no more charge them with the burden of their sinnes, but most merciful∣lie forgiueth them their olde and odde debtes, and pardoneth them of the punish∣ment which they haue deserued, not tho∣rough anie of their good workes, merites, or desertes, but through the power of the merites and desertes of our Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ, wh hath made restitution for that which he neuer had: and hath not on∣ly taken vpon him to discharge our debtes, but also to suffer our punishment, and hath borne the same wholie in his owne person: so that hee is iustie called, Our raunsome, Our Pastour, Our pledge Our full sa∣tisfaction, and the costlie pice of our sal∣uation, without whom there is no saluati∣on, no raunsome, nor redemption in the worlde. And therefore say they, That who soeuer will beginne to account or reckon with God a newe, and make satisfaction or
payment vnto him,Galat. 5.2.3.4 whether in whole or in parte▪ of that which they are indebted vnto him, those are wholie quite of Gods mer∣cie, and binde them selues soule and bodie to the full obseruing of the Lawe, and doe clearelie take away and renounce (as much as apperteineth vnto them) the merites of Christ: notwithstanding that (by the iust iudgement of God) sinne is so abhomina∣ble, that it can not by anie meanes bee re∣compensed, or fullie satisfied, but onelie by eternall death and damnation, or els by the sweete and most pretious offering of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ, which is (before God the Father) a sufficient satis∣faction and remission for the sinnes of all those that haue their full trust and confi∣dence therein.Rom. 8.55. Heb. 9.24. and 10.12. And also they doe acknow∣ledge, That God doth in the meane space correct his children in this worlde,1. Pet. 1.7. 1. Pet. 5.6. and 4.12. Heb. 12.5.6.7. Psal. 30.7.8. 1. Cor. 11.32. Rom. 5.3.4. Heb. 12.2. Colos. 1.24. Rom. 8.17.28 2. Tim. 1.8. Mat. 22.23. Mar. 12.29. and pro∣ueth their faith by manie and diuerse trou∣bles, crosses, & afflictions: partlie, for that they shall learne to knowe verie well their miserie and calamitie, and thereby be pro∣uoked the rather spedilie to flie to his mer∣cie for succour: partlie, that thereby they may become like vnto their maister & head Christ Iesus: and with him die from sinne,
and rise vp in newnesse of life, and hereaf∣ter liue and reigne with him eternallie: but they will in no wise consent, that these troubles, crosses, & afflictions, should serue anie thing for satisfaction or remission of sinnes, no not so much as for the least sinne that can be thought vpō. And likewise they clearely dissent & disagree from vs, saying, That al the good works that anie man can do, during all his life, can not serue him to anie purpose for the remission of the least sinne that euer he committed: considering that al men (without exceptiō) are of meere dutie bound to obey God, to loue him with all their hearts, with all their might, with all their power, in body and soule, with thanks, & in all that lieth in them: & to loue their neighbours as thēselues: in such ma∣ner, as though they had accōplished al this,Gala. 2.10. 1. Cor. 8.46. Roma. 3.9.10.11.19.22. Roma. 5.12.17.19. Luke. 17.10. (which is impossible for anie man to doe, for that we are dead in Adam, and that all the thoughtes of mans heart, & all the con¦ceites of his mind are meere mischiefe and malice against God, euen from the begin∣ning) in so much that they should yet re∣maine vnprofitable seruantes,Roma. 8.7. Gene. 6.5.8.21. Iohn. 3.6. and should haue done no more than they of verie dutie were bound to do: So farre doeth it differ
that they should be able thereby to satisfie God, & make amends for any such offences, as they heretofore haue committed. For if they should come in reckoning by works, then wee must make a perfect recko∣ning,Roma. 4.4.11.6. & not halfe a reckoning (say they:) o∣therwise works were no works: but contra∣wise, when men do seeke for mercie, & not for iustice,Phi. 3.7.8. Gala. 15.16. then must they (wt Paul) forsake all their works, all their righteousnes, their holines, & all whatsoeuer they haue done, & accompt the same as nothing, to obteine iustification by faith, through God mercy: for otherwise mercie were no mercie.Roma. 11.6. And after this, they proceede on further, & con∣clude in this forme and manner: Gala. 2.16.3.11.12. Roma. 10.5. Esaie. 1.12.58 5. Iere. 7.12.13.14.9.13.14.10.8.18, 22.Now, seeing God will not accept any iustificatiō by those works which he him selfe commanded in his Law, how much lesse will he accept these workes which other men haue deuised, and fetched out of their owne heades, which hee neuer commaunded? As, to hearing of Masse, to runne from one Church to another, to trudge from one altar to another, to go on pilgrimage▪ to weare hairecloth, to whippe them selues, to pull a Friers hoode ouer their head, to make vowes,
which God neuer allowed, with such o∣ther like workes, which the holie church doeth esteeme for verie meritorious, & calleth them Opera supererogationis, that is to say, Superfluous workes,Workes of the Catholikes. for that God neuer commanded them: & there∣fore men may hereby do more than they are of dutie boūd to do. These (say they) shall not onelie be vnacceptable before GOD, for good payement, but shall rather be esteemed for false coyne: yea, bee imputed for verie slandering and blaspheming of God,Esaie. 1.15. as before. and for a flat for∣saking and despising of the shedding of the bloud of Iesus Christ. O what a mat∣ter is this! O helpe blessed Ladie of the 7. Okes! Help S. Lewen, S. Rombold, S. Iames of Cōpostell, with all your scallop shelles, and pilgrims staues: helpe all you sweet men and women Saints, whose re∣likes are deuoutly prayed vnto by our deere mother. How can it be, that she should be so ouerseene? should then all good catholikes haue hitherto reckoned, and still do reckon without their host? should our forefathers haue deserued none otherwise by building Cloisters, Abbies, Trentals, Masses, and such like deuotions? should all that be lost?
O no, I defie that. We will rather forsake the whole Scripture, Peter and Paule, with the whole rable of them, than that such a slaunder should rise and take place in the holy Catholike, Apostolike, Popish church of Rome. For if that were so, then should all our Decrees & decretals, all our Sen∣tences and Setentiaries, al orders & ordi∣nances, old customes, vsages, priuiledges, and old proceedings of the holie church, all masses, with the appurtenances, al priests and priestly doings, and so one diuell with another be cleane ouerthrowen. And then it must needes followe, that the Lutherans, Zwinglians, & Caluinistes, shal yet againe beare the swing, & all the shorne swarme of holie shauelings, with all the Sophisters & Theologians of Louen, with all the newe Bishops, Abbats, Monks & Prelats, giue place. To what purpose then (I pray you) should the Duke of Alba with his Spani∣ards serue, hauing taken so troublesome a iournie vpon him, to stand the Bishops in¦stead of Sargeants & hangmen: and to set vp the ruined Romish church in her autho∣ritie againe? O no, no, we will neuer be gi∣uen to vnderstand & beleeue, that the scrip∣ture doth teach this: for otherwise the scrip∣tures
must be heretical, & directly against the holie church: & then shuld the scriptures haue deserued to be burnt, aswel as the Hu∣guenotes. Wel, surely our Doctors of Lo∣uen haue likewise perused the scriptures, & our newe Bishops do daily reade their ser∣uice & Masse booke, at lest when they haue leasure: but they find not this written there: & therfore it is to be thought, that either the heretikes haue other Epistles & Gospels, than is written in our Masse booke, & read in the church: or there is more malt in the mill, than the miller will be acknowen of. For although our mother the holy church is content to graunt the heretiks, that Christ is our right redeemer, & hath sufficiently sa∣tisfied for our sins (because it shal not seeme they haue vtterlie forsaken Christ, & thrust him out of his seat) yet is not that so to bee vnderstood, that he onely must be taken for our ful raunsome and satisfaction, or that he should haue fullie made our peace wt God the Father, through the offering vp of his bodie & bloud: so as we should now (through his merites) be esteemed for righteous, and the children of God, and haue an assured belefe, that God hath (for his sake) forgiuen vs all our sinnes, & is to vs a good & louing
Father (as these heretikes will needes proue by their Bible.) No, no, it wil not go so easilie to worke: we must go otherwise to worke: we our selues must paie our debtes with our owne monie, & satisfie God suffici∣ently for our sinnes, or otherwise all would be naught. For it doth not beecome the mercie of God (saith the councel of Trent) that he should forgiue vs our debtes for nothing,In the .24. sessi∣on, de satisfactio∣nis necessitate, &c. Cap. 2. without anie former satisfactiō. And although it be so, that Paul doeth take on him to defend,These are the proper wordes of Paule to the Romanes in the .4. Chapter. 2.5.6.7. that Abraham hath no iust occasion to presume of him selfe be∣fore God of any desert or former works: yea, & saith, That he that works not, but doth stedfastly beleeue in him that doth iustifie the vngodly, to him is his beleefe for righteousnesse: as Dauid also saieth, touching the iustification of those to whom God doth impute righteousnes without a∣ny works, by these words: Blessed are they, whose vnrighteousnes is forgiuen, and whose sins are couered. Blessed is that man to whō God imputeth not sin:These are the very wordes of the councell of Trent the .6. session. can. de. iustificatione. yet, that holie ghost of the coūcell of Trent hath concluded the contrarie, saying thus: Who∣soeuer will defend & mainteine, that the vngodly are iustified by faith only, & that
for the obteyning of Gods mercie, his works are not needful, let him be accur∣sed. And our Doctors of Louen haue once for all acknowledged & iudged, That God may not impute righteousnes to any mā through faith, vnlesse he be righteous of him selfe. For consider, this is the conclu∣sion of the worshipfull & profound learned Magistri nostri, Ioice Rauēstein of Thielt in his booke which he now (a while agoe) did write against the Lutherans of Ant∣werpe. This pretended righteousnes (saith he) doeth tend first against naturall reason:In the booke called confessio∣nes siue Doctrina qae nuper aedita est a mi∣nistris ecclesiae Antwerp. Imprinted at Louen per Pe∣trum Sanguam. 1567. and is written in the .24. leafe. for it cannot stand with any natural rea∣son▪ that one which had no wisedome in his head, should yet notwithstanding be called wise: either else righteous, who hath no inwarde righteousnesse in him selfe. Secondarilie, it is slaunderous against the holie Ghost, who hath testified and witnessed of manie men in the scripture, that they were righteous before God: & so should the holy Ghost be attached for a false witnesse. Thirdlie, it doeth differ from the doc∣trine of the Catholike Fathers.
Consider now, here we haue a clere iudge∣ment & irreuocable sentence: wherevpon it must rest, That Paule hath spoken amisse, in saying, that God doeth ascribe righte∣ousnes to the vngodlie without any works. For, what is the meaning of this ascibing our alowing? Our sharpwitted Magistri nostri of Louen can not by their naturall reasons, nor wt al then Syllogismes, Quot∣libets, nor other speculacions, conceiue the same: no nor will permit that God should impute righteousnes, or yet couer sinnes through the merites of Christ, to one that were not righteous of him selfe by deeds, & that had sufficiently satisfied for his sinnes by his deeds: so that God is not licenced to name things that are not, as though they were, as Paule ascribes vnto him: or to deck vs with a righteousnes and obedience which we haue not deserued our selues:Rom. 4.17. our deare mother the holie Church of Rome doeth esteeme it for a foolishnes, vntoward∣nesse, and blasphemie against God, that Christ onelie should be our wisedome, our righteousnes, our holines, and our only re∣demption. Shee will haue it, that we shall euen of our selues, and by our selues, haue our owne wisedome, righteousnesse,
holinesse, and redemption before God, at least, if we will be esteemed for righteous. She doth esteeme it for a foolish and faith∣lesse trust, that one should trust to the righ∣teousnesse of anie other than him selfe. She will haue it, that euerie one shall be iusti∣fied by his owne righteousnesse, and by his owne merites, and therewithall satise and pay all the sinnes and offences, wherewith hee may bee by anie meanes iustly bur∣thened. It is true, That originall sinne hath some preeminence, and that it may not be tried to the vttermost point. For not∣withstanding that originall sinne,Rom. 5.12.17.18. 1. Cor. 15.21. Ephe. 2.3. is that which makes vs the children of wrath, and brings vs to death, yet will our mother the holie Church stay a little, and pale in Gods determination,They are the wordes of the Councell of Trent, in the 7. ses. titul. de satis¦factionis necessi∣tate & finctu. c.  and persuade the best be∣twixt both, saying, That it doth not well become the righteousnesse of God, that he should deale with those which before baptisme haue (through negligence) fal∣len into sinne, in the same maner, as with those which after the baptisme haue wil∣lingly and wittingly defiled the Temple of God, and made sad the holie ghost. She doth plainly acknowledge, that e∣uen at the first houre of their birth, they
haue deserued death, and are fallen into the curse and wrath of God: yet for all that, she will take vpon her to be a meane betwene parties at variance, and be like vnto But∣ter which bettereth althings, & therfore wil haue this hold, That God as touching originall sinne, shall bee satisfied by wa∣shing away the same by baptisme, not re∣ceiuing or requiring anie other satisfac∣tion or raunsome for that matter, and for this hath shee also named Baptisme, The first plancke whereby we are saued in our shipwrack. But I assure you, as tou∣ching all other sinnes, shee doth sing vs a new song, as followeth: In the 7. session at the councell of Trent de bapt. cano. 10.Si quis dixerit, peccata omnia, quae post baptismum fiunt, sola recordatione & fide suscepti baptismi▪ vel dimitti, vel venalia fieri, Anathema sit: That is to say, Whosoeuer will maintein, that all sinnes cōmitted after baptisme,Sinnes com∣mitted after baptisme. should either be forgeuen, or at least may be forgeuen onely through faith and power of Bap∣tisme, let him be accursed. Here you may see now, that this planke alone is too weake, to beare vs out of the water, so that Baptisme is not (in anie wise) the Lauer or bath of those that are
borne a newe, wherein Christ shoulde haue purged and cleane washed his spouse, that she might become without spot or wrinkle, as Paule goeth about to teach:Tit 3.5. Ephe. 5.26. but onelie forsomuch as doeth apperteine to the first spotte wherewith we are borne,Math. 3.11. Mar. 1.4. Luke. 3.3. Act. 13.24.19 4. Rom. 6.3. In the .14. sessi¦on, can. 2. de sa∣cramentis poeni∣tentiae. and no fur∣ther. Neither is nowe anie more a Bap∣tisme of conuersion & penance, as it was in the Apostles time. For the holie Fathers assembled in the Councell of Trent, haue accursed all those that shall call it a Lauer or bath, and Sacrament of conuersion and repentaunce. And therefore haue they prouided an other planke for vs, where∣with wee may swimme out of this water, (as lustily as with a couple of Hogges bladders:) to witte, the Tree of penance, consisting of three braunches: namely, Confessio, that is Shrift: Contritio, that is Heartes sorrow: and Satisfactio,In the 4. canon of the same ses∣sion, and in the booke of senten∣ces. lib. 3. dist. 4 that is Full satisfaction, and a plenarie payment for our sinnes. For this is the Saint Christopher that can carrie vs ouer the Sea: and through this shall wee receiue once at our Baptisme the garment of in∣nocencie, and being afterwardes bespotted with sinne, wash the same off again, & bring all into the right way. Therefore it will
be said, according to the vnderstanding of our deare mother the holie Church, as ma∣nie holie Catholike Champions haue both said and written, That Christ hath made full satisfaction for originall sinne, and hath fed vs when we coulde not yet slie, but now that our fethers are ful growen, we must slie of our selues out of the nest, and helpe our selues: That is to bee vn∣derstood, We must from henceforth sa∣tisfie and sufficiently recompense for all our sinnes our owne selues, For this is the opinion and meaning of manie holie Champions and pillars of the holie church of Rome, as doth euidently appeare by the before written example of the two pillars. But yet notwithstanding, when all is well considered, this is not yet the verie right tune and harmonious noyse, which the holie Church commonly vseth in this daunse: for out of this might follow, That God should impute righteousnesse to those which are not righteous in them selues: and through Christs merites, and for his sake, forgiue sinnes without any other satisfaction. I tell you, our mother the holie Church will not meddle with this pretended righteousnes: She will not remaine in Gods debte, but
will clere the score, and cut off all the nicks of the tallie. Therefore hath she a little pat∣ched vp this, and concluded, That men shall likewise satisfie for some part of origi∣nall sinne, and so fully satisfie God, because he shall not hereafter report, that hee hath forgeuen and pardoned the same, for no∣thing, but for Iesus Christes sake onely. For weigh this wel, this is the vtter deter∣mination and conclusion of our maisters of the Sentences,These are the very woordes of the schoole writers, like as they are sette by Gabriel in the .3. booke of Sentences. dist 20. in the .5. cō∣clusion. That although the merits of Christ are the most speciall desert, through which Gods mercie, and the way into the kingdome of heauen is graunted vnto vs, yet this notwithstan∣ding, is in no wise to be reckoned for the only, whole, and full satisfaction and de∣seruing: Whereby it doth euidently ap∣peare, that alway with the merites of Christ, there must be ioyned some deeds and workes of those, which receiue the mercie and rewarde, whether it be for themselues, if they be of age: or for ano∣ther which is not yet come to full yeeres of vnderstanding: which deedes are cal∣led Meritum de congruo, vel condigno, that is to say, A deseruing worthily ob∣teined, or, A lke worthie deseruing.
Originall Sinne.Consider then, now doth it followe, that for the redeeming of originall sinne, some meritorious works are adioyned: and spe∣cially the merites of the Sacrament, which (as our mother the holy Church saieth) doe giue vnto men mercie, Ex opere operato, that is to say, For the worthinesse of it selfe,Concilium Tri∣dētinum ses 7 de Sacramen. can. 8. and deseruing by woorkes. For whosoeuer will say and defend, that the Sa∣craments shoulde not Ex opere operato, or by their owne worthinesse, present and giue mercie vnto vs: but that faith or be∣leefe in Gods promises, should be sufficient for the obteining of mercy, (as Paul saieth that Abraham did beleeue the promise of God,Rom. 4.8.12. and it was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse, and did then first re∣ceiue the Sacrament of Circumcision for a seale to this freely giuen righteous∣nesse) hee is by the Councell of Trent ac∣curssed, and excommunicated. And because it shall not seeme, that the Sacrament of baptisme is not sufficient to deserue the for∣giuenesse of sinne, Ex opere operato, consi∣dering that the childe which is christened, doth not there worke,The deseruing by the Godfa∣thers in Baptsme. whereby it may de∣serue any thing: therefore doth our dere mo∣ther the holie Church say, That the God∣fathers
deserue it for the child. And to the end that this deseruing may the more free∣ly be put in the reckoning against the accu∣sations of the diuell, therefore hath our mo∣ther the holy Church deckt it trimly, and hanged much costly ware about it, as speci∣ally strong and mightie coniuring,Christening of children papi∣stically. and commaunding of the diuell, wherethrough he is forced to remoue streight way, and giue place to the holy ghost. Item, with ma∣nie holie crosses, which the Priest doeth make ouer the foreheade, ouer the eyes, the nose, the eares, the mouth, the breast and the shoulders of the children so christned: by the might & power whereof, the diuell & origi∣nall sinne, are chaced seuen mile frō thence, so that his accusation is not esteemed worth a straw. After this is the child gresed on the nose and eares, with the priests snot & spit∣tle: which spittle doth bring a maruellous strength with it, as men may wel cōiecture: so that of necessitie it must thereby receiue the mercie of God. And in the end is giuen vnto it a white cloth, or a coyfe, and a waxe candle burning, which the Godfathers do receiue in the name of the childe, which surely is maruellous acceptable & welcome vnto God, as the holy Church doeth beare
witnesse, euerie Easter eeue, singing vnto the waxe Candle, whiche the Priestes do at that time hallow:This is in the Masse booke. in oratione ad be¦ne dicendum ig∣nem in Sabatho sanct. pasch. Talia igitur Do∣mine digna sacris altaribus tuis munera offerimus, quibus te laetari religio Chri∣stiana non ambigit: That is to say, Ther∣fore Lorde doe wee offer vnto thee, such worthie presents and giftes vpon thine altar, wherein (as Christian Religion nothing doubteth) thou doest greatly delight and reioyce, &c. How must he then reioyce herein, when hee shall see all these precious giftes and goodly ceremonies together, whereby de∣uout persons haue greatly refourmed, and trimly set forth the ordinances of his sonne Iesus Christ? Will not he with a good will forgiue both originall sinne, and also the rest of the whole debte, seeing hee is so wr∣shipfuly paed with wax, with tallow, with creame, and with spittle? And then doeth not hee forgiue for nothing, and onelie for the merites of Christ (as the Here∣tikes say) but he is satisfied with redie pai∣ment. And if he will not yet be therewith∣all content, then we will fill his hands with a heape of deseruings of holie Saintes of both kindes, for which onely he must vn∣doubtedly
forgiue the whole debt, yea al∣though it were asmuch more, insomuch as there shall not be left one iot vnsatisfied. But howe nowe, may some deuout Ca∣tholike heart thinke, is Christ then nothing at all accounted of, nor regarded, by our deare mother the holie Church? O yes by Saint Marie, for shee doeth vse him speci∣ally to stoppe all holes withall. For if so be that neither our paiments and satisfac∣tions, nor the merits of saints would be suf∣ficient to discharge the whole debt, but that there should remaine some behind vnpaid, then that must be laide on his necke. But if we be of our selues sufficiently furnished to satisfie all that resteth, or if wee can by some of the Saintes, to whome wee haue good deuotion, get a good suretie or pledge which will answere for all: then wee shall haue no neede to trouble Christ much, wee can spare him well enough. Then onelie, if we hauing done our best to satisfie all our selues, or to finde a sufficient suretie, and yet can not bring either of both to passe, then saieth our deare mother the holie Church, that Christ must come foorth, Vt suppleat nostros defectus, that is to say, To supplie our defaultes, and to stoppe
all holes. But nowe, because all this doeth seeme verie vnhandsome, and that Christ might perhaps take this in euill part, and perchaunce forsake vs, and cast vs cleane off, and send vs back againe to our Baalim, and other Patrones, at whose handes wee haue first sought help, as he hath oftentimes giuen warning by his Prophetes,Iere. 11.11.12. so as then by that meanes we should fall betwixt two stooles in the ashes, and so be forsaken on all sides: To auoid this daunger, the ca∣tholike doctors haue a little strengthned the rampier, and baked the cake after another maner, as may appeare in the said booke of Iodocus of Rauenstein, where he writeth: Whereas men do charge vs, that we teach that Christ shoulde haue satisfied only for originall sin or other sinnes cō∣mitted before baptisme,In the .80. leafe of the be∣fore specified boke of Iodocus Rauenstein writ∣ten against the confesion of ye preachers at Antwerp. & that then the Masse should satisfie further for the o∣ther sinnes, our meaning is not so: and if there be anie such which do so vnderstād, or haue any such opinion, we vtterly re∣nounce their doctrine. And truely their particular iudgement ought not to be applied to any former iudg∣ment of the Catholike doctrine touching the Masse: for the verie meaning of the holy
man Thomas de Aquino, was neuer such: as appeares plainely out of that which hee writeth in the third part, vpon the first que∣stion in the 4. rticle whereof he writeth: It is most true, that Christ came into this world, not onely to take away that sinne, wherein naturally all the posteritie of Adam are borne, but likewise to the cleansing of all other sinnes. And in the 49. question of the said thirde part: Christ (saith he) hath released vs frō our sinnes, Causaliter, that is, Cōcerning the cause, to wit, for that he is the onely cause of our releasment, through which all our sinnes are to bee forgiuen, as well those past, as these present, or to come. And then againe: Forsomuch as the pas∣sion of Christ, is a sure▪ generall, or com∣mon cause of the forgiuing of sinne, it must needes follow, that it bee annexed to the washing away and purging of the sinnes which we our selues haue cōmit∣ted, which is don by baptisme & penāce, and other sacraments which haue power through the passion of Christ, &c. In summe, this is their meaning, That as the sinnes wherein wee fell before bap∣tisme, haue not more aduauntage than
the other, but must all alike be holpen tho∣rough penance and Sacramentes: which are the right satisfaction, and true raunsom∣ming, through which God is made at one with vs, and hath forgiuen vs our sinnes. And yet they haue not gotten this power only of themselues: but for that Christ hath (through his merits and passion) deserued the same: so that by this order, Christ hath now his part in all things, seeing that he (in all the merites of the Masse, satisfac∣tions, and other good workes,) is alway by our deare mother the holy Church called to be one. And this office is committed vnto him, that hee shall alway trudge vppe and downe, to and fro, farre and neere, with the merites of good workes and satisfaction, as a common messenger, & trauell so as they may continue in their full estimation and worship. And for that cause it is, that in all their blessings, hallowings, consecrations, coniuring, and bewitching, in all Collects, Secrets, Complets, and in all Ceremonies of the holie Church, wherein they pray vnto God for the forgiuenes of sinnes, for euerla∣sting life, & for all other good gifts, either spirituall, or temporall, which she requires in consideration, & the power of her almes
deedes, fasting, and abstinence, through merites, keeping of holidayes, and by the strength and power of her hallowed wa∣ters, salt, candles, palmes, hearbes, oyle, tallowe reliques, holie clothes: and also through the might of the Sacraments, the Masse, and merites of Saintes, and such other like things: and yet alway in the end they adde this conclusion, Per Christum Dominum nostrum, that is, Through Christ our Lord. As though they woulde say, that those Ceremonies and creatures, which they offer vnto God, are the right marke to shoote at: but Christ must giue the aime: or else, that those are the true mint or coyne, wherewith they make paiment to God, and doe fullie satisfie for their debtes, and that Christ is he which doth value and allow the monie for currant. And that this is the verie meaning of the holy Church of Rome, it is plaine to be noted out of the de∣crees of the Councel of Trent▪ Wherin are accursed and excommunicated all those which wil mainteine,In the .6. sessi∣on, can. 10. d▪ ustificatione. that the obedience and merits of Christ should be, Formali∣tr, that is to say, Euidently, onely, & of themselues, our iustification, so that wee should be fully iustified before God, and
esteemed for the children of God onely through the obedience and merites of Christ. For this do they ascribe only to our own righteousnes, whervnto we are moued of God, whē we haue prepared & made redy our selues to reeiue the same: which righ∣teousnes is our owne workes, former deser∣uings, & satisfactions, and say that we haue wone this only out of the merits of Christ, that this our iustification by desertes, as penance, satisfaction, & other good workes which we do, are by God accepted, and so ntered in his reckoning booke for good wares, and sufficient paiment, with which iudgment Iodocus Tiletanus hitteth iump in this sort: We denie vtterly that the righteous∣nes and obedience of Christ,In the foresaid booke written against the Mi∣nisters of Ant∣werp of their confession in fo∣lio▪ 1. should bee the onely cause▪ through which we are formaliter, that is euidently & throughly iustified. But like as the first man Adam, through his vnrighteousnes and disobe∣dience was the onely cause, that all wee which are come of him▪ haue euerie one his owne sinne within himself, through which he is of himselfe and apparantly a sinner, and an vnrighteous person: euen so likewise it is to be vnderstood, that the
righteousnes and obedience of Christ, is onely a meritorious cause, wherthrough all those which through faith and the sa∣cramentes of faith, are borne anew in Christ, doe now receiue to themselues a righteousnes of the father, to wit euerie one his owne proper and inward righte∣ousnes, through which he is iustified of himselfe, and hath obediently satisfied the righteousnesse of the Lawe, &c. Whereby is notably to be vnderstood: first that Christ is not our iustification, and likewise that we must forsake and giue o∣uer our owne iustification (as Paul persua∣deth) to be partakers in the iustification by faith, which is in Christ Iesus:1. Cor. 1.50. Iere. 23.6.33.16. Phil. 3.8.9. Roma. 10.3. but contra∣riwise, we must iustifie our owne righteous∣nesse, as the Iewes did afore time, and so seeke our saluation at our selues, and in our selues, as before we haue had sinne and damnation vpon and in vs. Secondarily, out of the same we vnderstande, that wee are not borne anew, onely through Christ, but through belief and the Sacraments, in Christ▪ that is to say, That Christ is the only cause that our workes are our full ac∣coplishment, & satisfaction, which are vnder this word Sacramēts cōteined & vnderstod:
and yet of their owne might (as is before said,) Ex opere operato, can beare vs a∣new, and iustifie vs. For this (by our deare mother the holy Church) is the perfect and naturall description of the Sacraments, That a Sacrament is properly called, not onely that which is a signe or token of Gods mercie,The maister of of sentences in the .4. booke .1. dist. cap. but also, Forma, that is, the verie effect and substance of the hidde mercie, so that it doeth both signifie the same, and is cause of the same. So that the Sacraments do not onely signifie sanctify∣ing, but also of themselues sanctifie: and doe (as the glosse specially setteth forth) make vs righteous, Ex opere operato, that is,Henricus Brima∣ius. vpon the same distinct. Out of the merites of our workes, and of our selues. So that the Sacramentes, conteining vnder them our deuocions, and our owne workes, are the only naturall and proper cause of our saluation, and do make vs Formaliter righteous: but Christ onely Causaliter, that is, for that he commeth in as a generall and farre fetched cause. They are the principall, they haue the rudder in hand, and stirre the ship: but Christ may yet help to row, as a grmet or simple mariner. though this friendship bee vsed to him for his credite, that he is called to be one of the
Councell, to haue his aduice, howe is best to stirre the ship: yea, & mn report by him, that he (amongst the rest) is one of the most principal occasions that the shippe keepes a good course, where otherwise it might either be lost vpon some sande, or broken in pieces against a rocke. And therefore, when any good and deuout Catholike man lies a dying, wee doe not vse to breake his head much with Christ, nor to trouble him greatly with faith & hope (which he ought to haue in the death and passion or Iesus Christ:) but he must specially be put in re∣membrance of shrift, to receiue his God; & to be annoynted: and then after to haue a waxe candle by him, with a Crucifixe in his hand, and so persuade him to the building of some Chappell or Monasterie, and to ap∣point a Trentall of soule Masses, and to re∣member Vigils & annuall or yerelie pray∣ers, and such like. And if Christ bee (by chance) spoken of, that doeth commonlie happen, to the intent the better to set forth and preferre the said Masses, Vigils, and annuals, and the rest of the baggage: for Christ of him self is not set by nor esteemed at all. In summe, Christ is onelie necessa∣rie and fitte to serue the holie Church of
Rome, her purpose in this point, & that is to coine good monie of bad & naughtie me∣tal. For if Christ had not died, God would without doubte, that all men shoulde haue fulfilled his Lawe fullie in all pointes: hee would haue iudged all things according to his woorde and Lawe, without hauing a∣nie respect at all to our deuotions and me∣ritorious woorkes, or to Saint Frauncis, or to Saint Dominikes order. And be∣sides that, hee would in the ende haue pu∣nished all breakers of his lawe, with eter∣nall malediion, death, and damnation, without hauing anie regarde at all to our merites or satisfaction. But nowe, seeing that Christ died, the holie Church of Rome may nowe fill him a hood with hay, they may boldlie cast his commaundementes in a corner, and thrust in, in steade of them, their owne ordinan∣ces, good intentes, and deuotions, and with spittle, water, ashes and dust, salte and tallowe, oyle and waxe, fire and smoke, shelles and belles, leaping and running, springing and daunsing, satisfie and pay him: hee must take all in good part. Pro∣uided, that men continually make this the foote of their prayers, namelie: Per Chri∣stum
Dominum nostrum: for that is the butter that doth better all things. And here∣withall he is by and by satisfied and plea∣sed? Haue not the Catholikes then a good and a gentle God, which is content that they pay hi with mussell shelles? But that is not to bee maruelled at, seeing that when they haue plaid wt him a good while, he suffereth them euen to eate him vp, and deale with him as the cat with the mouse. Yet notwithstanding, for that he should not be herewith offended, as though men did mocke with him, because they do make so small account of the breaking of his lawes, they haue to eschew that inconueni∣ence, elt his lesson to him before hand, & verie substantially & cunningly haue deter∣mined and iudged, That all sinnes are not deadlie,Deadly sinnes. but that there are but senē dead lie sinnes onelie, which (together with their branches and fruites) haue deser∣ued death: The rest are altogether small, simple and venial sinnes, which he may not punish by death,Veniall sinnes. but with a smal rod, such as doth serue to beate children withall. And herevpon she hath valued all hir deseruings & satisfactions, euery one ac∣cording to his price, to the vttermost penie:
and so hath committed the balance to S. Michael,S. Michael  the . with open commission & charge that he do iustlie weye all the sinnes and of∣fences of the Catholikes against the trou∣bles which God hath sent them, and like∣wise against their good deedes & merites, vpon this conditiō,hen as the  are too light. that if the said troubles, good deedes▪ and merites, be but an ounce or twaine, or some small weight lighter than the other, then Christ shall make that good by his death and passion. But if the difference in weight should be great, so as it were to be considered vpon, then must he, to conterueil and make the weight euen, put into that scale some good deedes, &c. as building of Abbies, Masses, Pilgri∣mages, Pate nosters, and Aue Maries, waxe candels, holie ashes, holie water, Popes , pardons, grey friers cowles, girdles, S. Iames shels, & other like stuffe: till both the balances wey alike. But nowe Econtra▪When the me∣rites are the heauier. if the good deeds, meries, &c. be the heauier then shal the surplusage be kept against another time, to helpe a good friend withall, or to  some  soule one of Purgatorie. And our mother the holie church hath had much a doe  this matter, to bring the balance to a iust ight and
value, to make all things euen, betwixt the offences of men, and the punishmentes of God, and to approue that to be the right way which notwithstāding she hath strong∣lie fortified with plaine scriptures. And in especially where S. Iohn Baptist saieth, Facite fructus dignos poenitentia, that is to say, Bring forth fruites worthie of re∣pentance.The  the. 4  16  the  chap. For out of this hath she conclu∣ded, That the effect and nature of the pu∣nishment & scourge of God must be equall with the effect and nature of the crime. Well considered, that the operation of good workes is not needfull to be so great, or so manie in one that hath done esse sins, as in him that hath cōmitted a great deale more sinne, &c. And therefore, when as God doeth visit anie man in this world with po∣uertie, sicknesse, hunger, trouble, or anie o∣ther crosse, he must likewise haue those va∣lued against his sinnes and offences. And if it be found, that the crosse and punishment which God hath laid vpon him, be of grea∣ter importance than his sinnes haue deser∣ued, as our mother the holie Church of Rome will suppose that often times it is, then must the surplusage of that be by some honest meane recompensed: or if it be such
as cannot well be recompensed by God then it shal be shut vp and kept in the chest of indulgencies and pardon, to serue the turne of such as shall haue neede of it: for that shal at some conuenient time be sealed together with a Bull, and then some profite will come of it: as our deare mother the ho∣lie Church hath concluded: alledging for that purpose a plain & euident text of Iob, saying: O that my troubles and sorowes might be weyed,Iob. 6.2. which is to this purpose brught in by ilmnus in En∣hir ck in titu∣o de ndulgen∣u. & my paines deliuered vp in a paire of balance! They should be found heauier than the sande of the seas, therein is it that my wordes haue ouer∣slipped me. Consider now, out of this hath our deare mother the holie Church gathe∣red, that Iob was contented to come to a reckoning with God, and haue his crosse & punishment weyed against his offences: & if his crosse & punishment be greater than his sinnes, (as shee supposeth,) then will she that the surplus of the weight shall be shut vp in the Popes chest, to elpe sme other good fellowe withall for a little mo∣nie, and so bring him out of daunger. And to the end that hereafter no brabbling, or processe, should happn in diinguishing which are light and venall sinnes, and
which are heauie and deadlie sinnes:Veniall and deadly sinnes. and how euerie sinne is to bee esteemed: for that purpose hath shee fetched out of her cofer, with her keye, called Allegorica expositio, a trimme scripture,Looke pon the first chptr of the secon . thereby to declare those things sufficiently, beginning thus: That like as in the beginning the serpent did first intise the woman ofte to sinne,The maister of the Sentences in the 2. . 24. dist. 9. cp. and then the woman brought the man to the same: so haue wee now like∣wise the wittinesse within vs, which is the serpent: and then more, the wise∣dome or the principall vnderstanding, which is the man: & last of all the know∣ledge or the simplest part of vnderstan∣ding, which is the woman: and this man is the same, which by witnessing of the Apostle is called, The image & honour of God: & the woman is the same which by the Apostle is called, The honour or beautie of the man. Is not this well and profoundly philo∣sophied of our mother the holie Church of Rome? I can not thinke, but that the Maister of the Sentences, was some∣where in the bottome of a deep seller, when hee founde out this profounde speculation.
For otherwise it were not possible, that he should haue conceiued these profounde se∣cretes of his owne head. But nowe let vs heare further of the matter. Nowe there is (saith he) a spirituall ma∣riage & a naturall coniunction betwene the man and the woman: and out of that is to be considered, which is a dead∣lie sinne, and which is a veniall sinne. For euen as the serpent did by persuasion a∣buse the woman, and the woman the man, euen so it falleth out with vs. For as the inward consent is the serpent, which accepteth the accomplishment of sinne, and so persuadeth the woman, that is the knowledge or least branch of accompli∣shing: and then, when as by such reasons they are brought to consent to the ac∣complishing, then it commeth to passe, that the woman doth eate the forbidden fruite, and then presenteth or offereth of the same to the man: and so, when she hath entised the vnderstanding, or prin∣cipall desire, that it doth giue consent to the same, then hath the man eaten of the forbidden fruit likewise. But nowe, if the full accomplishing remaine sticking in the minde and cogitation, and taketh
not full effect, then it is but a verie small veniall sinne: but when onlie the simple pretence is willing thereto, to witte, the lust and desire of the mind, or thought, without any further full pretence & tra∣uell, to bring the same effectuallie to passe, then hath the woman onelie eaten of the apple, and not the man: who hath by his owne strength subdued his will, that it proceedes not to the performing and finishing of the woorke: and yet in that case it is sometime a deadlie sinne, and sometime a veniall sinne, according to the continuance of the time▪ But if in the meane space there follow a perfect & resolute desire to accomplish the same, then hath the man likewise eaten: prin∣cipallie in cōsenting resolutlie with pre∣tence of accomplishment: and in that case it is a damnable and an heauie sinne, &c. Surelie this will trie Saint Mchaels wittes, and put him to his trumpe,A great trouble to S. Michael for to weigh the merites. howe to obserue this rule in weying and iudging these sinnes, vnlesse he come first for a while into the Vniuersitie of Louen, or to the Sor∣bonistes of Paris, there to loiter, read ouer, and learne to vnderstand the glosses and
expositions of the Maister of the Senten∣ces: I knowe no other meane for him howe to deale, vnlesse he can find out in one place or other, some subtil Doctour of diuinitie, and make him so much his friend, that hee will helpe him through with the matter: & yet notwithstanding, the principall know∣ledge and speculation may well be brought to passe and considered, as, That we are not (of dutie) bound to loue God with all our hearts, with all our minde, and with all our might: in such sort, as he by his lawe hath commaunded: seeing that the soule can se∣parate her selfe from him, and so giue ouer her selfe to sinne, and yet not plunge so deepe therein, as to fall throughly into Gods wrath▪ yea, there is great recōpense deserued at Gods hand, when as a man is prouoked to sinne, and to fall from God, & that by his wisedome hee doeth withstand the same: so as the serpent onelie doth eate of the forbidden fruite:In the 7. chap. of ye same dist. vpon the last Can. as the Maister of the Sentences hath in another place writ∣ten. Therefore it is that our mother the ho∣lie Church of Rome hath expounded that which our Sauiour Christ set foorth in the fift Chapter of S. Matthewe, (As to loue
our enimies, not to doe euill for euill, not to desire another mans wife, and such other like sayings more:) after the Phari∣saicall manner: As, that it is no speciall commaundement, but onelie a counsell and aduise: and that therefore no man is bounde to obserue and keepe the same, but such as haue professed and vowed chasti∣tie, as Monkes, Ankers, and other such like. Whereby doeth euidentlie appeare, either that GOD hath wholie created and shapen the soule, and hearte of man, or at the least, that his Lawe is not alto∣gethr spirituall, considering that he hath not the full gouernment of the spirite, onelie through this occasion, that reason did not consent and agree wholie to sinne. For in conclusion, you may not esteeme sinne thus, as though all that is done a∣gainst Gods lawe and commaundement, were a deadlie sinne, and could not bee re∣compensed by deseuing or satisfaction: but all sins & offences must be weighed in the balance of our mother the holie church of Rome, who saieth thus: That for all ordinarie and light sinnes and offences, a man may sufficientlie satisfie with say∣ing a Pater noster, and an Aue Maria,In the 4.  of the Sent. in the 4. can. the 16. dist▪
with knocking vpon the breast, and say∣ing, Peccaui, with holie water, and especi∣ally with hearing of a Masse: as for deadly sinnes, the like must be done, but yet with much more force, efficacie, and deuotion. And to say all in all, satisfaction is neces∣sarie and requisite for all sinnes, according to the qualitie and quantitie of the same. And although a man shoulde wholie re∣turne to God, yet can not that helpe, vnles hee make full satisfaction. For whereas these Heretikes doe say, That when soe∣uer a sinner doeth conuert and repent him of his sinnes, God doth pardon and forgiue him:Ezech. 18.21. 1. Iere. 33.34. Heb. 8.12.10.17. Psal. 103.12. Miche. 7.19. Esaie. 44.22. Iere. 50.20. Eze. 18.24. yea, in such sorte, as he doth wholie forgette the sinnes committed, and casteth them as farre from him, as the East is from the West: yea, and sin∣keth them down euen into the bottome of the sea: yea, maketh them consume to naught, euen as smoke, or as a cloude, in so much as they are not once more thought vpon, euen like as he doeth also vtterlie forget all the good deedes that a man hath done, which in the end doth giue him selfe to mischiefe. Take heede of that saying, for it smel∣leth of a faggot. For our mother the ho∣lie
Church of Rome hath speciallie con∣cluded, That GOD doeth not forgiue a∣nie sinnes, vnlesse a man doe first make full satisfaction and payment for the same to the vttermost and last farthing: shee can allowe that hee forgiueth the sinne, but not the punishment: and for that cause must hee likewise bee well recompensed, doing after this manner:Christ shoulde pardon the of∣fence, but not the punishmēt. As if a man should par∣don his debter all whatsoeuer hee did owe him, and giue him to vnderstande, that hee cancelled his obligation, and in the meane space caused him to be arrested and cast in∣to prison, there to remaine and lie till the whole debte were paide, euen to the vtter∣most mite. Were not that great mercie vsed, and a liberall pardoning of debters? After that manner will our deare mother the holie Church of Rome haue that re∣mission of sinnes vnderstoode, which wee haue obteined through the bloud and passi∣on of Iesus Christ. For the bloud of Ie∣sus Christ (saieth shee) hath washed away the sinnes: but holie water, the Masse, and such other like satisfactions, doe de∣liuer vs from the paine and punishe∣ment. Or rather, the bloud of IESVS Christ hath troden the path, by the
which Masses, Pilgrimages, Holie water, and other satisfactions may runne post after our Lorde God, to put him in re∣membrance, to pardon vs of the punish∣ment which we by our sinnes haue de∣serued. And if they perhaps should come to late, then are the merites of Saintes in a readinesse, to shut vp and make euen the rest of the reckoning and accompt. For our deare mother the holy church of Rome saieth plainlie, by speciall textes of the Scripture, That God doeth neuer cleare∣lie forgiue and pardon the punishment for sinnes, through the merites of the bloud and passion of Christ, without a former sa∣tisfaction. For all the Scriptures and ex∣amples, which the Lutherans▪ and Hu∣guenotes; alledge and bring in, to proue, That God doeth chasten his children with plagues and punishmentes, to the end, to bring them to perfect knowledge and vn∣derstanding of their miserie and calami∣tie, and to proue their faith, or that hee will (thereby) bring them from the diue∣lishe dissimulations of this worlde: all this doeth our deare mother the holie Church of Rome alledge, to proue; that God hath onelie forgiuen them the of∣fence,
but not the punishment: as appea∣reth by the example of Adam, who al∣though, after his fall, hee receiued com∣fort againe at Gods hande, yet was hee well punished, euen by bodilie death, and with manie calamities, sorrowes, and troubles, by the which hee made satisfac∣tion. And likewise, take example of the Pro∣phet Dauid, who hauing grieuouslie of∣fended God, and afterwardes returned by repentance, obteined forgiuenesse of his sinnes: and was yet afterwardes, notwith∣standing this, sharplie punished, & so forth of manie other examples. For our mother the holie church wil in no wise allow, That God did so punish them, onelie to the ende they should so feele his mightie hande, as they should euer after walke in feare and o∣bedience: and acknowledging their owne weaknesse, should learne with more expedi∣tion to call on him for helpe: as the verie words of the scripture do set forth: for that is altogether Caluinistrie: but shee will haue it plaine, That those punishe∣mentes were as a raunsome and paye∣ment made, wherewith they did paye or satisfie God: and make full recompense
for their faultes and offences: yea, and that they thereby deserued, that such as now call vpon them, shoulde bee released from their punishment. So that it helpeth not now, what soeuer these Heretikes alledge out of the Scripture, to proue, that if God should enter into iudgement with men, by their deedes,Psal. 143.2. Psal. 130.3. Iob. 9.3. Psal. 19.13. Ioh. 15.10.14.4. Psal. 40.1.38.5. 1. Cor. 8.46. no fleshe should be saued: nor that one man amongst a thousande were a∣ble to answere him: for that man doth dai∣lie: yea, continuallie and euerie minute, fall into so manie sinnes, ouer and besides those whereof his owne conscience doeth inces∣santly accuse him, if God shuld once begin to punishe according to the greatnesse or multitude of sinnes,Esaie. 64.6. there should be neither end nor measure in punishment: yea, that all the righteousnesse of the holiest men, is nothing else but as a stayned cloth: in so much that their good workes can not in them selues stande in anie steade before the iudgement seate of GOD:Psal. 143.2. Rom. 3.20. Galat. 2.16. howe much lesse are they sufficient to make full satisfaction for sinnes and transgressi∣ons? Also, where they saie, that God doth not punishe vs according to the desert of our sinnes,Psa. 103.10. thereby to make full satis∣faction for the same, but as a good father
doth chastise his child,Psal. 103.10. Heb. 12.6.7. Iob. 5.17. to the intent he may be warned & amend: & many such like pla∣ces they bring in, to long to bee rehearsed: for they are all but litterall sentences, and therefore can not serue the purpose of our deere mother the holie Church of Rome. And likewise, whereas these Heretikes doe alledge the theefe hanging vpon the Crosse, to whome Christ did not once make an mention of satisfaction and recom∣pense: and also of Paule, and of a multi∣tude of such other, which haue obteined only by Gods mere mercie forgiuenesse of their sinnes, through Christ, and for his sake, be∣ing pardoned as well of the punishment, as from satisfactiō for the same: for that Christ had not only taken vpō him our sinnes, but likewise the punishment for the same: We passe not a point for all that: for they are all nothing else, but particular & special exam∣ples and priuiledges, wherof we will make no account, nor esteeme them for anie per∣fect rule. For this rule established at the Councell of Trent, must needes remaine stedfast for euer, to witte, that God doeth not pardon any sinne entirely, vnlesse a man haue first made full satisfaction, and suffe∣red condigne and deserued punishment for
the same. And this will we proue wonder∣fully by an inuincible argument. Heare now a little and mark well, for here the ewe lambs. These Hexetikes must needs (whe∣ther they will or no) graunt this, That no mans sinnes are forgiuen him without pe∣nance. And now you must consider, That penance is nothing els but a punishment for sinne. For looke, thus the Master of the Sentences doth write: Poenitentia dicitur a puniendo,In the .14. booke of Sent. in the first cap. dist. qua quis punit illicita quae commisit: that is, Penance commeth of punishment, or pyning, whereby a man doth punish the euill which he hath cō∣mitted. Ergo, this matter is clere, and the Heretikes catched in a snare. For whereas they will (perhaps) say, to wind themselues out of the nette, That this is a starke lie, & an asseheadly dulnesse, considering that this worde,Poenitentiae. Poenitentia is nothing else in good Latin, but Penitentnesse or repentance: and is deriued, not of the worde Punire, To punish, but of the worde Poenitere, that is to say, Penitent, or sorie: all this can not helpe them. For to that we answere, That our deare mother the holy Church hath no∣thing to do wt their new heretike Latin, she hath Latin of herself, which is called Mon∣kish
Latin, or Scullarie Latin. In such la∣tin a Spanish chaplein of the Emperour Charles 5. did speak to a Germain at Aus∣burge, & said: Latinū nostrū non est sicut vostrū, Our Latin & yours is not all one. And therfore it is sufficiēt for vs, that Poe∣nitentia is so to be taken in our Latin, and so it must be, though the Crowe should be no bird. And therfore is this certein, & wtout all doubt, as was cōcluded at the councel of Trent, that whosoeuer wil say,In the .4. sessiō can. 12. de sacra∣mento poeniten∣tiae. that aswell the punishment as the offences are forgi∣uen, & that ful satisfaction is nothing els but a perfit faith, wherby we faithfully be¦leue that Christ hath fully satisfied for vs, he is acursed & excōmunicated: so that in cōclusion no sin is forgiuē wtout ful satisfac∣tion. And now cōsidering that so long as we liue, we are neuer assured, whether our satis∣faction is of our God fully accepted & al∣lowed, because it may happen that the Re∣ceiuers haue kept the same in their hands, or else that our paiments be not currant in heauen: or some other such thing, by reason wherof our tallie should not be allowed by Gods auditors: therefore hath our holy mo∣ther, vpō this point cōcluded, That no man can assuredly know, or say, that his sinnes are
forgiuen him, or that he shall be iustified before God without any doubt, or to be assured of his mercie. For this was the determination and conclusion of the holy fa∣thers at Trent, as followeth: Whosoeuer saith▪ that to the remission of sinnes,The councell of Trent. it is needfull for all men stead∣fastly to beleeue, that all his sinnes are clearely forgiuen him, not hauing anie doubt of his owne weaknesse and insuffi∣ciencie, let him be accursed. Iere. 31.34. Heb. 8, &c. as before.For, notwithstanding that our Lorde hath promised this vnto vs, without anie doubt, and confirmed the same by his pro∣mise, that he will (for Christes sake) be our mercifull God and father, and that he will no more thinke vpon our sinnes, but will clearely forgiue and wash away the same, for his owne names sake, and not for any of our desertes: yet may not wee credite him fullie so farre. For, although he say plaine∣ly, That he wil not think vpon our sinnes to iudge vs according to the same: yet will the holie Church of Rome haue vs take good heede to the matter, least it should happen and chaunce otherwise: and therefore will haue vs to consider well be∣fore hand, and make good prouision of our
merits, and supererogatorie or superfluous good workes, to fill his hand with those, and so to content and please him, as men please children with puppets and counters. Not∣withstanding, all that Paule saith,Rom. 8.14.15 That all they that are the children of God, haue the spirite of God, and are ledde by him, and he beareth witnes of them, that they are the children of God, and therby they crie, Abba, Father: and saith, That those which haue not this spirite, are not of Christ, considering that all those which are in Christ, and do faithfully beleeue in him, and haue their recourse to him, with per∣fect and steadfast hope through their be∣liefe in him:Ephes. 3.22. Ephes. 2.4.4.6 8. and That God who abounds in mercie, hath (through his inestimable loue wherewith he hath loued vs) when we were dead in sin, made vs aliue againe in Christ, through whose mercie wee are beecome holie: yea, and hath raised vs vp againe, and placed vs in the heauens by Christ Iesus, iustifying vs of his meere mercie through faith: not through our selues, but through the gift of God: not by workes, least anie man should boast himselfe: so that from henceforth none can charge or blame the elect of God:Rom. 8.33.34 39.
for it is he only which doth iustifie them, who therefore can condemne them, see∣ing that Christ hath suffered for them? So that they are assured, that neither death, nor life, nor Angel, nor rule, neither might, nor power, neither anie thing present, nor to come, neither hight, nor depth, nor any other creature, can sepa∣rate them from the loue of God, shewed in Christ Iesus our Lord: With manie such other like thinges which Paule spea∣keth of. But all that cannot helpe. For our mother the holie Church will haue that vn∣derstood onely of such,The Coun∣cell of Trent, 6. session .9. cap deet. de iustifi∣catine. in the Interim of the Emperour Charles in the 8. Chap. as haue and are assu∣red of the same by some speciall reuelation, and of such as trust simplie vpon Gods worde and promise. For she hath resolutely concluded, that such a manner of beliefe should be nothing else, but a flat and vaine-glorious presumption. But when a man doth trust to his owne merits, good works, and satisfactions, then he is assured to come out with his iust reckoning: or at the least, if there haue not bene ynough done here in this worlde, that shall bee after in ano∣ther worlde accomplished and paied to the vttermost farthing: insomuch that he shall not remaine one mite in Gods debt. For
to that ende and purpose, hath our deare mother the holie Churche of Rome ordei∣ned the blessed Purgatorie: whereof wee will nowe make further declaration, and proue it to bee as well grounded on the Scripture, as the merits and satisfactions, whereof we haue now alreadie spoken. The viii. Chapter. VVherein Purgatorie is established, as well bp Scripture as by inheritance. And herein are likewise intreated the remedies and helpes whereby the sillie soules are relea∣sed out of Purgatorie. HEre is to be considered,Purgatorie, & how soules are redemed out of it. that Purga∣torie is founded and hath his ground out of the holie Scripture. For if Masses are founded vpon the Scripture, as wee haue alreadie certiied, then surely we may not make a bastard of the Masse of Requi∣em. And now, if it be so, that the Masse of Requiem is founded vpon the Scripture, then no doubt there must needes be a Pur∣gatorie. But nowe let vs bring forth (for the proofe hereof) speciall textes of scrip∣ture. First note, howe there is written by Paule to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 3.11.12.13. That no man may lay anie other foundation but
onely vpon Iesus Christ.This tet is by all Catolike writers al∣ledged, and spe∣cially in the .4. booke of Sen∣tences. cap. 10. dist. 21. And so whosoe∣uer doth build on this foundation, gold, siluer, precious stones, timber, hay, or stubble, euerie mannes woorke shall ap∣peare: for the day shall declare it, and it shall be shewed in fire, & the fire shall de∣clare euerie mans woorke what it is, &c. This hath our dere mother the holy Church vnderstood, meant, and set forth of Purga∣torie: And although out of this it should fol∣low, That all manner of persons (without exception) as wel he Saints as she Saints which our holy father the Pope hath cano∣nized: yea, and the verie Popes themselues shoulde daunse in Purgatorie, as well as Iacke and Tom, with the rest. But consi∣dering how that doth not agree in one with the beliefe of the holie Church of Rome, in respect of the superfluous good woorkes, which those Saintes haue done for them∣selues,Deruse the ooke called Compendium theologicum. lib. 7. cap. 1. anar∣diu de Bustis. in osario in the 2. sermon. in the first parte. and for their good friendes, more than they were of duetie bound to do, there∣fore she properly & wisely concludeth there∣vpon, That those soules onely which de∣part out of this world without any dead∣ly sinne, and before they haue sufficient∣ly satisfied by penance, for their veniall and quotidian sinnes, shall remaine a
certeine space in Purgatorie, & be there broiled and sodden, til such time as they shall (with soule Masses, pardons, or in∣dulgencies) be hailed out of the pan or chaldron, as with a flesh hooke. The which is worthie to bee noted, considering that which is thereout concluded: as first, that (as heretofore is declared) al sinnes are not deadly,In the .7. ca. of the .2▪ parte. neither deserue euerlasting dam¦nation: and then againe, by this you may perceiue that which of late we did speake of: namely,Originall and daily sinnes. That the death and passion of Iesus Christ,In the councell of Trent in the .7. session canon .10. and 14. ses cap. 8. hath purged but onely our o∣riginall sinne, and not our daily sinnes, for which wee must make full satisfaction our selues. And whereas the Heretikes say, that Paule doeth not (in the foresaide text) meane any thing at all of Purgatorie,Epiphanius in his booke na∣med Ancirmus, speaking of the doctrine of Trent, saith yt it is the one∣ly foundation, & bringes in this texte of Paule for his purpose. but meanes onely to speake according as the text importeth, & as many ancient fathers haue expounded & vnderstoode the same of the fire of the holy ghost, which doth in time trie & cause to appere plaine all doctrines: namely those which take their foundation of Iesus Christ. And they say that good doc∣trine and godly learning shal in this proofe remaine stedfast: but babblers and false teachers shall consume like hay, or stubble,
before the fire. With all this we haue no∣thing to do: for that is but an exposition af∣ter the letter, and not after the spirit or alle∣gorie. It is sufficient for vs, that our holie mother the Church of Rome, hath vnder∣stood Paul otherwise,Reade Eckius and other wri∣ters vpon this. Math. 9.23. Luke. 8.52. and applied his text vnto Purgatorie: like as she hath applied the wordes of the Euangelist, where hee saith, That it was a custome amongst the Iewes, to weepe ouer the dead. For ther∣by she hath concluded, That the Iewes did beleue, that there is a Purgatorie, because (as she thinkes) it had bene a great follie of them, to weepe for the dead, vnlesse they did beleeue there was a Purgatorie: so that it is a thing verie credible, that those which wept so sore ouer Steeuen (as in the Acts of the Apostles is declared) did thinke none other,Act. 8.8. but that he was gone into Purgato∣rie, notwithstanding that he had seene Ie∣sus Christ sitting on the right hand of God the father, and sealed the testimonie and witnesse of him with his bloud. Thirdely, Purgatorie is clearely proued ut of the plaine textes of Paule, who saith, That in the name of Iesus al knees do bow,Phil. 2.20. those that are in heauen, those vpon the earth, and those vnder the earth. Surely we wil
not haue this vnderstoode of diuels: Ergo then it must needs folow, that it is spokē of the souls which lay burning in Purgatorie. For thus saith S. Iohn in the Apocalypse touching the same matter:Apo. 5.13. And all crea∣tures which are in heauē, & in the earth, & vnder the earth, & in the sea, & all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing, ho∣nor, & power, be to him that sitteth vpon the seat, & vnto the lambe for euermore. Where vndoubtedly he doth vnderstand & meane Purgatorie, according to the expo∣sition of our deare mother, the holie Church of Rome. And by this you may perceiue, that Pythagoras was not farre different or disagreing in beliefe from the holy Church of Romes beliefe, when as he saide, That mens souls departing from their bodies, did enter into beastes. Considering nowe that Iohn here, and Dauid in other places, do witnes, that the creatures vnder the wa∣ter: yea, the fishes themselues do laude and praise God, and that the same is vnderstood by our holie mother the Church of Rome, of the soules that be in Purgatorie, she hath not without great appearaunce of trueth concluded,Reade Eckius in his Encheiridi∣on. That there is likewise a Pur∣gatorie, in the bottome of the Sea:
by which reasons it appeareth, that the soules of drowned men, place themselues in the bowels of fishes. And it is possible that this was the occasion which moued Pytha∣goras to forbid his scholers the eating of fish: considering specially withall, That S. Patriks purgatorie in Ireland, lies fast by the sea side,S. Patrikes Purgatorie. neare vnto a mountaine cal∣led Hecla, where our mother the holie Church of Rome doeth beleeue, that the sillie soules are as ill punished in yse, as in fire. So that by good reason, there might haue bene added vnto the same sentence of Paule, That the trying and shewing open∣ly of the workes of such as build vpon the foundation of Iesus Christ, is not onely by fire,Psal. 66.12. Reade Eckus and other Ca∣tholike writers and specialy the booke of Sen. but likewise by water and by yse. For so the holie Church vnderstands that place, where it is written. We haue passed tho∣rough fire and water. And Virgil the wise Poet, which had so good vnderstanding of the sacrifice of the Masse, as is declared before, hath likewise placed Purgatorie by a Sea,In the .6. booke of Aneidos. or by a great water called La∣cus Auernus, which lies not verie farre from Rome, in the Kingdome of Na∣ples, where hee describes to bee the entrie and forefront of Hell, and then setteth forth
Purgatorie, with all the paines and tor∣ments, which the soules doe suffer, so per∣fectly and well, that a man would thinke that our deare mother the holie Church of Rome, hath kindeled her Purgatorie with his fire, tongs, and bellowes. Insomuch that our Catholike Doctors did not amisse when they proued their Purgatorie,Dantes in his. booke called purgatorie and Margarita Philca. by the authoritie and testimonie of Virgil. Now, if it were so, that there were no Scrip∣ture to proue Purgatorie by,Virgils purgato∣rie. yet would the inheritance and possession of it, teache vs sufficiently, that there is a Purgatorie. And therefore we neede not to trouble our selues much, with bringing out the booke of the Machabies for a witnesse, and there∣by cause the Heretikes to mocke and ieast at vs. For they say, that that booke is so farre off from being allowed for an authen∣tike booke of holie Scripture,Machab. 15.29.40. that the writer and Authour of the same, did desire to bee pardoned and borne withall, if hee had not written so sufficiently as he ought. And men may further consider, what account is to bee made of his writings, seeing hee did so greatly praise one Razis, who ripped out his owne vowelles and liue him selfe,2. Machab. 14 43.46. because he woulde not fall
into the handes of his enimies: which vn∣vndoubtedly was a detestable deede, and directly against Gods commaundement. They declare likewise,Reade what Eu∣sebius of Meliton writeth in the 4. booke of his histories. capit. 26, And read Augustine in his 2. booke against Gandenuum. ca. 23. and Hierom in his prologue vpon the Ma∣chabies. that neither by Christ, & his Apostles, nor by the whole cō∣gregation, in three or foure hundred yeares space, that was neuer esteemed nor taken but for Apocrypha, to witte, for the wri∣ting and setting sorth of a man, and not for the vndoubted worde of God. And yet they say beeside this, that if they shoulde accept that Booke, yet is there nothing written therein touching Purgatorie, but onely a praying for the deade, in respect of the resurrection, and not in anie respect of satisfaction by Purgatorie. And there∣fore wee will not breake our heades great∣ly about this matter, but will establishe our Purgatorie strongly, by inheritaunce and possession. Besides that, I leaue the Priestes pur∣ses vnspoken of, which is a souereigne, so∣king, and a drawing Purgatorie, as eue∣rie man may both say and feele. And yet be∣sides this,The Iegenda au∣rea and the Vi∣ae patrum are full of such sffe. we finde by certeine & vndoubted testimonies of our auncesters, that many soules haue appeared, & haue plainly said, that they were extremely punished in Pur∣gatorie,
and therefore haue heartily desired that men would helpe them out of it, with Masses, almes, pardon letters, and bulles: as it is written of Pope Benedict 8. him∣selfe:Fassiculus to∣porum and o∣ther histories▪ and as the Legend and other Catho∣like bookes testifie, which are full of such worthie matters and notable examples: so that there is no occasion to put any maner of doubt concerning Purgatorie. And further, we do finde diuerse euident and very true histories of Odilions Pur∣gatorie, in the kingdome of Sicilia,Odilions Purgatorie. in the mount Aetna, which flames continually, where the sillie soules are burnt, and broy∣led like dried herring, or like Westpha∣ling hammes, or gammons of Bakon, whiche haue houng seuen yeares long in the smoke. And this was the occasion that moued Pope Iohn 8. through the great pittie that hee had vpon the sillie soules: and by the good and ripe aduise and counsell of the foresaide Odilion, which was a holie Father, and Monke of an Abbie called Clunie, to commande and ordeine,An Soule day. that alwayes the next day after Al-hallowes day, a solemne day of deuotion should be kept for all christen soules: which order is very precisely followed & obserued by
our dere mother the holy Church of Rome, and many yeares of pardon giuen & graun∣ted to all those which vpon that day doe de∣uoutly visite the Chantrie priests & Masses of Scala Coeli, vsing their purses liberally for that purpose, and to haue a trentall of Masses, a sackfull of seuen Psalmes, and three or foure pokes packt with Pater no∣sters, and Ane Maries, all well measured & filled, whereof to make a present to the sillie soules in Purgatorie, for that is euen fitte meat for their mouthes: and they are as wel refreshed with those dainties, as though they were wrapped about the head with a wet clout in a cold morning. And yet beside all this, the holie Churche of Rome hath sought all maner of meanes & wayes to re∣fresh, coole, & ease the pain of the silly poore soules, which lie in the great heat of Pur∣gatorie gaping for aire, as a Carpe doeth for water:All these. 15. helpes and re∣medies you shal finde euen as they are here written in the booke called Sermones disci∣puli de tempore & de sanctis, cum Promptuario ex▪ mplorum. all which meanes she hath dig∣ged out of the holy Scriptures. For, to beginne, she hath appointed bur∣ning Candles, which must bee set vppe to light the poore soules in the darke places of Purgatorie: because it is written, Christ is the true light, and whosoeuer doeth followe him, walketh not in darkenesse.
And therefore hath our holie mother prac∣tised, that at euerie corner of the hearse, a candle shalbe set burning for that the dead should be forgiuen and pardoned of foure sundrie manner of sinnes: which hee hath committed, to witte, in thinking, in spea∣king, in doing, and in suffering. Secondarilie, she doeth succour the poore sillie soules with censing: for thereby they are released of the horrible stinke which is in Purgatorie. Thirdlie, shee doeth relieue them with holy water, which must be deuoutly sprink∣led vppon their graues, with a sprinkle, that thereby they may be cooled and refre∣shed of the great and extreame heate of the fire: for it is written: Asperges me Do∣mine Hysopo: Thou shalt sprinkle mee (O Lord) with Hysope: which is to bee vnderstood, that the Parson or Curate, shal all to water my graue with a holy wa∣ter sprinkle. For you may well consider, th6at Dauid was dead and buried, when he spake these wordes, and his soule was in Purgatorie: otherwise, our deare mother would not sing this dailie in the name of the soules departed. Therefore must this holie water needes
as much profit them, as a couple of Egge shelles: which is apparant by the holie Scripture. For it is written in the Gospel of S. Luke, That the riche man, when hee laie burning in Hell, did require onelie a drop of water, to coole his tongue. Then consider nowe, if a droppe of water can suc∣cour and helpe the soules that lie in Hell, how much more shal the sweet holie water coole the soules that lie in Purgatorie, when it is so swashed and dashed ouer all the graue with a swinging holie water sprinkle? Fourthlie, they are greatlie relieued by the offering of bread and wine: for through the might of such an acceptable offering, the soules are fedde and refreshed of God. Fiftlie, with Vigils, of three, sixe, and nine lessons, with De profundis, with Requiescant in pace: and with such other like pleasaunt songes, as Iob and Dauid soung, when they lay in Purgatorie. For our deare mother the holie Church of Rome hath applied all such matters vn∣to Purgatorie. Sixtlie, they are relieued by fatte offe∣rings: for that the soules are maruellous
glad, when the Priestes get manie offe∣rings. And in deede, it is a most sweet mor∣sell for their mouthes. Seuenthlie, with praying to he Saintes and she Saintes, and with singing of Le∣tanies, Driges, & Ryrieleesons: for there are manie and great indulgencies graun∣ted vnto them. Eightlie, with fasting & kneeling. For there is a plaine texte in the decrees, which saith, That the fasting of the liuing, is the hope of the dead. Ninthely, when men do pay for them such debtes as they left vnpaied. Tenthly, when men do for them workes of mercie, and especiallie when they are done by Priestes, Monkes, or Friers. The xi. when their executours accom∣plishe and fulfill their last willes, and testa∣mentes, especiallie if they haue vequea∣thed any thing, either monie or lands, to a∣nie Abbie or Cloister. The xii. when anie man shall doe for them such penance as they haue left vndone when it was enioyned them by their ghost∣lie fathers. The xiii. when anie man perfour∣meth for them such vowes of pilgrimages,
and other like deuotions, as they made in their life time, and yet haue not kept them. The xiiii. when men do pardon & for∣giue them such offences, as they haue com∣mitted against anie person or persons, hee or shee, in their life time. The last reliefe, and the best of all, is, when men cause Masses to be soung or said for them: for that is farre aboue all reme∣dies, because it is a goodlie drawing plai∣ster, which hath not power onelie to drawe soules out of Purgatorie, but also to picke monie out of mens purses. And that same Requiem aeternam beeing three times soung in the Masse, is such a pleasant me∣dicine, that (in a moment) it doeth cleane take away all the paine and griefe which the soules suffer, and bringeth them fast a∣sleepe like dormice, in so much that they feele no more smart, neither at the sto∣mache, nor in the backe: yea, and though that their bladder were puft vppe like a Cowes vdder, so that they had not the pow∣er to pisse a plumb stone, yet with that medcine they should in the twinkling of an eye, be as sounde as a rotten apple. And yet nowe, besides all these good & wholesome meanes before specified, the
good & holie Nonnes of Leydē in Holland,Nonnes of Ley¦den in Holland. and all other Couentes of that profession, found out an other helpe of great impor∣tance: for euerie day, betweene Michael∣masse and All Saints, after that the Vi∣gils of ix. lessons be song, then goeth the Mother or Prioresse of the Cloister into a darke chamber, with a great rodde in her hande, and then come the Nonnes in thi∣ther one after another starke naked, euerie one alone, & turne vp their bare buttockes: yea, some of them as naked as my naile, & so lie downe before the Prioresse, and there receiue holie discipline for the soules in Purgatorie: for, for euerie ten girkes that one of them doeth so receiue, there is a soule deliuered out of Purgatorie, and flies vp into heauen without anie staie. Is not this nowe a goodlie matter? I beleeue verilie, that all the rest of the Nonnes of other pro∣fessions will doe the like, though it were but euen for good manner sake, and that the Father or Patrone of the Cloister doth vse to execute the office manie times, when the Prioresse is sicke, or otherwise earnest∣lie occupied. And nowe (besides all this) Durandus writeth, That euerie Sunday and holie
day, the soules do play. For seeing that God hath commaunded, that on the Sabbaoth day al people should rest from their labour:Soules do rest and play on Sundayes and Holidayes. it is great reason, that the sillie soules shoulde be relieued of their paines on those dayes. In consideration wherof, it appeareth a maruellous charita∣ble deede of our deare mother the holie church of Rome, to haue instituted so many holie dayes (beside Sundayes) & comman∣ded them to be solemnely kept, because the soules may vppon those dayes rest them∣selues, and go a playing: for that it is to be thought, that they obserue as well the pre∣ceptes of the holie Church, as Gods com∣mandements: otherwise they were no bet∣ter than Lutherans. And now we know ve∣rie wel, that there commeth no Lutheran into Purgatorie: for Purgatorie is only for the good Catholikes which hold fast on the church of Rome. So that it is verelie to be thought, that the poore soules are as well holpe vp wt so many idle holy daies, as with the Nonnes discipline on their bare arsses: yet it is to bee considered, that albeit this, they must be praied for on Sundaies & other Holie daies, as well as on the worke daies, when they lie scortching & scalding
in Purgatorie: for that hath our mother the holie church speciallie commanded, being therevnto moued by the example of a good fat Abbat,In the .7. booke in tit. de officio mortuorum. nu. 2. who (as Durādus saith) because he had forbidden his Monkes, to pray for the soules in Purgatorie, vpon Sundaies & Holy dayes, but onlie vpon worke daies, he was vpon a time (by the poore soules) catched, & verie sore beaten & wounded, & by that meanes forced to reuoke & breake his former order & cōmandment. And sure∣lie, that was but reason: for although the sillie soules haue some playing daies, yet I assure you they paie full dearelie for it at o∣ther times.This is copied in a manner woorde for woorde out of the booke cal∣led Sermones dis∣cipuli de tempo∣re, & de sanctis, cum promptuario exemplorum in the .160. Ser∣mon of the soules. For the paines which they suf∣fer there, are so extreme, that our Doctours write for a trueth, That there was a soule which had lien 30. yeres in Purgatorie, & at last, there came an Angel, who did bid the soule choose, whether it would tarie yet one short Winters day in Purgatorie, or that it would returne into the worlde againe, and there doe a maruellous hard penance, to witte, for one long hundred yeares space, shoulde goe barefoote, and treade still vppon sharpe yron nailes, eate nothing else but browne bread, and drinke bitter gall mingled with vinegre,
and weare a cloth made of Camels haire next the skinne, & a stone vnder the head in place of a pillowe. This soule did choose much rather to doe all that same harde pe∣nance in earth, than to tarie one daie lon∣ger in Purgatorie. Consider nowe what a sharpe biting sauce mustard is: for as it is written in the Decrees: There is no earth∣lie paine, or martyrdome, to be compa∣red to the paines of Purgatorie: yea, that holie man Thomas de Aquino saith,Capit. qui in aliud dist 25. That the paine of the fire of hell, and the fire of Purgatorie, is all one, and that they differ nothing at all, but that the one is but temporall, and the other is eternall. So that it was not without iust occasion, that Virgil set a partition of yron,Aeneid. libro. 6. and other metall betweene those two fires: although some men be of opinion, that the partition was but a pale made of wainscote, which (because it was of wood) was long agoe burnt away:Hell and Pur∣gatory both but one kitchen. so that nowe Hell and Pur∣gatorie enter in both at one hole, and are both but one fire. Which is the occasion that some take vpon them to say, that The fire of Purgatorie is pist out: although there be other learned men, which bring in another occasion, whereby it is happened,
that there is now no partition betweene Hell and Purgatorie, but that they are ioyned together. For it is written in a cer∣ten historie:This is writtē in the Apologie of Barnard. Oli. That there was a good holie Pope, which was verie desirous to know of his Secretarie, being a good wittie & learned man, whether (as he thought) he might giue a general pardon at once,The Pope and his Secretarie commen of indulgencies & pardons. for all such soules as were then in Purga∣torie, and ioyntlie withall pardon alike all such as should hereafter be condem∣ned thither: so that after, there shoulde be no more neede of Purgatorie. Wher∣vpon his Secretarie did demaund of him this question againe: Whether hee did not verilie thinke, that if it were so, that he had such power, if he did not thē verely beleeue, that all his Pope prede∣cessours haue had the like authoritie in their time? Wherevnto the Pope answe∣red, Yes surelie, considering that all his power and authoritie came from them. Then the Secretarie did demaunde of him againe: Whether that of so manie Popes, and holie Fathers, which had possessed that place before him, there were not one of them so mercifull and louing towardes the poore soules,
that had taken vppon him to doe that charitable deed, if his power did so farre extend? Vnto this the Pope answered, As touching that, he knewe not. Where∣vpon the Secretarie gaue him a full reso∣lution, saying, I can tell then certeinlie: Once our Lord Iesus Christ, chief Bishop of all Bishops, & Pope aboue all Popes, had full power and authoritie to doe the same, for that he was almightie: and hee had also the will to doe it, for that he was most mercifull: and did likewise beare an infinite affection and loue vnto all mankind, in so much that he did ef∣fectuallie and fullie accomplish that mat∣ter. So that it is not needful for anie man to trouble him self anie more about that matter, seeing hee hath (by offering vp of his bodie) obteined a pardon of God the Father, and sealed the same for euer∣more, with his owne pretious bloud for the redemption of all faithfull soules,Christes indul∣gence and par∣don for all chri∣sten soules. past, present, or to come. So that nowe there falles no more condemnation or iudgement vpon them, neither shall they neede to feare Death, Hell, nor Purga∣torie, but depart out of this life directlie into euerlasting life, as he him selfe doeth
plainlie testifie by Iohn the Euangelist in his Gospell.Iohn. 3.18. Iohn. 5.24. Nowe see,Purgatorie condemned. out of this will some men mainteine, That Purgatorie is cleane ta∣ken away, euer since this great and gene∣rall pardon came: in so much that diuelles are come to dwel there, & haue now brought Hell and Purgatorie all into one kitchen, where they broile their soules, and turmoile them at their pleasure. And for that like∣wise, that good Catholike Doctour Bar∣nardus de Bustis doeth defende this case with the testimonie and witnesse of Grego∣rie: That the fire of Hell and Purgatorie are kindled together, saying, Nam (vt in∣quit Gregorius) sub eodem igne electus purgatur, & damnatus crematur: that is to say, For (as Gregorie saith) with one fire are the elect purged,In his booke called Rosarium, in the 3. part the 2. sermon. and the damned burned. And therefore it is, that our deare mother the holie Church, in the prayer cal∣led, Offertorium, which she singeth com∣monlie vpon All Soules day, & in the An∣niuersarie, doth put no difference betwixt Hell and Purgatorie: for these are the wordes which shee doeth vse: Domine Iesu Christe, Rex gloriae, li∣bera animas omnium fidelium defunc∣torum
de manu inferni,Offertorium on all Soules day & de profundo lacu, libera eas de ore leonis, ne absorbe∣at eas tartarus, sed signifer S. Michael re∣praesentet eas in lucem sanctam, &c. That is to say: O Lord Iesu Christ, King of glorie, de∣liuer thou all faithfull soules out of the power of hel, and out of that deepe lake: deliuer them out of the mouth of the lion, that they sinke not downe into hell, but that thy standard bearer Saint Michael may bring them into that holie light, &c. Wherein they nowe plainlie call Pur∣gatorie, Hell. And in an other Collect, which they doe sing vpon the same daye, they call it, Regiones tenebrarum, that is to say, The region, or place of darknesse, praying vnto God, that S. Michael will or may doe so much, as to deliuer them from thence. In summe, they make but one hole, and one lake of those twaine. Howsoeuer it happeneth, whether the pale that was be∣tweene them be burnt, or that Purgatorie is pist out, I wote not, it is to profounde a question for vs, and therefore we will com∣mit the disputation of that matter to the Doctours of Louen: They may (perhaps)
tipple out a flaggon of wine or twaine, in the matter, before they agree vppon it. It is inough for vs, that we haue proued Purgatorie sufficientlie, not onelie by plaine textes of holie Scripture, but also by inheritance and possession, and so esta∣blished it, as there is nothing to bee saide a∣gainst it. The ix. Chapter. Intreating of indulgencies and pardons, prouing and e∣stablishing the same by the Scripture. NOwe it doeth followe, that we intreat of pardons and indulgencies,Indulgencies and pardons. which of necessitie must proceede out of the foun∣dation of Purgatorie, especiallie if you do minister vnto it a glister of parchement, waxe, and lead: for that hath a wonderfull operation in it, sithence it doth refresh a∣gaine, our deere mother the holie church of Rome, and maketh her lustie, though shee be something troubled with a laske: al∣though in deede shee is nowe waxen so olde and vnweldie, as glisters can not helpe her greatlie, especiallie so long as these Hretikes are still gaping after Scrip∣tures,
and will beleeue nothing, vnlesse i be set downe or confirmed by the Bible. Nowe therefore I wil send them the Epi∣stle of Paul to the Colossians,Colos. 1.24. where they shall find, that Paul saith thus, Now ioy I in my sufferings, which I suffer for you, and fulfill that which is behinde of the passions of Christ in my flesh: for his bo∣dies sake which is the congregation. Al∣way prouided, that they shal not vnderstand nor interpret this text after their mindes, nor after the letter: to wit, as though Paul did meane nothing els, but that he (as a member of Christes body) doeth followe Christ his head, in suffring for the loue of the congregation, and strengthening of the same: for this interpretation is hereticall, & doth not wel agree with the interpretation and beleefe of our deare mother the church of Rome. But they must know & confesse, that Paules meaning in that place is, that the passion of Christ is not sufficient to sa∣tisfie for all our sins, which we haue cōmit∣ted since: for those must euery man make sa∣tisfaction for by good workes & pardons, & wt bulles & indulgencies: for to that end serue the merites of such Saints, as haue bin canonized by Popes, and the bloud of
their martyrs, which suffered in defence of the holy church of Rome, & furthermore, all the meritorious works, which S. Fran∣cis, S. Benedict, S. Dominick, & other holie fathers haue laid vp for a help, which were superfluous & more than they were bounde to do. For all these merites & good workes,Petrus Asotes in Catholica asserti∣one de lege. laid together vpon a heape wt our merits & superfluous good works, which we haue in store,Looke for this in the Exrauag. of Pope Cle∣ment 6. Rubric. de poenitent. & remis. cap. vnige. Dei filius. Item in the writing vp of the treasure of Churches tkē out of the Com∣pilation of ma∣ster Iohn de Fa∣brica super relax. Item the glosse cap. anti. ext. de poenit. & remis. ouer & besides those which must first answere for our sinnes: All these (I say) are shut vp in a chest together, wherof our holy father the Pope hath the keies to keepe: & doth distribute them to euery person accor∣ding to his discretion: which is commonly according as euerie man doth annoynt his hand with golden oyle: For this same gol∣den oyle is of such strength & vertue, that there is no offence, knauerie, sinne, nor ab∣homination so great, but it will be heled & made cleane with the same, as is plainly to be sene in the Taxa poenitentiaria aposto∣lica, that is, In the booke of reckoning, or taxe register, where the pardon and price of al sinnes is set vpon certein summes of mo∣nie, which are set & taxed in the popish or a∣postolike penance chāber: but now among the rest, the Pope dealeth most liberallie
with such as come to Rome, in the yeere of Iubilie, and doe there deuoutlie visite the graues or tumbes of Peter and Paul: for those haue full remission of all their sinnes, à poena & culpa:This is plainly set out in the glosse in capit. antiq. de poen. & rmis. & therewith are the two Apostles maruellouslie recreated: for out of that may S. Peter note, that the prayer of Christ for him, when he said: I haue praied for thee, that thy faith should not fayle: doeth there receiue ful effect, when he seeth the people so deuoutlie disposed to go visit his tumbe and graue. And by this nowe is that likewise (which we alledged out of S. Paul) fulfilled: in so much (doubtles) that they haue great pleasure, when they see such deuotion vsed, and surelie do laugh wihall, as though they had the tooth ache. The holie Church of Rome doth yet bring forth other textes of importance, for the e∣stablishing of indulgencies, as speciallie, where Christ said vnto Peter: I shall giue vnto thee the keies of the kingdome of heauen:Math. 16.19. which are to bee vnderstood, the keies of the chest before mentioned,This standeth likewise plainly set foorth in the said glosse, and is confirmed by all those Ca∣tholike doctors. wherin that rich tresure is shut vp, which can neuer be emptied nor diminished: for if it were possible, that all the people of the worlde did go to Rome in one yeare of Iubilie,
that euerie man might receiue full indul∣gence and pardon, yet should the same chest be no more emptied thereby, than the O∣cean sea should be, with taking out of it one spoonefull of water: or Saint Goddards mountaine be diminished, by taking from it one handfull of sand: as is plainly sette forth by a verie trimme and fine verse, as followeth: Mille licèt sumant, deperit inde nihil. That is to say: Thogh thousands take & none said nay: Yet nothing wastes or weares away. And now, how necessarie and profitable this is, to our holie mother the Church of Rome, it doth appeare plainly out of this, That onely the indulgencies, with the let∣ters of pardon,In the booke called defensio Parisien. Curiae pro libertate ecc. Gal. Ludouico. 11. oblato aruc. 77. and the Reseruationes pe∣ctorales, mentales, regressus generales, & speciales accessus, with such other like tri∣fles mo, are worth to the Pope of Rome in France onelie, aboue two hundred thou∣sand Crownes a yeare: so that through all Christendome, it doth amount to aboue ten millions of Crownes, which is a prettie summe. But what shoulde I talke much of the Pope? It is not long agoe, that a simple
gray frier called Samson of Millan, be∣ing by Pope Leo, 10. appointed (amongst other) for one of the gatherers or receiuers of the monie for Bulles and Indulgencies, had within a little space, gotten so much monie for himselfe, that he did offer to giue a hundred and twentie thousand Ducats in redie monie,120000. Du∣cates offered to be made Pope. to be chosen Pope. In summe, all indulgencies, pardons, iubilies, & buls, with the rest of the Popes authoritie, are lightly to be proued and declared by scrip∣ture, if men will vnderstand them rightly, and according to the exposition of our deare mother the holy Church. The x. Chapter. VVhich doth treat of the Supremasie of the Pope, and pro∣ueth & establisheth the same by scriptures & examples. The Popes power.NOw as touching that which is to be said for the supremasie, and authori∣tie of the Pope, that is to bee proued by so many clere & strong testimonies & witnes∣ses of scripture, that I can scarse tell where it is best to begin. But I may take first the best knowne and plainest text, where Christ said:Math. 16.18. I say vnto thee, that thou art Peter, and vpon this Petra, (which is to say a stone, or a rocke) will I build my congre∣gation, and the gates of hell shal not pre∣uaile
against them, &c. For by these fewe wordes, to begin withall,Cap. ita dominus dist. 29. capit-omnes. dist. 2. capit. non trba∣. 24. Quae▪  & in the I. decree. in the begin∣ning of Cle∣mens Epist. it is witnessed (af∣ter the spiritual expositiō of the holy church) that Peter is the firme and seedfast founda∣tion of the Church (for she hath nothing to do with Christ in this matter:) as Clemens hath verie worthily set forth in his Epistle written to Iames the brother of our Lorde. And againe, here is not to be vnderstood by Peter, the person of Peter the Apostle: but in the name of Peter, are our holy Fathers (the Popes) pointed vnto, as with a wette finger. For whereas the heretikes will say, that Peter was neuer at Rome, it is a stark lie. See I pray you their follie: well, his head & bones lie there yet at this present in a golden chest. And yet besides that,S Peters hi∣storie of Rome not on∣ly his Legend, but likewise that holy man Lippomanus, & the booke called Speculū historiale, that is, The Mirror of histories made by Vincentius Lirinensis, do perfect∣ly set forth,Capit. Quamuis. 21. dist. capit. sacrosanct. dst. 22. cap. beati. 2. Quae. 7. capit. Fundamenta de electione & electi potestate. That Iesu Christ met him with out the town gates of Rome. And being demanded by Peter whether he was go∣ing? He answered, I am going to Rome to be there crucified againe: and a while after was Peter crucified, and that vpon the same day, & place, & vnder the same tyrant
that Paule, iust a yeare before, was put to death: yea, after that he himselfe had bene Pope, and gouerned that sea 25. yeares, by the same token that his seate which was hewed out of a Purphyre stone, and the Albe wherein hee song his first Masse, do both remaine yet for a memoriall. And although Saint Luke doe testifie,Read the Actes of the Apostles where is trea∣ted of Corneli∣us the captaine of the councell at Hierusalē, of Peters impri∣sonment, and in many other pla∣ces. that hee continued verie long at Hierusalem: yea, and that in the verie same time that hee shoulde haue bene in Rome, by the recko∣ning and calculation of our deare mother the holie Church of Rome: and that Paul doth seeme to agree with the same, where he writeth, that the time that he lay in pri∣son in Rome, there was not one of the faith∣full that did visite or assist him: I leaue to say, that Peter shoulde then haue beene Pope: but all this cannot persuade vs. For that is to bee answered, that Saint Luke might be ouerseene in his writing, and I thinke he was no good Arithmetician: or else we may say (as diuers Lutherans them selues confesse,) that one bodie may bee in two, or three, or mo sundrie places, at one time. And touching that, he had perhappes forgotten that Peter was Pope of Rome: as is apparant by that he writeth to the
Galathians, where he saieth,Gal. 10.2.7.8. That Peter was appointed for an apostle to the Iewes, and he himselfe to the Gentiles. Or else it may well be answered, that it was not de∣cent for Peter, beeing a Prince and Duke ouer all the Apostles, to go seeke or visite such a simple fellow as Paule was, lying in prison:Gregorie. 7. Considering how that Pope Gre∣gorie the 7. successour, about the yeare one thousand and seuentie,Themperour Henrie the .4. This doth Pla∣tina write, Ben∣o Cardinalis, & other Historio∣graphers. did suffer the noble Emperour Henrie 4. who came in the colde winter, simply clad, bare headed, and barefoote, most humblie desiring to haue accesse to his holinesse, beeing then in the towne of Camisen, his holinesse did (as is before said) suffer him to tarie before the gates of the towne, three daies, without once looking vpon him, or sending to him. I let alone that he would once step a foote to go meete him,This do all the Catholike doc∣tours write, & many old histo∣ries, which yet notwithstāding do not agree among them selues, so that there may be false heades a∣mongest them as it seemeth. being in the meane space passing his time & dallying with his Cur∣tesans, and with the Dutchesse Matildis, who yet at last did make intercession for the Emperour. Wherefore, is it not to bee thought then, that Peter did likewise stand vpon his grauitie and reputation, without much going to the prison, to seeke Paule, or visite him? Especially considering, howe
busie he was to appoint and set new Pre∣lates in euerie place. For it might perhaps be, that Peter was not verie well at ease, or diuerse other occasions might cause it. But this is alway to be beleeued, and holden for a verie truth, That Peter was fiue & twen∣tie yeres complete, resident at Rome, and distributed the landes to euerie one, ac∣cording as he thought good: & likewise ordeined and instituted Prelats,This is set foorth in the .2. decretall Epi∣stle of Anacletus written tou∣ching the ordei∣ning of bishops and Archbi∣shops. In the first booke of the councell capit. Prouince▪ dis. 39 This witnes∣sing of Dauid in the 98. Psal. is brought in in the .3. Epi∣stle of Anaclet. treating of the Patriarchs, & in the decrees. capit. sacrosancta dist. 21. Mat. 12.1. Mark. 9.53. Luk. 9.46. Bishops, and Archbishops, ouer all the world, and deposed the heathē gouernors, which at that time bare rule, out of their places, & placed other in their roomes, which hee did name Primates, for that euerie man came to receue iudgment at their hands as is very finely and at large set out in the epistle of Anacletus, and in the booke of decrees. And that this is wel founded vpon scripture, it is apparant by the wordes of the saide Anacletus, who doth bring in (for verefying of his saying) plaine textes out of the Psalmes, to witte, Moses and Aaron with their Priestes. For out of that is for∣ceablie concluded (as hee saieth) that the Pope of Rome is the head of the Church. Is not that well shot, God saue the marke. Also the holie Apostles (saieth hee) did
debate and determine amongest themselues (as I thinke at that time, when they did striue who should be chiefe amongst them) that the Bishop of euerie Countrie shoulde knowe, who should bee next vnder him: for notwithstanding, that they were all Apo∣stles alike, yet did Christ giue that vaun∣tage to Peter, that he shoulde bee chiefe of the Apostles, and so named him Cephas,How Christ wil led his apostles to vse thēselues in bearing rule one ouer ano∣ther: You shall find in Luk. 22 25.26. Mat. 20.25.26. Mar. 10.42.45. Iohn. 1.42. that is to say, The chiefe head or Prince of the Apostles. See now, this is the ex∣position of our deare mother the holie Church of Rome, vpon these woordes of Christ: Thou art Cephas. And yet it is true, that Cephas is a worde of the Chal∣dee tongue, and doth not signifie A heade, but A stone: as Petra doth in the Greeke, or Latin: for so S. Iohn the Euangelist him selfe doeth expounde it. But notwith∣standing that, seeing it hath pleased our deare mother the holie Church of Rome, to vnderstand it so, considering that this worde Cephas, or Cepha, doeth signifie in the Chaldee tongue, A stone, & the like worde in maner, in the Greeke, and in the French tongue, doth signifie A head, as to wit, Ce∣phali, or Cheff, therfore it is good reson that we take the exposition of Iohn as literall, &
repose our selues vpon the exposition of our deare mother the holie Church: who onely in deede, hath the power and authoritie, to interprete the Scripture spiritually, and allegorically.Glosse. in capite antiquorum. ext. de poenitentia & remissionibus. So that this worde Cephas, must needes signifie A head, and not A stone: as is plaine to be seene in the glosse of the Decretals. And out of this we haue to note two prin∣cipall pointes. The first is, that the holie Church hath such power and authoritie, that she can (not onely) chaunge the bread into flesh, but is able to make of a stone a head, & as well transubstantiate the wordes as the bread. The second is, that a man may make a good similitude or parable, vpon the neerenesse of names in speache, which in pronuntiation doe sound one like another, as the holie Church hath conclu∣ded herevpon,S. Clara. S. Quintine. S. Valentine. S. Etroius. That Saint Clare can make dimme eyes looke clere: S. Quintine, can heale the quensie in the head: and S. Va∣lentine, the falling sicknesse: and S. E∣tropius, the dropsie: because these names in pronuntiation do sound one like another. And yet this can not alway fall out so: for then might the Heretikes conclude out of the same, that Curats, are curres: the Spi∣ritualtie,
spite faultie: Bishops, verie bite∣sheepes: Cardinals, carnals: and that maister Gentianus after the French, is vn genti asne, that is, a proper asse: and Blindasinus, a blinde asse. Which thing nowe can not bee so, considering that asses are not accustomed to write bookes, as these men haue done. Therefore wee must remitte the iudgement of these mat∣ters (in like cases and nerenesse of names) to the holie Church, when they shall be so vnderstoode, and when they shall ot be so taken. Now doeth our deare mother the holie Church, inioy duerse other goodly and plaine Scriptures, wherewith o prop vp, and make fast the seate of our hole fa∣ther the Pope: as specially, where it is written:Iob. 4.34.5.30 Esaias. 10.15. Which testi∣monie was al∣leged by Pope Nicholas, ver∣bam, vnto this purpose, in an Epstle by him writtē that was snt to the bish. of Constan. and  is likewise in the decree cap. Inferor sedes. dist. 1.21. That Christ came to fulfill the will of his father. For of that must needes follow, That all good Christen men are bound to fulfil the will of their holie mother the Church of Rome, of which church the Pope (without all doubt) is the supreme heade. And againe, God speaketh by the mouth of his Prophete Esaias: But doth the axe boast it selfe against him that heweth therewith? Or doeth the sawe make anie bragging against him
that ruleth it? Signifying thereby, that the king of the Assyrians had no power a∣gainst the almightie God, who woulde vse him as an axe, or a sawe, to punish and cor∣rect his people by him. Out of this hath our mother the holy Church of Rome con∣cluded, and (as she saith) made it appeare clearer than the Sunne, that there is no power nor authoritie in this worlde, but in the power of the holy sea & pope of Rome, to correct or punish the same. And this shee doeth establish yet more strongly, by the wordes of Paule, who saith: That the na∣turall man cannot conceiue nor vnder∣stand Gods doings: but the spirituall man doth vnderstand & rule all things, but may not be ruled of any man. For this doth the holie Church vnderstand by the pope of Rome,Boniface. 18. in the Extraua∣gantes, trac. de maioritate & obedientia ff. quod etiam Gen. 2.1.1. that he is of himselfe so spiritual and ghostly, that no man may nor can iudge nor punish him. Now further, his power is established in the first booke of Moses called Genesis, where it is written, That God in the beginning did shape both heauen and earth. For now, that is as much to say (after the exposition of the holie Church of Rome) that the Pope is the beginning of all things. Considering
there is no mention made but of one begin∣ning. It is not said: In the beginning,This doth the Pope Boniface the .8. write in his Extrauag, Tractat. de ma∣ioritae & obedi∣entia. ff. in hac e∣iusdem. as of mo or manie beginnings: and therefore whosoeuer should compare the Emperour to be as good as the Pope, he is a rank he∣retike & of the sect of the Manichees, who saide, There was mo beginnings of all things than one. What thinke you now of this? Is not this a good bagpipe to play a galiard vpon? But now, tarie yet a little, it is likewise writen,Two greate lightes. That God did shape two great lightes, a greater and a lesser: which do signifie (after the interpretation of the holy Church) that the pope of Rome is aboue all other Potentates, & aboue the Emperour: for he is the Sunne, & the Em∣perour is the Moone. Whereby nowe is clearely to be seene, that Moses had a fore∣knowlege of the pope & his authoritie. And Iob must needes haue had some feeling of his cōming. For thus God said vnto Iob:Iob. 38.33. This interpre∣tation with the other two follo∣wing are wor∣thily written in the glosse of the decretals in the Cap anti∣quorum ext. de poenitentia & r∣misionibus. Knowest thou (I pray thee) how the hea∣uens are gouerned? Or canst thou rule him vpon earth? That is (after the inter∣pretation of the holy Church) That euen as in the heauen one eternall God doth gouerne all things, and as the holy Tri∣nitie is brought to one onelie vnitie:
The like consequence must fall out here vpon earth. So that here the Pope onely must haue dominion ouer all estates, dukedomes,The Pope a∣boue all kings. kingdomes, & other what∣soeuer, in consideration that hee is the onely line, leuell, and compasse, whereby all other people are and ought to be di∣rected. And in consideration hereof is the prophesie of Paul thus vnderstood, saying: Vntil the fulnes of the Gentils be come,Ro. 11.25.26. and then shall all Israel be saued: ioining this, with that which Christ said: So that there shalbe but one flock,Iohn. 10.16. & one sheep∣heard: as to vnderstand, When all the nations vpon earth, shall be subiect to the Pope. Like as now in our daies we haue seene a good beginning, & do daily see with our eyes very great apperāce of more. And that the Pope ought not only to haue a spi∣rituall gouernment as a Bishop: but must likewise maintein a worldly gouernment, as a king, is by clere testimonie of Scrip∣ture of our deare mother the holy Church approued.The Pope is a king. For there is without doubt, a plaine text,This you shall find in the text before alleged of the decretals. ff. in hac ext. de maioritate & obedientia. that the Apostles did say: Be∣hold here are two swordes. Wherevnto Christ answered not, saying: That it was too manie, but that, that was inough.
Now out of this doth our deare mother cō∣clude, That the Pope of Rome must vse two swordes, to wit, a spirituall, & a tempo∣rall sword. Ho ball, ho how will this sound in the eares of the Heretikes? But now must they vnderstand for a spe∣ciall matter, that a good while ago there was in Spaine an honest man, who coulde not vnderstand it so, saying that this scrip∣ture did serue nothing at al to that purpose. And by and by, the holy inquisition (which is the dearest and chiefest nourse & fosterfa∣ther of the Church of Rome) did take him, and burne him at a stake, as one which had highly blasphemed: because that vpon his opinion should follow, that the holy church hath not full power to interprete the scrip∣ture as she will: which I assure you is a terrible slaunder. Therefore haue these heretikes need to looke well to the matter, & kepe their ton∣gues, & giue eare to other testimonies and witnesses. For yet besides this, Christ said to Peter: Put vp thy sword into the sheth.In the extraua∣gants de maiori. & obedi. and is likewise so con∣cluded in the councell of Reines. Out of those words doth plainly appeare (as our holy father Bonifacius the 8. saith) That both the swordes, as well the tem∣porall, as the spirituall, are vnder the
power and iurisdiction of the Church, Yea, and it is verie necessarie, that the one sword be subiect to the other: which is to be vnderstood, That the temporal iurisdiction and authoritie must be subiect to the spiri∣tuall & ecclesiasticall power and authoritie. For (according to the saying of S. Paule) There is no power or authoritie, but that which is appointed by God. Truely (saith he) there would be no good regi∣ment, if the one sword were not subiect to the other: and that the lower and in∣feriour were (by some good meanes) brought in subiection and obedience to the higher and superior. Consider, this is the onely naturall and grounded interpre∣tation of the before alledged text of the ho∣lie Scripture, as our deare mother the holy Church hath interpreted the same, word by word. Is not this Popingaie then trimly shot downe? Lee these Huguenots, and Lutherans come out now, who crie al∣way that we cannot establish the power & authoritie of the Pope by anie scriptures: now they may see, that we haue scriptures now to hit the marke withall. But now will we teach out of the scrip∣tures, That the Pope only hath power to consecrate and halow Churches, & to blesse
altars.For blessing and hallowing of Churches and altars. Psal. 127.5. Durandus in the booke called ationale diui. offici▪ lib. 1. rubr. 7. de dedicatio∣ne Ecclesiae. Iohn. 15.1. Marke well the wordes plainly set out in the Psalms, where it is written, Ex∣cept the Lord build the house, their la∣bour is but lost that build it. For this is the verie text, that the holy fathers assem∣bled at the coūcell of Carthage, were chief∣ly perswaded by to giue speciall comman∣dement, That no cōmon or simple Priest shoulde take vpon him to doe any such thing. Was not that (I pray you) a mat∣ter of importance to consult vpon? And yet besides this, it is there written: I am the vine, you are the branches▪ he that re∣mains in me & I in him, shall bring forth much fruit, which the holy Church vnder∣standing of the pope, hath resolutely cōclu∣ded, That no man may consecrate or hal∣low any Church, but he alone. Think you not that they had great reason so to do? And therefore no doubt, they are herein verie well founded, and vpō great reason persua∣ded out of this, and all the other texts before alledged▪ to conclude, teach, and determine thus, Glosse in the Extrauagantes de verbor. signifi. ad apostol. ff. nos li. 6. de sent. &  iudicata. Item read herevpon the plain texts in the decretals cap. Quando per∣sonam de transl. episcop. and the glosse in the de∣cretal. lib 1. de electione, & electi potestate. and alledge vpō that cap. quos deus. 3.9.2. That the Pope is not onely a man, but Gods Lieftenant: yea, a God himselfe vpon earth: by which occasion hee doeth likewise Glosse vpon the Preface of the decretals, onely in the 6. booke. chaunge his name, at suche time as hee is promoted to the
Popes seate, specially, for that hee doeth likewise after his nature, and from the de∣gree of a man, is become halfe a God. And vpon this consideration Cap. Sic om∣ns dist. 19. must his mandates be obserued, as Gods commaun∣dements. Yea, it is not cap▪ si qus sua dene. 17.13.4 lawfull for anie man to doubt, or to reason vpon his title & authoritie. For hee may (if it so come in his head) Cap. Praeceptis dist 12. set vp and establish a newe ser∣uing of God, or religion: and all men must (of necessitie) Cap▪ in memo∣riam. dist. 19. folow his commandements, how heauie or incomportable so euer they be. For he can (of an Cap. Fuit sem∣per. 9.9.3. & cap. Euphemium 23.9.3. arrant knaue) make an honest man: Cap. si Papa & ibi glossa dist. 40 cap paret. cap. nemo iudicabit. cap. aliorum. cap. acta. cap. cuius & per mundū with the other chap∣ters folowing 9. causa quaest. 1. neither may hee by anie man be iudged or punished: no not although he runne headlong to bel, and carie a great companie with him, seeing it is he that iud∣geth all men by his absolute power. Yea, thre is giuen to him, Cap. omnes. dist. 22. cap. non no. dist. 40. & the glosse in Extraua∣gants. cap. 1 de rel. ordin. Papa Smachus, & Ar∣nolds Babarus. glos. in. Extrau. ad aposto. de Pa. dist 3.  persona. a full power & au∣thoritie, as well in heauen as in earth: and he must be of all men esteemed holie: yea, although hee were knowne to be an arrant knaue, & vile varlet: neither may anie man say vnto him, Wherefore do ye so, or so? And therfore the holy Church doth Extra de maioritate & obedientia paragrap. porto. Read likewise vpon all these matters ostensis a noble Canonist in summa titu. de offcio legati ff. quod pertinet ad officium. nu. 3. & is likewise spoken by Nicholas Gotiu in his treatise de potestate legati a lare Nu. 23. and 24.say,
declare, & pronounce, That it is most ned∣full that all Christen men (for their sal∣uation sake) submit them selues wholie vnder the Pope of Rome, as it is written in the Iohn 1.18. first of Iohn: And of his fulnesse haue we all receiued euē grace for grace. Which being vnderstood, according to the letter, may wel be applied to Christ: but af∣ter the spiritual vnderstāding, which is ac∣cording to the interpretation of the Extr. de vsu pallii, ad hno∣rem. Esae. 10.14. holie Church, and of the Catholike Doctours, it is (without doubte) to bee vnderstoode of the Pope of Rome. And therefore doeth Cap aliorum hominum, Can. 9 quaest. 3. Esaias say: What will ye doe in the day of the visitation and destruction, which shall come from farre? To whom will ye runne for helpe? Troilus Mal∣uitu in his treatie de Ca∣noni atione Sanctorum, in 3. dubio. Or to whom will yee giue your honour, that he may keepe it? This is nowe to be vnderstoode (after the interpretation of the holie Church) This stan∣deth written in a maner verba∣tim in the booke called Ceremo∣niale S. Roman. eccle. in the 2. Chap. of the 1. booke. That the Pope of Rome is all our honour and wealth. For howe can it be otherwise vn∣derstoode? Considering that hee hath the power to choose anie man or woman whō he liketh of, and him or her, in the name of God, or in his owne name: yea, and that without the will or consent of his Cardi∣nals, declare, pronounce and iudge for a
Saint, canonize them, put them in the Kalendar, place them in the register of Saintes: and so appoint them a roome in the Romish Hierarchie, either amongst Angels and Archangels, or else amongst Martyrs & Confessours,Hierarchie is to say, an holie re∣giment, & was called Dionysi∣call: by one cal∣led Dionysius, who said that the Romshe Church was Areopagi: wher of Luke doeth speake in the Act of the Apo∣stles: other say that it was S.Donyse of Paris, other take it but for a feined name, and a false booke which is put out in his name, where he doeth set forthe the heauenlie Hearchie, or regiment, with all the Chores of Angels, with all the stooles and banks, so perfectly as though he had dwelt there ten yeares. Or men may vnderstand by this Dionyso Hierarchie, the holi regiment that Dionysius companions, that is Bacchus companions doe keepe vpon the Saintes holidaies, which the Pope hath canonized, as on twelfth eeuen, S. Martins eeuen, and such like. as he shall thinke good: willing and commaunding, That in euerie Church, one holie day shal be kept for them, and deuoute seruice said and done that day, as to an holie Saint is proper & apperteining: yea, and further, giue and graunt to all such as shall once a yeere (be∣ing shriuen and doing penance) goe on pil∣grimage, & visite the tumbe of such a newe Saint, pardon of all their sinnes, for one whole yeere and fourtie dayes. Yea, more∣ouer, he may (if it be his pleasure) depose, deface, and blotte out of the Kalendar, and register, such as haue bene a long time ca∣nonized and worshipped: as did appeare by Pope Boniface the 8. who caused Saint Herman of Ferrare, to bee digged out of his graue and burnt, after he had bene ta∣ken
and esteemed for a Saint more than twentie yeeres. And that which is more, wee finde written, That Pope Clement the fift (about the yeere of our Lorde, 1309.) did charge and commaunde the Angels, through his Popish authoritie & power, that they should take the soules of all such, as comming in pilgrimage to∣wardes Rome, did die by the way, and forthwith carie them into heauen without anie delay or tarrying, or without letting them once smell the fire of Purgatorie: as appeareth by his Bulles herevpon gran∣ted and made: whereof diuerse copies doe (at this day) lie at Vienne, at Limoges, and at Poytiers, townes in France, in the chestes where the priuiledges of the same Townes are kept. Wherefore then I pray you) should not wee willinglie ac∣cept him for all our wealth and honour, seeing hee can canonize, make, and vn∣make hee Saintes and shee Saintes: and hath likewise power ouer the Angels of heauen? I doe not speake of this, that hee, as a King and Priest, can make God: yea, and create him, who onelie createth all thinges,Reade the 1. chap. of the 2. parte. as it is written in the booke called, Stella Clericorum, which is to say,
The starre of the Clerkes,That is to say the creatour of the creator of all thinges. 2. Thes. 2.4. Daniel. 11.36 These prophe∣sies of Daniel Paule Eerardus Archbishop of Saliburch hath interpreted v∣pon the Pope of Rome, like as is too bee seene in the booke called Annales Aun∣tini Lib. 7. And so like∣wise the Em∣peroure Frede∣rike 2. hath done the like, & set it forth so, e∣uen in the same place. And Arnoldus, Bishop of Oli∣ans did the like in the councell of Rein. Read Cap. lect. with the glosse dist. 34. & 17. And the same is fortified by Sigismund, Neap. or Priestes: wherein all Priestes are named, Creato∣res Creatoris. And nowe, he maketh all Priestes: so that he may iustly bee called, Creator creatorum creatoris: that is to say, The Creatour of those which haue shapen and created the verie Creatour of all things. So that the writing of Paul to the Thessalonians, where hee speaketh of the Pope of Rome is not amisse: where he saith, That he shal extoll and aduance him selfe aboue all things that is named God, or Gods seruice, and shall sit in the temple of God, as though he were God him selfe, and proclame: him selfe for God. Which thing also was before spo∣ken by the Prophete Daniel, That hee should lift and set vp him selfe aboue all Godhead, and should speake maruelous things against God, and do euerie thing after his owne lust: placing him selfe a∣boue all things in the worlde: distribu∣ting landes and kingdomes, euen as hee best list and will. Nowe, according to this prophesie, hath our deare mother the holie Church ordeined and concluded, That hee hath full power and authoritie to doe what soeuer his will and pleasure is, and
that he may dispense both with the old and newe Testament: with anie othe,Read the glosse vpon the first book of the de∣cretals Gregorii tit. de translatio. Episcopi, Cap. quanto peso there you shll finde the place set forth and e∣stablished by witnesses of the decrees. Item the glosse of the decrees caus. 15. que 1 And in the ex∣trauag. Ioan. 23. tit. 14. cum inte. And Pa∣normitan. wri∣ting vpon the same place. Fonius Gaia in lib. 1. in Pin. 4. Col. de Pac∣tis. Cutius senior ex Baldo, in Concil. 20. in sine. Ioan. de . cremaa: Caaldtius in trctatu de pote∣state Papae. August. Berotus in Rubri. de off. de leg. num. 10. Bero. in cap. cum tu, in um. 1. de Vsuris. Decius & Ludonicus Gomesius vpon many places. vowe, or promise. In summe, hee is ouer and aboue all iudgementes, of God or man, to make of nothing something, of streight crooked, and of crooked streight, to transubstantiate and chaunge the forme and substance of things, euen as it shall come in his head: For vnto him are all lawes & iudgements subiect, and neither anie lawe nor iudge∣ment hath power or iurisdiction ouer him: for that he is the liuelie funteine of lawe and iudgement, who (as touching matters of our faith) can not (in anie point) faile or misse: and therefore hee may order and determine vpon all matters touching our beleefe and faith, and so interprete the Scripture, as he thinketh good: he onelie may take and leaue, doe and vndoe. In so much that (though all the worlde were a∣gainst him) yet must we take his part. To be briefe, there is no man to bee compared vnto him, but God alone: and therefore can he do all things that God doth. For looke what soeuer God doeth in heauen, the like
doth the Pope here in earth.Zodericus Zamo∣rensis in speculo humanae vitae, lib. 2 cap. s. Barto. Chassan. in cata∣logo gloriae mun∣di in 4. parte. in 7. consideratio. Antonius Flo∣rentinus in his Summa. What should a man say more? His authoritie and pow∣er is so great, that no tongue can expresse it, neither is it possible for the capacitie of man to conceiue it: as Zodoricus Zamo∣rensis and Bartholus Chassaneus, yea the whole Catholike church of Rome hath de∣termined and concluded. For as Antoni∣us Florentinus doth testifie, he is aboue al creatures, and his might and power doeth extend euen to matters in heauen,Ths doth Fe∣linus witnesse in manie pla∣ces. earth, and hell: for that he is the cause of causes, and the Lord of Lords, the Head & Bride∣grome of the whole church: yea, the high and principall Gouernour of the worlde v∣niuersall:In cap. quoniam de vnitate eccle¦siaum. 6. Iohan¦nes de turre cremt in manie places. Antonius de Roellis, Corse∣cus. Sicalus in tracta de regia poteliat. he is the light, the brightnesse, & the verie foundation of faith, and the verie summe and touchstone of the trueth: hee is the hiest step of the staires, and all in all, whatsoeuer can be thought or said. For as touching the giuing and distributing of Kingdomes, Dukedomes, lands and coun∣tries, to whom, & when he shall think good: that office he hath fast & sure in possession, and doth dailie practise & put the same in exercise: as is right to bee vnderstood by this pretie verse folowing: Petra dedit Pe∣tro, Petrus diadema Rodulpho.
That is to say: The Rocke gaue Peter, and his race, a princelie and emperiall crowne: And Ralfe receiu'd from Peters Grace, a royall diademe of renowne. Which trimme verse was (by the before named Pope Gregorie 7.) (after that hee had excommunicated the saide Emperour Henrie 4. and cursed all his adherents) sent vnto Ralphe the Duke of Swaben with am Imperiall crowne:Reade Benno th Cardinall, Iohan∣nes Marius, Mae histoiarum, Crnia Sige∣berti, Platina and o∣the moe wri∣ters of Histo∣ries. aduertising him plainlie therewithall, that it lay who∣lie in his handes, to giue to whem soeuer it pleased him, as well the Empire, as the crowne: wherein hee did finelie prophesie in such order, as Caiphas the Iewish Pope had prophesied, saying: That hee would neuer be esteemed as Pope, if there did not die the same yeere before Whitsun∣tide a false or vniust King: For it came euen so to passe: Not that the Emperour Henrie (by whom hee spake) did die that yere: but that the lotte fell vpon Ralphe, to whom the Pope had giuen the Imperi∣all crowne, who was the same yere pitiful∣lie slaine, his hands first cut of, & he lamen∣ting sore before the Bishops, That through informing of the Pope & their prouokings
he had made him and his accursed, and re∣belled against his owne lord and supreme head. Nowe a litle after this did succeede Pope Paschalis 2. who againe excommu∣nicated afreshe the Emperour,Paschalis Pope. and com∣maunded the Earle of Flaunders, called Robert,The Popes letter to Ro∣bert the Earle of landers, written in the 2 booke of coun∣cels folio 810. to destroy with fire and sword, the territories of Luek and Camericke, be∣cause that they would remaine true vnto their naturall lord and Souereigne the Emperour Henrie. Yea, hee did giue the Imperiall crowne with all the iewels of the Empire to Henrie the 5. sonne vnto the said Henrie the 4. Emperour: & herein preuailed so much, that he did pro∣uoke the sonne to rebell and persecute his owne Lord and naturall father: yea, with such horrible and vnnaturall malice, that he let him (most pitifullie) starue in the prison at Luek: which happened in the yeere of our Lorde 1108. Neither would hee receiue the Lukeners to grace, til such time, as they had taken vppe the dead car∣case of his father (which was by thē there buried) & cast the same out into the fields,Read the Chro¦nl of Robert rnes, Eu∣s▪ and Nau∣erus. like the carion of a dogge. And by that meanes the Lukeners were likewise dis∣charged of the excommunication which
Pope Paschalis had laid vpon them. Men may likewise verie well conceiue the same by the example of the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa,Fredericus Bar∣barossa. who after a great manie of excommunications and curses, was in the ende within the towne of Ve∣nice vpon the great market called Saint Markes place,Rede Iohn Charion in his Chronicle, and other wri∣ters of Chroni∣cles. at the toppe of the staires of the great church or palace, troden vpon the necke by Pope Alexander 3. euen with his feete: who, for the establishing of his authoritie and power, did vsurpe and openlie pronounce before al the people this saying in the Psalme:Psal. 91. Super Aspidem & Basiliscum equitabis, & cōculcabis Leo∣nem & Draconem: that is to say, Thou shalt ride vpon the Lion and the Adder: the yong Lion and the Dragon shalt thou treade vnder thy feete, &c. And thus likewise was Franciscus Dan∣dalius Duke of Venice,Franciscus Dan∣dalius. excommunicated and banished by Pope Clement 5. and en∣ioyned vnto certeie penance: which was, That he should goe creeping alongest the Popes palace, vpon his handes & knees, with a collar about his necke like a dogge. So that it is apparant, that the Pope of Rome hath ful and absolute power ouer al
Kings,Quaest. 45. and 46. whole through. Dukes, and Princes: and there∣fore may commaunde them, as his sub∣iectes and tenantes: and may extoll or ad∣uance, and disgrade or depose them, euen as he shall thinke good. Which authoritie of his doeth extende and reache so farre, that hee hath likewise full power, com∣maundement and iurisdiction ouer the Kings and Emperours of Turkie, and o∣ther Heathen countries. In so much that a man may lawfullie appeale vnto him, (in anie matter) from before anie earthlie Prince or Potentate.Augustinus de Ancona in summa De Ecclesiastica potestat. quaest. 1 articulo 7. And more other ca∣nonists. Iacobus de Teano, chamberleine to Pope Vr∣bane 6. writeth this, In tracta∣tu , qui incipit: Red∣die quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, &c. Matth. 22 21 Marc. 12.17. Luke. 20 25. In summe, hee hath vnder him the rule and gouernement of all Emperiall, Princelie, and Spirituall iu∣risiction: for hee is consecrated as a Priest, and crowned as a King: and is therefore the King of Kings, and Lorde of Lordes. For, as touching that which these Here∣tikes do alledge against this, That Christ should haue said: Giue vnto Caesar that which is Caesars, and vnto God that which to God belongeth, that (saieth our mother the holie church) was not a perpetuall rule, but stood in effect onlie for a short time, to wit, till such time as Christ had suffered, and was ascended vp into hea∣uen.
For now, to answere that, where hee saith: After that I shalbe lifted vp from the earth, I will drawe all things vp after me: that is thus to bee vnderstood, (saieth the holie church of Rome) That Christ af∣ter his ascension into heauen, should take al Kingdomes, Dukedomes, and such like out of the possession of Kings, Dukes, &c. and that by meanes of his souldiers, es∣peciallie by his Romishe Apostles. And whereas in other places hee doeth forbid his Disciples to seeke after,Matth. 10.. Marke. 6.8. Luk. 9 3.12.33. or to receiue golde or siluer, that must likewise be vn∣derstood, but till such time onelie, as they haue brought in subiection and vnder them all Kingdomes, and so to leaue the same by will and testament vnto the Popes of Rome (their successours:This doeth Platina wit∣nesse in the booke of the Popes where he doeth set orth the life of Alexander the 3.) for then endeth that determination. And that was the cause why the Popes beganne to trauell with a deliberate intention, to make a di¦uision of the Imperiall crowne of Rome, who then had the East and West coun∣trie of Greece, and almost the whole world in subiection: as Pope Alexander 3. did plainlie acknowledge vnto the Embas∣sadors of Emanuel Emperour of Graecia,
declaring plainlie, That hee in no wise would haue the Empire of Graecia & the Empire of Rome vnited or ioyned toge∣ther againe in one: which was done espe∣ciallie to the intent that hee might bee the better able to ouerrule them both. Fredericke the 2. deposed by Gregorie the 9. in anno. 4.And out of that it doth likewise growe, that Gregorie the ninth, and Innocenti∣us the fourth, Popes of Rome, did depose the Emperour Fredericke the second, and absolued his subiectes of their othe which they had taken and made vnto him: and a∣boue that, did excommunicate and banishe all such his subiectes, as did remaine faith∣full and true vnto him. And furthermore, graunted great indulgence and pardon to such as would rebelliouslie rise vppe to de∣stroy and confound them. And yet besides all this, after that hee (with the summe of an hundred and twentie thousand markes of golde in weight) had redeemed and set free him selfe out of the excommunicati∣on of the said Pope Gregorie, yet was hee (notwithstanding that) once againe ac∣cursed and banished.Nauclerus. In so much that Henrie Lantgraue of Thuringe was chosen Emperour: and after his death,
(which was verie sudein) the Imperiall crowne was giuen to one William then Earle of Hollande:Emperour William coun∣tie of Holland slaine by the Freeses. who verie shortlie after that, was by the Freeses slaine. Af∣ter whose death the Empire did remaine seuentene yeres complete without head or Emperour. And yet I pray you, consider: Do wee not finde by all perfect histories, that Pope Vrbane the fourth,Vrbane. 4. did about the yeere of our Lorde 1264. violentlie dis∣possesse Conradinus sonne to Conrade,Conradinus king of Sicilia. then Emperour of the kingdome of Sici∣lia, notwithstanding the same, did by iust title of inheritance apperteine vnto him, and gaue the same to Charles Earle of Angiou de Prouince, and brother to Lodoike King of Fraunce, and his successour Clement the fourth, did set the Crowne vpon his head, with conditi∣on, that hee shoulde yeerelie pay to the Sea of Rome,Reade the Chronicles of Fraunce. fourtie thousand crownes of golde. Nowe to deface that deede and intent, Pope Nicholas the third about the yeere of our Lorde 1268. caused Peter the King of Aragon,Pope Nicholas. 3 who had maried the cou∣sine
germane of the said Conradinus to come out of Italie, to depriue the saide Charles of the same, and brought the mat∣ter so farre, that he tooke perforce the said kingdome of Sicilia, hauing first by a craftie practise (in one night) caused most cruellie to be murthered (by the Sicilians) all the French,Frenchmen murdered in the vespertina Siciliana. both men, women, and children, yong and olde, that were with∣in the whole Island of Sicilia: by reason whereof, they vse yet at this day for a com∣mon by woorde, to call it, The Sicilian E∣uensong. And then after, to the contrarie of this,Martinus did curse and ba∣nish Peter King of Sicilia. his successour Pope Martin the fourth, did both banishe and curse the said Peter: and so not onelie committed the de∣fence and custodie of the said kingdome of Sicilia vnto Robert Earle of Artois, for and to the vse of the sonne of the said Charles, who was kept prisoner in the handes of his enimies: but did likewise take from him the kingdome of Arra∣gon, which hee possessed and enioyed by patrimonie, and did giue the same king∣dome of Arragon vnto Charles, Earle of Valois, and sonne to Philippe the Frenche King.
And did not Pope Bonifacius the eight in like manner curse Philippe the French King, and gaue his kingdome to the Emperour Albertus, by authoritie and gift of the holie and catholike Church of Rome: and that,Philip king of France. because the said Philippe would not acknowledge, accepte, and re∣ceiue the Pope of Rome, for his superi∣our: In so much that the foresaid king of France was forced (of necessitie) to sende out secretlie vnder the gouernement of Sarra Colomna,Reade the Cro∣nicles of Frāce and Carion. three or foure hundred horsemen, who in the night, tooke the Pope prisoner at Anagnia, where he was at that time resident, and so brought him to Rome as prisoner: where (within foure and twentie dayes after) hee died like a beast, as by a common prouerbe (which hereafter shalbe more expreslie set forth) doeth appeare.Alexander. 7. These are the words specified in the Bull of Pope Alexand. grantd for the same in anno 1943. the 4. of Maie: which Bull is set forth by Francis. Lope de Gomora, in his hist. of Ind We haue likewise seene not long agoe, that Pope Alexander the seuenth, did giue vnto Ferdinando king of Castile, & grand father vnto the Emperour Charles the fift, all the countries of the newe Indians, which lie Westwarde from Spaine, in the Ocean Seas: and that in such or∣der and maner as by the Bull is specified,
Motu proprio, that is to say, Of his owne meere motion, and beeing not therevnto required: but much rather, De mera liberalitate, & ex certa scientia, ac de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, that is to say, Of meere liberalitie, and an assured knowledge, and by full pow∣er Apostolicall. In so much that the King of Peru, called Atabaliba,This historie you shall finde written by the saide Francisco Lopes de Gomo∣ra in the histo∣ries of the In∣dians, in the 113. chapi. who being ouercome by the Spaniardes in a battell, saide (ve∣rie vnwiselie) That hee did not esteeme the Pope, saying that hee would giue a∣way to another that which was none of his owne. For Frier Vincent Valuer∣da, had let him plainlie vnderstande, out of his Breuiarie or Portesse, That Christ the Sonne of GOD did at his depar∣ting out of this worlde, appoint and leaue the Pope of Rome for his Liefe∣tenant, with power and authoritie, to giue and distribute all kingdomes, at his will and pleasure. And that the Pope of Rome had giuen all his countrie of Pe∣ru, and the newe Indians to the King of Spaine. And likewise, in the yeere of our Lord, 1515. Leo 10. would haue giuen Frances
the French king (who was then at Bolo∣nia in Italie, and that to make confedera∣cie and league with him) the whole Em∣pire of Constantinople.Leo. 10. doth geue away an Empire. But the king gi∣uing him worthie thankes, woulde not ac∣cept the gift, vnlesse he would put him in possession of it, which our holy father the Pope had no minde to do, because it would haue cost him a great deale more monie than the sealing of his Bulles. And not long before this, about the yeare of our Lorde. 1466. Pope Paule 2. had deposed by sentence George the naturall king of Boemia, from his said kingdome,Pope Paul. 2. frankely did giue away the kingdome of Boemia, but vpon mad con∣ditions. and gi∣uen the same to the Dukes of Germanie: marie with this condition, that they should go and take it perforce, at their own cost and charges: in which attempt they lost aboue an hundred thousand men, both horsemen and footemen, and yet did pre∣uaile verie little. For such presentes and gifts, are of the nature of his Bishoprikes of Hierusalem, and other townes in Tur∣kie, which he giues to this man and that man, whereof the Bishops neuer inioy a∣nie more, but the bare title, which they haue well wrapped vp in a Bull of a sheep skin surely sealed. And if they be not there∣withall
content, they may go seeke further at their owne cot and perill. And yet will our holie father haue homage and re∣warde for it,The Pope chiefe Lord of Naples. although it haue cost him ne∣uer a penie. Of the like to this, we see daily examples, as the kings of Sicilia, and Naples, must euerie yeare (vpon S. Peters day,) do homage vnto him, and ac∣knowledge him for their chiefe Lord: and for testimonie of the same, they present him with a white hackney,The Pope chiefe Lord of England. well trapped with riche furniture, with thousands of ducates besides: yea, the kingdome of Englande was a great while in subiection,Platina in the life of Alexan∣der 3. and at the disposition of the Pope. For the before written Pope Alexander 3. did bring one king to that point, about the yeare of our Lord 1181. And that vnder pretence that Thomas Becket Archbishop of Cantur∣burie, was by the kinges consent slaine. And further, long before that, in the yeare 740. a certein king of England called I∣nas, did make the whole Island tributarie to the Pope of Rome: insomuch that the Popes had alwayes their Collectors and Receiuers in Englan, to gather vp and receiue the Peter peace, till such time as it was forbidden by king Henrie 8.
But to what purpose should I so parti∣cularly name the kings of England, Na∣ples, and Sicilia, seeing that all Kings and Emperours, throughout the whole worlde, are bounde to kisse with great re∣uerence the Popes holie feete? Is not that a sufficient proofe, that he hath full power and iurisdiction ouer them all? And good reason it should so be. For by him Kings do reigne, and by him Iudges ex∣ecute the lawe: as it is written by Solo∣mon in his Prouerbes. Chap. 8. For that which he writes there, of the eternall wise∣dome of God, that is by our mother the holie Catholike Churche, vnderstoode and sette foorth concerning the Pope of Rome.Glos and Pa∣normitanus, vp∣on the Clemen∣tines, lib. 5. tit. ad nostram. This is plainly set forth and at large in the booke called Ceremoniae Ec∣clesiae Roma∣nae, in the 2. tit. of the first booke ff. ordo processe. & fur∣ther in the 3. ff. de prima lotion manuum. As plainely doeth appeare by the glosse vpon the Clementines, and by Pa∣normitanus likewise. And therefore, whensoeuer the Popes holinesse is disposed to ride on horsebacke, then must the Emperour or King which is present, holde his stir∣rop, and after for a while lead the horse by the bridle in his hand. And alwayes when the Pope will be caried in a chaire, then is the Emperor or King whosoeuer
it be, bound of duetie, to bow downe his necke, and to take the chaire vp vpon his shoulders. And likewise when the Pope goeth to dinner, the duetie of the Emperour or King, is to serue him with water wherwith to wash his holy hands, & he must be sure to attend at the table, till the first course be serued. Clem. vnica de iureiurano▪ ves. postqum bi. and in. ff. Cer∣um. and the same is set foorth like∣wise by Restaurus Casta∣dus in tract. de imperatore. quaest. 36. and the forme of the truth is sette forth in cap. Tib domine. dist. 63. This you shall finde in the booke called Ceremoniale eccl. in the first tit. of the .3. booke.For a finall end, hee must serue the Pope euen as a seruant doeth serue his maister: yea, and I pray you wherefore should he not, seeng he hath taken & made his othe solemnly of obedience and fideli∣tie to the Pope, as is plainly sette forth in the Popes lawes? And yet is not the Pope bound in anie point or iot to him, nor to a∣nie other earthly creature, vnlesse he will sometime of speciall grace, rise out of his seat to let the Emperour kisse him kindly. Otherwise, all men liuing are bounde of duetie, as soone as they come within his presence, to fall three times downe vpon their knees, and then to kisse his feete. And wheresoeuer he passeth by, there they must all fall downe vpon their knees, and wor∣ship him: otherwise they are like to eate stockish, which his Garde will giue them largely: yea, and that without Butter.
And therfore do they crie, Abasso, Abasso,This doth Barbazia a Catholike Doctour set foorth thus, and is so vn∣derstood of the Canonistes. which is as much to say as, Downe vpon your knees. Which thing I assure you is most duetifull, and established by plaine Scripture: for that it is written Psalme 8. Thou hast put all things vnder his feete, sheepe and oxen: yea, and the beastes of the field: which is to be vnderstood,Ca. Cuncta per mu dm. 9. quas▪ 3 and the glosse in the chap. ad aposto∣licae de senten∣tia & e Indie. in 6 and so tho∣rough. in quaest. 23.32.45.46. Chri∣sten men, Iewes, Turks, & Moores. And the foules of the aire, that is, The Saints departed. And the fishes in the sea, that is, The soules which lie in Purga∣torie. Insomuch that there is nothing, but it is made subiect vnto him. For he onely is Lorde ouer all the world, and the worlde is properly his, so proued by the plaine text. Psal. 23. The earth with all her plen∣tiousnesse, is the Lordes, as our mother the holie Church hath interpreted it, and so concluded. For which cause, he may (as Antonius de Rosellis doth testifie) take from one whatsoeuer he will,Antonius de Rosellis in. tincta. de con∣ciliis. and giue to another what he list. And this is that which Cardinali Poole (being the Popes liefte∣nant at the councell of Trent) did likewise defend and establish by Scriptures,Regialdus Polu in the booke which he wrote vpon the coun∣celles of Trent. euen by the verie wordes of Christ saying, That he would make of Peter a fisher of men.
Which is in this sense to be vnderstood, ac∣cording to the interpretation of the holie Church of Rome, That he would driue al Emperours and Kings: yea, all people of the world, into the Popes net, so that he might seeth them, broyle them, or frie them in a panne, euen as his holi∣nesse should thinke best to vse and order them. 2. Cor. 4.4. Iohn 12.31.14.30.26.11.And although Paule did speake of an other, which shoulde bee the God of this worlde: and that Christ doeth likeise name the same, The Duke, or Lorde of this worlde,Ephe. 2.2. meaning the Tempter which shewed him all the kingdomes of the world and the glory of the same, saying vnto him, All these will I giue thee,Matth. 4.9. Luke. 4.6. if thou wilt fall downe, and worship mee: for they are mine, and I may bestowe them vpon whom soeuer I will. Yet doeth not all that make anie thing against our purpose: for they twaine, to witte, the Pope and he, are both as one, and agree like two heades in one hoode: so that there can no gealou∣sie growe thereby. For as the Scripture sayth, and beareth witnesse: The dragon hath rendered vp and giuen to the beast with seuen heades all his power,Apocal. 13.2. his
seate, and authoritie. Now what condi∣tions are made betene them, I wote not, but let them alone with that matter, they will agree well ynough. Thus much then in effect touching all that which Daniel and Paule did say and prophesie in the Scriptures before specified, is throughly fulfilled in the Pope of Rome: and there∣withall likewise, that thing whereo Iohn speaketh in the Apocalypse, that The citie which is builded vpon seuen mountains or hilles,Apocal. 17.. And this is by  of the ci∣tie of Rome▪ in hs boke against the Iewes, and in the  oke against Ma on Lactat▪ . in the . Read lkewise the e∣pistle of eo liensis. aduersus Paschalem, & in the 2. booke of Councels. fo. 809. (which out of doubt is the Citie of Rome, as Tertullianus, Lactantius, Hieronymus, and all the old fathers haue testified, and as the situation and state of the citie it selfe doth make apparant) shall receiue a maruellous power and authoritie (specially of the same whome Paule cal∣leth, The God of this world, and whom Christ calleth, The duke or Prince of this world, & whom Iohn calleth, The dragō:) insomuch that all kings and princes of the earth shall pray vnto him, & he shalbe trim∣med and decked with golde, siluer, pearles, and all rich & precious iewels, as you may plainly see in our holy father the Pope of Rome, with all his Cardinals, who are deftly decked vppe with all costly iewels
like Puppets, And hee shall receiue a mouth speaking great and wonderfull things, so that all the worlde shall say, Who is like vnto him? Euen after the same sort, as you see the Pope giue forth strange things touching his owne person, and doeth attribute to himselfe a certeine power & authoritie aboue all kings, prin∣ces, and angels in heauen: yea, euen aboue the sonne of God, and (which more is) a∣boue God himselfe. Insomuch that, vpon this consideration, our deare mother the holie Churche hath concluded, that hee shoulde bee called Papa, as though men should say Pape,Papa. pape. which is as much to say in our language, as a wonderfull shreeke or hem in derision. For it is a worde which doth signifie a monstrous wondring, for because that he is a wonderfull monstrous and straunge beast.The glosse vp∣on the preface of the Clemen∣tines vpon the chapter Quoniam. vpon the worde pape and here he doth allege a Poet, whō he names Angeli∣cus, which is to say an Angel or an Angeli∣call Poet. Insomuch that one of his owne Poets doth call him Papa stupor mundi, that is to say, The wonder or mocking stocke of the worlde. Euen as if a man shoulde say, Tushe, who is to be compared to him? So that it is most apparauntly to bee seene, that Saint Iohn in his Apocalypse doeth as it were, euen point to him, with his finger,
and that Daniel and Paule doe in many places of the Scripture, paint him plain∣lie out in all his feathers. In so much then that these Heretikes are farre ouerseen, when as they will say, That the Scripture doeth not make anie mention of the Pope of Rome, considering that wee haue pro∣ued all his authoritie to be grounded vpon the Scripture, in such order, as there is nothing to be said against it. The xi. Chapter. VVherein is set foorth, howe that no Prieste nor spiri∣tuall persons are subiect or vnder the iurisdiction, or power of the temporall Magistrates or Officers. NOwe, let vs come to speake of the o∣ther Priestes and spirituall persons, who are throughlie furnished in all points with their Officials, Deanes, Archdea∣cons, Vicars, Inquisitours, Sumners,The spiritual∣tie not n anie subiection to anie temporall Magistrate nor Officer. Prisons, Places and Instrumentes for punishment: so as they are not in anie point subiect to anie temporall Officer or Magistrate. Neither may anie of them haue anie their causes or questions deba∣ted or determined, before anie temporall Iudge or Officer, so farre as they haue
shauen crownes,For the marke or priestly cha∣racter, reade Thomas de Aqui∣no▪ Scotus, and other scholemen and then ioyne therewth all that which Iohn writes in his Ruelation, touching the same character. which is the right marke & character of the citie with seuen moun∣taines, whereof Saint Iohn makes men∣tion in the Apocalypse. And the same is likewise to bee proued by plaine textes of the holy scripture. And for the first, it is written, That when as Lot went about to dissuade the wilfull Sodomites from their abhomi∣nable actes, they saide vnto him: Thou art come hither among vs, and art but a straunger here: What hast thou to doe, for to take vpon thee to correct and iudge vs? Out of this Text, hath our mother the holie Church of Rome fi∣nally concluded,Cp. nullus cleri∣cus. 11. quaest. 1. that the Priests may not bee iudged nor punished by temporall Magistrates and Rulers: vnderstanding the matter thus, That the Priests are vn∣doubtedly right Sodomites,Priestes right Sodomites. Burgesses borne, and maisters of this worlde by inhe∣ritance: considering that they are made by the Pope, to whom the worlde doeth abso∣ltely apperteine: and that the temporall Magistrates and Officers, are but as straungers: who haue but (as it were) the gouernement of the world by lease, at the handes of the Pope, and his Priestes.
And therefore it doth not become them for to rule or punish the natiue Burgesses of Sodom, and Gomorra, that is to say, the Priestes and Spiritualtie.Anacletus in his Epistle of the sorowfulnesse of the Bishops' and their inno∣cencie or com∣plaint, in the book of the de∣crees, ap▪ lege ecclesiarum, cau∣sa. 3. quaest. 6. For so hath the Pope Anacletus determined and set forth in his Deccetals, which interpreta∣tion of his, is (by our deare mother the ho∣ly Church) allowed for good, and regi∣stred in the booke of their decrees for an article of our faith. Secondarily, the same is proued by a speciall text out of the Gospell, where it is written, That Christ did driue or chace the buiers and sellers out of the Temple with a whippe, or scourge. For thereby it is apparant,This you shall finde in the 2. epistle of Ana∣cletus, of the admission of Bishops and Archbishops. It is likewise in the Decades cap. accusatio quoque causa. 2. quaest. 7. & in the decrees Iuonis in the 4. book that the Priestes or Spiritu∣altie, may not by anie meanes be punished by anie temporall Officer, as is concluded by the forename Anacletus, and the holie Church of Rome: vnderstanding the mat∣ter thus, That the Priests are to be estee∣med as the very changers & sellers in the Church, who do vtter their merchandize so deare, that the sight of them (manie times) will stand a man dearer, than the best ware that the Habardashers of Paris and Lions haue in their shoppes. And although other chaungers of monie, and vsurers,
did inioy the benefites of the like priui∣ledge, as well as the Priests, to witte, that they were with the same whipping driuen out of the temple: yea, and although dogs be sometime vsed after the same manner: yet, considering that the Priestes are my white sonnes, and must haue somewhat the more preeminence and aduauntage, speci∣ally for that their merchaundize are of more estimation than the rest, and their incense of better smell than the incense that the dogges smother abroade in the Church. Insomuch that the holie Church of Rome doeth vnderstande this by the priests onelie, to wit, that temporall Ma∣gistrates or Officers, shall haue no iuris∣diction ouer them, considering well, that Christ had them in such estimation as he himselfe onelie woulde whippe them out of the Church. And yet hath shee more strongly established the same, by the plaine Texte of the Prophete Dauid, where it is written,Psal. 81.1.6. This procedeth forth after, in the said epistle of Anacletus. God stoode in the middest of the Gods, that is to say, of Priests and Prelats. Againe, I haue said, All you are Gods. Now truth it is, that the whole Psalme doeth (after the letter) speake of Kings and Gouernours of this
world: yet notwithstanding, our deare mo∣ther the holie Church, hath vnderstood the same wholy of the Priestes and Spiritu∣altie, according to the spirit, and that speci∣ally by reason of sixe weightie causes: to witte: First, because the whole text doth con∣clude, as well, or rather much better, vpon the Priestes, than vpon anie other: for it is written, That will not vnderstād, but will walk in darknesse, and set the whole world in a rore.In the 5. verse of the saide Psalme. Which wordes seeme to conclude so well vpon Priestes and Bi∣shops, as though they had bene spoken on∣ly to them. Now secondly, the Priests are of much more estimation, & better, than any Kings,This is set out with plaine wordes in the cap. Duo sunt. dist. 69. and in the cap. Sacerdo dist. 95. & cap. Quis dubitat. dist. 96. or Princes: yea, they do excell them as far as Leade doth Gold: and therefore must Emperours bow downe their heads vnder the knees of the Popes: as is plainely set forth by the holie father Pope Gelasius, writing vnto the Emperour Anastasius, and registred in the decrees. Yea, they are the light of the world, Fathers & Maisters to all men: so that they deserue much bet∣ter to be called Gods, than either Kings or other Rulers do or can deserue.
Thirdly, the Priestes are of more wor∣thinesse and estimation than Angels.Guido de monte Rocher in his Enchiidion Sa∣cerdotum. Rubr. de sacramento eucha. cap. 2. For (as our deare mother the holie Churche of Rome hath verie well concluded) an Angel may not sing nor say Masse: for that hee hath not the priestly character, which is to bee vnderstoode, because hee hath not the marke and token. And it is plainelie written: That no man may buie or sell,Apoc. 13.17. vnlesse hee haue the cha∣racter or the marke, or else the name of the beast. Now, as touching the fourth cause, you must vnderstand, that all Priestes are fel∣low partners (in some case) with our holie Father the Pope, who is not onely a man, but a God on earth. Which considered, they must needes by kinred bee partakers of his Godhead: as it is written, That commonly a man growes like him, with whom he is conuersant. And againe, Hee that medleth with pitch, some part of it wil cleaue to him. And therefore such as bee conursant with God on earth, must needs be godlie. Fifthly, it is great reason they shoulde bee called Gods, seeing that they them∣selues can make God: and are (as wee
haue taught before) creatours of the Crea∣tor. And nowe there is a perpetuall and in∣fallible rule amongest the Doctours of Louen, which can not faile, for that it is fetched out of their maister Aristotle,Stella clerico read the 10. cap. of the 2. part. & it is this: Propter quod vnumquodque tal est, illud ipsum magis est tale▪ that is to say, Whensoeuer anie thing doeth get anie vertue or estimation out of the po∣wer, or by the gift of an other: the same by whome hee doeth receiue that wor∣thinesse or vertue, must needes haue verie much more like vertue in him∣selfe. Seeing then, that by the power and knowledge of the Priest, a piece of breade may be made God, how much rather then are the Priests themselues Gods? For it is written in the holie scripture,Iere. 16.20▪ That no man in this world can make anie Gods: Ergo, then must the Priests of necessitie be more than men, seeing they do daily make God himselfe. Now sixtly, the common Latine text, which is receiued in the holie Church of Rome, and by the Councell of Trent al∣lowed for good & credible, doeth say thus, That God did stand in the Synagogue
of the Gods. Which may verie well bee applied to the Priestes, considering that they also haue their Synagogues, like as the Iewes haue had heretofore. And fur∣thermore, it is most certeine, that Christ stoode in the middest of the Priestes and Prelates, at such time as Annas and Cai∣phas di accuse him, and sought witnes∣ses against him, to put him to death. Which manner of doing, our Priestes of the holie Church of Rome, doe verie liuely counterfeite. Whereby it is plaine to bee vnderstoode, that they are the Gods in the Synagogue, amongest whome the Lorde stoode, and doeth yet (by his elect) daily stand to bee condem∣ned to death. So that our deare mother the holie Church of Rome, hath verie aptly applied this Text vnto them, and so concluded, That they being Gods, can in no wise bee subiect vnto the iudgement or correction of any earthly man. Besides this, she doth bring forth manie witnesses, euen by heapes, all which are fetched out of holy Scripture: as speci∣ally, where Saint Luke saieth, That God shall aduenge his elect.Luke. 18▪ It is likewise
written in the Psalmes: Lorde God, to whom vengeance belongeth,Psal. 194.2. God to whom vengeance belongeth, shewe thy selfe, &c. Also, the Apostle Paule saieth, What art thou that iudgest an other mannes seruant? And in the same place,Rom. 14.14. Rom. 14.13. Let vs not therefore iudge one an other anie more, but iudge this rather, that no man put a stumbling blocke or an occa∣sion to fall in his brothers way. And the Lord saith by his Prophet Zacharie: For,Zachar. 2.8. who so toucheth you, shall touche the apple of his owne eye. Are not these honest, goodlie, and verie strong witnesses, such as can not bee dis∣proued? And doe they not plainlie set forth that the Priestes can not be vnder subiec∣tion to anie temporall iurisdiction? At least, so farre as men will allow and sticke vnto the exposition of the holy Church of Rome: without hauing anie respect to that which these Heretikes bring in: for they would alledge all these witnesses, di∣rectlie against the Priestes and Spiritu∣altie, and to their reproch and detriment. But nowe is there one speciall text to bee brought in and alledged, against the which ariseth no obiection, to wit, where Christ
saith,Math. 8.20. Luke. 9.5.8. Foxes haue their dennes, and the Foules of the aire haue their nestes, but the Sonne of man hath not whereon to laie his head. These Heretikes may well inough sloppe their eares at ths: for out of this doeth our deare mother con∣clude verie strongly, That those which will blame or finde anie faulte with the Priestes, are they whom Christ here cal∣leth Foxes. And to the corroboration and strengthening of the same, shee bringeth forth the text of Solomon, where he saith: Hee that hath digged the pitte, shall fall into it him selfe. Againe, The stone is heauie, and the sande is weightie, but the wrath of a foole doeth passe both. Consider, doe not these agree in one mar∣uellous well? It seemeth they are both painted with one pencill. In summe, all her decrees and ordinances are full of such apte textes and sentences of scrip∣ture, which shee can wrest and wring mar∣uellous finelie for her purpose: so that there is not one stitche amisse. For, when as the Scripture speaketh of Bruggesse, shee applieth that to Ghent: and if the Scrip∣ture speake of a Catte, shee will bring in a Ducke.
For a finall end and conclusion, shee can make of a Cowe a Windmill: and of a Windmill a Cowe. And therefore she can not lacke, but doeth alway finde witnesses enow out of holie Scripture, to proue all her matters substantiall and good. The xii. Chapter. VVhich proueth by Scripture, that Priestes, and all Spiri∣tuall men, ought to be rich. NOwe, that the Priestes and all Spi∣ritualtie,Spirituall per∣sons ought to be rich. together with our holie fa∣ther the Pope, ought to be rich and weal∣thie, that is to be found set foorth by the Scripture likewise. For the noble and ex∣cellent Cardinal Poole, of late the Popes Liefetenant in the Councell of Trent,In the booke that he made of the councel of Trent. did cause the text of Luke (before allead∣ged) to serue for that purpose, where Christ saith: You doe nowe catche fishe, but you shall from hence foorth catch men.Luke. 15.10. For that (said hee) was a prophesie which was not yet accomplished in the time of the Apostles, when as Paule said: That there were but a fewe rich men in the Congregation of Christ: but the same (said he) was first fulfilled & accomplished
about three hundred yeeres after, to wit, at such time (men say) as the Emperour Constantine did courteouslie giue vnto Pope Syluester,Ca. Constantin. a great portion of the Empire of Rome, or rather (as hee tear∣meth it) did giue againe and restore: as is apparant by the copie of the writing, which standeth entred in the booke of De∣crees verbatim. True it is, that Laurentius Valla, and manie other learned men, did mocke and ieast at this writing, & likewise do plain∣lie proue, as well by diuerse histories, as by the same writing it selfe, that it is but a counterfeited writing, and that so grosselie done, that a Calfe with one eye may per∣ceiue it. But I will leaue that to the Doc∣tours of Louen, to dispute vpon, when they are set vnder the roofe, with a Gallon of good Rennish wine, for they can not away with Pittaw: as for vs, whether it be a lie or a true tale, it is all one: but thus much there is of the matter, that our holie father the Pope is in possession, and doth enioy the landes which S. Peter left vnto him by testament: by the same token it is cal∣led, Patrimonium S. Petri, that is, Saint Peters patrimonie▪ He is likewise in pos∣session
of the rich iewels and bagges of the holie Sea of Rome, and of the precious triple crowne, and other rich and costlie peeces: for all the Bishops must sweare,In the othe which they take before they be admit∣ted Bshops. that they shall (to the vttermost of their power) helpe to keepe and augment the said iewelles, and that Patrimonie. But what needeth all this? Paule him selfe saith, That Bishops must keepe hospita∣litie, and bee harborous. And then is it great reason▪ that their purses should bee well filled, for to enterteine Kings and Princes, and to make them great cheere.This is the ar∣gument of Ec∣kius in his Encheiid. For how should they els bake good cakes, if they haue neither fire nor fatte? I assure you, if they had not that preeminence and aduantage, they would not buy Bishop∣rikes so deare, neither would they pay thir∣tie thousand Ducates for a Pallium, if they must afterwardes say with Peter, Aurum & argentum non est mihi: I haue nei∣ther siluer nor golde. But that is nowe all cleane turned, and the chaunce is chaun∣ged: therefore must the Priestes and Pre∣lates nowe a dayes bee riche, and possesse the goods of the worlde, considering that their father and master the Pope, is Lord of the whole worlde: as we haue sufficient∣lie
proued in the 11. and 12. Chapters be∣fore. The xiii. Chapter. VVherein is set forth by the Scripture, the praying to images. NOwe will wee treate a while of the praying to images,To pray to images. and see with what Scriptures it is defended. For that second holie Councell of Nice,Reade the first chap. of the 4. parte. fol. 4. is (without doubt) maruellous well furnished of excellent scriptures, which serue as fitte for that purpose, as Roses for a swine stie. But we will onlie choose out and set forth the prin∣cipall and most meete to serue our turne, to the intent that euerie man may iudge by those, what all the rest are. Among other they haue fetched out of the olde testament, That GOD did shape man to his owne likenesse:In the Epistle of Pope Adri∣an, read and accepted in the coūcell of Nice, act 2. reade the 2. booke of the coūcell. fol. 482. a. b. act. 2. pag. 486. and therevpon concluded, That men may verie well haue images. Item, that God hath diuided the light from the darkenesse, and therefore (saith Agapius, that most holie Bishop of Caesarea) I ac∣cept images gladlie, and cursed bee all they, which are of other opinion. Aha, my friendes! Howe like you this geare? And after that is the writing of Adrian, the Pope of Rome read: wherin hee saith,
That Iames did pray to Iosephs staffe, or else to Ioseph him selfe.Act. 2. Synod Ni∣caenae pag. 480. Then (I pray you) wherefore should not wee pray to i∣mages? For although that Heretikes do herein so crie out with the Hebrewe texte, which saith, That he prayed to God, lea∣ning vpon his bedde, or vppon a staffe, (for it may be taken both wayes) yet not∣withstanding it is sufficient for vs, that our deare mother the holy Church hath vnder∣stood it otherwise:Concil. Nicen. of Irene. and that all the forked Bishops which were assembled at Nice, haue otherwise interpreted it. For they (you must vnderstande) could not misse, nor erre, seeing they were as∣sembled, inspired, and gouerned by the holie ghost of the Empresse Irene: whose spirit was so zealouslie addicted vnto the worshipping of images, that shee did put out her sonnes eyes, who was the right and naturall Emperour, and so kept him shut vp in prison, to the ende that she might haue the rule and gouernement, reigne as Queene all alone, and set vp and extoll images, according to her owne minde. Wherfore should not we then beleue this holy Ghost? Whereas he hath declared by
the mouthes of the Bishops, that there was a litle proper fellowe carued out vp∣on the end of Iosephs staffe, as you see vp∣on the staues that children and fooles doe ride vpon: yea, and that the same pretie fellowe was by Iacob worshipped? tione 5. synod. Nicaena, & pag. 498.Then do they further alledge this ext: The soules of the iust, are in the handes of the Lord. Againe, God is maruellous in his Saintes. For by these Saintes doe they vnderstand nothing else, but dumbe Saintes or images, which stand in the church: for that it is written in an other place: The Saintes which are vpon the earth. Item, Noah did set vp one altar vn∣to God: and Abraham likewise, with ma∣nie other mo. And it is good to be thought, that they would not set vppe anie altars without goodlie images of our Ladie, of Saint Christopher, and of S. Anthonies swine, and such like, to stand vpon the al∣tars. For an altar without Saints, is like a Cowe without a taile, or a Turd without Sugar. ctio. 4. pag. 504. .Againe, Moses did make the Propitia∣torium, which is the round chest of pure golde, and did by Gods commandement, se two Cherubims vpon it. And wherfore
then should we not set images vppon our altars, according to the commaundement of the holie Church? For, whereas the Heretikes will say, that these two Cheru∣bims, and the golden chest, were couered and hidde, so that no man could see them, much lesse pray vnto them: to that our deare mother the holie Church of Rome doeth answere, that they can doe so like∣wise. For the whole Lent through, they do cause their images,Images coue∣red with blewe cloth. to looke through a blewe cloth, and plaie bo peepe: and so they continue till Easter: then come the Priestes and play their pates, and so bidde Coppin out of a corner, and shewe his face like a man. So then, these Here∣tikes haue no cause to prae and say, That our images are neuer hidde or co∣uered. Againe, our holie fathers say,Aio 3. synod. Nicaen. pa. 498. that notwithstanding the Cherubims were kept close, so that no man might see them, for that no man migh enter into that ho∣lie place, but onelie the hi Priest: and hee but once a yeere: yet did not the Iewes forbeare to pray continuallie to the same. For so haue the fathers at the same Councell concluded out of their
owne heads. Nowe thirdly, the holie fathers say, That seeing images may be had secretlie, wherefore should wee not (much rather) haue them openlie to pray to them? For notwithstanding that God hath forbidden it, yet he must bee giuen otherwise to vn∣derstand the matter: for he was not yet in∣formed, that images are the bookes of the Laie people, till such time as Pope Gre∣gorie came, and aught it for a perfect doctrine. But nowe, euerie man doeth knowe, that bookes must be laide vppon a deske, that euerie man may reade on them, and are not to bee cast behind a banke, or in a corner. For it is plainlie written, that a candle is not to bee set vnder a bushell, but in a candlesticke, that euerie man may bee lighted thereby:In the epistle of Adrian to the synod. act. 2. fol. 481. which the holie fathers doe likewise vnderstande by the images, to witte, that they must stande on high pranking vppon the altars, and so be deuoutlie prayed vnto by the com∣mon sort. Besides all this, they bring forth, that Moses did set vppe a brasen Serpent in the wildernesse,The brasen serpent. by Gods commaunde∣ment,
to the intent that all such as should looke therevpon, might bee healed of the biting of the venomous serpentes. For vppon that text of scripture they say thus: What follie and madnesse should it then bee of vs, that wee should yet doubte, whether all such as looke vpon the image of Christ, the image of our Ladie, and of all other holie Saintes, shall become holie, and shall likewise bee healed of all diseases? Which thing is likewise by the holie father Pope Adrian, most faithfully as∣sured with Bull and Seale:In the foresaid episle sent to the fathers of the Councell. so as there is no further doubte to bee made in that matter: the rather, for that this is to bee seene euidentlie at Halle, a towne in Bra∣bant, where so manie rutches of lame men, and so manie painted tables are hanging, of such as haue bene so well and perfectlie healed of their diseases, that the most part of those which hang there, neuer feele anie paine or griefe, nei∣ther in the head, nor in the bladder. I speake not of so manie wiues, as haue bene conceiued with childe, after that they had once had our holie and blessed Ladies girdle tied about their middles.
And nowe of late it chaunced in Hol∣land, That a poore woman with a verie great bellie came verie deuoutlie, to seeke our blessed Ladie of Heukelem, and when shee had giuen her offering, shee returned home againe,A miracle. and left her great bellie be∣hinde her. Yea, there was a blinde Gent∣leman came out of Fraunce, to Saint Iob of Wesemale in pilgrimage, to re∣couer his sight againe, which he had lost by Saint Iobs disease: and after hee had well ended his businesse, hee cried to his seruaunt in French, Ie voy, which the Doctours of Louen did vnderstande, not to bee, that hee would be gone, but that hee did see. In so much that the same is written,In the table of S. Georges miracles. and hanged vp vppon a table in the Church for a great miracle. And it is to bee crediblie beleeued, that hee did see as well without spectacles, as with a candle. I forbeare to speake of the great mira∣cles which the holie and mightie blessed Ladies at Laureto in Italie, and Mont∣ferrato in Spaine doe: and of Saint Iames of Compostella, and Saint Ca∣tharina of Scena, and such other like holie hee Saintes, and shee Saintes: for that
is not meate for euerie mans mouth: wee must content our selues with courser meates, and keepe our mouthes close from such daintie dishes. Yet notwith∣standing, if there were a plompe Hollan∣der, or a Malle Brabander, or a Botte Flemming that had a stomache or appe∣tite to such lordlie fare, and would goe take vpon him a pilgrimage for a wager, to come againe within a certeine time, hee may doe so well inough, and so goe and strawe his lust abroad amongest the holie and blessed Ladies of Spaine and Italie, and see what great miracles they can doe more, than our Ladies can doe here. Hee might perhappes speede as well as a good honest man of Paris, who could haue no children by his wife, and in hope of helpe, did vowe diuerse pilgrimages: And first hee went to seeke Saint Iames at Compostella, and from thence hee went to Rome to vi∣site the holie Apostles, Peter and Paul: and then on forwarde to our holie and blessed Ladie of Laureto, and from thence to Hierusalem: and last of all, to Saint Catharine of Scena: in fine
so as hee was about a three yeeres from home: And then when hee came home againe, hee found his wife merrie, and had in the meane space gotten three prettie children, with helpe of the good Saintes, which hee so deuoutlie had sought. Was not this nowe a great miracle? Therefore, who soeuer hath a desire to goe from home, and seeke Saintes, hee may set forwarde, when soeuex hee will, the wagon standeth readie. And nowe will wee proceede to our matter againe, and campe with these He∣retikes, who mocke and iest with these our holie fathers of the foresaid Councell, be∣cause they bring in and alledge an exam∣ple of the brasen serpent, to establishe their images, by saying, That the same was a figure in the olde Testament, pointing to Christ, and was set vppe by GOD his speciall commaundement: but vnto this wee will answere them, That they haue eaten stockfish, and knowe not what doeth belong to a pregnant and ripe wit: for otherwise, can they not perceiue, that our images are figures likewise, as wel of Christ, as of his deare mother, grandmo∣ther,
and other holie hee Saintes and she Saintes: yea, and that are by speciall commaundement of our holie father the Pope, and the holie Church set foorth. But yet for all this, these dull Heretikes goe on forward with their follie, saying, That the good King Ezechias did breake downe and burne to powder,Brasen serpent burnt. 2. Reg. 18.4. the same bra∣sen serpent, as soone as euer hee sawe and did perceiue, that the people beganne to cense and honour it, in like manner as the holie Church of Rome doeth nowe honour and worship her Saintes. And those mad brained fellowes doe therevpon conclude, that wee ought likewise euen so to burne our images. But wee denie that flatlie: for that was an other matter, considering that our images are no serpentes, as that was. It is verie true, that wee doe as well cense to Saint Margaret, Saint Georges dragon, and Saint Anthonies hogs, as to the Saints themselues, & pray to the one as well as to the other, although those are not much better than serpents: but that now is otherwise to be cōsidered, for it is not done in honor of the dragons, but of the Sainte which they stand by: as is well proued by a
certeine Doctour of Louen, who going out of the porche of the graie Friers, at Louen did put off his bonnet before the i∣mage of Pilate, which standeth there, & so∣denly turning back again, cried wt a lowd voice: Non tibi Pilate, sed Christo, as though hee would haue said: As for thee Pilate, thou art but a varlot: what dost thou thinke? I did not put off my bon∣net to thee, but to that Christ, with whom thou art dealing. Nowe consider, euen so standeth the matter with our Dragons, and with S. Anthonies hogs. They gette many times offrings and waxe candles, and are often times kissed for neighbourhood, for the good Saint sake by whom they stand: but they doe not take it vppon them selues, no more then a dumbe stocke or blocke. Ther∣fore remaineth this determination of the holy fathers of the said Councell, alwayes fast and ratified, to witte, That the holie Church must haue images: seeing that the Iewes had a brasen serpent. This is like∣wise mainteined with manie other goodlie testimonies, as specially with that which the prophet Dauid saith in the 96. psalme, There is praise & honor before his face.Psal. 96.
Item, I loue the cituatiō of thine house.Psal. 28.8. For by these followeth, that the Churches must be trimmed vp with goodly images. Item, O Lord, I seeke thy countenance,Psal. 27.8. Item, O Lord, the rich shall pray before thy face. Item,Psal. 4.7. Let the light of thy coun∣tenance shine vpon vs. For out of these textes do they conclude, that men ought to haue our Lords visage goodly painted, and to pray to it. And for that cause it is, that euerie yeare at Rome vpon good Friday, the holie Veronica, which is an old ouer worne cloute, whereon they say our Lords face is painted, which they pray vnto with great deuotion. And the common peo∣ple crie alowde, Misericordia, misericor∣dia, that is, Mercie, mercie. The like is done also at Besanson in Burgonia, and in manie other places. For this same holie fisnomie of the Veronica, was sette vpon good grounde, and is therefore so well spung vp, and in such plentie, that there are to bee found a number of them, all which do worke great miracles. And besides this, they bring forth these testimonies, to witte, that the beliefe commeth not onely by hearing, but like∣wise by sight: for that Iohn saith, Like as
we haue heard,2. Iohn. 1.1. Num. 15.38. Deut. 6.8. Matth. 23.4. so haue we likewise sene. Item, That the Iewes did weare broade borders vpon their clothes: Ergo, so must wee likewise haue images in the church: with many such other like proofes, which close vp together as fitte as a spin∣dle vpon a flesh pot. So now, when anie man hath a desire to see these goodly testi∣monies, let him read ouer the whole pro∣ceeding of the saide Councell of Nice, as it is sette foorth in the seconde booke of Councels, or else he may reade another little booke, which was set foorth about the same time, in the name of the Empe∣rour Carolus magnus, touching the same Councell: hee shall therein reioyce his spirites, with reading of all those goodly, copious, and fine allegations, brought out and alledged by those holie fathers, to that end and purpose:Read the coun∣cel of Nice. act. 4. fol. 521. There doth the Monke Theo∣dosius declare these pleasant histories of the dreame of Con∣stantine, and of the waren i∣mage of Cos∣mus and Damia∣nus. and with the dreames of Constantine, who (to heale his leprosie) had shedde the bloud of young innocent children, and was for the same comforted by Peter and Paule, in his dreames. And there you shall finde also, a great manie of goodlie and notable miracles done by images, taken out of the booke of Cos∣mus, and Damianus, and out of the booke
of Sophronius, of the miracles of Saints, and other such like bookes, which those ho∣lie fathers caused there to bee read and heard, and by their iudgementes esta∣blished them, and allowed them for good. So as there is no more doubtes to be put in them, than vpon the golden Legende, which standes authentike in the Masse booke. And to the end that men shall haue the more desire to read them, I will bring forth here one example out of them, seruing greatly for our purpose: to the ende you may perceiue by the nest, what birdes are within it. There was a liuely holie Monke,This prettie ieast was read in the councell of Nicaen by the Monke Stepha∣nus, out of the booke of Sophro∣nius: reade of the 2. booke of the councels in the 2. councell of Nicaen. act. 4. fo. 520. ad whiche was continually tempted and troubled with a diuell, euen till his olde dayes: and when in the end he be∣ganne to waxe wearie of it, hee then did pray the diuell verie friendly, that hee woulde let him alone in quiet: wherevpon the diuell did answere him, that so farre as he would promise to do, and sweare to keepe secrete, a thing that hee woulde commaunde him, then hee woulde leaue off to trouble him anie more. The Monke did promise him, and tooke therevpon a deepe othe.
Then said the diuell: If thou wilt that I shall trouble thee no more, then thou must not pray anie more to that image: and it was an image of our Ladie, hol∣ding her childe in her armes. But the Monke was more craftie than the diuel: for he went and confessed him of it the next day to the Abbot, and the Abbot did dispense with him for his othe, vpon condition, that hee should continue his praying to the image. Is not that a fine and worthie testimo∣nie, borowed of the diuell, whereby the ho∣lie Fathers in the foresaide Councell, haue wonderfull strongly established the pray∣ing vnto images? Truely it is worthie to be written vpon balkes and beames, be∣cause calues shall not licke it off. And our Champion, maister Gentianus, is wor∣thie to carie the standard, & to be crowned with a three footed stoole, seeing hee dare so boldly aduenture, to lay the worthinesse of that Councell in the ballance, against the second commaundement of God, which doth sharpely forbid all worshipping and praying to images: and likewise bringeth in the said Councell, against the Councell of Eliberum, which was kept in Spaine,
in the yeare of our Lorde 1200, and was consonant and agreeable vnto the worde of God. The xiiii. Chapter. VVhich treateth of some particular images, and painted tables, which the Church of Rome doth vse, and for the establishing of the same by the Scripture. NOwe, because these Heretikes are most busie with some speciall images,Diuerse parti∣cular images & painted tables of the holie Church. which the holie Church of Rome doe vse with great deuotion, and with them doe these Heretikes mocke and ieast most of all: it is verie necessarie that wee proue and establish the same out of the holy scrip∣ture. Then, to begin withall, it is not to be mocked, nor wondered at, that they in their Churches, and Masse bookes, doe paint the Trinitie with three faces: for our mother the holie Church, did learne that at Rome, where they were wont to paint or carue Ianus with two faces. And then further, there is written in Iohn,The trinitie with three faces. That there are three in heauen which beare witnesse, the Father, the Worde, and the Holie ghost: and these three are one, &c. Then of necessitie they must
be painted or made with three heades, or three faces, vpon one necke. For where∣as these heretikes say, that it is plaine for∣bidden, to make the likenesse of God any maner of way, seeing God himselfe saith: Thou didst heare a voyce out of the bush,Deut. 4.12. but thou sawest no likenesse: Ther∣fore be well warie,This did the fa∣thers of the Councell off Nice cut of thus: the like ckius, saying, that the Iewes were addicted to idolatrie. that thou make not anie image after my likenesse: That was spo∣ken to the Iewes onelie, and is now alte∣red through the worthie custome and v∣sage of our deare mother the holie Church of Rome. And whereas the holy Church hath also chosen to make the similitude of the father, an olde man, with a long gray beard: and for the sonne, a man hanging on the crosse: and for knowledge of the holie Ghost, a doue: that is done of her owne inuen∣tion and free will. For she might as well haue made a bushe, or a flame of fire, or a cloude, to counterfeite the father: for that he did shewe himselfe in all these like∣nesses, as well as in the likenesse of a man, or they might as well haue made for Christ, a childe in a cradle, or a man teaching and instructing the people. And likewise for the holie Ghost, a tongue, or
a flame of fire, as well as they doe a man crucified, or a doue. But therein shee doeth vse her libertie: for that hath alwayes his course by the common rule, which is: Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas: Our pleasure is as we command, Our lust for lawe perforce shall stand. Or according to that which the Poet Ho∣race saith in a verse: Pictoribus atqué Poetis, Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa pote∣stas: Painters and Poets, haue licence to measure Their colours and verses, euen at ther owne pleasure. Secondarily,Angels with wings. whereas angels are coū∣terfeited with wings, that is taken out of Esaie & Ezekiel, who say, That the Cheru∣bims were shewed vnto them in a vision with wings.S. Micael with his ba∣lance. Read also in fol. 107. And whereas S. Michael is made with a paire of balance in his hand, that is, because hee must wey the soules, to see whether their good workes & deserts be not heuier in weight,Rom. 3.4. Galat. 4. Ephe. 2. than their sinnes & of fences. For (as before we haue written) the holy church hath appointed him that office, because she esteemeth it a sure article, that none can be saued by the merits, bloud and
passion of our Lorde Iesus Christ onelie,Antonine parte. 3. tit. 4. cap. 20 & par 4. tit. 9. cap. 7. Bonauen∣tura in ent. lib. 4 dst. 15. Barnard. Rosetus in sermo. 0. Petrus Sotus in assertione Calo. de bonis peri∣bu▪ and all o∣ther Catholike writers. 2. Cor. 3.7. Exod. 34.30.35. Moses with hornes. yet Paule doeth so teach: but euerie man must (by his owne good works & deserts) bee weyed out and saued, making full sa∣tisfaction thereby, of his sinnes and of∣fences. After this now, where Moses is pain∣ted with hornes, is vpon this occasion. For that it is written, to witte, that the face of Moses did shine (as Paule himselfe doeth set it forth) that hath the common transla∣tion of the holie Church expounded thus, That Moses had hornes, for that he should be as it were a figure of our Bishoppes, which now likewise we are two hornes. And whereas they make of the three wise men,The three Kings. that came out of the East, three Kings, and one of those as blacke as pitch, like a Morian, that is fetched out of the wordes of Dauid,Psal. 72.10. or Solomon, saying: Kings shall come out of the Moores lande, to worship Christ. For this hath the holy Church interpreted, to be spoken by the three wise men. And although the Morians land, lay much more to the West of Iurie, than to the East, from whence the wise men came, that is of no impor∣tance: for the holie Church can alter the
lying and situation of the landes, and make of the West the East. Againe,The Oxe and the Asse by the cribbe. whereas they haue likewise set an Oxe and an Asse by the cribbe of their litle Iesus, whiche doe warme him with their breath: that is grounded vpon the plaine Text of Esaie, who saith, The Oxe doth know his maisters will,Esaie 1.3. and an Asse the cribbe of his maister: but the peo∣ple of Israel will vnderstande nothing at all, &c. Yea, and it may be a verie good allusion, that by the Oxe, the Bishoppes, Abbattes, and Prelates, are vnderstood, because they weare hornes also, like an Oxe, and can roare out excellentlie well against these heretikes, better than they can preache the worde of God. And by the Asse may verie well be vnderstoode the graie Friers, which are likewise as graie as asses, and therewithall, all the residue of Monkes, Friers, and poore Priestes, who are not much better lear∣ned than Asses, and doe esteeme Christ still as a young childe that lies yet in the cribbe, and therefore go about to please him & make him contented with goodlie images, and puppets, with belles & rat∣telles, with piping, and daunsing, and
with such other like fonde toyes and cere∣monies. Saint Lungies with a Lance.Againe, where they paint S. Lungies, who pricking Christ in the side with a speare, receiued his sight, by vertue of the bloud which sprinckled in his eyes, that is likewise proued by good scriptures. For Saint Iohn saith,Iohn. 19.34. That a souldier with a speare did pearce Christes side. And this speare in the Greeke was called Longi, whereof the holy Church hath made a Saint, and named the same S. Longinus. And because the saide Iohn said: That it came so to passe,Iohn. 19.37. because the Scripture should bee fulfilled, saying: They shall looke vpon him whom they haue pear∣ced:Zach. 12.18. Out of that haue they fetched the lies or Legend of S. Lungies, as to say that he was blind, and thinking to haue thrust his speare into a Crowe, did thrust it into the side of Iesus Christ, and so the bloud did spring out into his eyes, wherby he re∣ceiued his sight: and was long afterwards canonized by the Pope, and put into the Kalendar for a Saint. In summe, all their paintings, and all those dumbe images, which are set vp in Churches: as the Apostles with rounde
trenchers behinde their heades, and eue∣rie one of them with his weapon in his hande, our Ladie with her frised haire, and goodlie golden garmentes, with her perukes, fine kerchiefs, and goodly set forth with all her conceites like a Princesse of this world, and Saint Katharine, and S. Barbara, bare breasted, with their embro∣dered and stitched workes, as trimly deck and painted, as the Courtesans of Rome, and Venice. And all this can our deare mother fetch finely out of the scriptures: yea, and shee can finde you a threede for euerie needle. So that these Heretikes haue nothing to say to this: for whatso∣euer is done of a good intent and pur∣pose, and to the profite of our deare mo∣ther the holie Church of Rome, that must bee by God accepted without anie doubt, and hee must of necessitie passe it in his reckoning booke, or else muscels were no fishe, neither should you haue anie oysters at Billingsgate. For a fla conclusion, wee must haue goodly images, and braue painted ta∣bles, in the Church: yea, and though it did not serue for anie other purpose, but that young men and maidens, will
therefore the rather come to Church: for thereby it happens often, that when they come onelie to see the images and goodlie paintinges, and fisnomies: yet in the meane space some deuotion commes in their mindes, to haue a snatch at a Masse, or to heare a Salue Regina: whereby they often obteine pardon of their sinnes, euen halfe against their willes. And therefore we care not a beane, for all that these He∣retikes can say to this, but will manteine and vpholde our olde deuotion without a∣nie iotte lacking The xv. Chapter. VVhich is touching the difference of meates. Forbidding of meates.NOwe, as touching the forbidding to eate some kinde of meates, in some certeine times, that is likewise founded vpō plain textes of the scripturs.In the decrees. Cap. Sexto dist. 5. And first whereas God said to Adam, Thou shalt not eate of the fruit of the tree of know∣ledge, &c. Out of that hath holie Church concluded, That men may eate no fleshe vpon the fasting dayes. Item, after that Adam had sinned, then did God curse the earth. And now we doe knowe verie well,
that all fleshe which is to be eaten, com∣meth of the earth. Therefore hath our deare mother the holie Church streight∣lie defended and forbidden all men, which on the moste principall and holie-fasting dayes, must doe penance for their sinnes, that in no wise, they doe eate anie flesh, on those dayes,Fleshe forbiddē to be eaten, and wherefore. least they shoulde be parta∣kers of the cursing of the earth, like as the holie Bishop Durandus hath verie well set it forth. Whereby it is apparant,Durandus in the booke called Rationale Diuin. officiorum. li. 6. Rubr. de aliis iiuniis Nu. 22. that the Core whereof bread is made, and the grapes whereof the wine is made, are no fruites of the earth, but of the Sea, as the fishe is: for otherwise they were likewise accursed, and so must e forbidden on the fasting dayes. Or else it may be alledged, that the holie Church hath dispensed with them, because the fishe woulde not haue had any good last without bread and wine. And for this cause hath our mother the ho∣lie Chrh forbidden the eating of fleshe, as a thing vncleane and accursed: in so∣muche that those whiche doe eate fleshe, or gges, vpon a fish day, are to be banished and rooted out as shamelesse Heretikes, and to be burnt at a stake, because (not∣withstanding whatsoeuer may be alledged
out of Paule, or out of the holie scriptures, that flesh and egges are vncleane, vnholie, yea, and accursed: and that is apparant by the great miracle that happened in Italie, vpon the mountaine called Il monte de la virgine, that is, Our Ladies mountaine. For whosoeuer doeth bring vnto that mountaine,This is to bee found in the booke of a Monke called eander Albertus of Blloigne, na∣med the dis∣course of Italie, in fol. 242. flesh or egges, yea, or milke, by and by it will be full of wormes, be∣cause our Ladie will not suffer, that anie man shall eate (vpon her mountaine) flesh nor anie vncleane meates, but only fish, or hearbes and fruites. But what needes all this? And though the flesh were not cursed, nor vncleane: yet notwithstanding our deere mother the ho∣ly Church hath great reason to forbid the eating of it: for that shee (at the least) may haue a difference in the eating of meates, and in that point shewe her selfe some∣thing like vnto the figures and shadowes of the olde Testament, wherein the chil∣dren of Israel▪ were forbidden certaine kindes of flesh, as a thing vncleane. Al∣though that our deare mother is of such discretion and vnderstanding, that she doth not esteeme flesh to be altogether vncleane in it selfe. For otherwise our holie Fa∣ther
the Pope, with his Bishops, and Cardinals, woulde not so well digest it, that they woulde as well in the Lent, as on good Friday it selfe, licke their fingers after it. But shee doth not meane to vse her Prelates straitely in that mat∣ter:kius in his pamphlet. Leuit. 11. Deut. 14. but to proue lightly the obedience of her subiectes, like as GOD (in the olde Testament) did forbid his peo∣ple certaine meates, rather for the kee∣ping of them in subiection, than that the meates of them selues were vncleane: for whatsoeuer GOD hath created, is from the beginning of it selfe good and cleane, but the holie Church of Rome,Gene. 1.25. 1. Tim. 4.4. hath had another respect in this mat∣ter: as that shee did esteeme the fleshe for vncleane, but not in it selfe, but vnto suche as haue not bought Bulles of li∣cence of the Pope, to the ende they might digest the same with a cleare conscience. For like as in the time of Paule,1. Tim.  . all meates were made holie by prayer and by thankesgiuing: so is the meate nowe made holie with the Popes Bulles: for whosoeuer hath those, may boldely eate of all meates without anie scruple, and say with a good conscience,
Omnia munda mundis: that is to say, To a man that is cleane, all things are cleane. But he that hath no Bull, although he had ten times prayed, and giuen God thankes for his good giftes, yet that can not helpe him at all: hee must bee cur∣sed, excommunicated, and cleane rooted out of the number of the good Catho∣likes and faithfull subiectes of our deare mother the holie Church of Rome: yea, and bee burnt at a stake, like an arrant and gracelesse Heretike. And therefore it is that the holie Pre∣lates, Cardinals, Bishops, and all other loyall subiects of the sea of Rome, doe so often forget to say grace and prayers at their meate: and when as sometime (by ill hap) they do say grace (which happens ve∣rie seldome) they say it commonly in a tongue or language, which neither they themselues, nor but a verie fewe of those which sit at the table with them, do vnder∣stand: not eseming that, that can much pro∣fit to the clensing of the meat, nor much hin∣der nor further the matter, so that they haue good daintie fare. But they in place of this will eat flesh on a fasting day, and for that purpose, in stead of grace, they must haue
their Bulles well sealed, & hanging downe with silken tassels: yea, and such as they themselues can well both read and vnder∣stand, otherwise it were all not worth a strawe. So now then, flesh (on fish dayes) is vn∣cleane, to them that haue no Bulles: which you may conceiue by this, That in Spaine, where the holie inquisition doeth beare the swinge: yet he, whosoeuer that can get a Bull for a royall of plate, may eate (all the Lent through) puddings, tripes, and all the entrails, with head, neck, and purtenaunce, without anie daunger or scruple of conscience. And therefore it is, that the worthie Doctour Eckius,In his Enh∣ridion. taking vpō him to defend this forbidding of meats by scripture, doth bring in this text out of the Acts of the Apostles: Take heede that you refraine your selues from meates of∣fred vnto idols, For as Paule saith, That which was offred vnto idols, was offred to the diuel: and therefore he did curse all such as should eate of it with such a consci∣ence▪ So likewise (saith he) it falleth out al∣wayes with flesh on fasting dayes, when as the vncleannesse and malediction there∣of is not taken away, and made cleane by
the Popes Buls: but otherwise, it is all well inough, as here before is sufficientlie proued. The xvi. Chapter. VVherein Lent is proued by the Scripture: And further, that the Romish church must counterfeite Christ in all pointes: and lastlie, touching festiuall dayes, and the ordeining of the same. Touching Lent seeke the decres Statuimus with the .2. folowing dist. 76. and cap. Solen. de consecra. dist. 1. and chefely cap. Quadra. de conse∣cra. dist 5. where this ar∣gument is re∣hearsed. In the foresaid chap. here follo∣weth the verie woordes of the Glosse vpon the decrees, Can. Quadra. de con∣secra. dist. 5.ANd nowe, as touching the time of Lent, that is verie stronglie proued by our deare mother the holie Church out of the scripture. For it is written, That we are bound to offer vp vnto GOD the tenth part of our goods. And now (saith the holie Church) Lent is the tenth part of the yeere: and therefore must wee necessarilie obserue the whole Lent, not presuming to eate anie fleshe at all: Con∣sidering that (as is before said) flesh pro∣ceedeth of the earth which is accursed: for nowe for the tenthes of three hun∣dreth three score and fiue dayes wee must fast sixe and thirtie dayes: and yet there remaines fiue dayes & sixe houres: and of these fiue dayes we do fast foure, not for payment of tenthes, but for an other occasion, to wit, That the talies of good workes and merites might be full.
So there remaineth yet one day and sixe houres,Occasion of the fasting daies. which maketh iust thirtie houres, whereof the tenth is not paid: but for recompense of that, we must go late to supper. So nowe, is not this past verie iust? Now let God come and take a reckoning when soeuer hee will, and hee shall finde, that the holie Church of Rome is not one pennie in his debt: nay, shee hath rather paide him more than his duetie. For this reckoning you shall finde passed and set downe in the reckoning booke of the De∣crees, if God will accept & allowe of that booke (as no doubt hee must) considering that his liefetenants the holie Popes are the makers of it, & then all is cocke sure on our side: & the Catholiks must into heauen, though they shuld go barefoote & bare leg. It helpeth to prate & pratle, the heauen is theirs, if they can gette into it, by meanes of obseruing their Lent well. Nowe further, for fasting,In the booke of decrees. cap sig∣nifica. de electio∣ne. ca. Deus omni. 2. q. 1. and the Glosse vpon the argument of the .6. booke of decrees. wee find writ∣ten also: That Christ did fast fourtie dayes in the wildernesse, Ergo, then wee must do the like, following the common rule: Omnis Christi actio, nostra est in∣structio, that is, after the meaning of our
mother the holie Church,) all, whatso∣euer Christ hath done, we must counter∣feite and do the like after him. For, not∣withstanding that this was a miracle done for the establishing of his doctrine, as Mo∣ses and Elias had done before, which in deede we can not do after him: yet we must doe what we can, and so resemble Apes & Munkies, which, though they can not doe as men do, in speaking, and vnderstanding with reason: yet they will counterfeite men in anie thing that possiblie they can com∣passe. For so hath our deare mother the ho∣lie Church concluded, not onelie in this matter, but in all whatsoeuer Christ hath done. For, as he did take spicle, and rubbe the blinde mans eyes withall, and said in the Syrian tongue, Epphatah, that is to say, Be open: euen so doe the Priestes rubbe the yong childrens nos ares with spicle, and say Epphatah likewise: although the eares and nostrels be open alreadie before. And as hee came riding into Hierusa∣lem vpon an Asse, so must the Cardinals likewise ride vpon Mules with their foot-clothes of red scarlet, euen downe to the grounde and so must men likewise, vppon
Palme Sunday,A woodden Asse drawen about. drawe a woodden Asse round about, with the Pharisees & Priests following. And as Christ did washe the feete of his Apostles,Washing of feete. so doeth the Pope vppon maunday Thursday washe the feete of cer∣teine poore men, and Abbattes wash their Monkes feete with great ceremonies and pronkings. And as Christ did weare a crowne of thorne,The Popes crowne. so likewise doeth the Pope weare vpon his head, a three double crowne of golde, brauelie set with pearles and preti∣ous stones: ouer and besides other two fll of Rubies and Diamonds, which are al∣wayes carried before him, when as hee is borne about in his Pontificalibus vppon mens shoulders, like a woodden image or Saint. Item, as Christ was loden with cariage of his crosse,The Popes crosse. so must the Pope likewise weare vpon his coape or mantle, a crosse of pure golde, set full of pearles and preti∣ous stones. And as Christ did shedde his bloud, so nowe in figure thereof,Bloudie man∣tles and hattes of the Cardi∣nals. must the Cardinals weare bloud redde scarlet mantles, or cloakes and hattes. For, whereas these
Heretikes will say, that their garmentes looke so bloude red, by reason of the bloud of the Martyrs, which they haue shed: or else, that their clothes are red, for shame of the shamefull deedes which their mai∣sters doe: all this can not bee true, seeing that Durandus, Innocentius, and all o∣ther Catholike men doe otherwise inter∣prete it. Item, like as Christ was betraied and solde for certeine round pieces of siluer, so must the Ose or cake, wherewith they say Masse,Durandus ration. diuin. offic. lib. 4. rb. de terr. num. be round like a pennie, as Duran∣dus doeth set it foorth: and the rather, for that they doe there likewise sell him for readie monie: as is written in the booke called, Stella Clericorum, That those Priestes which say Masse for monie, doe euen as much, as though they should say with Iudas: What will you giue me, to deliuer you the man? Item, because that Herod did clothe Christ in a white garment, therefore must the Priests weare a long white garment like a shirt vpon their coates or gownes at such time as they must play their partes in the Masse.A white gar∣ment. And then, because the Iewes did afterwardes cloth him with purple,
therefore they put on the cope aloft vppon that white cloth.Cope and stole in the Masse. And because he was bound,Peruse ouer the exposition of Durand. Inno∣centius de offic. Miss. and Guidon de monte. Roch▪ the which haue expounded all this very neat∣ly. therefore doe they weare the stoale about their neckes, & maniples about their armes, & girde their surplesse to them with a girdle. And further, because he was nailed vpon the crosse, with his armes stretcht abroad: therefore do they likewise stretch out their armes abroade in the Masse, as though they would be crucified. And because hee was wounde in a fine white cloth, when he was buried, therefore doe they lay their litle god vppon a white cloth, fast by the chalice. And because the souldiers did cut Christ his garments in pieces, and so dealt them amongst them for a prey, therfore it is that the Priestes do (vpon good Friday) couer their altar with one single cloth, & then laie two other small clothes or napkins, at the endes of the altar: and as soone as they be∣gin to sing these wordes: Partiti sunt vesti∣menta mea, They diuided my garments amongst them: so must likewise those two clothes or napkins by and by be stollen & pluckt away from the altar. And because Christ after his resurrection
did breath vpon his Disciples, and gaue vnto them the holie Ghost. Therefore it is that the Bishops and Suffraganes, at such time as they doe create anie Priest, doe blowe vpon them: for with that same winde are the Priestes filled as full of the holie Ghost, as a Cowe turde is stuffed full of muske and ambers grease. In summe, Christ hath not done anie thing in his death and passion, but they do plaie and counterfeite the same after him, so trimlie and liuelie, that no plaier nor iuggler is able to do it better. Yea, do we not see likewise, that vppon good Friday they haue a Crucifixe, either of wood, or of stone, which they laie downe softlie vpon the ground, that euerie bodie may cōme creeping to it, vpon handes and knees, & so kisse the feete of it, as men are accustomed to doe to the Pope of Rome? And then they put him in a graue,Creeping to the Crucifixe and burying it. tll Ea∣ster: at which time they take him vppe a∣gaine, and sing, Resurrexit, non est hic, Alleluia: He is risen, he is not here: God be thanked. Yea and in some places, they make the graue in a hie place in the church where men must goe vp manie steppes, which are decked with blacke cloth from
aboue to beneath, and vpon euerie steppe standeth a siluer candlesticke with a waxe candle burning in it, and there doe walke souldiours in harnesse, as bright as Saint George, which keepe the graue, till the Priests come & take him vp: and then com∣meth sodenlie a flash of fire, wherwith they are all afraid and fall downe: and then vp∣startes the man, and they begin to sing Al∣leluia, on all handes, and then the clocke striketh eleuen. Then againe vpon Whitsunday they be∣gin to play a new Enterlude,The holy ghost on Whitsun∣day. for then they send downe a Doue out of an Owles nest, deuised in the roofe of the church: but first they cast out rosin and gunpouder, wt wilde fire, to make the children afraide, and that must needes be the holie ghost, which com∣meth with thunder and lightening. Likewise, vpon Ascension day, they pull Christ vp on hie wt ropes aboue the clouds,The Crucifix ascendeth to heauen. by a vice deuised in the roofe of the church, & they hale him vp, as if they would pull him vp to the gallowes: and there stande the poore Priests, and looke so pitifully af∣ter their God, as a dogge for his dinner. In summe, a man doeth often spende a pennie or two, to see a play of Robin hood,
or a Morisse daunse, which were a great deale better bestowed vppon these apishe toies of these good Priests, which counter∣feite all these matters so handsomlie, that it will do a man asmuch good to see them, as in frostie weather to goe naked. I speake not of their perambulations, processions, & going about the towne, cari∣ing their crucifixes alongst the streetes, & there play and counterfeite the whole pas∣sion, so trimlie with all the seuen sorrowes of our Lady, as though it had ben nothing else, but a simple and plaine Enterlude, to make boyes laugh at, and a litle to recreat heauie or sorrowfull hearts: for these mat∣ters fal out onlie vpon church holy dayes or solemnities, when the Catholikes are determined to be merrie, & drink thēselues so droncke, that they tumble frō their seat: as you shal see our Maisters of Louen doo euery yere in their solemnitie, & especially at the seuenth yeres procession, which is, of the seuen sorrowes of our Ladie. All what soeuer Christ hath done, must bee set abroch to be counterfeite. And after the same manner, wee play by the Lent. For, because Christ did fast four∣tie daies lōg, therfore shal our dere mother
the holie church bee content to fill her belly all sortes of fish onlie, not once touching one morsell of flesh, according to the special wordes of Paule, who saith, Eate it not: Taste it not: Handle it not.Col. 2.21. And so like∣wise Moses did fast fourtie dayes, for the establishing of the lawes of God, which he presented vnto the people. And now, seeing the Bishops & Prelates do weare hornes, as Moses did, wherefore should they not as well faste fourtie dayes as he did? And if the Bishops doo faste, then are the Leye people much more bounde to faste, which haue no such power nor meane to obteine dispensations, bulles, or tollerations of our holie father the Pope, as these holie Pre∣lates haue. Therefore we do now conclude, without exception or contradiction, That the holie time of Lent is as firmelie founded vpon the scripture, as all the rest of the articles of the faith inuented and founded by our deare mother the holie church of Rome: and therfore it is good reason, that our mo∣ther the holie church of Rome do maintein her Lent & fish dayes in great reputation, & not onelie to hold it for a good and holie work in it self, but for a meritorious work,
whereby we may merit & deserue heauen, & the mercie of God, appease his wrath, and do & make sufficient satisfaction & recom∣pense for all our sins. In so much that our deare mother doth esteeme her fasting: yea in a manner better, than the merites of the blessed bloud & passion of Iesus Christ, whervpon these Heretikes doe altogether boast themselues.In the Masse booke. For consider, this the ho∣lie church saith in one of her secretes, vpon the Wednesday in the Ember weeke in the Aduent, and on Friday in the Ember dayes after Whitsunday, and vppon the Tuesday in Easter weeke: O Lord, we beseech thee, that thou wilt accept this our fasting, and that by it we may be made cleane & purified, & wor∣thie of thy mercie, & that it may bring vs vnto euerlasting saluation, &c. What can a man wish or desire more? S. Iohn the Apostle will seeme to set foorth a speciall matter, when hee saith: That the bloud of Christ Iesus doth cleanse vs of our sinnes, & maketh vs acceptable be∣fore God the father: but this other nowe doth growe all vpon our owne ground: for with our fasting we can obteine that well inough, which he doth attribute onelie to the bloud of Iesus Christ.
What shall I neede to make much a doe for the festiual daies, & obseruing of them?Festiual dayes. Of which our dere mother the holy church maketh so great account,This is sung in the .1. collect in the mber weeke of the Aduent. that shee doeth yerelie pray vnto God, that her festiuall dayes, may obteine for her meanes suffici∣ent to liue wealthily in this world: and after assurance of eternall saluation, & that she may by the perfect obseruing of the said dayes, merit to enioye perpetuall saluation and blisse. And of the hallowing of Easter eeuen, shee doeth say plainlie as followeth: Huius igitur sanctificatio noctis,This is sung the Saturday following nexte after. fugat scelera, culpas lauat, & reddit innocenti∣am lapsis, moestis laetitiam, fugat odia, concordiam parit, & curuat imperia: That is to say: The halowing of this night, doth driue away sinnes, doth purge faults, doth restore such as are fallen to their inno∣cencie againe, and to the sorowfull gi∣ueth gladnesse, and expelleth all hatred, procureth concord, and doth bow Em∣pires or Kingdomes, &c. Consider nowe, what a power the ob∣seruing of these festiual dayes hath. What a mischiefe ayles these Heretikes, that they so raile vpon vs, because wee make
a difference and diuersitie of dayes? They make a doe with vs, saying, That Iesus Christ with his precious bloud,Col. 2.14.16. hath clear∣lie adnichilated and taken away the instru∣ment which was against vs, which consi∣sted wholie in such ceremonies and com∣maundements of the lawe, and hath made fast the same vnto his crosse: so that no man else can hereafter iudge vs, for our meates or drinkes, nor for the obseruing of anie holie dayes, of new Moones, or Sab∣baoths: and still they are troubling of vs with that, which Paule writeth to the Ga∣lathians, saying: Gal. 4.9.10.Seeing that you haue nowe knowen God, or rather that you are knowen of GOD, howe doeth it happen, that you returne your selues againe to ob∣seruing and worshipping of weake ele∣mentes, which you beginne and goe a∣bout to serue againe? You obserue dayes, monthes, times, and yeeres, I am afraied on your behalfes, that all my tra∣uell amongst you, will be spent in vaine▪ &c. But what haue we to do with this▪ seeing our mother the holie Church doeth attri∣bute as much power to the obseruing of
our festiuall dayes, as to the bloud of Christ it selfe: and therefore haue our Ca∣tholike Doctours reason, in teaching, That the obseruation of certeine dayes & feastes, heretofore vsed by the Iewes, are not in anie point taken away, by the death and bloud of Iesus Christ, as Paule goeth about to perswade, so alway as the dayes bee something altered:In his Enchi∣ridion. as Eckius hath verie finelie set foorth. For in place of their Passeouer of the lawe, wee haue our Easter: and in place of their Pentecost, we haue a Whitsuntide of our owne deui∣sing: and in steade of the feast of the newe Moone, wee haue our Ladies dayes: and in place of their Trumpet feasts, we haue the Apostles dayes: and in place of their feast of Tabernacles, wee haue our Church holydayes or solemnities: and so forth, as is plainlie to be seene in the booke of the said Eckius▪ So that there is no o∣ther difference, but as though the diuell (to disguise him selfe) should put on a Friers cowle. And wheresoeuer in the olde Testament anie mention is made of feast dayes, our deare mother the holie Church of Rome, applieth it to the establishing of her festiuall, or holie
daies and solemnities: so that the Heretikes can not iustly complaine of vs in this case, & say, that we can not bring in any Scrip∣tures for proofe of the matter: seeing that the olde Testament is full of such Scrip∣ture, as they them selues knowe well i∣nough. The xvii Chapter. VVhich treateth of the forbidding of Priestes to marrie, and howe womn ought to be common, by speciall commaundement of the church of Rome, which is di∣ligentlie by them obserued. A forbidding of matrimonie for Priestes.NOwe as touching the forbidding of Priestes, Monkes, Friers, and all o∣ther Spirituall persons, to marrie, that matter we can not defende by the olde Te∣stament, seeing that in the old Testament all Priestes were married. Therefore, in this matter we will haue nothing to doe with the olde Testament, because it doeth make against vs: but wee say, that it is chaunged by the newe, as heretofore wee haue proued by speciall textes, as to write, where it is written: None of those that liue after the fleshe,Rom. 8.8. can please God. A∣gaine:Leuit. 10.18.11.25. Be you holie, like as I am holie, & more such like, which hertofore we haue alledged, and by the booke of decrees
established for euer. Yea, and it was spe∣cially prophesied by Paule,1. Tim. 4.3. That in the latter dayes there shoulde come such as should forbid marriage, and the eating of meates, which God hath created and ordeined to bee eaten with thankesgi∣uing. So that it is no maruell, that it was not forbidden in the olde Testament, nor yet in the beginning of the new testament: for these last dayes, whereof Paule spea∣keth, were not yet come: and as a good wise Doctour, & holie Priest of Groining saide: The Pope did not then gouerne. But nowe that those last dayes are past, and the Pope hath taken the whole regi∣ment of the Church into his handes, the Church hath now declared, openly set forth, and established without retractation, That no man being married can bee holie, nor please God, for that is plaine vncleane∣nesse and fleshly defiling,Here aboue in the 1. & 2. lease. as we haue here¦tofore declared by plaine and special texts of the decrees. And therefore hath our deare mother the holie Church of Rome concluded and set forth, That it is much better, and lesse offence, for a Priest to vse another mans wife, than to marrie one of his
owne, after that he hath once accepted and married our deare mother the holy Church for his wife during his life: as Phigius, Eckius, Ioachimus Perionius, and other like pillars of the holy church of Rome, haue verie finelie set out in their writing. Yea, we do finde by daily experience, that the holie Catholike church of Rome will a great deale rather suffer, that these holie sheete Nonnes of Cloisters, and such like should (being with child) destroy it in their bodies with drinkes and other medicines,Nonnes mur∣ther their owne children. yea or kil it after it is borne, than that they should (according to the counsell of Saint Paule) marrie a husband. This visitation and that which was founde there is written by Iohn Ball an English wri¦ter in the argu∣ment of his booke of the life and conuersati∣on of Popes. Iohn Pontan in his booke de immanitat. Cap. 6.Which thing was apparant at the visi∣tation of the Cloisters in England, which King Henrie .8. caused to be done through∣out all England, where manie priuies in Cloisters were found full of the bones of yong children, with manie other abhomi∣nable matters, which are not meete to bee rehearsed. And Iouianus Pontanus, a good Catho∣like, and a well learned man, doth likewise witnesse, that it is a common practise of these holie Religious women, to doe such thinges.
It is likewise found in ancient credible histories,This is writtē by Huldrick bishop of Augs∣bridg in a let∣ter which he sent vnto Pope Nicholas 1. a∣bout the yeere 265. treating of this matter. That Saint Gregorie Bishop of Rome, after he had first set foorth a ve∣rie straite commaundement against the marriage of Priestes, did afterwarde re∣peale and call backe againe the same verie earnestlie, lamenting and repenting verie sore his former doing: because, that sen∣ding vpon a time to his pondes to haue some fishe taken, there was drawen out of the same with the nettes, and brought to him, aboue sixe thousande heades of yong children, which he straight wayes did with sighes and lamentations acknowledge to haue bene so murthered, by reason of his said commaundement. But our deare mother the holie Church, who hath not lightly anie respect to such small matters, as that, although she heares of inough such: yea, and doth daily see them before her eies, and is often times put in remembrance of them: yet shee had much rather ouersee and suffer such thinges to bee done, then to consent that those holie Nonnes, which haue professed chastitie, should marrie. I doe not speake of it, that shee will rather looke thorowe the fin∣gers,Peruse the 11. chap. of the se∣cond part. or winke at the abominable & filthie
Sodomitrie of Monkes and Friers, than she will reuoke and call backe againe her holy commaundement for chastitie: not∣withstanding that Pope Pius the seconde himselfe, hath oftentimes acknowledged, that although the forbidding of Priests to marrie, was done vpon great considera∣tion: yet it must now vpon other considera∣tion of greater importance, be set at liber∣tie againe. But this is their first rule, and ABC, that they learne as soone as euer they are admitted Priestes, or professed Monkes or Friers, and that they continu∣ally harpe vpon this string, Si non castè, tamen cautè: which is thus ment, That if they cannot liue chastly, yet they shall vse it so secretly, as that it be not much talked of, nor knowne. And now after this, to prouide so for the matter, that these holie Fathers should not go to grossely to worke, therefore hath our deare mother the holie Church, laid an or∣dinance before her spouses, the Priests and Spiritualtie, that they might freely vse o∣ther mens wiues, & that all women ought to be common for them. Whereby men may well consider, that she is none of these gealous wiues, which cannot be content,
that their husbandes shoulde once make a good countenance to another woman: for she is well contented that her sweete hus∣bandes, to witte, Priestes and Monkes, shoulde vse all women at their pleasure. Yea moreouer, she will mainteine, that it ought to be so: and so goeth about to esta∣blishe it, with plaine textes of the holie Scripture, besides the worthie witnesse which shee doth borrow out of the heathen Philosophers. For consider, these bee the proper wordes of the holy father Pope Clement, whom the Church doth esteeme to haue bene a successour of Peter: and therefore hath she caused these his wordes (which are worthie of perpetual memorie, to be written vpon the doores of all Cloy∣sters, and Spirituall houses) to bee set in her booke of decrees, as a woodden dia∣mond might be set in a laten ring, where he saith: Deare brethren, to liue in common is verie necessarie for all men,This is euen thus set downe word for worde in the decrees Cap. Dlectissimi Causa 12. quae. 1 and in the 4. letter of Clemēt in the 1 part of the Councels. but most specially for those which will stoutely, and warily fight vnder Gods banner, and counterfeit or follow the example of the Apostles & their disciples. For the same by nature ought so to bee, and all
things in the world ought to bee com∣mon: but the wickednesse of man hath bene the occasion, that the one hath be∣gonne to say: This is mine, the other said, And this belongeth to me: And by that meanes, dealing or participating of all things crept in. To bee briefe, a verie wise man amongst the Grekes hath spo∣ken maruellous well,Pythagoras whō Plato did imi∣tate in the go∣uenement of his citie. saying: All things are common amongst good friendes. Nowe it is then without doubt, that vn∣der the name of all things, the wiues are likewise conteined: For like as the light and the shining of the Sunne can not be separated nor parted,Married wo∣men common. euen so there can∣not likewise anie separation or dealing be made of that which is to bee vsed in common: but it ought to be generallie at the commaūdement of euerie one of the companie. And for that cause it is, that God saith (gentle Reader note wel here speciall textes of the Scriptvre) by his Prophet,Psal. 133.1. saying: O what a goodlie and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together. And this custome be∣ing obserued by the Apostles, so must they haue all together liued with one an other in cōmon:Act. 4.32. like as it is written: The multitude of the beleeuing was one
heart, and one soule, &c. Note here the determination & con∣clusion of our deare mother the holy church worde by word. whereby shee doeth abso∣lutelie conclude out of the holie Scrip∣tures, that these Heretikes, which are al∣way in hand with the scriptures, haue now no more cause to complaine, though the Priests & Friers will sometime (euen for loue) borrow some of their wiues, for the mainteining & knitting together of this holy Clements commontie. And although the glosse thervpon say, That this hauing of women in cōmon is not to be vnder∣stood, after the vse of the flesh, but sim∣plie for the good willingnesse & charita∣ble loue towards the congregation: yet notwithstanding, the text is plain inough, which saieth, That men must be conuer∣sant with them, as the light is with the sunne shine, which do continually enioy one another. And the same is established, by the doctrine of Plato and Pythagoras, who speciallie were of opinion, that all women should bee common. And that is apparant inough, by the daylie exercise thereof: for you see that the Priestes may haue no wiues of their owne, but doe
vse all women in generall, when, or where∣soeuer they can get them. But yet they wil not looke so narrowlie to haue things com∣mon as touching their goods, because eue∣rie one of them will looke to enioy his own goodes, but not his owne wife: so that it is rather done for the wiues, than for anie thing else. And this may likewise verie well bee the occasion, wherefore the Romishe Church (which in deede can be but one particular Church, because that Rome is but one particular towne) is yet called The Catholike church,For what cause the Church of Rome is called Catholike. that is, The com∣mon & generall Church ouer all, which specially proceedeth by reason of that goodly common sort of women, and boyes, which she mainteines, and doeth increase and multiplie her generation ouer all the world: yea, and filles the whole face of the earth with her young Priests and Monkes, whereof shee hath made such a number, as there are flies in the Summer: in so much that shee may iustly bee called Ecclesia oec∣comenica: that is to say, The Church that doeth flowe ouer the whole earth, like a spring tide.
The xviii. Chapter. VVherein the seuen orders of Priesthoode are set foorth as well by Scriptures, as by the examples of Christ. SEeing that we are nowe in hande with the holinesse of Priests,Seeke for this in the .2. chap. of the second parte. wee will pro∣ceede directlie to the establishing of all the seuen orders of Priesthoode by the Scrip∣ture. And first you shall vnderstande, that our deare mother the holie Church doeth teach verie plainlie, That our Lord Iesus Christ him selfe was forced to passe tho∣rough all those seuen orders, before hee could be admitted to bee a Masseprieste. Marke nowe what a matter must this be,All these good∣ly exposiions are written by the reuerend Bishop Durand. in his booke cal∣led Rationale di∣uinorum officio∣rum in the .1. booke Rub. de ministerio & ordi¦ne Ecclesiae. And in the .4 booke of Sentences. Psal. 24.7.9. and yet for all this, these Heretikes make no accompt of the blessed Masse, whereas Christ had inough to do, for to come to the vse of it. For first, he must exercise the office of a Porter, like as hee did, when he droue the changers of monie, and the sellers and bu∣ers out of the Temple, and snake out of the mouth of Dauid: You Princes lift vp your gates, and be you lift vp you euer∣lasting doores. Item, when hee said, I am the doore of the sheepfolde.Iohn. 10. In the .4. booke of Sentences the .3. chap. After that, he was Reader, when he did reade the Prophet Esaias in the Temple.
In the 4. booke of Sentences the 4. chap.Then after he became an exorcist or Coniurer, when he droue seuen diuels out of Marie Magdalene: & when he did rub the mouth & eares of the dumbe and deafe man wt clay and spitle, saying, Epphatah, Be open. Acoluthus in Greeke is with vs as much as Page, or one which follow∣eth vs. Iohn 8. ca. and is repeated in the 4. booke of Senten. cha. 5.4. Dst. cap. 6.4. Dist. cap. 7.And after that he came to be Acoluthus, that is, a Page, and Ceroferarius, that is, a Candlebearer: when he said, I am the light of the world: hee that followeth me, shall not walke in darknesse. And then was he a Subdeacon, when he did washe his disciples feete. After that a Deacon, when hee did mini∣ster the Sacrament of his body to his Apo∣stles, and (being in the mount Oliuet) wil∣led & persuaded them to watch and pray. 4. Dist. cap. 8. and peruse the same allegatiō by Durand.And lastlie, he became a Priest, when he did consecrate the bread and the wine, and so said Masse at the table. This done, straightway he became a Bi∣shop, when hee laid his handes vppon his disciples heads, saying, Go abroade and preache the ghospell in all places. All this you may see set out at large in the foresaid booke of Durandus,In the 23. and 77. Dist. and in the booke of Sentences, & in the fourth coun∣cels of Tolledo and Carthago, & likewise
in the Decrees. So that it is apparant, that all these holie orders are fished out of the bottome and ground of the scriptures, and are founded vppon the examples of Christ: notwithstanding nowe, that the Priestes haue somewhat the more prero∣gatiue then Christ had, so that they can pushe through all these seuen orders at one time, or else skippe ouer foure or fiue of thē at once. For they that can once get the shauen crowne on their heades, (which is the character, marke, & token of the wor∣thie order of Priesthoode) may not then onelie proceede to be Priestes, but also to be Bishops and Cardinals, and to gette sackes full of benefices: for our most holie father the Pope may freelie dispence with all such matters, as it pleaseth him. But that carieth his authoritie in the Popes foundation, which wee haue here before set forth and declared to be so strong, as the diuels of hell are not able to withstand it.Peruse the 11. chap. of the 2. part. For this time wee doe onelie teache, that when soeuer it shall please the holy church to vse the seuen orders orderlie, shee is able to establish the whole heape of them trim∣lie and finelie out of the scripture.
The xix. Chapter. VVherein is concluded, that all the ceremonies of the holie Church of Rome, are founded vppon the Scrip∣ture, if they be well vnderstoode, and according to their interpretation which onelie is to bee esteemed so good: and what aduantage they haue, that stande fast to this interpretation. And herein is likewise mention made of the masse, and of maister Durandus booke. Ceremonies of the holy Chur∣ches in general.YEa, shee doeth nothing in the world, either of great or small importance, but it is all so finelie founded vppon the Scripture, as can bee deuised. And that may appeare by this: That shee hath fet∣ched the golden slippers, and the precious breeches of our most holie Father the Pope out of the Scriptures. For it is writ∣ten: O howe faire and pleasaunt are the feete of those, which bring tidinges of peace,Esaie. 52.7. Rom. 10.18. This expositiō is set downe by Durandus in his booke called. Rationale diuino∣rum officiorum chap. 7. Num 8. Slippers and breeches of the Popes. which bring good tidings: which after their interpretation is as much to say, as, That the feete and legges of the Pope of Rome, must be decked with good∣lie golden slippers, and with maruellous rich and costlie breeches: as it is well set forth by the holie Doctour & Bishop Du∣randus. And therevpon it proceedeth like∣wise, that the Pope doeth suffer Kings & Emperours to kisse his feete: yea, to treade
vppon the Emperour Frederiks necke, as is before declared.Seeke the 10. chap. of the 2. part. And the rather his feete are to be kissed, because they are so faire & pleasant, and smell so sweete, especiallie two or three dayes after he is dead: for then come all the deuoute catholike people, and kisse them bare, whereby they obteine a verie great indulgence and pardon. But nowe, if anie man be desierus to vnderstand howe finelie all this is groun∣ded vpon Scripture, and further, to know particularlie the reasons, and causes of all the other ceremonies of the holie Church of Rome, and to see howe they are fished e∣uen out of the verie deepest ground & bot∣tome of the holie Scriptures, let him read the booke of Durandus, which (vpon this occasion) he hath named,Durandus tou∣ching ye Mas. Rationale diui∣norum officiorum Sanctae Romanae Ec∣clesiae, that is to say; The reckoning, and reason, or cause of the ceremonies and diuine seruices of the Church of Rome. He shall therein finde maruellous secrets, and verie trimme iewels: yea, if the whole Bible were cleane lost, there might quick∣lie a newe Bible be deuised and made out of this booke, which would agree a great deale better with the ordinances of the ho∣lie
Church, then the Epistles of Paul doe, which these Heretikes and Huguenotes haue in such great reputation. He hath the textes of the Bible as fast, as a handfull of flies: and there is not one iotte conteined or vsed in the blessed Masse, but hee hath a good reason, and a trimme text to bring in for it. There is not one hole but he hath a pegge to stoppe it: hee doeth there set you forth maruelous trimlie, all the reasons, why the Priest doeth so trimme him selfe in such mumming garments, when he go∣eth about to play his parte: why hee doeth first put a biggin vpon his head, and then a long garment like a womans smocke aloft vppon his gowne?Search the 15. and 16. chap. of this 2. part. and then aboue that, a Cassocke without sleeues, looking out at a litle hol aboue, euen like as a Snaile lookes out of her shell, or like as a magget a pie out of her cayge: Why he is bound with a corde about the middle, like a theefe that were going to hanging: why hee doeth turne sometime his tayle to the people, and sometime his face: why hee trippes sometime to the one ende of the Altar, and sometime to the other side of the Altar, as though
hee were daunsing the Maides Morice: Why hee heaues or liftes vppe his voyce sometime like a chimnie sweeper, and by and by hee is as still and quiet a∣gaine, as it were a mouse in a trappe: why sometime hee foldeth his handes to∣gether, like sorrowfull Marie Magda∣lene, and sometime hee stretches them out on euerie side, as though hee would shoote in Robin Hoodes bowe: and then sodenlie hee pluckes them in againe, and tosseth them from the one side to the other, as though hee were catching of flies, or would fraye and scarre awaye crowes. After this hee doeth set foorth verie perfectlie, and in particular, all the occa∣sions and reasons, wherefore Sir Iohns Table is so earlie couered, and the Cup, the little Cannes, and the sauser so man∣nerlie set therevppon: and wherefore Sir Iohn doeth sometime sleepe at his table, and sometime starteth vppe sodenlie out of his dreame. Item, what it meaneth, that hee doeth runne and whisper his se∣cretes to the breade and wine in their eares with a lowe & soft voyce, and that
his companions sometime crie out so yeal∣ling with open throates, like wolues in a caue, or like swine when the butcher kil∣leth them: and wherfore some goe to work with Organes, other with ringing of bels, as though there were an vplandish bellie-feast towards, or some such triumphe. And wherefore men do in the meane space light torches, as though they were bringing the Bride to bedde: and wherefore they lift vp the Priests taile behind him, as though they would looke into his arse, to minister a glister to him. And if you peruse that booke well, you shall likewise finde there, wherefore Sir Domine with his long smocke doth so lu∣stelie lift vp on hie a wafer, and a cup of wine, and that then euerie bodie falleth downe vpon their knees, and knocketh vp∣on their breastes with their fistes: and wherefore the Priest beginneth then to looke so fully▪ like a cae laide on the butchers stall, and then beginneth o la∣ment the wafer or snging bread pitifullie▪ & to weepe with snes teares▪ and then at the last, when hee hath tossed it too and fro, long inough, away it goeth with a  into his throate, and so swalloweth
it downe without chewing: and then hee hath his cuppe filled againe, and so he sen∣deth that after the rest. And yet you shall vnderstand further, wherfore he doth licke the chalice so sweetely, as an Ape licketh her yong ones. And you shall (besides all this) beare wonders, of all the rest of the holie ceremo∣nies of the Romish Church, which they do vse at their Mattēs, at noone, at euensong, at complen, and manie other times, with great deuotion, with all the gestures and fashions which they doe therein vse: and who haue deuised them all: and what eue∣rie one of them doeth signifie. Hee can tell you more, all the feast dayes, and double feastes, all Vigils, Ember dayes, and fa∣sting dayes, all dayes of fish and egges, all processions, goings about with the crosse, gange dayes, and all the whole brabling vsed through the yeere: all this hath hee e∣uen at his fingers endes, and can bring in for euerie one of them, textes verie finelie founded out of the Scripture. So that I assure you, it is a pleasure for those that can heare it. Besides all this, you haue there set forth all the estate, pompe, and pranc∣kings of our holy Bishops and Prelates,
especiallie, of our most holie father the Pope of Rome: whereof there is not one iotte forgotten nor left vnconsidered: yea surelie, I beleeue that his holinesse, sitting vpon his stoole of easement (sir reuerence of his holinesse) should not make one sowre or skornefull countenance, but this wise & profounde learned Doctour and Bishop, can straightwayes bring in for it some mysterie and weightie matter: And to bring a text of Scripture for it, which shall serue as fit for that purpose, as a sadle for a sowe. What needeth manie wordes? hee is a passing Apoticarie, hee can make a good medicine of a Cabadge stalke. And therefore it is, that our deare mo∣ther the holy Church doeth so greatly e∣steeme this his booke,Durandus his booke. so that shee would not forgo it for anie good: and she hath rea∣son for it because in deede it is her chiefe iewell or treasure, wherein all her holinesse is locked vp. Where will all these Here∣tikes now hide them selues, these Luthe∣ranes, Huguenotes, Zwinglians, & Cal∣uinistes, the one heape wt the other, which do bragge so much of the word of God? Let thē but once take this booke of Durādus into their hands, and they shall finde there,
that all the ceremonies of the holie church of Rome, all their prankings, and strange deuises, are finely founded vpon the Scrip∣ture, so that there is not one lacking: yea, and that the Scripture is wholie on our side, if it be right vnderstood, according to the meaning and interpretation of our deare mother the holie Church: to witte, that you passe ouer and let slippe the dead letter, and the plaine text, & depend wholie vpon the spirit of speculation of our Doc∣tours of Louen, & those of Paris, which is only the spirit, That quickeneth & maketh aliue, as is heretofore rehearsed. Therefore, let all such as wil be good and Catholike subiectes of the holie Church and Sea of Rome, holde fast and sticke to this interpretation, and in anie wise shrinke not from it: but beleeue all whatso∣euer the holy church beleeues, not once go∣ing about to knowe, or to aske any questiō what it is: because it is inough for them to know, that the church of Rome cānot erre, so long as she remaineth fast groūded vpon the foūdation of the Pope. Let them keepe in mind the saying of Salomon, You shall not remooue the pales & markes which your fathers haue planted: that is to say:Pro. 22, 28.
You shall not once moue,Thus doth Ec∣kius and all o∣ther Catho∣likes expounde it. touche, or al∣ter any thing of al that, which our deare mother the holie Church of Rome hath established and ordeined. And dooing thus, they shalbe her white sonnes, & haue the worlde at will, they shall enioye the goods of this worlde: some shall become Bishops, and some Cardinalles, riding brauelie to the Courtes of Popes and Kings vpon braue horses and Mules, and shal haue the fairest Courtisanes of Rome at their commaundementes. In summe, they shall say to them selues, What canst thou desire? Where contra∣riwise, these felowes will bee so nose∣wise, that they will knowe all things, and will beleeue nothing, but iust that which they finde in Scripture, and in their Bible plainlie set out: yea, they doe mocke our deare mother, & the interpretations which shee bringeth forth vpon the Scriptures But those surelie are Heretikes to the fourth generation: as Doctours and Phy∣sicions say, Euen to the hiest steppe of the staires. For like as Master Gentian hath here finely concluded, They do not beleeue the holie Church, They beleeue not the twelue articles of our faith: yea, they doe
not beleeue the holie scripture, seeing they will not accept the interpretation of the scripture, which the holie Church hath al∣lowed for good: And therefore, they must be banished, accursed, and excommunica∣ted: yea, they must be burnt to ashes and powder, if they will not recante. For that is the sure sentence and resolute determi∣nation of our holie mother the Church of Rome, wherein doeth not fall anie stay or appellation, for that nowe from henceforth they will not, nor shall not beare with them anie longer. And herewith we will make an ende of the second part, hauing emp∣tied this distaffe: and nowe (by ma∣ster Gentianus leaue) we will in hande and proceede with another part.
Here followeth the ex∣position vpon the third part of Gen∣tianus Haruets Epistle: wherin is trea∣ted of Auricular confession, of the Sacraments, of Matrimonie, of Con∣firmation, and of the holy Anointment. The first Chapter. Of Auricular confession, and howe necessarie it is, and of establishing the same by the Scriptures. Auriculer con∣fession.HEre now doth followe the third part of the Epistle of Gentianus, wherein he doth declare himself great¦lie to wonder, that these new Preachers of the gos∣pell will go about to abolish auricular con∣fession. Cockes populorum! But howe would they go to worke? Where our holie mother hath so straightlie cōmanded vpon paine of damnation,These are the very wordes of Pope Innocent the 1. in a gene∣rall councell cō∣cluded, and is set down in the decrees, Chap. Omnis vtriusque sexts de penieten¦tis & remissioni∣bus. That al such as are of both kindes, to wit, male & female, shall as∣soone as he or she is come to yeeres of dis∣cretion, confesse them selues to their owne Curate of all their sins, at lest once a yere: vnderstanding the same alway of deadlie sinnes only, as is set forth by the glosse vp∣on the text: because daily and perdonable sinnes are with a Pater noster, or with a
sprinckle full of holy water, cleane washed away. I maruell, howe these Heretikes can speake against this. For were it not euen as much as though they would put out both the eies of our mother the holie church? For vndoubtedly, this auricular confession is worthe two paire of eies to her. For by the one, she can see, perceiue & learne al the secret determinations, counsels, and pre∣tences of all Kings, Princes and Poten∣tates of Christendome: by reason whereof she is come to a peaceable possession & en∣ioying of her authoritie and gouernement ouer all Countries and Kingdomes: And by the other she can see and creepe euen in∣to the verie bottome of the bosomes of yong maides, simple and sorrowful wiues, and widdowes, and so grope out and vn∣derstand all their secrets: and then enioyne them such friendlie penaunce, that their troubled consciences are thereby comfor∣ted, and their sorrowfull heartes made ioy∣full. O good Lord! How often haue these holy Priests and Friers giuen (vnder con∣fession) good wholesome counsell to the sorrowfull barren wiues, whereby they haue afterwardes become blyth mothers,
and haue euer after borne an inward loue towardes their holie ghostlie fathers, euen as though it were to their owne husbands. Yea, there is at this present a good ho∣lie graie Frier at Brudgesse, called Bro∣ther Cornelius the Whipper, who (by meanes of this holie auriculer confession) did teach a great many of simple womē, to tame and mortifie their fleshe, in this man∣ner: That they for the fulfilling of penance to them inioyned, and to receiue of him ful absolution of their sinnes, haue verie wil∣linglie gon creeping vppon handes and feete, starke naked before that holie ghost∣lie father: and when he did marke anie that the fleshe was not sufficientlie mortified, them did he followe with a rodde in his hand, and whipped thē vpon the bare but∣tockes, till they had thereby done suffici∣ent penance. By the same token, that hee is yet at this houre called, Brother Cornelis the whipper, and is verie well beloued in the towne of Brudgesse, where the women are verie deuoute to do such penance. Consider now, if that auricular confessiō had bene pulled downe, howe could he haue brought those good women to such a de∣uout
mortification and penaunce? Howe shoulde our deare mother the holie Church bring into the right path, that goodlie and friendly congregation of women, whiche Pope Clement did commaunde, if it were not by that holie auriculer confession? So that truely, Nectarius Bishop of Con∣stantinople was muche to blame,Nectarius. for dis∣anulling auriculer confession, onelie be∣cause there was a Deacon or a Priest, whiche had shreeuen a woman vnder her smocke.In the yeare 395. Was not that a straunge matter of the Bishoppe?This is set out in the storie triparite in the .9. booke. Chap. 28. Surely he must needes haue bene either a Lutherian or a Hugue∣note, seing he had no more regarde too the ordinaunces of his deare mother the holie Church. But I assure you, it goeth now to worke after an other manner, what woulde that Bishoppe haue done, if he had seene brother Cornelis the whipper, and such other good felowes, Surely he would haue driuen auriculer confession with all that baggadge to the gallowes.Chrisostome vpon the .51. Psal. and in the 3. Homelie vp∣pon the .12. chap. to the He∣br. And in the Homelie of penaunce. &c. Seing he was so earnestly moued for such a smell matter. But we will let him alone with a morren. And although Chrisostome was of the same opinion, and did directly with∣stande auriculer confession, yet notwith∣standing
we haue nothing to do therwithal, we will sticke to and keepe fast our auri∣cular confession: yea, and though all the Doctours of the Churche, shoulde runne madde. For when all is saide, it were al∣most as good that the Masse should be put downe and buried for euer, as that there shoulde be no auricular confession. Our deare mother the holie Church will take heede to that, she wil not put downe nor suf∣fer to be ouerthrowen, such a trimme and necessarie thing as that is, to please these Heretikes: especially seeing she can de∣fende it by holy Scripture, aswell as any article before specified, as you may clearly see out of the doctrine of Maister Gentia∣nus Haruet. Iohn. 20.28.Is it not written, (saith he,) Whose sinnes soeuer you doe forgeue, the same shall be forgeuen. Now they cannot for∣geue without hauing knowledge first of the matter: and the matter cannot come to anie knowledge, but by confession, made either openly or in secrete. And therefore without doubt (sayth he) au∣ricular or secrete confession is muche more comly and honest, than open cō∣fession. Consider well of this matter
(gentle Reader,) here the matter is so cleare, that a blinde man may see it aswell in the darke as without a candle. For not∣withstanding that Christ speakes there of ministring & preaching the gospel,Whose sinnes you remit, &c. where∣by the forgiuenesse of sins is pronounced vnto all those that beleeue: as he himselfe doth expounde it, saying: That Paule shall open the eyes of the blinde,Act. 26.18. to the end they may turne from the darkenesse, to the light, and from the power of the di∣uel, vnto God, so that they may obteine forgiuenesse of their sinnes, and so bee partakers with them, whiche are by be∣liefe in Iesus Christ, made holie. Wher∣vpon Paule plainely sayeth, That he hath folowed this commaundement, not by con∣fessing of women secretly in their eares, but by preaching and setting foorth of the Gospell, and the forgiuenesse of sinnes. And whereas Chrysostome and all the olde Fathers haue so vnderstoode and set it foorth: yet notwithstanding,Chrysostome vpon the .23. of Mathewe the .44. homilie. since that the holie Churche hath vnburthened all Bi∣shops, Priestes, Ministers, and Officers of the Church, of their charge of preaching, and haue geuen the same to images and Sainctes made of stockes and stones, to
be bookes and preachers to the Laie peo∣ple. The time and matter is much altered: And the priestes beginne to finde a good taste in this auriculer confession. They haue blowen this forgeuing of sinnes in at the eares. They geue thee absolution with a Crosse, alledging and setting foorth the woordes of Christ, for proofe thereof. So that it is not to be merueiled at, that our Maister Gentian doeth so glorie of this Text, and will with that plainly prooue au∣riculer confession: Notwithstanding that the holie Churche hath many other cleare Textes of the Scripture, whereby to proue and establish the same. As for example: whereas Christ sayde to the Lepre, after that he had made him whole:Mathew. 8.4. Marke. 1.44. Luke. 5.14. This witnesse is by Eckius and all other Ca∣tholike writers interpreted to this sence. Goe and shewe thy selfe to the Priest, and offer thine offering accor∣ding as Moises hath commaunded. For that is onely thus to be vnderstood: Goe hence and shriue thy selfe vnto thine owne Ghostly Father, and doe such pe∣nance, as he shall enioyne you. And the like,Iames. 5.26. where Saint Iames saith, Confesse your sinnes one to an other, By that did Iames meane nothing else, but onely seeke you out a Priest or a Frier, to whom you
may open your minde, and declare vnto him perticulerly al your euil deedes, and he will quickly geue you absolution, es∣pecially, if you let him see a peece of golde. For (by interpretation of our deare mother the holy Churche) One to an other, is as muche to say, as the Priestes and Friers onely. And therefore, where Sainte Iames following right in the same place saith, And pray one for an other, we may very well vnderstand that thus, as though he would say: Pray onelie for Friers and Priestes, that the world may be cleane cleansed of them, and Purgatorie filled with them. The .2. Chapter. Treating of the Sacrament of seuen orders, & of matri∣monie, & of the holie oyle or oyntment, and of the number of the .vii▪ Sacramentes. AFter this commes Maister Gentia∣nus to the rest of the Sacramentes,The Sacramēt of seuen orders and sayeth thus: As touching the seuen orders, is there not a playne Texte in Saint Paule where hee sayeth:1. Tim. 4.14 Doe not neglect that which is in thee, whiche is geuen thee by prophesie, and laying on of handes of the Priesthood,Looke the .18. Chap. of the .2. part. for that is asmuch to say, as Take good heede and
see that you doe not take vppon you to be masse Priestes,Looke the 19. Chap. of the .1. parte. before you haue bene Porter, Candle bearer, Chorister, or A∣coluthus, Subdeacon and Deacon, for all these must goe before, if you wil haue the other to followe, as we haue hereto∣fore declared by scriptures.The Sacramēt of matrimonie. Then he doth further declare, that ma∣trimonie is a sacrament,Ephes. 5.32. bicause there is written: This is a greate mysterie, I say in Christ Iesus, and the congregation. But I could be very well content, that gentle Gentianus, had helde his tongue there, and neuer haue written so. It is ve∣rye true, that our deare mother the holie church hath bene accustomed heretofore, to bring in the same for a testimonie or witnesse, before that the common sorte had read or were acquainted with the scriptures: but now the time doth not serue any longer to geue men brickbattes for turfes, or to make them beleeue that the Moone is made of greene Cheese: for eue∣rie one will pretend now to know how the world walkes. Therefore he had better haue held his tongue touching this matter. For, to begin withal, an Asse might haue seene and perceiued, that Paule dooth not
there meane anie thing at all of matrimo∣nie: but of the vnitie betweene Christ and his congregation: which he doth name to be A greate or deepe mysterie farre a∣boue the vnderstanding of all men. And besides this, these scornefull Heretikes, will sowe a paire of Asse eares on maister Gentianus head: seeing he did not consi∣der, That herein he doth speake both a∣gainst himselfe, and against our deare mo∣ther the holie Churche, who hath plainly concluded that matrimonie is fleshly, vn∣cleane, and vnholy: and hath for that cause forbidden, that Priestes shall marrie, in∣somuch,Looke the 17. Chap. of the  parte. that it cannot be a holie Sacra∣mente: or else it muste followe, that Prie∣stes are not woorthie to enioye so holie a Sacrament. And besides that, these He∣retikes will set a paire of spectacles on maister Gentianus nose, to the ende hee may see and perceiue, that if it be so, that Matrimonie bee a Sacramente, then must virginitie or maidenhoode much rather be a holie sacrament, bycause that by our deare mother the holy Church it is much more esteemed thā matrimony, & so there must be eight sacraments. Yea, widowes will come in for their partes,
and challendge viduitie or widowehoode to be a sacrament. So that men shall at the last be forced to regester for sacra∣mentes, all states and calling of men. Wherevpon must needes follow, that our deare mother the holy church hath erred in setting foorth & teaching, that there were onely seauen sacramentes, vnlesse that shee (peraduenture) will haue it vnderstoode, that by the number of seauen shee dooth meane an innumerable number, as by Gentianus reasons appeareth shee dooth, so that by his argument it must followe, That in all places of the scripture, where this woord Misterium, that is to say a mi∣sterie is vsed, that must streight way bee esteemed for a sacrament: and by that or∣der, also must the kingdome of Antichrist and the beast with seauen heades be ac∣compted for sacramentes: So that in the end, we should haue so many sacramentes, that we shoulde not know what to doe with them: but we must go set them out in the Sunne to dry, or lade a great Hulke with them, and send them into Norway: which out of doubt were a greate disorder, and such as might make open to al the worlde the impudencie and shamefulnesse of our
deare mother the holy church of Rome: see∣ing shee hath resolutely set foorth, that there may be no moe but seauen sacra∣mentes. Which thing she hath likewise fetched out of the coffer of the scriptures with hir Allegoricall or Anagogicall key (saith shee) Seuen deadly sinnes.Looke the .1. chap. of the .2. parte. Ergo must there be of necessitie seuen Sa∣cramentes, which must driue away and ouercome the same seuen deadly sinnes. Item there is mention made of seuen Seales, wherewith the booke of the olde Testament was sealed vp. Also there were seuen pillars, wherewith the church was vnderset: how like are they to be the seuen principall of the new Bishops of the base countrey to wit,Seuen bishops in the low coun¦treis Vigilius. The Cardinall Grand∣well, the President Viglius, Franciscus, Sonnius, Petrus Cursius, Ioannes Lin∣danus de castro and Fryer Kniefe, Who (I assure you) sticke to their tackling and holde vppe the Romish Church like faste and sure pyllers and proppes for feare shee should fall into the myre. After this like∣wise is mention made of Seuen washings whereby Naaman was healed of his le∣prosie, and likewise of seuen Basens,Henricus de Vr maia vpon the fourth booke of Sent. dist. 1. which the Sonne of Man held in his right hand,
and of Seuen loaues, wherewith Christ fed the multitude of people: & of seuē times going about wherby the towne of Iericho was ouerthrown▪ of seuē eyes in one stone: and lastely, of seuen candles set vpon the tabernacle. For now (saith our mother the holy church) by all these are signifi∣ed and set foorth the seuen doctours of the Romish church, to wit, the foure principall of the scholasticall theologie or diuinitie, as Thomas de Aquino, Ioā∣nes Scotus, Albertus Magnus, and Oc∣cam, together with the two profound in∣terpreters of the masse, namely Rabanus and Durandus, and the Maister of the Sentences called Petrus Lombardus: all which make iust seuen, who should like∣wise set forth and establish in the church of Rome seuen sacramentes. There may yet be alledged many other examples for the establishing of the num∣ber of seuen Sacraments, to wit, the seuē Psalmes, which serue the soules in Pur∣gatorie for seuē sacramentes.Matth. 12. Luke. 11. Item the se∣uen diuels which cam to inhabit the house when they found it cleane & emptie: then the seuen sciences: and also the seuen or fiue wittes of our Doctours of Louen, where∣with
they farre excell all the profounde wit and vnderstanding of the Apostles and Prophets, with many other thinges more, which might be broght in: but our mother the holie church of Rome is satisfied with these examples and figures before specifi∣ed. Although yet me thinkes (vnder cor∣rection of my maisters of Louen be it spo∣ken, to whose iudgements I submitte my selfe) that the number of the seuen Sacra∣mentes may best be applied (for that which is written in the Apocalypse, of the beast with seuen heades: or (as heretofore is set foorth) Irenaeus himselfe hath applied this beast to the Romishe churche. And the num¦ber of sixe hundreth sixtie sixe, which is the number of the beast,Apoc. 13 18. For each letter in greek makes one number. 5.20.20.30.2 EKKΛH 200.10.1.10 Σ. IAI 30.1.30.10. TAΛI 20.1. KA Ths makes together. 666. Apoc. 13.17. doe agree very well in one wt this Greke worde EKKΛHΣIA ITAΛIKA, Ecclesia Italica, which is to say, The Italian or Romish Church. And there is likewise specially spoken of the Character, or marke of the beast: And now our mother the holy church sayth that there is likewise a Charecter or marke in the sacraments. And last of al it is credibly affirmed that it is a mysterie: to wit, Baby¦lon: And nowe will our deare mother cō∣clude, as is apparāt, that matrimonie is a
Sacrament because that this woorde mi∣sterium is playnely set foorth: and then it must of necessitie followe, that here also somewhat is spoken of Sacramentes, see∣yng that this woorde is likewise spoken of here. And so must the beast with seuē heads, vndoubtedly betoken and signifie the Ro∣mish church with her seuen Sacramentes, and with her character or marke. So that maister Gentianus is herein to be blamed, That he hath (to mainteine his argument) vsed this worde misterium for the purpose of matrimonie to be a sacramēt: cōsidering that our deare mother the holie Church hath alwaies vsed the same for her strōgest bulwarke, alledging the same continually, But herevpon yet might fall out a great question, to wit, how doeth it happen, that men accompt vpon no more, but seuen sa∣cramentes, seeing that yet our deare mo∣ther the holie Church hath ordeined at the least seuen and seuentie Sacramentes, whereof none is conteined vnder anie of these seuen? For on Easter eeuen, when they do blesse the Easter candels, then doth the holie Church offer vnto God the Fa∣ther Fier, for a great rewarde and a holie Sacrament,Fire a Sacra∣ment. saying thus:
Te in tuis operibus inuocantes in hac sacratissima noctis vigilia, de donis tuae suppliciter offerimus Maiestati, non adi∣pe carnis pollutum, non prophana vn∣ctione viciatum, non sacrilego igne con∣tactum, sed cera atque stuppa construc∣tum, in tui nominis honore succenssum ignem, obsequio religiosae deuotionis offerimus. Magnum igitur Mysterium, & noctis huius mirabile Sacramentum, dignis necesse est laudibus cumulari. That is to say: Calling vpon thee in thy workes, this holie Eeue of Easter, we offer most hum∣bly vnto thy Maiestie, this sacrifice: namely, a fire not defiled with the fat of fleshe, nor polluted with vnholie oyle or oyntment, nor attainted with anie pro∣phane fire: but we offer vnto thee, with obedience, proceeding from perfect de∣uotion, a fire of wrought waxe & weeke, kindled and made to burne in the ho∣nour of thy name. This so great a myste∣rie therefore, and the maruellous sacra∣ment of this holie Eeue, must needes be extolled with due and deserued praises. Marke well nowe, here is the holy fire, or else surelie the Eeue it selfe, called (not
onlie Mysterium) but also A maruellous Sacrament, and offered vp vnto God for a great present, whereby he is (as in the end is concluded) made verie ioyfull & merie. The finding of the Crosse, a sacrament.Likewise, the signe of the Crosse is also called a Sacrament. For vppon the day called Inuentio sanctae crucis, that is, The finding out of the holie crosse, are song by our deare mother the holie church, in a certeine metricall sequence, these words: Non sunt noua Sacramenta, Nec recenter est inuenta Crucis haec Religio. Ista dulces aquas fecit, Per hanc Silex aquas iecit, Mosis officio. Nulla salus est in domo, Nisi Cruce munit homo superliminaria. That is to say: This is no newe made Sacrament, Nor holie crosse doeth represent a late vpstart inuention: This crosse made bitter water sweete, And floudes from rocke of flint to fleete, by Moses priestly function. All health and wealth is turnd to losse, in euerie house and houshold,
Except the signe of holie crosse be set vpon the threshold. So that the signe of the Crosse must also be a holie sacrament without doubt. And the like, when they make holie wa∣ter, they pray thus: Deus, qui ad salutem humani generis maxima quaeque Sacramenta in aquarū substantia condidisti, adesto propitius inuocationibus nostris, & elemento hu∣ic multimodis purificationibus praepa∣rato, virtutem tuae benedictionis ✚ in∣funde: vt creatura Mysterii tui tibi ser∣uiens, ad abiiciendos daemones, mor∣bosque pellendos, diuinae gratiae sumat effectum, &c. That is to say: O God, who hast (for the health of mankind) ordeined and made manie sa∣cramentes of the substance of water, ac∣cept mercifullie our prayers, and sende into this water (which is by manie meanes made cleare) the vertue of thy blessing ✚: So that this creature of thy sacrament seruing thee, may receiue per∣fect strength and power, to chace away diuels, and to driue away all diseases & sicknesses, &c.
Water a Sa∣crament.Here is the water likewise called Crea∣tura mysterii: so that it must needes bee a sacrament, seeing that A Sacrament is no∣thing els, but a holie signe of anie holie thing:The Maister of sentences in the .1. chap. the dist. and .4. booke. or▪ A visible similitude or likenesse of anie inuisible grace or pardon. So that it may iustlie bee said, Accedat ver∣bum ad elementum, & fiet Sacramentū: that is to say: When the worde is ioyned with the element, it is made a Sacramēt. And now, out of doubt, here is an element, to wit, the water: And herevppon commes the wordes of the Priests, by which it doth receiue a gratious power, to participate vnto men an vnuisible gift, euen as well as the holie oyntment, or anie other sacra∣ment of the holie church, ergo is it likewise a sacrament. And herevppon it doeth followe, that the holie ashes also is no lesse. Item▪ the Priestes spittle. Item, the Palmes. Item, the waxe candels, and all other elementes, which our deare mo∣ther the holie church doeth likewise conse∣crate, hallowe and blesse, to the ende they may assist men by some inward power: all such must likewise be sacramentes. Make the reckoning then, and note whether wee shal not haue a notable companie of sacra∣ments.
And whereas some men will say here∣vpon, that there is, or must be a difference betweene these, and the seuen sacraments:Henricus de V∣maria vpon the foresaide texte of the sentences because that the seuen sacramentes doe not onelie betoken things, but do also of them∣selues minister mercie and grace, and that the other can not of them selues giue anie grace, neither be the occasion of anie: that is plaine blasphemie against the holie church: as is euidentlie to be seene out of the lectures, readinges, and exorcismies or coniurations, which she doeth vse ouer the saide elementes, whereby they doe receiue as great power at the least, as anie of all the seuen Sacramentes haue: as you may plainly see in the Masse booke. Otherwise men might say that all her lectures or rea∣dinges and exorcismies or coniurations, were vnnecessarie, without power, and of no value: whiche is plaine blasphemie. And if men woulde say then, that all these small Sacramentes are conteined vnder the Sacramēt of penaūce, seing that satis∣faction is included vnder penaunce, and that al these do tend to the doing of satisfac∣tiō for our sins, & therfore are cōteined vnder satisfactiō: that woulde not sound well: for this alegation woulde alway be brought in against it, that baptisme and the holie
oyle or oyntment, and Confirmation, with all the rest of the sacraments, must all like∣wise be conteined vnder penaunce: seeing all they (as is heretofore declared) doe iu∣stifie men Ex opere operato, or by the merites of good workes, and so are recko∣ned for good payment and satisfaction. And therfore as touching this matter, wee must conclude thus: That this remaineth onlie at the will and discretion of our deare mother the holie Church of Rome: so that shee may ordeine and establishe as manie sacramentes as she list, and in the meane space make vs beleeue that there are no more but seuen. And so might it well bee said, that the number of seuen is here to be vnderstood for an endles number, as hath bene written before. And nowe, as touching the holie oynt∣ment, wherewith they do vse to anoint the sicke, when they lie a passing, Gentianus doeth establish that verie finelie by scrip∣ture, as specially, where Saint Iames saith: If there be anie sicke among you, let him sende for the Elders of the con∣gregation, and let them pray ouer him, and anoint him with oyle, in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of the faith∣full
shal comfort the sicke, and the Lord shall restore him: and if he haue sinned, it shalbe forgiuen him. Whereby our ho∣lie mother doeth vnderstand, that whenso∣euer anie bodie lies a passing, so that there is no more hope of life in him, the Prieste shal then anoint him with holie oyle, blesse him with crosses, and coniure him with certein words, and then he can neuer come in hell: for all the diuels will runne away from before the crosses, like a dogge before a fliche of bacon. And therefore must hee take vp his lodging, either in the suburbes of hell, or in Purgatorie, where hee shall haue his house hire and firewood free, till such time, as he (with soule Masses and Popes pardons) haue gotten a platte of ground in heauen, to build a house thervp∣pon, of merites and good workes. And this same oyle is of such power, that through it all our sinnes are forgiuen vs, according to that which the Priestes mumble out in their Masse:In the Masse booke. Per istam sanctam vnctio∣nem & piissimam suam misericordiam, indulgeat tibi Deus, quicquid peccasti per visum, per aud itum, odoratum, ta∣ctum, & gustum, &c. that is to say, Tho∣rough this holie oyntment, and by his
meeke mercie, will God forgiue thee all thy sinnes, what soeuer thou hast com∣mitted, by seeing, by hearing, by smel∣ling, by feeling, and by tasting, &c. Consider nowe, what can you looke for more to enioye by the pretious bloud shed∣ding of Iesus Christ the sonne of GOD, than that, which the Priestes doe beare vs in hand to giue vs, by the power and vertue of their holie oyle? These Heretikes may (if they will) hold fst on the offering vp of the bodie and bloud of Iesus Christ: but the good Catholike subiectes of the ho∣lie church of Rome, will in no wise forsake this holie oyntment. We will rather bidde Christ him selfe Adieu, then wee will suf∣fer such a pretious thing to be wroung out of our handes. It is verie true, that these Heretikes doe herein againe mocke with our deare mother the holy Church, saying, that our Priestes are like vnto Apes and Monkies, which will counterfeyte euerie thing that they see done before them, though they haue neither knowledge nor vnderstanding of the matter: and this doe they alledge hereof, because that Marke doeth witnesse,Mark. 6.13. That the Apostles had re∣ceiued the gifte of the holie Ghost, where∣by
they did make the sicke whole with their prayers, and with anointing or lay∣ing on of handes, or by some other appa∣rant token. As it doeth likewise appeare in Paule,1. Cor. 12.2. who amongest other apparant giftes of the holy Ghost, did likewise deale with this gift of making the sicke whole: and he him selfe did shewe a notable token ouer the dead,Act. 20.10. falling vpon the dead car∣case, and embrasing it in his armes: As we reade also of the Prophet Eliseus, who did the like ouer the dead childe,2. Reg. 4.34▪ stretching forth his feete and his handes, and set his mouth directlie on the mouth of the dead, and his eies on the eies of the dead: and so he with these notable tokens, iointlie with his deuoute prayers, did reuiue that dead carcase. But nowe, seeing there are no more such giftes amongst the Congrega∣tion (for that nowe the preaching of the Gospell hath no neede of anie newe esta∣blishing by signes and miracles) therefore will these Heretikes say, that it is but verie Apes plaie, to vse outwarde tokens, where they haue no inwarde power nor might, which may be shewed with the signe or token. For otherwise the Priestes must rubbe all blind mens eies with spitle and
clay, and stretche them selues out vpon all dead carcases: which were a verie beast∣linesse, seeing they haue not the power to make the blinde see, nor to reuiue the dead: neither can they (with their oyle) make a∣nie sicke man whole. And therefore they were better to burne the oyle in their lampes, or grease their bootes withall, ra∣ther than so to dissemble and mocke with God and his word: This talke these He∣retikes haue, when they are gathered toge∣ther: but we doe not passe for them one haire. For when wee shall finde anie of those, that would grease his shoes with that holie oyle or oyntment: yea, if he will not pray vnto it, and worship it vppon his knees, as though it were God him selfe, him we will burne in steade of oyle, and make a good fire of him▪ For we will stand vnto the wordes of Iames, & the example of the Apostles, whether we haue the po∣wer to make whole or no: we go foorth with our matter, euen as we also grease the chil∣drens eyes with clay and spitle, although we haue not the power to make the blinde see: yea, and although the children are not blinde, it is inough for vs that our mother the holie Church hath so ordeined. Not∣withstanding
it is here greatlie to bee no∣ted, that maister Gentianus hath gone about to declare his innocencie herein, saying, that hee did bring this in onelie by manner of example, and as children playe in iest: For otherwise, if it were in earnest, hee would bring in other manner of stuffe: for hee could say so much to the matter, as hee would quicklie stoppe the mouthes of the Heretikes, as men may easilie iudge by his goodlie vt∣terance, and by his great lear∣ning, which doth appeare of him on all partes.
Here doeth followe the declaration vpon the fourth parte of Maister Gentianus Epistle, treating of the praying to images: Howe they are holden and ordeined in the Churche of Rome: And also of this worde or name Idololatria, of the idolatrie of the Hea∣then, of praying to Saintes, and of the Sacrament, with suche other like mat∣ters. The first Chapter. Of the name Idololatria, and that men ought to pray to I∣mages, wth suche prayers as do appertaine vnto those, after whom the images are made. And of the good fe∣lowhippe and agreeing in one, which is betwixt the Iewes and the Churche of Rome, and of the hallowed Agnus Dei. Of inuocating mages looke the 4. leafe and 13. chap. of the 2. parte.THe fourth part is a weigh∣tie matter, and of greate importaunce, which doth make master Gentianus haue an vnquiet minde, as he himselfe doeth say: to wit, That these Heretikes haue no more respect vnto these olde and deuoute Catho∣like men, but for to esteeme them for ser∣uers of false Gods, & worshippers of ima∣ges, and do call them Idololatras that is, Idolaters. Alas, is not that greate pitie?
And are they not maruellous muche to blame?In the coun∣cell holden at Nicen in the 1. session in th Anathema∣tisme. whereas our deare mother the ho∣lie churche can in no wise beare with this name, nor heare of it: but hath finally con∣cluded, commaunded, and ordeined, vpon paine to be banished, accursed, excōmuni¦cated, & anathematized: That no man shall name her Saintes,Idola. by that same Greeke worde Idola, which is asmuch to say, as an image, or likenesse, yea, and hath flat∣lie determined, that from hencefoorth this same worde shall no more be taken properly for images or likenesses made after any man, or other thing to their worship, like as it hath euermore from time to time bene taken and vsed, aswel by the Greekes as Latinistes: but shall now be taken for nothing else, but one∣ly for the false Gods of the Heathen or Iewes, and such images as they hereto∣fore haue vsed in their Temples: Inso∣much that the verie naturall and proper name and similitude of this worde, is wholy transubstantiated, and turned in∣to an other substance and being. And therefore these Heretikes, are ve∣rie much to blame that they will come and plague our most deare mother, yet agayne
anewe, with this worde Idola, & say, that the good Catholike people, and Subiects of the holie church of Rome, are verie I∣dolaters, because they doe greatly esteeme, and woorshippe the images of our Ladie and of other holie Saintes, and doe kisse them and licke them, and trimme them vp, with goodlie garmentes and iewelles, (setting candles burning before them,) be∣cause they cannot see without candles, and cense them with sweete incense, and sing Hymnes and other songs of praises deuout∣ly before them: and because they carrie them about vppon their shoulders, for that they cannot goe themselues, and fall downe vpon their knees before them, and say to them, Our father which art in hea∣uen. They set them vpon Altars, they go to them on Pilgrimage, to gette health and good lucke in their affaires, and doe e∣uen as much worship to them, as the aun∣cient Romanes, and Greekes, or as the Israelites did vnto their false Gods. Nowe vpon this these Heretikes say, that it is verie ill done of them, and will proue them to be verie idolaters and woor∣shippers of false Gods: but the blinde he∣retikes doe not perceiue that our images
are no idolles, but holie Saintes,Images are Saintes whiche doe manie and great miracles. Neither will they vnderstand, howe that our deare mother the holie churche of Rome hath commaunded vs so to doe. For all the holy catholike teachers haue verie friendly and ioyntlie concluded, that all images ought to be worshipped with like worshippe,This historie is writen in the golden Le∣gende. Also in the booke of Le∣ander Albert of Boloigne, which he hath named the de∣scription of I∣talie in the 164. leafe of this booke prin¦ted in the yeare 1550. Item it is writ∣ten by Vincent Lirinensis. And so forth by bro∣ther Bernarde of Luenburgh Doctor of fol∣lie in the 11. parte of the 4. booke called Catalogus Haereticorum. Thomas part .3. Quaest. 25. Arti∣cle. 3. as doth apperteine vnto such, after whome the said images are made, as the good and ho∣lie man Thomas de aquino hath plaine∣ly written. Yea, because that he did handle that matter so exactly, there was a cruci∣fixe in the citie of Naples which spake to him, saying, Gentle Thomas thou hast written well and truely of me, what reward wouldest thou receiue? Where∣vpō he did make answeare to the crucifixe, and saide: I will haue nothing else but euen thy selfe. Now whether the same crucifixe was of Gold, or siluer, (bicause he was so farre in loue with it aboue all other things) that I cannot tell, but I knowe very well, that hee hath written wonderfully for the ad∣uauncement of prayer and woorship to be done to Images: and is for that cause likewise by Pope Iohn the .21. canonized
for a Saint. For he hath concluded (where∣in our deare mother the holy Church doth likewise follow him) that whyle Christ is praied vnto with Latria,Latria. which is to say af∣ter their interpretation, with the spirit as God: men shall likewise pray with Latria vnto his Image, which is with a cole, or with a Pencill painted vpon a wall, and likewise woorship it as God himselfe: if it be so, that it be painted with lōg haire and with a round Trencher behinde his heade, and holding vp his two fingers, and hauing the world with a crosse vpon it in his hand: for euen such a fellowe is the righte Saluator mundi.Bonauentura su∣per senten. lib. 3. dist. 9. quaest. 2. The worshipfull Maister Bonauentu∣ra doth likewise establish this matter: yea all the writers of the sentences haue gene∣rally so ordeined and concluded herevpon, insomuch that these Heretikes ought not now to doubt any more of the matter. Yet it is very true, that Durandus woulde not allowe of it, but did rather directly with∣stād it, saying plainly, that Images ought not to be prayed vnto, with the like honour as those after whome they were made or painted. But all the rest were offended with him, for that he refused to follow the
authorite of the holy church. And perhaps, if he had not written so as hee did, hee had been canonized, as well as Thomas de A∣quino. Notwithstanding that a certeine Spaniard called Perezius, did followe him in that point, saying, That stones and blocks ought not to be praied vnto & wor∣shiped wt Latria, as God, cōsidering they do alway remain stones & blockes,this is reersed by brother Br¦nard of Luzen∣burge & Lean∣der Albert and other besides. how muchsoeuer they be halowed or cōiured by any body. But he is far out of the way in this matter: For first wee knowe, that Saint Thomas de Aquino, was taught by Saint Peter and Saint Paule, so that he coulde not erre, and after that, hath our deare mother accepted his opiniō for the best. And wherfore shuld she not? For, seing that a simple priest can wt fiue words, of a little round cake, make a God: where∣fore I pray you, should not a Bishop or a Suffragane make of a goodly gilded I∣mage a God also? That were to put little trust in our deare mother the holy church. Therfore we must remain stedfast vpō the common opinion and iudgement of our deare mother the holy church of Rome. For a final end, the Heretiks do vs greate wrong to call vs seruers of false Gods,
worshippers of Images and Idolaters, e∣uē as the Iewes do, who cānot find in their hartes, to bestow any honester name vppon vs. And therefore saith Maister Gentia∣nus, that some good people, which see de∣per into the matter, mistrust that these He∣retiks should haue some secret intelligence wt the Iewes: yea, should play bootie & be in pension with them, to maintein frend∣ly conuersation with them, yet he addeth vnto it, that he for his part doth not beleeue any such thing, whereby it seemeth, that he woulde herein a little flatter and annoynte their mouthes with Honie, to please them withall: but it is not so, for hee speaketh in this behalfe, as doth become a good and stoute Catholike subiecte of the holy church of Rome. And besides that, he should haue done these Heretikes a great deale to much worship, if he shoulde haue yoked them in a Waggon, with the na∣tion of the Iewes, who (as wee haue heretofore plainly set foorth) are the very best founders and chiefest fountaines and welsprings of all the ceremonies, and insti∣tutions of the holy Church of Rome. It is verie true, that our deare mother
hath amended them, and brought them in∣to a better order, for that her wisdome and vnderstanding doeth farre exceede the wisedome of Moses and Aaron: And ther∣fore hath shee in place of one temple of So∣lomon, caused to be builded vppon moun∣taines and hilles, and other hie places, a∣boue a hundred thousand: and in place of three or foure altars, which they had, shee hath set vp so manie, that they are not all to be told ouer in seuentie yeres. Although in deede (as before is rehearsed) the exam∣ple and paterne doeth proceede from the Iewes, and is borrowed of them: which shadowes and figures our deare mother hath followed verie diligentlie.Heb. 9. through¦out. Col. 2.17.18. Gal. 4.9.10. and so foorth. Therefore, whereas these Heretikes will (with the Apostle to the Hebrewes) defende and say, that all the figures and shadowes of the olde Testament were en∣ded, and cleane taken away by the com∣ming of Christ, and ought not to be vsed a∣nie more, is rancke heresie. And truelie, they do therby sufficiētlie declare, that they haue no vnderstanding with the Iewes, neither in white nor blacke.The faith of the Iewes out of Moses lawe. For the Iew∣es hold that for the principall article and foundation of their beliefe, to wit, that the
lawe of Moses with all her ceremonies, & figures, shall neuer be taken away, nor al∣tered, but shall continue in her Esse for e∣uer, like as it doeth appeare by their tea∣cher Rabbin Moses Henmaymon, who wrote a booke of the thirteene articles of their beleefe. Ceremonies of the Lutherans.This tendeth likewise as right as a line, against the doctrine of the Luthe∣rans and Zwinglians, who take vppon them to defende stoutlie, that men ought not to vse anie other ceremonies, than onlie such as Christ him selfe and his Apostles haue ordeined. And therefore will not they haue in their tēples anie altars, nor guilte images,1. Cor. 14.29. nor any other such like ceremoni∣all things: but will onlie, when as they are assēbled together, that nothing els shalbe done, than, like as Paule hath taught, af∣ter that euerie one hath soung a Psalme,1. Cor. 11.2.25. or declared some texte of Scripture, or some open declaration or exposition, and all tending to edifying:This is in the decrees chap. vasa. de conse∣cra. dist. 1. And it was the Pro¦uerb of Boni∣fac of the mar∣ters & Bishops. or (as he sath in an other place:) That which we haue recei∣ued of the Lorde, &c. And now they are so grosse, that they doe not note, that it was so, In illo tempore, that is to say: At that time, when there were wodden chalices
and golden Priestes▪ but (as the good martyr Bonifacius, and after him Duran∣dus haue aide) the leafe is now turned: because now wee haue wodden Priestes, and golden Chalices. For now is the au∣thoritie of the Church, and the seruing of God, waxen a great deale ftter, than it was in the time of the Apostles. And ther∣fore can the holie Churche now agree a great deale better with the Iewes. And so haue commaunded verie straightly,Looke the fore∣said Chap. Vasa. In the Decrees and that which followeth. And the councell, Tribur. Can. 9. that there shall no more Masse bee ministred with wodden Chalices, for that God shall not bee moued to wrath in such a thing, wherwith he ought to be pleased, as if they be of golde and siluer, as it hath bene con∣cluded in the Councelles of Triburensis, and Remensis, and so entered in the decre∣tals. For she will (according to the maner of the Iewes) set foorthe her seruing of God brauely with gold and siluer: yea, the more that the religion, and the Gospell doe take o them, the more will shee haue the Iewish maners and ceremonies vsed. So that Maister Gentianus shoulde erre verie fae,Looke ye whole first dist. de con∣secrat in the decrees. if he should goe about to re∣semble the Huguenotes and Caluinistes to the Iewes, who doe agree so well in one
with our deare mother the holie Churche of Rome, that they pisse both in one quill, and haue all studied in one schoole. But these Huguenotes will haue all thinges after their owne minde refourmed accor∣ding to the Gospell, as it was in the time of the Apostles, and therefore wee will let them goe, with a good yeere, and holde vs fast to the Iewes. For our holy father the Pope himselfe doeth beare the Iewes verie good will,A synagoge of Iewes at Rome. and doeth shewe them all the friendshippe he can, or may. He doeth keepe a great many of them, in his citie of Rome, and lettes them haue one or two of the best streetes that bee there. This taske hath authoritie with¦out Italie. But within Italie is a pounde Turnoys chan∣ged to a pound Sterling.Yea, he is fast in their pension: for of euerie Iew that will haue a synagoge in his house, the Pope hath thirtie pounde Turnoys, which is seuen Ducates, and sixe sterlinges: and if they will haue li∣cence to set vppe one openly, then the price is set vppe in the Popes reckoning chamber, at sixtie pounde Turnoys, which is fifteene Ducates. Note what feare∣full blasphemie shoulde it then bee, to say, that the Huguenotes were in pension with the Iewes likewise, for that there∣vppon
it must needes followe, that they shoulde bee companions and brethren with our holy father the Pope: No,The Pope a∣greeth better with Iewes, Turkes, and Heathen, than with Hugue∣notes. no I warrant you, he can agree much better with the Iewes: yea, with the Turkes & Heathen, better than with the Hugue∣notes, which goe about to refourme his holy Sea, according to the Gospell: he can neither abide the sight nor smell of them▪ yea, and the matter is so farre gone, that he woulde allowe them an assemblie and meeting together, as he doeth the Iewes, for a small peece of monie, to the ende that he might sette a  vpon them, and burne them all vppe, where he might catche them, or come handsomely by them. It is most true, that the Iewes doe like∣wise call vs Worshippers of false gods, and idolaters, that is, Prayers to ima∣ges, and doe herein agree with these He∣retikes: but they are therein to bee orne withall. For they haue learned it of olde out of their Bible, and also out of their Prophetes, who knewe nothing at all yet, of the goodly and Hellishe (I forget my selfe, I should haue said holy) or∣dinances of the Popes of Rome: neither
did they vnderstande, that the images must bee prayed vnto and worshipped, euen as the thing, after which they are made and fashioned. For Saint Thomas de Aquino, that heauenly English Doctor, was not yet in place for to teache such thinges, neither had▪ they yet hearde any tidinges of our Saintes, nor of all the miracles which they doe, nor that the milde Empresse Irene had not yet scratcht out her sonnes eyes, to bring to passe (by the good assis∣taunce of the seconde councell of Nice) the woorshipping of images againe. And therefore the Prophetes knewe not yet the difference that is betwixt Latria,Looke the .13. Chap. of the second part. Du∣sia, and Hyperdulia: and therefore did they condemne all such, as did pray to any images, for woorshippers of false goddes, without making any difference or exception betweene the Catholikes and the Heathen. And now, when the Iewes doe reade the same, they thinke that the Prophetes did speake as well of our deare mother the holie Church, as of their forefathers. And then that which the Prophet Ie∣remie saith:Iere. 7.17. That they did offer Cakes
to the Queene of Heauen, that doe they thinke to bee spoken of by suche as call our Ladie, The Queene of Heauen,Queene of Heauen. and doe offer to her Cakes, Flawnes, Tartes, and all kinde of proper thinges, without care. But these heretikes doe knowe bet∣ter▪ yea, their olde shooes doe knowe, that the Prophetes speake to the Iewes, and not to vs. For wee were yet vnborne, and therefore wee may not seeme to take it vp∣pon vs: for he that is not ytchie hath no neede to scratche, and he that is not scab∣bed, hath no neede to clawe. And yet they pretende so, as though they knewe no o∣ther, and doe not forbeare to blare vs out for woorshippers of false goddes, and ido∣laters: therefore shall not they goe free wt the Iewes. And it is not to be thought, that they shoulde haue any secrete confe∣rence with the Iewes, as Maister Genti∣anus hath verie learnedly considered and noted, yet hath he dealt verie grossely in one point, where he doth so spitefully blame the Iewes, for their golden Calfe, saying,Golden Calfe. that our deare mother the holie Church of Rome hath neuer beene brought vnto so great a follie as that. Truely, if this had not proceeded from him euen of a pure and
simple Catholike zeale, it might almost be taken for a blasphemie and an heresie. For although it bee verie true, that the holie Churche hath no golden Calfe: yet hath shee not therefore forgotten to follow herein the trace and footesteppes of the Iewes, her good schoolemaisters. For in place of that that Aaron the high Priest once halowed the golden Calfe, our deare mother hath ordeined and set foorth, that the Pope of Rome (who vndoubtedly is established in Aarons place) shall yeerely hallow and blesse a certeine number of lambes of waxe, which he doeth call Ag∣nus Dei,Agnus Dei. that is to say, The lambe of God: or, The sonne of God, which hath taken away the sinnes of the worlde: and being slaine as a lambe for vs, hath released vs from the bondage of the di∣uell, euen as Aaron and the Iewes did name their Calfe: The God which had deliuered them out of the slauerie of the land of Aegypt. And now, although that a Calfe is better than a lambe, and golde of muche greater value than waxe: yet our holie father the Pope of Rome hath suche a
notable deuise of Alcamistrie, that he will for these lambes bring good fatte Oxen into his kitchin, and lumpes of golde which will not bee muche lesse woorthe than the golden Calfe of the Iewes: for the power of these lambes is so great, that it is vnspeakable. And that may be per∣ceiued out of the Latine verses whiche Pope Vrban did once send with fiue such Agnus Dei, to the Emperour of Graecia,In the booke called Ceremo∣niale Roman. Eccle. for a great and solemne present, whiche verses are these that followe: Balsamus, & munda cera, cum Chrismatis vnda, Conficiunt Agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum: Fonte velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum: Fulgura de sursum depellit, & omne malignum. Peccatum frangit, vt Christi sanguis, & angit. Praegnans seruatur, simul & partus liberatur. Dona defert dignis, virtutem destruit ignis.
Portatus munde, de fluctibus eripit vndae▪ That is to say: Balme, virgin waxe, and holie water, an Agnus Dei make: A gift than which none can be greater, I send for thee to take. From founteine cleare the same hath issue, in secrete sanctifide: All these ver∣tues are ascri∣bed to the Ag∣nus Dei, or lamb of God.Aynst lightening it hath souereigne vertue, and thunder crackes beside. Each heinous sinne it weares and wasteth, euen as Christes precious blood: And women whiles their trauell lasteth, it saues, it is so good. It doeth bestowe great giftes and graces, on such as well deserue: And borne about in noysome places, from perill doeth preserue. The force of fire, whose heate destroyeth, it breakes and bringeth downe: And he or she that this enioyeth, no water shall them drowne. Now my maisters, how like you this sauce? Let vs now see, if the golden calfe of the Iewes had such might and power. No, that was farre from home. Neither do the Iewes ascribe anie such thing to
their calfe: but did euen simplie thinke▪ see∣ing Moses was away, that they wold haue some apparant thing before their eyes, which should put them in remembrance of their deliuerance by God: and therefore they did call it, The God which had de∣liuered them out of the land of Aegypt, as our mother the holie church doeth like∣wise cōmonlie say, by an old rotten blocke▪ Behold, there is your God, which was hanged vppon the crosse for you: or, There is our Ladie which hath done great miracles. So that their Calfe is not to be compared with our Agnus Dei. But nowe, seeing the Iewes do knowe nothing of all this, neither do vnderstande of what power this is: therefore may they iustlie thinke, that their golden Calfe and our Agnus Dei, are both children of one mo∣ther. So that Maister Gentianus had done much better (speaking vnder correc∣tion) that he had not so quicklie and spite∣fullie blamed them for that matter: least nowe they should say, that the potte doeth blame the kettell for being so blacke with smoke.
The ii. Chapter. That the sacrament of the Altar must be prayed vnto, o∣therwise Christ were no God.. Looke also the 4.5. and 6 cap. of the 2. part.ANd nowe, proceeding to the conclusi∣ons which Maister Gentianus doeth adde herevnto, which (I assure you) are ve∣rie fine and spiteful wittie, & is a very lear∣ned piece, which the schoolemasters of Lo∣uen call Argumentum cornutum, that is to say, A cornet or horned Argument, be∣cause he doeth herewith thrust all the Hu∣guenotes as farre backwards, as a lustie yong oxe would crushe Paules steeple in pieces with his hornes. Marke nowe, this is his argument: If the sacrament of the Altar were not prayed vnto, then were Christ no God: and now Christ without all dout is God: Ergo these Huguenots must needes be damnable Samosatenes, which denie the Godhead of Christ. That hitteth as iumpe as sixe fingers in a gloue: For the holie church hath once for all resolutelie concluded, That the breade of the sacramēt, is the verie body of Christ, as long and as broad as it did hang vppon the crosse. Then it must needes followe, that whosoeuer doth not beleeue that, doth therewith also not beleeue, that Christ is
God: or else must men needes say, that the Church of Rome hath erred, which were so daungerous a matter, as would make the brisles of a wilde Bore to stand on end. It is verie true, that Christ did not com∣maund vs to praye to it, but said simplie, Take, eate, &c. And neither Saint Paul▪ nor anie of the Apostles did euer knowe of anie praying to it. But what is that to the purpose? Seeing men are sufficientlie in∣formed, that they had not yet that power to make goodlie pixes, or sacrament hou∣ses, to laie him in, and to carie him some∣time about in procession vnder a Canopie of silke: The followers were then to many: they had not the leasure nor time: nei∣ther was the dearelie beloued and eldest daughter of our deare mother the holie church of Rome as yet borne, to wit,Peruse the 4. chap. of the 2. part. Tran∣substantiation. But as soone as that bles∣sed babe was brought into the worlde, by the meane & faithfull helpe of that good middewife called, Theologia Sophistica, and was nourished vppe with the sweete milke of her deare mamme and nourse Concomitantiae, then came first in sight iointlie withall, The praying to the sacra∣ment: and then they lodged their God in
the halfe moone, and shut him in a goodlie golden cofer or pixe, till the time that hee should goe abroad with the Giant in the procession to quicken his spirites a little, and then they will daunse before the Bride with a fife & a drumbe. And thus doth this wittie conclusion and argument of Master Gentianus proponing remaine so fast and firme, as a reede, which is shaken to and fro with all windes. The iii. Chapter. Of praying to images, and especiallie to the crosse, and of the great power and aduantage of the crosse. Touching this turne also to the 1. chap. of the 4. part.NOwe, after the praying vnto shapen goddes, hee doeth begin againe with praying to images, and to the crosse, which is from the Oxe to the Asse: and surelie, he hath conceiued that verie wiselie, where he saith, That we may not pray to the crosse, as to a creature, or to a similitude or like∣nesse: For there was neuer anie man so frantike or madde, which would pray to a∣nie thing in steade of God, as a bare and simple creature: yea, the Iewes thēselues (as we haue seene) when they did pray vn∣to their golden calfe, did it not in worship of the golden creature, as a creature: but
in remembrance of him which had broght them out of the lande of Egypt: as they well witnessed them selues, in naming it by the name of him, after whom they had made it. The like haue the Heathen al∣wayes done: and in consideration thereof, they did call their images, idols, or simu∣lachra, that is to say, Likenesses or ima∣ges, because they did (in making them) attribute vnto them the power of God. And therefore did the Egyptians pray vn∣to those creatures, wherein they perceiued best Gods goodnesse to bee declared to∣wardes vs, as Oxen and Kine, the Sunne and the Moone, and other creatures, wher∣in they founde anie speciall helpe or com∣fort: as is to be seene by Iustinus, Athena∣goras, Arnob. August. Lactan. Eusebius, Orosius, and other such like, which haue written against them: and verie notorious∣lie out of Esaie, who speaking against the Iewes, said, That God by his eternall and vnspeakeable power did make hea∣uen and earth. And then he doth demaūd of them: Like vnto whom then will you make God? Or wherwith will you make his image? Giuing them thereby plainly to vnderstand, that they did not praye to
their blockes and stockes onelie as simple creatures, but that they did (through such resemblances & likenesses) thinke to haue an image, and so a remembrance of God: euen as Maister Gentianus doeth here likewise alledge. And it was also thus con∣cluded in the second Councell of Nice. For sure,Looke the 13. chap. of the 2. pt. a calfe may conceiue and see, that our deare mother the holie church hath this discretion, as well as the idolatrous Iew∣es and Heathen. It may well happen, that some simple people, and olde deuoute wiues do esteeme that blocke or stocke it selfe (where it standeth) for a verie God: especiallie, when he beginneth to laugh vpon them, or els to weepe bitter teares for great pitie. But what then? That is satis¦fied by their good intents and deuout mea∣nings, which the holie church doth applie to the best. Yet notwithstanding, her owne ground and foundation is no other, but e∣uen the same groūd of the Iewes and Hea∣then. Alwayes excepted and to bee conside∣red,The Image of the crosse pray∣ed vnto. that the image of the Crosse hath a speciall prerogatiue before all other ima∣ges & likenesses: for it is like to the Sex∣tons Cowe, and therefore may grase in the churchyard: and she is by our deare mother
prayed vnto with a three folde deuotion more than other. But now, that I do not forget the crosse of pardons, which is commonly set vp in the church, when anie bulles or letters of pardon are come down from Rome: which crosse hath euen such power (vnlesse men will make the Popes Legates ranke li∣ers) as the offring vp of the body & bloud of Iesus Christ vpon the crosse for our sinnes. And yet we must besides al this, pray vnto and worship all small or ordinarie crosses with Latria, that is to say, with such wor∣ship, as doeth apperteine vnto God onelie: acording to the order & cōmon rule of their schoole here before rehearsed & spoken of. After this now, the verie wood of the crosse which came from Hierusalem,Iohn Tekel the Popes Legate, and after that Bishop of Mentz, did preach this at Franckfort, anno 1517. Latria. Read the wri∣ters of Sent. which haue al∣together con∣cluded this af∣ter this maner. and which Christ was crucified vpon, must bee by vs worshipped as a creature for it owne pro∣per worthines, & praied vnto with Hyper∣dulia, that is, wt such worship, as is ascri∣beth vnto the virgin Marie▪ especiallie cō∣sidering the great miracle that is thervp∣on to be seene: which is, that it is so waxen & increased, that the pieces thereof would lade a good Hulke. And lastly, in reuerence of the most holie crosse, we must worship al
other tokens & similitudes of the same▪ Wherein our louing mother doeth attri∣bute great preheminence to the holy crosse in respect of that which shee doeth shewe towardes all the reliques and holy things. True it is, that (most deuoutlie) she doeth worshippe a heape of speares, wherwithal Christ his side was pearced, and twoo or three dosen of the verie same nailes, which our Sauiour was nailed with on the crosse: yea, shee hath also ordeined a holie day in uerence of the same, and hath appointed a speciall Masse for it: namelie, In festo Lanceae & Clauorum Domini. And then greetes the same most friendlie with a Sonnet,The feast of the Speare & Nailes of Christes pas∣sion. wherein shee singeth thus: Aue ferrum triumphale, Intrans pectus tu vitale, Coeli pandis ostia, Fecundata in cruore, Foelix Hasta nos amore, Per te fixi saucia, &c. with the rest that followeth, which in our tongue might thus be englished: All hayle, O Speare triumphant, which pearcing Christ his side, Commaundedst as thy seruant, heauen gates to open wide:
O happie Speare and blessed, dyde Crimson red in blood, Of loue saue vs distressed, vouchsafe to be so good, &c. Thereafter hath she yet foure or fiue of the right sponges, wherewithall Christ was refreshed with vineger,Sponges. which she deuout∣lie doeth licke and kisse, and reserues for a singular relique. Moreouer, shee hath the verie naturall tayle of the Asse whereon he rode,The Asse taile. The Manger. and the same Manger wherein hee laie, whereof she makes great store. But what is all this to be compared by the re∣uerence which she doeth shewe to the holie Crosse? For admit shee doeth worship fiue or sixe Speares, and some Nailes, yet will she not worship all the speares, which are vsed in the warres, nor all the nailes which are made in the smithes forges, nor all the sponges which growe in the sea, nor yet al the tailes wherewith the asses are couered behind, nor all the mangers wherein hor∣ses haue their prouender, (like as she doth permit to worship all the crosses which can be made) for then you should counter∣feite the Ape to nigh: yet may it seeme strange to some, whether all other reliques or holy things haue pist against the moone
because they cannot atteine to the like pre∣ferment. For all the roddes of right might challenge the same priuilege, in worship of the rod wherewith Christ was scourged, and al ropes in worship of that with which he was bound, & all haithornes in worship of the thornes wherewith he was crowned. But it behoues them to be content wt their portion, for they are sufficientlie prouided for: & if sobeit the holy church doth please to attribute more to the crosse, it proceedes of her meere liberalitie, and of the special loue which shee doeth beare to the same, which for the same cause shee reuerenceth more than the verie body of Christ, which did hang on the crosse, or than his bloud which he hath spilt on the crosse. For wee can not perceiue, that in reuerence of the bodie of Christ, all bodies, & much lesse, all similitudes or likenesses of the bodie are had in reuerence or worship: like as not on∣lie all crosses, but all figures & likenesses of the crosse are worshipped, reuerenced, kist, and lickt in reuerence of that onelie crosse whereon his bodie did hang. But it hath thus pleased our louing mother the holie church: and not without most great and waightie occasions: for without doubt, the likenes of the holie crosse is of
of such great power & singular vertue, that the deuill doeth take it for a bulbegger, and flies from it, as a dogge doeth from a piece of bacon. Like as euidentlie ap∣peareth in the golden Legend of Saint Christopher: and in a number of other legendes, where almost for feare hee be∣raied his breech, so soone as a crosse was made. And it is also the cudgell where∣with he was once beaten, like as wee may plainlie see on all altars, & in processions, where our Sauiour is counterfeited knoc∣king with a crosse vpon the gates of hell, at which all the deuils runne awaye as though they were possessed. Moreouer, it is the token with the which God hath created heauen & earth: and that is it which Esai would say (according to the expositiō of our holy mother the church) saying thus: Who hath holden the waters in his fist? Who hath measured heauen with his spanne, & hath comprehended all the worlde in their measures? Who hath wayed the mountaines & hilles in a balance? Which is to say, that God did (with three fingers) make a crosse, when hee created heauen and earth. Item, our holie mother the church saith besides, That
Moses did with the figure of the crosse change the bitternes of the waters in the wildernesse, and caused the water to flowe out of the stonie rocke. And al∣though the scripture doth not make menti∣on of anie crosse, but onelie of a rod wher∣withall Moses did strike: yet our mother the holy church hath thus expounded the same, supposing that Moses did the like to the Bishops now, who with their staffe do make a crosse & so blesse the people. Shee hath also fained, that those which do sprin∣kle their thresholdes with the bloud of the Paschal lambe, & theron set the figure of a crosse, that the striking Angel by meanes of the crosse doeth passe by it, like as wee haue out of their sequences, (which they vpon the crosse dayes, named Inuentio S. crucis, signe) here aboue rehearsed. Be∣sides that, the same which Ezechiel doeth mention of Tau,Ezech. 9.4. Tau is an He∣brew word, sig∣nifying with vs a token. For that which E∣zech. doeth call Tau, that doeth Iohn expounde for a seale, Apo. 7.3. that is to say, of the token or seale, which is set vpon the foreheads of the elect, therof hath she also made a crosse: albeit that the letter Tau doth resemble the figure of the crosse no more then an aple doth an oyster: for the one is written thus, ת & the other thus, ✚: notwithstanding she doth not take the matter so neere: wee
must (for clownes) sift meale through a lattice, and set them packing after the homeliest sort, then may they bake their bread as they list. This once is the issue, that all cursing and coniuring, all hallow∣ing and blessing, al mysteries and cōsecra∣tions must be made with crosses. The holy Masse is likewise ful of crosses from one end to another: sometimes with two at once to saue both bodie and soule, or to change both breade and wine: some∣time with three together, in worshippe of the Father, Sonne, and holie Ghost: some∣time with fiue at once, in reuerence of the fiue woundes of Christ Iesus. The blessed holie water is made with crosses, the waxe candles, the salt, the holy oyle, the palmes,Thom. de Aquin. in the epositiō of the Masse. Gudo de monte Roch. in Encheir. sacerd or the Pamphlet of Priestes, in the title De Sac. Euc. Seeke alo Du∣randus and In∣nocent, for they do expounde these crosses al∣so in like man∣ner. the Agnus Dei, the holie ashes, and all the implementes pertaining to the Priestes, are created with crosses: yea the Priestes themselues without crosses cānot be made Priestes. In al processions the crosse must go before. Vpon all bables, toyes & sacra∣ment boxes must stand a crosse, least the di∣uell should put in his nose: yea, vppon all wafers & trinkets, vpon churches & vppon steeples, & also vpon coine, & vpon Māmo∣na iniquitatis, a crosse must simper.
To conclude, the crosse hath an oare in euerie boate, and hath a place in all the ce∣remonies perteining to the holie Church of Rome. There can not a Pageant bee plaied, but shee must haue a part: yea, a Nunne durst scarse let a fyste, but shee must blesse her selfe with a crosse. And the Priestes are neuer worse at ease, than when they haue neuer a crosse in their purse. Therfore, it is not without great & vrgent occasion, that our holie mother doth holde the crosse in such honour: in so much as she hath for her sake, ordeined and insti∣tuted three or foure holy or festiual dayes, as namelie, Inuentio crucis, Rogatio∣num, Exaltatio crucis, and other such like.Looke the 16. chap. of the 2. She hath also a speciall Masse in ho∣nour of the holie crosse, which shee names, Missa de sancta cruce: and a seruice cal∣led, Officium de sancta cruce. And be∣sides she hath more ordeined and charged,Looke the 16.2. that we should vpon the good Friday after Maunday thursday, deuoutlie and sadlie creeping along the ground vpon our bare knees, worship the crosse, and there bestow a good fat offering, and liberall almes to the benefit and maintenance of the poore Priestes, so that they with crosses in their
purses, might be preserued against the di∣uell. Wherevnto she hath franklie giuen a great heape of pardons to those which with great deuotion do the same. For shee doeth esteeme and beleeue, that the crosse hath no lesse force than the bloud of Iesus Christ the sonne of God. For behold, these are the wordes with the which shee cau∣seth the crosse to be consecrated or hallow∣ed. Oramus te Domine sancte pater, &c. vt digneris benedicere hoc lignū crucis tuae, vt sit remedium salutare generi hu∣mano, sit soliditas fidei, bonorū operum profectus, & redemptio animarum: sit solamen & protectio, ac tutela contra saeua iacula inimicorum, &c. That is: We beseech thee, O Lord heauenlie fa∣ther, that thou wilt so blesse this wood of the crosse, that it may be a healthfull help to mankind, a cōfirming or streng∣thening to faith, a furtherance to good works, and a redemption of soules: that it may be our comfort, our safegard & defender against the noysome dartes of the enimies, &c. What can we ascribe more to Christ Ie∣sus the sonne of God for the helpe & conso∣lation
of man, than our mother the holie church doeth ascribe here vnto the crosse? yea all that Christ hath euer done, & all the good which can be thought, that hath shee in like manner attributed to the figure of the crosse. For these be her wordes: Ista suos fortiores Semper facit, & victores, Morbos sanat & languores, Reprimit daemonia. Dat captiuis libertatem, Vitae confert nouitatem, Ad antiquam dignitatem, Crux reduxit omnia. O Crux lignum triumphale, Mundi vera salus vale, Inter ligna nullum tale, Fronde▪ flore, germine: Medicina Christiana, Salua sanos, aegros sana, Quod non valet vis humana, Fit in tuo nomine, &c. That is to say: It makes her souldiers excellent, and crowneth them with victorie, Restores the lame and impotent, and healeth euerie maladie, The diuels of hell it conquereth,
releaseth from imprisonment, Newnesse of life it offereth, it hath all at commaundement. O Crosse of wodde incomparable, to all the world most holesome: No wodde is halfe so honourable, in branche, in bud, or blossome, O medicine which Christ did ordaine, the sound saue euerie houre, The sicke and sore make whole againe, by vertue of thy poure. And that which mans vnablenesse, hath neuer comprehended, Graunt by thy name of holinesse, it may be fully ended, &c. Beholde, here may you see that Christ Iesus is depriued of his right, & the same is giuen to a wodden Crosse, so that it is not without iust cause, that the Catholike children of our holie mother the Churche doe name themselues seruantes and slaues of the Crosse, singing thus: Serui crucis crucem laudent, qui per crucem sibi gaudent, Vitae dari munera, dicant omnes, dicant singli: Aue salus totius soecli, arbor salutifera:
That is to say: The seruantes of the holie Crosse, her praise to heauen let them tosse. And they which in the Crosse reioyce, and of the giftes of life haue choyce, Let this of all, both old and young, in solemne sort be said and soung, O holie Crosse which canst preuaile, O tree of life, All haile, All haile. Therefore neither is it any maruell, that she doeth call vpon it so deuoutly, and prayeth that it may defend vs from all ad∣uersitie, crying with a shrill voyce: Ecce lignum crucis, venite, adoremus, That is to say: Beholde, here is the wood of the crosse, come let vs worshippe it. And also, O crux spes vnica, auge pijs iustiti∣am, dona reis veniam, That is to say: O holie Crosse our onely hope, increase righteousnesse to the godly, and pardon the offences of the wicked. It is no won∣der neither, that she doeth so friendly flatter and coll it euen like as the shee Ape doeth her young ones, with all manner of plea∣sure shee can deuise. For shee doeth speake vnto it, and doeth commend it as though it had great vnderstanding. For this is it which they say:
Dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulcia ferens pondera: quod solum fuisti dig∣num sustinere Regem coelorum & Do∣minum. That is to say: O sweete wood, which diddest beare a sweete burthen, fastened vnto thee with sweete nailes, which wast reputed worthie, thou alone aboue all other, to beare the King of Heauen the Lorde Ie∣sus. With other sonnets, sounding all vpon the same tune, which shee singeth deuoutly in Gang weeke. And to the end that none should maruell hereat, Maister Gentia∣nus doeth here shew, that all this is foun∣ded vpon the Scripture, the which he doth confirme by these wordes of Paule, God forbid that I should reioyce,Gala. 6.14. but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ: for by this Crosse doth not he vnderstand the sa∣tisfaction and saluation which it brought vnto vs by the Passion and death of our Sauiour Iesus Christ (for that vnderstan∣ding is hereticall) but onely the figure and bare likenesse of the Crosse, like as our deere mother the holie Churche hath ex∣pounded it, ordeining and commaunding that these foresaide wordes of Paule, bee
song vpon the day called Inuentio sanctae Crucis, with open voyce ouer the figure & likenesse of the Crosse. And in deede it is to bee thought, that this is the iust mea∣ning of Paule: for otherwise if he had ta∣ken it so, like as these Heretikes will in∣terprete it, what else might ensue thereof, then all manner of anguish and sorrowe, persecution and trouble?Gala. 3.13. Deut. 21.23. Which is all to∣gether vnderstoode by the Crosse of Iesu Christ, which was a kind of shamefull and detestable death, as the gallowes is with vs. Verely Maister Gentianus nor the Prelates of the holie Church conceiue no great pride in such a manner of Crosse: but they gladly post it ouer to the Heretikes and Huguenotes, against whom common∣ly they crie, Crucifige, crucifige, Hang them vp, hang them vp. But the figure and holy token of the crosse formed of gold or siluer, is the onely hope, trust, and staie of the holie Churche of Rome, & of all her subiectes. For it bringeth her in good rentes, and maketh continually a warme kitchen and a plentifull table. Therefore must we (doubtlesse) vnderstand Paule so, to the end his text may agree with the fore∣said sonnet of the holie Church.
But touching Maister Gentianus, in that he is here angrie, and rores against the Heretikes, saying: It is a diuelishe mockerie, that the Heretikes regard not to aske, whether we will fraie away flis, when wee make a signe of the Crosse with three fingers. Therein hath he not (in my iudgement) any great reason, so to disturbe himselfe. For seeing that with a token of the crosse we fraie away diuels: what maruell is it then with the same to driue away flies, which in comparison are nothing so wicked as diuels? How∣beit they doe oftentimes shamefully be∣shite the Sacrament boxe, yea the God himselfe, which dwelles therein, and often∣times do disturbe the deuotion of Priestes in their Memento, and when they stande dreaming in their secretes. Verily that is not to be compared by the diuelles. But Zele and feruent affection hath caused our Gentianus thus to speake. And from the flies doth he retire againe to the images, for those in no sauce can he forget, but will defende them by vertue of the second coun∣cell of Nicen. But because wee haue here∣of spoken sufficiently before, wee will not trouble the reader therewith any further.
The .iiii. Chapter. Of the worshipping of Saintes, and how their charges and offices are bestowed to eache a part, and special∣ly of our holie Ladie of Loretto, and further of the a∣greement and disagreement which is betweene the atholikes and the Heathen. FOrwardes he doth proceede from the images,Saintes. and falles to the worshipping of Sainctes, which are those holie ones which are departed this worlde into hea∣uen, and saith, That they are not worship∣ped of our louing mother the holie Church as goddes, but they are prayed vnto onely that they will make intercession for vs. For albeit that Saint Paule saith, There is but one God,1. Tim. 2.5. and one intercessour, betwixte God and man, namely Iesus Christ: yet that must bee vnderstoode of those days, when the holy father the Pope of Rome had not yet canonized any Saintes, neither commaunded, that wee should erect any altars or Churches for them,In the councell of Nice, in the councel of Tren Peter Lom∣barde in the▪ 4 booke of Senten.. dist. 45. Bna∣uent. dist. eadem arti. 2. reade Masses, or offer giftes, and by their merites to craue pardon for our sinnes. For since that time hath the holy Church concluded in sundrie her Coū∣cels, that they should also be our Attur∣nies, Intercessours, or Mediatours: and that wee should crie to them at all times
of our neede. Yea she hath prescribed to eache his charge, like as vppon Twelfe Eeue, euerie one is appointed his office by drawing of lottes: Our Ladie hath gotten the beane out of the Cake, and the Queene of Heauen is their hope, their staie, the gate of heauen, the Queene and mother of mercies, Mo∣ther of compassion, their life, their plea∣sure, and their onely Mediatour & Ad∣uocate. In summe, there is no other refuge or present staie, than she alone, like as they with expresse wordes doe dayly sing in their prayers and thankesgeuing in their Christi virgo dilectissima, their Aue Ma∣ria stella: O intemerata: Stabat mater, and many other pretie pageantes, whiche our holy fathers the Popes of Rome them selues haue made, and with manie par∣dons haue trimly adorned and set out: but in especiall in their Salue Regina. Yea, they beseeche her in one of her prayers, which they call Prosas, that she will, by her motherly authoritie, commaunde Christ Iesus the true and euerlasting God, and shewe by the date, that shee is the mother. Moreouer they beseeche her also that shee
will accept and receiue them in the last houre of death,Looke ye church songue begin∣ning Aue prae∣clara maris stella. Also looke the Masse bookes and the seruice of our Ladie Marie, her Ro∣sarium, Hortulus animae: the .7. tydes, and o∣ther Popish bookes, which are replenished with such pranckes. and to defende them from their foes in the prayer called Maria ma∣ter gratiae, &c. After that, all whatsoeuer is spoken in the worthie song of Solomon, named Cantica canticorum, of Christ the sonne of God & of his louing spouse, name∣ly, the commonaltie of the faithfull: Also, all whatsoeuer Esaias hath prophesied of the sprigge, which should spring out of the roote of Iesse: & of the same which should crush the old crooked snake, that doe they all expound and declare of her: Yea also the selfe same first promise, which God made to our forefather Adam, saying: That the seede of the woman, should grinde in peeces the head of the Serpent, That hath our holy mother the Church of Rome aduisedly expounded of Marie. And there∣fore in place where there stoode, He shall grinde, hath shee set, Shee shall grinde, as being spoken, not of Christ Iesu the sonne of God, but of Marie herselfe, which should be the promised seede. In summe, all the worshippe which in the scripture is attri∣buted to Christ Iesu the euerlasting sonne of God, the same hath she bequeathed vn∣to our Ladie. And therefore will shee (be∣sides
so many holy dayes as are instituted and ordeined for worshipping of her, that we shall notwithstanding celebrate and keepe holie the Saturdayes for her, to the ende she may at least haue as much pre∣ferment as her sonne Iesus Christ to whō the Sundayes are attributed. Howbeit, for all that vppon the Sundayes, Offici∣um beatae Mariae, that is, The seruice which is done for her worshippe must not be forgotten. And hereof is it,This doth B∣nardinus Ochi∣nus rehearse in his Apologio. Graie friers. that once at Venice was great heuinesse towards. For when the Graie friers had preached vppon S. Francis day, the vnspeakable great par∣dons and merites, which might be got∣ten euerie yeere, if so be that the people woulde celebrate that day in their Church by hearing Masses, and offering large giftes, whereby they gathered great summes of monie: The Blacke friers enuying the same did take vppon them to preache,Blacke friers. that it was not neede∣full to tarrie a whole yeere for S. Francis day, to merite pardons, seeing they might haue them euerie Saturday bet∣ter cheape, if they would resort to their Patronesse: namely, our Ladie euerie
weeke, and in honour of her, bestow their deuotion in their Cloyster, where∣by they preuailed so much, that the peo∣ple did wholy forsake Saint Francis, and bequeathed themselues to our Ladie, and the Blacke friers beganne by this meanes to bee verie riche, and to make good fatte brues.Croutched Friers. But when the Crout∣ched friers enuying this, would also preache, that the generall pardon might (not onely from weeke to weeke, but al∣so from day to day) be merited, in most abundant maner, if so be it that the peo∣ple would come to celebrate and reue∣rence the crosse of Christ daily in their Cloyster, for as much as Christ by his crosse and passion had purchased such a large remission and pardon of all mens sinnes, that they needed not to tarrie for the Saturday, and much lesse for S. Francis day, neither yet to runne after any other Saintes, when as they might draw water out of the fountaine it selfe: whereat all the friers together waxed so wrothe▪ that they procured by the Sig∣noie of Venice, that these Croutched-friers should be musseled, & forbidden to preache so any more, as beeing a
matter most hurtfull to all Saintes, and especially to our welbeloued mother of God, which by the Catholikes is wor∣shipped, & who was verie wofull to be so forsaken, by meanes of following her sonne. So as it is not without occasion, that our welbeloued mother the holie Church, hath foresene this matter so dis∣cretely, ordeining that she should at least deserue as much deuotion and reue∣rence, as Christ Iesus himselfe. For this their Ladie is desirous of glo∣rie, and verie fonde of such deuotion:This storie is set foorth in the Churche of Lo¦reta, & affirmed in the historie of eander Al∣bert of Bullin, called The de∣scription of I∣tal, where he is writing of Recanati. which euidently appeareth by her clo∣set, wherein she was borne and bred. For when the Iewes did first cleaue to the faith of Mahomet (gesse when this was) then did shee ordeine, that the Angels should remoue her closet from the foū∣dation, standing in Nazareth, and beare it through the aire into the countrie of Slauonie: But when shee perceiued that she was not sufficiently honoured there, as she did looke for, then did shee most speedily cause the Angels to remoue the same closet to a hill in the countrie of Recanati, in a wood, which apperteined to a good womā named Loretta: wher∣by
she is yet called at this day, Our La∣die of Loretta, howbeit, she could not abide to staie there long, for that (by reason of the great accesse of people) many murders and robberies chanced: for which cause she remoued againe, & caused her closet to be borne vnto an o∣ther mounteine or hill, which appertei∣ned vnto two brethren, which for the lucre or gaine which they receiued by her, fell at variance, & agreed like dogs and cattes together, so that she would a∣freshe remoue againe: and seemed in a manner to haue a flie in her taile, being vnable to remaine in one place. In sum, the Angels did remoue this closet again from thence, and did bring it vppon a common highway, where it doth yet re∣main to this houre, without any ground hold or foundations, by reason that the foundations were left at Nazareth. And now it is compast in and preserued with bulworkes & strong walles, which not∣withstanding dare not touche the holie closet, through feare & reuerence which they beare to the same. And for proofe that this is true, doth first appeare hereby, That our Ladie
did appeare to a deuoute man in a dreame,This demon∣stration is also written in the Church of Lo∣ret, and is re∣pead by Le∣ander Albert. and hath manifested all these thinges vnto him, and he hath declared all the same to the commons of Reca∣nati, the which (therevpon) did forth∣with send .xvi. chosen men to Hierusa∣lem, to inquire for the certeintie hereof. To be briefe, they haue found the foun∣dations yet standing there of the same closet, so that there remaines no more doubt to be had in this matter. Secondly, a certeine holie Heremite (about two houres before day) did see a great light descending from heauen, (in likenesse to fire) which lighted vpon this Churche, and it was twelue foote high, and sixe foote broade: so that vn∣doubtedly it must needes be our Ladie, which came to take viewe of her feast, and solemnization: for this happened vpon the day of her birth, the eight day in September, in those dayes, when dumbe beastes spake, and houses did lie. And then did the cocke crowe, and it waxed day. Lastly, wee may easily discerne this same, by so many, yea many godly mira∣cles which shee euen there hath shewed
vppon those whiche (in their neede) did call vnto her, out of so many faire pic∣tures and costly monumentes, whiche were lefte there in her holie Churche, by sundrie Emperours, Kinges, Dukes, and all other sortes of people to an euer∣lasting memorie. This is no mocking matter: For the Pope of Rome was wont yeerely to receiue hereby about a hundreth thousande Ducates, (howbeit, that now the rent is greatly abated.) And therefore is it, that he doeth cause it to be so diligently kepte, and so strongly in∣uironed with walles, appointing al∣wayes a Cardinall for safe keeping of it, and aboute foure or fiue dozen Can∣nons and Chaplines, which vsually ob∣serue to doe her diuine seruice, and keepes her from Theeues▪ and Robbers, from Spiders, from flies, Mothes, and other her enimies. The whiche is so true, that who so dare but once doubte of it, the same is reputed and presented for an Heretike: like as is manifested by the example of Petri Pauli Vergerij, which for the same cause, was once in the han∣des and examination of the Inquisitours. Whereby wee may sufficiently gather,
that this Ladie is greatly desirous of glorie and honour, and coueteth to bee accepted and worshipped for the Queene of Heauen, and also to haue the preemi∣nence before all the Saintes of Para∣dise: For shee is of an other disposition than the holy Virgin Marie (the mother of Iesus Christ) was,Luke. 1.48. who did acknow∣ledge her selfe to bee a poore handmaide of God, and did direct those which nee∣ded any thing vnto her sonne Iesus Christ. But this standes bedeckt and garnished with Golde and Siluer like a Queene,Iohn. 2.5. and willes that we should reuerence and a∣dore her clothes and iewels, her Chur∣ches and Chappels, her gilded cofers and other her furniture, vtensiles, and imple∣mentes, like vnto the euerlasting and li∣uing God. To conclude, the holie Church hath made her Queene. After this,Offices of Saintes. hath shee also mustred all o∣ther Saintes, and hath assigned and ap∣pointed to each his sundrie charge and se∣uerall office a pat. Each hath his holy day, his sundrie Collect, holy Hymnes and deuout praiers: euerie one doth know ouer what handicraft or science, ouer which di∣sease, ouer what towne or Church he is ap∣pointed
to be patrone, defender, and Baal▪ The Dutche are vnder the defence of Saint George. The Burgonians holde Saint Andrewe for their Patrone. The Frenchmen Saint Michael. The Spani∣ardes Saint Iames. And further, Saint Peter and Saint Paule are troden in the place of Romulus and Remus, and de∣fend the Citie of Rome with a key and a sworde. Saint Markes Lion is Pa∣trone ouer the towne of Venice, Saint George on cockehorse ouer Genua, Saint Ambrose with his staffe and whippe in hand ouer Millain, the three Kings ouer Cullin, Saint Dionis keepes the towne of Paris, Saint Goele doeth keepe scoute watche at Brussels, Saint Baue and S. Louell doe loue the towne of Gaunt, Saint Romboute doth keepe the garrison at Machelin, Saint Lam∣bert at Luike, and so foorth. After this hath Saint Hugh and Saint Eustace, gotten the hunters in gard, Saint Mar∣tin and Saint Vrban the Aleknightes, Tauernhunters, and dronkardes, Saint Crispin and Crispinian are Patrones of the Shooemakers, Saint Arnold is Baal ouer the Millers, Saint Steeuen
ouer the Weauers, S. Luke is alloted the Painters. And the Physicians (which might haue grudged and complained hereat) haue gotten Cosmus and Da∣mian to their chosen. The Carpenters do vaunt of their Patrone S. Euloge. The Tailers (which loue good fellowship) do cleaue to S. Goodman. The potmakers haue elected S. Goare, who carrieth a blacke diuell vppon his shoulders, with gloing eyes, and a pot in his hand. The whores and light women were not con∣tent with one Patronesse, but haue Saint Aphra (which may bee set in Venus place) which in times past was also cal∣led Aphrodite: and besides her S. Mag∣dalin, and so forth, as appeareth in Pro∣cessions and statelie shewes in Brabant and els where, where each companie doth beare his Patrone or Baal in stre∣mers displayed with great state. Moreo∣uer and aboue this, S. Anthonie must keepe the hogges, S. Loy the horsses and kine, S. Hugh the dogges, least they run madde, S. Gallus gardes the geese, Saint Wendelin the sheepe, S. Gertrude reig∣neth ouer rats and mice. Yea, which is more, each disease hath
his sundrie Apothecarie and speciall Doc∣tour. S. Iohn and S. Valentin do heale the falling sicknes, howbeit that S. Iohn with S. Benedict is also appointed ouer all infections of poyson. S. Anthonie can heale the burning, S. Roche the pesti∣lence. Notwithstanding Saint Sebastian hath some skil in it also. S. Roman doth restore the possessed and madde people againe to their former health, S. Marke doeth preserue the people from souden death. S. Cosmus and Damian are good for all byles and swelling diseases. S. Iob for the pockes, S. Appolin for the touth ache. S. Clare doth cleare and heale the firie and red eyes. S. Agatha hath skill howe to deale with swelling breastes. S. Margaret is middewife for those which are in trauell with childe. But because that she remained alwayes a chaste vir∣gine, and therefore not throughlie ex∣pert in her facultie, S. Norpurg was ioy∣ned with her, as a trustie mate in such a matche. S. Petronella can driue away all manner of agues. S. Vincent and Saint Vinden cause all thinges that are lost to bee restored againe. Saint Ser∣uatius doeth cause all thinges to bee
well kept. Saint Vitus doeth direct all daunsers, and such as will leape or vaute. Hereafter yet hath eche his chosen ioynt or speciall place in gouernement of a mans bodie, like as in times past the twelue signes of the Sunne. Saint O∣tillia doeth gouerne the head, in place of the first signe named Aries: howe∣beit shee hath bequeathed the tongue to Saint Katharine, and to Saint Appo∣lin the teeth. Saint Blasius is appoin∣ted ouer the necke, like as the signe Tau∣rus. Saint Laurence keepes the backe, together with the shoulders, in steede of Gemini, Cancer, and Leo. Saint Erasmus rules the whole bellie with the entrals, in place of Libra and Scorpius: Notwith∣standing that Saint Appollinar hath al∣so taken charge ouer Scorpius: for hee is president of the secret members. And forwards, in steede of Sagittarius, Capri∣cornus Aquarius, and Pisces, hath the holie Church of Rome elected Saint Burgard, Saint Rochus, S. Quirinus, S. Iohn, and other more, which gouerne the thighes, the knees, the shinnes, and the feete.
To conclude, eche hath his seruice, and who so is the deuoutest in honouring these Saintes, with burning tapers, with rose garlands, with gaie coates, and with good fat liberall offrings, the same is the most acceptable and beloued of our mother the holie Church. It is verelie great pro∣uision with small cost, that the poore peo∣ple (what neede or disease so euer they haue) knowe presentlie where to finde a good Apothecarie or Cheirurgian to cure their diseases. For touching the Heretikes which vpbraide vs herevpon, that we imi∣tate the vnbeleuing Heathen, and worship∣pers of idols (as hath bin said) & are none, like as Iupiter, Mars, Mercurie, Vulcan, Iuno, and Diana, and other such like haue bene: but are holie saints & Gods friends. And therefore ought we (at least) to shewe them as great reuerence, as the Heathen did to their idols. Wee ought in time of neede to call vpon them: to put our trust in them: obseruing their rules as a cōmande∣ment of God: to bequeath Cities & Coun∣tries to their custodies: to erect Temples and Altars in their names: to builde Cloi∣sters and Abbies for their sakes: to conse∣crate and hallowe Priestes, Monkes,
Cannons and Nonnes for their worship. And like as the Heathen had their Flami∣nes, that is, Priestes of Iupiter, Mars, Ce∣res, Bacchus, Venus, and Diana: and also their Nonnes of Vesta, Flora, Bona Dea, Sibyl, or Magna mater, and other such like. Euen so must nowe the Church of Rome also haue Cannons of S. Peter, S. Bauen, and S. Lambert: And Nonnes of S. Clara, and S. Brigit. Also as they were accustomed to offer sacrifices in honour of Apollo, Diana, Ceres, and Proserpina: euen so shee obserueth to doe her Masses and Trentals, in honour of S. Anthonie, S. Hugh, S. Sebastian, S. Rochus, S. Barba∣ra, and of all Saintes. To conclude, they did not anie worship or reuerence to their idols: but the holie church doeth ten times more to her Saintes: for shee doeth attri∣bute such things as they durst not to do the like. For (as Homer maketh mention) when Iuno, Pallas, or Apollo, or anie o∣ther of that companie would assist anie of their friends,Homer in his 1. booke Iliad▪ they were faine to des∣cende from heauen downe to them, & could not heare their praiers so far off, because they knewe not their thoughts, although they were mediatours and in∣tercessors
for them to the great idol Iu∣piter. Yea, Iuno her selfe, which was his sister and spouse, knewe not what Thetis had held him in hand with. But our Saints remaining sitting in heauen, canne erewhilest helpe the people here on earth with their images, which can laugh and weepe, and doe all manner of miracles: and they heare from aboue eue∣rie mans inuocation, as well as God him selfe. For, admit that the Scripture wit∣nesseth,1. Reg. 8.39. That none doeth see or can con∣ceiue the thought or inward cogitation of man, except God alone: yet the holie Church hath found a trimme remedie for that, by a preatie deuise of The looking glasse of the Trinitie, saying, That the holie Trinitie is a looking glasse, wherin the Saints can see all things whatsoeuer happen here on earth: yea, can sound the depth of mens thoughts, and per∣ceiue the secretes of their heartes. It is verie true▪ that we doe not call our Saints by this name God, like as the Heathen were wont to doe their canonized Saints: But what skilles it for the name, when wee vnderstande the matter aright?
Howebeit notwithstanding, wee name them Diuos: which is euen as much as Gods, or, Men created Gods: like as they also were wont to call their men canonized Goddes, as Hercules, Dio∣nysius, Augustus, Vespasianus, &c. And here besides we doe attribute to them this name Saintes, or holie men, after the same sense, as GOD names him selfe the holie one of Israel, that is,Esai. 43.3.14 and in manie places. The Defen∣der and Safegarde which doeth san∣ctifie Israel. So that our Saintes are (at least) so highlie honoured of vs, as in times past anie idols haue beene by the Heathen, and as God him selfe can bee by vs. The v. Chapter. Of the interpretation of the wordes Latria, Dulia, and Hyperdulia, and howe they are distributed to eche. FOr seeing it is requisite, aswel through the obiections which the Heretikes do here alledge, as also that God hath com∣maunded,Psal. 50.15. that wee shall alone call to him in our neede, and that he esteemes it more than all sacrifices and burnt
offrings which we can make to him: yea, that it is hee alone which can helpe vs,Esa. 63.6.43.11. Esa. 63.16. and 64.10. and that Abraham doth not knowe vs, nor Israel can say nothing of vs, but that God alone through his might can re∣lieue vs, that is to smal effect: for that knot can our holie mother so netelie lose, that it is a maruell which the distinction that Maister Gentian doeth here bring foorth: and is by all Catholike Doctours, and es∣peciallie by the worshipfull Sir Sonnio, reputed for a mightie bulworke, namelie, betwixt Latria, Dulia, and Hyperdulia. For the holie church hath hereby made a diuision or cauill betwixt GOD and the Saintes, wherewithall eche must bee con∣tent, as namelie: That God alone with his images and the holie crosse, shalbe honoured with Latria: the Saintes & their images with Dulia: and our Ladie with all the ima∣ges which apperteine to her, and all the reliques of the right and holie crosse in deede, with Hyperdulia. In verie deede, God hath the worst chaunce: for if so be we do expound it natu∣rallie, and according to the literall sense of the word, then is Latria nothing else but
A hirelings payment. For Latron is a Greke word,Latria, looke the 3. chap. of the 4 part. which betokeneth A reward or pay which is made to a hired seruant: and thereby are the hired men seruantes called Latres: and the maid seruantes La∣tris. And euen so is God serued of the holy Church of Rome onelie for reward, like a maister of a hired seruant. Againe this Dulia, which is the Saints lot and porti∣on, signifieth A bound seruice:Dulia. for Dulos in Greeke is A slaue, and proper to anie. And touching our Ladie, to her is alloted the best chaunce: for Hyperdulia is to say,Hyperdulia, lok the 1. chap. of the 4. part. More than proper bounde seruice. So that the good Catholikes are but simplie hirelinges, or Gods hired seruantes and slaues to the Saintes, but bounde to our Ladie aboue all. But, be it, as be may, Quod scripsi, scripsi, said Pilate: The holy Church will not reuoke her cauils, the lot is east: that which is written, remaineth written. Yet notwithstanding, because God shall not be displeased, she hath ordei∣ned, that the Saintes shal giue him a share of their Dulia: but hee shall keepe Latria wholie to him selfe: so that Latria shall sim∣plie signifie nothing else, then the seruice which perteineth to God alone.
In this respect hath Maister Gentian and all other Catholike writers great reason, (as they alledge) that the holie Church doeth not worship the Saintes like God with Latria, but simplie as Saintes with Dulia and Hyperdulia: for that hath his plaine dispatche and ground on the cleare text of the Scripture, where Christ saieth to the Saintes,Mat. 4.10. Thou shalt worshippe the Lord thy God, and him onlie shalt thou serue. For in these last wordes doeth hee vse the worde Latreum, the which doth a∣gree with Latria: and saith, that to God a∣lone we shall attribute the same. But in the first wordes he doth not once mention, that we must worship God alone with Pros∣kynesi, that is, With falling feete, or knee∣ling: Therefore will the holy church, that this shall also be attributed to the Saints, like as it is apparantly manifest by the 2. Councell of Nice, and by al Catholike wri∣ters. And although it is true, that Christ doeth declare these wordes by the witnes of Moses,Deut. 6.13.10.20. which doeth ascribe the first as well as the last to GOD alone: yet the holie Church is not to reason with Moses in this point: for so much as Moses
wrote that to the Iewes which were incli∣ned to the seruing of idols, and not to the Church of Rome: which doe not woor∣shippe idols, but onelie Saintes. Item, there is an other plaine text in Paule, which saieth to the Galathians, That when they did not knowe GOD,Galat. 4.▪ then did they serue them which were no Goddes: euen where he doeth vse this word Dulium, which is deriued of Du∣lia. Whereby it doth manifestlie & plain∣lie appeare, that these Heathen haue also knowen this Catholike distinction, and therefore woulde not worshippe their Saintes, as Apollo, Bacchus, Hercules, Castor and Pollux, with more other such like, with Latria, but baselie with Dulia: Euen like as nowe the holie Church of Rome doeth serue her Saintes. Tou∣ching all other Prophetes, which so often crye, that in time of neede, wee should on∣lie turne to GOD, and that hee will bee honoured by our calling to him: yea, and say, that all Patrones, Defendours,The Scripture is full of such. & Ba∣als which may be thought on (to declare our grieues vnto them) are plaine idols, all that is to small purpose, for they did not (in those dayes) knowe anie
thing at al to say, touching this our distinc∣tion, and therefore haue they gone roundly to worke, vsing plaine speech, without fa∣uouring the matter, or lapping it about wt softe ragges: but haue serued all such as in∣uocate idols, pray to Patrones, seeke vnto Saintes or anie deceased dead men, with one sawce, and without excepting anie, hath giuen them to drinke of one cuppe. But if the Iewes and other idolaters had bene so wise, to haue obiected to the Pro∣phetes this worthie distinction in steade of a bucklar, I trowe they would as easily haue stopped their mouthes, as nowe ye newe gospellers and preachers are put to silence. The vi. Chapter. VVherein the worshipping of Saintes is affirmed by Scripture. NOtwithstanding our louing & deare mother the holie Church of Rome,Looke the 4. chap. of this part. can also fishe somewhat out of the Pro∣phetes writinges, wherewith shee doeth approue the seruice of her holie Saintes: Prouided alwayes, that shee hath the keie to vnfolde the same for her most ad∣uantage. For in the first booke of Mo∣ses
(called Genesis) is plainlie and expres∣lie set downe, That Iacob doth pray ouer Ephraim & Manasses, after this sort, say∣ing:Ge. 48.15.16. This witnes is brought forth by Eckius, derius, and all o∣ther Catholike writers, trea∣ting vpon the same. God before whō my fathers Abra∣ham & Isaac did walk: God, which had fed mee all my life long vnto this day, and the Angel, whiche hath deliuered mee from all euill, blesse the laddes, and let my name bee named in them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. This hath the holie Church of Rome construed after this sorte, That E∣phraim and Manasses must inuocate or call vppon the name of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: for so much as the olde Ro∣mishe exposition (which shee doeth accept as most firme and irreuocable) hath in place of, named, or called, set inuocated. And although the Heretikes doe vnder∣stande this after the most vsuall manner of speeche, (accustomed amongst the He∣brewes) that Iacobs name called vppon, or named by Ephraim and Manasses, is as much to saye, As that they should bee accounted of Iacobs generation, and ac∣cepted for children of Israel, like as Ia∣cob him selfe doeth expounde it, saying: E∣phraim and Manasses shalbe my chil∣dren,
and shalbe called after the names of their brethren, in their inheritance. And, like as is saide in Esaie, the fourth chapter, That seuen women shall wishe by one mans name to be named,Psal. 4.1. or cal∣led vpon by them, which is, That they may be called the wiues of one man: Notwithstanding, for so much as this ex∣position is according to the plaine literall sence: therefore hath the holie Church of Rome abiected the same, and accepted the other former meaning: thereby con∣cluding, that Abraham, Isaac and Iacob are to bee inuocated or called vpon: How∣beit, the Prophetes & Fathers in the old Testament haue neuer done the same, but haue protested the contrarie, saying, O Lorde,Esai. 63.16. thou art our father: for Abra∣ham knoweth vs not, neither is Israel acquainted with vs: but thou Lorde art our Father & Redeemer, and thy name is euerlasting. &. But that happened, be∣cause the foresaid Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, were yet in the lodge of hell, and must pray for them selues, & could not then see in the looking glasse of the Trinitie, what was done here on earth. Wherefore likewise the Romish Church hath not set
downe their names in the Kalender, accor∣ding to the custome of Rome. Besides, thei are to old, and were neuer canonized of a∣nie Pope. Neuertheles, they serue our turne, to shewe after what order wee must deale with our Saintes. Moreouer, we haue yet an euident text in Ieremie, which is, Thē said the Lord vn∣to me:Iere. 15.1. Though Moses & Samuel stood before me, yet haue I no heart to this people. Wherevnto doth agree the text of Ezechiel, saying thus: When the land sin∣neth against me,Ezech. 14.14. and goeth forth in wic∣kednes, I will stretch out my hand vpon it, and destroy all the prouision of their bread, and send dearth vppon them, to destroy man and beast in the lande. And though Noe, Daniel, & Iob, these three men were among them, yet shall they in their righteousnesse deliuer but their owne soules, saith the Lord. &c. Nowe, like as (by these wordes of E∣zechiel) it is concluded, that Noe, Dani∣el, and Iob, were in the towne of Hie∣rusalem, when GOD destroyed the same: so may wee also (in the like man∣ner) conclude and affirme, that Moses and the Prophete Samuel did pray for
the children of Israel. And notwithstan∣ding that the Lorde saieth, That he would not giue eare to their prayers, yet the ho∣lie Church doeth not regarde it, for so much as (like as it hath beene saide) they lye yet in the dungeon of hell, and could not praye so earnestlie nor with such zeale, as the Saintes doe which nowe are in heauen. Yet neuertheles, If they (being yet in the dungeon of hell) prayed so hartilie for the people:These are the arguments of Eckius in his En. or Pamphlet in the chap. De venerat. Sanctor. What may wee suppose that the Saintes doe nowe, which stande in the Kalendar, and are Canonized by the Pope? Verelie, they praye so zealouslie, that (often times) their images here on earth, through an∣guishe doe sweate and weepe. The holie church doh bring forth manie moe places of scripture for confirmation of these arti∣cles:Psal. 139.17. namely, that which Dauid saith: O God, I haue honored thy friends, which is, That we shuld call vpon Saints, which are Gods friends. Also that Iob saieth: Crie (I pray thee) if happilie there be a∣nie that wil answere thee,Iob. 5.1. & looke thou vppon the holy men, &c. And albeit hee speaketh there of the holie men which are in this worlde, like as the verie
text doeth plainely shewe it selfe, yet why may wee not vnderstand the same of our Saintes and holy men deceased? For so much as our mother the holy Church will so haue it to be vnderstoode.This argumēt is brought forth by Ecki∣us, and other writers also. Ouer and a∣boue this, Christ will say at the last iudge∣ment day, vnto those which haue beene helpefull to the poore and needie: What∣soeuer you haue done to the least of these, the same haue you done vnto me. Ergo, Who soeuer doeth pray to the Saintes, and in place of God doth wor∣shippe them, that doth God accept, as if it had beene done to himselfe. There are yet many more & sundrie of such like proofes of scripture, which woulde bee to tedious to rehearse: But because the Heretikes doe deride them, and will vnderstand them according to the literall sense, and after the Greeke and Hebrewe text: I knowe no better meane to dispute with them, then with a good fagot. Yet will I adde thus much more, That when they haue a sute to a King or migh∣tie Prince, they knowe verie well,This is an ar∣gument of Ec∣kius and all o∣ther Catholike writers. that first they must speake and sue for helpe of some of the Lords, who may broach their cause, and by their intreatie, be a meane for them
and so to further their sute, which conside∣red, they ought not so rudely to encroche vpon the king of all kinges, without first to haue spoken with one of his court. In verie deede it is most true, that a poore woman at Louen sometime did thwart the Doc∣tours and set them non plus: by saying. That if so bee it that the King or Prince himselfe had called & charged her, that shee should come to him, like as Christ expresly charged vs to come to him, say∣ing:Matth. 11.28. Come vnto me all ye that labour and are laden, & I will ease you: Then would she not haue gone to seeke any other for her Mediatour. But this womā was a great Heretike, and therefore was also burnt. Wherfore this article doth re∣maine in force & vnsoluble: to wit, that we must haue & allowe these Saintes for our Mediators, Aduocates & Atturnies, being else vnable of our selues to obteine fauour of Christ Iesus: yea though he should once againe die the death for vs, to prepare vs the way to haue free accesse to the merci∣full throne of his heauenly father. For all this cā not serue, but we must haue a great sort of Solicitors, Patrones, Mediators & Baals which must moue the matter for vs
to whom we must vse all the worship and reuerence which we are able to shewe vnto God himselfe, sauing that they must bee content with Dulia, and must permit God to enioy Latria to himselfe, wherewith this matter is fixte. And so will we proceede to an other. Now followeth the de∣claration vpon the .5. part of Maister Gentian Heruet his letter, wherein is shewed, that the heretikes seek nothing but libertie of the flesh, hating all pray∣er, fasting and abstinence. The first Chapter. Which declares that it is a lawfull thing, to lie & falsely to accuse an heretike, being to a good intent. Also of the fables of Cocles of Laurence Surius and of Aloysi∣us Lippomanus, and to what purpose they serue a things most needefull and necessarie. IN this fifth part doth M. Gentianus shewe,Wherefore wee may lie. that these Heretikes seeke no∣thing else but fleshely li∣bertie, and to get loose the bridle of their owne wills and appetites: and therefore (saith he) is
it, that to the death they hate all prayers, fasting and abstinence. But here draweth great heauinesse towardes: For a man might euen at the first sight imagine, that he speaketh not indifferent, but of affectiō. Forsomuch as it is most manifest and well knowen,Fasting and prayers of the Lutherians and Huguenotes. that they highly esteeme of prayer, and also fast verie often: re∣fraining not onely from fleshe, but also from all kinde of meates, vntill the verie night, and remaine durable in prayer and in hearing of sermons. Hereby then a man might suppose, that Maister Gentianus hath deserued a whet∣stone, and wagged the thumbe, to make his case good. Wherefore wee will more deepely consider this point, and warily weigh the reasons which haue moued him herevnto. So that wee haue then here to consider vppon two pointes: Namely, the first is that which Dauid saith,Psal. 69.10. That the zeale of the house of the Lorde hath euen eaten him, Which is euen here af∣fected in Gentianus. For he is so hottely inflamed with the zeale of the holie Ro∣mish Churche, that he is in a manner asto∣nied and amased, so as he doeth not see what he saieth. In the meane while not∣withstanding
doeth he recorde and call to minde that whiche our holy mother the Churche of Rome hath concluded in the councell of Constance, and the same time did put in practise, when the holie fathers there congregated did permit Iohn Hus and Hierom of Prage to be burnt, contra∣rie to the letters of safeconduite, whiche were graunted and giuen them by the Emperour and the saide councell, ordei∣ning most firmely, that it should bee no of∣fence to breake promise with Heretikes. Yet perhappes our Gentianus hath read in Cicero, That a mans faith or promise is stedfastnesse or vowed truth, of that which he pretendes to doe or speake. Therefore he feareth (as wee may iudge) that if he should say nothing but a truth, he might bee reputed and taken for a trans∣gressour of the ordinances of the foresaide councell, as though he had vndertaken the faith of the Heretikes. Moreouer,Lies to a good intent. the holie Church hath con∣sented and ordeined, that sometimes a lie may be inuented against Heretikes, for a good intent, as to fraie simple people from desire to reade their bookes, least thereby they should fall into their heresies. And
that this be true, appeares first by strong prouebable reasons: & further by credible examples. The reasons are these: That the holie Church hath ordeined & conclu∣ded (like as yet by the daily exercise ap∣peares) that it is not ill done, to make the people beleeue many fables & Caū∣terburie tales:Fables. as of holie reliques, Saint Gabriels fethers, and Saint George his speare with whiche he did pearce the Dragon. Also of Saints as S. Christopher, S. Barbara, S. Katherin, of S. Francis vine and others suche like, whereof Gesta Romanorum, Vitas Patrum, Specu∣lum historiale, the booke Lippomani, the booke Abdiae and Sophronij and the golden Legend, are full, and reple∣nished with a number of suche fables, whiche our holie mother the holie Churche of Rome doeth tearme Piae fraudes,Pi fraudes. that is to saie, holie deceiptes, or golden Legendes: And saieth that it is the milke, whiche Paule did giue the Corinthians to drinke when they were yet vnable to disiest strong meates: like as a good gray frier was woont to say at Ghaunte. In so much then, that it is allowable to faine suche fine fables, to
prouoke people to deuotion, muche more then is it tollerable to rehearse some odde and strange iestes of Heretikes, as to wit, that they are blacke and foule fauoured, and worke matters with the diuell, with such like thinges, to affright people from the studie of their doctrine. Now the exam∣ples are also verie sure & waightie. For vp∣on such like lies, which the holy supposses or subiects of the Romishe Churche, hath persuaded Emperours & Kings to beleue, were they permitted to make their pla∣cards & priuileges against the Lutherians & Huguenotes, wherby such controuersies & tumultes are growen & sprong vp in the world, that it is to be doubted, great bloud∣shed will be made before they will be app∣peased againe. This may sufficiently ap∣peare by the wordes of the Placard in the reigne of the Emperour Charles of noble memorie,Placardes of Charles the .5. set forth in the yeere .1521. at the citie of Wormes, declaring expresly, That Luther was a Pelagian, and did dis∣dainefullie contemne the Saintes. Also he taught, that there ought to bee nei∣ther gouernment nor superioritie, nor yet obedience, & did gainesaie reproue and disalowe all good ciuil pollicie and
spirituall reformations, to the ende the commonaltie should be moued & pro∣uoked to raise armes and rebell against their rulers as well Ecclesiasticall as Ci∣uill, and to frame themselues to con∣tend, murther and steale, wasting and consuming all thinges with fire and sworde, to the great indammaging of the whole common wealth of Christen∣dome▪ And, which is more detestable, he ordeined & allowed a certeine kinde of life, whereby each should doe that which he would in manner of brute beastes: and as a lawlesse man did ab∣iect and detest all Ecclesiasticall & tem∣porall lawes. Beholde, these be the verie wordes of the Emperours acte, and this is the verie first & originall welspring of all the bloud∣shed, which hath happened throughout all Christendome for the space of seuen and fortie yeeres, vntill this present time, the which all men may both see with their eyes, and in a manner feele with their fin∣gers to be most grosse, blockishe, and pal∣pable lies, which Petrusa Sotto (the Em∣perours good ghostly father) and other Catholike Priestes did blowe in at his
eares: not for that they did suppose it to be so, for they had not a haire on their hea∣des but it knewe the contrarie. But fea∣ring the reformation of the Gospell, did moue the Emperours Maiestie (which o∣therwise of himselfe was not by nature gi∣uen to wrath or any desire of bloudshed) to a bloudie abolishing & wrathfull extirpa∣tion of all these Lutherans & Caluinistes, which were not (in any respect) for their tooth: forsomuch as they sought to reforme papistrie by the authoritie of the Gospell: Notwithstanding, vpon their wordes one∣ly did the Emperour proceede in his pur∣pose, & would not at any time giue eare to the Heretikes. Like as now the King of Spaine, of a good zeale (supposing to doe God high & acceptable seruice) doth also proceede to the vtter ruine & manifest de∣struction of his own inheritance & naturall countrie, & his most loyall, louing, & obedi∣ent subiects: knowing no other,Placardes of king Philip. but that all is true, which his ghostly fathers and other Spanish Priestes and foster fathers of the holie Inquisition do put in his head: yea vppon the same hath not spared his na∣turall and onely sonne, but hath deliuered him ouer into the handes of the hellishe
Inquisitours permitting them to throwe him into prison, where most miserably he ended his lamentable life. Verelie this was a slie and fine fetche, whiche our holie mother did wiselie weigh, that to a good intent men might make a lie. For otherwise, if they might haue mani∣fested naught but a troth, then shoulde the Heretikes haue founde audience by Kinges and Princes: the plaie had been made, and all thinges woulde haue gone a wrie with Priestes and Poperie, Mas∣ses and suche tromperie of the Romishe Churche: yea, the whole Spiritualtie would not haue beene worthe a beane, like as wee may perceiue in all places where these Heretikes haue had hearing, and where they haue beene permitted to plead their cause openly. But worship bee vnto our Ladie of the seuen Okes, and Saint Iob of Wese∣mall with all the glorious Saintes, which are at Antwerp on the high aulter. For there (in good time) did happen some foresight, by the cunning of vnfolding the booke of lies, and causing Kinges to be∣leeue that the Moone was made of greene cheese: And good reason: for who so faines
himselfe to be a sheepe, may happen to bee deuoured of the Woolfe, according to the vulgar saying. But yet haue ye another commoditie whiche groweth by this kinde of sacred dealing. For if Priestes and Monkes were bound alwayes to preache the truth, there woulde ensue a great disgrace vnto them, for that they woulde oftentimes in their pulpettes become as dumb as fishes, being vnable to bring foorth any thing, be∣cause they are all vnfortunate in declaring the trueth, and therefore shoulde misse the meane to vtter their excellent giftes of fi∣led eloquence. But when they haue no more arrowes lefte in their quiuers, then doe they fall vppon the Heretikes, and haue store of matter to talke of, yea wonderfull things to declare against them: they rage, they rore, they thūder, they lighten, & make them so blacke & deformed like diuels in hell. Sometime they catch a Caluin by the throte, sometime Beza, sometime their quarell is against Marottes Psalmes: sometime with the Greeke and Hebrewe texte, whiche in no sauce they can abide: sometime they martyr the Catechisme so pitifully, as though they had it on a racke.
To be briefe, they regard neither doore nor post, but shoote their shaftes vp to the feathers in it. They prattle like Pies, and seeme in a manner as they had soulde all their potte herbes, and yet reserue of the best to themselues, that is truely a sport and pretie pastime: specially to the de∣uoute women, which are not greatly ac∣quainted with the Bible, or Gods worde, but rather listen to the Popes lies, and to daunse after his pipe, or to heare some Gospell of a distaffe, and tale of a tubbe. In fine, a man would verily iudge, that such Catholike preachers had beene all their dayes Pedlers or pelting Apothecaries of Dutchlande, or that they had farmed the prattle courte wholly to themselues. Like as daily may bee perceiued at all their Sermons, and specially at the woor∣thie Sermon, which a goodly grayfrier doeth vsually make in Frenche at Ant∣werpe in S. Iacobs Churche. It seemeth he is one of those foresaid pelting Apothe∣caries whiche hath trudged these seuen and thirtie yeeres to all markets & faires, about the countrie, to sell his triacles and rattes bane.
It doeth also appeare by the preaching of the foresaid brother Cornelis the whip∣per,Seeke the first Chapter of the second part. who doeth with such a zeale roare against Heretikes, that he will haue them rooted out quite, and to bee burnte to ashes. Yea, he hath not long ago prea∣ched, That childe bearing women ought to haue their wombes rent and torne, to take out their babes, and burne them, be∣fore they shoulde bee borne or brought foorth into the worlde, which he doeth af∣firme with a plaine texte, which he hath read in the kitchen bible, or else hath lear∣ned of his Cooke: namely, that of Egges fride in a frying panne, come no ill chic∣kens. I omitte the goodly Sermons of dronken Nicholas,Dronken Ni∣cholas. the Bishoppe of Har∣lem, and many famous sermons more of sundrie worthie champions, which doe ring their larum belles with suche vehe∣mencie against Heretikes, that when they are in their pulpites, their hearse and rustie throtes will scarse bee refreshed and cleared againe with foure or fiue pottles of wine. Yet can I not forget, nor let slippe out of memorie, that pretious Sermon of the reuerend Bishop of Vtrecht, which he
made when the Prouinciall councell was holden there, whiche is about three yeeres past. For in the same he declared and pro∣nounced it out at large, of the Dutche Beare Luther, and that his mother was a whore, and had slepte by the Diuell, with many suche like Caunterburie tales and forged fables whiche he had rakte together out of Cochles or brother Laurence Surius who were godly Catho∣like pedlers. And verelie suche trustie speares as Laurence Surius and Cochleus haue well deserued a good peece of rosted beefe hotte from the spitte, considering that with their notable and excellent briefe histories, they haue furnished and well armed the Bi∣shoppes, Monkes, and priestes, with suche stuffe as will serue their turnes to occupie their Pulpittes with all. So as their sto∣ries may well and aptly bee called Dor∣mi secure, that is to say, Sleepe without care: So that the Monkes and Parishe Priestes neede not studie in their Bibles for to make a sermon, so long as they are prouided of suche bookes. For there∣in they finde made readie to their handes,
matter enoughe to prate vppon: yea if it were naught else but the pretie pageant whiche the foresaid Laurence Surius doth rehearse of Caluin.This pretie tale is to be reade in the hi∣storie of Lau∣rence Surius, which he hath called, Comen∣tarius breuis re∣rum in rbe ge∣starum, and is printed at Cul∣len. To wit, That Cal∣uin shoulde seeke to confirme his doc∣trine with miracles, and therefore shoulde persuade a man to suffer him∣selfe to bee borne in a coffin to Church: And when Caluin called to him, before the multitude) that if his doctrine were true, he should arise, the man being smothered in the cheste was founde starke deade: his wife begin∣ning pitifully to lament, Caluin did (with faire speache and promises of recompence) perswade her to bee still: and presently gotte him into the Pul∣pitte, declaring to the people that it was long of their vnbeliefe that this miracle woulde not fadge. It is a common saying, that, To him which telles a lie or a fable, it behoues him to haue a good memorie. But this was out of this good Historiographers heade, for so muche as he did not call to minde, that they are not accustomed at Geneua, to bring deade▪ corses into the Churches▪
and muche lesse in time of any Sermons: besides, he had forgotten, that Caluine did alwaies teach it to be an vngodly and a diuelishe acte, to goe about to confirme the doctrine of the Gospell a new with mi∣racles, which hath alreadie in times past beene sufficiently confirmed with most notable and wonderfull miracles of God. But the good Catholike is to bee pardo∣ned, for that (with eating too muche fishe) his braines are weakened, and his memorie thereby decayed. Yet he de∣clares more, which sounde a great deale better. As touching the miracles of Luther: of the bloud which issued out of the Sa∣crament from the altar in the countrie of Brandenburge, whiche (it may bee) he hath learned of Aloysius Lippomano, who hath likewise written a great booke full of such iestes. And many more suche lies and toyes with a witnesse, which serue greatly for the vse of Priests and Monkes in time of their sermons & preachmentes. And chiefely these newe base Countrie Bishoppes, whiche (for the most part) haue spent their time in studie, betwixte
the butterie and the kitchen, and can saie but litle except they be prickt forwardes with some helpes: like as may appeare by the worthie sermon of the reuerend Bishop Franciscus Sonnius, (the father of all the newe Bishops) which he made at his first entrie to a citie called Hertoghenbosch, saying, That the citizens might reioyce, for so much as they had gotten him to be their Bishop,The sermon of Sonnius. for that henceforwards (quoth hee) you shall haue great resort of manie strangers, which (afore times) were wont to haue their trade to Luyke and Vtrecht, and the one should eate a herring, the other should drinke a potte of beare, which would be a great helpe to their impost, &c. Was not this a good helpe to sing Gaudeamus? In like manner also Curtius at Bridges, which notwithstanding had bene Pastour or Curate of the great and chiefe church at Louen, expounding that parte of the Gos∣pell: Ego sum, nolite timere: I am hee, be not afraid, said, That he was the man,The sermon of Curtius. of whom so much had bene spoken, and that they should not stande in feare of ought, considering he was a towns man borne, and christened in the same font.
In fine, it was: which way to London? A pooke full of plummes. The good Cu∣rate had but litle to say, for hee knewe no tales of Robin Hoode, nor yet of Caluin, nor the Dutch Beare his miracles. Hee had not red ouer the pleasaunt histories of Laurence Surius, Cochles, nor Lip∣pomanus. Therefore are they highlie to bee commended, which can furnish out their matter with such pleasaunt rehear∣sals, to keepe the audientes waking: as for the Byble or Gospell, they haue not forgotten much, because they feare to read it, least (thereby) they should become He∣retikes. To conclude, so farre foorth as lies and fables doe serue to the aduance∣ment of the holie Church of Rome, they are not onelie to bee borne withall, but also greatlie extolled. And therefore it is no maruell, that Maister Gentianus durst thus boldlie affirme by writing, That the Huguenotes and Lutherans did hate and detest all prayers, fasting and absti∣nence. This is than the first point, which is to be cōsidered hereof, for his discharge, to wit, That he hath (in this behalfe) be∣haued him selfe as a good and faithful Ca∣tholike.
The ii. Chapter. VVherein is declared, Howe it is to be vnderstood, that the Huguenotes & the Lutherans do hate all prayers, fasting, abstinence, and penaunce or mortification: and herein is comprehen∣ded of the abstinence and mortification of Monkes, Bishops, Prelates, and other: and of the mortification which is vsed amongst the Huguenotes & Lutherans. THe other part is,The manner of fasting & pray∣ers amongst the Hugue∣notes and Lu∣therans. that hee hath great reason to say, the Heretikes are mor∣tall foes to prayer, fasting & mortification. For there is a rule in lawe, That, to plead a case ill, and otherwise then it ought to be, or to neglect the same wholie, doeth fall out to one effect. Well then, albeit the Heretikes doe often pray & fast, for so much as they doe it not as they ought, it serues them to no purpose. It is true, they pray morning & euening: & would be loth to go to their meales or to arise without praying and seruing God: which notwith∣standing is oftentimes neglected by the most chiefest of the catholikes: like as may be seene in the Popes sacred Court, and at the tables of the Cardinals and Bishops: yea, amongst the most faithfull subiectes of the Romish church.Pardons to drinke after grace is said. In so much as it hath bin founde necessarie for a Pope to graunt pardons to such after their meales
should once drinke, to the ende that (there∣by) he shoulde remember the good ale knights to say their graces, for to haue one good draught more when they haue done. I admit then that the Heretiks do pray a∣pase:Iam. 1.5.6.7. Mat. 7.7. Mar. 11.24. Mat. 14.31. Mar. 9.23. Iohn 16.23. Psal. 27.1.2.3 Rom. 8.1.16. Rom. 4.20.8.33.34.34. &c. Galat. 4.6. Ephe. 1.13. 1. Cor. 13.5. Augu. vpon the 1. epist. to Ti∣mot. in the 8. sermon, and v∣pon the Galat. in the 5. Antoni. parte 4. Tit. 6. cap. 2. ff 7. Stanislaus Ho∣sius in the booke of Here∣sies. And in the Councell of Trent, it is thus concluded. 9.12.13. & cap. 13.14, &c. Sess. 6. But to what ende is it? They pray not as they ought to doe. For, in primis, they will approue, that whensoeuer we de∣sire ought in the name of Christ Iesus, that wee are assured to obteine the same. And therefore (say they) All faithful peo∣ple are assuredlie persuaded of their sal∣uation, and stand in no doubt at all of Gods gratious good will and fatherlie loue towards them: for so much as God can not lie, who hath (for Iesus Christes sake) vndoubtedlie promised them the same: and with his holie Ghost hath sealed and affirmed it in their heartes. This doeth the holie Church of Rome hold for great heresie, teaching to the con∣trarie, That none in this present worlde can certainlie know, whether his prayer be heard, much lesse, whether he bee in Gods fauour or no, except by great pre∣eminence, or some speciall miracle, it be reuealed and made knowen vnto him. Therefore doeth she hold it for great arro∣gancie
and presumption, to say (according to Saint Paul) That the holie Spirit of God is in vs, and prayeth in vs,Rom. 8.27. and that without it, we can not pray at all: For so much as none doeth knowe whether hee hath the spirit of God or not: and therefore must alwayes stand in doubt betwixt hope and feare, like to a ship without helm and compasse, betwixt the gulffes and waues of the sea, like as S. Iames doeth say.Iames 1.6. Secondarilie, the Heretikes will not de∣clare and complaine their neede, but to God onelie, nor call vpon anie but him a∣lone, as though none but hee could helpe them, or that he were at leasure, and had nought else to doe, but iust to heare what they would say vnto him. To the contra∣rie of this, doeth the holie Church com∣maund,In the 4. chap. of the 4. part. That wee shall likewise call vpon Saintes, and put our trust in them, like as hath bene declared before. Moreouer, they will not haue anie Mediatour or Ad∣uocate to God, but onelie Christ Iesus. And so set all Saintes aside, as seruing for sifers, and standing to none effect: euen as though Christ alone were a sufficient Me∣diatour, and that the sillie Saintes had not one voyce in a court.
After this, they will not pray anie thing, for (forsouth) it must first be found prescri∣bed in the Scripture, forasmuch as To pray without faith (say they) is sinne:Rom. 14.23. Heb. 11.6. Rom. 10.17. And faith can not be allowed, without the promes and word of God. Hereby (la)doeth it come to passe, that the poore soules do remaine still frying in Purgato∣rie, for default of a Pater Noster, & an Aue Marie. In so much as now the high waye (through which the soules were wont to passe) is become such a thicket, ouer grow∣en with thornes and thistles, that it is not possible to passe that way anie more. Moreouer, they will not pray otherwise than in their own mother tongue, or in such a language as them selues do vnderstand, as though our God did not vnderstand La∣tin: or at least, that they them selues ought to vnderstand that which they say. They build vpon Paule,1. Cor. 14. throughout the whole chapter. who forbiddeth to pray in an vnknowen tongue. But they doe not consider that the holie Church of Rome hath altered the case, commaunding, that Masses, Eeuensongs and Vigilles, Mat∣tens, and Meridians, with all other such tromperies, should bee red in the Latin
tongue, euen like an vnlearned theefe rea∣deth his necke verse:Latin tongue. for that is more me∣ritorious, than if wee our selues vnder∣stoode what wee did say. Like as Cardi∣nall Hosius, and Doctor dolt Eckius haue finelie affirmed out of that part of Scripture, where it is written, That Pi∣late did set downe the title or superscrip∣tion, in Hebrewe, Greeke, and Latin. And in deede, it is good reason, that they which (after the example of Pilate) do cru∣cifie Christ, ought likewise to vse and imi∣tate his language. Further, these Heretikes will not say their Aue Maries, nor Pater Nosters, with litle pretie woodden bullets or beade∣rowes made of stone or yuorie, as though they should score them vpon a poast: they suppose perhappes, that GOD maye nomber or tell them him selfe, thinking he hath nothing else to doe. They will neuer kneele vnto Images or dumbe Saintes, (by prayer) to craue their helpe or ayde, but imagine GOD to bee present euerie where,Mat. 6.6. and that their prayers bee as for∣cible in their bedde chambers, as to our blessed Ladie, the Ladie of Hayle, or to
Saint Iames of Compostella in Spaine· And therefore do deride all the pilgrima∣ges of our louing mother the holie church. And when they desire to receiue Gods ho∣lie spirit, they knowe not that they ought to say an Aue Marie, like as the good Ca∣tholikes vse to do at their sermons, for so much as Aue Marie is as much to say with them, as, O Lord graunt vs thy holie spirit. And, which is worst of all, they will not pray, neither through the merites of Saintes, nor through the vertue of holie water, of the holie oyle, of sanctified bread, of Palmes, Agnus Dei, holie Reliques, nor through the merites of holie dayes which they haue obserued, neither through the merites of their fasting, or anie world∣lie thing else, but onelie through the me∣rites of the onelie sacrifice or oblation of Iesus Christ, being offered vpon the crosse to God the Father: yea, they make a iest of all such matters, & condemne them for meere superstition and idolatrie. To con∣clude, they will not pray as the holie Ro∣mish Church doeth. Ergo, they pray not as they ought to do: and therefore must we account of them as though they did not pray at all.
Euen in like sorte doeth it fall out with their fasting: for they fast after their owne orders, and will not obserue the ordinance of the holy Romish Churche. But like as they pray without keeping any set taylie, or Ceremonie, so due they fast without a score, and without exception of dayes:Fasting with∣out a score. so that God cannot well remember, when they haue fasted or prayed. And further when they fast, they wil not eate any thing at all, and make it as great a matter to eate fishe, as fleshe, and Egges: which is a great heresie, like as is shewed before. Where againe (notwithstanding) they will (with an obstinate hed) defend, That,Mat. 15.11. Titus 1.15. 1. Tim. 4.3. that which goeth into the mouth, defi∣leth not the man: And, To them which are cleane, all thinges are cleane, whiche God hath created, to vse them with thankesgeuing. After this, they will not fast in reuerence of the Saintes, to obserue their Vigilles with deuotion, like vnto our holy mother: And when they haue brought all about, to what ende (I pray you) serues their fasting? They acknowledge them∣selues, that of it selfe, it is neither good nor bad: And,Rom. 14.17. 1. Cor. 8.8. That the kingdome of God doeth not consist neither in meate nor
drinke. Yea, they vphold, That meate or drinke doeth not make vs acceptable to God: And, That wee are not the better for eating, nor the worse for not eating. And that all their fasting onely serueth to make them more apt & fitte to serue God, and to submitte themselues to his omnipo∣tent power: chiefly whensoeuer his wrath is kindled against them.To what ende fasting is vsed. Then doe they vse fasting, not for the deede it selfe, but for the occasion of prayer, & to humble them∣selues, but further benefit do they not seeke by it, vnlesse that anie of his own accord or free wil, do accustome him selfe therevnto, thereby to subdue his flesh, and the sinfull affections of his minde.A true kinde of fasting. Else (say they) the right fasting is, to refraine from all vn∣godlie and sinfull deedes, and to frame him selfe to vse a perpetuall sobrietie & temperancie all the dayes of his life.Esai. 58.6. Luke 21.34. Rom. 13.13. Whereas notwithstanding our deare mo∣ther expreslie doeth teach, That fasting is a meritorious worke of it selfe, whereby a man may merit heauen, the fauour of God, and life euerlasting, as hath bene declared before. Seeing then that the Heretikes make
no account hereof, but rather esteeme it for vile, and an open blasphemie towards GOD, so doeth it appeare, that they do hate and abhorre the right fasting of the holie Church. Concerning Penaunce, mortification,Abstinence. and brideling of the flesh, therein they doe not likewise conceiue anie great pride: for otherwise they would goe to shrift, where∣as nowe they mocke with it, and with all the penaunces which the ghostlie father doeth but then the penitent soules: withall. Further, they will haue Priests to marrie wiues▪ That eche one shall haue his mar∣ried wife,1. Cor. 7.2. and euerie woman her espou∣sed husband, to the ende, aduoutrie & fornication may bee auoided. And will not lende out their wiues to the parishe Priestes nor Monkes, like as the good Catholike felowes (especiallie in Spaine) doe, for to pleasure the holie Clementish communitie, as is before rehearsed. They passe not for anie Ember weekes: They obserue neither Lent, nor Shroue∣tide, Saint Martins, nor Twelfth daye at night: they will not daunse, neither will they drinke anie more, than to satisfie their thirst: once they wil be right Huguenots▪
they do not imitate their forefathers: they will haue a newe lawe after their manner: they esteeme it not worth a rotten medler, to remooue into a Cloister or religious house, and to begge from doore to doore: they skoffe with the holie Monkes coate: they do not greatlie glorie to be buried in a Monkes greasie hoode: they count the rope wherewith the Friers are girt, of no worth: but (say rather) It would fitte bet∣ter about his throte, than about his loynes: they would not giue a beane, for the hearn garment of Heremites: they will not be chastised, and receiue the Mise∣rere, till vnto vitulos: they will not whip them selues, like as the Spaniardes doe at Bruxelles, and the cōpanie of those which are called Flagellantes: they make no ac∣count of pilgrimages, and will not goe barefoot and bare head in processions, af∣ter the holie sacrament of Miracles, with a torche in their hand: they esteeme all the festiuall and loytering dayes neuer a whit: and when the good Catholikes doe sit in Tauernes drinking and swilling, de∣uoutlie obseruing the festiuall dayes, then sit these in their shoppes at worke, or else go to heare some sermon, or walke abroad:
in so much, that at Antwerpe (when pub∣lique preaching of the Gospell was per∣mitted) it hath bene firmelie found by the impost and taxes of drinke, that these holie dayes haue bene neglected: where through the Almoners found them selues likewise much greeued, because they did not receiue such summes of money, as they were wont to doe by brokes of those which in their drunkenesse were wont to wound and slaie eche other: for so much as the Heretikes did not celebrate these festiuall dayes af∣ter the olde order of the Romish Church. In summe, they will not doe any thing at all to mortifie their fleshe, otherwise than the Apostles haue charged them to do, or then they did them selues, as though in deede they were Apostles them selues. So that we may plainlie perceiue, they doe not regard at al the fasting, abstinēce, mor∣tification, or penance of the holie Church worth an oatten cake. And therefore can they not in like case merit heauen, I omitte that they should make others partakers of their merites, like as our Catholike Monkes & Priests, and especiallie the greie Friers do:The penance of greie Friers. which are so leane, as though they had lien disea∣sed
seuen yeares in a coale house, and doe such penaunce, that wee may perceiue by their bleared eyes, they haue not droncke so much wine, as they desired to haue done: They lay their heads at one side on their shoulders:Esai. 58.5. They wreith their neckes like a rush, they haue alwayes their Dirige booke in their hands:Esai. 59.5. They punishe their owne flesh: they wrinkle their foreheads like a Bucke: they make their eyes as dim as an Owle: they watche by night, to sleepe in the day: they forsake their owne riches and substance, to liue on the sweate of o∣ther mens browes: they labour neuer a whit, to the ende they may enter into more deepe contemplations: they vowe cha∣stitie, and will not haue wiues them selues, to the ende and purpose, they may the more bouldlier shriue, and the better com∣fort other mennes wiues and daughters: they vowe obedience vnto their chiefe ru∣ler, for to bee released and wholie freed from all obedience towardes other Ma∣gistrates and rulers: they take vpon them pouertie, to enriche their Monkerie: they wander like pilgrimes, to fill their baight bagges with lumpes of bread and roast meat: they visit the sicke, to cause them to
put on S. Francis cope, and go to tend those which are redie to leaue this life, to helpe thē make their willes: they weare a hearie garment and a graie coate, to shewe that they are like to wilde beastes and wolues in doing their penance: they weare a fooles hood, to declare that the world is repleni∣shed with idiotes: to be short, we may per∣ceiue by their noses, that they loue morti∣fication, as a dogge doeth a cudgell. But what shal I say concerning the holy Prelates and Bishops,Penance of the Bishops. who in al their clo∣thing & vttermost habits do shewe their in∣ward penance & mortification? Doe they not weare a Miter on their head with two hornes, to signifie that they doe knowe (by heart) both the testaments a like? and are alwayes prest to butte with their hornes a∣gainst al heretiques? As also to shewe that they haue bin crowned wt thornes, aswel as our Lord was? And sometime they weare them snow white, to declare their vndefiled purenesse. Doe they not weare a paire of gloues, that their left hande knoweth not what the right hand doth? And, their gold ring, what doth it els signifie,Golde ring. but that they be vpright & without dissimulation? Their staffe, that they are strōg against heretiks?
And their handkercher (which is alwaies at hand) that they bee euer readie to aban∣don all earthlie filthines, and wholie doe rubbe of their fleshlie affections? After this, all Priestes in generall, haue they not a shauen crowne on their heades, to shewe, that like as a round crowne hath no corners, so haue they not anie filthines, which they can spare, or be without. But if I should rehearse all these matters peece by peece, it would verilie seeme to be a Ba∣bylon, which is, A fowle confusion, or meruellous medlie. Therefore, it is suffi∣ent to gather hereby, what great mortifi∣cation doeth lurke and lie hidden in the skinnes of these holie subiectes of the Ro∣mish Church, which by their outward ap∣parell and seeming, doe shewe such excee∣ding great holinesse. I referre now al men to consider what is to be thought of their inward parts, which are so holie, as though they were possest with seuen spirites. To the contrarie whereof, these newe Prea∣chers, haue neither sticke nor staffe, myter nor ring, neither yet anie shauen crownes or other, whereby they may declare their mortification: yea, they goe arraied like o∣ther plaine people, and say, that Penance
and mortification doeth not consist in such and such like outward ceremonies,Ioel. 2.13. Iere. 4.1.2.4. but in the conuersion of the mind and soule to Godwardes, and in an inwarde feeling of miseries, a true feling of Gods wrath against sinne, and in a firme faith and trustie staie vppon Gods goodnes and mercie through the merites of Ie∣sus Christ. Moreouer,1. Tim. 6.8. That bodilie ex∣cercise is litle vailable, but Godlinesse in all thinges is profitable and helpefull. Wherein they sufficientlie shewe, that they knowe litle concerning the mortifica∣tion which the holie Church doeth teache, and they contemne holie Confession, Con∣trition, Absolution, and Satisfaction, and other such like thinges, and loue the first day of Lent aswell as the last. Behold, for this cause is it, that Maister Gentianus hath so cunninglie concluded in this Arti∣cle, That they hate & wholie condemne fasting, praying, abstinence, and morti∣fication of the flesh. The iii. Chapter. VVhich doeth shewe, howe it is to be vnderstood, that we can not make satisfaction for the least offence: and hree is concluded, that the penaunce of Heretikes is not acceptable with God.
BVt forsomuch as they do here acknow∣ledge, that we can neuer make satisfac∣tion for the least offence of the worlde, that might seeme to be a great heresie: for if it were so, the Heretikes shoulde haue great reason to saye, that our satisfaction were vaine and friuolous. And therefore they would say,In the 7. chap. of the 2. part. as hath bin shewed before, That we ought to laie aside and treade vnder foote all hope of satisfaction, and wholy to cleaue & trust to the meere goodnes & vndeserued mercie of God,Rom. 3.21.24 25.4.6.16.5. Galat. 2.16 3.13. Ephe. 2.8.9. 2. Tim. 1.9. 1. Pet. 1.19. Esai. 53.5. which in respect of our partes, is without desert bestowed vpō vs, but in respect of Gods righteousnes, is giuen vs for an exceding deere price, to witte, the bloud of Christ Iesus the vnspotted lambe, which (as E∣saie saith) hath borne our infirmities, & was laden with our punishments: which was wounded for our sins, and for our sakes did suffer death: and vpon him is laid the punishment whereby we are at peace. And hereout they conclude with Paul, That we haue (through Christ) all satisfaction,Colos. 2.3.4.5 1. Cor. 1.30. and that hee is wholie our saluation, iustification, and deliuerance▪ And with Peter,Act. 4.12. That by none other in the world, saluation is to be gotten, for
somuch as there is not anie other name giuen to mankinde, whereby they may be saued: insomuch that all our boasts,Rom. 3.27. 1. Cor. 1.29. whether it be of good workes, merites, or satisfaction, is wholie excluded and brought to nothing: in so much as be∣fore God it doth not preuaile, and that no fleshe can be iustified in his presence by the workes of the lawe,Psal. 143.2. Iob. 9.3 Rom. in the 3. and 4 chap. and Gal. in the 2. throughout. Esaie 64.6. and that all our righteousnes is naught els but a stai∣ned cloth. But al this is heresie, as it hath ben sufficientlie shewed before, and they which learne such, are hanged and burned like Heretikes.In the 2. part in the chap. of Satisfaction. For els (as hath bin said) what should become of satisfaction, and meritorious deedes, which (according to the doctrine of the holy Church) do amend faultes escaped,These are the proper wordes of Anthonius v∣pon the Sent. par. 3. in tit. 14 cap. 20. and by good foresight de∣fend and set vs free from those to come? What should become of al our good works whereby wee can deserue three sundrie things, namelie, Eternall life, Increase & augmentation of mercie,These are the wordes of Bar∣nardine Roset sermone 20. and Forgiuenes of sinnes? What should become of the me∣rites of Saintes, through the which the holie church doeth pray vnto God, that he wil pardon all their offences, through the Saintes, whose reliques & bones do lie on
the altar where the Masse is said?This is in a prayer which the Priests say in their Masse presentlie after Consiteor, and herewith doeth agree Pet. Lom. in the 4. booke of Sent. dis. 45 Alto Bonauen. in the 2. article, and al other ca∣tholiks writers In so much, as (often) shee doeth pray through the merites of ashes, horses and dogges, whose bones for the most parte remaines also (as reliques) on their altars. What (moreouer) should become of our excee∣ding good workes, which are called Ope∣ra supererogationis, wherewith wee doe not onelie make satisfaction for our selues, but also for others, and especiallie for the soules in Purgatorie? Yea, what shoulde become of Purgatorie it selfe, if there were not satisfaction? What would be∣come of Pardons and Bulles, which are allowed and sent from the Pope? Verelie they would serue for no purpose better, than to be brought to the house of office, to be sealed with portingale waxe, if so bee it were true, which Maister Gentianus doth here set downe, as that wee are vnable to make recompence for the least offence. It were in deede a lamentable case: therefore we must vnderstande him here aright. For his meaning was to speake thus obscure∣lie, because he would tole and entise the he∣retikes into the field. For otherwise, this is not his meaning: but doeth simplie vn∣derstand, that we can not satisfie, Nisi con∣currente
gratia, that is to say, Except mercie doeth assist, and helpe our me∣rites (as is said before) sometimes tho∣rough the pikes. For we haue apparant∣lie concluded, that wee must make a bar∣gain betwixt God and vs. He doeth giue vs his mercie in our baptisme: but after that, wee must shift for our selues, and by our good deedes bind God vnto vs, so that of duetie he must receiue vs into heauen: especiallie if we be assisted wt the meanes and by helpes of holie church: namelie, by the vertue of the Masse, holie water, ta∣pers, &c. and with the Popes Bulles: for thereby will our infirmities amende, like corne shaken with a shower of haile, or like fish left on the sandes, and as sower Ale in Sommer. And if so be that (besides this) we will submit our selues, and take vnto vs the habit of a Monke or Frier, and so frame our selues after the ful shapen order of S. Francis, & S. Dominicks rule,Of supereroga¦torie works, read Peter de Asolo in the booke called, Asser. Cath. si∣dei, where hee speaketh of the Law. And Ek. in his Pamph. and so compasse more then God hath commaun∣ded vs, then wee excell all the rest of our friendes in riches, and may bestowe some of our ouerplus vpon them, which wee like best. Like as our louing mother the holie Church hath neatelie concluded. Therfore
is Maister Gentianus to bee vnderstoode after this manner: Forsomuch as he doeth verie Doctorlike conclude, saying, Wee may not repose or trust hereto to much, to witte,All Paules E∣pistles are full of these doctri∣nes, & the pla∣e are noted before. that Christ shoulde haue made full satisfaction for vs: For albeit that S. Paule (euerie where) doeth teache o∣therwise, and (in anie case) will haue, that we shall repose all our confidence (without anie surmising or doubting) vppon the merites and satisfaction of Christ, yet this is not to be vnderstoode literallie▪ as the Heretikes do take it, but spirituallie, that is to say, after the glose & interpretation of the spirituall Coun∣cell of Trent, like as we haue sufficiently declared aboue. And therefore is that likewise true which Gentian doeth ga∣ther hereof, to witte, That God doth not accept or allowe the conuersion and re∣pentance of Heretikes, for so much as it is not done, as it ought to be. And it is not an easie matter (as he saith) to make God a flexen beard. For that can none do, but our deare mother the holie Church of Rome,God with a flaxen beard. which hath foure white feete, and can not erre. Therefore hath shee (in to∣ken that she wil make God a flexen beard)
a religious custome, to make her God with a graie beard like to flexe: And in their procession, when they carrie Corpus Do∣mini about, they doe likewise make a god with a flaxen bearde, and so beare him tri∣umphantlie about with a Tabber & pype, in manner as though they were going to the Theater, or to the playing of a Fen∣sers price. And howe be it, that Gentian saith, God will not be derided, or moc∣ked, that is vnderstood by the liuing God which is in heauen, and not by the same God which our deare mother doeth keepe as prisoner in the Sacrament boxe, a∣gainst her festiuall solenmizations. For that is a patient God, and is neuer an∣grie, but alwayes pleased alike, and at one staie: prouided alwayes, that he be saflie kept and well garded from myse, mothes and wormes, which are his deadlie foes.
Now followeth the ex∣position vpon the sixth and last part of Maister Gentian Heruet his Epistle, treating of the ignorance and wicked life of the Huguenote preachers, and of the Holines of the Pope, and other Prelates. The first Chapter. Declaring the lothing of Gentian Heruet, and what we must doe, when a Priest doeth lothe so much, that he doeth cast the Sacrament out of his stomache, after he hath said Masse. IN the sixt and last part saieth Maister Gentian, that he doth maruellouslie lothe, when hee considereth the qualitie, that is, the custome and life of the newe Huguenot Preachers. But it were not good that he should consider that to much, after he hath song Masse: for o∣therwise he might make a mad sturre, and giue the holie Church both her hands full. He might by ouerlothing, cast a calfe, and so cause the louing God to voide his sto∣macke.
Were not that a goodlie loathing? It is true in deede, that the Romish church is prouided in this respect, that who so doeth cast the calfe, shall againe suppe vp the same without salt. Yet hereby might growe a greeuous matter: for the calfe might cause him to lothe more, then he did before: insomuch as the good God would lodge no longer in his stomacke, and then should we be driuen to burne him, and to keepe the holie ashes for a relique vnder some aultar. This were (in verie deede) most blasphemous, and worst of all for our deare mother the holie Church, that shee should handle the matter with her blessed God, as she doeth with Heretikes and Hu∣guenotes. True it is, that vpon a time, when the Doctors were assembled together at Pa∣ris, and with this matter beeing greatlie encombred, there was one of the ancient which did esteeme and passe it verie light∣lie, saying: Seeing hee did permit him∣selfe to be crucified of the Iewes, why should he not suffer him self to be burnt of vs? And thervpon was it concluded, that which (yet in these dayes) is to bee seene in the Cantils of Masses, and all
Masse bookes,This is in the Masse booke, &  thus iudged in the Councel of Orlians, in the 5. Chap. to wit, that both he, and the cast Calfe, shall together bee burnt without redemption, and thereof to be made holie ashes, for to seale, on the first day in Lent, or on Ashewednesday, all good, godlie, or deuoute people there∣withall on their forehead. Yet were it not meete in these dayes, to followe that Councell in burning him, see∣ing the Heretikes doe on all sides so ouer∣charge him: for if he perceiue nowe, that the Catholikes will also burne him, his heart might fal into his heeles, & cause him to loose his courage quite, and than our game were quite lost. Therefore I would wishe Maister Gentian to be friendlie in treated, not to loth so sore, especiallie after he hath said Masse: or else, if in cace his stomacke be so tender, that he cannot abide anie filthines, he ought to beware frō loo∣king to muche on the Huguenote prea∣chers forsomuch as they bring such loth∣somnes to his stomacke. The ii. Chapter. Of the great knowledge & holines of Priestes & Monks. BVt I pray you let vs heare, whereat he doth so much loath. Hee saith first, that they are the most ignorant and the moste
vnlearned, which are to bee founde in the world: & after that, that they are likewise of a wicked life. But before he doth come so far, he doth aboue al, protest, That there is in some Priests & Monkes, & other re∣ligious persons, a certaine excessiue and beastly ignorāce. yea, that some do lead a verie lewde life. Which he doth handle verie wisely & circumspectly, to the end we should the sooner beleeue him to desire a re∣formation, aswell as others do. Like as we may lightly gather hereof (according as himselfe doth witnes) that he hath expoun∣ded the sixth article of the coūcell of Calce∣donie, & permitted the same to bee extant in print. Is not this a great matter, & an vnfallible token, that he meanes the refor∣mation of the mind? He hath assuredly de∣serued hereby a fatt benefice, or a Bishops myter. Yet doe I not regard so much the first point, that there are such ignorant Priestes, which cannot reade their Masse nor Dirige bokes. And if they can do that, what neede they any further? Therfore is Gentian to blame, to esteme them vnlear∣ned: howbeit, I surmise he hath done thus, to shew that he hath learned Rhetorica, or The arte of eloquence and vtterance.
For thereby is learned, That if we seeke greatlie to rebuke any man, it cannot be done more aptlie, than by dilating and amplifying his default, in comparing him to some one, who hath bene tainted with the like. For, as touching the Monkes, it is no maruell, though they are vnlearned, seeing their profession doeth re∣quire the same: and the more ignorant they bee, the welcomer and more acceptable are they to their Couent. For those which are verie well learned, haue commonlie to much tongue, and therefore are often pu∣nished: and if then they do not mend, they are throwen into a dungeon, or are closed somewhere betwixt two walles in a seller, and there permit them to liue so long as they can. Like as might haue bene seene a yeere ago at Antwerpe, Ghaunt, and o∣ther places more, which haue remained there, some eight or ten yeeres, some twen∣tie, and thirtie yeeres. Therefore it is no maruell, though Monkes be vnlearned: in∣somuch as in the Latin tongue is vsed a common prouerbe: Monacho indoctior, that is to say, A great Asse or dolt, and more vnlearned than a Monke. Yea, they haue a speciall Latin tongue for their own
vse, which the learned sorte them selues can not vnderstand, and is called,Friers latin. Friers latin, or, Kitchen latin. But touching Priestes, they neede no great learning: for, if they can but onelie repeate the fiue se∣crete wordes of the Masse without giuing Priscian or Despauter a bobbe on the face (that is to say,Priscian or Des∣pauterie were men, which wrote the latin Grammer, or the rules for the latin tōgue. And therfore it is vsuallie said, that those whi∣che speake false latin, do strike Pris. and Despau. on the face. without intermingling of Friers latin) than is the matter cocke sure: They are more learned then the An∣gels in heauen: for they can make God, which thing the Angels can not doe. And if besides that, they knowe but howe to brewe of the smallest sort of latin withall, then hath their sowe pigd, they may bee bold to inuite their neighbors to the feast, and serue out messes with the great Laten ladell: for then they may not onelie bee pa∣rish Priestes, but also Bishops, Prelates, Cardinals, yea Popes them selues. And what more can they craue? For, touching their life, we must alwayes coniecture the best, like as is commaunded in the De∣crees, and not to thinke that those which dailie do handle God,This is openlie commaunded in the Decrees cap. in scriptis, dist. 96. would commit anie thing, that is not to be allowed. Therfore, if a Priest do kisse a maid, or grope her about the pappes, we must suppose, that
he is about to shrieue her, or doeth giue her absolution for her sinnes. And if so∣be any man doth take them opēlie with the manner, he must couer, or lap them about with his own cloake, lest he make them ashamed. For they are euen by na∣ture verie shamefast, & change collour, like a pewter platter: otherwise may not anie correct or punish thē (as is shewed before) wt the expressed wordes of the Sodomites, which would not be corrected of Loth: yea although they were the veriest smelsmocks which might liue. For they are of that nū∣ber which plead, Noli me tāgere, Touch me not. The iii. Chapter. VVhich treateth, whether the spiritualtie doe likewise practise knauerie: and here is repeated the high & no∣ble stocke of the Clergie, their forefathers▪ progenie, brought into 32. degrees, and ech set out and beautifi∣d with his armes, crestes, banners, and knightlie actes. IN recording or calling to mind the sūme hereof,Knauerie of the Clergie. a deuout & wel disposed catholike mind might suppose, whether it were pos∣sible for the most reuerend spiritual profes∣sors (whose daily exercise is to make god, & who are created and descended from the stocke of the most holie father the Pope of Rome) might vse, or were able to exer∣cise
any kind of knauerie or wicked dedes? God forbid, that anie such matters should passe in our thoughts. For howe were that possible? Seeing they are all sprong forth of so noble a stocke, & descended of so wor∣thie, so righteous & holy forefathers (whose footsteps they followe so feruently) that a mans heart must melt away, to heare the same rehearsed. But to the end it may seme no iest, I will (as brieflie as I may) define their noble & worthie progenie, and set it foorth to eche mans sight, to the ende these birds may be knowen by their kind, & these coltes by their dammes. And for that eche thing may appeare substantiall, I will (af∣ter the sagest and ancientest maner of these noble Dom Cannons of Colen & Ludick) bring their stocke into 32. degrees, to wit, eight from the fathers father,32. degres of the Clerg. & eight from the fathers mother: also eight frō the mo∣thers father, and eight from the mothers mother. For whoso can describe these de∣grees in their proper and deserued armes & banners, without doubt, there is nothing to be gainsaied, but that he may not only be a dom Cānon, but also freely possesse al the priuiledges of a Gentleman, and account himselfe to descend of the worthiest race.
Like as eche (who herein hath anie know∣ledge) will easilie condiscend. Therefore, if cace I can declare anie such thing of the old discent of the holie forefathers of the spiritualtie, then is the case sixe, and (spite their teeth) they must bee famous. For the bloud wil not lie, and a Goose can laie no Owles egges. It must be most true and certein, or Mussels are no fishe. The first 8. quarters.Concerning then the first eight quarters, they proceede onlie of noble, most famous, and renoumed Heretikes, notorious blas∣phemers of God, and shameles deriders, which haue plaied mocke holie daye with all religious and godlie setuice. For in place of the first, they haue the holie father & Pope Liberius,Liberius vpon whom they builde their stocke: who, after he had first sted∣fastlie professed the trueth (& for the same had bene banished by the Emperour Con∣stantius,Searche for tis Pope Libe∣rius, Athanasius in the Epistle to those whiche liue in vnitie. Also the histo∣ries of Platina, of Iohn Maiero, and the historie tripartite, and Abbas Visper∣gensis. did afterwardes reuoke, and, to please the Emperour, did turne his coate: and reputed him self amongst the Arrians, (which denied the eternall Deitie or god∣head of Christ.) And being for that cause banished, was (through the intreatie of the Noble Romane women) which were also of the Arrians disposition, called home a∣gaine
from his banishment, and restored a∣newe vnto his seate, from whence hee had bene driuen before: Insomuch as there was great dissention and brabling betwixt him and Pope Foelix, who had in his ab∣sence occupied his place: which Foelix,Iohn de Maier in the booke of Councells. Hierome and Eusebius also do witnes to haue bene an Heretike, and for that cause obteined the Seate of Rome, howbeit o∣ther Historiographers write the cōtrarie. After that, they count their discent from Anastasius the second, who in the dayes of Anastasius the Emperour,Anastatius the second. about the yeere of our Lord 500. did likewise decline from the trueth, and consented to the Nestori∣ans,Hereof peruse Platina and as¦cicul temporum, and the decrees cap. Anast. dist. 19. with the glosse vpon the same, & Nauel. who denied the humanitie or manhood of Christ: yea, he sought by al meanes pos∣sible, to call the Heretike Acatius from his banishment home againe, and vsed like∣wise free accesse and companie with Pho∣tinus the heretike: in so much that he was forsaken of al true beleeuing Bishops: and at last (being stroken by the hand of God) did (in easing him selfe) voide all his in∣trailes, and departed this life as Arrius did before him. Thirdlie, they boast them selues vppon Boniface the eight,Boniface the 8 who reigned in the
times of the Emperours Adolphus and Albertus: this prouerbe (in those dayes) passing of him: Intrauit vt vulpes, regna∣uit vt leo, mortuus est vt Canis: that is to say,Touching this, read Cornelius Abbatus, Iohn Maierus. Volaterranus in his 22. booke. Platina, Chroni∣con Charionis, Baleus and other Historiogra∣phers. He entred like a fox, raigned like a lion, and died like a dogge. For when Coelestin the fift (a good simple compani∣on) did possesse the Sea of Rome, and for his honestie (and specially for that he com∣maunded the Cardinals to ride no more on horses nor Mules, but vpon asses) was by them hated & had in contempt. This craf∣tie foxe did ordeine a man, to feine him selfe an Angel of God, who speaking through a gutter or pype which was bo∣red through a wal, did warne Coelestine by night (as in a vision) to giue vp his charge, he being vnfit for the place, and therefore to resigne it vnto some other, more able for that function. Insomuch as this Boniface (by this subtill deuice) obteined the Popedome, mocking with God and his owne profession. And im∣mediatlie after this, fearing least Coele∣stine might yet giue out him selfe for the right Pope, did throwe him into pri∣son, and caused him there (most misera∣blie) to ende his life. Further, hee play
many iniurious & vngodlie partes more: for he dispossessed (by meere force) two Cardi∣nals (being of the stocke of the Columne∣ses) not onelie from their Cardinalships, but also from their owne proper inheri∣tances, because they had reported, that hee was not the right and lawfull Pope. Also, he did banish and curse Sara Columna, wt all the Columneses. He refused to crowne the Emperour Albertus: and setting the crowne vpon his owne head, and girding the sword to his side, said, I am Emperour my selfe. Yet notwithstanding after that, the King of France did in his owne person crowne him, to spite the Pope: which king of Fraunce (named Philip) hee did like∣wise excommunicate, and adiudged him to be dispossessed and deposed from his king∣dome (the same apperteining to the Em∣perour Albertus) because hee denied the Pope for his Soueraigne. Yet besides this, in token of his godlinesse, and to the ende eche one might knowe, that hee deri∣rided his owne religion, It fortuned on a tyme in the Citie of Genes, that hee had in handling the Archdeane, na∣med Prochetum, vppon the first daye of Lent, cōmonly called Ashwednesday:
And in place that he shoulde print the signe of the crosse on his forehead with hallowed ashes, after the accustomed manner of the Romish Church, and say, Memento homo, quia cinis es, & in cinerem reuerteris,Seeke Nauel. and Chronic. Caion. that is to say, Remember (O man) that thou art ashes, and to ashes thou shalt returne: he tooke a handfull of as∣shes, and threwe them into the good mans eyes, and said in a great rage, Me∣mento homo, quia Gibellinus es, & cum Gi∣bellinis in cinerem reuerteris, that is to say, Remember (O man) that thou art a Gibel∣line (for they were called Gibellines, which tooke part with the Emperour) and shalt bee consumed with the Gibellines, to dust: and therewithall did he bereaue him of his benefice. But what shall I say further? It doeth manifestlie appeare, that he hath deserued a good place amongest the first quarters, seeing he was (at a general Coū∣cell holden in Paris) accused and founde guiltie of three speciall faultes,Seeke for this Councel, and f his death the Chronicle of France, called, Les Annales de France. namelie, of Murther, Heresie, and Simonie or bri∣berie▪ and for those causes, dispossessed of his Popedome: and shortlie after was ta∣ken as prisoner in the towne of Anagnia, where hee was resident, and from thence
conueied to Rome in a prison called castra de. S. Angel▪ where (through verie spite & malice) hee became raging madde, in so much as hee did gnawe and deuoure his owne handes, and so most miserablie (like to a dogge) ended his life: howbeit, it see∣med that the Diuels did maruelouslie mourne for him: for the same whole daye was heard in the prison, where hee died, such great and horrible thunderclappes, & terrible sturre, that it seemed, al the belles, Priestes, and Monkes in hell did sing his Requiem: for he had bene vnspeakable ho∣lie, forsomuch as hee was the first which did set forth the shoppe of Indulgencies & pardons, and first brought to light the yere of Iubile. Therefore it is most meete,Agippa de va∣ntate scientia. that hee furnishe this thirde place of these eight first quarters. The fourth place we may (of dutie) at∣tribute to Iohn the 23. forsomuch as hee was a manifest and professed Heretike: defending not onelie by woordes, but also openlie, that the soules die together with the bodies, till the later day of the resur∣rection. And verelie at his election, the ho∣lie spirit of the Cardinals was so zealously inflamed, that two of the most principall
were murdered:Reade of this Pope in Mao historiarum, Sup∣plementum Chro¦nicorum, Chron. Eusebii, Chron. Carionis, and the extraa. of Iohn the .22. begin▪ thus. Cum inter nnnullos. Ex▪ de verborum signifi∣catio. yea, he him selfe was in∣flamed with a burning zeale towardes our deare mother the holie Church: and there∣fore did condemne the Emperour Lodo∣wick of Beyren for an Heretike, because he would not take the Emperiall crowne at the hands of the holie Pope of Rome: yet was he him selfe afterwardes in a ge∣nerall Councell found an heretike, and by Nicholas the fift (who possessed his place) was figuratiuelie burnt like an heretike. And further, after his death, were his opi∣nions by his successour Benedict the 12. condemned for heresies. Hee was also before by the Generall of the Gray friers (named Michael of Saesena) complained vppon, and accused of an other heresie, to wit, that he would by force mainteine, a∣gainst all sufficient and true proofes of the Scripture, That Christ and his Apostles had in this worlde borne temporall rule: yet notwithstanding, howesoeuer hee vsed the matter,Supplementu Chron. Chron Eusebii Polidor. Virgil. in the booke de inuen. rerum. he reigned & remained Pope. For he made two Saintes, namely, Tho∣mas of Erford, & Thomas of Aquin: and ordeined, that at night should be song Aue Maria: therfore is he also worthily nūbred among the noble ringleaders of the spiri∣tualtie
in this first quarter. For the sift in this quarter,Grego. the 11. we may place Gregorie the 11. who reigned about the yere 1371. Seeing he lying at the point of death, did make a most true cōfession, de∣claring him self thereby not much better than an heretike: for after he (like an honest man) had of meere malice banished & cur∣sed all the Florentines,Nauclerus. and with a mightie armie, had sought their confusion: and had raised the tenth pennie throughout al Ger∣manie,The tnth pen∣nie in Germany whereby hee had caused a great schisme to grow among the people: At last (death approching) he sent for his Cardi∣nals, and other Prelates, to come to him, and holding the Sacrament in his hande, coniured euerie one which were there pre∣sent, that they shoulde beware from doo∣ing those, or other such like thinges as hee had done: forsomuch as hee (in place of Gods woorde, and following of good counsell) had inclined to those, whiche sought to preferre their owne false imagi∣nations and feigned dreames, and there∣by had brought the Church to a perfect likelihoode of confusion and ruine, by great debate and schisme: like as i did sufficientlie appeare after his death.
For immediatlie did arrise the horrible schisme, which the Historiographers doe tearme, The twentie and two Schisme, which continued aboue fortie yeres. After this followeth in the sixt place of the first quarter, a worthie and an Ancient bearer vp of all vngodlie Heretikes and Epicures,Iohn the 24. called Iohn the 24. who at the first brought to passe, that Alexander the fift and Pope next before him, by an ap∣proued and faithfull seruice of his Physi∣cion (named Daniel de Sancta Sophia) was,Bptista Panact. in the 56. ser∣mon. Peruse the Councell of Contance, in the 2 booke of Councels. Stella. with a Romish figge pickt ouer the pearch, to make place for this honest man. After that, hauing assembled and gathe∣red together the Cardinals at Bullin, (by force of armes) compelled therevnto, to the ende they should choose a Pope accor∣ding to his liking: when they had nomi∣nated three or foure which did not please his mind, at last he demaunded for him self Saint Peters cloake and habit, francklie to bestowe it where it pleased him best. But hee put it on him self, and saied, Ego∣met ipse nunc Papa sum, that is to say, I am nowe Pope my selfe. Was not this an excellent, orderlie, and lawfull election of the holie Ghost.
After this,These are in a maner the pro∣per wordes of the Councel of Constance, like as it is set downe in the 2. booke of Coūc. in the 1050. leafe. And are touched by all Historiograph▪ He was conuicted and pro∣ued in the Councell of Cōstance, an ap∣parant Heretike, vngodlie knaue, an op∣pressour of the poore, a persecutour of the righteous, a staie to the wicked, a piller to barterers of benefices, a glasse of dishonestie, a vessell full of all vice▪ yea a Diuell incarnat, & therefore deposed from his holie Apostolical Romish Seat: beeing conuict with witnesses, that he had not onely vnlawfullie kept com∣panie with his brothers sister, manie ho∣lie Nonnes, yong maides, and married wiues: but also like a Captain and wor∣thie champiō of all Hereticks, did make sale of all manner of Prebendes, Bene∣fices, Churches and Bishoprikes for his most profit, & bestowed them on yong babes, & misse begotten bastardes. Yea moreouer, did him selfe oftentimes sell one benefice to sundrie persons at one time, and made a mocke at all religions, for that hee did not onelie contemne Masses, Eeuensong, the Seuen tides, the Fasting dayes, and Abstinence: but had likewise solde Saint Iohns head (which lay in Saint Syluesters cloister) to the Florentines for fiftie thousand Duccats,
if so be he had not bene hindered from the same by the Citizens of Rome: And had said openlie in the presence of many Prelates and other honest and credible hearers, That after this life, no other was to be looked for: yea, remained vn∣moueable in the same: that the soule to∣gether with the bodie, did quite die, and that there is no resurrection at all. Aha Sirs, is not this good stuffe? And yet notwithstanding, this holy father being accused of more than foure and fiftie such like articles, which were orderlie read to his face, hee answered to eche of them, sighing verie heauilie: Alas, I haue committed yet a more haynous offence than this is: namelie, for that I haue des∣cended and come down from the moū∣taines of Italie, and haue submitted my selfe in Germanie vnder the subiection of this Councell. Nowe marke well, if our holie fathers and Popes, by this ex∣ample, are not well instructed, to suffer no Councel to be holden out of Italie, in a coū∣trie where they haue neither power nor iu∣risdictiō. In cōclusion, this holy father was deposed from his Popedome, notwithstan∣ding he was him self exceeding holy, consi∣dering he had canonized Saints, & had en∣tred
S. Brigit in the register of saints. And he was the same which sōg the high Masse on Christmasse day in the councel of Con∣stance, where the Emperour Sigismund (in maner of his Deacon) did sing the gos∣pell. Therfore it is great reason, that this place be bequeathed vnto him. And further, seeing Leo the 7. did freshlie followe him in his holy Romish beleefe,Leo the 7. he shal also furnish the place following wt his armes i this quarter. For besides his great gluttonie & incōtinēcie for the which he is set forth for a horrel in histories: also besides that, he deposed the Duke of Vrbin from his Dukedome, & ioyned the same to the Sea of Rome: that he likewise did be∣reaue the Duke of Ferrara of two townes, Mantua & Regiū Lepidi: and besides, the bloudie warres which he kindled & main∣teined betwixt the Emperour Charles 5. & Francis king of France▪ yet hath he,This is rehear¦sed in the book which the No∣bles of Germa∣nie set out, for to be freed frō the Councel of Trent. Also in Baleus & other Historiograp. to an euerlasting memorie, left this brag of him self, namely, That he esteemed no more of the life to com, thē the foresaid Iohn: & whatsouer is written of Christ in the gospel, he accounted for iestes & fables. In consideration whereof, when Peter Bembus, a learned man, which afterward
likewise became a Cardinall, did alledge vnto him a certein and true place and rea∣son ut of the Gospell, he answered laugh∣ing: I pray you what come you nowe forth with your fables of Christ? Inso∣much as he in deede hath earned an honest roome amongst this sacred companie. Clemens the 7 Reade the Pas∣quilles of the Popes. Also ye Epitaphes of Clement, & the booke called, Resistance of the workes of Christ and the Pope▪ etat in French.At last we wil conclude these eight first quarters with Clement the 7. who hath also bin a holie father of the Spiritualtie, most famous and renoumed, by reason of his diuelishnes, poysoning, treason, and coniuring. For he dispatcht manie Cardi∣nals with the Italian tricke, to the end he might possesse their goods, and so ga∣ther money, wherewithall hee might buie the Popelie seate, which was resigned vn∣to him for thirtie thousand Ducates. Yet especiallie it is reported of him, that hee (lying on his death bed) said, That nowe at last he shuld be resolued of that great doubt, whether soules were mortall, or not So as it may ealie bee coniectured hereby, what opinion hee helde tuching Christian beleefe, the whole Scripture, & of his owne religion, which he manifested directlie yet an other way. For beeing de∣stitute of money, he set certein Apostles of
gold to pawne, to get some money by that meane, and after that did raise an Impost vpon the expedition of Bulles, which hee named, Pro redemptione Apostolorum, that is to say, For the redeeming of the Apostles. In respect whereof, wee may worthilie place him, to stoppe vp the nea∣thermost hole in the bottome of these eight first noble quarters, seruing properlie for Heretikes and publike blasphemers of GOD: which for armes beare in their shieldes Foxes, Wilde Swine, Dragons, Sea horses,Armes of the first quarter of holie Popes. called in Latin Hippopota∣mi, Adders, Basiliskes, Snakes, and Spy∣ders▪ and in their bāners the cities whence they are descended, namelie, Rome, Sa∣maria, Dan and Bethel▪ And for their squiers▪ Epicurus, Lucian, Arrius, Sabel∣lius, Iulian, the cōductours of reprobates, and other such like. The second eight quarters of this noble and renoumed stocke of spiritualtie,The seconde eight quarters. de¦pend most vpon vnchastitie, whorehūters, breakers of Wedlocke, or adulterers, and Sodomiticall knaues. Of which, Pope Ioan the ninth, or Iuth is the right mother and most meete aun∣cient bearer. For,Pope Iuth. as a litter of pigges are
farrowed of a fruitfull Sowe, so are the Priestes and Monkes, and all the Spiri∣tualtie sprong from her. And in very deed, she was inflamed with such a zealous loue towards this holie generation,Platina, Chroni∣con Charionis, and other Historiogra∣phers. that she suffred her selfe be gotten with child by one of the Cardinals, and was deliue∣red of a childe in the midst of the streate, at the midway betwixt the Colosseū & S. Clements chappel, euen as she was de∣uoutlie and statelie treading in processi∣on: By the same token, that yet at this day there doeth remaine an image of stone hewen out of the earth, & that the Popes in their processions doe neuer passe that way: fearing lest the like might happen to them also. Neuerthelesse, for the auoiding of such a chaūce, the holy Ro∣mish Church did ordeine two chaires to be heawen of Porphyr stone, where they vsed to feele frō vnder, whether the new chosen Pope was furnished of al his ware. How∣beit that custome is now left, for that they make the matter manifest by acte, and by the number of their bastards which before hande they do get. Lando.Afterwarde, they are descended of Lan∣do, who begotte Iohn the eleuenth in a∣dulterie,
and further passed the most part of his life with whores:Petrus Pomonst. wherefore hee is to occupie the seconde degree of these quarters. And his sonne Iohn the eleuenth maye followe his father,Iohn the 11. in the thirde degree of this quarter: who, by the shameles whore Theodora, Regent & Gouernesse of the citie of Rome,This doth Luit∣prndus of Paui in a manner write frō word to word in his 2. booke the 12 and 13. chap. was first forced to vse for∣nication with her, and after that, when he had shewed him selfe willing in the same, was first created Bishop of Bullen, after, of Rauenna, and lastlie, made Pope of Rome. Which fell out a sower sawce vn∣to him: for Marozia, daughter to the fore∣said Theodora, being also a subtill strum∣pet, brought to passe by the helpe of her husband Guido Gouernour of Thuscane, that some of his souldiers did apprehende him at S. Iohns, in the Pallace of Lateran, in the yere 928. & there wt a cushen twhart∣ning his mouth, did pitifully smother him. And this happened, to the ende that this Morozia might further her son Iohn the 12. (whom Pope Sergio the 3. had begot∣ten on her in adulterie) to the holy Seat of Rome. Howbeit, that ioy did not continue, forsomuch as he (that same yere) was by a
great commociō of the citizens of Rome, deposed, and Leo the 6. set in his place. But this Leo was within seuen monethes after, in the yeare 930. poysoned by Ma∣rozia: & further (as men suppose) Stepha∣nus the 6. who did succeede him, was ser∣ued wt the like saue, & sent to the kingdom of Mooles: Insomuch as the foresaid Iohn her sonne did (at last) achieue the holie seat againe. Nowe, this said Marozia had a sonne named Albericus, who perceiuing that he was mightie and feared in the citie of Rome, did compell the nobilitie & Ma∣gistrates of the same by oth, that they, (af∣ter the decease of Pope Agapitus who then reigned) should elect and make his sonne Octauian Pope, as in deede they did,Iohn the 13. and hee was called Iohn the 13. who (forsomuch as he was descēded of whores and knaues) shewed him selfe no change∣ling, but declared of what stocke he came. For he was so excedingly giuē to vncha∣stitie, and filthie liuing, that he maintai∣ned an open stewes: and being for the same blamed by the Cardinals, from the one he cut of his nose, from the other his hand, and from the third his legges and priuie members. So that of duetie
he is to be placed in the fourth quarter a∣mongst the noble forefathers of the spiri∣tualtie. This is the verie same, who did vowe homage to the Emperour Otto, ac∣cording to the othe which is registred in the Decrees. And hee likewise crowned the said Emperour. But when Otto had turned his backe, hee tooke part against him with his foe, the sonne of Albertus Be∣rengarius. The which when the Empe∣rour vnderstood, hee returned againe to∣wards Rome: And then my lord the Pope betooke him selfe to his heeles, flying into the wilde wooddes, and would not by anie meanes come in presence of the Empe∣rour, notwithstanding the promises and assurances whiche were made vnto him. Wherefore the Emperour caused a Coun∣cell to be gathered, wherein the Pope was complained vpon,This whole hi∣storie with the articles here set downe, are rehearsed by the Historio∣graphers. Luit∣prandus almost throughout his booke. and accused with these faultes following, to wit, That he did not read his drudgerie, that in saying Masse, he did not receiue the Sacrament of the Altar, that hee had made a Deane in a stable, that hee had committed whore∣dome with two sisters, that he had made Bishops of children, that he had defiled manie yong virgins and widowes, that
of S. Iohns Pallaice at Laterane, hee had made an open stewes: that he had lyen by and had at will, his fathers Concu∣bine, named Stephana, also a widdowe named Rauera, and yet an other called Anna, with a Niece of hers. Besides, that he had bin the occasion of fiers, which sūdrie times had happened, that he had broken vp windowes and gates in the night time, that he had offered vp wine to the deuill, and in gaming with dice, had inuocated & besought ayde of the deuill, wt manie such Popelie parts, which were to tedious to repeate. For which cau∣ses, he was in that Councel deposed by the Emperour (with consent of the Prelates) and in his steade was placed Leo the 8. Yet notwithstāding,This is repea∣ted by Ioh. Ma∣rius, Nauclerus, Chron. Sigis. Ro∣bert. Barus. after the Emperours departure, the whores of Rome (whom he had his friends) wrought so much with the Nobilitie of Rome, & plaied their partes so gallantlie with great summes of mo∣ney, and by promising the substance and coyne of the Church, that hee was yet once againe called to the Seate, and the afore∣said Leo put of. But this soone ripe fruite was soone rotten: for hee was shortelie af∣ter,
by a man that dwelt without Rome, in the night time, thrust thorough with a dagger, beeing taken a sleepe in bed with his wife. And this was hee, who first taught his successours to christen belles, & caused the great bell of S. Iohns at Lateran, to be cal∣led by his owne name. After whom, wee may place Paule the 2. in the fourth degree of this quarter,Paule the 2. in this degree. who first boasted to haue al Gods and mans lawes shut vppe in his breast. So as it was no maruell, that hee did so carefullie pamper the same with ioyllie good cheare, & for the most part, past and spent his time with view∣ing of olde golde, and antique coynes. And further, to studie by all the meanes he could deuise, to make and set out him self proper and neate, with al maner of pearles and pretious stones: wherein hee past all his predecessours. Yea, when hee should shewe him selfe, hee did painte and cou∣lour his face with a certein kinde of ver∣nishe, and other like trumperie, like to his countriewomen the Courtisanes and Strumpettes of Venize, amongst whom hee had a long time gonne to schoole.
He was the first likewise, which ordeined, That the Cardinals shuld haue their close stooles, and pispottes couered ouer with Crimson veluet▪ which they (euen at this day) do yet most duelie obserue, as did suf∣ficientlie appeare at the Councel of Trent, whither they caused such goodlie stuffe to be conueied on their Mules amongst other of their most costlie and precious iewels. At last (notwithstanding that hee was reported to be most cunning and famous in the arte of witchcraft and coniuring) hee could not auoide nor saue him selfe, but the deuill his good maister brake his necke, whilest he was practising his vntollerable Sodomiticall filthines, wherein hee often (after the Venetian maner) did accustome him selfe. In consideration whereof, hee must of right be reckoned in the register of this gentle generation. After whome (not onelie in the Pope∣dome but also in good life▪Sixtus the 4.) did follow Six∣tus the 4. who was not him selfe alone ad∣dicted to this lothsome Sodomitical sinne, and to all manner of fleshlie desire besides, (whereon he consumed within the space of two yeeres,Iohannes Rauisi∣us Textor, in his booke called Officina. the summe of three hundreth thousand Duccates) but further gaue li∣cence
to all the generation & kinred of the Cardinall of Saint Lucie (who was his huntsman) that they might vse this Sodo∣miticall filthines in the three whotest mo∣nethes of the yeere, namelie, Iune, Iulie, & August. And this is the holy man, who hath ordeined so manie festiuall dayes, as Saint Francis &c. and of the Presentati∣on of our Ladie. And further hath made that deuoute prayer, whiche beginneth, Aue sanctissima Maria mater Dei, Regi∣na coeli, &c. giuing a thousand yeeres re∣mission out of Purgatorie, to whom soe∣uer doeth say the same before her Image. Yea he hath also made a Saint of S. Bona∣uentura: wherefore it is good reason that he should likewise furnish a place amongst the companie of our Saintes. Immediatlie after this,Innocent the 8 followed Inno∣cent the 8. who had but eight bastarde sonnes, and as manie daughters: which he fostered and brought vp all verie highlie, according to his ofspring. Yet forsomuch as he was of no great discent, and that it is but of small estimation with Popes, to haue bastardes, wee will let him steppe for such as he is. And place Iulius the third in the seuenthIulius the 3.
degree of this quarter, who did not onelie abuse him selfe with strumpets,The memorie of these two Popes is yet so freshe, that the pranckes which be here rehear∣se, are knowen to eche. but also kept manifestlie a yong knaue called In∣nocent, to his filthie, vnnaturall and vn∣chaste Sodomiticall vse: yea and did often boast himself therof. And when he was cho∣sen Pope, he did giue vnto the said boye, as a reward for his beastlines, his Cardinals hatte, with his syrname and armes: So that he afterwardes was alwayes named by the Popes syrname, and yet is so cal∣led, namely, Cardinalin de Monte, that is to say, The litle Cardinal of Monte. Lastlie, we will place Pope Pius the 4. (nowe last ouerpassed) in the eight de∣gree of this quarter:Pius the 4. of whom our Priests, Bishops, and Prelates are (for the most part) sprong vp and proceeded. This good holie father, when hee iourneied thorough Bullin towardes Rome, at what time the the Seate was voyde, hee fained him selfe verie weake and sicklie, hoping thereby to winne the Cardinals vnto him, and that they would chose him, vpon hope, he would not tarie long by it. And when this fetche would not serue his turne, hee sought ano∣ther waye: for beeing in the Conclaui, which is, the Closet of Cardinals, he did
glose with the Cardinall of Trent, as though hee would permit in Religion ma∣nie things to the Germanes, as namelie, The whole exercise of the Sacrament, & the libertie of wedlock for Priestes. But when hee perceiued that the Cardinals were greatlie offended hereat, and that all this did not further, but rather hinder his intent, he proceeded further, & did by gifts and faire promises, buie their voyces. And at the same time got for a prouerbe of the Pasquill: Impius es tu, Pater tuus latro est, Mater tua Meretrix, quomodo huc intrasti? that is to say, Thou art an infi∣dell, thy father is a murtherer, and thy mother a whoore, how camest thou hi∣ther? For which occasion, to fetche out this shamefull staine of infidel, he would be cal∣led Pius, that is to say, Godlie. But to fall to our purpose, he loued not onelie the strū∣pettes and Courtesanes of Rome excee∣dingly, but also the married wiues. Inso∣much as in the latter and vttermost time of his age, besides an open and manifest Courtesane or whoore, he kept and main∣tained also, the wife of a certein Gentle∣mā of Rome, named Papyrio Capizucchi,
and most commonlie did eate Oysters and Snayles, and did drinke vnto them a verie strong wine called Mangeguerra, to re∣uiue and prouoke his fleshlie lust. And when all would not helpe, inso∣much as his Courtesane did opēlie deride him, as an impotent sewter, and that shee esteemed more of the foresaid litle Cardi∣nal de Monte, he caused her to be throwen in a stinking dungeon: yet afterwardes, of meare pitie and loue did set her free again, and hauing tyred him selfe on her, in his vnnaturall luste, and further beeing desi∣rous to solace him selfe in bedde with the foresaid Gentlewoman, did one night eate so manie Snailes, and dranke so much of the foresaide wine called Mangeguerra, thereby hauing recouered a freshe youth, that he got to bedde with her: from whence he neuer rose, but was borne wt his heeles forwardes vnder the greene coueringes. Wherevppon an Epitaph was grauen on his graue, as followeth: Le Donne, Lumagi, & Mangaiguerra, M'hāno luato dalla Sedia, & posto in terra That is to say:
Women, Snayles, and Mangaiguerra braue, From statelie seat, haue broght me in graue. He shall then (as of duetie to him ap∣perteyning) shut vp the seconde eight de∣gree, forsomuch as he had duentured his life in the daunger of whorish and most fil∣thie incontinencie, and thereby hath pur∣chased an euerlasting name, amongest the noble predecessours of the Clergie: who (most triumphātlie) beare in their armes, Buckes, Bulles, Beares, Leoppards,Armes of the second quarter of holy Popes. Har∣pies, Sowes, Mares, and salte Bitches: And in their banners, the cities of Rome, of Sodom & Gomorra: of whence their noble race is proceeded: and for their squi∣ers they haue Ammon, Absolon, Sarda∣napalus, and Heliogabalus. Nowe followeth the thirde eight de∣grees,The third eight degrees. from whence the sacred stocke of the spiritualtie is sprong vp: and these pro∣ceede most of greedie couetous persons, & rauening bloud houndes, which haue pur∣chased the Seate with money and bribes: and further haue stirred vp great commo∣tions and troubles, and shed much bloud. Therefore they weare in their armes, Li∣ons, Wolues, Crocodiles, Tygres, Ea∣gles,
Griffones, Hawkes, and Rauens. And haue for their squiers, Cain, Nemrod, Esau, Nero, and other such like. Marie in their banners, they beare the cities of Rome and Edom. The first of these Noble personages, may be Pope Formofus (who reigned a∣bout the yeare 893.) together with his ad∣uersaries, who haue brought such dissenti∣ons and discords in Christendome, that in many yeres after could not bee appeased. For the enuie which the one bare to the o∣ther, was so monstrous and vnnaturall, that Stephanus the 6. caused the dead bodie of Formosus to be taken out of his graue,Stephanus the sixt. & congregating a Councell for the same, did first commaunde him to be clothed with a Popely habit, and after stript him of that, clothing him with laie apparel: & after cut∣ting two of his fingers frō his right hand, caused them to be throwen into the riuer of Tiber, & then buried him as one of the vul∣gar & vnlearned sort: and caused all his or∣dinances to be voide & of no effect. To the contrarie whereof Romanus the successor of Stephanus,Nauclerus. did establish & allow againe all his actes & ordinances, and made those which Stephanus had enacted, to bee fru∣strate
and of no force. Whom also in this case Pope Theo∣dore the second did followe,Mare historiat. & Nauclerus. establishing al those which Formosus had ordeined to beare charge. The same also did (though not without great stirre and commotion) Iohn the tenth, who did succeede him, and did not only disanull al the actes & statutes of Stephanus, but further caused them in a common and vulgar Councell to be burnt. After wom did presentlie followe,Mare historia. Robert. Barnes. Chron. Sigisb. Bene∣dict the 4. and after Benedict, Leo the 5. After the which Leo followed Pope Chri∣stopher, whō we may of right place in the second degree of this third quarter, forso∣much as he did imprison those, which had receiued anie preferrement of the foresaid Benedict the fourth, & obteined the Seat perforce: so as poore Leo through sorrowe died. But this great vngratfulnes of the fore∣said Christopher was worthilie repaide:Christopher▪ For Sergius the third, a notorious whore∣hunter (as was signified before) did appre∣hend him there also,Sergius 3. and first kept him in a cloister, afterward in a cōmon gole, wher pitifully he ended his miserable dayes.In the 3. dege of the 2. quar∣ter. Supp. Chron▪ And this is the same Sergius, who yet
once againe commaunded the foresaid bo∣die of Pope Formosus to be digged out of his graue,Pope Formo∣sus beheadded. and most inhumanlie to bee be∣headded, and his other three fingers to bee cut off, and so did throwe the bodie into the riuer of Tyber: yet notwithstanding was it (in the time of Anastasius the third) fisht out againe: and being in S. Peters church honestlie buried, was by the Images and woodden idols (through a speciall mira∣cle) nodded vnto, and bid welcome: if hi∣stories do not lie. But that is a small fault: Once we will make this good man Sergi∣us Quarter maister in this thirde degree, considering that of so worthie a fellow, all other Popes, and the whole Clergie are growen like maggots of a rotten cheese. Boniface the 7For the fourth in this quarter, we may chose Pope Boniface the seuenth, who ha∣uing atchieued the Seate by vnlawfull meanes, began to perceiue that hee was not well thought of, nor assured at Rome. And therfore, he got him packing to Con∣stantinople: but forgot not priuilie to steale and take with him,This historie is rehearsed by Nauclerus, Rob. Barus, and Corn. Abbas. all the costlie iewels and treasures of Churches. Wher∣of (within eight monethes after hee was abandoned) he had made a great masse of
money, wherewithall he wrought so wilie, and blinded the eyes of all the Romanes, in such sorte, as they perceyuing no more his wickednes and naughtie dealings, did receiue him againe, and permitted them∣selues with the shine and brightnes of the gold to be blinded: so as he found meanes to apprehend as prisoner Pope Iohn the 15. who was placed in his roome,Pope Iohn his eies put out and hauing put out both his eyes, did famishe him (in prison) to death, and so got the go∣uernement vnto him againe: Howbeit, he enioyed not long, for being shortlie af∣ter ouertaken with a soudein death, was by the common people trayled alongst the streetes,Boniface the 8 his death. being thrust through with speares and bodkinnes, and at last, buri∣ed like vnto a lay and common man. Here may now followe Benedict the eight,Benedict the 8 vpon a blacke horse. who may set out this quarter with his armes: of whom the Histories doe a∣gree in one, that after his death hee appea∣red to a Bishop in a fearfull shape, sitting vpon a blacke horse: and when the Bishop had demanded of him: Art not thou Pope Benedict, who is departed this worlde?Fasci tempor. and other Hi∣storiographers He answered: I am verelie the subtil and miserable Benedict▪ But howe then stan∣deth
the case with you, good holy fa∣ther (quoth the Bishop:) Whervnto hee answered: I am most pitifully tormented and martyred: notwithstāding the mer∣cie of God is not quite shut from me, if so bee I may bee holpen with prayers, Masses, and Almesdeedes: and therfore shalt thou go to Iohn my successour, & tell him, that in such a coffer or chest, he shall finde a great summe of monie, which he must distribute to the poore: for whatsoeuer was giuē for me before, will not helpe, because it was stolen and euill gotten goods. Wherevpon the Bi∣shop, hauing done his message, did forsake his Bishoprike, and placed him selfe in a Cloister. But whether this be true, or whe∣ther it be a lie, or that the diuell or some end appeared in likenesse of the Pope, I refer it to the Doctours of Louen to iudge. Once (forsomuch as all Historiographers do witnesse alike, it is manifest, that he, as well as his predecessours, and successours, did gather the most part of their substance with rouing and stealing, and heaped the same by vngodlie meanes: wherefore it is reason, that he be also allowed a roome in this third quarter.
The sixt place in this quarter wee maye bequeath to Clement the 4. who could find out most notable meanes to fetch in monie and goods. For being crowned Pope,Clement the 4. hee sent for Charles, the French kings bro∣ther, & made him chief Councellour & Ge∣neral ouer the citie of Rome: & further, cau∣sed him to be crowned, by his Cardinals, king of Hierusalem & Sicil: yet vpon con∣dition, that hee should, by vowe, plight him selfe to paie yeerelie to the Church of Rome, fortie thousand crownes of golde, & should not at any time accept the Domi∣niō of Rome at the hands of the Almains, although it were profered vnto him.Naucler. Caion. And after that, in the yere 1267. when Conra∣dinus the right and naturall king of Sicil, being fled out of the field and from the dis∣comfiture which he had receiued of Char∣les, was deliuered into his handes, the Pope wrought so much by his practises, that he was at Naples, together wt Frede∣rike Duke of the East Countrie, and o∣thers more, against al right & reason, most lamētably beheadded. Beside this, he was the cause of the x. pennie▪Tenth pennie. leuied throughout all Germanie, & banished Iohn Teutoni∣cus, because he had bent himself against it.
In summe, seeing hee coulde finde such meanes to catche coyne, it is meete, that he helpe to furnish this third part with his armes and valiant actes. Eugen. the 4.Further, in the seuenth degree of this quarter, may wee place Eugenius the 4. of whom all Popes and Cardinals, all Bi∣shops and Prelates, and the whole Spi∣ritualtie, are as of a fruitfull stocke sprong forth: Notwithstanding, that hee was at first driuen out of Rome by the Citizens, as one who set all things in debate, & was with stones and dartes driuen through Ty∣ber, and so hunted out of the towne. And after that, was lawfullie and often summo∣ned by the Councell of Basil, to appeare, being complained on for a mutiner and a stirrer of sedition, for a bloudthirstie and wicked man,Searche the Councell of Basil. and for a persecutour of the Spiritualtie. And when he would not ap∣peare, for feare least it might haue happe∣ned to him, as it did not long before in the Councell of Constance, vnto Iohn the 23. he was (at last) lawfullie and iustlie depo∣sed, and bannished. Yet this notwithstan∣ding, at the last, by force of armes, with the ayde of the Dolphin of France, (who af∣terwardes was called Lodowick the ele∣uenth)
he recouered his Seate againe, af∣ter that hee had disturbed the Councell at Basil, and had raised a great tumult and schisme, the which continued more than fourteene or fifteene yeares after. Lastlie, for the locke of this quarter, can not be found anie more fitte than Iulius the second, of whom is written,Iulius the 8. That he threw Saint Peters key into the riuer of Tyber, protesting, that (thenceforth) he would vse, and helpe him selfe with S. Paules sworde. And in verie deede, he passed his whole time of Popedome with warres & effusion of bloud: For albeit that hee was maruellouslie addicted to dronkennes, and to other fleshlie filthines, and especiallie to that Sodomiticall incontinencie, like as appeared by two noble children which the Queene of France had sent to Rome by the Cardinall of Nantes, whiche did fur∣ther this good holie father in his beastlie appetites: yet besides this, he had no grea∣ter pleasure in the world, than in warres. For proofe whereof, it is to be read in all Chronicles, that he (within the space of se∣uen yeares) had brought aboue twoo hun∣dreth thousand persons to their ende. And therefore it is good right and reason, that
he with his armes shut vp this quarter. We might ouer and aboue haue brought in this quarter, manie other Popes and holie fathers of the Clergie, who maintei∣ned the contrarie parte against the Empe∣rours, with great commotions, warres, & bloudshed. Like as haue bene Gregorie the 7. Victor the third, Vrban the thirde, and Paschal the seconde, against Henrie the fourth: Gelasius the second, and Calix∣tus the second, against Henrie the fift: A∣drian the fourth, and Alexander the third, against Frederike Barbarossa, which was also trode vpon with feete by Alexander. Honorius the thirde, Gregorie the ninth, and Innocent the fourth against Philippe the brother of Frederike, and against Fre∣derike the second the first Frederiks son, and against Conrade the sonne of Frede∣rike the seconde: And Clemens the fourth against Conradine King of Naples, and sonne of Cōrade. Insomuch as they hand∣led the matter so roughlie, that after Wil∣liam Duke of Holland, the Dominion of Rome was for the space of xvii. yeeres without an Emperour, vntill that Rodol∣phus of Hasburg was elected for Empe∣rour: who for that cause would not come
there, taking example (as hee said) by the Foxe, whereof Aesope maketh mention in his Fables: who being sent for by the dis∣eased Lion, to visit him in his sicknes, like as other beastes had done, made aunswere, That the footesteppes did fraie him, which were all bent towards him, but there were none which returned againe. We might then (say I) rehearse all such worthie champions and holy fathers, and inserte them in this quarter, which haue so wilfullie breathed against Emperours & Gods anointed. But forsomuch as our in∣tent is not to repete euery Popes historie, but only to manifest the noble progenie of the holy & reuerend Clergie: And that eche may very well know, that in the registre of kinred wee cannot nūber further than 32. degrees, to shew a noble discent, the rather for that wee haue brieflie touched such Popes, & their feates, where anie mention hath bin made of them. Therfore do we re∣ferre the reader in this behalf, to the Histo∣riographers, & prosecute our last 8. quar∣ters of the Papistical discent, wt their skut∣chions, banners, and quarter maisters, in due and decent order. So then, do these eight last quarters de∣pend
vppon Coniurers, Necromaneers, Poysoners,The fourth and last 8. quarters & other such like, which worke with the Diuell and his crafte: and weare for their armes Owles, Howlets, Battes, Kites,Armes of the 4. quartrs of the holy Popes. Crowes, Blacke dogges, and Di∣uels clawes. For their squiers do I know none more meete than the diuell him selfe, whom in their coniuration they inuocate, and call vpon, except they would haue Si∣mon and Elymas the coniurers: In like manner, and for their banners, canne they not finde more fitter cities, than Rome, Babylon, and Aegypt, from whence their Gentilitie hath taken roote: forsomuch as they haue alwayes bene replenished with such diuelishnes: except they will haue hell it selfe, where their first father the Diuell long since hath farried and prepared their places. Nowe then, in the first commeth our Syluester the second forth as foreman, who was Pope about the yere 998.Syluester the 2. the coniurer. This was first a Monke, at Flueria (vnder the domi∣nion of Orleans named Gerbertus,) and after that, beeing remoued to Ciuill in Spaine, to studie & applie his booke, got a Maister who was skilfull and of great ex∣perience in this arte, and by the ayde of his
maisters daughter, with whom he was ve∣rie familiar, did steale one of his especiall and chiefest bookes in that art, & got him packing therewithal, without saying fare∣well. And to the end he should not be trapt in his theeuerie, he did bequeath the Diuel his soule, with a solemne oth: alwayes pro∣uided, that he might returne into France, and be prosperous in his attempts. After that, he became a Schoolemaster, and fur∣ther, maister to Otthonis the third,Platina and all other histories. and to Robert Hugon Capets sonne, and to Lo∣tharius, by whose ayd he was made Arch∣bishop of Rhenes: howbeit, Benedict the 7. deposed him as an Heretike and Con∣iurer. Yet after that, by the helpe of Ot∣thonis the 3. whom he had taught his art, he became Bishop of Rauēna, and at last, to be short, Pope of Rome: and made with his maister the deuill a compact, that hee shoulde liue so long, till hee said Masse at Hierusalem, supposing that the same woulde neuer haue happened. But the mai∣ster deceiued the scholer: For in the citie of Rome was a Chappell, which was cal∣led Hierusalem, in the Church of the ho∣lie Crosse, and saying Masse there, hee waxed sicke, and perceiued the Diuels
comming for him to their feast. And here∣vpon the Historiographers declare, that he became penitent, and confessed openlie his offences, commanding that his dead carcase should be throwen vpon a carre, & the oxen permitted to drawe it▪ whither they would: so the oxen drewe the carre be∣fore Saint Iohns church at Lateran, where he lies buried: and it is said that he wroght manie miracles there. Yea, this is to bee seene before the same church pictured ve∣rie brauelie in a table. And therefore this holie Syluester shall occupie the first place in this last quarter, forsomuch as of him are proceeded all other hellish fathers, which with their plaguie spiritualtie haue possessed and replenished the world. After this may follow Iohn the 19. who likewise had friendlie and familiar confe∣rence with Robin goodfellow,Iohn the 19. This is writtē by Benno the Cardinal, and Blondus the Historiogra∣phers. like as had bene taught him in the schole of the fore∣said Syluester, and with the ayd of his mai∣ster the Diuell, gotte the Popelie triple crowne on his head, about the yere 1005. but possessed it but 5. moneths. And after, went to catch Moles, proceding forwards to view his masters Maygame in Purga∣torie, or thereabout. Yet in that short time,
he did great good: For he confirmed All soules day, which then was newlie inuēted and first registred in Clunie Abbie by O∣dilius. I suppose he knew before,Robert. Barus, & Supple. Chron. that he should shortlie after goe visit the soules in Purgatorie, and helpe them there to cele∣brate their feast. The third place we cannot by right at∣tribute to any sooner,Benedict the 9 then to Benedict the ninth, who before being called Theophi∣lactus, had lien at studie together with one Laurentius, Archpriest in the schole of the foresaid Gisbertus (who after was called Syluester the second) and was faithfullie instructed in his worthie science, whereby he atchieued the Popelie Seate, and farre surpassed his Uncle Benedict the 8. (who had reigned not long before him) in al sub∣tiltie and craftie dealings, like as histo∣ries make mention: Hee reigned in the dayes of Conrad 2. & Henrie 3. And after being departed this life, appeared to an Heremit, in the likenesse of an horrible & vnnatural beast,This historie is rehearsed in Supplem. Chron. Mae historiarum Fasciculus Tem∣por. and others hauing head & taile like an Asse, & the rest of his bodie like a Beare. And being knowen of the Heremite, & de∣manded what the same signified, made an∣answer, that he ought not to maruel therat,
considering that by Gods iust iudgement he was perpetually cōdemned to the same, as one who after a beastly manner had li∣ued without faith, and beleefe, without re∣son and Lawe in this worlde. Like as by all credible histories is vniformally decla∣red: and therefore was in his life time complained vpon for many shameful actes which he had committed. And in the thir∣teenth yeare of his Popedome was bani∣shed Syluester the third being chosen in his roome,Iohannes Marius, Fasciculus Tem∣porum. who also was deposed within nine and fourtie dayes after, as an vnmeete and vnlearned man. And the foresaide Bene∣dict put in againe, who within a while af∣ter was put forth againe, & Gregorie the sixt taken in his steed.Iohannes Marius, and Mare histori∣arum. Howbeit some Hi∣storiographers wil say, that he was not de∣posed the second time, but did of meere co∣uetousnesse for ready monie sel his title vn∣to the saide Gregorie.Robertus Barnes, & Nauclerus. In fine, this is the effect, That there were the same time three Popes at Rome: namely, Benedict, Syl∣uester, and Gregorie, who did all at once draw for the longest cut, & drew so long, till the fourth named Gratian did arise,Gratianus. who had likewise gone to schoole with Syluester the second, and played his part so neately,
that he bought all their three partes, and became Pope him selfe. Howbeit, that he, like a Simoniake, that is, one which was crept in with coyne, was first by the Spi∣ritualtie of Rome, and after by the Empe∣rour Henrie in a generall Councell depo∣sed, and one promoted to his place, called Sindegerus, who (after that) would be cal∣led Clemens the second. But hee likewise made the matter short:Supplem. Chron. Robertus Barnes. for nine monethes after stept Damasus the seconde in place, hauing poysoned the other: and scaled the Romishe Seate him selfe without a lad∣der, that is, without election of the Com∣monaltie, or helpe of the Clergie.Damasus the 2 Where∣fore we may allowe him the fourth degree of this last quarter: considering that in those dayes the most part of Popes and o∣ther Prelates were addicted to sorcerie and poisoning, with other diuelish deuises: whereof histories do sufficientlie witnesse, and make mention at large. The fift place (by all reason) doeth be∣long to Gregorie the seuenth,Gregorie the  whiche be∣fore was named Hildebrand, who (as hi∣stories declare) did temper his Triacle so well, that as good as fiue or sixe Popes were by the Italian Dramme brought to
their baine, to the ende hee might finde a readie beaten and troden pathe to their place:Fascic. tempor. yea he was also a scholer of the fore∣named Syluester. Forsomuch as Syluester (as hath bene shewed) did instruct Lau∣rence the Archpriest, and Theophilactus (who after was called Benedict the 9.) and Laurence did teach this Hildebrand, who thereby atteined to the holie Seate. And notwithstanding that first in a Coun∣cell holden at Worms, he was for a coniu∣rer and craftie villain, who by policie had obteined the Popedome, and also after that, in a councell holden in the citie of Brixne by manie Nobles and Bishops, & lastlie in a councell at Mentz, as a Simo∣niake, or a merchant of Benefices, & a se∣ditious mutiner, deposed from his Seate▪ being accused & lawfullie charged, that he lie, & with briberie crept into the same, and had brought all Christendome into a commotion, sowen discord on all sides, did mainteine and receiue vnder his tuition, al Periurers, Murtherers, Church spoylers, Villains, Theeues, and such as by fire con∣sumed true mennes substaūces: like as af∣terward him selfe (lying on his death bed) did confesse. Yet, all this notwithstanding,
he wrought so much with helpe of his ma∣ster whom he serued, that he againe (like to a cat) did clamber on his seat, and did work all the spight & hurt which he could deuise vnto the Emperour Henrie the 4. subor∣ning certain persons, some with treason, some with poyson, & some with other trea∣cherie & subtile deuises, to procure his end. And the better to atchieue his intēt, did cō∣monlie beare in his bosome a booke of Ne∣cromancie. Yea his Secretarie Iohn the Bishop of Portua, did testifie in a publike sermon, that he had committed such factes,This declaret the Cardinal Benn, who li∣ued in those dayes. whereby he deserued to be burnt quick: for∣somuch as he had throwen the holie sacra∣ment into the fier, in his coniurie, to the end he might haue knowledge from the di∣uell, of his good fortune and succession a∣gainst the Emperour Henrie. And this is the holy man which did forbid Priests,Marian. Scotu. and the rest of the Clergie, to marrie wiues: yea that none should be receiued in anie office pertaining to the Church, except first he were sworne to liue chast & vndefiled, that is,Cap. quae. 1. di Sabb. de consecr. dist. 5. Ca. Carni∣um, de conscr▪ dist. 5. without a married wife. He also did forbid all Chisten peo∣ple, on the Saturdaies, & all Monkes for euer to eat flesh. Likewise, he did separat
Azo the Gouernour of Esten from his wife the Dutches of Matildo,Platina, Naucler. Abb. Vrs. vnder pre∣tence that they were a kinne within the fourth degree: but in verie deede, it was because hee would haue the woman at his pleasure: like as all Histories do wit∣nesse, that shee had great familiaritie, friendlie conference, & continuall con∣uersation with him. What say you then, was not this fellow holie ynough, to occupie the fift place in this noble quarter? Go to then, after him may followe in this quarter Iohn the 21, (who reigned in the yeare 1276.Iohn the 21.) for that he did giue such credit to his knowledge of Geometrie, and to the Geometricians or starre Pro∣phetes, that he spared not to say, That by the same hee was assured to liue a long time. But he deceiued none more than him selfe. For he continued but eight moneths in his Popedome, being soudeinlie slaine in the citie of Viterben, by the falling of a chamber, which hee had caused there to be built: so as it is manifest, that this was one of the diuels prankes, who had assured him so finelie of a long life. Nowe for to furnish the seuenth part of
this last quarter, we can find none more fit than Alexander the sixt,Alexander the 6. who before was named Rodorike Borgia: and being Car∣dinall sought by all meanes possible, to waxe Pope: finding in the ende no waye more commodious to atchieue the same, than by framing him selfe to the studie and exercise of Necromancie or black science: which art he most diligentlie did applie, & thereby examined the diuels, whether they would willinglie and without grudging, prefer him to the Popelie crowne. Wher∣vnto they presentlie consented, with condi∣tion, that he should be sworne to be subiect and seruiceable in all matters vnto them: wherevnto with right good will hee also did condescend: desiring onelie, that when this compact should be confirmed, the di∣uell should not appeare in any fearful like∣nesse, to demaunde the accomplishment of his othe, but should shewe him selfe in the habit and semblance of a Protonotarie. The diuell (who could not haue wished a better vizard) was soone intreated to shew him that pleasure. So it fortuned on a time, that the Cardinall did walke in the auncient citie of Rome, to the mount cal∣led Monte cauallo, and drewe him selfe a∣side
in a sommer parler, or place of plea∣sure, where byding alone, his lord the Pro∣tonotarie came also treading in, in the si∣militude of a comelie middleaged man, seemely apparelled wt the habit of a priest. And hauing taken the oth of the Cardinal according to his wish and prescribing, did assure him to become Pope: & that agreed verie friendlie vpon the time wherein Bor∣gia should reigne as Pope, to wit, 1108. In fine Borgia was made Pope, and gaue himself throughly to al maner of pleasure & desire of his flesh. Hee laye with his owne daughter named Lucretia, whiche neuer∣theles was vsed in like case the same time by his sonne her owne brother, called Va∣lentin Borgia: insomuch as of his daugh∣ter he did not onlie make his bride, but also his daughter in law, like as her Epitaph (extant on her graue) doeth expreslie de∣clare. Hee caused likewise the good man Hieronymus Sauonarola to bee burnt at Florence, because hee did boldlie preache against his wicked life and doctrine. Be∣sides this, hee did couenant and agree with the Marranes, which is, with the re∣uoked Christians. Yet further, after hee had committed manie murthers, as well
with his owne handes, as also thorough the meane of his aforesaid sonne Valentin, who had raised a commotion through all Italie, and had brought Iacobus Caieta∣nus, the Cardinal Vrsin, and the Abbatte Aluiane, with manie other more, to their ende. Hee would at last at a banket (which verie liberallie hee had prepared) haue poysoned a Cardinall: So it chaunced, that through mistaking the one bottell for the other, hee which filled the drinke, did serue the poyson to the Pope him selfe: in∣somuch as hee therewith did swell, and became exceeding sicke. The while nowe, that good counsell with him was deare and farre to seeke, he sent one of his most trustie seruauntes called Modena, into a studie ioyning next to a chamber where he laye in bedde, to fetche a prettie golden booke of Necromancie, which hee had alwayes most carefullie kept amongest his costlie and chiefest iewels. And as the aforesaid seruaunt mas entring into the studie, he sawe the aforenamed Proto∣notarie sitting in the Popelie habit, who did so well resemble his maister in all respectes, as if it had bene him selfe.
Whereat being greatlie frighted, and in a manner halfe dead through feare, did re∣tire backe, vntill his maister the Pope had reuiued him againe, and then aduenturing the second time to enter the studie, was as∣ked of the Diuell, what he had there to do, who answered, that the Pope had sent him for a booke. Then roared the diuell with a terrible noyse, and cried out: I am Pope my selfe: wherewith he vanished away. After the which time, the Pope began to hasten toward his end. Yet a litle before his death, did his maister appeare once more in likenesse of a Poste or Purseuant, and hauing had long conference & a longer discourse with him, did teache him his A∣rithmetick, or his table of numbring, effec∣tuallie giuing to vnderstand, that eleuen & eight did signifie eleuen yeares and eight dayes, and not nineteene yeares, so as the Pope had reckoned without his host. And then with a filthie stinck he departed from my lord the Pope, who immediatlie after followed, and with his faithfull maisters departed this world into the Popes hea∣uen. Nowe, seeing his Requiem is a sin∣ging, wee will affoarde him this seuenth place in the last quarter.
The last and best, which may not onlie conclude the fourth quarter, but also shutte and seale vp the whole registre of kinreds with his noble armes and Popelie actes, is Paule the third, whose high renoumed & noble feates do shewe them selues,Paule the 3. partlie in all the foure quarters: for he is at first, a kinne to the fathers of the first quarter, in∣somuch as he was, all his life time, a nota∣ble Epicure: openlie skoffing at Christ the sonne of God, and esteeming the worde of God for a vaine fable. Like as they do sufficientlie know, which in his time haue frequented and bene at Rome. After that, he is a kinne likewise to those of the second eight quarters, forsomuch as he was not simplie a whoremonger, but besides the women which he defiled, being the Popes Legate, was by his kinsman Nicholas Querceo, taken with the man∣ner, whereas he beeing a bedde with his owne cousine germane Laura Fernesia,Laura Fer∣nesia. wife to the said Nicholas, was for the said cause, by him thrust with a dagger into his bodie, whereof hee bore the scarre to his graue. Yea he did lie with his own daugh∣ter Constantia:Constancia. and to the ende he might the more safelie do the same, did poyson her
husband named Bosa Sforza. He had also a sonne called Peter Aloysius,Peter Aloisius. who knewe verie well how to followe his fathers foot∣steppes. For besides innumerable shame∣lesse and most detestable crimes, whiche would be to tedious to repeate: he did per∣force rauish the Bishop of Fanes, and mis∣vsed him, with helpe of his seruants, to the satisfying of his most horrible Sodomiti∣call lecherie, whereof the good Bishoppe (through sorrowe & anguish of heart) died: which notwithstanding, the good sonne got of the holy father for a reward of his good deed an Earldome of fortie thousand Duc∣cates a yeere. But what maruell is it, that he forbore & mainteined his sonne in such a dishonest and detestable life, seeing him selfe through the whoredome of his sister Iulia Fernesia,Iulia Fernesia. which she had committed with Pope Alexander the sixt, was called to be one of the colledge and fellowship of Cardinals? Forsomuch as shee did threa∣ten to forsake the Pope, vnlesse hee would bestowe on her brother a Cardinals hatte. After this he doeth claime kinred of the third 8. quarters: considering he kept open shop or market of all manner of benefices, & merchādise. For being by Pope Clemēt
(who lay at Rome as prisoner in the Pa∣lace called Castra de Sancto Angelo) sent of an Embassage to the Emperour Char∣les, would not take it vppon him, but that the Pope must first preferre his yong Ne∣phewe to the Bishoprike of Parma, who was but a childe of x. yeres olde: and after∣wards being Pope, did giue all, or most part of this treasure perteyning vnto the Churches, vnto his friends and kinsfolkes, as well women as men: yea solde from the Duke of Ferrara two townes called Mo∣dena & Rhegium. He alienated also Par∣ma & Plasancia, & gaue them to his friēds. He was not abashed to raise all manner of strange impostes & taxes, & to demaund of his subiectes 3000 Duccates a yere, and besides that sometimes the tenths, some∣times the one half of their fruits, to gnaw the cōmon people to the verie bones, & ga∣ther mony from al quarters & corners. And further touching bludthirstines & murther, therin he was doctor long before he got the Cardinals hat on his head: for in the daies of Pope Innocēt, he was throwē into Bo∣cardo for two murthers by him cōmitted, & for poysoning his owne mother and ne∣phew:Murthers committed by Pope Iulie. insomuch as he hath also deserued a
place in this fourth and last quarter: consi∣dering he was so skilfull in tempering an Italian figge, that hee did not spare his owne naturall mother. Yea after that did bring his owne sister to her baine, who o∣therwise was none of the holiest. Besides this, he was a necessarie and toward com∣panion in Necromancie & diuelish artes: as appeared by his indeuour and diligence in preferring (so much as in him laye) all those of the same science, to witte, Cecius, Marcellus, Gauricius the Portugal, and other more his approued friendes and fel∣lowe studentes. To conclude, he is the ve∣rie same, wt whom we neede to fill vp this beaderowle, and to bring these two & thir∣tie noble degrees vnto one notable stocke or graft, from which all our holie Clergie, all our triple crowned Popes, all bloudie Cardinals, all mytred Bishops, all lazie Abbattes, fat Curates, houdded Monkes, idle Channons, Massepriestes, shauen Clerkes, fysting Nonnes: In fine, all the shauen sorte are proceeded and sprong vp, and further, haue filled the earth, as with a heape of grassehoppers.
The iiii. Chapter. Declaring that the lewde and wicked life of Priestes can not be a let to the administration of their Sacrament. And herein is treated, the briberie, and chopping of benefices vsed in the holie Church of Rome. SEeing then that our Clergie is descen∣ded of so high, holie, renoumed, noble, and right honorable stocke, of all sides, that they can shewe and declare all the armes and banners of their predecessours, so ex∣actly & perfectlie: wherefore then shoulde they not (as of right to them apperteineth) possesse their fathers rentes & reuenewes, and enioye all the priuileges which of old are bequeathed and giuen vnto them: and which (manie hundreth yeares ago) they haue alwayes vsed? Good reason then, that they should after the auncient accustomed manner of their olde mother the holie Ro∣mishe Apostolical and Catholike Church, inuocate and call for helpe of their old fa∣thers, whensoeuer anie heauines or trouble doeth seeme any way to come vppon them. And especiallie in this, that our maister Gentian doth here diligently treate vpon, to witte, that the wicked and lewde life of Priests cannot staine or disgrace the com∣mendable and worthie order of their ad∣mission
to be Priest. And it is in deede true, for else the matter would cotton but ilfauouredlie with our louing mother the holy church: for to the end I neede not re∣hearse euery seuerall part,Looke before in the 5. chapter of the firste parte. we haue heard aboue, that the decrees do mention: If anie Pope or other religious person doe wt Si∣monie, that is to say, with giftes or bribe∣rie, with affection or friendship, or with a∣nie other vndecent meane, obteine a bene∣fice, liuing, or other spirituall stipend, the same shal not onely be banished & accursed, but beside al whatsoeuer he doth, or ordein, shalbe accounted without force, voide, and of none effect. And al Priestes and those of the Clergie placed and appointed by him, shal likewise be banished & excommunica∣ted with him. Nowe helpe good Ladie of Walsingham: for is it possible to find one amongst ten thousande, whiche can get his benefice otherwise, than by such prettie practises & cunning sleights? I refer that to the right worshipful Abbat of S. Bauen at Gaunt, & to the Secretarie Argēterus, & to Morilliō the Cardinal of Grandveile his brokers,Vigilius. A Argenterus. B Morilion. C which were wont to be called the A.B.C. of benefices (because he had so many benefices, as there are letters in the
crisse crosse rowe) I refer it (I say) to their consciences, if perhaps there is anie con∣science at all left in them. They know how indulgēces & aduousons of benefices were wont to be dealt withal. They knowe also, what subtill practises that the good Cardi∣nal Grandville hath brought vs in the low countries, to scumme the best fat from our pots, with the scummer of indulgences, & sheare the sheepe, where others sheare the hogs. I referre me also to the Notaries, Bull writers, Registres, and Secreta∣ries of the Romish court: they know what notable gaine they yerelie put vp by their boxes for all the pardons, dispensiues, ex∣pectatiues, priuileges, Bulles, newe pro∣uisos, Vocatories, Commendaticus, Abso∣lutions, Dispēsations, for to cōpasse three, foure, or ten benefices at once, for Proto∣notariships, Promotions of Chaplaines, Conseruatories, Reuocatories, Reducti∣ons, Exemptions, and other such like paul∣trie more, which wee haue rehearsed be∣fore. But I pray you, was there euer anie Pope, whiche obteined his place other∣wise, than by giftes or bribes, or with open force and armed hande?
That appeareth sufficientlie by the horri∣ble schismes,Peruse Iohn Marius, and o∣ther Historio∣graphers. contentions, murther, and warres, wherwith histories are so through∣lie replenished, that it is wonderfull. Men∣tioning at last of 22. manifest schismes, wherein were sometimes two, sometimes three: yea foure Popes at once, eache con∣tending most stiflie against the other to winne the bell: and that continued some∣times three or foure, sometimes tenne or twentie: yea sometimes thirtie and fourtie yeares. But I omit all the rest, onelie calling to mind the late passed Pope Pius the 4. Hath not he openlie on a time with redie monie,Pius the 4. an other time by faire promises, bought the voyce of Cardinal Caraffa, and his adherents (which alwayes helde the contrarie part against the Ferneses, and Mantuans?) Did not he promise the said Cardinall a pension of manie thousande Ducates a yeare, to receiue them out of the reuenues of the Bishopricke of Tole∣do in Spaine, which he by meanes of the Duke of Florence (who was suretie for the same) would cause him to obteine, and also certeine Fortes and Castles situate in the lande of Naples, which hee should deli∣uer
into the hands of the Duke of Paliano? And at last, when the time of paiment was come, he caused the Cardinal to bee throt∣led with a napkin about his neck, and his brother the Duke of Paliano to be behead∣ded, and further paiment they might seeke where they could. But what neede I (by sundrie examples) declare, that which a calfe with one eie might lightlie perceiue? The Lawier Marsilius Patauin him selfe could wel discerne this, and by writing te∣stifie with these wordes following:In defension pacis, cap. 24. parte 2. Quid aliud Romae, quam Simoniacorum vn∣dique concursus? That is to say: What els is at Rome, but a gathering & floc∣king from all places of bribing Here∣tikes, and brokers of benefices? The same did the Monke Baptista Mantuan lament, writing thus: Vaenalia nobis Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae: Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum Est venale, Deusque. Which might be thus Englished: Wares of all sortes, are here to be sold:
Buy what you will, for monie downe told: Churches, Priestes, Altars, Offrings, and Crownes: We passe, for quicke sale, all cities and townes: Fire, Franckincense, Dirges, and pardons from paine, Hell, Heauen, God, the Diuell, we giue all for gaine. Wherewith a good Abbat doth finelie agree, who being asked, Papa cuius partis orationis? That is to say: What part of speeche is this word, Pope? Answered, that it was Participii par∣tis, Quia partem capit a Clero, partema Seculari, partem ab vtroque, cum totius orbis doloris significatione, sine modis & temporibus. That is to say: This word Pope is a participle, or of the qualitie of those which put foorth their hands on both sides of the dishe: for he receiues of the Spiritualtie, hee re∣ceiues of the Temporaltie, & doth parte stakes on both sides, without measure or end, to the great anguish and sorowe of all the world. And for proofe of this, may be sufficient∣lie
perceiued by the taxes, or valuing of Benefices, wherout the Pope must alwais haue his share. For to let sky a manie of scrappes,First fruites. This calculati∣on and recko∣ning is to bee read in the hoke called De∣sensio pro liber∣tate Gallie. Eccl. aduers. Rom. au∣lam, made by the parliament of Paris, and de∣liuered vp to king odwick the 11. in the 72.73.74. and 75. article. Peruse also here of Charles Molinaes. in the booke de Anna∣tis, and search the tare of Bi∣shoprikes and Archbishopriks and Franciscus Duarenus de sa∣cis Eccle. mini∣stris ac benefiiis in the end of the booke. which he so carefullie doeth ga∣ther from vnder the table of the Beneficed, like a dogge: onlie the first yerely fruites, which the Bishops, Abbats, Prelats, and other beneice buiers must alow the Pope, do amount onelie in France, yere by yere, but to tenne times an hundreth thousand Crownes. Yea in the time of Pope Pius the 2. were void in France aboue twentie, so of Archbishoprikes as Bishoprikes, which brought to his coffers, a hundreth & twentie thousand Crownes. After that, he receiued not much lesse of xl. Abbies which were likewise voide in his time. And fur∣ther of Priories, Deanties, and Parso∣nages, he got in no lesse than an hundreth thousand Crownes. And aboue all these were there about an hundreth thousand pa∣rish Churches & Pastorships, which the one wt the other did eche alow to the Pope xxv. Crownes. Behold, and consider, if this doth not in the whole amount vnto xxviii. times an hundreth thousande, and more, xl. thousand Crownes? Reckon then, and o∣uercast all the other profites, besides the
first fruites. And then ponder what a mon∣strous summe of money, al other countries (throughout all Christendome) doe bring together, which in a manner are serued with the like sawce. I omit the reuenewes which he receiueth, and is paid euerie yere by the strumpets of Rome, amounting (for eche paid a Ducate) aboue fortie thousand Ducates: besides that which he dueth like∣wise get of the Iewes: and further, that which is brought him in the chamber of penance, where the remission of all sinnes are rated and taxed at a certen price: like as we haue touched before, and graunted dispensations, for to marrie with their nee∣rest kinred, whiche is not allowed to anie, but such as be riche. For thus soundeth the text: In the booke named, Tax, & Cellar. Apost. cū notabilibus, iuxt. stylum hodiernū Rom. Cuiae, in Rubri. de Matri∣monial.Et nota diligenter, quod huiusmodi gratiae, & dispensationes non cōcedun∣tur pauperibus, quia non sunt, ideo non possunt consolari. That is to say: And note diligentlie, that such fauour and dispensations are not alowed to the poore, for they are not, and therefore can not be comforted. Behold, this is a text of the Bible, which
speaking of the people of Israel, vnder the name of Rachel, saith, that she is mourn∣full, and doth bewaile her children, and can not be comforted, because they are not present. This doeth the holie Romish Church vnderstand of the poore fellowes, which haue no Ducates or Crownes of golde, and therefore can not be relieued in the chamber of penance: where none finde ease, but such as will come off, and deale li∣berallie. But who were able to declare al the sundrie merchandizes, fines, trumpe∣ries, and simonie of the most holie fathers and Pope of Rome? It is euen a verie bottomles poole, whiche doeth surpasse mans capacitie. Insomuch as wee neede not maruell, that Pope Iohn the 22. after his discease, did leaue vnto his successours, xxv. Millians,This writeth Francisc. etar. and Masil. Paa. in defen. pacis. or xxv. times thousand thou∣sand Crownes in redie monie, which after our reckoning, is fiue hundreth tonnes of golde. Besides all that, which he (whilest he was Pope) did wastfullie spende and consume with whores and knaues, with sumptuous and daintie fare, with riot and banqueting, and other such like Popelie holinesse, the which vndoubtedlie was an infinite masse of monie.
In his booke called, Sylua lo∣corum commun.Therefore it is, that the Archbishop of Maydenburg, noting this summe, and ha∣uing cast and reckoned, that in the time of Pope Martin the fift, were brought into Rome, as good as nine millians of golde, which is, nine times thousande thousande Crownes onelie out of France, with great admiration vsed these wordes, Iudicet ti∣moratus, quae vorago haec: That is to say, Each one which feareth God, record and iudge hereby, what an vnsatiable & bottomlesse poole this is. But what nedeth further repetition here∣of? Euerie one doth know wel inough, that al things with the Popes of Rome, are set at sale. And this appeareth sufficiently by the worthie actes of the holy fathers Alex∣ander the 6. and Leo the tenth. For of the first did Iohn Picus Prince of Mirandu∣la write thus: Vendit Alexander, Cruces, Altaria, Christum: Emerat ipse prius, Vendere iure potest. That is to say: Vpstart Pope Alexander, and out with his male,
And made vp his market: What set he to sale? Christ (by Saint Maerie) Altars, and Crosses, He bought them, to sell them: Men liue not by losses. And of the other did the learned Poet Accius Sannaharius indite as followeth: Sacra sub extrema Si forte requiritis hora, Cur Leo non potuit Sumere? vendiderat. That is to say: If this to knowe be your intent, Why Leo, at his dying day, Could not receiue the Sacrament: What other cause did lette, (I pray?) But that, for greedie gaine of gold, Out of his hands the same he sold. But if promotions and benefices were onelie to be solde for monie and bribes, then were our deare mother the holy church to be borne with, and not greatly to bee blamed. But what helpeth it? It is apparantlie perceiued, that they are to be gotten by Ruffianlike liuing, whorehun∣ting, periurie, and abhominable Sodo∣miticall filthinesse.
For to the end I let slip, that Pope Pau∣lus the third, after that he was put by the third time, did at last obteine a Cardinals hatte, by the importunate instigation of his sister Iulia Fernesia, Pope Alexan∣ders strumpet, who threatened to forsake him, vnlesse he would admit her brother in∣to the honest and worthie fellowshippe of Cardinals. To the end I also let slip the forenamed litle Cardinal of Monte, who by his filthie Sodomitical mildemeanour, possessed the Cardinals hat of Pope Iuli∣us de Monte. Those which haue but a while frequented Rome, can testifie, that it is a common order & vsuall course: yea, it is not of to day nor yesterday, but it is one of the olde traditions or customes of the holie Romish Church, which she with∣out setting downe in writing, hath recei∣ued from the father to the childe, or from heire to heire, and doeth still followe the same. For Pope Benedict the twelfth, who him selfe made a decree, forbidding, That to the vndeserued, or such as were vnworthie, should not anie benefice bee giuen, did notwithstanding in the yeare 1336. offer the learned man Francis Pe∣trarcha a Cardinals hat, vppon condition,
that he should deliuer him his sister for a Concubine.This is rehear∣sed in the life of Petrarch. of that which is writ∣ten of Vergerio & Squarciasico, which within le did liue vpon the said time. Wherevnto Petrarcha aun∣swered, That hee had no neede of so fowle or filthie a hatte. Yet his brother Gerard Petrarcha consented thereto, and deliuered his sister to the holie father for a Cardinals hat. But when the Pope had satisfied his desire with her, and did not paie the hat, the good man did despaire, & got him selfe away into a Catholike cloi∣ster or religious house. Such merchandize is a dailie thrift to the Romish Pilates and holy fathers. And therefore might Peters barke suffer ship∣wracke, if vpon their holines and honestie you would builde the worthie state of Pre∣latshippe and spirituall callings, and the Masse with the seuen Sacramentes. For admit they had obteined all their liuings, benefices, and shauen crownes, by their worthines and holie actes, yet might wee not heare their Masses, so long as they haunt and vse the companie of their pretie Minions, by vertue of the councel of Man∣tua, wherein is expreslie forbidden, That wee shall not heare the Masse of anie Priest, whom we knowe to exercise the companie of anie women.
And nowe I referre the matter to the consciences of Priestes, Monkes, & Can∣nons, whether the holiest amongst them al, do alwayes refraine and keepe themselues from the haunt of harlottes. Forsomuch as it is knowen and manifest, that the cōmon sorte are not content with one proper bed∣fellow, as we may sufficiently perceiue by the Popes and other Prelates their ba∣stardes, with which they haue replenished the world, and haue distributed their lands and liuings amogst them. And therefore must we alwayes be mindfull of this rule: that whēsoeuer we heare ought of Priests or Monkes, whiche soundeth not well, yet the same cannot be preiudicial or hurtful to their state or calling, or hinder the vertue of holie Masse: yea it is sanctified & made holie through the worthinesse of the person him self, how wicked and sinfull soeuer the fact can be.Felius in cap. ex parte. 1. De offi∣cio delegati. & Ia∣cobatiu▪ in tract. de Conciliis. Tit. 4. Chap. 4. For this hath our mother the holie church after this sorte concluded: That in case the Pope shoulde for rea∣die monie sell all the Spirituall goods, all benefices and prebendes, and all the trumperie, one with the other, yet may not that be reckoned for Simonie, so long as the holinesse of his person can
washe and cleanse away all stayned spots and filthinesse. Yea, of a sinne canne hee make a good and godly worke, as is shew∣ed before. And the Pope with the holie Church of Rome can no further bee tain∣ted with this crime of Simonie or bri∣berie, than that the Court of Rome maye bee called Monarcha Simoniae,This is repea∣ted by Restau. Castaldus, in tra∣ctat. de Imperat. that is to say, A Monarche or Dutchesse of Spi∣ritual theeuerie. And therefore Bribe∣berie or Simonie canne not bee founde at Rome. And as concerning other factes, the Pope can wholie dispense with them: in∣somuch as the holie Church is out of daun∣ger, yea although shee were as full of vil∣laines and reprobates, as an egge is full of meate. The v. Chapter. VVhich treateth of the ignorance of Hugnenote preachers, and the great and singular learning, capacitie, weightie and deepe grounded questi∣ons of Catholike Doctours. NOwe let vs proceede with our Hu∣guenote Ministers and Preachers, and paint them forth in their colours. Go
to then, maister Gentian saith: They are vnlearned, and of a wicked life. Touching the first point, their ignorance is easilie perceiued by this, in that they will not say and sing their Pater Nosters, Benedic∣tions, or thankesgiuing, Psalmes, and o∣ther prayers in Latine, but alwayes vse their owne mother tongue. Truelie if they had their latine tongue so prompt and rea∣die, as the Priestes haue it in their Masses and Diriges, they would not be so charie and daintie of it. In deede, it is verie true, that some of them haue not onlie the latine tongue, but also the Greeke and Hebrewe more perfecte & readie, than the Priestes and Monkes haue their Kirieleyson and Per omnia. But in primis, it is Heretical Latine, and of this new sorte, which is vn∣knowen, (much lesse vsed) amongest the Doctors of Louen, Colen, and Paris, and such as the holy Romish Church can not skill of. On the other part, there are some amongst them, which know no more latine then our Monkes and Parish priestes: yea they will not boast or crake to knowe anie thing, saue onelie Iesus Christ, & the same crucified:1. Cor. 2.2. and perswade them selues, that that alone, (at least) is worth as much, as
all the Doctors copes, Aristotles breeches and lyripypes, which our Magistri no∣stri and Supermagistri at Louen haue wonne with great and painfull industrie. But when all is said, are their learned sort such iolly fellowes? Are they of thē selues able to dissolue one of those questions, which our maisters of Louen with great heapes do daylie deliuer? and breake their braines about them, in such sort, that when they come abroad in the aire, their heades are lapt and wrapt about with cloutes and ragges, as though they were in danger to breake and fall asunder? Ywys syr no. He had neede to be a wylie Woodcocke, which shuld be able to dissolue such indisso∣luble questions. For beholde, these are they, whereby they permit their studentes to proceede Bachelers, Maisters of arte, and Doctours: Namelie, to knowe, Whe∣ther God be able to sinne?Questions of Catholike Doc∣tours. If he were a∣ble to hate his Sonne? If it were in his power to commaund anie thing, that is euil? If he might haue created the world in better condition than he hath done? If he could haue created a father with∣out a childe? Or a childe without a fa∣ther? Or a hill without a valley? If hee
were able of a whore to make a virgine againe? Also, whether the sonne of God could haue taken a womans shape vpon him? Yea, if he could turne him selfe into the likenes of a Diuell? Or take vpon him the nature of an Asse? Whether hee could not haue bene a peeble stone? A Pompin? or Colewort? And if hee had become a Pompin, howe then would he haue preached? Also, whether our Ladie was borne pure and without sinne? Fur∣ther, howe manie companies of Angels there be? Who sits on the highest end & who on the lowest: who goeth before, and who folowes after? Moreouer, what is done in hell? With what sort of tongs and bellowes the fire is kindled? Howe hotte Purgatorie is? Wherewith all it was separated from hell? How long the soules must frie in it, before they bee i∣nough? Besides them which we haue re∣hearsed, concerning Mise which were cerpt into the Sacrament box, what they find there to gnaw vpon, considering it is changed from bread? Howe long the man in the Moone will tarie there, and when he taketh his flight? Whether the host be poysoned when there is any poi∣son
mixt with the bread? And whether flies dare presume to beshite it? With o∣ther more weightie questions without me∣sure or end, wherein the Heretikes are no∣thing seene, nor can tell no more of, than of the wind which last blew of my hat: & ther∣fore it must of necessitie followe, that they are most ignorant & vnlearned. They sup∣pose it is nowe, as it was in the dayes of Paul & the other Apostles, whē there was no talke of Bachelers nor Masters of Art: when as Quotlibets, horned or forked Sil∣logismes, Quidditates, Identitates, Rea∣litates, and other such like rattes nestes, were not yet found out, when Fishermen were preachers, and Tanners Apostles. And therefore are they all busie with their Paul, and their Prophetes,Doctor subtilis, is to say, a pro∣found and deep witted doctor, & so do they cō∣monlie cal Ioh. Scotus. Doctor Aneus is an Angelicall or Angellike doc∣tor, and this is the Sirname which they giue Thomas de Aqui∣no. and scoffe at all that our Doctor subtilis Iohannes Scotus, Doctor Angelicus Thomas de Aquino, That our Albertus Magnus, Petrus Lombardus, Occa, and all other such like famous and learned Doctours, haue written in great bookes and large volumes, and whiche they haue after deepe and speciall speculation, conclu∣ded and sette foorth for chiefe and prin∣cipall articles of our beleefe.
But we pratle in vaine, they must (at the least) go yet these ten yeares to schoole, if they will be reputed and taken for learned. What tattle I of ten yeares? A wise Doc∣tour of Diuinitie said to Erasmus, That in nine yeares could not be vnderstood, what onelie Scotus, in his argument vp∣on Petrus Lombardus, had written. And another said, That it was impossible to conceiue one sentence or place in Sco∣tus, except hee had Aristotles Metaphy∣sickes at his fingers endes.Metaphysica is to say, those things which surpasse nature as Spirits, An¦gels, &c. And it is the name of a booke which Aristot. hath written of su∣pernaturall things. What a good yeare meane these Heretikes then, that they are learned, because they haue read the Bible, or S. Paule, or Augustine and Hierome? Or because they vnderstand He∣brew, the Chaldean, and Greeke tongues? They must to it a litle better, and must yet these twentie or thirtie yeares goe beate their braines in their common scholes, and drawe Aristotles breeches ouer their eares: or else they shal remaine but vnlear∣ned doltes all their life time, and can neuer proceede Maisters of Arte, or Bachelers, I say not Doctours: Yea, although they had eaten seuen Bibles, and know asmuch as euer did Paule. Therefore it is no mar∣uell, that maister Gentian doeth cast in
their teeth, and vpbraideth them with their ignorance: forsomuche as they did neuer tast the knowledge and doctrine of our mo∣ther the holie Church, nor yet the wisedome of the deepe grounded and surpassing lear∣ned Louanistes. The .vi. Chapter: Declaring the life and reformation of Huguenote Preachers, and the citie of Geneua and to the contra∣rie, of the great vertues & valure of the citie of Rome: and of the loue and kindnesse of the church of Rome. And of the taxations or rate booke of the penaunce Parloure. COncerning their liues, Maister Gen∣tian doeth put in vre his arte, whiche he learned of the Oratoures and maisters of eloquence and filed speaking: Forso∣muche as he doeth first burden his contra∣rie partie, with suche crimes, as his owne conscience doth pricke him for, and findes himselfe guiltie in: Notwithstanding he doeth handle the matter very circumspect∣lie: For he saieth but that, hee hearde say, That in the Citie of Potiers in Fraunce, was executed a Huguenote Preacher, who had (all his life time) bene a thiefe, and murtherer: and had with his owne handes murdered as good as a hundred per∣sons. And if so bee that this be true, it
seemes straunge vnto him, that suche prea∣chers will accuse and rebuke the Pope of Rome, for a theefe, and rauenig bloud∣hounde, and the Cardinals and Bishop∣pes for villaines and reprobates. In deede it were straunge. For it is vnsitte, that one Woolfe shoulde bite an other. They ought rather to be faithfull friendes toge∣ther, and say according to the common pro∣uerbe: Te ti, Te mi, Clawe me and I will clawe thee: or, Keepe my counsell, and I will keepe thine. Howebeit, Master Gentian will not say, or assure much thereof. For he saieth that he knoweth none such: wherein, as an ho∣nest man, he doeth acknowledge his faulte in time, least he might be taken for a bro∣ther of that companie. Therefore, although he saith that the common brute goeth, that there are some Huguenote Preachers whiche are little better than those whiche stande by the high way side, Fellons, and rauishers of virgins: yet he soone letteth slippe his purpose, and doth leaue them for such as they are. He feares perhappes, that he might come to nigh the holie seae of Rome, and rubbe the holie fathers to neere the gall.Of the citie of Rome. For it is not onely a com∣mon
reporte, but the verie truth, which e∣uerie one may see and feele, That when∣soeuer suche fellowes are wanting, which might fittely serue to furnish a Gallie, they are not to be found in anie place more rea∣die, than at Rome. For, according to the glosse which is written vpon the decrees, Rome was first founded and built by Rouers and Fellones,Gloss in cap. Fundamenta. N autem. De electi & elect. potestat. in 6. and doth yet ob∣serue her auncient customes. Wherefore it is called in Latine Roma, as though one shoulde say▪ Rodens manus, that is gnawing the handes. Like as the saide glosse doth testifie in the decrees, with this following verse: Roma manus rodit, Quos rodere non valet, odit. That is to say: Rome gnawes the flesh, from th'andes of euerie one: And hates all those, of whom she can haue none. Which being considered by the good & worthie king Alphonsus, he was wont to say: That the greedie, rauening, birdes, (called by the Poetes) Harpies, did not nestle or dwell anie longer in the Islandes▪ but were remoued to Rome,
and did possesse the Romishe Court. And too this purpose, in like maner, did Pope Adrian the 4. lament and complaine vpon, to Iohn. of Sarisburie, Bishoppe of Chartres, saying, that the Pope of Rome was rightlie named, Seruus seruorum, that is, A slaue of slaues, forsomuch as he was a seruant and slaue of the Romanes, which are the verie slaues and seruantes of couetousnesse.This writeth Iohn of Salis∣burie himselfe in his booke, called Speculum or the Mirrour. In cap. quotiens. 1.4.7. Like as the Glose doth also testifie, in this common verse: Seruierant tibi, Roma, prius Domini Dominorum: Seruorum serui nunc tibi sunt Domini. That is to say: O Rome in time past, Lords of Lords were thy vassals: But nowe at the last, Slaues of slaues and ranke rascals Are Lords ouer thee, As all people see. Yea, he said further, That the Pope of Rome was no more a follower of Peter, but of Romulus: which Romulus, in the time, when the citie walles were a buil∣ding, did murder his owne naturall bro∣ther called Remus: And within a small
while after, did perforce rauish the wiues and yong virgins of his neighbours the Sabines, vnder pretence of keeping a spe∣ciall day of solemnization. Insomuch as the citie of Rome is meerlie founded, sanc∣tified, and hallowed, with murder riot; and rauishing of women. And therefore, it is no maruell, though such birdes keepe their feastes there, and are so welcome into it. Yea, not onlie Murderers, Spoylers by the high way side, and Rauishers of wo∣men, but also, all whatsoeuer (without ter∣rour) a man can not call to mind, to witte, All Buggerers, all such as lie with their mother and sister, all Sodomites and Go∣morites, all seducers of children, all vn∣godlie Epicures, which openlie do scoffe at God and Christ, all blasphemers and cursers, all periurers, all whoores and knaues, all proude and salte bitches, all Bawdes, Ruffians, and slewes haunters, all villaines and theeues, all falsifiers of Scriptures and Gods testament, all trai∣tours and ministers of poyson, all dice cog∣gers, false counterfeiters and clippers of coyne, Cawbackes, Parasites, Hangge∣byes, Shiers and Couseners, all Sorce∣rers, and Coniurers, all newe fangled and
inuenting practisers, all braggers & boa∣sters, all enhaunsers of coyne, lease mon∣gers, and vsurers. In summe, all rascalls, knaues, roges, gallowclappers and casta∣wayes, keepe in the Court of Rome open housholde, and there bee enterteined and friendlie welcomed. There doe they ob∣teine Benefices by heapes, Bishops mi∣ters, Cardinals hats, & Popelie crownes. There do they write bookes of Iohannes de la Casa, Archbis∣shop of Beneuen∣ta, hath writ∣ten a booke in commendation of Sodomitrie calling it, A godlie worke, & saying, That he tooke great delight in the same, and vsed no other bedellow▪ He was Deacon of the Apostolical chamber, & the Popes Embassadour throughut the whole countrie of Veice: and hee is the same which first permitted the registre of the forbid∣den booke to be extant, in the yere 1549 the 7. of Maie. And the booke wherof we mētion, was printed at Venice, by the printer cal∣led Nous. Petrus Aetinus hath bin likewise a great friend to Popes, and hath published many bookes,  he treates of many mat∣ters touching bwderie, and caused manie filthie and vnseemele pictures to be made at Venice, and sundrie sortes of by sleeping to be printed, and made a booke and exposition vpon the same. In the yere 1558. in the dayes of Paule the 4. was one at Bullin, who did openly in the publike scholes argue vpon Shrou tuesday, against Matrimonie, in comendatiō of Sodomitrie. Of this disputation the Italian bookes be full. Sodo∣mitrie, and all maner incontinencie, and e∣steeme them for a godlie matter: like as haue done, the Bishoppe Monseur de  Casa, and Petro Aretino. There doe they keepe common schooles, and dispute, whether Matrimonie is better than So∣domitrie.
Also whether the soule be mortall, & whe∣ther Christ hath euer bene, like as Pope Leo the tenth did. There is kept the sta∣ple of all villainie which may be thought on. There do men fetch dispensations for all sinnes and incontinent liuing: like as may expressely be seene in the Taxa Poeni∣tentiaria. There do they buy and sell holy and vnholie women and men, sonnes and daughters, soule and bodie, Bulles and Pardons, Benefices and Venefices: yea God and the Diuell, S. Peter and Saint Paule, and all thinges whatsoeuer, are there to sell. Yea the towne it selfe would be solde, so far forth as a merchant might be found, who had monie ynough: like as sixteene or seuenteene hundreth yeres ago, was prophesied by one named Iugurtha.This doth Sa∣lst declare in his historie na∣med, Bellum Iu∣gurthinum. To conclude, there is not anie thing so wicked nor irksome in all the worlde, which is not franklie and freelie allowed and permitted to be done in Rome: onelie is excepted and forbidden, to liue godlie. Like as the aforenamed Monke Baptista Mantuanus him selfe hath testified, wri∣ting thus: Viuere qui sancte cupitis, Discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, Non licet esse pium. That is to say: All you, which desire to liue in holinesse, From Rome must retire, the sinke of sinfulnesse: Where all things are free, for euery man to vse: Saue godlie to bee, which all men must refuse. Behold, for this cause was maister Gen∣tian well and wiselie aduised, and would not reason to farre in these matters, fearing least he might haue touched the Citie of Rome to nigh▪ forsomuch as eache doeth sufficientlie knowe, that the thrift and sta∣ple (of those things which hee did burthen the Heretikes withall) is in the citie of Rome, yea in the Court and Palace of the holie father the Pope. For Rome (as the Italian Poet Franciscus Petrarcha hath finelie soung) is a right, Fontana di dolore, Albergo d'ira, Scola d'errori,  Tmpio d'heresia: Gia Roma, hor Babylonia falsa & ria, Per cui tanto si piagne & si sospira. O fucina d'inganni, O priglon d'ira,
Oue'l ben muore, e'l mai si nutre & cria Di viui Inferno, vn gran miracol sia, Se Christo teco al fine non s'adira. Item: Nido di tradimenti, in cui se coua Quāto mal par lo mōdo hoggi si spāde, Di vin serua, di letti & di viuande, In cui Lussuria fa l'vltima proua, &c. That is to say: A gulfe of great greefe, a rocke of furious rage, And (take it in breefe) a schoole or common cage Of errours most straunge: Farre Rome to looke vpon, But (marke well the chaunge) nowe beastlie Babylon. O dungeon most deepe, of fraude, deceipte, and guile: O cage, fitte to keepe hotte hate and vengeance vile: Where vices preuaile, where▪ vertue lies starke dead, Where sinne with full saile all states hath long misselead, O whirlepoole of hell, O fowle and stinking lakes, Such as in thee dwell, all goodnesse quite forsakes.
A rare and straunge worldes wonder, thou wilt of all be thought, If Sathan keepe thee vnder, and Christ set thee at nought. Item: O neast of diuelish treason, from whence all vices issue: O enimie to reason, O fatall foe to vertue: O drudge to drowzie dronknesse, and surfetting excesse: O shrowde of shifters shamelesse, as whoores, and such like ghesse, &c. To the contrarie hereof, these Hereti∣call and Huguenote Preachers, like as they are sworne enimies to the holie Ro∣mish religion, so in like maner do they hate and persecute the auncient Romish orders and worthie traditions: especiallie in that thrise accursed citie of Geneua, they are such terrible enimies to our Romish prac∣tises and worthie feates, that if anie dare once presume there with women, to prac∣tise the Romish, Gomorrian, or Clemen∣tine manner, hee should first bee made a Cardinal with a redde hatte vppon his head: or a Bishop at Tyborne, where he
might giue his benediction with his heeles: and his Mantle or Bishoppes cloake would not stand him in thirtie thou∣sand Ducates, like as the Mantles do at Rome. Therefore, if maister Gentian his case be not cleare, as it is to bee doubted of one so faithfull a subiect of the holie Romishe Church, but that he is somewhat tainted with the Romish holinesse: I would by a∣nie meanes aduise him to visit these newe founde Preachers, or to tast of the Hugue∣notes reformation or mortification. Al∣though it seeme by his writing, that hee would gladlie knowe howe the matter is wrought amongest them: but if hee bee wise, he will keepe him thence, and beare aloofe from them, for it might breed a scab, and cause all the veines in his bodie to re∣pent his enterprise. For their mortificati∣on is to the Romish beleeuing Christians, such a bitter receipte and lothsome pill, that it would goe neere to make them burst. If maister Gentianus bee well in his wittes, hee will packe thence, and rather trudge to Rome to his father the Pope, to holde with the mortification of the holie Churche of Rome.
For our deare mother is so kinde, that she gladlie receiueth all commers into her lappe, according to the expresse text of the Prophet Ezechiel,Ezech. 16.25. to wit, The daughter of Israel hath laid open her legges, for e∣uerie one which passeth by her: and recei∣ueth euerie one, Lutheranes and Hugue∣notes onelie excepted. And further proui∣ded▪ that the taxations and rates of the A∣postolical Penance parlour, be allowed, in token of an vpright penance. As namelie: Whosoeuer hath layen with his mother or sister, the said shall for foure pounde Turnois, be remitted. But whosoeuer, besides this, haue com∣mitted aduoutrie with her, to wit, shee hauing a husbande, then must hee paye six pound. Whosoeuer is accused and founde guiltie of Simonie, shalbe forced to paie, fiue and thirtie poundes Turnoys. But whosoeuer hath slaine father or mother, sister or brother▪ the saide shall scape scotfree with foure poundes, one Ducate, and six Carlines: and so of all o∣ther. Vnderstoode alwayes, that this va∣luation is ment and taketh hold, so long as the Romish Court is resident on this
side the mountaines, namely in France: For if she haue her habitation, on the o∣ther side the hilles, as in Italie, then for poundes and pence Turnois, shalbe rec∣koned pounds and pence stearling: like as the Iurist or Lawier Ludouicus Gor∣nesius hath written, and mencioned.In Reg. Cancella. In regula de a∣lore exprimeo Col. 4. In summe, they can not commit anie so great a faulte, but they may at Rome for a peece of monie, haue dispensation for it, & so scape free without blame or punishmēt, insomuch as they shall neuer come in Pur∣gatorie, if they can keepe themselues from hell mouth: Whereas maister Gentian shalbe more welcome a great deale, than at Geneua, or elsewhere amongst the Hu∣guenote Preachers. And this worthie Booke or Epistle which hee hath made, may serue him verie well at Rome, for a speciall recommendation to the holie Fa∣ther the Pope, for to obteine him a Bis∣shops Myter, or a Cardinals hat. The vii. Chapter: VVherein is giuen to Maister Gentian and all other holie Catholikes, good and wholesome counsell: And thus the booke concluded. BVt aboue all things in the worlde, I would wish master Gentian, to be per∣swaded
to remaine stedfastlie, and sticke close to the olde customes and traditions of his predecessors, like durte to a carte wheele, and he can not speede amisse: For although he bee then a good fellow wt the rest, or an Aleknight, or one which loues the companie of pretie wenches: yet so long as he is not an heretique, it makes no matter: hee needes but once in a yeare to go to shrifte, and obserue a highe feast daye, and then shall he be taken for a good & faithfull subiect of the holie Catholike Church. And admitte that after his deathe he should passe to Purgatorie: yet shall so many Masses (which nowe are fallen in price and become good cheape) be said for his soule, that he with hose and shooes, shal flie to heauen, as straight as a sickle. Therefore must I greatlie maruell and reioyce at his wise, deliberate, and wellpremised conclusion, which hereto hee hath annexed, to witte: That hee will re∣maine permanent in the lappe of his dear∣lie beloued mother the holie Churche of Rome, without medling or hauing ought to doe with the Heretikes. For seeing they cannot (as he saith) he
faithfull, forsomuch as they will not be∣leeue all whatsoeuer the holie Church doth beleeue: and in especiall will not beleeue the holie Sacrament of the Altar. See∣ing also it is a lie, that we ought not to be∣leeue anie thing, but whatsoeuer God com∣prehendeth in the Scriptures, and that we may not adde or diminishe anie parte thereof: and that in like case the Scripture doeth holde on our side, beeing rightlie ta∣ken and vnderstoode, after the exposition of the holie Church. Seeing they doe also call vs worshippers of idols, like as also the Iewes do: seeing their liues be no bet∣ter then good christians liues, and that they detest and deride al prayers, fastings, and mortification. Seeing their Prea∣chers and Ministers may worthilie be re∣puted for ignorant and vnlearned: yea also reproched for lewde & wicked liuers: and that they canne bring vs no better demon∣stracions, nor alledge other reasons, than is in the Scripture: and that master Gen∣tian euen vntill this verie time hath heard say, that there is no saluation without the Church: so will hee then liue and die with his deare & holie mother the Church:
and wil not at anie time forsake her, but vn∣moueable remaine with her for euer. For although he with great hast did offer an an∣sweare, and makes a shewe, as though he woulde runne in pot haste to the Hugue∣notes sermons, yet he is not in earnest. I esteeme him to be so stedfast and obstinat, that he will not easily alter his hide, nor his spottes,Iere. 13.23. like as Ieremie doeth say of the blacke Moore and the Libarde. In the meane while notwithstanding, when I consider the merueilous burning zeale, wherwith he is driuen, then am I of meere necessitie forced, in the name of the holie Church, to beseech God, that the Hugue∣notes do not answeare him, but may find so much to doe with other hardie and waigh∣tie matters, that they doe not thinke on Maister Gentian, for feare least it might so fal out (which I hope not) that he might be chaunged, forsomuch as it seemes, that he is driuen with such seale to his saluati∣on, that hee regardes neither Hedge nor ditch, but runnes so directly thitherwards, as a yong headelesse Ducke. Therefore had I rather request the Pope, to cast a morsell in his mouth, and giue him a good fatte benefice, to the ende he departe not
from vs in such haste: for it were to great a losse, if the holie Church shoulde misse such a strong pillar. They might go nigh to fall both in the ashes, which Gods good mother, and all the Saintes which are at Bruxelles on the high altar of S. Goele, deliuer vs from,S. Goele is the chiefe Church in Bruxe's, a citie so called. Per omnia secula seculo∣rum, that is to say, For euer, Amen. Further, I am friendlie to request the good man, which did translate the Epistle of Gentian into the Dutch tongue, that he will take thus much paines more, for the commoditie of our deare mother the holie church, and to the reioycing of the foresaid good man maister Gentian, to translate this our exposition of his Epistle into the French tongue: to the end that the Wal∣lons may in like manner vse this our Bee hiue, and gather the honie & honiecombe thereout, to the renoume, glorie, and honour of our mother the holie Church, against all her foes.
The conclusion of this booke, to the Christian Reader. HEre hast thou (welbeloued Rea∣der) a short exposition and declara∣tion vpon the Epistle or letter of the most learned Doctour maister Gentian Haruet: which serueth not one∣lie thereto, but to all other bookes and writings of the Catholike writers, and de∣fenders of the Romishe Seate. For we haue herein (as brieflie and expresselie as may be) rehearsed the two chiefest foun∣dations, wheron all their Scriptures, rea∣sons, conclusions, and Syllogismes, are founded and built, namelie: The first, The holie Catholike Church what shee is, whereon shee dependeth, and howe farre her authoritie and power doth streatche. And the second, namelie: The expositi∣ons of the Scripture: wherein eache may see with eyes, that howbeit the Hugue∣notes and Lutheranes do alwayes referre them to the text of the holy Scripture, yet our deare & louing mother the holy church
can so aptlie handle the said text, that shee maketh it so fitte and pliable, as it doeth wholie bende and stretche to her aduan∣tage. Then reade the same, and accept our paines in good worth: and considering the grounded reasons of all commotions and insurrections, which from fourtie yeeres hitherwarde haue bene in Christendome, for causes of Religion and Gods seruice, pray vnto God, that he, for his Sonne Ie∣sus Christ his sake, will shortlie appeare, & with the breath of his mouth, and force of his holie Spirit, consume and destroy the wicked wasters, and falsifiers of his holie worde and doctrine, to the glorie of his most holy name, and the edifying of his Church and Congregation. But seeing that here aboue in this our Bee hiue of the Romishe Churche, wee haue often and in sundrie places repeated, that with manie ragges and patches it is botcht and sowed togeather, and selected from diuers and sundrie sortes of flowres and herbes, to make the honnie sweete, wee will for thy delight and for the further declaration & confirmation of that whiche
is said, dilate and more amplie declare the condition and propertie, or rather commo∣ditie of our Bee hiue, the original, disposi∣tion, nature, cunning, and capeable capa∣citie of our Bees, in their honie and honie combes, their rule and regimentes, with all things appertaining: to the end it may be knowen wherein they doe agree with our common sorte of Honie Bees, and in what respect they disagree & decline from them. In which treatie, we will presentlie followe with the description of Bees, which Aristotle in Greeke, Varro, Colu∣mella, Virgil and Plinie in Latine, haue wittilie written, and for our learning left behinde them. But because none shall thinke, that we will in anie respect be in∣iurious to the holie Romish Church, forso∣much as we compare her holinesse and vn∣moueable foundation, to Bees, and a Bee hiue, I will first and before all other mat∣ters, rehearse the high prayse and com∣mendation which shee her selfe doeth at∣tribute vnto them. For beholde, these are the wordes which shee doeth vse vpon Ea∣ster eeuen, in the hallowing or sanctifying of her Easter Tapers.
Cum igitur huius substantiae mira∣mur exordium,In the Masse booke. Apum necesse est laude∣mus originem: Apes vero sunt frugales in sumptibus, in procreatione castissi∣mae, aedificāt cellulas cereo liquore fun∣datas, quib. humanae peritiae ars magi∣stra non coaequatur: Legunt pedibus flores, & nullum damnum floribus in∣uenitur: partus non edunt, sed ore le∣gentes concepti foetus reddunt exami∣na, sicut exemplo mirabili Christus ore paterno processit. Foecunda est in his sine partu virginitas, quam vtique Do∣minus sequi dignatus, carnalem se ma∣trē habere, virginitatis amore constitu∣it. Talia igitur Domine digna sacris Al∣taribus tuis munera offeruntur, quibus te laetari Religio Christiana non ambi∣git, Per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen. Which in our English tongue is to say: Forsomuch as we doe maruellouslie wonder,Commendati∣on or praise of Bees. in considering the first begin∣ning of this substance, to wit, waxe ta∣pers, then must we of necessitie greatlie commend the originall of Bees: for they are sober in diet, & exceeding chast in engendring. They make closettes, &
found them on the souple waxe, wher∣vnto mans▪ inuention and knowledge is not to bee compared: they gather of the flowres with their feet, and yet the flowres are not endamaged by it: they bring foorth no yong ones, but deli∣uer their yong swarmes through their mouthes, like as Christ (for a wonder∣full example) is proceeded from his Fathers mouth: they haue a fertile cha∣stitie without bearing, which example Christ hath thought good to followe, and ordeined to haue a carnall mother, for loue of chastitie. Therefore, O Lord, are such worthie giftes offered and pre∣sented vpon thine Altar, wherein Chri∣stian Religion is assured that thou de∣lightest exceedinglie: through our Lord Iesus Christ, Amen. Beholde, here wee perceiue, what a precious iewell these Bees are. Where∣fore our deare and louing mother the holie Church of Rome, ought not to scorne or disdaine, that wee doe compare her cu∣stomes and orders to a Bee hiue, conside∣ring that she her selfe doth compare the incomprehensible generation of the sonne of GOD from his Father, together with
his birth, out of the pure and vndefiled Virgine Marie vnto the Bees: whiche were in verie deede a great blasphemie, if the Bees were not of so great valour and vertue, that by them wee might liken and compare the holie Church of Rome. And seeing shee saieth, That GOD is delighted with the giftes and presentes of the Bees, why should not shee her selfe ex∣ceedinglie reioyce with our Bee hiue? Therefore can none blame vs herein, vn∣lesse also they blame and accuse the ho∣lie Church of Rome for blasphemie. Which considered, we will with∣out feare or dread, proceed with this our Bee hiue.
Now followeth further the exposition & declaration of the Bee hiue, and the description of the Bees, the Honie and Honicombe, with all things belonging therevnto. The first Chapter. VVhereof the Bee hiue is made. THE Bee hiue then, wherein our Bees dwel, swarme, & make their honie, is made with tough and strong wicker, or oziers of Louen & Paris, plaigh¦ted and wrought together. They common∣lie call them at Louen, Sophismata, or Quotlibeta, and are founde for the most part by the Basketmakers of the Romish Church: namelie, by Iohannes Scotus, Thomas de Aquino, Albertus Magnus, and other such like, which haue bene verie expert and cning in this arte. These roddes thus wouen or plighted together must for the more securitie be bounde also with grosse Iewish or Thalmodician ca∣bles,
and then ouer that drawe a clammi or cleauing morter plaster, made of olde rubbish or chaskie dust (wherewithall the auncient old decaied Councels were wont to bee morteied and dawbed) beeing good and small beaten to poulder, and wrought verie thinne, with a litle chopt straw, which the Apothecaries call, Palea Decretorum, weing and often moyste∣ning the same with scomme of the aun∣cient Doctors: and also mingled among the same some newe chalke of Trent, and so wrought together with sande, whiche is digged out of the decayed welles of mens superstitions: or of that olde sande which the Heretikes were wont to binde their argumentes withall. Here vnder you may also mingle some Iewes lime, or Bitu∣men, which is a verie tough and cleauing substance, wherewithall the citie and Towre of Babylon was wont to be bound and it is drawen out of the poole and dead sinke of Sodom and Gomorre: For herewithall thou shalt make such an excel∣lent morter, that neither the heate of the Sunne, nor showres of raine, will bee of force to moisten it, or make it to splitte. The maisters of this Bee hiue, who loue
to haue it somewhat garishe to the eye, vse besides all the rest to make snowe white Gypsus, or a kinde of playster of white bi∣blish Marble stone very finely grounde in a Louauist or Parisian mill, beeing wrought with excellent stronge durtie de∣crees, and so stroke ouer with a whiting brushe or pincell, and then painted with all manner of gallant pictures and braue i∣mages: for that makes a gaie shewe, and causeth the Bees the rather to enter into it. The ii. Chapter. Declaring the first originall of these Bees. COncerning the first original of Bees, are sundrie opinions amongest the learned. Some amongst the Poetes, as Higinius, and others saye, that there was a woman,Melissa. named Melissa, whome Iupiter did transforme into a Bee. And it seemeth partely, that our bees be of a feminate dis∣position. The other, as Euhemerus saith, that they are proceeded of hornettes and horseflies, which did norishe and feede Iu∣piter, being in a caue, in the lande of Cre∣ta, and that he (for that cause) did endue
them with honnie. Which fable therein doeth agree with the trueth, forsomuch as the idol Iupiter, and all other idols are nourished and mainteined with the hony of our bees, and by them brought acquainted in the worlde. Some suppose, they were firste founde in Thessalia, whiche is a ve∣rie fertile soile of all manner poisones, and sorcerers necessaries: the other say, in an Isand named Quea: other some, vppon a mounteine Himettus. In sūme, what so euer it be, thus much is of it, that our Bees are exceeding olde: for Moses mentio∣neth, that in Aegypt were suche a sorte of Bees,Psal. 118.12. Esaie. 7.18. Dauid declareth also of a swarme of such Bees, which hadde enuironed him a∣boute. And Esaie speaketh of the Bees in in Assyria and Chaldea. Yet notwithstan∣ding our Bees do somwhat differ from those. For these were firste bredde at Rome, in the dayes of Numa Pom∣pilius, and continued many hundred yeares after, and are maruellousie in∣creased: yet after that, the firste kinde beeing all most worne out, they are growen to an other kinde, in the dayes of Phocas the Emperour of Rome. But wee
will permitte this to the iudgements of Historiographers, and prosecute our mat∣ter. The iii. Chapter. Of the qualitie and sundrie sorts of Bees. Those Bees Ergo, are of sundrie quali∣ties, but are in a manner all brought into two sortes or species,Natural. hist. lib. 11. Cap. 18. Domesticall Bees. according to the description of Plinie. For the one are do∣mesticall or house Bees, and bee conuer∣sant among people. The other are strange and odde, terrible to see to, more teaslie or angrie, and with a sharper sting, but with∣all more diligent in their Beehiue. And al∣beit they are conuersant also amongest people, and frankly bestowe their honie, yet bee they more solitarie and straunger than the other, and therefore are called with the Greeke worde Monachi, that is to say, dwelling solitarie or by them selues and are knowen from other, by a hoode which they weare on their heads. Wee will tearme the first tame Bees: and these wilde Bees.Tame Bees. Wilde Bees. Furthermore, they are both diuided in∣to
foure manner of sortes or kindes,4. sorts of Bees after the description of Aristotle and Columel∣la. Of which, the verie best are thicke and round: they make the most honie,Thicke and sanguine co∣loured. & keepe companie next to their king, amongest which the most excellent are of a sanguine colour, as though they had redde scarlet winges. These tend the king, & are com∣monlie by his side, being of both kindes, wilde and tame: the other are of mani∣folde and sundrie sortes, with more varie∣tie: but howe much the neerer they ap∣proche to the king, so much the thicker & rounder they commonlie growe. The second kinde or sort resemble and are like to Waspes, Horseflies, and Hor∣nets:Like waspes. they make not so much honie as the first, because they come not of so good a kinde. Notwithstanding, they labour ear∣nestlie, and bring also much honie into the Hiue. They are in a manner of the condi∣tion and nature of Horseflies & Hornets, sauing that they loue not so well to flie and seize on horses and kine, as they doe on sheepe. Wherin they digresse cleane from the nature of the ordinarie Honiebees, which do carefullie shunne the sheepe, for
feare, lest they should intangle them selues, and sticke in their fleeces. But these haue a good remedie for that, for they first bite away their wooll after that their skinne, & lastely do sucke their bloude, to which they are wonderfullie addicted: and therefore (of many) are called bitesheepe, or for bre∣uities sake, Bishoppes. There are also a∣mongst these, which are as profitable in the Beehiue, as any other, by reason of their fearcenesse, for they haue verie fearce and murthering stinges, insomuch as those being stoung by them, canne hardely escape death. For the wound can not bee remedied with any thing, but with golden salue: they are of the generation of Wasps, which Aristotle and Plinie do name in Greeke Ichneumones, which may bee interpreted Inquisitors, or after the La∣tine phrase Inquisitores, and after the say∣ing of Plinie are so called, because with greate industrie and diligence, they know to seeke and catch the flies, and bite off their heades, permitting them to liue of that which remaines: howebeit, these our Ichneumones do moste couet the woll and bloud of sheepe, and are maruellous bloudethirstie. They are like wise of both
kindes, some tame, some wilde: But the wilde are alwaies more fearce and deadly. They are bredde or ingendred, after the same order, which Aristotle doeth declare of his Ichneumones: namely, they take verie venimous spiders, named Phalan∣giae, (which are found plētifullie in Spaine at the olde Inquisitors walles and postes) and carrie those to their holes: and after they haue greased them a good with filthe and durte (wherevnto ours vse commonly Popes grease) then do they set or broode o∣uer them, and after that sorte increase their kinde. The thirde sorte is by Arlem named Pheres,Pheres. which signifies as much as theues and rouers, because they are of an excee∣ding theeuish disposition, and haue a great large and broade belly commonly blacke to see to. These deuoure greate store of honnie, and loue exceedingly well the smacke of Prebends and fatte beneficed honie, whiche the Bee Apothecaries do tearme in Latine Veneficia: And there∣fore are called Veneficiati, or veneficed. They are for the most parte tame, yet there are founde not a fewe, which are of the wilde and straunge disposition.
And they are separated amongest them∣selues, each ouer a seuerall office & charge, according as the king hath appointed them. For some haue nothing else to doe, but with an irksome buzing by day and night do swarme in their hiue. But they knowe their rule, how and when they shall swarme, and are for that cause called Re∣gulares, or by a Greeke worde Canonici. Some are appointed eache ouer his honi∣combe apart, which they call Parishes, by reason whereof they are called Parishe Priests. The other are as Presidents in the conuocation house, & haue eache about ten Bees vnder their iurisdiction, whereof they are called in Greeke Decani: which in our tongue doth signifie the tenth men, or Capteines ouer ten. Touching the wilde sorte of Bees, some are called fathers, or wt a Chaldean word Abbas, because they beare rule ouer the other Bees, like a father ouer his chil∣dren. Some keepers, or after the Itali∣an and French phrase, Gardians. Some are called the first, or in Latine Priores. Some Controllers, or in Latine Prouin∣ciales: eache after his state and calling, & according to the rule and dominion which
he beareth ouer the other common Bees, which common Bees make the fourth and last heape or kinde of Bees, according to Aristotles declaration, and are named in Greeke Cephenes, and in Latine Fungi, that is after our language, Buzzardes or Drones. These are the most vnprofitable Bees, and yet the most in number: they haue no sting, and will not worke, but liue on the labour of the other, and chieflie the wilde Bees, amongst the which some flie swarming from doore to doore, to finde out baightes to fill their bagges: and therefore are called Mendicantes, that is to say, Beggers, or begging bees: because they are of the begging order of Bees. But the tame Drones do not flie so from house to house, but tarrie in their Bee hiue, & there get their commons with swarming, with∣out labouring, or doing anie good. For when they would doe anie good, then doe they commonlie misse, and are also for that cause called Missebees, or Masse∣bees. And these are the foure chiefest sortes & kindes of our Bees, agreeing verie fitlie with the descriptions of Aristotle & Plinie. For touching certein wormes (wherof they
mention) the which do growe in the Bee hiue, & are termed by them with a Greek woord named Cleros▪ and hath no other name in Latine then Clerus, that is no se∣uerall or speciall sorte of Bees, but is a ge∣neral name of all the Bees, when they first come forth: like as Plinie in the 16. chap. of the 11. booke hath written. For he saith, that whensoeuer the Bees come not to per∣fection, but remaine still wormes, then are they called Clerus, which falles out in like order with our Bees: for amongest them are none called Clerici, but those whiche beginne to fledge, and haue a white spot on their heads, which seemes to bee a white worme, as Plinie saieth. And if so be it, they remaine still in that state, without cō∣ming to further order or degree of Bees▪ then are they esteemed and accounted as of an vnperfect creation, and haue no other name but Clerici, and the white spot which they beare on their heads, Tonsura Cleri∣calis. The iiii. Chapter. Of the nature of Bees: of their ingendring, and pro∣creation. FVrther, concerning the nature of these Bees, there is a difference betwixt
male and female, especiallie amongest the wilde. And they loue to go together, yet do they not ingender the one of the other, but be most altogether ingendred & made of their king, like as Aristotle and Plinie doe plainlie shewe: for without this king, they can not bring foorth their like, not∣withstanding they can brood vp these fore∣said wormes, named Clerus, after they haue bene first ingendred by the king: if Plinie be credible, in the sixteenth Chap∣ter of the forenamed booke of his Historie. The V. Chapter. VVhat the rule and beeing of these Bees are, tou∣ching their King. IN their rule they resemble the common sorte of Honie bees, for they haue all one king: yea can not abide without a king, whom they call Papa, as if one should say,Papa pate Apum. Pater Apum, that is to say, The father of Bees, whereof it commeth, that we call al these Bees in the Dutch tongue Papen, & with vs, Papisticall Priestes. For the Bees are called in Latine Apes. This king hath a sting in like maner, but
he doeth not occupie him selfe abroad, be∣cause al other Bees are prest to do him ser∣uice, in whatsoeuer it pleaseth him to com∣maund. And like as this king of Honie∣bees hath a spot on his head: so likewise doeth he carrie a token or marke on his head, like a triple crowne: howbeit, all the other Bees (as hath bene said) do beare in like maner a round white spot in the mid∣dle of their heades, in manner of a crow∣net. They flie all at once about this king, and shewe themselues verie meeke and o∣bedient towards him. Hee goeth seldome abroad, but when he doeth determine to go forth any whither, it may be perceiued lōg before, by the swarming and humming of the forerunners. For whensoeuer he goeth out, the whole swarme followeth round a∣bout him, and oftentimes they carrie him on their shoulders, like as the honie Bees doe carrie their king. He hath likewise certeine loiterers by him, and Seruitours which garde him, and some other of the verie best, which bee of a ruddie or sanguine colour, & remaine alwayes next to his side, and are for that cause named Laterales, or a Latere.
In summe, each one would faine be next: for that is reputed for great honour: where he settles, there is the host of the whole swarme and staple of the honnie and hon∣nie combe: and such as dwell many hun∣dreth miles thence, bend notwithstanding their flght thitherwards: who so euer hath him to friend, shall in like manner finde friendshippe of all the whole swarme: when they lose him, then is all their porridge spilte, and sporte at an end: For they creepe pensiuelie to their selles and closets, and there buzze or swarme so longe and so much, till they haue gotten an other. And if by mishappe it chaunceth, that there bee twoe or three kings, (like as hath often hath bin seene,) then falles out great schis∣mes and troubles among them, and they bee at mortall warres together: yea, cease not, till the one or the other bee dispatcht & made away: like as Virgil hath finely set forth. The Vi. Chapter. Of their Burialles. THey obserue their burialles verie carefullie, like as also the common
honnie bees do, and make a great hūming, whensoeuer they carrie anie of the Bees forth. With the sound of hallowed beiles & pannes, they are greatlie to be comforted: for with such tinging they are well holpe vp & amended, and then they gather toge-in their bee hiue wt a great buzzing. But especiallie they are to be cōforted whē they are pēsiue & ill at ease,Argentina and Nummularia are phrases alluded to coyne or gold & siluer. with a burnt incense of good herbes, to wit, Argentina & Num∣mularia: for that sente they loue a life, ac∣cording to Virgils writing, who saith, The cōmon honiebees are well pleased wt burnt incense of Casia, Thymus, & other sweete smelling hearbes. They obserue their Vi∣giles like to other Bees: for there are some which rise in the night with a great hum∣ming, & swarme the one to the other, like as if they were singing Mattines or De profundis. The vii. Chpter. How these Bees worke, and how they be mainteined. THese Bees in their labour resemble much the common sort of honiebees, for they cease also from worke in the win∣ter time, & when it is foule weather. They intend not to labor, onles first the Beanes do bud, and hauing once begun, they cease
not so long as faire weather continueth, iust as Plinie doth write of the other bees. But herein they differ from the other, in that they cannot make anie freshe or newe honiecombes: but it must be made to their handes, by certeine other Apothecaries, which are skilfull in the same, & make the honiecombe after this sorte: They take two or three vnces of honiedeawe, whiche falleth from heauen vpon the Prophetical and Apostolicall beanes, & is commonlie called, Manna coeleste, or Drosomeli. It was wont to be found plentifullie in Cala∣bria, but nowe it is also in Germanie, En∣gland, and Fraunce: yea also verie rife in the Base countries. But this may they not by name put rawe in the hiue: for it would cause the Bees to haue a laske, and would all die of it. Therefore do they hate this excedinglie: insomuch that where they are conuersant, this heauenlie deawe is scarse and harde to bee founde. Therefore the Apothecaries must first temper this honnie deawe in this order: They let it be molten first by a whote fire of Sophi∣sticall seacoales, and after that they doe let it seethe more than the one halfe away, in a thicke and troubled muddie water,
which they haue drawen out of the Tiber at Rome,Tiber, Sene, and Dilie, are riuers so called the Sene at Paris, or the Dilie at Louen: and beeing thus sodden, do still it in a clocke bell, or Doctors hood, so long and sufficient, till the naturall substance is cleane gonne, and that the Quinta es∣sentia by them bee drawen from it. This Quinta essentia, they mingle with a plaster cake, which they make thus: Recipe halfe a pounde of blewe counsell, which let soke three dayes & three nightes in strong Romney or Bastard: or if you can not get Romney nor Bastard, then take of the best Vinum Theologicum, which is to bee got, or of that wine whiche the whore of Babylon was woont to giue kings and Princes to drinke. These coun∣cels thus soakte, and the stalkes and car∣nels pickt cleane away, you shall bruse or beate verie small in a Parisian morter, and ofter moysten them with strong Romishe durtie decres, straining it through a Spa∣nish cloute, or an Inquisition bowlter, and mixt with a little driuell of the olde Tea∣chers, and sturde together, you shall with waxe, wherewith the Bulles of Rome bee seald (so much as need requires) make it in a Plaister cake: which Plaister cake is
by the Apothecaries, named Pastillus, or Bolus fidei Romanae, and this cake a little besprinkeld and powred ouer with the forenamed Quinta essentia confected of the honnidewe, you shall set in the Bee∣hiue. For this is the honnicombe, and the foundation wheron the Bees labour. If so bee it, you can not make the same, you shall finde it to bee soulde at Trent, for there haue these bees Apothecaries for the space of two or three yeares ben gathered a long time together, to make so much of this hō∣ni combe, that it may suffice all the Bees in Europa, and is sould very good chepe. You may cause it to bee brought thence by the Pardoners, which commonly driue their Mules amongest the mountaines in Italie. The viii. Chapter. VVhich sheweth on what flowers and herbes these Bees labour and gather honnie. THese Bees do labour almost on all sortes of flowers and hearbes: but Plinie saieth that they cannot worke of one herbe, which is called in Latine Rumex, & in dutche Patience, which with vs is Pa∣tience, nether yet of an other, which he cal∣leth Chenopodium, and with the Ger∣maines,
is called Swines death. To these two herbes, our Bees in like case haue no lust or desire: but aboue all, they hate twoo other hearbes, of which the one is called a∣mongst the Apothecaries, Gratia Dei, or the Mercie of God: the other, Palma Chri∣sti. For whosoeuer dare presume to set these herbes by their hiue, they would all at once set vppon him, and kill him with their stinges. Therefore if any will keepe this Bee hiue, he must fence his gardē frō such hearbes: but he shal sowe and set these hearbes following, wherein they haue a singular delight, as namelie, Broade way, Cokoe flowres, Assecucombers, or wilde Cucombers, Dogges tongue, & Dogges ribbe, Calues snow, Cats tayle, Wolues clawe, Goose grasse, Goats beard, Buck∣beanes, Hogges grasse, Toades fowres, Lybards clawes, Madde hearbe, Togge∣worth, Pennie male and female, or Man and wife. And next to the Bee hiue, hee shall set Popes hearbe, Popes wodde, Dragons bloud, Seuen tyded hearbe, Monkes hoods, Foolish mathes, Romish morsels, or Diuels bit, Romish royles or rigges, (as it please you to tearme them) Wolues berries, Belflowres, and Caun∣terburie
tales. Also a litle further from the Bee hiue, whither commonlie they go to solace thē selues, shalbe Virgins markes, Maiden haire, Capillus Veneris: For therewithall they are wonderfullie plea∣sed. Also, Pothearbe, and Cuppeberries: for these they oftentimes like better then Seuentyded hearbe or Popes hearbes, which groweth next their hiue. And if it fall out, that you haue the commoditie of a running water by it, or a faire ditche, that wilbe patte and fit their turnes maruelous well. And you shall set in it, the hearbes called Vmbelicus Veneris, and Restum Merionis, which in the Germane tongue is called Narren Kolben: and shalt not forget to haue neare about the Bee hiue, some beanes growing with their flowres. And further, if thou canst so bring it to passe, thou shalt place a Mill not farre from the same: for they flie willing about the Milles, because they resemble them in lightnesse and vnstabilitie.
The ix. Chapter. Declaring the diseases of these Bees, and the remedies to the same. THese Bees in like manner are not without diseases, like vnto other com∣mon Honie bees, and are especiallie trou∣bled with the laske of the purse, and with the monie dropsie: and then are they quite out of heart: therefore must their Hiue bee often perfumed and smoakt with the fore∣named herbes, to witte, with Argentina Nummularia, Goldemaries, or Marie∣goldes, golde flower, and other such like. The Apothecaries knowe also to make a syrrope, which is verie good against all their diseases, which is this: Recipe, A handfull of rootes of Seuen tide herbe, of Rattleflowers, Coggeworth, and Penie∣male, and beate them with Diuels milke, and sprinkle or mingle the same with the Quinta essentia of foolishe mathes. And further, a bole of fine white wheat meale, with dogges greace made trimme and round, and that sodde together with crosse thornes, and crosse herbe, and with nine leaues of Alleluya, and that being done, steepe it, and let it soake in Vine syrrope,
and then hallowed with fiue fingred herbe: put to the same so much honie, vntil it wax a thicke syrrope. This syrrope is called of the Bee Apothecaries, Syrrupus Missati∣cus, which is verie good and costlie to bee laid in the Bee hiue. For if the Bees eate of the same in the morning fasting, they shal not die the same day, vntil their breath be gone from them. And if so be they hap∣pen to die, then shal they immediatlie passe to the Bee heauen. It might also by great mishappe fall out, that the whole genera∣tion of Bees might perish, like as in some Countries hath bene seene, as England and Scotland: for the auoyding of whiche inconuenience, Virgil giueth you good counsell, whom in anie case followe. Pro∣uided alwayes, that you, in steade of a Calfe, may also take a Hogge or an Asse, and stoppe his mouth or nostrelles, like as Virgil doth write: howbeit, you neede not to kill him, but onlie strawe certen herbes vnder him of the most principal, which we haue named in the Bee hiue, to wit, Popes herbes, and Seuentide herbe, and let him lie a while on these foresaid hearbes, in hogges dongue, you shall perceiue a won∣der:
for of this Asse or this Hog will rise a swarme of Bees. And thus dooing, you may mainteine the kinde. The x. Chapter. Of the waxe and honnie of these Bees. THe waxe which these Bees make, is called Bull waxe, being of great esti∣mation and solde verie deare: yea, a great deale dearer, then his weight in golde: but it is exceeding forcible, for who so hath of this waxe, doubtles hath great prehemi∣nence: for in Lent he may eate fleshe with∣out let or daunger of lawe, he may marrie and lie with whom he will: yea, although she weee his owne sister, without beeing reputed an Heretike for dooing the same. He is also defended from Purgatorie, as one which eateth mustard is free from the daunger of thunder. For it is said, That if anie with this waxe, did come before Lu∣cifers gate, he should bee forced to deliuer three or foure soules out of Purgatorie, spite of his teeth: yet wel vnderstood▪ so far forth the wax do not melt through the heat of the fire: for there must stand vpon it, the perfect seale impressed with a ring called
Annulus piscatoris. Concerning the hon∣nie, there are some coūtries in which no o∣ther is vsed then of these bees, & whereas it is greatly esteemed, to witte, aboue all, in Spaine. It was wont also to be much vsed in Germanie & Frāce, but is growen now out of request, & with many nothing regar∣ded, like as it is also fallen out in the base countries: but the Spaniards haue of late brought whole ship lodings out of Spaine, whereby it is become more vsuall againe: yet by experience it is found, to be vnnatu∣rall and vnholesome, yea verie hurtfull and poysonable to be eaten. For it is of the same operation,In the 21. boke of the natural historie, in the 13. Chap. which Plinie doeth menti∣on, speaking of the poysonable honnie, and declaring that the same may bee knowne, by that it is not fast nor thicke, but of a ruddie colour and straunge sent, whiche strikes soone into the head, and prouoketh neesing: such as haue eaten it, do cast them selues downe to the grounde, and seeke to coole them selues, &c. This is the description wherewith∣all the nature and operation of our bees honnie, doeth fittely agree. For it is in like manner bloudie coloured, and waxeth neuer thike nor faste, but remayneth still
nature and operation of our Bees honnie, doeth fittlie agree. For it is in like man∣ner bloudie coloured, and waxeth ne∣uer thicke nor fast, but remaineth still vnstedfastlie floting. It hath also a maruel∣lous strange sent, for it sauors very strong∣lie after the honnie combe, which is chefe∣lie made of stinking Romishe Decrees and decretals, and perboild or sodden with foule stinking water. It strikes in like manner quicklie into the head, and pro∣uokes not only neesing, but also beereaues one of his senses and vnderstanding. It is also exceeding heauie in weight, and burdensome, and therefore such as vse it, haue for the most parte a heauie stomach, as though a mill stone lay on their heart. It incenseth all the limmes and partes of the bodie with heate, and makes one as it were puft vp, and further makes one chole∣ricke and angrie: yet remaine they still creeping and cralling on the ground, very loathe to looke vp towards heauen. They seeke still to coole them selues, and runne like madde men from one place to an o∣ther, and fling them selues vpon their knees, before woodden stockes & stones▪
or brasen images, to finde some refreshing. But howe much more they trouble them selues herein, so much the more sicke and diseased they become both in heade and stomache. They raue sore, and are verie greedie after the foresaide syroppe, calle Syrupus Missaticus: but the more they vse of it, the more they swel with self-holines, so that they are like to burst: som∣times they wax faint hearted, & loose their courage, their eyes are darkened, their eares stopt vp, all their partes numme and astonied: and yet they are persua∣ded to be most strong and lustie, & to haue their senses at libertie, to vse their limmes, feeling, and vnderstanding. Wee finde some, which haue euen the like accidents or Symptomata, as though they were bit∣ten of a madde dogge, hauing their bo∣dies wholie bloudie and sanguine colou∣red. They are lothsome, and shunne the light: they haue an euerlasting payne, like a gnawing worme at their heart: they foame at the mouth: yea, they barke and blowe, and also bite those whome they meete, although it bee their owne father and mother, sister or brother, those onelie
excepted, whiche are troubled with the same disease: for to such they doe no hurte or dammage. Some of them runne a pil∣grimage to Saint Heughe, or Saint Gole, or in like case to our Ladie at Halle: yea, they sticke not to runne to Italie, to our Ladie of Loretta, or to Spaigne to Mont∣serrato, and to Compostille, and to Hie∣rusalem, and to other places more, hoping to saide some refreshing of the Saintes, but all will not helpe them. The xi. Chapter. VVhich heweth a remedie for all those, which are diseased with the honnie of these Bees. THe onely remedie is, to make them caste all, whatsoeuer they haue recei∣ued and taken in (but that will they hardly doe:) And after that▪ shall be ministred vn∣to them euery morning a Syroppe of the heauenly honnie deawe, whereof wee haue spoken before, wholy rawe and vnsedde. And after they haue vsed this a while, and that there boddie is well prepared and cleansed with the same, Then shall they receiue a drink of the sapp of Gratia Dei, And of Palma Christi: And so (with Gods
helpe) shall, by that meane come, to good health and perfection. The xii. Chapter. Declaring howe it is to bee taken, that which Aristo∣tle writes, that the Bees dye, whensoeuer they are anointed with Oyle. TOuching the rest of that which might be said of the nature and propertie of Bees, I referre you to Aristotle, to Plinie or to Collumella. For our Bees doe in a manner agree wholie with theirs. Onely you are to note, that where as Aristotle & Plinie doe write of the other common hon∣ny Bees, that they dye, whensoeuer they are anointed wt oyle, that is to bee vnder∣stood, of a speciall kinde of oyle or grease, which is called holy or hallowed oyle. For when our Bees are anointed with the same, then are they queasie, and without doubt, do seldome recouer or rise againe: but touching the other oyle, they haue a singuler ioy in it: for they can not worke aright, or as they should do in the Beehiue, vnles they bee first greased with oyle. And whensoeuer you will raise the gene∣ration of an Asse, Calfe, or Hogge (as
was saide a little before,) then must you grease the same a good with oyle, or else it will take no effect. There is also made a certeine confect of Oyle, Salte, White Virgins waxe and spittle, wherewithall their heads bee smeared, before they come or are bredde to anie full perfection. And if they will not yet cotton, then are they greased againe with oyle: for therewith∣all are they formed and brought to a fashi∣on, and when they come to be full growen Bees, then must they the thirde time bee salued againe with oyle, and there∣withall they come to a full natu∣rall and most perfect kinde.
The locke of this Booke. HErein I thought good to instruct thee, good reader, to the end thou mightest discerne the nature and propertie of these Bees, from the other common honnie Bees: and not to thinke, that in all respectes they agree, but differ in many. But whosoeuer hath any vnderstanding, will perfectly perceiue it of him selfe. Therefore will wee not trouble thee any longer, but make an end of this our Bee hiue: Each reade & con∣sider, & specially ponder all the witnesses and allegations which are alledged here∣in, as well out of the Scripture, as other Bookes, I trust he shall reape commodi∣tie by it. God the Lorde lighten all our hearts with his holy spirit, and keepe vs from all errours, through his euerlasting trueth, wisdome, and Sonne Iesus Christ, to whom belongeth all praise, honor and glorie, with the Father, in the vnitie of the holy Ghost. Amen. FINIS.
Imprinted at Lōdon, at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson, for Iohn Stell. 1579.
