18507.54 17256 S103375 99839131 3530
A LETTER SENT FROM MAYNHEM CONCER∣ning the late defeate giuen the Duke of Brunswicke by Mon∣sieur Tilley. Whereunto is added a Couranto of other newes from Vienna, Prague, the Palatinate and other places this 20. of Iune. 1622. LONDON. Printed by Bernard Alsop for Nathaniel Butter. 1622.
THE COPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM Mainhem the 20. of Iune 1622. SIR, since my last, wee receiued a packet certifying; that about the fifteenth or sixeteenth of this month that before the Duke of Brunswicke could passe the riuer Maine, staying a day and a night after hee had built his bridge at the towne of Hoest two Dutch mile from Franckfort, hearing that Tilley with his army of 24000 was aduancing towards him, resolues to stay to giue him bartle, so loosing his opportunitie of passing the bridge with his whole army, at last perceiuing the greatnesse of Tilleys army, and by the perswasion of his Councell of warre, makes all the hast hee could to put ouer his army, all his foote being safely passed be∣ing about 10000. men, and his horse about 7000. a great part of them hauing past the bridge with all of his treasure, and some Canon; Tilley so speedily pur∣sues his rereward of horse, that he slue at least 1000. of his horse, tooke three Earles, the one of them called Count Leuistone, taking a great part of his baggage, and three peeces of Canon. And it is reported that a peece of Ordnance being discharged by Tilley, brake the bridge, which as was thought was the occasion that
Brunswicks lost so many of his horse for want of pas∣sage, others suppose it was done by Brunswicke to preuent Monsieur Tilleys pursuite, it is thought that Brunswicke the same day, or the next morning, came to the King of Bohemia, and the Marquesse of Baden: It is certaine, that Tilley cannot get to Openheme with∣out a long and tedious march, with many difficulties. Count de Lip is one of the three Earles, prisoners. This Letter came from Brussels, dated the 24. of Iune. From Vienna the 24. of Maie. 1621. Yesterday is his Imperiall Maiestie happily arriued with 5000. men at Odenburgh, and was receiued with great pompe and state of the Hungarians; whether the proposition shall be done to day o to morrow, is yet vnknowne. Thurs is come to Odenburgh with 600. horse, but his Ladies sickenesse caused his speedy departure. The Hungarians declare that they wil not haue two Kings, or that the Span-ships, or the confederated, and the best part of all Hungary to be giuen vnto Beth∣lem Gabor, and desire neuerthelesse to be secured a∣gainst the Turkes, who make great preparations. From Prague this 26. of Maie. 1622. The Duke of Bauaria, hauing written for great aide vnto the Emperour, his Maiestie had consented the Holsteynish Saxish 1000. horse shall ioyne with him: they are mustered now, the Holsteynish lie at Liedtmo∣rich, and the Saxish in Padmer kreits. They of Glats hauing made a sally out of the Cittie, haue taken 140. oxen that were driuing towards Prage
comming from Prussia, and conducted them to their Cittie. A coppy of a trustfull Letter from Vienna the 27. of May. 1622. Fauourable Lord and friend, the warres in the Em∣pire are made in the Empire with enough disorder, and it seemeth that the Duke of Bauaria doth but little preuaile with his forces; And Tilley impouerisheth the Country by the contributions: He fauours much the Bishop of Wirtsburgh, but it is to be feared that hee is not able to helpe his Lordship much in his preten∣sion. Concerning the peace or warre of Hungary, we shal now soone know what will be the Hungarian dyet, which vpon some new conditions offered by the Em∣perour, is now begunne at Odenburgh, where the Em∣perour met with 00. horse and foote. The Ambassa∣dours of Bethlem Gabor; and the States of Hungarie with 12000. And the Lord Budeani went thither with 6000. men. There is great longing for the propositi∣on and issue of this diet. They maruell at Constantinople that Bethlem is en∣tred so deepe in this treatie of peace, without giuing any notice afore-hand of it vnto the great Turke: but seeing Bethlem hath not sent thither any body to giue accompt of his dealing and further enterprise, the Turke hath likewise not yet resolued what he will doe. In the meane time he hath sent an army of forty thou∣sand men, vpon the frontires of Hungaria, and appoin∣ted Generall of the Campe, the Viceroy of Gracia, ha∣uing beene before Bashaw of Buda.
From Bunten this 24. Those of Predigaw haue as yet strongly besieged Meyevelt being 8000. in number both horse and foote. The besieged haue slaine in two seuerall places 1200. of their enemies, and driuing many of them in∣to the riuer, did get at their great need aboundance of armour and munition, and looke yet for more ayde of their confederates that are assembled at Baden. Those of Zarich haue sent vnto them of Predigaw before Maeuelt 600. men and three peeces of Orde∣nance, besides diuers Petards: Those of the Glarer haue sent them likewise two hundred men, and they looke for more ayde from other places, and haue beset the passe. The besieged of Maeuelt write, that if they be not rescued, within a fort night they must surrender them∣selues, the Canon playing mightily vpon their cittie. From Strasburgh the 2. of Iune. From Switserland wee vnderstand that the Grisons keepe themselues brauely, hauing lately defeated the socours come from Millaine, driuing the rest backe, which caused the Gouernour of Millaine to resolue to come into the field himselfe in the defence of the house of Austria, and to take with him the Spanish Re∣giments, and that of the Collonell Serbellone, leauing the gouernment of the Dukedome into the hands of the Castelein, charging him to raise two Regiments more during his absence, to bee imployed in time of necessie, The Grisons re-enforce themselues like∣wise
being assisted with 60000. Gilder by the Swissers as other friends. From Franefort the 9. Iune. The king and the Count of Mansfield lyes yet at Darmstat and is not yet knowne when they will depart nor whether. The whole land is declared prise, but burning and murdering prohibited vpon life, there is great store of Kine and Sheepe to day conueyed in this cittie, the Magistrates haue bought many of them, because the people may redeeme them againe for the money layd out, as is done already by many. The Count Lodwic is yet at Darmstat. Yesterday is the Spanish Commissarie, S. de Fort besides the Rector of Hochst taken prisoner by this Cittie and carryed away. From Franckfort the 12. of Iune. By my former Letters is aduised that the king of Bohemia was riued in the Land of the Count Darm∣stat, which is mightily spoyled by the souldiers. The King was yet the 8. day of this moneth in the cittie of Darmstat, but the next day he intended to go towards the Bishoprick of Ments. In the interim had the sayd Count treated with the King vpon some poynts which the King propounded, but the Count not liking the conditions, went on Thursday last with his sonne pri∣uately out of the Cittie to saue themselues there, but was taken within a mile of the sayd Citty by the Mar∣quesse of Durlach being strong 8000. foote and 1600.
horse, and conueyed againe to Darmstat, which flight caused the army not to depart so soone. From Ments the 10. of Iune. We vnderstand here that the Count Lodwicke of Darmstat by command of the King of Bohemia is ta∣ken prisoner, and with a strong conuoy both of horse and foote conducted to Mainhem, & his land is made prise, excepting onely burning, murdering and like shamefull actions. The cause is as they say, that the Count (aforesayd) a while agoe had written Letters against the king of Bohemia directing the same vnto the Magistrate of Hidelbergh. The Count of Mansfield hath demanded from the Iewes at Franckfort a notable summe of money, they say 150000. Rix Dollers, it is reported that they of∣fer 12000. From Hanan the 6. of Iune. The Lord of Anholt is with his forces lying neere Frankfort, but two miles from Mansfelt, of both sides they come within the Citty threatning one another. The Marquesse of Durlach is ariued at Basheym, how strong, is not yet knowne. Monsieur Tilley is about Aschassenbach, with whom ioyne the forces sent lately from Bauaria: whether Anholt shall doe the like, is vn∣certaine. From Collen the 11. of Iune. The Lord of Anholt is with the most part of his forces at Aschoppenburch; where it is thought that Til∣ley
shall come to meete him. The Spanish forces haue broken the bridge at Op∣penheim, resoluing to make another at Steyn. The duke Christian of Brunswike did lie about Gota, taking his way towards Franken-land. Yesterday did Count Mansfield send a Trumpet∣ter, to sommon Steynheymb (lying vpon the Riuer of Meyn) to surrender it, but was answered, that they had nothing for him but gun-powder and lead. The Elector of Ments fearing Mansfield, hath com∣maunded the trees about the Citty to be cut downe, and the Ordenance to be planted vpon the walles; be∣sides other preparations to defend the Citie. Count Henry of Nassau, is the first of Iune ariued at Arnhem, trauelling in all speed to Embricke; there are sent many shippes vpwards the Rheine, with soul∣diers and warlike preparations. The 11. of Iune, is finally concluded and granted by the high and mighty Lords the States generall of the vnited Prouinces, the West-India company, wher∣in they trafficke for salt, and the negociation vpon Guinea are comprehended, to the great good liking of all good Patriots. And the subscribing shall last vntill the last of Iuly, being two moneths after the resoluti∣on afore-said, but forreiners shall haue three moneths. The King of Denmarke commaunds two thousand horse to be leuied, which his Maiestie shall maintaine at his owne charges in the seruice of the vnited Pro∣uinces. FINIS.
