18635 99848466 13561
engraved title page royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE. The first parte An historicall, & chorographicall discrip∣tion of Middlesex. Wherin are also al∣phabeticallie sett downe, the names of the cyties, townes, parishes hamletes, howses of name &c. Wth. direction spedelie to finde anie place desired in the mappe & the distance betwene place and place Without compasses. CVM PRIVILEGIO BY THE TRAVAILE AND VEW OF Iohn Norden Anno 1593
TO THE HIGH, AND MOST MIGHTY EMPRES, ELIZABETH, BY THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, FRAVNCE, AND IRELAND, POWERFVL PROTEC∣TOR OF THE FAITH, AND VNDOV∣TED RELIGION OF THE MES∣SIAH, THE MOST COMFORTABLE NVRSING MOTHER OF THE ISRAEL OF GOD, IN THE BRITISH ISLES. HER HIGHNES LOYALL SVBIECT IOHN NORDEN, IN ALL HV∣MILITIE, CONSECRATETH HIS SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE.
royal blazon or coat of arms E R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE SEMPER EADEM
TO THE RIGHT HONORA∣BLE SIR WILLIAM CECILL KNIGHT, LORDE BVRGHLEY, Lordhigh Treasurer of England, and of hir Maiesties most Ho∣norable priuy Counsell. HAuing by your Ho∣norable meane (my good Lord) obtei∣ned, at the hands of my sacred SOVE∣REIGNE, gratious passe, & priuiledge, for mine intended labours, the description of famous ENG∣LAND. I cannot but, in dutie, render vnto your Honor, condigne thanks, and withall diligence, and dutifull endeuour, proceed therein: hoping, that although (in regarde of my long sicknes & other impediments) this beginning carrie not so absolute per∣fection, as in your wisedome may be requi∣red: yet may I enioy your patient directi∣ons, and gratious assistance, I shall effect the residue more fully to answere Ho∣norable expectation. Your Honors in all dutie, IO. NORDEN
TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE HONORABLE, WISE, AND LEARNED. ALthough I cannot but confesse that I am the vnwoorthiest of manie in this lande, (and especiallie in these daies of surpassing knowledge) to vndertake (after other farre more deseruing) so commendable a labor: which requireth arte, industrie, learning, counte∣nance, and charge, wherewith I am not so fullie fur∣nished as some other. Yet it may please you (in fa∣uour) to accept of my willingnes, and beare with my wants: And the rather for that it hath beene helde heeretofore an excuse (in curtesie) Velle bene, though in this age (more ripe in experience) is expected, Optimè perficere: which neither, altogither escapeth without emulation: I, as ouercome with a desire to take pains to profite my Countrey, rest vndoubtfull, that the wise, and learned, will not onely tollerate, but in fauour accept this simple beginning. The fruits of my trauell tend not alone to my selfe in priuate, but to the publike ease of many. In lieu whereof, my hope and desire is, that he that can re∣prooue, will friendly reforme what he findeth iustly faultie. So shall my proceedings grow to more per∣fection: and I by all endeuour will seeke to accom∣plish what may answere discret affections. Nihil vbique placet. IO. NORDEN.
Aduertisements touching the vse of this labor. IT is to be noted, that for your ease I haue in the list of the Map of the Shire, set downe certaine deuisions, letters, and figures: the deuisions are in steed of a scale of the miles, the lesser cō∣taining one, the greater two miles. The letters and figures serue for the present finding of any place desired in the Map, which places are found in the Alphabet with the letter and figure that direct to the place desired. A matter of so great facilitie as needeth no example. He that desireth to know the distance betweene places in the Map without compasses, the vse of the crossing lines, which serue for a vniuersall scale through the Map, answe∣reth his desire. Whereas in the collection of the Alphabeticall table, there are heere and there dispersed houses of Nobility & Gentrie. I craue fauorable consideration, though I haue not so narrow∣ly acquired their interestes, as that may assure me, that they be all the true ownoures in fee, of the places which they are resident in, which thing to obserue; as it doth not meerely ap∣pertaine to my purpose, So were it a matter intricate, and the more, for that information (often vncertaine) must be of ne∣cessitie, the chiefest guide therein. Such therefore as I con∣ceiue most doubtfull for want of certaine certificat, I haue noted with two starres thus, **. Also in this commencement of my trauailes, I haue obser∣ued certain funeral monuments with the armes (if any ther∣on rest vndefaced) which if it may be fauorably conceiued, I shall with more diligence obserue the like hereafter, whereby may be preserued in perpetuall memory, that which time may deface, and swallow vp in obliuion. Also by this obseruation, many may be certified of the places where their auncestors and allies are interred, and by the coates finde out their vn∣knowne kinred. Negotium ex negotio seritur. IOHN NORDEN.
Io. Nordenivale, ad primam par∣tem sui SPECVLI BRITANNIAE. VAde liber Speculi caput es, tua mēbra sequentur, ELISABETHA potens, arx{que} patrona tua est. Quid si in te domin úm{que} tuum ruet inuidus audax? Tu dominúsque tuus, tutus inermis eris. Ito foràs, valeásque liber, te forte sagaces Incultum voluant: caetera culta forent, Ibis in orbe gerens, quamuis tua fata libelle, Ardua principio, spes meliora canit. ELISABETHA valens, altissima, maxima, firma, Auxilium, quandò, sceua procella venit. Haec tibi conductum, non te pericula tangunt, Digna patrona illa est, spesque, salusque tua. The Saxon Alphabet. A b c d E f g H i k l M n o p q r S s t u ƿ X x y aA bb cc dd ee ff gg hh ii kk ll mm nn oo pp qq rr SS ss tt uu ww XX xx yy AEÆ aeæ ThÐ thð thþ and& that{that}
A BRIEFE DECLARATION OF THE TITLES, INHABITANTS, DIVISIONS, AND SCITVATION OF ENGLAND or BRITANNIA maior: a necessary introduction to our Speculum Britanniae. NOtwithstanding it resteth vn∣certaine, how, when, and by whom, this our BRITAN∣NIA was first peopled, yet to satisfie such as expect the iudgements, and opinions of some auncient writers con∣cerning the same:Berosus in Chald. ant. Annius in Beros. Caesar. Com. I thinke it not impertinent to scite the affirmation ofSome suspect that the historie of Berosus, was but counterfeit, fals∣ly fathered vpon hu name, & there∣fore helde of no great authoritie. Berosus, who saith that Samothes called also Mesech, brother to Gomer and Tuball, called also Dis, the sixt sonne of Iaphet, the sonne of Noah, came into this land about 252. yeres after the floud: who called it Samothea, 3593. yeeres past: in which name it continued vntill Albion, the sonne of Neptune, (who discended of Cham) entred the same, and chaunged the name of Samothea into ALBION. This Albìon raigned about 562.Ringman. in des Europae. yeeres after the floud: in the yeere of the worlds creation 2219. 3340. yeeres since. Plinie calleth it ALVION. Ptolomey . Strabo Munster, and others,Munst. Cosm. will haue it ALBION ab albis rupi∣bus, of the white sea clifes, which are in the south coast of the lande: Some others will haue it come of the Greeke worde Olbion,Olbion. Cowp. in Dict. which signifieth felix happie, in regarde of their happines belike that first atchiued it. So doth Strabo call Albania,Strabo lib. 4. wherein he pla∣ceth the people Caucasiae: felicem habitatu regionem, a happie coun∣trie to dwell in. So is Gothia in the countrey language ierra bona, a good countrey. Some will haue it ALBION of Albina Diocle∣sians daughter, which hath no próbabilitie.Caxton. It continued in the name of ALBION 608. yeeres, vntill Bry∣tus or Brutus Iulius, arriuall, who conquered the same about the yeere of the worldes creation 2828. 2734.Brutes arriuall. Galf. Monum. Bale Cent. 1. This Brute changed the name of ALBION into BRYTANE, and the people Albionds into Britans; or after some BRVTAYNE of the same Brute y, being turned into v.
Some will haue it BRITANNIA of Brytona a nymph of Greece:Britanniae. others rather holde that it shoulde take that name of a sepera∣tion, as M.Twinus in Com. Twine in his Commentaries, who saith, Britannia is so called, for that it is Locus diuorsio separatus ab eo cui adhaeserat: a place seuered from another whereunto it was annexed: and the more to fortifie his reason, he coniectureth that this Britannia (nowe an apparant Island) was somtime Peninsula annexed vnto the maine of Fraunce; which no doubt is true, but not since the generall in∣undation, (by probabilitie) whereby infinite chanels were eaten in the earth, with the rage of so violent a floud, and consequently many Islands dispersed as we see in the main Ocean, and middle earth seas: for surely if it had beene Peninsula, or Istmus since the floud,Plinie. Plinie who liued neere 1500. yeeres before M. Twyne woulde haue as well mentioned such a conjunction, as that part of the sea which runneth betweene England and Calleys, which he calleth Mare Gessoriacum,Mare Gessoriacū. and which Ptolomey calleth Oceanus Britannicus. But it seemeth that M. Twyne standeth vpon the opinion of Anto∣nius Volscus a Poet, who dreameth of a passage fiue miles in bredth betweene England and Fraunce: from whom also Seruius Honora∣tus seemeth to say,Seruius Honora∣tus. that BRITANNIA was Olim iuncta continenti, our Brytaine was ioined to the maine continent: which secrets passe our apprehension. Sir Thomas Eliot will haue Britannia to be Pritania: Humfrey Lloyd also seemeth to say it should be Prid-caine which signifieth beauti∣full or white of colour,S. Th. Eliot. Humf. Lloyde. though the c be omitted for more easier pronunciation, which maketh it Pridaine. Againe, some will haue it come of Brith a british worde, which signifieth painted, which cōiecture I take to come of Caesars words, where he saith,Caesar Com. lib. 4. Omnes Britanni glasto se inficiunt, all the Brytons be∣smere themselues, and staine their bodies with oade: of which worde Brith and tania a Greeke worde which signifieth Regnum a kingdome, it is supposed to be aptly called Brithtania, the countrey or kingdome of the Brithtons or depainted people. Goropius Becanus seemeth to hold another opinion, that it should be Bridania,Goropius Be∣canus. M. Camden. wherof M. Camden maketh construction, that Bri in Bri∣dania should be free, and so to make it Fredania, or Free-denmarke. Thus is our Britannia forced to sustaine sundry titles vnder one truth,The seuerall titles of Brytaine. as Brytannia, Pritania, Prid-caine or Pridayne, Brithtania, Bru∣tania, Bridania, and such like: according to as manie sundrie mens conceits. But were not Brute so generally reiected in these our daies, I could verie easely be drawne to assure me that it might be most truely Brutania of Brute the supposed conquerour, and that Greeke worde tania a kingdome, though Brute were no Greeke, yet might he fitly conioyne this worde tania vnto his name Brute, and so conclude it Brutania,Brutania. Bruti regnum, the kingdome of Brute,
u being nowe turned into i, as in other wordes, Pessumus is nowe written Pessimus, so are manie other Latine words. Manie of late yeeres reiect the hystorie of Brute, among others, an Abbot some∣time of S. Albons, Iohn of Wheathamsted,Io. de Wheat∣hampst. who wrote about the yere of Christ, 1443. who saith plainly, that Totus processus de Bruto illo, est Poeticus, potius quam historicus: The whole matter of that Brute is Poeticall, (fabulous) rather than a true hystorie. This author liuing of late daies affoordeth reproofe of the most auncient. But what antiquitie hath left, and wee by tradition haue recei∣ued, Ipse sciolus, dare not absolutelie denie, vppon anie mans bare coniecture. It is at this day called ENGLAND, Anglorum terra,England. the land of Angles, or Englishmen, the Latins call it Anglia, and the French Angle terre. The Angli or Englishmen inhabited part of Germanie whom (as I take it) Ptolomey calleth Angili:Angili. Ptolomey. and placeth them betweene the Casuari, & the Chemae, neer the riuer Visurgis, now Weser, in that countrey which is now Westphalia:Caes. Com. who (as Caesar saith) Praedae ac belli inferendi causa, ex Belgis transierunt, came out of Belgia the lowe Countries, to seeke releefe, and to war with the Britons: inuading most especially that part of the lande which borders vppon the south east, or Germaine sea, as Kent, Sussex, & Essex.Beda. The Angles or Englishmen inhabited Cambridgeshire, Isle of Elie, Norffolke and Suffolke; all which was called Eastanglia, and the people East Angles, The Saxons which came also with the Angles were disper∣sed and seated in other quarters of the lande, as by the deuision, and Heptarchie it will appeere. The Saxons and Angles draue the Britons into Wales,Aun. dom. 620. and Cornewall, and other places of refuge. And Egbert king of the west Saxons became sole Monarch of the whole land, and called the same England, of that part of Germany wherof he was, wher∣in the Angili or Angles inhabited. Some other will haue it England of Anglia,Anglia. the name of a Queene, sometime of this Countrey. But what, whence, or when she was they seeme not to report. Others will haue it Anglia, scytuate as it were in Angulo in a corner, or newke by it selfe. Which opinion is not altogither to be reiected, for that Iulius Solinus saith,Iulius Solinus. that the sea coast of Gal∣lia had beene the ende of the worlde, but that the Isle of Britaine, (which standeth alone as it were in an angle) for the largenes thereof, deserueth the name of another worlde, being seperated from the rest of the earth, as Virgil saith, Penitus toto diuisos orbe Bri∣tannos. Iosephus in the oration of king Agrippa saith,Ios. lib. 2. cap. 26, bel. Iud. The Romaines sought another world, beyond the great Ocean, sending their hostes into Bri∣tayne. And Aegispus saith, The Romaines by strength gat another
world beyond the Ocean in Britaine far from them.Allgis. lib. 2. de excid. Hier. Ant. Volsc. Antonius Volscus af∣firmeth, Peloponesum to be Vltìmum orbem, Brìtannìam verò alterum or∣bem: So that it may be saide it standeth in Angulo, yet it seemeth not thereof to be called Anglia. This our famous BRITANNIA (of it selfe another world) for the firtilitie and pleasantnes thereof, hath been sought for, con∣quered, and inhabited of many sundrie nations. The first as some dreame were Aborigines such people as the earth it selfe,Aborigines. without humaine propagation brought foorth: who belike followe Ouid,Ouid metamor. who saith, Caetera diuersis tellus animalia formis. sponte suo peperit, &c. But to say that men should spring of the earth since Adam disagreeth from the word of God, whereby we learne that God created them male and female, to increase & multiply, & to gouerne all other earthly creatures. There were a people in Italie,Aborigines in Italie. and they of very great antiquitie: yet not begot∣ten or sprong of the earth, but because they were Vagi, and Sine la∣ribus, wanderers vpon the earth without house or home, voide of all ciuilitie; & because they were vnknowne from whom they de∣scended, they were accounted Nullorum filii, the children of no fa∣thers, as the Romanes who blush not to say they are Deorum filii, descended of the Gods. Such might be in this land at the Britons ariuall;Giants in Englād. Britons. Ann. mundi 2855 Deut. 1.28. which might bee counted Indigenae, Vagi, vnciuill, and therefore called Giants, as were the Anakimes mentioned in the Scripture. But to leaue these vnknowne people;Yuand. Do. Tolos. lib. de genel. Iapheth. Yuandus writeth that our Britannia was inhabited first by Babylonians: But it is not to be de∣nied that the Britons, (whereof soeuer so named) were the first that vnder ciuill regiment possessed this land.Romanes. After them the Ro∣mans, whom Iulius Caesar first conducted hither: & after him Claudi∣us the Emperor came into this land with his Romanes about An∣no Christi 40.Iulius Caesar. Claudius impe∣rat. Pictes, Scots. Beede. M. Camden. Scots afflict the Britons. After the Romanes came the Pictes and Scots out of Scythia (as Beede reporteth.) But M. Camden taketh them to bee Britons which fled into the north parts for feare of the Romanes. The Scots possessing the North parts of Britaine, Albania nowe Scotland, greatly afflicted the Britons, of the South, who craued aide of the Saxons, and they with the Angles ariuing: in processe of time subdued the Britons, and possessed the lande, driuing the Britons into Cambria now Wales, into Cornewall and other pla∣ces of refuge,Ann. Dom. 1012. Danes. William duke of Normandy with his Normans. about the yeere of Christ, 430. Then came the Danes, and distressed the Saxons neere 200. yeeres. Lastlie the Normans vnder the conduct of William duke of Normandie, who vnder a pretended title subiected this lande vnto himselfe about the yeere of Christ 1066. by which conquest he is intituled WIL∣LIAM the CONQVEROR, who inforced all the inhabitants to sweare vnto him fealtie, faith, and true allegeaunce, and being
quietlie setled in his kingdome, caused this land to be described and exactly surueied about the 15. yeere of his raigne,William Con∣queror caused England to be de∣scribed and sur∣ueied. Doomes day book. wherein he caused to be obserued, how many hides of land, there were in his kingdome, the value of euery hide, and who possessed it: which suruey resteth in record at Westminster in a booke called Doomes day, or the role of Winchester. The vsuall account of lande at this day in Englande is by acres, yardes, carewes, hydes, knightes fees, cantreds, baronies and counties. Xiphilinus diuideth this land into Britanniam Superiorem,Ex Dione. England how deuided. & Inferio∣rem: Ptolomey into Magnam & Paruam: Sextus Rufus, who liued vn∣der the Emperor Valentinian, hath Britanniam primam, & secundam flauiam, and Maximam Caesariensem, another part added called Valentia, remembred by Marcellinus. It was also deuided into Loe∣gria, Cambria, and Albania, called also Caledonia, which are nowe England, Wales, and Scotland. It was deuided into seauen kingdomes by the Saxons, after, into Prouinces, Shires or Counties, all which were enhabited by peo∣ple of seuerall names after Ptolomey, as may appeere. 7. king∣domes of the SAX∣ONS. 1. Norþanhym∣braric. regnū Northumbrorū, the kingdome of the Nor∣thumbers. Northumberland & part of SCOTLAND. Brigan∣tes Westmerland. Cumberland. The Bish. of Durham or Du∣nelm. Yorkeshire. Lancashire. 2. Myrcnaric regnum Mer∣ciorum, the kingdome of Mercia. Cornaui. Cheshire. Shropshire. Staffordshire. Warwickeshire. Worcestershire. Coritani. Nottinghamshire. Lincolneshire. Northamptonshire. Rutlandshire. Leicestershire. Derbishire. Dobuni. Glocestershire. Oxfordshire. Catticu∣chlani. Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire. Part of Hartfordshire. Herefordshire, part of the Silures.
Huntingdonshire part of the ICENI. 3. ƿestseax∣naric, occidu∣orum Saxonum regnum, the kingdome of West Saxons. Atreba∣tii. Berkeshire. Hamshire. Belgae. Wiltshire. Somersetshire. Durotriges. Dorsetshire. Dammo∣nii. Deuonshire. Cornewall. 4. Suþscaxna∣ric, Australiū Saxonum reg∣num the king∣dome of South Saxons. Regni. Sussex. Surrey. 5. Centric reg∣num Cantiorum the kingdom of Kent. Cantii. Kent. 6. Eastangla∣ric regnū ori∣entaliū Anglo∣rū, the kingdō of East Angles. Icen. Norfolke. Suffolke. Cambridgeshire. The Ile of Elie. 7. Eastscax∣naric regnum orien. Saxonum the kingdom of East Saxons. Trino∣bantes. Essex. Middlesex, and part of HERTFORDSHIRE, These seauen kingdomes containe 39. shires, which are deuided into 22.Bushoprikes in England. Bishopricks, namely, Caunterbury, Rochester, Londō, Chichester, Winchester, Salisburie, Exceter, Bath & Wels, Worcester, Glocester, He∣veforde, Couentrie & Lichfield, Lincolne, Elie, Norwich, Oxford, Peterbor∣rough, & Bristow, in number 18. vnder the Archb. of Caunterburie Primate of England. Yorke, Durham, Chester, and Carelyle, 4. vnder the Archbishop of Yorke. Cambria Wales. CAMBRIA, WALES, in∣habited by the Britƿea las or WAL∣LI BRI∣TANNI, is deuided into 13. shires. Ordoui∣ces. Flintshire. Denbigh. Mongomery. Merioneth. Caernaruan.
Silures. Radnor. Brecknocke. Glamorgan. Monmouth. Dimaetae. Caermarthen. Penbroke. Gardigan. Mona. Anglesey. The former Heptarchie, or Countrie of 7. kingdomes,The Heptarchie now a Monarchy. nowe a Monarchie, most happely gouerned by the sole Empres thereof most renowmed Queene ELIZABETH, was deuided into the former prouinces,Aluredus deui∣ded the shires of England. H. 8. of Wales. shieres or counties by ALVREDVS the fourth sonne of ADOLPHVS, & brother to ETHELDRED, who raigned in the yeere of Christ 872. But Cambria, now Wales, was distingui∣shed by shieres, by the famous king HENRY the eight: all which shieres were deuided into certain parts, which the Saxons called ðrihingaf which we cal leþs or lathes,Shires deuided in ðrihingaf or leþs. Ridings. these deuisions are yet in Kent: and Yorkeshire at this day is diuided into Rydings, which may be also called ðrihingaf, all which parts conteine in them certain Hundreds, in euerie of which was conteined ten teo∣þunges, of vs called Tithings, conteining ten men,Hundreds. wherof it was called also tienmentale, a colledge or corporation of ten men,Teothongs. & the officer of this Tithing the Saxons called teoþungmon, of vs (especiallie in the West) a Tythingman: in some places, as in Northamptonshire, a Therdbarrow:Therdbarrowes. so that ten of these Tithings yeelded a 100. men, whereof the English call it at this day a Hun∣dred (though the number of the men be now vncertaine) the La∣tines call it Centuria. In steede of Tithings, (especially beyonde Trent,) they haue Wapētaches,Centuriae. Wapentaches. which the Saxons called ƿeƿon∣tacs, which tooke that name of the view of weapons, and where the Tenaunts deliuered vp their weapons vnto their Lords.Boresealdor. The officers of these petite deuisions or Tythings, are in Kent called BorHesealdors, the chiefest or eldest pledges as M.M. Lamberde. Lamberde most expert in the Saxon toung affirmeth. The word Shire commeth of the Saxon Verbe Scyran,Shire why so called. which signifieth to cut or to deuide. Euerie of these Shires in time past was gouerned per Comitem, whom we now call Earle, who was quasi praefectus regius, the kings Lieuetenant, who of the Saxons was cal∣led Eorle, of whom euery Shire is called a Countie, a Comite,Counties why so called. of the Earle. But of later time there haue been, and are yeerely cho∣sen in euery shire, an officer by the Prince, which in Latine is called Vicecomes, as one appointed vice Comitis in the Earles steed,The Sherife what and whence so called. we call him the Sherife, the Saxons called him Scyregerefa, the Reeue of the Shire, for gerefa is an officer to collect rents, and other reuenues, and to execute things vnder, & for another,
the Germaines at this daie haue Burgreeue of the Saxons ƿor∣tgerefa,Manie sortes of Reeues. the Mayor of a Towne, Margreeues, whom we cal Wa∣terbaylifes: a Landsgreue whom we call the Reeue of a Mannor. Pliny, Gildas Solinus, and Martianus do agree, that this our BRITANNIA MAIOR is 800.The length of Brytaine and the bredth. miles in length, including also Scotland: and Martianus saith, it is in bredth 300. miles: in which dimensuration they seeme to account after the Italian measure, which is lesse then our myles:The supposed breadth & length of Englande by statute measure. yet were England measured accor∣ding to the true and exact mensuration prouided and allowed by statute, it woulde appeere to be of greater length & breadth, then these authors account. An Italian mile containeth mille passus ma∣iores, or Geometricos a 1000.A myle A furlong. A pearch. paces of fiue foote to the pace, which is also a fadome. And our English mile is eight furlongs, euery fur∣long 40. pearches, euery pearch 16. foote, and halfe, which maketh 5280. foote, which is more then the Italian mile by 56. paces. But our ordinary mile exceedeth both the Italiā, & true English mile. The forme of this land is Trianguler,The fertilitie of England. much like Cicilia an Island in the middle earth sea. The center of this land which I take to be about Titburie castle, hath latitude about 52. degrees, 50. minuts, and longitude 21. degrees 28. minuts. This our BRITANNIA for the fertility & fruitfulnes therof, matcheth the best, yeelding such generall commodities, & in such abundance, that it may be said: Albion emporiis, tellus opulenta marinis, fertilis omnigenum rerum: Another saith, Anglia non segetes effundit diuite vena? Pascua non pingui fertilitate tument? In gremio fluuiis riui miscentur amaenis, Gurgitibus rapidis & vada pura meant. Nobilis antiquo nutat cum robore quercus. Et nemorum grato spirat odore viror. Visceribus mediis errant pretiosa metalla, Diuitiae crescunt intus, opesque foris. It were too long to recite the particuler fruites, and rare com∣modities it yeeldeth, all which are knowne to the worlde, as the Cosmographicall Poet saith, Omnia sunt famatotū vulgata per orbem. And aboue all other blessings it hath greatest cause to reioyce in the free vse of the true knowledge of Christ,England most happie in the vse of the Gospell. wherein it trium∣pheth aboue all other kingdomes or Countries of the world, most happely therin maintained, (vnder the mightie king of kings, ce∣lestiall lehouah) by the sacred hand of the most imperial Queene ELIZABETH, the fruits of whose happie raigne who can enioy, & not vnfeinedly commend hir safetie, and happie continuance, vnto that all sufficient God, who beyond expectation, in fauour, commended hir to vs? in regarde whereof our Englande may be truely called OLBION a happie Countrie.
SPECVLVM BRITANIAE. The first part, conteining a briefe Historicall and Chorographicall discription of MYDDLESEX. HAuing thus briefely touched the generall, I purpose to proceede to the particular descriptions of this out BRITANIA: wherein (imitating the artificial Painter, who beginneth alwaies at the head, the principall part of the bodie:) I thought it not vnfit to begin my Speculum Britaniae with MYDDLESEX,The causes why Myddlesex is the first part of Speculum Brita∣niae. which aboue all other Shyres is graced, with that chiefe and head Citie LONDON: which as an adamant draweth vnto it all the other parts of the land, and aboue the rest is most vsuallie ferquented with hir Maiesties most regall presence. Of MIDDLESEX, and of the Trinobantes. IT is called MIDDLESEX of the mid∣dle Saxons,Myddlesex why socalled. for that they inhabited that part betweene the East Saxons, West Saxons, and South Saxons. MIDDLESEX was a percel of that countrey wherin (as Caesar saith) dwel∣led the Trinobantes whom Ptolomy cal∣leth Trinoantes, omitting the b.Myddlesex parte of the Trinoban∣tes. Caesar Com. Ptolomey. Galfr. Moun. some call them Trinouantes, putting u. for b. The chiefe Citie of these Trino∣bantes, was then called Trinobantum,Colchester. London the Citie of the East Saxons and Tri∣nobantes. Corn. Tacitus. of some held to be Colchester of some London; Beede saith that London was the chiefe Citie of the East Saxons, If so, then of necessitie, of the Middle saxons, and consequently of the Trinobantes; yet Tacitus saith, that London was not Trinobantum; nor the people Trinobantes, neere London, and his reason is that if the Trinobantes had beene neere London, they would not haue suffered Suetonius to haue passed thither; which argument Humfrey Lloyde seemeth to confute in this manner.Humf. Lloyd. The Trinobantes (saith he) being Suetonius enemies, would haue as well preuented him in the inner part of the countrey, as neere London, considering that Suetonius came from the Isle of Anglesey, marching through the whole countrey. So that in what place so∣euer the Trinobantes were resident, they could not be ignorant of his passage.
Polydore Virgile,Pollidore. a man of no great credite, as touching his hi∣storie, affirmeth from some other that Trinobantum was Northamp∣ton, and the Northamptonshire men Trinobantes,Northampton Tranton. and his reason is for that the countrey men in their language called that place Tran∣ton, which hath no such semblable consonance with Trinobantum that he, or any other, should seeke Trinobantum in that part of Bri∣taine. Master Camden,M. Camden. a singuler scrutator of antiquities seemeth to hold (but not absolutely) that the Trinobantes should be so called, of the brytish word Trenant, which signifieth townes scytuate in the valley.Caesar. But Caesar saith, they inhabited Prope firmissimam ea∣rum regionum ciuitatem, neere the most strongest Citie in those countries; which as I take was London. The lymites and principall bounds of MYDDLESEX. MYDDELSEX is scituate in the south east parte of this lande, bordering vpon the north, vpon Hertfordshire. On the east vpon Essex,Lea riuer. devided thence by the riuer Lea, and the Meere ditch: on the south vpon Surrey, hauing the most famous riuer Thamise, the bound and lymite betweene them, and on the West vpon Buckingham shire, Colne riuer and the Shire ditch, being the deuision betweene them. That famous riuer which is commonly of vs called Temes, is of Ptolemey called Iamesa aestuarium,Ptolemey. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 3. Iamesa aestuariū. of Plinie Iamesais; of Caesar Tamesis. It seemeth to be compact of two names of riuers, Tame and Ise, which two riuers meete neere Wallingford in Barkeshire, where after a familier manner, they louingly conioyne and vnite them selues, and after a kinde of Matrimoniall order, of two they become one Tame,Thamise of Tame and Ise. and Ise, becommeth Thamise holding that name, growing more and more famous, vntill with great pride it saluteth the maine sea. The like coniunction of names is in Palestina or the holy land,Iordan of Ior and Dan. where that famous riuer Iardan, is compact of Iar, which riseth neere Mara, towardes Damascus, and Dan which riseth neere, and taketh name of the Citie of Dan, both rising out of the mountaines Lybanon, and meete at Caesaria Philippi, where, these two Iar, and Dan, become Iardan, as the Poet saith.Hunt. Cosm. Iordannisque sacer geminis è fontibus ortus. The riuer of Thamise ebbeth and floweth as farre as Richmond, sometime farther, some time not so farre, neere sixtie miles from the maine sea. It hath beene obserued and affirmed by some that this riuer doth not easely increase with land waters. Sit experientia Iudex.
The riuer Lea, of the Saxons lig a is a proper riuer, heretofore,Lea riuer naui∣gable in time past(as some affirme) nauigable, and that shipping passed through the same, from the Thamise to Hartford. Barges haue of late pas∣sed that way, to Ware, which was granted by Acte of Parliament about the eighteene yeer of the raigne of Queene ELIZABETH, but for some causes of late discontinued. This riuer for the most part deuideth MIDDLESEX and Eastsex. But there is a ditch called the Meere ditch, about two miles and a halfe in length,Meere ditch. be∣tweene Waltham abbey, and Higham hill bridge which is cut into the mershes and passeth through the same, for a distinction of the boundes betweene the two shires. Colne riuer is the deuision between MIDDLESEX and Bucking∣ham shire, But that a ditch called the Shire ditch,Colne riuer. Shire ditch. which seemeth to haue been forced into MIDDLESEX, about two miles in length, north of Colnebroke. Through this riuer as some affirme, haue passed shipping to Saint Albans. Minime credendum. The nature of the soyle and fer∣tilitie of MYDDLESEX. MYDDLESEX is a small Shire,The length and circuit of Middlesex. in length not twentie myles, in circuite (as it were by the ring) not about 70. myles, yet for the fertilitie thereof, it may compare with any other shire: for the soyle is excellent, fat and fertile and full of profite: it yeeldeth corne and graine, not onelie in a∣boundance,Middlesex ser∣tile. but most excellent good wheate, especiallie about Heston, which place may be called Granarium tritici regalis,Heston. for the singularitie of the corne. The vaine of this especiall corne seem∣eth to extend from Heston to Harrow on the hill, betweene which as in the mid way, is Periuale, more truely Pureuale.Piriuale or pure∣uale. In which vale is also Northold, Southold, Norcote, Gerneford, Hayes, &c. And it see∣meth to extend to Pynner, though with some alteratiō of the soile. It may be noted also how nature hath exalted Harrow on the hill,Harrow on the hill. which seemeth to make ostentation of it scituation in the Pure∣uale, from whence, towardes the time of Haruest, a man may be∣holde the fields round about, so sweetely to addresse themselues, to the siocle, and sith, with such comfortable aboundaunce, of all kinde of graine, that the husbandman which waiteth for the fruits of his labours, cannot but clap his hands, for ioy, to see this vale, so to laugh and sing. Yet doth not this so fruitefull soyle yeeld comfort, to the way∣fairing man in the wintertime, by reason of the claiesh nature of soyle: which after it hath rasted the Autume showers, waxeth both
dyrtie and deepe: But vnto the countrie swaine it is as a sweete and pleasant garden, in regard of his hope of future profite, for The deepe, and dirtie loathsome soyle, Yeelds golden gaine, to painefull toyle. The industrious and painefull husbandman will refuse a pallace, to droyle in these golden puddles. This part of MYDDDLESEX may for fertilitie compare with Tandeane,Tandeane. in the west part of Somersetshire. But that Tandeane, farre surpasseth it for sundrie fruites, and commodities, which this countrie might also yeelde, were it to the like imployed: but it seemeth they onely couet to maintaine their auncient course of life, and obserue the husbandrie of their fathers, without adding, any thing to their greater profite. This shire is plentifullie stored,Middlesex bew∣tified with faire buildinges. and as it seemeth beautified, with manie faire, and comely buildinges, especially of the Mer∣chants of London, who haue planted their houses of recreation not in the meanest places: which also they haue cunningly contriued, curiously beautified, with diuers deuises, neatly decked with rare invencions, inuironed with Orchards of sundrie delicate fruites, gardens with delectable walks, arbers, allees, and great varietie of pleasing dainties: all which seeme to be beautifull ornaments vnto this countrie. But who so turneth his eies vnto the stately & most princely pallaces of Queene ELIZABETH in many parts of this shire most sweetely scituate, garnished with most prince∣lie delights, beholding also the houses of Nobilitie, may saie as Vadian of a fruitefull and pleasant place in Egypt, Facies istius terre pulcherima est,Vad Cosns. &c. The face or superficies of this countrey, is most beautifull, the fields fresh and greene, the valleyes delightfull to behold, the townes villages and stately buildings enterlaced with the pleasant woodes are glorious to be seene. Of the Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill gouernment of this Shire. FOr matter concerning Church gouernment, and order, this shire is vnder the iurisdiction of the bishop of London; which See sometime did belong to the Archbishop, vntill S. Augustines time, who was called the Apostle of Englande, he turned the Archbishops See from London to Caunterburie, where it continueth. And whereas all other shires within this land, for the most part, haue a perticular officer yeerely elected by hir Maiestie, called a Sheryfe Shere-Reeue,Sherife of Mid∣dlesex. or Reeue of the shire: this shire by charter made by King IOHN, Quinto Iulii anno regni sui 1. is in
that point, vnder the high officer of the Citic of London the MA∣IOR: who by force of the same charter, yeerely constituteth a Sherife, within the same: who also is accountable vnto the saide Citie for all matters appertaining to his said office. Euerie Alderman that hath beene Maior of London is Iustice of peace in MYDDLESEX. Hundreds within MYDDLESEX distinguished with these letters in the MAPPE. A Edmondton or Edelmeton.Hundreds. B Goare. C Oselston. D Istlewoorth. E Elthorne. F Spelthorne. Market Townes in MYDDLESEX. Westminster.Market towes. Brentforde. Stanes, Vxbridge, Harrow on the hill, was a market towne in the time of Doct. Bordes perigrination as appeereth by a little Trea∣tise of his in writing. It is to be noted that this shire hath in it manie Chappels of ease, that haue the name of parish Churches: as Vxbridge a mar∣ket towne belongeth to great Hellingdon: Brentford a market town belongeth to great Eling, manie mo there are within this shire which to expresse would be too tedious. Houses of Lawe. THere are two houses of Iudges and Searieants, called Seriantes Innes, the one in Fleestreere the other in Chauncerie Lane. Innes of Courte are fower. Inner Temple. Middle Temple. Lyncolnes Inne. Greyes Inne.
Innes of the Chauncery 8. Clyffords Inne. Dauydes or Thauyes Inne. Furniuals Inne. Barnards Inne. Staple Inne. Clements Inne. Newe Inne. Lyons Inne. Battles in MYDLESEX noted thus ✚ NEere Barnet in Enfielde Chace,Polid vir. Tho. Wals. was a battle fought between EDWARD the fourth, and the fauourites of HENRIE the sixt. Neere Brentforde was a conflict betweene Edmond Iron∣side and the Danes.Tho. Wals. Parkes of hir Maiesties within MYDDLESEX. THis Shire is plentifully furnished with hir MAIESTIES Parkes, for prinecly delights, exceeding all the kingdome of Fraunce, wherein are not so manie, (if the discourse be true which is made of a debate betweene an Heraulde of England, and a Herauld of Fraunce) where it is affirmed that there are in all that Region but two Parkes: In MYDDLESEX are ten of hir MAIESTIES. S. Iames Parke. Hyde Parke. Marybone Parke. Hanwoorth Parke. Kenton Parke. Hampton Courte Parkes, two. Enfielde Parkes, two. Twickenham Parke, disperked. Hilles of name. Harrow hill. Hamsted hill. Highgate hill.
map of Middlesex MYDDLESEX Caracters distinguishing the difference of places Market townes Parishes Hamletes or villages Howses & Palaces of Quen Eli Howses of Nobilitie ⊙ Howses of Knightes, Gent. &c. Castles & fortes Monasteries or religious howses Bushops Seas Hospitales ✚ Places where battells have bene Decayde places Lodges in forestes chases &c. Mylles. Ioannes Norden Angl. descripsit 1593
Olde and auncient highwaies now vnaccustomed. THe old and auncient high waie to high Bernet,Port Poole. from Porte-Poole, now Grayes Inne, as also from Clerkenwell, was through a lane, on the east of Pancras Church, called Longwich lane. frō thence, leauing Highgate on the west, it passed through Tallingdone lane and so to Crouch ende,Tallingdon lane. and thence through a Parke called Harnsey great parke, to Muswell hill, to Coanie hatch, Fryarne Barnet, and so to Whetstone, which is now the common high way to high Bernet. This auncient high way, was refused of wayfaring men, and carriers, by reason of the deepenes and dirtie passage in the winter season: In regard whereof it was agreed betweene the Bishop of London, and the Countrie, that a newe waie shoulde bee layde forth through the said Bishops parks, beginning at Highgate hill, to leade (as nowe is accustomed) directly to Whestone: for which newe waie all cartes, carriers, packmen, and such like tra∣uellers, yeelde a certaine tole vnto the Bishop of London,Highgate tole. which is fermed (as is said at this daie) at 40. li. per annum. and for that pur∣pose, was the gate erected on the hill, that through the same all traueilers shoulde passe, and be the more aptlie staide for the same tole. Another auncient high waie which did leade to Edgworth, and so to Saint Albons, was ouer Hampsted heath, and thence to, and through an old lane, called Hendon wante, neere Hendon,Hendon want. through which it passed to Edgwoorth, whence it passed ouer Brokeley hilles, through part of Hertfordshire, by Radnet, Colnestreete, Saint Stephens, and Saint Mychaels, leauing Saint Albons, halfe a mile in the east. This way of some is helde to be Watlingstreete, one of the fower high waies, which Bellinus caused to be made, & leadeth (as some affirme) through Watlingstreete in London. An Alphabet of the Cities, Townes, Ham∣lets, Villages, and howses of name within MID∣DELSEX, conteined in the Map of the Shire, with ne∣cessarie annotations vpon sundrie of them. The vse of which Alphabet is set down, before to the Reader. A. Ascot. E. 8. Augustines lodge. H. 18. a lodge in Enfield chace.
Acton east F. 14. Acton west G. 14.Baron of Burford buried. The Barron of Burford died there, as he pas∣sed from London, and is couered with a Marble stone, in the yeere of Christ 1527. Ashford I. 8. So called of the brooke or ford through which men passe at that place. Astleham I. 8. B. Breakespeare. E. 4. The house of George Ashby Esquire. * Brockenborrowes E. 6. There dwelleth Gomersale Gentleman. Brownswell E. 4. a Well in the high way from Highgate to Ber∣net, the water whereof is a sweete refreshment often times to we∣ried and thirstie poore trauellers, of late reedified by some well disposed. Burye streete B. 20. a Hamlet of Enfield. Buls lodge A. 18. a lodge of Enfield chace. Belsise E. 16. the house of William Wade Esquire, one of the clerkes of hir Maiesties preuy Counsell. Brentstreete E. 14. So called of the riuer or brooke called Brent through which it runneth.Brent riuer. It is to be noted that at this  streete many yeers since dwel∣led the Brents, among whō  Iohn Brent who died Anno Chri∣sti 1467. whose auncestors before him had there, their residence, This Iohn lieth buried at Hendon vnder a marble stone, with his picture and the time of his discease: whereby it seemeth that the streete tooke name of the Brentes, and the brooke of the streete, and heereof also doth, Brentforde H. 12. commonly called new Brentford or Brayne∣forde, or Market Brentforde take name, for that Brent brooke passeth through the towne. This Brentford is a market towne, yet no parish, but belongeth vnto great Elinge. It is called new Brent∣ford as I take it of the late purchase of the market which was in the time of king Edward the sixt:Brentford why so called. for the chappel argueth it of grea∣ter antiquity then the other, which hath the name of old Brentford. of the river Brent, which runneth on the west part of the towne, and betweene it and Syon entreth into the Thames. This worde Brent among the countrey people, of those partes, signifieth,Brent, the word how the people take the signifi∣cation. and is taken for all brookes, riuers, and currants of wa∣ter, therefore is euerie small brooke called the Brent among them. Neere vnto this place Edmond Ironside,Edm. Ironsides conflict with the Danes. assaulted the Danes which he had driuen from the siedge of London, and there put manie of them to the sword, and put the residue to flight, about anno Christi 1016. the place appeereth by this carracter ✚.
Brentford old H. 14. a little thorowfare. *Bushoppes hall F. 22. the house of the Lord Wentwoorth. Blackwall, G. 22. neere which is a harbor in the Thamis for ship∣ping,Blackwall why so called. the place taketh name of the blackenes or darkenes of the water bankes, or wall at that place. Brompton G. 16. ** Boston G. 12. where dwelleth Iherome Halley Esquire. Bedfont west H. 6. Bedfont east H. 8. * Brumfielde C. 20. the house of Skeuington Esquire. C. Cannons D. 10. Crowch ende D. 18. * Coanie Hatch D. 18. there dwelleth Trot Gentleman. Clapton E. 22. ** Canburie or Cannonburie E. 20. a house in the hands of Atee Gentleman. It was builded by prior Bolton prior of Saint Bartholmewes in Smithfield in the time of H. 8. Childes hill E. 16. Chalcot or Chalkhill E. 16. Cowley F. 6. Chelsey G. 18.Chelsey why so called. So called of the nature of the place whose strond is like the chesel which the sea casteth vp of sand & pebble stones. Therof called Cheselsey breefely Chelsey, as is Chelsey in Sussex, north of Chychester, which standeth vpon the very edge of the sea, as this * Chelsey on the Thamise. Queene ELIZABETH hath there a faire house: The Lord Dacres hath there a faire house. Cheswicke H. 14. belonging to a prebend of Paules now in the handes of Doctor Goodman Deane of Westminster, where he hath a faire house, whereunto (in the time of any common plague or sicknes) as also to take the aire, he withdraweth the schollers of the colledge of Westminster. * Colham, Collumbe, or Colneham, G. 6. a house of the Earle of Dar∣bies, which taketh name Colneham of the scytuation thereof so neere a branch of Colne streame. Colbrooke or Colnebroke G. 6. one little part wherof is in MID∣DLESEX as farre as the bridge, the rest is Buckingham shire. Craneford H. 8. It is so called of the forde or brooke called by the name of Crane. Carleton or Charleton K. 8. D. Dalis D. 14. Dryuers hill D. 14. * Durance B. 20. the house of Robert Wroth Esquire.
** Durhams B. 14.Lacye Gen∣tleman. a house in the hands of Daleson hill E. 14. Dormans well F. 10. the house of the Lo. Dacres. * Drayton G. 6. a house late the Lord Pagets. E. Edgeworth D. 12. consisting of one maine streete, the west side whereof belongeth to little Stanmer called also Whitchurch the other part hath a church in it selfe.ƿorþ ƿorþ in the Saxon toong sig∣nifieth a place fruitefull, and fit in regarde of the apt scytuation thereof to be inhabited this ƿorþ standing on the very edge of the shire may be called Edgeworth, of some but corruptly Edge∣ware. East end D. 16. a member of Finchley. Edmondton or Edelmeton C. 20. In the Church whereof, are sun∣dry ancient monuments, the most of them defaced, among which is a tombe of gray Marble circumscribed thus. Hic iacent corpora Tho∣mae Carleton cuiusdā dni.Thomas Careleton buried. istius villae qui obiit 21. die Februar: Anno Do. 1447. & Elizabethae vxo ris eius. filiae Adae Francis militis per quam habuit dominium, whose arms are these. blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms There is also one Iohn Kirketon Esquire,Iohn Kirketen buried. whose monument is of white free stone erec∣ted in the south wall of the Church, and see∣meth as auncient as the Church it selfe, but there is no record of the time of his decease, his armes are these. blazon or coat of arms There is a fable of one Peter Fabell that lyeth in the same Church also,Peter Fabell bu∣ried. who is saide to haue beguiled the Deuell by pol∣licie for money, But the Deuell is deceite it selfe, and hardly deceiued.
There lyeth one whose name I cannot truly learne, his toumbe is verie auncient, couered with a faire Marble stone, his body fi∣gured in brasse, armed with a gorget of Mayle, vnder his feete a Lyon cowchaunt, at his helme, there seemeth to be figured a Ly∣on with his two fore pawes raised towardes his mouth, his hin∣der partes as it were mantuled, it is defaced and much obscured, his wife is there also intombed, on the monument are these armes blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms blazon or coat of arms Edmonton streete C. 20. Enfield B. 20. sometime parcell of the land of the Duke of Lan∣caster now Queene Elizabeths. The chace called Enfield chace ta∣keth name of this place. It is called of some Enfen and so recorded,Enfen. in regarde of the Fenny scytuation of some part thereof vpon the marshes or mee∣rish ground, which (though now brought to be good meadow and profitable pasture) it hath beene in time past fenney: thereof taking the name Enfen or Infen, now Enfielde. But these fenney grounds are now on the east, as the chace in the west, profitable neighbors not onely vnto Enfield, but to many other poore inha∣bitants neere. Elinge called great Elinge G. 12.Thomas frowike buried. In the Church whereof lyeth buried Thomas Frowike sometime owner of Gunnersbury or Gunwels∣bury an auncient seat within the same parish. blazon or coat of arms Eueney H. 6. a ferme house belonging vnto the Deane and chapter of Westminster. Enfielde house A. 20. Queene ELIZABETHS, builded by an Earle of Worcester.
F. Frith called also New hall D. 14. sometime the Therlebyes now Richard Weekes Gentleman,Lord Frowike. by purchace. Finchley D. 16. In the Church whereof ly∣eth the Lord Frowyke, Lord chiefe Iustice of England, in the time of H. 6. vnder a Marble toombe where hath beene his picture and armes in brasse, with circumscription about the toombe, but now defaced, his armes one∣ly remayning in the chauncell window in this manner. blazon or coat of arms There is also another Marble stone hauing the picture of a wo∣man whereon is inscribed thus. Ioan la feme Thomas de Frowicke gist icy, & le dit Thomas Pense de giser aueque luy. There lyeth also buried vnder a Marble stone in the Chauncell of the Church one Thomas Aldenham Esquire sometime Chirur∣gion to King Henrie the sixt who died in Anno 1431.Thomas Aldeu∣ham. his armes. blazon or coat of arms Fryarne Barnet C. 18. ** Fryarne Mannor C. 18. Sir Iohn Popham knight Lord chiefe Iustice of England, sometime maketh there his abode. ** The Folde B. 16. the house of Fulham H. 16. of the Saxons called fullonham (which as Master Camden taketh it) signifieth Volucrum domus, the habitacle of birdes or the place of fowles, fullon and fuglas in the Saxon toong doe signifie fowles, and Ham or Hame as much as home in our toong. So that fullon Ham or fuglasHame is as much to saie, as the home house or habitacle of fowle. It may be also taken for Volu∣crum amnis the riuer of fowle, for Ham also in many places signi∣fieth Amnis a riuer. But it is most probable it should be of lande fowle which vsually haunt groues, and clusters of trees, whereof in this place it see-meth hath beene plentie. * There is an auncient house belonging to the sea of London moated aboute. Henry the third often lay at this place. The hoste of the pagan Danes in the time of K. Alphred did win∣ter
there, in the yeere of Christ 879. the woodes,Galfr. mon. Greg. inpast. and apt scytua∣tion of the place, for passage by water (no doubt) moued them thereunto. Feltham I. 8. Feltham hill I. 8. G. Gernford F. 10. a very fertile place of corne standing in the pure vale. Gunnersbury or Gunwelsbury G. 14. an auncient house well scy∣tuate for wood, water, and ayre sometime the Frowickes now be∣longing to the ** Corbets, S. Gyles in the fielde F. 18. erected by Matylde Queene to H. 1.Rex. E. 3. for leprous people about Anno 1117. H. * Harefield E. 4. There Sir Edmond Anderson knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of the common plecs, hath a faire house standing on the edge of the hill. The riuer Colne passing neere the same through the pleasant meddowes and sweete pastures yeelding both de∣light, and profit. Highwood hill D. 12. a member of little Stanmer. Hendon D. 14. of the Saxous Highendune,Hendon why so called. which signifieth Highwood of the plentie of wood there growing on the hils. * Hendon house D. 14. the mannor house of Hendon, Sir Edward Herbertes knight: where nowe is often resident Iohn Fortescue Esquire, one of hir Maiesties most honorable priuie Counsell, when he taketh the ayre in the Countrey. Hollicke, D. 18. there are noted the foundations of ancient buil∣dings, affirmed by some aged men that it hath beene a Towne. but oftentimes, Immensa cani spirant mendatia folles. Harnsey, of some Hornesey, D. 20. a parish standing neere the Bi∣shop of Londons woodes or parkes, which of that place heereto∣fore had and yet retaine the names of Harnsey parkes. The Church of Harnsey is supposed to be built with the stones that came from the ruines of Lodghill. Hadley, B. 16. Holway the lower, E. 20. Holway the vpper, E. 18. Highgate, E. 18. a hill ouer which is a passage,Highgate why so called. and at the top of the same hill is a gare through which all maner passengers haue their waie; the place taketh the name of the highgate on the hill, which gate was erected at the alteration of the way, which (as is saide before) was on the east of Highgate. When the way was turned ouer the saide hill to leade through
the parke of the Bishop of London as nowe it doth, there was in regard thereof,A tole at High∣gate. a tole raised vpon such as possed that way with carriage. And for that no passenger shoulde escape, without paieng tole by reason of the widenes of the waie, this gate was raised, through which of necessitie all traueilers passe. This tole is nowe fermed of the said Bishop at fortie pound per annum. At this place is a free schole builded of bricke by sir ROGER CHOLMELEY knight,A free schoole. sometime Lorde chiefe Iustice of England about the yeere of Christ 1564. The pencion of the master is vn∣certaine: there is no vsher, and the schole is in the disposition of sixe governors or feffees. Where now the schole standeth,An heremitage at Highgate. A Cawsway be∣tweene Highgate and Islington. was an Hermytage, and the Hermyte caused to be made the causway betweene Highgate and Islyngton, and the grauell was had from the top of Highgate hill, where now is a standing ponde of water. There is adioining vnto the schole a chapple for the ease of that part of the countrey, for that they are within the parish of Pancras which is distant thence neere two miles. Vpon this hill is most pleasant dwelling, yet not so pleasant as healthfull, for the expert inhabitants there, report that diuers that haue beene long visited with sicknes, not cureable by Phy∣sicke, haue in short time, repayred their health by that sweete sa∣lutarie aire. ** At this place CORNEWALLEYES esquire,Cornwallis esquire hath a verie faire house from which he may with great delight beholde the stately Citie of London, Westminster, Greenewich, the famous river of Thamyse, and the countrey towardes the south verie farre. Hamsted, E. 16. standeth vnder a hill, in a verie healthfull ayre, hauing London in verie pleasant perspect. In the church thereof lieth M. ARMIGELL WAADE esquire, in a faire monument of Alablaster raised in the wall of the Chauncell with this inscrip∣tion. Memoriae sacrum. Optimis & charissimis parentibus ARMI∣GELLO WAADO è Brigantium antiqua fami∣lia oriundo,Armigell Waad Esquire buried. HEN. 8. & EDW. 6. Regum Secretori concilio ab epistolis, & in agro Middlesexiano Eirenarchae qui in maximarum artium disciplinis, prudentiaque ciuili instructissimus, plurimarum linguarum callentissimus, legationibus honoratissi∣mis perfunctus, & inter Britannos Indiarum A∣mericarum explorator primus. Ex duabus coniu∣gibus, blazon or coat of arms ALICIA PATENIA, & ANNA MERBVRIA, 20. liberos progenuis, tandemque post vitam, honorifice & pientissimè defunctam an∣no
virginei partus 1568. Mensis Iunii die 20. in domino placide obdormuit. Et ALICIAE PATENIAE quae patri 17. libros peperit, è quibus duo mares & tres femellae, adhuc in viuis existunt quae vita castissime & tem∣peratissimè transacta, anno salutis humanae 1568. animam pientissimam Redemptori reddidit. GVLIELMVS WAADVS filius maeximus natu, & heres, Idemque diuae ELIZABETHE Reginae concilio Secretori ab epistolis, hoc monument um posuit. Harrow on the hill, E. 10. standing verie high, in a place both pleasaunt and ftuitefull, and though loftely mounted on a hill, yet in reasonable sort watered. In the ile of the church lieth buried M. WILLIAM GERARD Esquire & DORATHEY his wife,William Ger∣rard esquire bu∣ried. who dwel∣led at Flamberds, so called of the Flamberdes, who somtime possessed the same, this WIL∣LIAM GERARD deceased the 15. Apr. 1583.Flamberds. and they both lie in a tombe of white marble, raised in the wall. blazon or coat of arms Diuers of the Flamberds of Flamberdes a hamlet in Harrow, are interred in the same Church, among whom is one IOHN FLAM∣ERDS, on whose tombe is thus inscribed. Ion me do marmore numinis ordine flam tumulatur. Barde quoque verbere stigis è funere hic tueatur.Iohn Lyons his gift to the erection of a free schoole. There is a schoole in Harow, as yet not a free schoole, but inten∣ted to be, and one IOHN LYONS Gent hath giuen (after his de∣cease to be imployed towards the erection and founding therof,) 300. pound, and 30. pound per ann. for a Master, and 10. pound for an Vsher (as it is informed) a president good to be followed of the able. Hellingdon great F. 6.Lorde Strange burted. In the church lieth buried vnder a tombe couered with a mar∣bell stone, the Lord STRANGE whose tombe is circūscribed thus, Sub hac tumba iacet nobilis IOHANNES dominue le STRANGE, Dominus de Knocking, Mahun, Wasset, Warnell, & Lacy, & Dominus de Colham, vna cum pictura IAGNETTAE quondam vxoris suae: quae quidem IAGNETTA, fuit soror ELIZABETHAE Reginae Angliae quondam vxoris Regis EDW. 4. qui quidem IOHAN∣NES obiit. 15. die Octobris Anno regni Regis EDW. 4.17. quam qui∣dem tumbam IOHANNA Domina le STRANGE filia & heres predicti IOHANNIS & IAGNETTAE, vnacū pictura IOHAN∣NAE ex sumptibus suis propriis, fieri fecit 1509. * Hayes, F. 8. belongeth to the Lord Dacres, and Lord North. Harlestone greene, F. 14. Hockesdone, F. 20. belonging to a Prebend of Paules.
Hackeney or Hacquenye, F. 22. In the church thereof lieth buried,Christopher Vrswyke buried. one CHRISTOPHER VRSWYKE whose chiefe monument is erec∣ted of white free stone, in the north side of the Chauncell, yet was he interred in the middle of the same Chauncell, couered with a faire graie Marble stone; pictured in brasse with this subscription. blazon or coat of arms CHRISTOPHERVS VRSVVICVS Regis HENRICI septimi Elimosinarius; vir sua aetate clarus, summantibus at{que} intimatibus cha∣rus, Ad exteros reges vndecies pro patria legatus, Deconatum Eborum Archidiaconatū Richmondiae, Deconatū Windesoriae habitos, viuens reliquit, Episcopatum Norwicensem oblatū recusauit: Magnos honores, tota vita spreuit: snugali vita contentus, hic viuere, hic mori maluit: plenus annis obijt, ab omnibus desideratus, funeris pompam, etiam testa∣mento vetuit: hic sepultus, carnis resurectionem, in aduentum Christi expectat: obijt Anno Dommini 1521, 24, die Octobr. The men of our time, who more greedelie thirst for high and great preferments, then for the diligent execution of their cal∣lings, and feeding of Gods people; may by this godly mans exam∣ple be mooued, somthing to mortefie their greedy affections, and onioying onely a sufficient portion, to endeuour rather the buil∣ding of the Church of God then their owne glory, And in time to cast away those things that hinder their going one, in a sincere course of life. In the same chauncell is the coat armour, shild garter and crest of the Earle of Northumberland.Earle of Nor∣thumberland. In the Church in the north Ile thereof is raysed a most faire and famous monument of Marble and Alablaster, very curious∣lie contriued, whereon lyeth very neatly figured, the picture and corporall proportion, of the Lady Lucy, daughter to the Earle of Worcester,The Lady Laty∣mer buried. wife vnto fir Iohn Neuell knight Lord Latymer, who de∣ceased at his mannour of Snape in Yorkeshire. The said Lady de∣ceased Anno 1582. hauing issue, foure daughters, Katherine the eldest maried Henry Earle of Northumberland, who by her had issue Henry Lord Percie, Thomas, William Charles, Richard, Allyn, Iossalyne and George, Lady Iane, Lucy, and Elinor. Dorathy the second daughter maried sir Thomas Cecill knight, who by hir had issue William, Richard, Edward, Christopher, and Tho∣mas, Katherine, Lucy, Myldred, Mary, Susan, Elizabeth, Dorathy, and Frances. Lucy the third daughter maried William Cornwallys Esquire by whom she had issue, Thomas and Iohn, Ione, Frances, Elizabeth, and Katherine.
Elizabeth the first and youngest daughter maried sir Iohn Dan∣uers knight, by whom she had issue Charles and Henry, Anne, Lucy, Elienor, and Mary. One Heron Esqire founded Hacquenie Church, and lyeth buried in the north Ile,Heron Esquire buried. in a toombe of white free stone his armes ap∣peare ingrauen in stone in euery piller of the same Church thus, blazon or coat of arms In the same Church in the south Ile was buried Roe knight,Roe Al∣derman buried. sometime Mayor of London, his monument is of marble and Ala∣blaster. Hamersmith, G. 16. Hamersmith hospitall, G. 16. Harlington, G. 8. Harmeswoorth, or Harmundeswoorth, G. 6. Heston, H. 10. a most fertyle place of wheate blazon or coat of arms yet not so much to be commended for the quantitie, as for the qualitie, for the wheat is most pure, accompted the purest in ma∣nie shires. And therefore Queene ELIZABETH hath the most part of her provision from that place for manchet for her High∣nes owne diet, as is reported. Hounslow or Hunslow, H. 10. belongeth vnto two parishes, the north side of the streete to Heston, and the south to Istlewoorth: But there is a chappell of ease, which belonged vnto the fryerie there dissolued, which friery after the dissolutiō was by exchange giuen to the Lord Windsore, by King Henry the eight. Afterwardes it came to Auditor Roan by purchace who hath bestowed the same chappell, and 40. shillings per annum vpon the inhabitantes to the ende and vpon condition that they by farther contribution shall maintaine a minister there. * There is a faire house erected where the friery was: belong∣ing to the heires of Auditor Roan. In the chappell was buried sir George Windsore knight in a mo∣nument of white free stone, raysed with foure pillers.Sir George Wind∣sore buried. In that place lie many other of the Windsores. Hanworth I. 10. a house of hir Maiesties. Hampton Court K. 12. an honour of Queene ELIZABETHES, a most regall pallace stately raysed of bricke after a most princely forme, by Cardinall WOVLSEY most pleasantly, scytuate vpon delightsome Thamise. Queene ELIZABETH hath of late caused
a very bewtifull fountaine,A fountaine erected at Hampton-court. there to be erected, in the second court which graceth the pallace, and serueth to great and necessarie vse, the fountaine was finished in Anno 1590. not without great charge. It is called Hampton Court of the parish of Hampton,Hampton Court why so called. which stan∣deth not far thence: and Court commeth of Curia, which was the place where the Senate of Rome assembled, and was taken for the Senate it selfe, And thereof groweth our word Court, which signifi∣eth all assemblies either for tryall of controuersies, or consulting of matters of state, as also it is amongst vs vsed as an adiunct, to diuers houses in this land of greatest antiquitie, as the most aun∣cient house in a mannor called the Court house. But this word Court is hereunto added neither in regard of antiquitie, nor head house of a mannor. But in regard of the Maiestie and Princely bewtie thereof, fit for none but for a King or Queene, whose residence in any place draweth a Princely assembly, which is called the Court, for where hir Maiesty is resident there is the Court of state. This word Court is a most common adiunct to places of antiqui∣tie in Artetia, as also in diuers prouinces of France and else where as Haplincourt, in Normandy, Bonlayn Court in Champaigne, and Hall∣court neere Amyens. There are belonging to this princely pallace two parkes,Parkes at Hamp∣ton Court. the one of Deare, the other of hares, both inuironed with wals of bricke, the south side of the Deare parke, excepted, which is paled and inuironed with the Thamise. Hampton K. 12. Hanuerde or Hanforde K. 8. I. Ickenham E. 6. Islington or Iseldon E. 20. belonging to a prebend of Paules. S. Ieames G. 18. hir Maiesties, a very stately house, built after a quadranguler forme, by the famous King Henry the eight. K. Kyckesende B. 16. Kingsland E. 20. Kentishtowne E. 18. Kylbourne or Keelebourne,Kylbourne why so called. E. 16. seemeth to take name of Keele, and bourn which signifie colde water: It is called in some re∣cords Kullebourne. In the time of H. the 1. Herbert abbot of West∣minster, by permission of Gylbert byshop of London, and by consent of the conuent, graunted to 3. Maides the Hermitage there which one Gorbone builded, with all the lande of that place. Kingesburie, E. 12.
map of London LONDON coats of arms ers Grocers Drapers. Fishmongers Goldsmiths. Skinners. Merchantaylors Haberdashers Salters. Ironmongers Vintners. Clothworkers Pieter Vanden Keere fecit▪ 1593. one of the for¦ 12 Compaines  Lo. Mayor  Cyte comenly . a. Bushops gate streete. b. Papie. c. Alballowes in the wall. d. S Taphyns. e. Sylner sheete. f. Aldermanburye. g. Barbican. h Aldesgate streete. i Charterhowse. k Holborne Conduct. l. Chauncery lane. m. Temple barr. n. Hobourn. o. Grayes Inn lane p. S Androwes. q. Newgate. r. S. Iones. s. S Nic shambels. t. Cheap syde. u. Bucklers bury w. Brodestreele. x. The stockes. y. The Exchanng z. Cornehill 2. Colmanstreete. 3. Bassings hall. 4. Honnsditche. 5. Leadon hall. 6. Gratious streete. 7. Heneage house. 8. Fancshurche. 9. Marke lane. 10. Minchyn lane. 11. Paules. 12. Easteheape. 13. Eleestreete 14. Fetier lane. 15. S. Dunshous. 16. Themes sh treete 17. Lōdon stone. 18. Olde Baylye. 19. Clerkenwell. 20. Wnchester 21. Battle hriage 22. Bermodsoy streete Ioannes  descrips
Kenton, E. 10. Knightesbridge, G. 18. Densington, G. 16. Kingstonwyke, K. 14. It is a Hamlet neere Kingstone vpon Thamis, standing in MYDDLESEX, and is so called,Wike whence deriued. for that it is a rowe of houses leading into Kingstone, which rowe of houses in Lattine is called Vicus, in our toong Vyke or Wyke, of the Saxons pyc. Vadianus an excellent Geographer,Vadian Cosme. saith that Vicus in opido via est domorum seriem complexa, Vike is a way or passage in a towne being orderly compact of houses, which we also cala streete. In Rome are divers of these streetes, as Vicus affricus, Vicus ciprius, & Vicus celera∣tus, Vicus sceleratus Roma. Kenton, K. 10. L. London, F. 20. the most famous Citie in all Brytaine, which Eras∣mus vpon the Proverbe Rhodii sacrificium, saith, is deducted of Lin∣dus a citie of the Ile of Rhodes, Stephanus calleth it Lyndonium, the Saxons Londenscaster, Londenbiryg Londenƿyc, Ptolo∣mey, Cornelius Tacitus, and Antonius, Londiniu, and Longidinium, Ami∣anus Londinum: the Welchmen Lundayne, we call it London: Ieffrey of Monmouth, Troia nova, or Ternouantum Newe Troy; some call it Luddes-Towne of Ludde the eldest sonne of Helie: Leland taketh it to be Trenouans, new Towne, for that in the british toong Tre signi∣fieth a towne: M. Camden seemeth, in some sort, to yeelde that it should be called London of the British word Lhwn, which signifieth a woode, or else he will haue it London or Londinum of the British word Lhong, which signifieth ships or shipping, in regarde that our Thamis yeeldeth such apt accesse for ships euen to the citie. There is great varietie among writers, who first founded this Citie: Some will haue Brute the Troian to be first builder of it, but Brute, and his historie, is meerely reiected of manie in our daies. It was reedefied by Lud, in the yeere of the worlds creation 5131.Bale. who builded the wals about it, and erected Ludgate, who also chan∣ged the name of Trenouant into Luddestowne, now London, for which alteration of Troye to Luddestowne,Gildas. Galfrid. Monuni. ponticus Brit. hist. lib. 1. great contention arose a∣mong the Britons, as reporteth Gildas and others. But our late writers will not consent heereunto: Insomuch as this fa∣mous Citie lacketh the truth of it foundation, as many other famous monuments also do. But it nowe reteineth the name of London, famous through the whole worlde. A Citie of great Mar∣chandize, populous, rich, and beautifull; This Citie was burned and greatly wasted by the host of the pagan Danes, in the time of king Alphred,Greg. in past. London burned. as reporteth Gregory in
his Pastorale about the yeere of Christ 872.London reede∣fied. This Alphred about the yeere 886. in the 35. yeere of his natiuitie reedefied this Citie, beautifieng the same with faire buildings, and committed the custody thereof to Alphred Earle of Mercia,Fabyan. as the same Gregorie re∣porteth. A great part of London was againe burned about the yeere of Christ 981. At what time it had most buildings, from Ludgate to∣wards Westminster, and little, where the heart of the Citie nowe is, but buildings scattered heere and there out of forme and or∣der: So that it seemed inferior to diuers other Cities of this land, as Lincolne, Canterbury, Yorke and others, as by the role of Winche∣ster appeereth. But after the conquest it was reedefied, and by the conquerour greatly increased, So that by degrees it is become a most ample and stately Citie, far excelling all other in this land. This Citie was (before the conquest) made by William Duke of Normandy) gouerned by Portreeues, called of the Saxons por∣tgerefas whom the Germans call Burgreues,The gouernement of London. which gouerne∣ment Richard the first altered, and appoimed two baylifes. Who in the time of King Iohn and by his command were discharged, for a time, by 35. elders or heads of the Citie, for a contempt a∣gainst the King. But they were not long in disgrace, but through their submission and the discreete handling of the matter by these 35. heads or elders of the Citie, the King not onely forgaue the baylifes, but granted vnto the Citie by his letters pattents, that they should yeerely choose vnto the mselues, a Ma yor which vsu∣ally is of one of the 12. companies, mentioned in the Map of the Citie, and two Shirifes who haue beene accustomed to take their oth vpon Saint Mathewes day, nine daies befor Michelmas, and vpon Michelmas day to take their charge, but it is now otherwise. The first Mayor was chosen in the tenth yeere of King Iohn,The first Mayor of Lodnon. Anno 1209. Euery May or was wont to be presented to the King where∣soeuer he was in England, vntill Henrie the thirds time, about Anno 1242. and before the King to be sworne; after that it was referred to the Barons of the Exchequere, and so continueth to this day. Sir Iohn Allin knight, twice Mayor of London gaue a coller of gold to be successiuely worne by the Mayor Anno 1544. In the time of H. 3. also the Aldermen of the Citie were or deined,Alcermen of London. who tooke rule of the particuler wardes thereof, 25. in number, and these Aldermen were yeerely changed as are the Shirifes, but now it is otherwise, which wardes and the parishes in them are these. Tower ward. S. Olafe. Alhallowes at Berking. S. Dunstane.
Billingsgate warde. S. Botolph. S. George in pudding lane: S. Androw in Eastcheape. S. Margaret Pattens. S. Mary hill. Dowgate warde. S. Laurance Pountney. Alhallowes the more. Alhallowes the lesse. Bridgestreete warde. S. Bennet of grace Church. S. Leonard in Eastcheape. Newfishstreete. S. Margaret in Bridgestreete. S. Magnes in Bridgestreete. Walbrooke warde. S. Iohn in Walbrooke. S. Mary B. S. Swythyn in Candlewikestreet. S. Stephen in Walbrooke. S. Mary Woulchurch in the Poultrie. S. Syth in Bucklersbury. Candlewike∣streete warde. S. Martyn Orgor. S. Clement. S. Michael in Croked lane. S. Mary Abchurch. Langburne warde. Alhallowes Stains in Lumbarestreet. S. Gabriell. S. Dionis in Fanchurch streete. S. Edmond. S. Nicholas Acon. S. Mary Wolnoth in Lumbare streete. Algate ward. S. Androwes Vndershaft. S. Katherines by Christeschurch. S. Katherin Colman. Port Sowkin warde. S. Botolph without Algate. Lymestreete warde. S. Mary Na.
Bushopes gate warde. S. Botolph at the gate. S. Alborgth. Alhallowes within S. Helines. Cornehill warde. S. Michaell. S. Peter. Brodestreete warde. S. Martyn Outwich. S. Bennet Finck. S. Bartholmew the little. S. Christopher. S. Peter the poore. S. Alhallowes on the wall. Colman∣street ward. S. Sthephen. S. Olafe in the Iurie. S. Margares in Lothburie. Cheape warde. S. Laurence in the Iurie. S. Marie Bow. Alhallowes in hony lane. S. Marie of Colchurch. S. Myldreds in the Pultrie. S. Bennes Shorehog. S. Martyn Poniers. S. Martyn in Iremonger lane. S. Maryes. S. Marie or Aldermarie. S. Anceline. S. Pancras. Queenehyth warde. S. Mychaell. S. Mary Somerset. S. Mary Mowthaw. S. Nicholas Olafe. S. Nicholas colde Abbey. S. Peter. Bredstreete warde. Alhallowes in Bredstreete. S. Myldred. S. Mathie. S. Io. Euangelist. S. Augustine at Paules gate.
S. Margaret Moyses. S. Botolph. S. Margaret in Friday streete. Vintry warde. S. Martyn. S. Mychaell Colledge. S. Thomas Apostole. S. Iames on Garlikehyth. Trinitie in Knightriderstreete. Beynerdea∣stle warde. S. andrew. S. Bennet. S. George. S. Mary Magdelene in old fishstreete. The warde of Farringdon infrá. S. Euan. S. Nùholas in the Fleshshambles. S. Faithes in Paules. S. Martyn within Ludgate. S. Mychaell at Querns. S. Fauster in Fauster lane. S. Peter at the crosse of Cheape. S. Gregory in Paules Churchyarde. S. Genyn within S. Martin le graunde. The warde of Farringdon extra. S. Dunstane. S. Bride. S. Androw in Holborne. S. Pulcher without Newgate. aldresgate∣street warde. S. Botolph without Aldresgate. S. Anne. S. Iohn Zacharie. S. Leonard in Fauster lane. S. Marie Staining. S. Mathew in siluer streete. Bassinghall warde. S. Mychaell. Creplegate warde. S. Mary Magdelene. S. Marie in Aldermanburie. S. Michaell in Hogginlane. S. Albons in Woodstreete. S. Elsinge spittle now a parish church.
S. Olafe in Syluerstreete. S. Gyles without the gate. Wardes 25. Parishes. 113. Other Churches there are within this Citie not mentioned in the wardes, nor vsed as parish Churches: whereof the first is Paules,Paules buylded. a most stately temple, builded by Ethelbert king of Kent, an∣no, 610. who consecrated the same vnto S. Paule. It was afterward augmented by Mauricius bishop of London, anno 1107. Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne, builded the south crosse Ile, & was there buried anno 1310. It is a Cathedrall Chruch the bishops Sea of London; sometime the archbishops Sea, but remooued thence to Caunter∣burie, by the meanes of S. Augustine, at the request of the Citizens of Caunterbury.Paules steeple. In the middell of this famous temple, is a Tower most artificially raised vpon strong pillers, verie admirable to be considered, for that the foundation of the same maine Tower can not be deserned in the bodie of the Church, and yet ascendeth in great altitude, as it were in the center of the church, not (without curious view) to be seene, howe it is supported: vpon this Tower was raised a Piramis or (as we cōmonly terme it) as Steeple, coue∣red with lead, which is saide to haue beene in altitude equall with the church in longitude, the height therof is recorded to be 534. foote from the ground: which stately piramis or steeple was thrice consumed with fire:Paules steeple burned three times. first in the yeere of Christ 1087. which was not long after newlie erected: and burned againe anno 1444. after that raised and againe consumed with fire, by vnknowne meanes (the iudgement of God inkindling it) in the yeere of Christ 1561. to the terror of the whole Citie: remaining as yet wihtout that stately ornament. There lieth buried Sebba king of the east Saxons who died anno domini 633. in a coffin of marble with couer of the same, his armes these. blazon or coat of arms There also lieth buried Etheldred king of England,King Etheldred burted. the sonne of Edgar who died an∣no domini 1017. in a coffin of marble with co∣uer of the same. There lieth also Iohn surnamed Plantaginet in a stately monument,10. Plantaginet buried. artificially raised of white free stone, whose stile is thus there recorded. Illustrissimus iacet hic, Iohannes cognomento Plantaginet, Rex Ca∣stiliae, & Legionis, Dux Lancastrie, Comes Richmondiae Le∣cestriae, Lincolnie & Derbiae, locum tenens Aquitaniae, magnus
Senescallus Angliae obiit anno 22. Ric. 2. Annoque Domini 1399. Also there was a Church at the Crotched fryars now conuerted to other vse. A Church at Augustine friars founded by Humfrey Bohune E. of Htford,1253. A Church called Tho. of Acris neer the great conduct in Cheape founded by Thomas fitz-Theobald in the time of H. 2. who gaue the same Church to the Mercers for a peece of money,Rec. E. 3. Anno 19. at the suite of sir Richard Gresham knight, and is now vsed for the Mercers hall. The Temple within Temple barre,The Temple. whose founder is not certaine∣ly recorded, yet some hold it to be that which was called Templum pacis or Concordiae, builded by Dunwallo Mulmutius, about the yeer of the worldes creation 4748. and therein was buried the same Mul∣mutius and also Gorbomanus and others.Galfr. Mon. But some take the Temple of peace to be that which is now Blackwell-hall. There are in this Temple, many very auncient monuments of famous men, shaped in Marble armed, their legges crosse, whose names are not to be gathered, by any inscription, for that, time hath worne it out. The form of this Temple, in the west, is made circuler, loftely raised with Marble pillers, set also circulely, so that it serueth, the students of the house for a walke most necessarie, & that, for a multitude with∣out disturbance of one by the other, by reuerting. Some say it was founded by the kings templers which were in England about the yeere of Christ 1185. but it seemeth that this Temple is farre more auncient. There was annexed vnto the Stilliarde an auncient Church called the Temple also, and after the dissolution thereof,A temple neere the Stilliarde. it was gi∣uen to the students of the Law, bearing the name of White hall,White hall. which belike in regard of the distance from the other houses of Law, it was at the length neglected and forsaken, which house seemeth to be of the number of the houses of Chauncery, in the time of Henry the sixt, when Master Fortescue compiled his booke of the Lawes of England, wherein he affirmeth that there were in, and neere London, ten Innes of Chauncery, now but eight, in which number of ten, was accompted this White hall, & the Strand Inne, which stood within the compasse of Somerset house neere the Strand. The Stilliarde (called of the Gothes the Haunse) signifieth a place of meeting of the people,Stilliarde why so called. and especially the Marchants of many Countries, and Cities: as of England, France, Denmarke, Muscouie, Brabant, Flaunders, and many other, where they enterchanged Marchandize by the sundry priueleges and freedomes of many Kings, Dukes, and Princes, which of late yeeres hath by little and little discontinued. It is not against reason, to thinke that these auncient Temples were erected by the Pagans wherein they offe∣red
sacrifices to their countrey gods.Galfr. Mon. For it appeareth by the hi∣storie of Ieffery of Monmoth that while C. Alectus Captaine of the Romaine host, was thus busied in his Pagan sacrifice M. Aur. As∣clepiodotus duke of Cornewall whom the Britons had elected to be their King, came to London, and besieged, and entred it; betweene whom was a hard conflict and Asclepiodotus vanquished the Ro∣manes and after beset Gallus another Captaine of the Romanes who remained in the citie, and ouercame him, who with his Ro∣manes being put to the sworde the chiefe Captaine Gallus was cast into a brooke, which then, and long since, ran through the Citie, whereof it is supposed to be called of the auncient Britons,Walbrooke. Nant∣gall of the Saxons galenbourne, and of vs at this day Wallbrooke, which runneth neere London stone which stone is neere in the mid way betweene Ludd gate and the Tower posterne gate. There are about this Citie 11. Gates of name, whereof foure are towardes the north, as Aldersgate supposed to be so called of the Alders which grew there, and some holde it to take name of Aldricius the Saxon, it may be so called of the antiquitie thereof, Aldestgate in the comparatiue degree as Aldgate, Newgate, in the positiue. Creplegat, So called for that it was the house for halt and lame, a hospitall for creeples and impotent people, it hath beene of late reedified by Edmond Thaa in the yeere of Christ 1490. Moregate so called for that it was the passage into a moorish, me∣rish, or watrie ground, which is called Moore fielde, though now brought to be more firme, by the industry and charge of a Mayor of London about 180. yeeres past. Bushopes gate builded by certaine Marchantes which traueled into Germaine belonging to the olde Haunce: But it seemeth by the adiunct that it should be builded by a Bushop. There are vpon the Thamis three gates, though two of them seeme rather portes or hauens for shipes and boates then gates for passage, onely the Bridge gate is a thorough fare, or passage by horse and foote, but Billingsgate is a harbor or kaye for shipping, yet hath the name of a gate, for that it was erected first like a gate,Galfr. Mon. by Bellinus, and of him called Bellines gate, in the top whereof he caused to be erected a Pyramis and on the top of it a vessell of stone, wherein he appointed the ashes of his brent body to be put after his death. There is also Dowgate or Dourgate that is Watergate On the east is one gate called Aldegate, so called of the antiqui∣tie thereof, as M. Camden and others suppose. On the west are two gates Luddgate or Luddesgate, of LVDD the supposed founder, who is saide to lie interredin the Church of S. Martins within the gate.Anno ante Chris∣tum 66. This gate was of late yeeres newly buil∣ded and made a most stately gate about the yeere of Christ, 1586. to the great charge of the Citie.Galfr. Mon. Ieffrey of Monmouth reporteth,
that the image of CADWALLO was in brasse artificially fixed on a brasen horse, set on the toppe of this gate,Cadwallo buried in token of a victorie had against the Saxom: whose body was also buried in S. Martynes church within the gate. There was betweene London and Southwarke long time passage by ferrie vntill the Citizens caused a bridge of woode to be erec∣ted:Lonlon bridge. after that, in the time of R 1 c. 2. anno 1176. they beganne to build a bridge of stone, which in the time of king IOHN they most artificially finished, anno 1209. contriuing it of 20. at ches, and in the midst a drawe bridge, and vppon the same bridge on either side, the houses so artificially combined, that the whole bridge seemeth not onely a mayne and faire streete, but men seeme to passe vnder a continuall roofe; the bridge is in height 60. foote, in bredth 30. foote, the arches are in sunder 20. foote, there are vn∣der the north arch of this bridge, most artificially erected certain wheeles or tide myles, which rise and fall according to the ebs & flouds, and they raise the water by pypes and counductes so high that it serueth such citizens houses in all places of London, as will bestow charge towarde the conducting thereof: The buildings vppon this bridge, on either side were consumed with fire An∣no 1208.Pollid. Virg. There is neere the three Cranes, a Church called now S. Mi∣chaels, sometime Whittingdon Colledge founded by sir Whit∣tingdon, sometime Mayor of London. There was in that place which is nowe knowne by the name of Blacke-fryers, an auncient and strong castle, which was called Pa∣latyne, burned in the time of WILLIAM the Conquerour: in the place of which castle are at this day erected many faire & beauti∣full buildings, and here and there the auncient wals and build∣ings as yet appeare. On the east part of the Citie, is a most famous and strong Ca∣stle, called the Tower of London, the maine tower whereof, some sup∣pose to be builded by IVLIVS CAESAR. It is strong and ample, well walled and trenched about, beautified with sundrie build∣dings, semblable to a little towne. There is in Cornehill a most famous monument, stately erected by sir thomas Gresham knight, who named it the Burse,The Royall Ex∣change. whereunto afterwarde Queene ELIZABETH gaue the name of Royall ex∣change; It is the place of the place of the publike meeting of Marchaunts, aswell English as foraine, wherunto twice euery day they dulie re∣sort, the form of the building is quadrate, with walks round the mayne building supported with pillers of marble, ouer which walkes is a place for the sale of all kinde of wares, richly stored with varietie of all sorts. It was builded about the yeere 1568. Leadenhall neere Cornhill was builded by one Sunken Eyre,Leaden hall. about
anno 1444. a place of prouision, or store house for releefe for the poore in time of dearth. Manie things might be spoken of this famous Citie which would too far exceede my purpose.The Longitude and Latitude of London. It hath latitude 52. degrees, & longitude 19. degrees 15. minuts. It is most sweetely seituate vpon the Thamis, serued with all kinde of necessaries most commodi∣oussie. The aire healthfull, it is populous, rich and beautifull, be it also faithfull, louing and thankfull. Lodghill D. 16. a hill or fort in Harnesey or Hornesey parke, and is called Lodghill,Lodghill sometime a fors. for that thereon sometime stoode a lodge, when the parke was replenished with Deare, but it seemeth by the foundation that it was rather a castle, then a lodge, for the hill is at this day trenched with two deepe ditches, now olde and ouer∣growne with bushes: the rubble thereof, as bricke, tile, and Cor∣nish slate, are in heapes yet to be seene, which ruines are of great antiquity, as may appeere by the okes, at this day standing (aboue 100. yeeres grouth,) vpon the very foundation of the building. It did belong to the bishop of London, at which place haue beene dated diuers cuidences, some of which remaine yet in the bishops regestrie (as is said.) This parke hath beene replenished with stately timber trees in great aboundance, now with the famous fort fallen to the ground as the Poet saith, Euum cuncta rapit furtiuáque temporamutant. Naturam, fortem, Nominaque & faciem. ** Ludraues, b. 18. a faire house scytuate in a valley neere En∣seylde chace, belonging vnto Lymehouse, G. 22. Lalam, I. 8. Littleton I. 8. in regard of the quantitie it may be called Linle∣towne.Linluon. M. More hall, E. 4. Mylhill, D. 14. Muswell hill, D. 18. called also Pinsenall hill: there was a chap∣ple sometime bearing the name of our Ladie of Muswell: where now alderman Roe hath erected a proper house, the place taketh name of the Well and of the hill, Mousewell hill, for there is on the hil a spring of faire water, which is now within the compas of the house.The Ladie of Muswell. There was sometime an image of the ladie of Muswell, whereunto was a continuall resort, in the way of pylgrimage, growing as is (though as I take it) fabulouslie reported, in regard of a great cure which was performed by this water, vpon a king
of Seats, who being strangely diseased, was by some deuine intelli∣gence, aduised to take the water of a Well in England, called Mus∣well, which after long scrutation, and inquisition, this Well was found and performed the cure; absolutely to denie the cure I dare not, for that the high God hath giuen vertue vnto waters, to heale infirmities, as may appeere by the cure of Naaman the le∣per, by washing himselfe seauen times in Iordan,2. King. 1.14. Iohn 5.2. and by the poole Bethesda, which healed the next that stepped thereinto, after the water was mooued by the angell. * Mockings, called also the mannor of Mockings, D. 22. an aunci∣ent house, of the Lord Comptons, moated about. Morehatch, A. 20. a hamlet of Enfeylde. Marybone, F. 18. Meerstreete, F. 22. a member of Hackney. N. Northend, C. 16. a hamlet of Finchley. ** Newington, E. 20. there, the Earle of Oxforde is sometime re∣fident, in a very proper house. Neesdon, or Neusdon, E. 14. a house sometime the Elringtons. Northolt lodge, F. 6. Northolt, F. 8. it soundeth Northwood, for hols in the Germayne toung signifieth wood. Norwood, or Northwood, F. 8. Norcote, or Northcote, G. 8. O. Olde forde, F. 22. a village taking name of the forde or passage at that place, ouer the riuer Lea in time past. * Osterley, or Oysterley, G. 10. the house nowe of the ladie Gres∣hams,Osterley builded. a faire and stately building of bricke, erected by sir Thomas Gresham knight, Citizen and Marchant aduenturer of London, and finished about anno 1577. It standeth in a parke by him also im∣paled, well wooded, and garnished with manie faire ponds, which affoorded not onely fish, and fowle, as swanes, and other water foule: but also great vse for milles, as paper milles, oyle milles, and corne milles, all which are now decaied (a corne mill excepted.) In the same parke was a verie faire Heronrie, for the increase & preseruation whereof, sundrie allurements were deuised and set vp fallen all to ruine. P. Prnner, E. 8.
* Pymmes, C. 20. a proper little house of the right Honorable Lord Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England. Ponder sen, B. 20. a hamlet of Enfeylds. Potters bar, A. 16. Preston, E. 12. Peryuale, or Pureuale, F. 10. of this place is spoken before in the nature of the soyle of MYDDLESEX. Paddington, F. 16. Paddingwyke, G. 14. for the the signification of Wyke see King∣stonwyke. Pancras Church,Pancras Church very auncient. F. 20. standeth all alone as vtterly forsaken, old and wetherbeaten, which for the antiquitie therof, it is thought not to yeeld to Paules in London: about this Church haue bin ma∣nie buildings, now decaied, leauing poore Pancras without com∣panie or comfort: yet it is now and then visited with Kentish towne and Highgate, which are members therof: but they seldome come there, for that they haue chappels of ease within themselues, but when there is a corps to be interred, they are forced to leaue the same in this forsaken church or churchyard, where (no doubt) it resteth as secure against the day of resurrection as if it laie in stately Paules. Pancras as dessolate as it standeth is not forsaken of all: apre∣brend of Paules accepeth it in right of his office. Parsons greene, H. 16. R. Riselip E. 16. S. Syon. H. 12. was built by HENRIE the 5. sometimes a house of munkes,Syon builded. but this king expelled them, and int heir place establi∣shed certaine virgins of Bridgets order; and appointed of them so many with priests and lay brethren, as were equall with the num∣ber of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, namelie of virgines 60. priests 13. deanes, 4. lay brethren 8. which made 13. Apostles, and 72. Disciples of Christ, vpon whome hauing bestowed suffici∣ent reuenues for their maintenaunce, he made a lawe that they should not accept of any other gift, but content themselues with his contribution: and to bestow on the poore whatsoeuer was a∣boue that which might reasonably suffice them. It is now a house of hir Maiesties, standing most pleasantly vp∣on the riuer of Thamys. It was called Syon in remembrance of that hill in Ierusalem, which was called the Holy hill, the mount of the Lord,
the Citie of Dauid, Mouns Syon. ** Swakeleys, E. 6. sometime a house of the Brockeyes, nowe fir Thomas Sherleyes. Stanmer great, D. 10. Stanmer little, called also Whytechurch, D. 10. South mymmes. A. 14. there is a faire warren of conies of the Lo. Windsores. Shackelwell, E. 22. Shordich, F. 20. Stretford on the bow, F. 24. the bridge ouer the riuer lea,Ree. E. anno 22. is the Bow, and thereof is called Stratford on the bow, neere it, is an olde church, founded by HEN. 2. Stepney, or Stybenhyth,Sir Henry Collet knight buried or Stibonbeath, F. 22. In the church thereof is buried sir Henry Collet knight, twice Mayor of London, who was fa∣ther to Iohn Collet, sometime Deane of Paules, who alone builded Paules schoole, his armes these. blazon or coat of arms There lyeth also the Lady Anne Wentworth wife to Thomas Lord Wentworth,Stepney. Lady Went∣worth buried. and daughter to Henry Wentworth Esquier. She died the se∣cond of Sept. 1571. blazon or coat of arms Sir Thomas Spers knight sometime Contro∣ler of the shipes to H. 8. Dame Margery,Sir Thomas Spert knight buried. Dame Anne, and Dame Mary his wiues, lie in the Chauncell there, he deceased Anno 1541. blazon or coat of arms
In the north Ile of the same Church lyeth William Chaldnam esquire,William Chald∣nam Esquire bu∣ried. and Ioan his wife he died the 27. of Sept. Anno 1484. blazon or coat of arms Strond, called the Stroud H. 4. a hamlet neere Cheswyke, and called the Strond, for that it bor∣dereth so neere the Thamys. Southholt, signifieth Southwood, G. 8. Sypson, G. 6. ** Stanwell H. 6. there was the auncient house of the Windsores. Stanes Church, H. 6. Stanes towne, I. 6. it is called in the Saxon toong. Stana. It stan∣deth vpon the Thamis, A market towne kept on the Friday week∣ly, it is gouerned by two Cunstables and foure Headborrowes: the towne is hir Maiesties lande, and the officers chosen by hir High∣nes Steward. It stand eth from the church halfe a mile, and the Church standeth vppon a little hill by it selfe, at if it were bani∣shed the towne. Some affirme it to be called Stanes of the Stakes called Coway Stakes,Coway stakes. which were fixed in the Thamys by the Brytons, to pre∣uent Iulius Caesar, of passing his armie through the riuer. There is a towne called Stanes vpon the frontires of Italie in Tyroll, vpon the riuer Inn.Bunn meadow. There is a medow neere Stanes called Bunn meadow, where king IOHN had parley with his barons, and where were sealed betweene them certeyne writings of truce. Sunburye K. 10. Nicasius Yetsworth esquire,Nicasius Yets∣worth buried. sometime secretarie of the French tounge to Queene ELIZABETH: And marie his wife, daughter to Ieames Bowser esquire, lie buried in the same church. blazon or coat of arms There was also buried Daniell Rogers Esquire sometime Clerke of the Counsell to Queene ELIZABETH a man of excellent learning,Daniel Rogers buried. and knowledge of toongs, and often imploid in Ambassage into Germainie, Denmarke, Low Countries, &c. blazon or coat of arms Shepperton K. 8. T. Tottenham or Totheham D. 20. In which Church is buried George Heningham esquire sometime seruant, & greatly fauored of K. Hen∣rie
the eight he founded there a little hospitall or almeshouse for three poore widowes. * At this place the Lord Compton hath a proper ancient house. Tottenham highcrosse D. 20. a hamlet belonging to Tottenham. and hath this adiunct Highcrosse of a woodden crosse, there loftly raysed on a little mount of earth. Tottenham streete C. 20. Twyforde west E. 12. So called of two little brookes or fordes that passe neere it. It is a parish but it hath but one onely house thereunto belonging, which is one Iohn Lions Gentleman. Twyforde east E. 12. belonging to a prebend of Paules. Touen Court F. 18. belonging to a prebend of Paules. Turnham greene G. 14. Thistle worth or Istleworth H. 12. a place scytuate vpon the Thamis, not far from whence, betweene it and Worton,Copper and brasse is a copper and brasse mill, where it is wrought out of the oare, melted and for∣ged. The oar, or earth, whereof it is contriued, is brought out of Sommerset shire from Mendip hils, the most from Worley hill, manie artificiall deuises there are to be noted in the performance of the worke. Twickenham I. 12 a parish seytuate vpon the Thamis.Twickenham why so called. So called either for that, at that place the Thames semeth to be deuided in∣to two Riuers by reason of the Islandes there, or else of the two brookes which neere the towne enter into the Thamis, for Twick∣nam is as much as Twynam, quasi inter binos amnes situm, a place scy∣tuate betweene two riuers. Tuddinton I. 12. V. Vxbridge or Woxbridge F. 4. a market towne vpon the edge of the shire, it is no parish of it selfe, but is amember of great Hel∣lingdon, but they haue a Chappell of ease buylt by Ro. Oliuer, Tho∣mas Mandin, Iohn Palmer, & Iohn Barforde of the same towne. In the fix and twentith yeere of Henry the sixt. The market is kept on the Thursday. it is gouerned by two Baylifes, two Cunstables, and foure Tythingmen called also Headborrowes, or as the Sax∣ons call them Borhesealdors the chiefest or head pledges. Vxenden or Oxenden E. 12. W. ** Woodhall E. 8. the house of * Wirehall E. 20. the house of Leeke Esquire. Waltham crosse A. 20. the farthest part of this shire towardes
the north, goeth to the Spittle there. Whitweb A. 20. Whetstone C. 16. Wilsdon of the Saxons ƿiuerlsdune E. 14. Wembly hill E. 12. West bourne F. 16. West water. Winchmore hill B. 20. Westminster G. 18. Sometime called Thorney of the Saxons ðorney of some Dorney but (as I take it) D. is pronounced in steede of Th. as it is in many other ancient Saxon words,Dorney for Thor∣ney. as Fader, Moder, Broder, for Father, Mother, Brother, which error ariseth belike of the mistaking of the capitall D. abreauiated thus Ð. which is as much as Th. and the little d. thus abreuiated ð. for Th. which abreuiations are often taken for the simple D. and d. by reason whereof it was called Dorney for Ðorney. This Thorney now Westminster was an Island inuironed with the Thamis, which deuided it selfe, and one braunch passed betweene Charing crosse and Kings-streete, throrowgh S. Ieames parke that now is,Thorney some∣time an Island. including Tootehill, and was called Thorney Island, for that it was ouergrowen with bryers and thornes; which Thorney place was in the time of King LVCIVS (as Authors affirme) clensed, a∣bout the yeere 186. which LVCIVS is saide to lay the first foun∣dation of the great Temple of S. Peters.S. Peters foun∣ded. But Authors greatly vary touching the founders of the same Temple. Master Camden from Sulcardus reporteth that there was first a Temple in that place, dedicate to Apollo, which was ouerthrowne by an earth quake in the time of Antonius Pius.Galfr. Mon. It is not vnlike that such an Idol Tem∣ple was, for it is reported by auncient Authors, that the Troyno∣uantes, or Trinobantes, did somtime sacrifice Buls, Bullockes, Stags, and such like to Diana Tauropolia whom the Gentiles called the Queene of Heauen. Of the ruynes of that Idoll Temple, It is said that SEBERTVS King of the east Saxons erected another Tem∣ple for the seruice of the liuing God, and consecrated the same to S. Peter, about the yeere of Christ 610. neere about the time of the building of Paules. Afterwardes it was destroyed by the Danes,Math. Westm. and Dunstan Bushop of London, reedified it about the yeere of Christ 960. and made there a monasterie for 12. Munckes. Fa∣bian saith it was builded by the means of ETHELBERT King of Kent, who also built Paules in London. I haue heard that there are, or haue beene, records int he same Abbey, which declare that it was a Church before the Britons re∣ceiued the faith, of Christ, which should seeme to be that Idoll Church of Apollo before LVCIVS time. This stately and famous S. Peters, hath by degrees come to it present bewtie, many handes haue been helpers to the finishing
map of Westminster WESTMINSTER
thereof; about the yeere of Christ 950.Polier. Guido. Virgil. Fabian. Edgar is said to haue ad∣ded thereunto, then Dunstane, After him EDVVARD the confes∣sor the sonne of Etheldred about the yeere 1049. and lastly (as Fabian saith) (in some part agreeing with other Authors) that HENRY the third when he had pulled downe what EDVVARD had set vp, raysed a more statly worke, in the yeere of Christ 1229. and finished the same in the yeere 1285. wherein I take Fabian to be deceiued, for by this computation, he argueth that the new worke of HENRY the third was 66. yeeres in building,S. Peters church 50. yeeres in buil∣ding. yet begun and finished, by HENRY the third, who raigned but 57. yeeres. Other Authors agree it was 50. yeeres in finishing. After Thorney, it became to be called Westminster, and that in regard of the scytuation of it west of London: for on the Tower hill was a monasterie called Eastminster,Eastminster. of the easterly standing thereof, which was called also New abbey, founded by EDW. 3. in the yeee 1359. There are within this temple, diuers, and sundrie, most rare and princely monuments: some of great antiquitie, some also of later times, increasing dailie,Edward confes∣sor buried. among the rest there lieth ED∣WARD called also the Confessor, who laboured before in this famous worke, and caused his corps to be interred in the west part of the Church, which when HEN. 3. had altred, he caused the body of EDW. to be remooued, to the place where now it resteth, in the east part of the Church. Also there lieth HEN. 3.Henry the third buried. Tho. Walsing. the finisher of this most famous worke, whose tombe is there in most kingly manner erected, by the dutifull endeuour and charge of EDW. 1. sonne of the said HEN. 3. and for that purpose, he brought Iasper stones out of Fraunce, wherewith he beautified his fathers sumptuous sepulchre in anno 1280. Manie other Kings and Queenes, and persons of high state, haue beene there buried, of whome the whole catalogue to re∣site would be tedious. There is in this temple a stone, in forme of a chaire,A stone chayre in S. Peters Church sometime seruing, as the throne of the kings of Scots, and wherein they were crowned, which stone was brought out of Scone in Scotland by EDW. 1. sonne to HEN. 3. about anno 1297. which standeth not far from his fathers monument, had in no little price at this day. There is adioining vnto this famous temple,A chappell of H. 7. in the east ende thereof, a chappell erected by HEN. 7. which in regarde of the beautie, and curious contriued worke thereof, is called of Lelande, Orbis miraculum: The wonder of the worlde. In this mirrour of art,Orbis miraculum. and archytect, are many rare and glorious monuments of Kings and Queenes,H. 7. buried. among whom the famous founder HEN. 7. lieth vnder a most regall tombe, framed & artificially formed of bras,
richly guilded with pure gold. Neere this chappell adioining vnto the Thamys, was an olde famous building,Olde pallace. called nowe the Olde pallace, which was consu∣med with fire, in the time of EDW. the Confessor. It was sometime the pallace of king CANVTVS the Dane,Olde pallace king Canutus house. also king of Denmarke, and where he made his abode about the yeere of Christ, 1035. after his returne from Rome into Englande, who in regard of his quadruplicitie of kingdomes, esteemed himselfe, more than a man mortall: for his Scicophants had so bewitched him with their inchaunted flatteries, that he deemed himselfe no lesse then a God.The pride of Cauntus. And in this proud conceit on a day he passed by the Thamys, which ran by that pallace, at the flowing of the tide, & making staie neere the water, the waues cast foorth some part of the water towards him, this CANVTVS coniured the waues by his regall commaunde to proceede no farther: the Thamys vnac∣quainted with this newe God, held on it course, flowing as of cu∣stome it vsed to do, and refrained not to assayle him neere to the knees: whereat this high conceited man as one amazed, begon to tremble, starting backe protesting that hee was but a man, though a mightie king. And that he that gouerned those waters, was onely worthie to be called a king, and all mortall men, most mightie kings, ought to subiect them vnto him. A woorthie note whereby is seene howe the almightie Iehouah by his weake crea∣tures, maketh to stoope the most puissant in his owne conceite. Some part of this old pallace is yet standing, as S. Stephens chappel, and other buildings vpon the Thamys, neere vnto which is a most famous hall, called Westminster hall, which was so called for that it was Aularegis, a kings court, but as touching the founder is great varietie. Some affirme that WILLIAM RVFVS builded it:E. S. de. reb. Br. but M. Camden affirmeth that Hoc quod nunc habemus pretorim RIC. 2. diru∣to vetustiori extruxit suaeque habitationi dicauit. RIC. 2. built it and made it his mansion house. But me thinks it is to be gathered by the words of Thomas Walsingham,Tho. Wals. hist. Aug. that Westminster hall was in the time of EDW. the 2. where he saith, Si ipsi Barones cum suis assen∣tatoribus in aula Westmonasterii & pleno parliamento venirent &c. whereby it appeereth that Westminster hall and the place of par∣lament there, was 64. yeeres before RIC. 2. But some may say, that the great Hall that nowe is,Tho. Wals. Ypo∣digni. New. pag. 49. was not in those daies, but the Hall that is nowe called White hall, where the Court of of Requests is now kept. To answere that the same Thomas saith, Rex E. 1. Celebrauit penticostes in aula magna apud Westmonasterium, whereby he maketh a distinction betweene those two hals, for the White hall was called also Aula parva, the little hall: which two hals and other buildings thereunto adioining, were vsed by RIC.
the 2. who caused all controuersies there to be heard, (who as all other kings) in those daies sat in iudgemēt:Kings sat in Court to heare and de∣termine causes. & whersoeuer the king was in person, there was the place of hearing, and determining causes: sauing that the common plees were by HEN. 3. appoin∣ted to be heard in a place certaine, as appeereth in magna Charta, where it is saide, Communia placita non sequntur Curiam nostram. Sed teneantur in aliquo loco certo. But at this day all causes of what∣soeuer nature, for the most part are heard and determinable, at this place as a place certeine.S. Stephens chappelli Betweene Westminster hall, and the Thamys is a chapple of S. Stephens: sometime verie beautifull, though now in the outwarde shewe something defaced: It was reedefied and augmented by EDW. 3. when he came victor out of Fraunce, about the yeere of Christ 1347. Westminster had sometime a house of monkes, who were re∣mooued thence by HEN. 7. and a Deane with certaine Pre∣bends established.Westminster a Bushops sea. In the time of EDWARD 6. it was made a bishops See, but shortlie after it came againe to a Deane and Prebends; Againe Queene MARIE ordeined there an Abbot and his munkes, who continued not manie yeeres, but were againe cut off by acte of Parleament: Lastly our most gratious Queene ELIZABETH made it a collegiate Church: instituting a Deane, twelue Pre∣bends, twelue well deseruing soldiers, and fortie schollers: who are thereby termed The Queenes schollers, who, as they become woorthie, are preferred to the Vniuersities. All which pupils, as long as they continue in this colledge, are vnder the Deane, now D. Goodman.Alex. Neuell. Norwic. Alexander Neuell Norwic. affirmeth that the Bishops of Caun∣terburie, in the time of RIC. the 1. did make their most abode at Westminster, as they do nowe at Lambeth, or Lomehith, and had ouer against the schoole that nowe is, a stately house:Lelande. yet Le∣lande affirmeth the contrary, who saith, that the Bishops of Caunterburie haue continued at Lambeth since the Normanes com∣ming into this land. There is an auncient monument within the libertie of West∣minster,Charing crosse. called Charing crosse, erected about the yeere of Christ,Tho. Wals.1290. by EDW. 1. in memoriall of the death of Elineor his Queene, who died at Hardlie neere Lincolne, & was buried in Westminster. The libertie of Westminster extendeth to Temple bar:Temple bar. so cal∣called of the Temple within the same bar, and is called the bar for that it stoppeth and barreth the Mayor of London, as also the Magistrates of Westminster, that neither intrude vpon other. This bar or gate was throwne downe by the Kentish rebels, in the time of RIC. 2.
Within the libertie of Westminster are fower parish Chur∣ches,Parish Churches in the libertie of Westminster. besides S. Peters, namelie, S. Margarets S. Martynes neere Charing crosse. The Sauoy Church. S. Clements, called Saint Clements Dacorum, or Saint Clements Danes. In the time of superstition there was in Westminster, a place called the Sanctuary,The Sanctuary. of an old Mosaical ryte, vsed among the Isra∣elites, among whom euery tribe had certaine cities, and places of refuge, to which malefactors might repaire, and for a time be protected from the rigor of the law. There was at Westminster kept a staple of wooll,The Woulsta∣ple. and is at this daie, called the Woolstaple, established in the time of EDWARD the 3. The Sauoye was first built (as M. Stowe hath recorde) by Pe∣ter Earle of Sauoy,The Sauoy. who was after made Earle of Richmonde, by HENRIE the 3. who called it the Sauoy after his Countrie. But Poll. Virg.Pollid. Virg. alloweth him not Earle of Sauoy, but calleth him Pe∣trus sebaudiensis: Peter a Sauoyan, or of the countrie of Sauoy, who as the same Poll. affirmeth, buylt the same, and called it the Sa∣uoy, of his natiue Countrey Sauoye. It was belonging vnto the Duke of Lancaster, in the time of RIC. the 2. in whose time it was wasted, burned, and spoyled by the Kentish rebels, about the yere 1381. It was reedefied by HEN. 7. by whose last will, it was in∣tended to be finished, and made an Hospitall, for the reliefe of a 100. poore people, which was perfourmed by the most famous HEN. the 8. his sonne, and sufficiently furnished with lande, and reuenues, for the maintenance thereof. Queene ELIZABETH hath within the precincts of this Ci∣tie three faire and pleasant pallaces:Howses of Queene Elizabeths with∣in Westminster. namely White hall, begun by Cardinall Woolsey, and finished, with manie most princely de∣lights, by HEN. 8. S. Ieames, erected by the same king HEN. 8. and Somerset house builded by the Duke of Somerset about the yeere of Christ 1549. There are other houses worthy to be remembred within this libertie of Westminster as Burghley house,Burgley house. founded and erected by the right honorable S. William Cycell knight, Lord Burghley, Lord high treasoror of England. Durham or Dunelme house sometime belonging to the Bishop of Durham,Durham house builded. it was builded by one Anthony Becke in the time of RICHARD the third. Other famous houses of nobility are in this precinct, which to mention I omit for breuitie.
Places distinguished in the Map of Westminster by these letters and figures following. A. The Abbey. B. Westminster hall. D. Long ditche. E. Theuing lane. F. The Amnerie. G. The way to Toothill fielde. H. The Lord Dacres. I. Lord Grayes. K. Kings streete. L. Round Woulstaple. M. The Parke lodgings. N. The Tilt-yard. O. S. Martynes in the field. P. Clements Inne. Q. New Inne. R. S. Clements Danes. S. Temple barre. V. Drurie lane. Y. The Gatehouse. 2. S. Margarets. 3. S. Stephens alley. 5. Petite Fraunce. 6. H. 7. Chappell. 7. Deanes yarde. 8. Tennies Courtes. 9. Way to Hounslow. 10. The Powder house. 11. White hall Orchard. 12. The Queenes Garden. 13. Staple Inne. This Citie of Westminster is knowne to haue no generall trade whereby releefe might be administred vnto the common sort, as by Marchandize, clothing, or such like, whereby the common wealth of a Citie is maineteined, and the inferiour people set to worke, had they not therefore some other meanes, the common sort could nor be susteined.The chiefe meane whereby Westminster is releeued. The first and principall meane whereby they are releeued, is hir Maiesties residence at White hall, or S. Ieames, whence if hir
grace be long absent, the poore people forthwith complaine of penury and want, of a hard and miserable world. And therefore doe the people in manner generally seeme to power forth dayly petitions, that it might please God to draw hir Maiestie to be resident at one of these places, whereat they reioyce and fare long the better. The like desire of hir Royall presence haue other places, where hir Maiesties Pallaces are placed. And hir Ma∣iestie in gracious consideration of their estates, doth visit them as it were Alternis vicebus, by turne at hir highnes pleasure, more for the comfort and releefe of the poore people, then for hir owne priuate delight. Therefore yee Citizens of Westmin∣ster, and other, whatsoeuer, forget not to be thankefull to the the Almightie for hir Royall presence, hartely praying the King of Kings, to maintaine hir a prospering Queene long and many yeeres, and euery faithfull hart will ioyne with you, hauing also the benefite of hir blessed inclination. The seconde meane whereby this poore Citie is maintained,The second meane, the Tearmes. and the people releeued, is by the fower Termes in the yeere, for it hath pleased God to establish there, the place where Iustice, lawe, and euerie mans right is (God graunt it) with equall bal∣lance, indifferently administred: whereunto great multitudes of people, vsually flocke, whose resort although the Citie enioie but in the forenoone, yet yeeldeth their presence, manie pence to the poore towne. There was in the time of EDW. 1. a discontinuance of the lawe,The hearing of causes remooued to Yorke. in this Citie, and was thence remooued to Yorke, where it continued, seauen yeeres after reduced to the former place. It hath beene often discontinued by the disfauour of Princes, and their conceiued displeasure against the inhabitants of the place, for disobedience, as a generall punishment. Receiue this ye in∣habitants of Westminster, as a necessarie premonition, that ye rest carefull and vigilant, least the king of kings mooue her Ma∣iestie to place the determination of causes else where, which now is vnto you no small support. The third and last meane (though it come seldome) is that great and generall convencion of all the estates of this lande,The third mean, the Parliament. the high Court of Parleament, which draweth vnto it a great accesse of noble persons, and others, to the place of assem∣blie, which is also set most gratiously within this Citie, which yeeldeth no small releefe vnto the same, which also (as is recor∣ded in histories) hath beene holden at diuers other places in this land. It is not yet forgotten,The tearme re∣mooued to Hertford. no doubt, how the God offended, visited not onely this Citie, but also London, with a dangerous late infec∣tion, insomuch as the last Michaelmas Terme was remooued to
Hertforde castle, which pinched the poore, and made the rich to complaine, in both these Cities: yet a more gentle forewarning of his displeasure he cannot shew, who longing for new obedience in vs, calleth vs by diuers meanes, and without speedie and harty repentance we shall likewise perish. The principal high waies from London through Middlesex, and towards what espe∣ciall places in England they lead. THe way noted with this figure 2. leadeth to Stanes, & thence towards Sarisburie, Exeter and other places in the west. 3. Leadeth to Colnebrooke, towardes Windsore, Reading, Bath, Bristow, &c. 4. To Vxbridge, and so towardes Oxford, Gloucester, & south Wales. 5. To Egewoorth, towards Woodstocke, Buckingham, War∣wicke, Stafford, Worcester, Chester, and north Wales. 6. To S. Albans, towards Bedford, Northampton, Leicester, Darby, &c. 7. Towardes Waltham, Hartforde, Bedforde, Huntingdon, Cambridge, into Norfolke: towardes Lincolne, Yorke and the Northen parts. 9. To Stratford on the Bow, and so into Essex and Suffolke. 10. Leadeth into Surrey and Sussex. 11. To Kingston vpon Thamis, Guyldford, Farneham, Win∣chester, Arrondell, Chechister, Southampton, Portesmouth, &c. Noblemen, and Gentlemen, for the most part, hauing houses, or residence, within this Shire. A. sir Ed. Anderson, Lord chiefe iustice of the common plees pag. 21. George Ashbie. pag. 16. George Atee. pag. 17. George Alleley at Daleson hill. pag. 18. B. L. Burghley, L. High Treasurer of England. pag. 38. L. Barnes. pag. 37. William Burrowes at lyme house. pag. 36. Richard Bellamy. The Bushop of London. pag. 20. C. L. Compion pag. 37. 41. L. Corbet. pag. 21. L. Cornewell. pag. 18. L. Cockeram at Hamsted. pag. 22 Iohn Cunstable at old Ford. pag. 37. Iohn Cornewallies. pag. 22. Iohn Carle at Maribone park. D. E. of Darby at Istleworth. pag. 17.
L. Dacres. pag. 17. 18. 23. F. sir Iohn Fortescue knight, one of hir Maiest priuy counsel pag. 21. sir Fleetewood. pag. 19. G. ladie Gresham. pag. 37. ladie Gylman at Twickenham pag. 41 ladie Gomershall, pag. 16. ladie Gifford. pag. 37. ladie Goddarde at Tottenham personage. pag. 41. ladie Gerrard. pag. 223. H. Ierome Halley. pag. 17. Iohn Hatrey, at Riselyp. pag. 38. sir Rowlande Haywarde knight at Clapton. pag. 17. sir Huggines at Meerstreet. pag. 37. sir Io. Harrington at Stepney. pag. 39. sir Hare at Pymmes. pag. 38. K. auditor King neer Finchley. pag. 20. aldermā Kempton at Hadley pag. 21. Thom. Kneuet at S. Iames parke L. Iohn Lyons. pag. 41. Iohn Leeke. pag. 41. Iohn Lacye. pag. 18. M. Iohn Middlemore. pag. 19. sir Richard Martyn knight neere Tottenham. N. L. North. pag. 22. George Nicholson at Twicken∣ham. pag. 41. O. earle of Oxforde. pag. 37. alderman Offley at Clapton. pag. 17. P. sir Iohn Popham knight, Lorde chiefe Iustice of England. pag. 20. Ric. Peacocke, at Northend. pag. 37. Ric. Plumbe at Northende by Fulham. Ric. Paine at Harlstone green. pag. 23. Ric. Payne neer Harnesey. pag. 21. Q. Ric. Quynnye at Chalcot, or Chalkhill. pag. 17. R. Ric. Roane. pag. 25. Ric. Ryth at Twickenham. pag. 41. alderman Roe. pag. 36. alderman Ryder at Stepney. pag. 39. ladie Isabell Counties of Rut∣land at Steyney. pag. 39 S. sir Thomas Sherley. pag. 39. sir Sewell at Cannons. pag. 17. sir Skenington neere Harnesey pag. 21. sir Skeuington. pag. 17. sir Sadler ad Edmonton. pag. 18. sir doctor Seysar neere Tot∣tenham. T. sir Trott. pag. 17. sir Throgmorton at Stepney pag. 39. sir Thomson at Lalam. pag. 36. V. sir Vaghan at Littleton. pag. 36. W. L. Wentworth. pag. 17. Iohn Wallison, at Riselipe. pag. 38. Robert Wroth. pag. 17. & 37. William Waade. pag. 16. Richard Weeks at Hamsteed. pag. 22. FINIS. I craue patience though I haue not giuen to euerie man his addition of Esquire or Gent. for that I may easely erre there∣in, without the especiall aide of an expert Herault.
To the right worshipful M. WILLIAM WAADE Esquire, one of the clearks of hir Maiesties most Honorable priuie Counsell. SIR, I cannot rest vnreadie in desire, to yeeld requitall of your aide extended towards the publication of this first part of my SPECVLVM BRITANNIAE: wherin I must, and do thankfullie acknowledge your good in∣clination not towards me onely, but to all such as indeuour mat∣ters tending to publike good. In lieu therfore of a farther faithful recompence, accept, I beseech you, my willing indeuor, vntil time afforde ablenes to make better repay. In magnis & voluisse dat est, I. N. A I Lettori. HAspeso molti di per Amor vostro. A pinger queste carte famigliare, Citte, castelli, fiume deliniare, Le terre misurar Nordeno nostro Non guardate à le carte, ne à l'inchiostro Perche è vna cosa, che non sa parlare Guardate pur se l'opra vi può entrare Se'l specchio ui piace, che vimostro Non otiòsa mà faticosa impresa è questo specchio del Britanno lido. Non è composto senza molta spesa Non cercano tal' opr' alcuno nido. Norden il specchio tuo senza contesa Risplenderà dou'è più chiaro il grido. Ar. Oln. Ingenuo lectori, de opere, & Au∣thore terastichon. QVem tulit is punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci; Nordenus tulit hunc, vtile, dulce canens. Vtile, dulce canit, digni laude ille, liberque: Nam placet, & prodest, vtile, dulce, canens. Notitia nobile nomen: Robertus Nicolsonus.
Sur le Miroir de grand Bretaigne, de M. Ichan Norden. GArdez gentils, regardez cest' ouurage, Tres-doctes Dames, & tres-sages, Sieurs: Moult delectant voz yeulx, voz sens, & coeurs, Cy fait Plaisir, auec Profit mariage. Chacun Degre, rumine, chachun Aage, Ce petit liure, plein de grands doulceurs: Rend luy louange, qui doulces rend odeurs, Que chacun fait, qui est sçedil;auant ou sage. Les autres sont autheurs d' Enui', & vice, Ennemis a vertu, sciens, & Notice, Vilipendans les oeuures de sçedil;auoir: Mais nobles, doctes, & gentils esprits, Qui compte tiennent des elegans escripts, Hault priseront NORDEN son cler Miroir. N'ayant espour qu' en Dieu. Robert Nicolson. Corrections. In pag. 11. line 5. for eighteene, read thirteene. In pag. 21. for Io. Fortescue esquire, read sir Iohn Fortescue knight. In pag 27. for 5191. read 3911. In the same pag. for Antonius, read Antoninus. In pag. 47. for Staple Inne, read Lyons Inne.
