18759 99855905 21413
THE ANATOMYES of the True Physition, and Counterfeit Mounte-banke: wherein both of them, are graphically described, and set out in their Right, and Orient Colours. Published in Latin by Iohn Oberndorff, a Learned German: and Translated into English by F.H. Fellow of the Coll. of Physitions in LONDON. Herevnto is annexed: A short Discourse, or, Discouery of certaine Stratagems, whereby our London-Empericks, haue bene ob∣serued strongly to oppugne, and oft times to ex∣pugne their Poore Patients Purses. LONDON Printed for Arthur Iohnson, and are to be sold at his shop in Powles Church-yard, at the Signe of the Flower de Luce and the Crowne. 1602.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣nourable Syr Iohn Popham, Knight, Lord chiefe Iustice of England, and One of her Ma∣iesties most Honourable priuie Councell. GAlen one of the most famous Well-springs of Phylosophie and Physicke (Right Ho∣nourable) compareth,Lib. de praecog. ad Post hun qui rep. Tomo quarte. vnlettered Empe∣rickes and Quack-saluers, vnto Theeues, and Robbers; making this only difference betwixt them, Quod hi in Montibus & Syl∣uis, Illi, in confortiss. Vrbibus insidientur. That is, they take a Purse by the high-way, in Woods or Forrests, but these do it in the most frequented and Populous Cities. This graue, Iuditiall, and Peremptory verdit and sentence, of that great Phylosopher, and renowmed Physition, dooth more closely attach, and strongly arrest our ignorant Intru∣ders, and bolde Periclitators in the Practise of Physicke, then all the world is aware of. This (I hope) shall euident∣ly appeare vnto your L. by the two Treatises ensuing, the one of them, being written in Latin by a Learned German, and by me put into an English Coate, for the good of my Country-men: and the other, a short Obseruation of mine owne. It is a Maxime among Diuines, that Simulata Sanctitaes, est duplex Iniquitas. In like sort it may be said, that fained know∣ledge
is double Ignorance, both because it is Ignorance, and because it lyeth, and counterfeiteth Skill and Science. For if it be a point and part of good wisedome, for a man to see and acknowledge his owne weaknesse and insufficiency, and therevpon, to keepe within Compasse, and meddle not (with the Shoe-maker) Vltra Crepidam: It must needs be an increase of Folly, Vanitie, and Arrogance, for any, to pre∣tend Skill and knowledge in those Things wherein they are altogether vnacquainted, and to professe those Arts, which they neuer learned. But our Emperickes and Impostors, as they are too ignorant either to Teach or Practise Physicke (which they neuer saluted from the threskhold) and too in∣solent, and arrogant to learne of the Maisters of that Facul∣tie, or to be reduced into Order; so are they most dangerous and pernitious vnto the Weale-publike. Among wild Beasts (saith one) Enuy is most Sauadge & exitiall, and among ta∣med Beasts Flattery. The reason is, because the Sycophant is least of all feared, and most difficultly discerned and discoue∣red. These Crocodils, disguised with the vizard of fained Knowledge, and masking vnder the specious Titles of Phy∣sitions, and Doctors, not attained in Schooles, but imposed by the Common people, do with their Absolonicall Saluta∣tions steale away the affections of the inconstant Multitude, from the Learned Professors of that Facultie, and with their Loablike Imbracings, stabbe to the hart their poore and silly Patients, ere they be aware, or once suspect such vncouth Trechery. The more worthy & excellent the Obiect of any Art is, the greater, and more daungerous is the Error of the Artist, if he faile in his Office. If a Taylor marre a Garment, or the Potter breake the Vessell he should make, the matter is not great. But as he said in the Comicall Poet, Graue est Pe∣riculū in Filio: So great is the Hazard, and greater is the Fault committed in the Bodie of Man, the Domicil and Palace of the immortall Soule, and (as Zoroaster calleth it) audacis Na∣turae
stupendum Miraculum. I omit as small matter, their li∣uing vpon the Spoile, and deceiuing the People of their mo∣ny and substance (which yet the good Magistrate doth vn∣doubtedly respect) but their hainous offences against the pretious Health and Life of Men, (whereof London hath many wofull Experiments in a yeare) are altogether intolle∣rable, and in no wise to be silenced or pretermitted. Neuer∣thelesse it is straunge to behold, and consider, how these cir∣cumforanian Impostors are dignified by the People, flocked and resorted vnto in whole Troupes, sought out far & neare, and equalized with, nay (which is the greatest Indigni∣tie of all other) preferred & extolled before the most Graue, Learned, and best Experienced in that Profession. If a man haue a scruple in Conscience, hee will not repaire vnto an Hedge-priest (as they are called) or bare Reader, hauing no more Diuinitie thē a Child of ten yeares old, for resolution, but to some Learned, godly and Iuditiall Diuine. If a Suit in Lawe, he will not resort to a Husbandman or Artificer, for Counsell and Direction, but to a Skilfull, well studyed, and approoued Lawyer: And yet (such is the extreme folly and madnesse of many Men), that in case of Health and Life, (Things most pretious) they think euery Tinker, Bankerupt, or wandering Fugitiue, who hath ouer runne his Creditors, forsaken his Trade, and seeketh to liue (like a Droan without any Calling) a sufficient and compleat Physition, to aduise, counsell, and direct them. It will be said, that these Good-fellowes haue bene obserued to performe some Cures, and to haue good successe in their Actions. It hath bene likewise knowne, that a common Mariner, the Maister and Gouernor of the ship dying, or miscarying by some Accident, hath safe∣ly brought the Barke to shore, and arriued at the wished Ha∣uen: and yet no man (if hee may chuse) will willingly sayle with such a Pylot. A Company of vntrained and rawe Soul∣diers, which neuer saw Field or Warre before, haue vanqui∣shed,
and put to flight a Band of Veterans, invred for many yeares, and well exercised in martiall Affaires. And yet no Commaunder will prefer the punee, and fresh-water Soul∣dier, before the auncient, tryed, and well-disciplined Warri∣our. Vna hirundo non facit Ver, Though that bee admitted (which notwithstanding if the Instances be well scanned) will be a difficult matter to proue) yet I hold firmly (with in∣comparable Galen) my former Position, that they are bad and dangerous Members of the State, and in no sort sufferable in any well-ordered Common-wealth. I do therefore presume to offer these my slender trauailes vnto your L. who as you are a zealous Louer of your Country, a for-ward Professor of the Gospell, an incorrupt, and vpright Iusticer, a Friend to Vertue and Men of Desert, a professed Aduersary to all Ma∣lefactors: So I nothing doubt, but you wil take vpon you the Patronage, of the Learned and honest Physition, against the Ignorant and Couzening Mounte-banke. Among your other manifolde, and Honourable seruices, performed to your Prince, and Country, (wherby you haue commended your Name and Memorie to all Posteritie), it is not the last nor least, that by your watchfull Prouidence, and healthfull Iu∣stice you haue cut off great numbers of Grassators, and Rob∣bers, and in a maner, clensed, scoured and rid the Realme, of those Monsters, and sauadge rauenous Beasts in the shape of Men. And I am perswaded, that your Ho. Endeuours in fur∣thering and contenancing the catching and suppressing of these tame Beasts, or rather wily Foxes and Panthers, who with their subtile fleights, sugred words, and sweet sents, do allure, entrap, and circumuent the Simple, and pray vpō both their Goods and Bodies at their pleasure, will be no lesse ac∣ceptable to God, profitable to your Country, gratefull and commendable vnto all succeeding Ages, then the former. But I need not spend words in perswading your L. who haue alreadie declared, your Honourable Inclination and
forwardnesse vnto that Businesse. Therefore fearing to be te∣dious, I desire only the continuance of your Honourable fa∣uour vnto the Societie whereof I am, in their iust and honest Causes, & Affaires, and wish vnto your L. from my most in∣ward affections, increase of Honor, Length of Dayes, pros∣perous successe in all your Honourable Enterprises for Gods Church, and your Countries Good, Health of Body, Tran∣quillitie of mind, compleat Faelicitie in this world, and Eter∣nall Happinesse in that, which is to come. Your Ho. most humble, and addicted Clyent. F. H.
IN ERVDITISSIMAM DISSERTATIONEM DE VE∣ro & falso Medico, Clarissimi & dexter∣rimi Medici Domini D. Ioannis O∣borndorfii. Epigramma. QVI Squis es infestis, qui conflictabere morbis, Fac ratio Luctae constet vt ista tuae. Fluctuat, incerto Natura relicta a duello: Auxiliatricemqúe indiga poscit opem. Si rectum quaeras Medicum: geminaueris ho∣stem Morbo, & victrici congrediêre manu. Sin faisum: gemino Natura occumbet ah hoste: Nam{que} nec Alcides sustinet ipse duos. Hinc malè si proprijs se credit viribus aeger, Peius ad insulsum confugiet Medicum. Ergò ne pecces, hoc erudiêre libello, Hostem vt praevertas, Thesea quaere tuum. Caspar Stemper D.
IN THEOREMATA DE VERO MEDICO, NOBILIS ET CLARISSIMI VIRI, Domini Ioannis Oberndorfferi, Physici & Medici celeberrimi. PSeudo prophetae Orbem Cacocaussidici{que} replêrunt, Quid Medicos mirum gliscere degene∣res? De puduisse quibus decus est, qui pectora fraude Plena, manus letho, labra Thrasonis, ha∣bent. Multum vasa sonant inflata, & inania semper, Strenuus ore magis, quò magis arte rudis. Nequior vt{que} quis est linguâ, sic jura fidem{que} Promptior astutis dissecat insidijs. O nimium tortos prauâ vortigine sensus, Orbem, at non dabitur ludificare IOVAM. Quando venit scelerum grauis & iustissimus vltor, Fraus, fraudis{que} faber quilibet, igne perit. Interea felix, qui quit dignoscere VERVM. A FALSO: oris IOVAE, instar is est DOMINI. A VLLI educis Medicâ PRECIOSIVS Arte, IANE, & O BERNDORFFI hinc nobile nomen ha∣bes, Nobile nomen habes, genus & doctrina SVPREMVM Tefaciunt Medico nempè cluére Choro, M. Christophorus Dana vêrus Ratisp. P. L. l. m. accinebat.
AD NOBILEM ET CLA∣RISSMVM VIRVM, IOANNEM Oberndorfferum, Medicae disciplinae Doctorem: in suam Veri Falsi{que} Medici Schemam. OMnia nunc passim toto vertuntur in ORBE; Flebile ad exitium cuncta minanter eunt. ARTES dispereunt meliori semine natae, At{que} suas miserae semper habent strigilies. Prostrant Artifices Docti non asse vel vno: Vulgus apud fatuum docta cohors perijt. Et quid non tentant exosa Catharmata: LEGIS Diuinae satagunt commaculare Libros. Enthea conspurcant mysteria; fronte petulcâ Audent in Magnum verba tonare Deum. Ecce Fori Coruos ex illâ parte; furenter In SACRA IVSTITIAE quàm sine menterunnt? Incessu grandi grallant, tetramqúe superbè Depressant, oculis, vultu, animoqúe Truces. Scilicet & sunt HI quos Tu cane peius & angue Vitabis, benè qui discupis esse Tibi. In MEDICA felix quis non hodiè Arte triumphat: Quin quo{que} Naturá prosiliunt Medici. Spermologi, errones, nactae, monachi fugitiui Divendunt Medicas indubitanter opes. Fures, Carnifices, & quae de faece popelli Res propè decoxit perdita turba suas:
Omnes hi Medici venerando nomine gaudent: Et quod turpè magis, turpè, senilis Anus. O MEDICINA, DEI quae prodita ab ore patescis, Tam foedis pedibus (proh) temerata iaces. Exulat, HIPPOCRATIS Diuina scientia, nemo Ingenium sequitur, docte GALENE, tuum. Quilibet ex proprio fabricat medicamina sensu: Pro placito fingit gramina nata sibi. Morborum quaeris si causas: abdita sunt haec, Responsant, sibi quae vendicat ipse DEVS: Quas non inquiri fas est sine crimine magno. Sic{que} rudem ludunt turpiter Arte gregem. At Tu, qui triplici munitus pectora ferro, Tam malè tornatos non bibis anre sonos: Fluctuat in dubiâ tamen heîc sententia mente, Veri quae MEDICI certa figura siet: Hunc cape, quem donat nativâ ex arte Libellum OBERNDORFFERI sedula cura Tibi. Pellege, sed praesens animo, Livore subacto: Livor enim planâ nescit inire viâ.) Is TE ductabit per amoena vireta: docebit, Perdiscas MEDICVM queî benè nosse VIRVM. Monstrat inaniloquos, impostores{que} nefandos: Qui populoqúe solent imposuisse rudi. Hos si cognoscis: Tu grata mente memento AVCTORI grates nolle negare suas. Martinus Oberndorfferus, Cantiaebius Palatinus, Iurisprud. stud.
THE ANATOMYES of the True Physition, and counterfeit Mounte-banke: wherin both of them, are graphically described, and set set out in their right and Orient colours. Antithesis. 1. Part. 1. WHosoeuer purposeth to attaine the right noble, and diuine Science of Physicke, and to become a true, and worthie Asclepiadean: before all things, it is requisite, that he be wholly carryed, and as it were rauished, with a naturall & heroi∣call instinct and inclination vnto that Studie. For it is not possible for any man, vnlesse  he be cast in Natures mould, and by her fashioned for that Professi∣on, to performe any thing therein, worth a Rush. But he that is therevnto framed, and disposed by Natures indow∣ment, doth not only in a short time, make happie proceedings in the knowledge of that high and learned Facultie, but doth likewise, witti∣ly and discreetly, apply himselfe vnto the preceptions, acting, and per∣forming in the view of the world, some famous Worke, of great ap∣plause, and admiration. Especially if he be of an ingenuous, and Schollerlike Disposition, willing and readie to receiue Instruction and Profit, by whomsoe∣uer. For this is the very store-house of Erudition, the most necessary  and precious Iewell of life, the Treasure, and Light of Science. Who before hee set vpon, so long and laborious a Studie, beside  honestie of life, and ciuilitie of manners, is polished and adorned with Pallas golden chaine: I mean throughly furnished, with those Arts and Tongues, which are most requisite and necessary in a Physition. For these are the well-springs and Fountaines of all humanitie,
wherewith if our Physition be not throughly watered, he can neuer bring forth any good or wholesome Fruite. For as these liberall and generall Arts leade vs (as it were by the hand) to the sweete and sil∣uer streames of Naturall Philosophie: so Philosophie bringeth vs (af∣ter some good acquaintance with her) to the spacious, goodly, & beau∣tifull Field of Physicke. It is needfull likewise, that hee bring with him an eager ap∣petite, and insatiable Desire, to penetrate, and diue into the My∣steries of that profound Science: wherein there are so many hid∣den secrets, farre remoued from the Eyes & Sence of the Vulgar sort. Wherevpon, that hee may the more easily and happily attaine the knowledge of these things, he placeth himselfe in some famous V∣niuersitie, replenished by the benigne aspect of Heauen, & clemency of the Aire & Soyle, with refined and braue Wits: where (as in a Mart of Phisicke) he doth not only store himselfe with varietie of medicinal furniture of all kindes; but doth likewise often enter into the lists with his Corriuals, & exerciseth himself in discussing the difficult Contro∣uersies, of that learned Facultie: chusing for his Maisters & Standerd-bearers, such as are of greatest learning, and most renowmed & happy Practise, and such as do teach the Art painfully and faithfully, that by these meanes he may more ioyfully and speedily aspire vnto the top of his Desires. Neither is he wanting to himselfe, but duly waying that Occasion is swift, slippery, and bald behind, he catcheth her by her fore-lockes: with daily and singular diligence he striketh the Iron, while it is hote, and taketh the Time whilest Time serueth. By this meanes, he layeth a sound and sure foundation of his Art, readily apprehending, firmly retaining the precepts thereof, and pru∣dently applying them to the vse of his Patients. Moreouer, he seriously bethinketh himselfe, that this diuine, and most learned Study, requireth not a laizie, drowzie, and slothful-snor∣ring Therfites: but a painfull, vigilant, and industrious Vlisses, hauing a chearfull and vndanted Mind, against all dangers, and troubles what∣soeuer. Herevpon he daily & painfully exerciseth himselfe in reading the learned volumes of those auncient Worthies, who haue faithfully, and fruitfully deliuered this Art vnto Posterity, the only Solace of humane Life: he diligently frequenteth the publike Lectures of Anatomy: and afterward himselfe doth make open Dissection. To conclude, he spareth no paine, but climbeth the high & steep Mountains, rangeth
thorow the low vallies, pierceth the woods and thickets, entereth the Caues and hollow Dens of the earth, searcheth thorowly the spatious and wild fields, the banks of sweet & running Riuers, to attain the true knowledge and nature of multiforme Simples. And that bee may comprehend and vnderstand the nature, pro∣perties, and vertues of all these, he refuseth no trauaile, nor forbeareth any cost, referring and applying them all, to the commoditie, benefit, and health of Men. In the meane while (like a Diogenes or Timon, who desires to be a∣lone and singular) he doth not refuse to ioyne with learned Phisitions, when they visit their Patients, and conferre together about the cura∣tiō of Diseases: but doth heedfully obserue those learned Colloquies, and Consultations, and carefully commit them to memory: putting likewise his owne hand by little and litle vnto the worke, and in Cases of difficultie and danger, is nothing ashamed to follow the Aduise and Direction of skilfull and well-pratised Physitions. But to atchiue all these things happily, and successiuely, suffici∣ent Time and Opportunitie are necessarily required. For the learned, ample and diuine Art of Physicke, which requi∣reth a whole man, is not learned in the space of one or two yeares: but for the largenesse, excellency, worthinesse, and profunditie thereof, the whole Life of man is hardly sufficient. If we expect that this heauenly Science implanted in the mind, and purchased by so many sweats, and more then Herculean Labors, should yeeld a plentifull haruest to the good, & welfare of Mankind. Thus you haue briefly (as it were) the birth, education, & institutiō of a true Aesculapian: to whom if you oppose your Changeling and masking Mounte banke, you shall finde them to agree like Harpe and Harrow. 2. For it is clearer thē the Sun, that the whole Rable of these Quack∣saluers, are of a base wit, & peruerse Nature, hauing no more naturall Inclination, or Dispositiō vnto this study, then the Asse to the harpe. For all these Bragadocian Thessali, which boast of their skill in this Profession, couering their Asses eares, with the honest tytles of Doc∣tors & Physitions, as with a comely Mantel, and practising Physick to the vnauoydable and lamentable hurt and danger, of their poore and miserakle Patients, if you consider them aright, for the most part are the abiect & sordidous scumme, and refuse of the people, who hauing runne away from their Trades and Occupations, learne in a corner, to get their liuings, by killing of Men.
And if we plucke off the vizards wherein these disguised Maskers do march, & bring thē to the Light which (like Owles) they cannot abide, they will appeare to be runnagate Iewes, the cut-throats and robbers of Christians, slowbellyed Monkes, who haue made escape from their Cloysters, Simoniacall and periured shauelings, busie Sir Iohn lackla∣tines, Thrafonical, and vnlettered Chymists, shifting & outcast Petti∣foggers, light-headed, and triuiall Druggers, and Apothecaries, Sun-shunning night birds, and Corner-creepers, dull-pated, and base Mechanickes, Stage-players, Iuglers, Pedlers, prittle-pratling Bar∣bers, filthie Grasiers, curious Bath-keepers, common shifters, & cog∣ging Caueliers, bragging Soldiers, Bankerupt marchāts, lazy Clowns, one-eyed or lamed Fencers, toothlesse and tatling old wiues, chatte∣ring Char-women, and Nurs-keepers, long tongued Midwiues, scape-Tibornes, Dog-leethes, and such like baggage, and earth dung. In the next Ranke, to second this goodly and sweet Troupe, follow Poysoners, Inchanters, Soothsayers, Wizards, Fortune-tellers, Ma∣gitians, Witches, Hags, with a rablement moe, of that damnable Crew, the very filth and drosse of the world. Now, if you take a good view of these sweet Companions, you shall finde them, not only meere Dolts, Idiots, and Buzzards: but likewise Conremners and Haters of all good learning. For the greatest part of them disdaine booke-learning, being al∣together vnacquainted with liberal Arts, and neuer came where Lear∣ning grew. For euery one of them, though in his own opinion an other Chi∣ron, yet either hath no bookes at all, or if hee haue a great Library, to make the world beleeue hee is a great Clarke, yet hee layeth them by the walles to feed the Moathes, but neuer peruseth them: nay many times cannot, so grosse is his Ignorance. For Bookes (witnesse Galen, the incomparable Maister of Phy∣sicke) are Monuments, and Registers, of those who are before lear∣ned; and no perfect Instruction for Rudsbies, and Idiots. Neither doth the possession of a great Library, and multitude of Bookes, make a man learned: no more then Aiax armor would make Thirsites a stout Souldier: But the painful and diligent reading them, and applying them to vse: as the skilfull vse of weapons, not the wea∣ring of them showeth and proueth a good Warriour. But these (for the most part) rush into Apolloes Temple, with vnwashen handes, and vnlettered heades: and as they are as blinde as Beetles, so they haue not so much as a desire to see into the myste∣ries
of that abstruse Facultie: they either vse no Teachers at all, or else make choise of some Thessalicall Empericks as learned as themselues, or some smoaky Chymist, or black Vulcane, able to teach them nothing but that which must afterward be vntaught: yet notwithstanding they swell like the Terentian Thraso, with a vaine and phoppish conceit of skill and knowledge, as though they were the onely profound Doc∣tors, and learned Phisitions of the world. To conclude, they are such as cannot abide to take any paines or trauell in studie: they reiect in∣comparable Galens learned Commentaries, as tedious and friuolous Discourses, hauing found thorow Paracelsus Vulcanian shop, a more compendious and short way to the Wood: spending Tyme, the most noble and precious creature of God, either with dooing nothing, or vainly and foolishly, about toyes, as in finding the Foolosophers stone, making Potable gold, or in doing that which is euill and pernitious, as in making some pleasant & refined poysons, vnder the names of Tur∣bith minerall, or Butyrum Arsenici, to keepe Charon from wanting worke; or else with a troubled and shittle head, tossed too and fro like a feather, and turning as oft as the weather-cock, they neuer bring any thing to good effect, or perfection. Others are so notoriously sottish, that being ouer head and eares in the myrie puddle of grosse Ignorance, yet they will by no meanes see or acknowledge it: so that they know not so much, as that they know nothing. For to giue an instance in the most absolute, exquisite, and diuine frame of mans Body, if they can shewe a rude Description thereof, hanging in their chamber, and nick-name two or three parts (so as it would make a horse to breake his halter to heare them) they think themselues iolly fellowes, and are esteemed great Anatomists in the eyes of the Vulgars. Now in the knowledge of Plants they are old excellent, and will roundly shewe you Spynach in stead of Sorrell, a Nettle for Betony, and Colchicū for Saffron, & that very demurely without any blushing. Others (as wise as these) affirme very confidently, if not impudent∣ly, that the knowledge of Plants and other simples, appartaineth not vnto them, but to the Apothecaries. But it seemeth to me very ridiculous, if not altogether dishono∣rable, and ignominious, that he who taketh vpon him to be an other Apollo and great Doctor, should not know the Instruments of his owne Art. Now they are not so ignorant & doltish, but they are as enuious,
impudent, and wainscot-faced. And since there is no punishment allotted vnto Ignorance in the weale publike, sauing the blot and brand of Infamy, that is so familiar and accustomed vnto them from the cradle, that it toucheth them no more then a flea-byting. And Impudencie is so rooted in the bones, and bred in the flesh, that they not onely in secret lash and whip with their venemous and serpentine Tongues, all honest and learned Phisitions, but at their pleasures do tyrannise and excarnificat mens bodies, and through their bayard like boldnesse, and licentious impunitie, make hauocke of their silly Pati∣ents, making experiments, and trying their Tartareall conclusions, by more then Tragicall Deaths. For there is no crime so haynous or odious, which lewd and lost Companions do not perpetrate, vnlesse they be bridled and restrai∣ned by feare of punishment: but if the Magistrate looke thorow the fingers, and winke at their naughtinesse, or else maintaine and patroci∣nate them therin, then they carrie all away smoothly, and sleep sound∣ly on both sides. But these men should doo farre better, neuer to vndertake those things wherein they haue no skill, then to professe those Arts which they neuer learned. Now it is the honestest and safest course for good and learned Phisitions, (since they haue no power in their hand to redresse these Enormities, and that there is small hope of a better world) to haue no societie with these Barbarians, enemies to all Antiquitie, Humanitie, and good learning, least they heare the old saying, Like will to like. As was said of the Diuell dauncing with the Collier. Antithesis. 2. 1. Part. IF we from hence proceed to the Course of life, and practise of a right Aesculapian, wee shall see him differ as much as white and blacke, from the croa∣king, and hedge creeping Quack-saluer. His maine and principall drift and endeuour, by meanes of his education in those studies, which wholly rauish the mind with the loue of Vertue, is, that as a faithfull friend, and well-willer of Nature he may religiously, vnspottedly, & charily preserue the precious healt
and life of man, and conserue the Estimation & Dignitie of that most honorable and worthy Profession. For he thorowly wayeth and considereth the excellencie of his Arts subiect, Man, that noble, admirable, and incomparable worke of Iehouah, the Temple of the holy Ghost, the most eminent and cleare Myrrour, & Spectacle among all creatures, of the diuine wise∣dome, Iustice, Goodnesse, I say Man framed after the similitude of the Eternall. Which noble and worthy Creature, committeth his dearest Selfe and Life into the hands and trust of our Phisition. Concerning whom, together with all his Operations, & Practises in his Facultie, he is to giue account vnto Nature and the Author ther∣of: the Eternall as a carefull Inspector, & sincere Iudge of them, in the day of that great & general Assise, & euerlasting Sabaoth of the world. When hee seriously and diligently pondereth these things, hee must needs remember his owne Condition, and that it concernes him to looke well to the vpshot and Conclusion. Herevpon he attempteth nothing, he appointeth and determi∣neth nothing, but with sound Aduice, Councel, & Iudgemēt, searching out with great care, industrie, and diligence, the nature and force of pre∣sent Maladies (weighing all things in the ballances of Reasō) with great and singular Dexteritie repelling them, and with admirable wise∣dome, foretelling and presaging future Calamities. He accounteth nothing more deare vnto him, then the Health of his Patients, wherevnto he is wholly deuoted, refusing no labour or danger, be it neuer so imminent, to attaine that end. Nay he cōsumeth himselfe with griefe and care for other mens Calamities, reckoning their woes, his owne miseries: and all to this end, that hee may per∣forme the office of a true Phisition, and deliuer his Patients from vn∣auoydable Perils, and rescue men as it were out of the iawes of Death. For Phisicke being the Art of helping and healing, not of killing and excarnificating, (as Scribonius saith well) the Professor thereof, our Phisition, dooth not value men by their Fortunes, and Places in the world, but reacheth out his helping and healthfull Hand vnto all that desire his assistance, and maketh sure neuer to hurt any, but helpe as many as possibly he can. Herevpon, as beseemeth a good and vertuous Man, hee carrieth not two faces vnder one Hood, but his Heart and Tongue, his words and actions agree and goe hand in hand together.
For he endeuoreth by all meanes to shew himselfe prudent, bash∣full, trustie, graue, modest, constant, couragious, courteous, and af∣fable. For all these faire Vertues do vsually attend them, who haue bene rightly conuersant, and trained vp in Apolloes Schoole. Among other Vertues hee greatly embraceth Taciturnitie, and Secresie. For there are many Misteries of the Art, many Diseases of Patients, which to blab abroad, were neither seemly nor expedient. Many things are said and done by these like parties, many Accidents fall out in their houses, which are to be concealed as Secrets, and not to be carried out of doores, and cryed at the Crosse. For it is a Signe and argument of a Gentleman-like Disposition, and amiable Discretion, to keepe close things to be secreted, least all our Wit seeme to lie in our tongues end, and not to be lodged in the Head or Heart. And as he is secret and discreet, so is he likewise Sober and Tempe∣rate, that he may be fit & readie to visite his Patients, at any houre of the day or night: being as good an afternoones-man, as a mornings-man. For as Galen witnesseth, a good Phisition ought to bee as studious of Sobrietie, as of Veritie. So in his attire there is no superfluous Curiositie, Courtlike Pomp, far-fetched & foolish Finicallitie: no nor Diogenicall nastinesse, and Lazerlike slouenie: but therein he laboureth to be decent, comely, and frugall. Moreouer he is contented with a mediocritie, and ioyeth in a meane Estate, not greedily gaping and breathing after Riches, being sufficient to himselfe, and knowing that they of their owne accord, fol∣low an industrious and laborious Hand, vnlesse a Mans lot fall among such as are altogether Clownes and Sowters. And that he may auoyd all sinister Cogitations, and Suspitions of euill, and vnhonest dealing, he cautelously shunneth and shutteth out all churlish, malignant, new-found, & suspected medicines, admitting those onely in his Practise, which are easie, safe, benigne, vndoubted, secure, and approued by long Vse, and certaine Experience of the anci∣ent Worthies, and great Maisters in Phisicke. And in all these things hee carrieth himselfe discreetly, ingenu∣ously, & without Cunning and Deceit: not refusing to submit his Pre∣scripts and Formes (if need require) to the Censure and Iudgement of learned Phisitions, willingly yealding to conferre with them, and (to
vse great Hippocrates words) embracing willingly any learned Collo∣quie, least by any meanes he should seeme to play the Coward or Flin∣cher. For Truth being of that Nature, that she neuer hideth her Face, or feareth to behold the Light, so the true Philosopher or Phisitiō, (for those two in our Age make one) is sociable, & readie to communicate, hearing other mens Opinions and Iudgement with great delight, only to this intent, that by this friendly Conference, and diligent Inuestiga∣tion, he may be confirmed and incouraged in his good Course, and the Patient receiue more assured, and certaine Benefites. 2. Antithesis. 2. Part. NOw if you compare with him, our suborned and masking Mounte-barke, whose wits are as dull as a doore nale, they will be found as farre different and distant, as Michaels Mount, and Cheuen Hills. For where shal you finde any one in this Crew, who hath any spark of Religion, or drop of Chari∣tie? where one that hath any right sence of Com∣passion, or common Humanitie? But to speake plaine, (though it be horrible, so much as to thinke) the greatest part of this Packe, are no better then ranke and arrant Atheists. And to speake within compasse, you shall sooner finde a blacke Swan, then an honest man in this Bunch: but if you prye narrowly into them, you shall discerne notorious Impostores, olde bea∣ten Foxes, and Cozeners; not Friends and Fauorites, but sworne Ene∣mies to Nature, and Man-kinde: laughing in their sleeues at their Budget full of wyles which they carrie in their bosome, most basely and wickedly, prostituting both Themselues, and the Art. For this lost Companion, hauing a Foxes Head, and an whorish and wainscotted Face, considering that nothing is set by in this Age, but that which is profitable, that wealth is more esteemed then Hone∣stie, and that Riches make the Gentleman, and that Money maketh Vertue stand behinde the doore, he setteth this downe as a Maxime, and Conclusion, that wealth must be had, though with the Iniurie and wracke of Pietie, Equitie, Humanitie, and common Honestie, & ther∣fore
prising Man, that immortall, and excellent Creature, the grand Myracle of the Eternall, at naught, hee carrieth himselfe Impiously, Desperately, and Craftily, in all his Courses, casting as it were the Dice vpon his Patients. Herevpon he pronounceth all Things darkly and doubtfully, as if Apollo should gaue Oracles from his Threefooted stoole. And if he happen at any Time on a Truth, you must pardon him, it was more then he was aware of. Now, all is Cocke sure, hee will pawne his Life and Credit (not both worth a Rush) all shall bee well. By and by, with a Stoicall Countenance, he threatneth Daunger and Death: breathing at once both cold and hotte, and all to this End: that which way so euer the World waggeth, hee may bee thought by his great Wisedome, and deepe reach in Diuining, to haue foreseene and presaged the Euent: which he foreknew as much as a Woodcocke. So that beeing himselfe more variable then the Polyp, hee is in twentie seuerall Mindes in an houre, turning and winding, too and fro, like a Tragedians Buskin, and vttering quite Contra∣ryes. Thus doth this base and lewd Couzener mocke God, and de∣spise Man, for whose cause the Eternall created the goodly and beautifull Frame of the World: and in whose Bodie, whatsoeuer is more largely in that Spatious, and Gorgious Pallace, and Theater delineated, is more briefly comptised, and as it were Epitomised, and represented a short Summe or Viewe. Against this Noble Crea∣ture, the small Counterfeit of the Great GOD, hee dooth oft times rage more sauagely, then any wilde Beare, or Tygar, refusing all good, safe, and wholsome Medicines, and purposely making Choise of them which were inuented by Sathan or his Imps, for the ruine, and De∣struction of Mankind. Now his Manners and Conditions (the liuely Characters of the Minde) wherein there is no one graine of Honestie, declare plainly what a sweet Companion this is. For if a man consider his Person, he shall finde him Lewd, Shamelesse, a Hater mortall of all Good Men, well seene and practised in all Couzening, Legerdemaine, Coney-catching, and all other cunning Shifts, & Sleights, a cracking Boaster, Proud, Insolent, a secret Back-biter, a cotentious Wrangler, a com∣mon Iester, a Lyar, a Busie-body, a Runnagate Wanderer, a Cog∣ging Sycophant, and Trencher-Chaplaine, a couetous Exactor, and Wringer of his Patients: in a word, a Man, or rather Monster, made
of a Mixture of all Vices. For hauing spent all his Tyme in learning these Feates, and long Custome hauing bred an Habit or second Nature, it cannot bee but that in Vertues Place there succeedeth a whole Troupe, and as it were a bottomelesse Whirlepoole of all Vice, and odious Naughti∣nesse and Filthinesse. Herevpon hee neither Fearing God, nor Caring for the good Lawes of Man, (I am ashamed to speake that, which they shame not to commit) refuseth not to giue Horrible and Detestable Counsell, for the murthering of Poore Infants in their mothers bellyes, procuring them to fall from the Tree, like vntimely Fruite. And being as las∣ciuious as a Sparrow in the Spring, hee maketh no bones to corrupt and sollicite to vncleannesse, young beautifull Maidens (hauing a spe∣ciall Facultie in Curing the Greene Sicknesse) yea, and comely Ma∣trons and Wiues, if he may handsomely come into their Chambers: blushing no whit to spend many houres in Carowsing in Tauernes, and dallyance among Curtemans. And according to the diuers Dispositions and Humours of Men, that hee may fit and Please all, he layeth aside the Behauiour and Grauitie of a Phisition, and putteth vpon Him the Person of a Syco∣phant, and Parasite, making account as the World goeth, to thriue better thereby, then by his profession: refusing no Seruitude, or Drud∣gery, how base so euer, that hee may creepe into Fauour with his Good Maisters, and Mistresses, and get into that Great Lord, or Rich La∣dies Bookes. One while hee playeth the Apothecarie, an other while the Cooke, an other while the Seruing Man: other whiles ser∣ueth in stead of Mother Midnight, and sometime hee is content to carrie the Pisse pot, abasing Himselfe to euery Seruile and Slauish Of∣fice. Nay by your leaue, Sometimes (which is of all other most vn∣worthy, and vnbefitting) hee playeth the Foole and Iester, and now and then (which is worst of all) the Bawd and Pandore. And he is so farre from being thought worse for all this, by the Vulgars, that he is counted an Obsequious, Officious, Neat & Neces∣sary Man, a Merry, and good Fellow, and the Onely Phisition. Among other things hee laboureth to excell in Garrulitie, and much Babling: his Tongue being like a Lambs Tale, or Aspen leafe, which neuer lyeth still, but is alwayes wagging. And since he cannot come neare others in sound Learning, Iudgement, and Skil in his Art, he will be sure to goe farre beyond them in Childish, Foolish, Vnsa∣uourie, Tedious, and Tiersome Loquacitie. So that by a vaine and
fond boasting of Learning, and impudent promising, and vnderta∣king many and great Matters, he is accounted a great and profound Doctor among the rude and ignorant Multitude, especially among simple & credulous Women, (who through their weaknesse of Iudge∣ment, shallownesse of Conceit, and Leuitie of Minde, are of all other most readie to embrace old wiues Tales, Lyes, and Forgeries) he kee∣peth a foule Coyle, playing the Champion, and Warriour with his Tongue, vaunting aboue measure of his great and noble Acts, in kil∣ling I know not how many Chymaeras; despising, & that with a Grace, all the Learned Phisitions of the Place, and sometimes Age wherein he liueth, barking and byting, reuiling, and calumniating them, at his Pleasure, as not worthy to carry his Bookes, or once to be named, or compared with his sweete Selfe, our great Magnifico, and all to the end that he might alienate Mens Minds from Them, & by his shame∣lesse Cauils and Slaunders, impaire their Reputation, and brand them with the blacke Coale of Infamy and Reproach. Now if by these cunning sleights, vnsauourie Pratling, secret Ca∣lumation, he haue scraped together a few Crownes, that he may tra∣uel into some forraine Countrey, hee will make sure to fawne vpon the Female kinde, and to purchase the Fauour of honourable Ladies and Dianaes, with some rare, and pretious Gifts, suppose a peece of Counterfeit Vnicomes-horne, or a Bezoat-stone, made of Powder of Post, or glassie Sand, the Onely, and Soueraigne Antidote, and Medicine, (if you will beleeue my great Maister) of all Maladie, Treacle, Diatessaron, or some Counterfeit Drugge closed hard with the Venetian Seale, or a litle white Clay: which hee calleth Terra Lemnia, or some such like precious Iewell, not worth a button. Now he impudently, with a whole streame of prittle prattle, set∣teth out to the vttermost his goodly Gifts, that they are worth twise their waight in Gold: that they must be laid vp in their Caskets, amōg their most costly Ornaments, and kept as their Life. Thus with these cunning sleights, fawnings, and flattering words, and Gifts not worth a strawe, (which notwithstanding silly Women haue not the wit to reiect, but take them with both hands, and locke them vp for Treasures, extolling and praising them to the Skyes among their Gossips) he winneth the Spurres among the Multitude: and being in high Admiration, Credit, and renowme with my Gossip Prittle Prattle, his Fame is by & by, spread through the whole Town, as with Bell and Clapper, and hee reckoned the onely Learned and profound Doctor.
For he cannot possibly make so loud and impudent a Lye, but it straight way runneth for currant, among these credulous and poore Soules. For among Blinde, the Blinker easily ruleth the Rost. So that by his lewd and lowd Lyes, and other pretie Shifts, and nimble Sleights, he bringeth to passe, that hee is applauded in euery Corner, and magnified by the common sort, as an other Apollo. For they delighting altogether in Noueltie, and loathing their old accustomed Physitions, though neuer so learned, if there come any straunge Beast, or Monster, out of Barbary, or Iacke an Apes from Cataia, they doo gaze vpon him with Admiration, flocke after him by whole Troupes, and set him out, in highest Degrees of Com∣mendations. And being compassed with this Crew of Idiots, and sitting in his Chaire of State with his Cap of Maintenance, by his silly Patient, it is a world to heare how his Tongue rowleth and walketh at randome, (but not one wise word, or any way appertaining to the matter, if he might gaine thereby a Kingdome.) One while with magnificall, bom∣basted, and ell-long words, he boasteth of his straunge and admirable Cures, (you may take time to beleeue them) an other while, he telleth endlesse, long, and headlesse Stories, of his rare, and hard Aduentures, in Trauailes and Perigrinations, vttering oft times, and that with great arrogancie, and shamelesse Impudencie, as many Lyes, as words. O∣therwhile he taketh vp the Person of a leaster, and playeth the Foole in the Play very singularly. For that Part of all other (as it pleaseth himselfe and his fond Fauourites the best) so it becommeth him right well. But he hath one propertie, which by the way is worthy of speciall Commendation. If he see or heare any Thing in the House of his Pa∣tient, it were as good to haue bene cryed at the Crosse. He cannot a∣bide to keepe Counsell. For it is not possible that a Man of many words, should haue any Truth or Secrecie in him. And as he is a Babler, so is he likewise a good Trencher man, or Good fellow as they call them, louing company and good cheare pas∣sing well: and the Chesse, the Dice, a Cup of neat Wine, better a great deale then his Booke. For if you misle him at any Tyme, you may be sure to finde him either in the Tauerne, or at Bowles, or at some Feast or Meeting of Good-fellowes. For our Smell-feast, will be sure to haunt the Houses and Tables
of Rich and great Men, partly to fill his Paunch, and partly that he may be thought to know all fashions, and that hauing wonne the fa∣uour of Grosse-headed and credulous Rich Capen-caters, hee may by their meanes be preferred and aduanced. And though he make glorious & vaunting Pollicitations of bin∣ding Beares, and moouing Mountaines, yet if trusting to his big and Bugge words, vpon some vrgent necessitie you desire his Counsell in some sodaine Symptom and headlong Disease, by and by you shall finde him falter at the first onset, as a Man beside his wit, and not knowing which way to turne himselfe, or at what End to begin. Then not able any longer to couer his Ignorance, he getteth into a Corner to peruse his Note-booke, which he hath patched from some Apothecaries File, or else some English Pamphlet of Surgery, which he yet vnderstands not without an Interpreter, or else he flieth to those old Sesbies, and Trudge blew-coats Antimony, and Mercury Pre∣cipitate, and if these good-fellowes chance to faile him, then wanting all found Learning and Iudgement, it is a Good sport to see how hee sumbleth and confoundeth himselfe, running into twentie Errors, and Absurdities, euery one greater then another. So that by this meanes the Disease doth oftimes sooner dispatch the Patient, then our Pretie and Gay Doctor can resolue of a Course to be taken. But that nothing may be wanting to our barred Cumanyst, hee laboureth in his Gate, Gesture, and Attire, to resemble the right Aes∣culapian: but so, that he is like an Ape clad in Purple, with a whole table of Toyes and Trinkets that by Garish, Outlandish, and vncouth Ap∣parell, his great Gold Chaine, and glistering Rings vpon euery Fin∣ger, he may draw to him the Concourse, and Admiration of the Peo∣ple, and more readily vtter his Cart-load of Leasings. Now as this Stage like Brauery requireth no small cost: so doeth it greatly further our Magnifico in many Prettie and Cunning Shifts and Tricks of Gaining. Among other Feats, if any of them is more Craftie, or hath a litle more broken Latine in his Budget, then the Common Sort, hee pryeth into the Practise of other Physitions, and layeth about diligēt∣ly for those Medicines, which he hath heard or knowne to do good: and hauing once gotten a Transcript of them, hee vseth them hand ouer head, without Art, or Reason. Which notwithstanding if wee giue credite to Herophilus,
vnlesse they passe through the Hand of Skilfull and Iuditiall Physiti∣ons, do more hurt then Good. That which is one Mans Blisse, is an o∣ther Mans Bane. The greater Part of these Study, and that seriously, the Art of Sophistry, Cousening, and plaine Cony-catching, aduauncing, and setting to sale with Great applause and Concourse, their wit∣lesse Nostrums, which they haue patched together by the marring of two or three good Medicines, to make a third worst of all, feeding the Common People with Toyes, Trifles, Bables, Nut-shels, plaine Chaffe in stead of Wheate, which notwithstanding they set out, to the vtmost, with more then Hyperbolicall, or rather Paracelfi∣call Commendations. Thus they inescate and circumuent poore silly Soules, leauing them as much mony in their Purses, as they haue Wit in theyr Heads: especially if they prepare theyr Medicines themselues, at home in theyr Selles, and hyre two or three Brokers, to blaze theyr Com∣mendations in euery Corner of the Citie. And if they can perswade them (according to the foolish opinion of Many) that nothing is wholesome, effectuall and Soueraine, but that which is far fetcht and deare bought (for they fill the Purse) they haue halfe wonne the Goale. For all ordinary and common Gifts of Nature, are despised and set at naught by these Braue Magnifi∣cos, which haue nothing but Vnicornes horne, Bezoar stone, Ma∣gistery of Pearles, and I knowe not what Precious, and Forreine Bugges and Drugges in theyr Mouthes. These our Mounts-banke proclaimeth lyke a Daw vpon a Perke, to be infallible and sure Cardes, approoued and ratified by long and good Experience, laying oft times his Head to pawne, that they are such as whereof common and triuiall Galenicall Doctors (for with that Style hee brandeth all learned Physitions) are altogether Igno∣rant. Wherevpon that hee may by all meanes auoyd to treade in the steppes of the auncient and moderne Worthies, this blinde, and sot∣tish Impostor, carefully shunneth all benigne, safe, well-expe∣rienced, Iudiciall, and Rationall Medicines, and maketh choyse, of Churlish, Violent, Vncouth Drugges, inuented not to Purge, but to torment and excarnificat: not to saue, but to Kill Men, couering theyr strong Poyson, in a small Dose, giuing them some∣times in Bozenges, sometime in Wine, that the poore Patient, looking vppon the fayre and pleasaunt Bayte, may not deserye
the Hooke and Poyson lurking within: and all this he doth with great Boldnesse and Impudencie, not knowing the Daunger and Perill ensuing. For they beeing (by all Classicall and Rationall Phisitions) raun∣ged in the Ranke of Poysons, do therefore violate Nature, not onely by their Quantitie, but likewise by their Qualitie, be their Dose neuer so small. Others as blinde and bold Bayards as the former, bring out of their Budgets, and dispearse abroad as Soueraigne Salues, certaine Powders, Alcola, Vnguents, Cerats, Oyles, not worth a rotten threed, not knowing whereof they are compounded, and oft times being not able to Name them aright. Other, vnder the Names and Tytles of Elixir of Lyfe, Quin-Es∣sence of Gold, Pearle, Azoth, and Panacea, which they themselues haue made, and account Secrets of Secrets (whereby they haue fetched backe I know not how many Soules embarked alreadie in Charons boate) do sell certaine Gimmalls, with great applause, and for graet summes of money, and by their Factors dispearse them abroad into forraine Countries. Others, that they may colourably and cunningly hide their grosse Ignorance, when they know not the Cause of the Disease, referre it vnto Charmes, Wichcrafts, Magnificall Incantations, and Sorcerie, vainely, and with a brazen forehead, affirming that there is no way to help them, but by Characters, Circles, Figure castings, Exercismes, Coniutarions, and other Impious, and Godlesse Meanes. Other set to sale at a great price, certaine A mulets of Gold and Siluer, stamped vnder an appropriate and selected Constellation of the Planets, with some Magicall Character, Shamelesly boasting that they will cure all Diseases, and worke I know not what other won∣ders. O gratefull and delightfull Comedie vnto the Diuell, whereat he is ready to burst Himself with loud Laughter, to see how he leadeth by the Nose the Common people, with these Iugling Illusions, and Sophistications, and thereby greatly amplifieth and inlargeth his Kingdome. Others swelling with a big conceit, and vaine ostentation, of skill, and deepe insight in their Facultie, by the sole and bare Inspection of the stinking Pispot, like an old Hag, or Sorceresse, shewing great wonders in her Christall Glasse, neuer once seeing the Patient, nor pondering with Iudiciall consideration, the Indications Curatiue,
doo vnsauourly and Idly discourse of the Nature, Causes, and Cure of Diseases, before silly Chare-women, and simple Boyes and Gyrles, that in whole troupes flocke to their Houses, with a Glasse Pisle-pot in their Hands: confidently auouching, or rather manifestly and shamelesly Lying, contrarie to the Part and Office of an Ingenuous and honest Man, that they finde out and discerne all these Things by gazing vpon the Putrified and strong-sented Vrine. But these Men esteeme Gaine to be sweete, though it come by impudent Lying, and vnhonest Couzening: whereby they send whole Multitudes of silly Soules, insnated in their Gins, vnto Plutos Kingdome. Others most impudently, and falsly affirme, that all Diseases and Maladies how contrarie in Nature so euer, may indifferently, and ea∣sily be cured with one Medicine, or Panacea. And that we need not so many Compositions, and Prescripts, as are now vsed: but that our Apothecaries may spare their Labour, shut vp their Shops, and seeke out some new Occupation, since it is a matter of small Difficultie, to make one Cacolicke, (I should haue said Catholike) which may serue for all Turnes. But since Experience hath neuer yet approued, this phantasticall and senselesse Fiction, of some crazed and addle Braine, neither Any Man made Demonstration thereof by good and sound Reason: it re∣maineth that these Idle and bruised-headed fellowes, are notable Impostores, Quack-saluers, and Such as offer most dishonourable and intollerable violence to Physicke, and all her faire and beautifull Nymphes. Yet the Poore and Silly Multitude admireth such, as Petite Chi∣rons and Apollos, not knowing that these Magicall Arts, and cun∣ning Sleights of Legerdemaine, and plaine Coney-catching, are growne into a great Mysterie and Occupation, and in a manner the onely Way to thriue: being indeed no better then plaine Theeuing, or Robbing of men by the high way. He therefore that hath bene trained vp in Cunning, and nimble Shifts, and Cousenings from his youth, and desireth to fill his bagge speedily, and withall to haue the ringing Name and Fame of a great and profound Phisition, let him take Order to make his Medicines at home in a Corner, or Seller, or at least giue it out, that they are so pre∣pared by Himselfe, though he secretly buy them abroad at the Apo∣thecaries; or let him haue alwaies at Hand one, or at the most two or three Medicines (if one of them be a Charme it is no matter, but all
the better, wherewith let him promise Boldly, confidently, and pe∣remptorily, without blushing any more then a blacke Dogge, that he will Cure all Diseases whatsoeuer. For by this meanes he shall be sure to vtter his Wares at a dearer and higher rate, then Reason or Honestie would require, and to make a good round Market when other stand still and coole theyr Heeles. And beside that, the Common people will flocke to such a One in whole Thraues, as vnto an Oracle of Apollo, hee shall gaine this thereby, that neither the Patient, nor his Friends, shal be able to know whether in stead of a Soueraigne Medicine, far fet, and deare bought, they receiue rank poyson, or at leest some vncouth, vnfitting, or coun∣terfeit Dregge, or Drugge. Neither neede hee to feare any sharpe Censure, of his supera∣bounding Skill, and double Diligence, and least being in Consulta∣tion with other Learned Phisitions, he be compelled to bewray his Sottish and barred Ignorance, if (as the fashion is of Men of his Cog∣nizance and Coate, hee can set a good Face on the matter, and Cla∣mour a loud, that these are hidden and abstruse Secrets, not to be re∣uealed to any, that they are no where to be had, eyther for Loue or Gold, but at his House, or from his Apothecarie, and that no Man in the World knoweth how to turne his hand to the making of them, saue Himselfe alone. But it is one of the greatest Mischiefes and Miseries in the World, that such should professe themselues Artists and Phisitions, who know not how to performe any one Part or Office of a true & worthy Phisition. For these are not the properties of any Ingenuous, Liberall, and Salutiferous Science, or Qualities of a Learned, Sufficient, and Skil∣full Artist or Professor, but rather euident Arguments, of a Peruerse, Illiberall, and monstrous Disposition, thus like an Owle, or Night-Rauen, to flye, and shun the Light. For it is appropriate onely to crooked, and ill mannered Na∣tures, and those that are altogether vnacquainted, with Humanitie, and all good Letters, to traduce and calumniate, among the rude and simple Idiots, the actions and workes of Cunning, and Learned Artists, most skilfully and artificially accomplished: and withall magnifically to extoll, and commend, with bombasted, and transcen∣dent Termes, their owne False, Sophisticate, and Adulterate Wares,
and to inuent these Sathanicall Delusions, and in inexpiable Crafts, and subtill Deuices, to insnare and abuse the Simple and Common Sort. So that by these Courses they both deceiue themselues in the end, and deceiue, delude, and abuse others most Impiously, lewdly, and Nefariously. We conclude therefore, and that as wee Suppose, vpon good and sufficient Ground, that Incomparable, and Diuine Hyppocrates, did most truly, and wisely affirme, that there are many great Phi∣sitions, in Name and Estimation of Men: but in Truth and Sub∣stance, but very fewe, rightly deseruing that Reputation and Style. And that they who are Complete and accomplished Phisitions, are by the Verdit and Iudgement of all the Sages, and Wise Men, that either haue or do liue in the World, worthy of all Honour, Praise, and high Estimation. And these alone, hauing passed thorow the Course of Learning, and giuen sufficient Testimony and Proofe of their sound Skil, Iudge∣ment, and Experience, grounded vpon Reason, Art, and Sence, are able and fitted to exercise the Diuine Art of Phisicke, to the Welfare and Health of Mankinde. And they alone doo happily atchieue these three maine Scopes, of Curing Speedily, without lingring Delayes, which are worse then a short dispatch of Death, Safely without hazarding, or running the Patients Life vpon those Rockes, wherevpon the Quack-saluer (as an vnskilfull Pilot) doth for the most part most lamentably wracke them, pleasantly without that loathsomenesse and Tediousnesse wherewith they are choaked by the counterfeit Mounte-banke and Slabtaker. As for them who doo more eagerly affect and hunt after the Name of Physitions, then the substance and sufficiencie, esteeming it inough for their purpose, if they bee created Doctors at Dawes Crosse, by the rude, and vnskilfull Multitude, and so be reputed, and passe Currant Physitions, and great Clarkes among them, who are indeed disguised and counterfeit Impostors, Iuglers, and Couzeners, they should bee rightly serued, and the Weale-pub∣like, Prudently and Religiously prouided for, if they should bee interdicted to practise that Art which they neuer learned: or in imitalatio of Cato Censorininus, proscribed, banished, and ex∣pelled by whole Troupes out of those Cities and Prouinces, where∣in they haue nestled, or at the least should bee punished for
their vnbridled and intollerable Boldnesse, in Butchering, and Excu∣sicating Mens Bodies, according to the Nature and Qualitie of their Offence. That by this meanes they might be restrained and reduced into their proper Ranke, and Order, & not through Polypragmony, which is the Companion of Ignorance, Well spring of Disorder and Con∣fusion, and common Pest of Mankinde, busily intrude themselues, and thrust in their Sickle into other Mens Haruest. So it would come to passe, that Honest, Good, and Learned Phi∣sitions, should not vndergo a most Vniust, & Vnworthy Conditiō: that is, in beholding daily Knaues, Couzening Shifters, and ranke As∣ses, preferred before them, or at least equally valued, esteemed, and re∣spected: and that Gate and Gap would be shut and stopped, where∣by these blind Buzzards, and bold Bayards, these butcherly Impo∣stores, doo freely enter to excruciat their poore Patients, and kill Men without controllment. But a good Magistrate, to whom nothing is more deare & pre∣cious, then the safegard both of the Goods, and Persons of his Sub∣iects, is alwayes a Louer and Fauourer of Learning, and Liberall Arts, a Patron, and Mecaenas of Learned Men, and therefore in his Wise∣dome, vertuous Disposition, and watchfull Care for the Common Good, prouideth by all meanes, that no Man be wronged or wracked in his Estate or Person, and preuenteth all Occasions, of such Schythi∣call, or rather Sathanicall torturing and massacring of Men. But he that Winketh, and looketh thorow the Fingers at these matters, and like a sleeping and drowsie Shepheard, letteth the Raue∣nous Wolfe at his pleasure, pray vpon the poore Sheepe, cannot pos∣sibly be excused among the vertuous. For that euill and corrupt Cu∣stome, which hath euery where preuailed, redounding greatly to the ruine and Confusion of Mankinde, can by no meanes free the Magi∣strate from blame. Nay it rather argueth, and conuinceth both the Practiser, Consenter, and Conniuer, at such horrible Crimes (for a small and base Bribe) to be worthy of the same Punishment. But they who are altogether Illiberall, Vnlettered, and Slaues to absurd, and erronious Opinions, loathing, and prosecuting with Va∣tinian hatred, all True and Learned Phisitions, nay Truth and Lear∣ning it selfe, haue this bred in the Bones, and rooted in the Flesh, through the Crooked peruersitie of their Dispositions, and Ruditie of their Wits, to barke against Learned Men, and their wholsome Coun∣sells, and honest Courses, and to be delighted with monstrous, and
vncouuth Conceits, or rather Deceits, and with such sottish and foo∣lish Quacksaluers; who are worthy to fall into the hands of these no∣torious Impostors, so well fitting their Humours, that according to the Old Saying, Like Lips may be serued with like Lettuce. But these grand Seniors should do farre better if they imployed their swelling and high Conceit of deepe Wisdome in their owne Af∣faires, and containe themselues within their Shops and Ware-houses, and not arrogate to themselues, to Iudge of Matters whereof they are altogether ignorant, (it belonging to Artist to Iudge of Art) least they be compelled to heare against their Will, That the Shoomaker must not meddle beyond his Shooe. Now (thou blinde Empericke, and vaine-vaunting Mountebanke, whosoeuer thou art) let me in Conclusiō, intreat thee, to learne by this short Discourse, this short Lesson, To Know thy selfe, which though it be briefe, yet is it the Chiefe, and Choyse of all other Documents. Dwell with thy Selfe, and breake not thy Ranke, but keepe with∣in Compasse, and thou shalt easily perceiue thine owne Pouertie, Want, and Weaknesse. I for my part, wish thee from my Heart, a more sound Head, and honest Heart, that thou mayest either fundamentally learne the No∣ble and Excellent Art of Physicke, and proceed in thy Cures by a certaine and right Lyne and Method, without foolish Superstition, or wicked Imposture, or else that thou wouldest honestly giue ouer that learned Profession, till Apollo haue more clearly enlightned thee, with his shyning and bright beames, least to thy indeleble Ignominy, Shame, and Reproach, some wise Man pronounce against thee this Sentence: That thou art either an Asse, a Foole, or a Cony-catcher. Be Bold and Constant in well dooing: for when all is done, Ve∣ritie will in the end, obtaine the Victorie. FINIS.
A discouery of certaine Stra∣tagems, whereby our English Emperickes haue bene obserued strongly to oppugne, and oft times to expugne their poore Patients Purses. IT cannot be sufficiently lamented, that the most auncient, worthy, and honourable Profession of Physicke, which hath bene in preceding Ages, a Colledge of learned, graue, and profound Philo∣sophers, is now become the Common Inne, Re∣ceptacle, and Sanctuarie of Make-shifts, Banker∣rupts, and Impostors. Fuit Honos Medicinae apud Seclum prius. Tyme was, when that diuine, and ex∣cellent Science was had in high, and yet due Admiration, Honour, and Reputation. Salomon the most wise, rich, and renowmed Prince that the world (from her Alpha to her Omega) hath yeelded, disdai∣ned not the Contemplation and Studie of this noble and diuine Art. Nay which is more, did illustrate Physicke with his writings, and composed a great Volume of the Nature, of Byrds, Beasts, Trees, and Hearbes, describing them, from the Cedar in Libanus, to the Hys∣sope that groweth on the wall. This excellent and incomparable Worke, to the vnspeakeable griefe, and invaluable losse of all Aesculapians, is perished in the deepe Sea-gulfe of Antiquitie, which hath swallowed vp, deuou∣red, and consumed the Monuments of many Worthies. Mythri∣dates that puissant King of Pontus, who was for many yeares terri∣ble to the World-conquering Romaines, amiddest his Martiall and Kingly affaires, spent no small time in Physicall Meditations: erecting to himselfe by the Composition of one Medicine, as no∣ble, durable, and admirable a Trophee, as Pompey the great did, by his Victory against him. In this Kings Closet were found by that Noble Romaine, ma∣ny Bookes written with his owne hand, both of the vertues of Plants, and Constitution of Mans Body, highly valued by that worthy Ʋic∣tor Euax a King of Arabia, wrote a Booke of Botanologye, which hee dedicated to the Emperour Nero. It is reported by Historians, that in auncient Tymes there was no King, either of Aegypt, Ae∣thiopia,
or Arabia, who did not himselfe either write somewhat con∣cerning the Art of Physicke, or at least by his Kingly bountie, and large Pensions, encouraged others to imploy their Heads and Wits in that Studie. Zenophon bringeth in Cyrus, conferring and discoursing with a Physition, as a fit Colloqunter for a Prince, about the hidden Secrets, and deepe Misteries of Nature. Iulius Caesar, that matchlesse and inuincible Romane Emperour, made a Decree, that all Professors of Physicke should be free Deni∣zens, and Burgesses of Rome. Democides the Physition was in such credit and authoritie with Darius the Persian, that hee had a place assigned at his Table, and was as it were fellow-Commoner with him. Ataxerxes hauing sent for Hippocrates, and being denied with griefe and anger, threatned a reuenge against all Greece. Asclepiades reiected Mithridates Messengers, and refused all his liberall and Princely Offers. Erasistratus the Phisition, receiued for a reward at one Tyme, of King Ptolomye, (ur as others write of An∣tiochus) an hundred Talents: which amounteth in our Money, to six∣tie thousand Crownes.Plin. 21. li. 1. Stertinius complained of the Princes of his Dayes, because his sti∣pend for reading Physicke, was but fiue hundred thousand Cesterties. This is esteemed 4150. pound & two shillings, foure penee, wheras he gained more by his practise in the Citie. The like stipend was giuen by Claudius Caesar to this mans Brother. Trinas the Massilian left an hun∣dred thousand Sestertyes by Legacie, to build the walles of his Citie. I forbeare to shewe their great fauour, credit, and authoritie with mightie Potentates and Princes, as Philip with Alexander, Musa with Augustus. I omit the Aruncians, Albutians, Rubrians, Lassians, and Carpentans, whose stipend in Rome was 205. Aureos. Thaddaeus the Florentine when he rode abroad, receiued ordinarily for his Fee, 500. Crownes a day: and for one Cure vpon Honorius the Pope, ten thou∣sand Crownes at a clap. Comineus the French Thucydides, telleth of a Phisition of Ludouic the 11. French King, who had from the King, admirable, and almost incredible Fees and rewards. To passe by these, with many other famous Presidents of Antiquitie, clearly demonstra∣ting to the Worlds view, the true and due worth and esteeme, of this excellent Profession, to the staine and blush of our present Age, it ma∣keth infinitly for the cōmendation of Phisicke, that the Messias & Sa∣uiour of the world, the Emmanuel, God, it is the Lord Iesus himselfe in the daies of his soiourning, & walking here vpō the Earth, (refusing to
intermeddle with deciding of Controuersies, & diuiding of Lands and Goods, did notwithstanding spend a good part of his Tyme (after the performance of his Propheticall office in teaching and curing the Soules of Men) in healing the Diseases and Maladyes of their Bo∣dies: that is, in plaine termes, in exercising the Office & Function of the Physition. But here me thinks before I proceed further in this Ar∣gument, one ioggeth me on the elbow with this item. A Sophister of Greece made a long Oration in praise of Hercules. One standing by, before he could pronounce the whole, cut him off thus. Quis (quaeso) vnquam Herculem vituperauit? In like sort a man may demaund of you, who haue begun a Panegyrick of Physicke. I pray you (Syr) who euer in his right wits dispraised Physicke? Well I could (if I were disposed) answere this Quaere. But I will bee con∣tent for this Tyme to take it for graunted, that no Man of Common Sence, Wit, Reason, Iudgement, Discretion, Learning, or Humanitie, will euer open his Mouth in dispraise of a Profession so auncient, ho∣nourable, beneficiall, and necessarie vnto Mankinde, (without which, neither Theologie can often preuaile to reforme the vicious Minde, vnlesse Medicine dispose the Body, and contemper the Humours: and Lawe should commaund in vaine, if Physicke did not yeeld apt and able Bodyes to obey) I will drawe nearer to my present Purpose: wherevnto I hope this short Praelude in Phisickes Praise, will proue nothing impertinent. For if Physicke be of that worth, honour and reputation (as hath bene in part touched, and might haue bene more amply declared, but that with the Dogge of Egypt, I am constrained to take a snatch and away) then, intollerable are the Indignities, and exceeding great are the Iniuries, which these base Cullions, and Buz∣zardly Venturers, (for so I chuse rather to terme them, with a Lear∣ned Man of our Colledge, then Emperickes) who leaping from theyr Shopboords, and leauing their Mechanicall Trades, haue, and doo daily offer to that faire, goodly, and gallant Lady. A Fardell and Packe of the deceitfull Wares, and subtill Sophistications of these Circumferaneous luglers, hath alreadie bene vnfolded and laid open in the former Treatise, written in Latine by a learned Germaine. Now giue me leaue, to acquaint you with some such cunning Sleights, and pretie tricks of Legerdemaine, which I haue obserued to be put in vse and practise by our London Interlopers, and Quack-saluers, wherby diuers honest Men and Women, haue bene notoriously abused, delu∣ded, emunged of their Money, and plainly coney catched. The cunning and slye Deuises, subtill Policies, and Warre-like
Stratagems, whereby these valerous Thrasoes, and great Magnificoes doo lay a straight siege, and make many strong assaults vpon their Pa∣tients Purses (for vnto the poore Purse is all the Quarell) haue partly respect vnto Themselues, and partly vnto their Patient. The first Proiect respecting Themselues, whereby they ayme to winne credit with the Patient, and insinuate themselues into his fa∣uour, bringing him into a Fooles-paradise, and causing him to haue their persons in high admiration, is to blowe into his Eares, and that with a shamelesse impudent face, and a tedious multitude of vaine, lying, and vaunting words, that they haue certaine hidden, deepe, and precious Secrets, altogether vnknowne to the Galenists, and Schoole-Doctors, whereby they are able to worke wonders, and to quell Gar∣gantua himselfe. If the Patient demaund how they came by this pro∣found knowledge, hauing neuer followed the course of Learning, or studied in any Vniuersitie: then they eyther begin with a so∣lemne grace, and set countenance, a long Storie of a written Booke of most rare and admirable Medicines, inuented by a certaine pro∣found, and deepe learned Fryar or Monke, and hidden with great care, in the Wall, or Sellar of a Monasterie: Which Booke by great Chaunce, and their happy Fortune, hauing come to their hands, they would not part with it for Saint Peters Cope, or a Kings Raunsome. Or else you shall haue a Tale of Manardes thē great Physition of Spaine, who keeping a secret Booke of most tare and excellent Ob∣seruations, your braue and vaunting Quack-saluer, auouching himselfe to haue bene his Man, will boldly (blushing as much as a blacke Dog) affirme vnto you, that beeing with him in his sicknesse, whereof he dy∣ed, and obseruing diligently the place, where Manardes laid vp his Iewell, they cunningly after his Death, seized on this Booke, and con∣ueied it away with them. Hereby they are made of vnlettered Idiots, great and skilfull Aesculapians, and vndertake the Cure of all strange, difficult, and deadly Maladyes. Or if the Patient misse of these Poe∣ticall Fictions, he may well stumble vpon that good fellow, who (as it is said) hath a long Discourse of Seuerinus the Dane his sonne, who being in seruice in the Spanish Armado, Anno. 88. was wracked and cast on Shore. Herevpon, wandering as a poore harbourlesse, and succourlesse Straunger, he arriued at the last at the house of our Iuppi∣ter Hospitalis, who receiuing him into home and harbour, vsing him kindly, and at his departure furnishing him with some supply of Pence, that thankefull Mercurie, in recompence of this great Hospitalitie and Humanitie, bestowed vpon him his Caducean Rodde,
or Booke of rare Physicall Mysteries, whereby in an instant hee was from a silly Sot, not able to speake one word of congruous La∣tine, presently Metaphorphosed into a graue, demure, and grand Doctor, and Maister in Physicke. A hundred to one, if hee hap∣pen not on some one or other of these stale Ieasts, or at the least, some other of the like Nature: Which notwithstanding, a great Number of our Common Ones doo as readily beleeue, as if they should heare the Story of S. Francis out of Legenda Aurea. And here by the way, it is worth our obseruation, that those graund Maisters do vtterly renounce and disclaime Learning, and all Educa∣tion in any Vniuersitie, wherein it is like they neuer came (vnlesse to set vp their horse in an Inne, whilest they breake their fast) flying to a written Booke, or some Medicines, receiued from a Friend by Tradition. And would a Man imagine that any should bee so voyd of common Sence, Reason, or Iudgement, as to thinke that a fewe scribled Receipts in an olde Moath-eaten paper should make a Physition? Why then euery one that hath lying by him, a good Booke of Lawe, as Rastalls Statutes, or Littletons Tenures, is a Com∣pleat Lawyer. And hee that hath two or three Bookes of Diuini∣tie in his House, is an absolute Diuine, and may step vp into the Pulpit. If this were so, we might well say with that merry Phisition, that it had raigned Doctors in all Faculties. Their second Engine, or Plausible perswasiue Motiue, where∣by they labour to fasten the former Nayle, to winne Reputation of deepe Skill to themselues, and purchase credite to their Pa∣naceas, and wonder-working Dregges, is a pretie figment, or for∣gerie, not vnlike the first. After they haue laide the former ground, and perceiue the poore Patient to giue a listening Eare to theyr forged Fable, conceiuing hope of luckie successe, and by his nibling at the baite, that hee is like to swallow the hooke, they proceede to Gull him thus. They begin, to make theyr former matter good, with incredible boldnesse and impudencie, to auerie that theyr knowledge is so singular, theyr secret Me∣dicaments so soueraigne, and of such admirable Efficacie, that di∣uers Learned and Professed Physitions, of great Note and Ac∣count, haue sought earnestly, Wooed, and Sollicited: nay offered good summes of money, to haue them imparted and communi∣cated. And because it is sinne to belye the Diuell, and some Men may
thinke I wrong them with so deepe a charge, I assure you vpon my credit, I speake no more then I haue heard Hisce Auribus. One base Thick-skin (whose Story it may be you shall haue hereafter more at large) taking vpon him to cure an incurable Disease, and being willed by a Phisition, requested by the Patient to ioyne with him, to make knowne his Medicine. My Medicine (quoth hee) with great indig∣nation, that I will not for any Mans pleasure. D. Dodcin, and D. Caso of Oxford, haue offered me fortie pounds yearely during my life, if I would acquaint them with that secret. This was as true as that the Sea was on Fire, and this good fellow quenched it with a Bale of Flaxe. Neuerthelesse, by this and such like pretie sleights, he carried away the Patient for that Time, and got some Crownes: the other Phisition, because he refused to hold the Candle to so base and blinde a Companion, being reiected. An other Medicastra, a tatling Gossip, (for such likewise haue learned their Leripoope, and haue as glib, smooth, & nimble Tongues as the best) hauing commended a Drench she had for an old Cough, vnto the Skyes, auerred boldly in the hearing of a Phisition, that her Medicine was of such vertue, and had done so great Acts, that D. Smyth and D. Turner, had taken her aside, and with many faire words, putting likewise some Angels into her fist, had intreated her, to im∣part to them her Secret. But (said she) with a grace I warrant you, Should I teach the Doctors? nay I will neuer do it. They would make 20. or 30. pound yearely of it, whereas I do good therewith, and take small recompence for my paines. The Physition smyling, answered. I beleeue you (good woman) that you will not teach the Doctors, I will be your warrant for that matter, you shall need no further Bond or Suretie. Was not this a goodly sweete Parrate trowe yee? Haue not the Doctrs cause to lament that they shall want the instruction of such a Lamia? A third, as bold and blinde an Empericke as London hath yeel∣ded these many yeares, beeing by the Coll. committed to prison for his notorious sottishnesse, Impudency, and manifold Misdemeanours, (to giue them the least and lowes terme) gaue it out among his fel∣low prisoners, and such as celected vetrum, that his commitment was, because he refused to disclose vnto the Physitions, his hidden secrets, whereby hee performed such Cures, as they were not able to turne their hands too. But suppose wee should graunt vnto these Bragga∣docian Thessali, that they had secret and good Medicines, yea such as diuers Physitions desired to knowe; would it therefore follow that
they were fit Men to take vpon them the Profession, and Practise of Physicke? Nothing lesse. For Physicke is a great Lady or Princesse, hauing subiect vnto her, many large, goodly, and spacious Territories. Whereof the skill of inuenting, and making a Medicine, is one of the last, and least in Estimatiō. So that a Man may be somewhat acquain∣ted in this Region, and yet altogether ignorant in the ample and rich Countries and Fields of Phisicke. Phisicke is defined by Galen in his Arte Parua: The know∣ledge of things wholsome, vnwholsome, or neutrall. Or, the Science of Things Naturall, Preternaturall, and contrarie to Nature. Physiologye the first Part of Physicke, chalengeth for her Patrimony, those seuen Things whereof our Nature consisteth: Elements, Temperaments, Humours, Spirits, Parts, Faculties, and Functions. Here is a large walke for our silly Emperickes, as vncouth, and vnknowne to them, as Terra-America, China, or Guiana, to our poore Plough men. Ana∣tomy being but one Shyre, Prouince, or Countie, in this Precinct or Countrie, discoursing vpon the Parts, whereof we consist, is of such Noblenesse, Amplitude, and Reputation, as that many worthy, and excellent Wits haue bene content here to take vp their Rest, and dwel therein their whole Time. A number of our iolly Quack-saluers, are so ignorant of this Skill, that they know not whether Anatomy be a Man or Woman, an Horse, or a Cow. And yet it is as possible, for him to be a Phisitiō, that neuer knew or sawe Dissection, as for him to be a good Carpenter, that neuer sawe an House, or a good Marriner, that neuer set eye on a Ship, in his Life. Hygicina the second part of Physicke, trauelleth in preseruing the health of those who haue obtained a sound Temperament, in their Similar parts, and right Proportion in the Instrumentall, by the mo∣derate and well ordered vse of those sixe Things, which we call Pre∣ternaturall. The knowledge of those Things, which we call Vnwhol∣some: or contrarie to Nature, if you respect the Theorie, is termed Pathologye, and intreateth at large of the Causes, Signes, and Nature of Diseases. If you regard the Praxis, it is termed Therapentice, who grapleth with Natures Enemie, and opposeth vnto all Maladies, apt, Artificiall, and Rationall Medicines, and that in three large Differen∣ces. The first is called the Dyet of the sicke: the second, Chyrur∣gery: the third, Pharmacentice. So that the Physition, as a great Com∣maunder, hath as subordinate to him, the Cookes for Dyet, the Surgi∣ons for manuall Operation, the Apothecaries for confecting, and pre∣paring
Medicines. You see then, how goodly large, and ample Patri∣mony Physick hath, and that all her Store, and Skill, consisteth not in compounding and mingling of a Medicine. If that were all, thē all our skilful Chirurgions, and Apothecaries (of whom we haue many in this Citie) should be absolute, and compleat Physitions, who I dare boldly affirme knowe moe and better Medicines, then the brauest, and Crakingest Mounte-banke in the Land. And yet how farre the cun∣ningest of them are, from being able to giue counsell in Physicke, both themselues will ingeniously and freely acknowledge, and all men of Iudgement, may easily discerne. But who so bolde as blind Bayard, who seeing not the Daunger, and Diche before him, ru∣sheth on without feare, and plungeth himselfe ouer Head and Eares, ere hee be aware. Herophilus calleth Medicines Manus Deorum, being prescribed and accommodated by the learned Physition, but flat Poysons if they come thorow the handes of vnlearned and ven∣terous Quack-saluers. Nullus Morbus idem omnibus: No Disease is of the same Nature in all Constitutions. Nullum Remedium evn∣dem vim habet in singulis. No Remedie hath the lyke Operation in euery particular Patient. A good Remedie in the Head or Clo∣set of an vnskilfull, and venterous Periclitator, is as a Sword in the handes of a mad-Man. Or as the blinde Mans staffe, which may so fall, as it may kill the Hare. So theyr misapplyed and mishapen Re∣medies, may sometime quell the Disease, but by as great chaunce and misfortune, as that good Fellow had, who being drunke and on horsebacke, ridde in the night safely ouer a foote-bridge, crossing a broad and deepe Riuer, it beeing a thousand pounde to a Nut∣shell, that both hee and his Horse should haue come short Home. Natura est Curatrix Morborum. Nature her selfe is the Curer of diuers Diseases, into whose haruest these intruding Copes mates do thrust theyr Sickle, reaping oft times her due Praise and Commen∣dations. To conclude this Poynt, (wherein I haue beene content to dwell the longer, because it is the strongest Castle and Hold, where∣in our Maister-Emperickes doo most trust, and wherevnto they haue continuall Resuge and Retreat in all assaultes) I dare boldly set downe this Maxime, and Theorem, and maintaine the same a∣gainst all Commers, that Morbi curantur magis Methodo, quam Medicina. Diseases are rather cured by a Rationall Methode grounded
vpon Arts Indications, then by force of any Remedie, though neuer so soueraigne. The Indications whereby Iudiciall and Rationall Physitions are guided and directed (as by Ariadnaees threed) in the Curation of Diseases, are many, (and not to be stood vpon at this Tyme) all of them neglected, and vnknowne to the poore blinde Emperickes. And yet the Poet could say, speaking but of one of them. Temporibus medicina valet data Tempore prosunt, Sed data non apto Tempore Vina nocent. But hauing (as I hope) sufficiently battered this Fort, and ferri∣ted these Coney-catching Companions from their Sanctuarie, or ra∣ther Fox-hole, I will proceed, or rather post vnto their third Topi∣call Place, or Latebra Sophistica, whereby they seeke to mount vpon the Banke of Fame, and raise vp Themselues in the Conceit of their simple Patients. When they perceiue the Patient to haue swallowed the two for∣mer Flyes, then they begin to stand vpon theyr Typtoes, and with a composed Countenance, and Stagge-like gesture, to relate such straunge, vncouth, lowde ringing, and Paradoxicall Narrations, as a man would suppose they were solemnly set to lye for the Whet∣stone. Ʋbi adbibit plus paulò sua mihi quae narrat Facinora. When they are set vpon theyr Ale-bench, (for it is worth noting by the way, that eyther at the Ale-house or Tauerne, where is their chiefe Haunt, theyr matches for Cures are vsually made) and are a little whitled, it is wonderfull, what fabulous Tales and Stories, what vnsauorie and odious Leasings they will tell of theyr incredible, and admirable Curations, performed vppon most desperate, and deadly Sicknesses, and such Persons as were altogether giuen o∣uer and forsaken, as forlorne and past helpe by the Physitions. There you shall heare of Dropsies, dead Palsies, (as they tearme them, olde and knottie Gouts, Apoplexies, great and growne Stones in the Bladder, a great rabble moe of Churlish and Sturdie Companions, all bowing the knee, vayling the Bonnet, and dooing lowe obeysance to our grand Seignior, Magnifico, Mounsier Mounte∣banke.
And least you should call in Question the credit of those good old Gentlemen, or doubt of the Truth of their Poeticall, Hyberbolicall, and extrauagant Discourses, you shall haue them name the Cities and Townes, Parties, and Places where their great myraculous Workes and Wonders were acted and executed: Marry they wil be sure not to name any Parties or Places too neare at hand (for that might perad∣uenture marre all) the fooles are more wise then so. But if you would finde out the cettaintie of these Matters, you may perhaps ryde your horse out of breath Some of them will haue for their Associate, an old Weather-beaten Broking Cōpaniō, somewhat known to the Patient, (as very a &c. as themselues) who shall play Gnathos part, soothing them vp in all their loud Leasings. His maner is, to scratch and clawe our Magnifico by the Elbow, and to tolle on the silly Patient, in this sort. (Syr) vpon my credit, this is an honest and simple-meaning Gentleman, if he say the word, you may be bold to build and write vpon it. He would not tell you an vntruth (I dare say and sweare too for a need) if he might gaine thereby an hundred pounds. Though he goe but plaine, yet his Reputation is good in the Towne and Coun∣trey where he dwelleth. He is sought vnto farre and neare. He is ac∣quainted with diuers Noble men, and great Personages, and hath ac∣cesse vnto them, and is admitted into Ladies Chambers, when your gay Doctors with their veluet Ierkins are shut out of Doores, to coole their heeles. He hath bene a Traueller in his Dayes, and hath there∣by attained such deepe and profound skill in Physicke, and such rare and precious Medicines, that hee putteth downe all the Doctors where euer he commeth. Vpon my knowledge, he hath cured them, which had bene with all the Doctors in London, and spent great summes of money, without receiuing any good, till they met with him. I may say to you, he is the oddest Man in a Land. If he vndertake you, I will bee his warrant that hee will cure you. I neuer knew him yer to faile in any. He hath the Luckyest hand in a Countrey. I neuer knew any miscarrie vnder it. Doth not this slye, and subtill Pricker tell a smooth Tale, to couer and colour this pack of cloaked Knauery? And no maruell. For he speaketh and pleadeth for his Fee, and Sha∣reth with his Maister Thraso Mounsier Magnifico, hauing sometimes a Proctors, sometimes a Councellors Paye for his labour. Thus these two Veterators, or Couzening Copsemates act their Parts, as it were on a Stage, circumuenting and insnaring simple Men and Women, altogether vnacquainted with these quaint Deuises, laughing them to come behinde their backes, ryding them for Asses, boasting of
their fiye and cunning conueyance of their matters, and each of them vaunting that he played his Part best. In this sort do they solace them∣selues with their sweete stolen Bread, and make merry with their Pa∣tients money. For you must vnderstand, that vsually it purchaseth nei∣ther House, Goods, nor Lands, but a fewe Pots of the best Ale or Wine in the Towne. And yet they receiue moe Crownes oft times for one of their Couzenages, (for Cures I will neuer call them) then diuers learned and honest Physitions, for two or three, iuditially, and happily performed Curations. Hauing now coursarily passed ouer the first Kinde of the warre-like Engines, whereby being raised vpon the Mount of their owne Praise and Fame, these braue Pot-souldiers doo make a fierce and strong batterie vpon the silly Patients Purse: I will proceed to the second Ranke, of militarie Statagems, and Warre-like Policies, by which they doo eft-soones, feale the Walles, enter the Ramperts, and like valiant, and victorious Conquerors, possesse them of the Piece and Fort, holding out against their matchlesse Puissance. As the former had respect vnto themselues, and their owne Fame and Reputation: So these last haue Reference and Relation wholly to their Patients Good. First therefore (let the Disease be what it will or shall) (for if you will haue the Truth, for the most part they care not, nor know not) neuer so daungerous, deadly, desperate, incurable, they will promise most cōfidently and arrogantly, a perfect, absolute, & compleat Cure. All is fish with them that commeth to Net. They make no bones at it. And yet the Poet could say thus much. Non est in Medico sempèr releuctur vt Aeger. Interdum docta plus valet Arte Malum. Hyppocrates the Father of Physicke, and Phoenix of the World, whose Writings are by venerable Antiquitie esteemed Oracles, and not words of Humane Tongue: who (as Macrobius saith) could nei∣ther deceiue, nor be deceiued, whose Humanitie and Benignitie was such, that hee knew nothing, but that hee would wee should likewise knowe, whose deepe reach, insight, and admirable Skill was so great, that no Man after him, knew any thing, whereof he was igno∣rant, this honourable Dictator of Physicke affirmeth often, that there are many Diseases incurable. This commeth to passe, partly because some diseases are hereditary a Semine Paterno, and beeing bred in the
bone, as we say, will hardly bee rooted out of the flesh: partly by the Furie and Violence of some Maladie and Symptoms, far surmounting Natures strength. And that appeareth eyther by the Nobilitie, and Necessitie of the Parte offended, or the Worthinesse and Ex∣cellencie of the Action violated, or by the euill Nature, and secret Malignitie of the Affect. Herevpon it is that Hyppocrates saith: Sol∣uere fortem Apoplexiam impossibile, leuem haud facile. And that in re∣gard of the Dignitie of the Part affected, the necessary vse and ex∣cellencie of the Actions of Sence and Motion, mightily oppugned, and the boysterous, and churlish Violence of that most terrible and deadly Disease. Herevpon likewise that honourable old man, the Mirrour of An∣tiquitie, in the same Book of Aphorismes, which hath merited the high∣est Place among humane Writings. Aphor. 1. sayth. O portet non so∣lum Medicum suum, officium facere, sed etiam Aegrum, & Astantes, & ex∣terna esse rite comparata. The Physition must not onely performe his office, but the sicke Man and his Ministers must do their Parts, and outward Things must be well disposed. This golden Sentence set in the Fore-front of that Diuine worke, giueth vs plainly to vnderstand, that all the Keyes of Curation hang not at the Physitions Gyrdle; it resteth not wholly and solely in him, to performe the Cure, but Patients and Nurses haue likewise their Offices and Charges to looke vnto, and externall Accidents may marre all the Market. Morbi sua Natura curabiles, saepe Patientium & Clinicaram niscitia, incuria, inobe∣dientia, aut morositate incurabiles redduntur. This was the cause why Galen wisheth Physitions neuer to meddle with those who are intem∣perate, and wholly addicted to satisfie theyr Appetite, and sensu¦all Delights: for (sayth he) neither shalt thou reape credit, not they any good or benefite by Physicke. A great Emperour brin∣ging with him to a sicke Courtier, two of his Physitions, demaun∣ded of them what they Iudged of the sicknesse, whether it were cure∣able, or no? The first answered, that it was cureable. The other that he Iudged it incureable. I (sayeth the Emperour) what is the Reason of this Dissention and Difference betwixt you? No diffe∣rence (my Lord) answered the later Phisition. Ille enim ad Rem respicit, Ego ad hominem. He respected, in his answere, the Disease, and I the Patient, whom I know to bee so vnruly and intemperate, that it is not possible to Cure him. How ignorant, vnruly, indiscreet, and vntractable, that I say not peeuish and peruerse many Patients are, it is too well knowne to Physitions, and Others likewise who are
not too too exceeding partiall, and therefore needlesse and tedious for me to stand vpon it. The manifold Errors and Misdemeanours of the friends of Patients, especially Women, Nurse-keepers, Seruants, Cookes, Surgions, and Apothecaries, would fill a seuerall and great Volume. I will onely point at one vulgar and common Fault, great∣ly hindering the happy proceeding, and succeeding of our Cures in London. And that is the ficklenesse, and fugitiue Inconstancie of our Patients, who being perswaded by euery pratling Gossip that com∣meth in to see them, and silly Chare-woman that attendeth them, will haue for euery Day they are sicke almost, a new and seuerall Phisiti∣on, and perhaps chaunge euery Day for the worse. Thus doo they deliiari and play the Wantons because of their ease and plentie of water at their Doores (I meane the varietie of good and skilfull Phy∣sitions) but chiefly by the fond and witlesse motions, of these busie giddy headed women, who are constant in nothing but Inconstan∣cie, blowne too and fro with euery breath, like a Feather. Some∣times they will dispraise and debase the former Phisition, for no other reason, but because hee is knowne vnto them: and magnifie and com∣mend a straunger because he is vnknowne, as a man of deepe learning and Iudgement. Otherwhile the Phisition is too young, and wan∣teth Experience: and then they will extoll to the Patient, a blinde Empericke, who hath neither Wit, Learning, nor Experience, and yet hee must be the Man. Sometime againe the Physition is too old, and spent, his Memorie and Iudgement faileth him, hee is now done, you must take an other that is more fresh and readie in his Mat∣ters. With these and the like, idle, trifleling and childish Follyes they do often interurbe and hinder our Curations: and the Physitions are blamed, traduced, and disgraced, when the Patient himselfe, or his wise Counsellors deserued well, much rather to be whipped. Qui Plures consulit Medicoes in singulorum Errorem cadit, ipse falsus maxime. He that runneth after many Phisitions, oft times deceiueth them all, and him∣self most & worst of all. That externall Euents do interrupt the course of Curation, and dash all on the sudden. it is most euident. A Phy∣sition in London had a Patient, who hauing bene sicke of a burning Feuer, and beeing in good way of recouerie, a Creditor of his (to whome hee owed a round summe, hearing of his Sicknesse, and daunger, pressed suddenly into the Chamber where hee lay, and expostulating with him, in many sharpe, and rigorous words and
threats for securitie of his Debt, so disquieted, vexed, and ouerheat the poore Man, that hee relapsed into a Phrensie and Idlenesse of Braine, crying out still vpon his Creditor, that he would lay him vp, that the Sergeants were at his backe, readie to seize vpon him: that he must lye by it, his Wise and Children should be : and thus ra∣uing, within fewe dayes dyed. This Man might haue recouered in the Phisitions Iudgement, if this vnhappy Accident had not happened. Incomparable Galen, the store-house of all good learning, from whose reading, the best learned shall euer returne more learned, concurieth in this point, with his Maister Hyppocrates, as hath bene alreadie by the way touched, and might be by many places of his workes plainely proued, if it were not altogether superfluous, to spend Tyme, and blot Paper, in a matter so euident. Consider then, the intollerable & shame∣lesse Impudencie of our vaunting Pyrgopolynices, who wil take vpon him to set Hyppocrates and Galen to Schoole, as simple & rude fellows in respect of his graund-Maistership. And heerein that brain-sicke Germaine, that notorious Sophister, and Impostor of the World, Pa∣racelsus, hath plainly discouered himselfe to be a mere Mounte-banke: (for if he had bene a learned Man, he would neuer haue done it) bar∣king euery where in his rouing and rauing Discourses (for Method or Art they haue none in them) at Galen, one of the Springs of Phy∣sicke, chalenging himselfe for Ignorance, his Medicines for insuffici∣encie, and inualiditie: all his Successors and Followers in the Physick Schooles and Vniuersities, for Dolts, Dunses, and Asses, in compari∣son of his goodly Selfe. Ebrius est nec enim faceret haec sobrius Vnquam. The Wine was in, and the Wit was out, when hee did and spake this, or else vndoubtedly he would neuer haue done it. But to let him goe, into whose grosse, and palpable Absurdities, intollerable Insolen∣cies, and incredible Sophistications, if a man should enter, he should find Powles work, as we say: it is more then manifest, both by the Au∣thorities, and sound Reasons of these graue and learned Phisitions, to whom, these base Cōpanions are not worthy to hold the Candle, or to be Named the same yeare with them, that all Diseases are not Cure∣able; and that therefore they are notorious, and not sufferable Impo∣stors, who take vpon them, more then the greatest Maisters of Art would euer arrogate to Themselues; and that which indeed is not in their power to performe. The like may be said of Cures, which was said of Martiall affaires. In rebus bellicis, Militum virtus, locorum oppor∣tunitas, Classes, Comeatus, Auxilia, multum tuuant, Qnin ipsa. Rerum Domina Fortuna magnam partem suo sibi Iuro vindicat, &c. So in Curati∣ons,
the Skilfulnesse, and Carefulnesse of the Physition, the Discreti∣on and Tractabilitie of the Patient, and diligence of the Keepers and Attendants, the faithfulnesse of the Apothecaries, Surgions, and other Ministers, the remouing of all externall Impediments, do greatly fur∣ther and forward Curations: but aboue all, and when all is done, there is a great Commaunder who sitteth in Heauen, and chalengeth to himself by good right, the chiefe sway and stroke in all this Businesse. In him are the issues of Life, and of Death, he hath created both Phy∣sicke and the Physition. Quo sine Diptamnus nil, Panacea iuuat. Except the Lord build the House, the builders, &c. Except the Lord watch the Citie, the Watch-men, &c. The Eternall who hath giuen vs these Soules and Bodies, (of whom it should seeme these iolly fel∣lowes, these boasting Thrasoes do fildome, or neuer thinke) hath re∣serued to himselfe a soueraigne and ouerruling Power: whereby hee doth oft times crosse the Meanes, and frustrate the Hopes of the most skilfull and exquisit Artists, much more, of our bold Periclirators, who blindly, sottishly, and sencelesly, go to worke. This caused that Eter∣nised old Man, whose Fame is like to last as long as the World lasteth, cry out, that there was Diuinum quid in morbis, a certaine Misterie in Diseases, which neither he, nor any humane Wit could euer sound. Their next Topicall Place, or perswasiue Insinuation pretending the Patients good, is this, that as they vndertake without all perad∣uenture, an absolute Cure, be the Disease neuer so stubborne or per∣nitious; so they likewise promise with no lesse Impudence and Vani∣tie, a short and speedie Cure. This is exceeding plausible to the poore Patient, bringing him a sleepe, and causing him to scratch where it itcheth not. He will (forsooth) leap ouer the hedge before he come at it: he will not stand thrumming of Caps, or picking strawes all the yeare, but with great Celeritie & Dexteritie, dispatch that in a weeke, which the Rationall Physition, the Schoole-Doctor with his Caute∣lous Caueats, will lye bungling and iumbling at a Moneth or two. Yet the wise Man willeth vs to hasten slowly, and telleth vs that a soft fire maketh sweete Mault, that a Thing is done soone inough, if wel inough: that hastie Bitches bring forth blinde Whelpes: that rash Temeritie is the Daughter of Folly, and Mother of Repentance. Di∣uers Diseases proceeding from Inanition and Exhaustion, require ne∣cessarily, a conuenient space of Tyme, that Natures losse and expence may be by degrees repaired, restored, and (as it were) reedified. Others are of a Churlish, Stubbborne, and Rebellious Disposition, and must be gently and softly handled, and by litle, and litle, in some length
of Tyme, tamed and cicurated. They are like a sleeping Dogge which must not sudenly be awaked, least you do Irritare Crabronem, duplicare malum, and bring an old house vpon your owne, (or at least) the Patients Head. Rome was not built in a Day, and no Matter of waight or moment, can be negotiated and managed in a moment or trice, vnlesse we will huddle, and slubber them vp in such sort, as we must doo, redoo, vndoo, and as good neuer a whit, as neuer the better. Their last and surest Card, whereby as with a cunning & strong Engine, they breake open the Gates of the long assayled Fort, making themselues Lord, and Owners thereof, so as the poore Patient dooth yeeld himselfe as altogether vanquished and subdued, and not able, to hold out any longer, is this. They will solemnly professe, that though their skill be singular, and supereminent, yet their Desire is rather to doo Good, then to heape vp Gold: (for if they had bene of that humour, they might haue bene worth thousands, and umbled themselues in siluer before this time) and therfore for the good liking they conceiue of the Patient, and his gentle and courteous Nature and behauiour, they will require nothing, vntill they haue performed, and perfited the Cure. Herevpon the Patient is so well appayed, that he thinketh he hath gotten the Popes holownesse by the Toe, & met with the plainest, kindest, honestest, and friendlyest Gentleman in the World. But you must know, that though our craftie Copse∣mate, and old beaten Veterator, gloze, and glauer thus, yet hee meaneth nothing lesse. For hauing by this meanes entered into worke with the Patient, after three, or foure Dayes, all which while, he will shewe himselfe double Diligent, and tell him many a fayre Tale, and loud Lesing, hee will (spying his opportunitie) breake with him thus. (Syr) you discerne (I hope) that I haue a speciall care of you, you see what continuall paines I take, beside the expence and laying out of my money out of my purse for your Medicines. I trust you will haue some consideration hereof, and allow me money for to pay the Apothecarie. The Patient (if he be of any good, or kinde Nature, being ouercome with kindnesse) cannot but yeeld to this equall Mo∣tion, and vsually wil out with his purse, and giue him foure or fiue An∣gels, to buy Poticary Ware, as they vse to speake. This our bro∣king Mounte-banke receiueth with a right good will, saying to him∣selfe, that hee shall not now loose all, but that hee is reasonable well payde for fiue or sixe, or at most tenne shillings bestowed in Drugges
And for the most part, when they haue gotten possession of this mo∣ney, they haue attained the end and toppe of theyr drifts. For you must vnderstand, that the greatest part of them tarry not out the processe of theyr Cures. But hauing made foure or fiue such like Markets in seuerall places of the Towne, wherevnto they arriue, they betake themselues faire and roundly to their heeles, giuing theyr Patients the bagge, and leauing them in the lurch, in the middest of their Foole-conceited Hopes. And although I might say, His facient exemola fidem, for Exam∣ples of these notorious Couzenages doo abound, and are too plenti∣full in all Places, yet because I feare least I haue tarried too long in this base Argument, and spent too much time in stirring this filthy Dung∣hill, I will hasten to an ende, and exemplifie my Discourse with one onely Store. That base, vnlettered, and vnmannered Thick-skin, (of whom mentiō by the way was formerly made, B. of H. by the Thames side) comming to London, and noysing abroad by his Trumpettors, his singular and admirable Skill and Dexteritie in curing diuers daun∣gerous, desperate, and in truth, incurable Diseases, was brought by some of his Brokers, to a graue and honest Cittizen, afflicted with that Maladie, wherein the learned Physitions flye to Solus Culter, Solus Cultellus. This noble Swanne, this vaine and vaunting Clowne, bragging of sundrie great and wonderfull Cures by him performed vpon Gentlemen and others in the Countrey, whom he blushed not to name, knowing that the Parties being absent, he could not be con∣trolled, professed to cure him absolutely (without cutting) and that in three weekes space. The Cittizen though hee gaue too listening an eare to these goodly Tales of our cracking Mounte-banke, and was somewhat tickled to heare of Health and Recouery, and that with such celeritie and expedition, yet hauing a tollerable and good con∣ceit of a Phisition, whom formerly he vsed, sent vnto him, desiring him to conferre with our deepe and profound Artist, & to ioyne with him in the Curation. The Physition repayring to the Patients house, and entering Parlee with our Mounsier Magnifico, Signior Rusticus, re∣quested him to know what Course he would take in the Cure. I (quoth he) will giue him no Physicke. How will you then (replyed the Phy∣sition) remoue the Disease. I will do it (saith our Quack-saluer) by a certaine Gift giuen mee, and by a rare and precious secret Medicine which I vse. No maruel (answered the Phisitiō) if your Medicine being no Phisick,
be straunge and rare indeed aboue all I euer heard. But will you de∣clare and shewe your Medicine, that wee may discerne and Iudge of the fitnesse and efficacie thereof, to performe this great and strange effect. Nay by your leaue (said hee) you shall pardon me, the foole is wiser then so. If I would haue discouered my Secret, two great Doctors of Oxford would haue assured me an Annuitie of fortie pound yearely, during my life. I am sufficiently knowne I tell you (Syr) and that to no Babes, or base Persons, but to diuers of the greatest No∣blemen in the Land: and am admitted to their Speech and Presence, when Veluet Coates daunce attendance without. The Phisition per∣ceiuing by this small Conference, Mounsier Mounte-banke to bee of the right stampe, taking the Patient aside, and shewing him the grosse Ignorance, and intollerable Arrogancie of the Sottish Asse, perswaded him in many words, to shake him off, if he respected his Life, Health, or Credit, as a meere Couzener and Impostor. But he (though otherwise of sufficient wisedome) was so inueigled, or rather bewit∣ched with the great bragges, and sencelesse Tales of this braggadoci∣an Quack-saluer, that he would admit of nothing sounding to his Dis∣grace, or Disparagement: affirming that by dealing with him, he could receiue no detriment, since hee required no money, vntill he had ab∣solued and finished his Cure. The Physition answered, that though hee made that goodly pretence to drawe him on, and himselfe into the Cure, yet it was like, that by one meanes or other hee would get into possession, some peece of mony (for sure hee was, that was the whyte and marke hee aymed at) and then bidde him farewell. This proued afterwards a very shrewd and perillous Prediction. For with∣in fewe Dayes, passing by the Citizens House, he called in, to see how the world went, and was by him saluted thus. (Syr) I doubt you will proue a Prophet, my Cunning Man, the last Day, complaining that he layed out his money at the Apothecaries, to buy Simples to com∣pound my Medicines, I thinking it no reason hee should bee at such charge for me, opened my Purse, and gaue him foure Angels. But I haue wished them since twise in it againe: for I feare hee will make your words good, he hath cast me once or twise by his tamperings and Drugges, into the fit of an Ague, so that I was readie (but for shame) to haue sent for you. I beleeue, when all is done, hee will shewe him∣selfe a Couzening Companion. The Physition smyling, answered: who then I perceiue your deepe Doctor will not loose all his labour. He hath now as much money as he will looke for at your hands, and you as much Good, as you must expect from his. Hee hath cleared
three Angels at the least, (sheare gaines) for three or foure Visitati∣ons: which if you had giuen the most learned Phisition in the Citie, you would haue scratched your Elbow, and thought your selfe vn∣done. Yet he fayled in his first conceit, which notwithstanding is commonly their Rest. For not long after the shamelesse Companion faigned a necessary and vrgent occasion of going into the Countrey, and before he went down, desired to haue so much of those Commo∣dities wherein his Patient dealt, as came to three Pound. The Citi∣zen knowing that by his meanes he had got in the Citie of diuers ho∣nest Men through his Hyberbolicall Commendation, twentie No∣bles at the least, was content to lay them aside for him. But when he expected his present payment, he phopped him thus. Syr, we agree∣ed for your Cure for fiue pound. I haue receiued alreadie fortie shil∣ling: now this three pound maketh vp the iust summe. Nay by your leaue (said the Marchant) I looke for readie money for my Ware. You haue had on me alreadie foure Angels, and I am no whit better then I was, but rather in worse State. Performe your vndertaken Cure, and you shall be assured of your money without faile. If it be so (said hee) I must leaue it behinde me til I return or send you vp money: for I haue sent downe my money before me. But neither Man nor Mony retur∣ned in haste. This was an old-beaten Souldier, a good Proficient, well trained vp in this Schoole of Couzenage, and Coney-catching, hee had learned his lesson perfectly, and was able to runne it ouer vpon his fingers Ends. For if you compare his Story with our present Dis∣course, you shall see that he neither failed nor faltered in any one Point of his Portuse. Thus I haue spent (as you see) some fewe successiue and Idle-vagant houres, in vnfolding and laying open the Packe and Fardle of these circumferanious Iuglers, and pedling Pettifoggers in Physicke, who by these Adulterate, and Sophsticate Wares, deceiue, abuse, pray, and feed vpon the ruder and simpler sort of People. Yea, and by your leaue, sometimes ouerreach & circumuēt those, who think them∣selues iolly fellowes, and great wise Men, to the great blemish and dis∣grace of that auncient, worthy, and honourable Profession of Physick, discredit, obloquie, and contempt of learned and good Phisitions, and to the great damage and detriment of her Maiesties Subiects, both in their Bodies, and outward Estates. My hope is, that this Cursorie, and Rapsodicall Discourse (for to haue ransacked euery Corner and Creuise in this Budget, would require a longer Tractat, and may here∣after be performed if this (Labor) proue plausible and grateful may do
good to some, and hurt none, except the intruding and shifting Mounte-banke, whose prosequution, and persequution, both I, and all the learned Gentlemen of our Colledge, haue in our Initiation and Inanguratiō solemnly vowed, and protested. It being the very ground and Originall, of all those large and bountifull Immunities and Pri∣uiledges graunted first to our Societie, by that puissant Prince of fa∣mous memorie, Henry the eight, and afterward ratified and confirmed by his Peerlesse Daughter, Queene Elizabeth, the Mirrour of all He∣roicall and Princely vertues, the Assertor and Protector of true Reli∣on, the Maule of Antichrist, the Astonishment and Wonder of Chri∣stendome, and the whole World, that we should, Videre & prospicere, ne quid in Rebus Med. Resp. Detrimenti caperet. That is, that we should foresee and take order, that the Common-wealth be not wronged in Matters appertaining to Phisicke. It is therefore an odious Calumnie, and slaunderous vntruth, which these base and out-cast Companions giue out, when they are punished by the Colledge, for theyr grosse Sottishnesse, shamelesse Intrusion, and vnsufferable, and pernicious Offences and Disorders, that they are therefore onely pursued by vs, because they take away our profit, (when as in truth, they eft-soones make worke for vs) and doo more good, then the Colledge of Phisiti∣ons: whereas the great Acts they do, may appeare partly by this pre∣sent Discourse, and yet more euidently by those lamentable Acci∣dents, and miserable Ends of many poore soules in London in a yeare, falling into these Hucsters, or rather Hacksters hands. Our Consci∣ences toward God, our Dutie toward our Prince, our Loue to our Countrey, the honour of our Profession, the Oath we haue taken in our Admission, do all binde vs, as by a double or triple cord or band, Ad persequendum indoctos Empericos, & Impostores. To pursue vn∣learned Emperickes, and Impostors. In conclusion therefore, I desire them who haue occasion to vse Physicke, to remember alwayes his saying, who affirmeth, that Plus mali a medico quam a Morbo imminet, si aut audacia, aut Imperitia Poccet. There is more Daunger to bee feared from the Physition, then from the Disease, if he offend either in blockish Ignorance, or rash Temeritie; and thinke it safe for them, to be of the same minde with a great Learned Clarke in our Land, who in a daungerous sick∣nesse, being moued by some friends to vse an vnlettered Empericke. Nay (quoth he) I haue liued all my Life by the Booke, and I will now (God-willing) likewise dye by the Booke. And so I wish from my heart to euery one of them, in Tyme of Health, a sound, faithfull, and
constant friend, who is called Medicamentum vitae, and that they may auoyd the Silken and Oylye Tongues of the flattering Syco∣phant, and in Time of Sicknesse, an honest and learned Phy∣sition: and that they may not fall into the butcherly hands of the mercilesse Carnifex (I would but (because it is out, and not amisse, let it goe) haue said) Quack-saluer. Carpere vel noli Nostra, veledae Tua. FINIS. Diuers faults haue escaped the Printer; which as they are easily discerned. so I entreat thee (friendly Reader) to amend with thy Pen, as thou goest along: and to pardon me, who by occasion of some Businesse, haue not looked so narrowly to them, as I should, and (otherwise) would haue done.
