19529 99855824 21327
Three to One: Being, An English-Spanish Combat, Performed by a Westerne Gentleman, of Tauystoke in Deuonshire with an English Quarter-Staffe, against Three Spanish Rapiers and Poniards, at Sherries in Spaine, The fifteene day of Nouember, 1625. In the Presence of Dukes, Condes, Marquesses, and other Great Dons of Spaine, being the Counsell of Warre. The Author of this Booke, and Actor in this Encounter, Richard Peeeke.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT Maiestie. GRATIOVS SOVERAIGNE, IF I were againe in Spaine, I should thinke no happinesse on Earth, so great, as to come into England, and at your Royall Feete, lay downe the Story of my Dangers, and Peregrination; Which I tell, as a late Sea-wrackt Man, (tos'd and beaten with many Misfortunes;) Yet, setting my weary Body at last on a Blessed Shore: My Handes now lay hold vpon your Altar, which is to me a San∣ctuary: Heere I am safe in Harbor. That Psalme of Kingly Dauid, which I sung in my Spanish Captiuity,Psal. 137. (When as wee sate in Babilon, &c.) I now haue changed to an other
Tune; saying, (with the same Prophet, Great is thy Mercy towards me (O Lord,) for thou hast deliuered my Soule from the lowest Graue.Psal. 86.13. And, as your Maiesty hath bene gratiously pleased, both to let your poore Soldier and Subiect, behold your Royall Person, and to heare him speake in his rude Language; So, if your Maie∣sty, vouchsafe to cast a Princely Eye on these his vnhandsome Papers; New Sun-beames shall spread ouer him, and put a Quickning Soule into that Bosome, which otherwise must want Life, for want of your Comfort. Those Graces, from your Excellent Clemency, (already receiued) being such, that I am asha∣med, and sorry, not to haue Endur'd, and to haue done more in Forreigne Countries, for the Honor of Yours; When from so High a Throane, my Souereigne Deignes to looke Downe, on a Creature so vnworthy, whose Life, he prostrates before your Highnes. Euer resting, Your Maiesties most Humble and Loyall Subiect, RICHARD PEEKE.
Three to One: Being, An English-Spanish Combat. LOuing Countreymen; Not to weary you with long Prae∣ambles, vnnecessary for you to reade, and troublesome for me to set downe; I will come roundly to the matter; intreating you, not to cast a malitious eye vpon my Acti∣ons, nor rashly to condemne them, or to stagger in your Opinions of my performance, sithence I am ready with my life to Iustify what I set downe; the Trueth of this Relation being War∣rented by Noble Proofes, and Testimonies not to be questioned, I am a Westerne Man, Deuonshire my Coun∣trey, and Tauestoke my place of Habitation. I know not what the Court of a King meanes,
nor what the fine Phrases of silken Courtiers are: A good Shippe I know, and a poore Cabbin, and the Language of a Cannon: And therefore, as my Breeding has bin Rough, (scorning Delica∣cy:) And my Present Being consisteth altoge∣ther vpon the Soldier, (blunt, plaine, and vnpol∣lished;) so must my Writings be, proceeding from fingers fitter for the Pike then the Pen: And so (kinde Countreymen) I pray receaue them. Neither ought you to expect better from me, because I am but the Chronicler of my owne Story. After I had seene the Beginning and End of Argeires Voyage,Argiers. I came home, somewhat more acquainted with the World, but little amended in Estate; My Body more wasted and weather-beaten, but my Purse neuer the fuller, nor my Pockets thicker lyned. Then, the Drumbe beating vp for a New Ex∣pedition, in which, many Noble Gentlemen, and Heroicall Spirits, were to venture their Honors, Liues, and Fortunes: Cables could not hold me, for away I would, and along I vowed to goe, and did so. The Dissigne opening it selfe at Sea for Cales,Cales. proude I was to be imployed There, where so many Gallants, and English Worthies, did by their Examples, encourage the Common Soldi∣er to Honorable Darings.
The Shippe I went in, was called The Conuer∣tine, (one of the Nauy Royall:) The Captaine, Thomas Portar. On the two and twentie day of October,October 22. The Fleete came to Cales. being Saterday, 1625. our Fleete came into Cales, a∣bout three of the clock in the afternoone, we be∣ing in all, some hundred and ten Sayle. The Saturday-night, some sixteene Sayle of the Hollanders, and about ten White-Hall-Men (who in England are called Colliers) were com∣manded to fight against the Castle of Puntall,Fight at Pun∣tall standing three miles from Cales, who did so ac∣cordingly, and discharged (in that Seruice) at the least one thousand sixe hundred Shott. On the Sunday morning following, the Earle of Essex going vp very early,Earle of Essex and an hower at least before vs to the Fight, commanded our Shippe (the Conuertine, being of his Squadron) to follow him: The Castle playing hard and hotly vpon his Lordship. Captaine Portar, and the Maister of our Ship,Captaine Por∣tar. (whose name is M. Hill,) hauing vpon sight of so fierce an Encounter, an equall desire to doe something worthy themselues, and their Coun∣trey, came vp so close to the Castle, as possibly Men in such a danger either could, or durst aduen∣ture, and there fought brauely: The Castle be∣stowing vpon vs a hotte salutation (and well be∣comming our approach) with Bullets; whose first Shot killd three of our Men, passing through
and through our Shippe, the second killd foure, and the third two more at least, with great spoile and battery to our Shippe: The last Shotte fly∣ing so close by Captaine Portar, that with the winde of the Bullet, his very Hands had almost lost the Sence of feeling, being struck into a sud∣daine numbnesse. Vpon this, Captaine Portar perceiuing the danger wee, and our Shippe were in, commaun∣ded a number of vs to get vpon the vpper Deck, and with our Small Shotte to try if we could force the Cannoneers from their Ordnance. Wee presently aduaunced our selues, fell close to our worke, and plyed them with Pellets; in which hotte and dangerous Seruice, one Master William Iewell,Mr. William Iewell, his Ser∣uice. behaued himselfe both Manly and like a Noble Soldier, expressing much Valour, abillity of Body, and readinesse; with whom, and some few more, I (amongst the rest) stood the brunt, which continued about three houres. Out Ship lay all this while with her Star-bord side to the Fort, who beating vs continually, with at least two hundred Muskets, whose Bul∣lets flew so thick, that our Shrowdes were torne in peices, and our Tacklings rent to nothing; and when she came off,500. Bullets in the Star-board side of our Shippe. there were to be seene fiue hundred Bullets (at the least) sticking in her side: I, for my part (without vaine glory be it spoken) discharging at this time, some threescore and ten Shotte, as they recounted to me who charged my
Peeces for me. In the heate of this Fight,Sir William Sentliger. Sir William Sent∣liger (whether cald vp by my Lord of Essex, or comming of himselfe, I know not) seeing vs so hardly besett, and that we had but few Shotte vpon our Deck, in regard of the Ene∣mies number, which played vpon vs, came with a Valient and Noble Resolution, out of another Shippe into ours, bringing some fortie Soldiers with him, who there with vs, renued a second Fight, as hotte, or hotter then the former: Where in this Fight, one of our Bullets was shotte into the mouth of a Spanish Cannon, where it sticketh fast, and putteth that Roarer to silence. Vpon this Brauery, they of the Fort began to waxe calmer, and cooler: And in the ende, most part of their Gunners being slayne, gaue ouer shooting, but yeilded not the Fort vntill night. Whilst this Skirmish continued, a company of Spaniards within the Castle, by the aduan∣tage of a Wall, whose end ietting out, they still as they discharged, retired behinde it, sauing themselues, and extreamely annoying vs; I remooued into the Fore-Castle of our Shippe, and so plyed them with Haile-shotte, that they forsooke their stand. What Men on our part were lost (by their Small Shotte) I can not well remember, but
sure I am, not very many: Yet the Spaniards afterwards, before the Gouernour of Cales, confest they lost about fifty,50 Spaniards slayne. whose Muskets they cast into a Well, because our Men should not vse them, throwing the dead Bodies in after. My Hurts and Bruises here receiued, albeit they were neither many, nor dangerous, yet were they such, that when the Fight was don, many Gentlemen in our Shippe for my encouragement, gaue me Money. During this Battaile, the Hollanders and White-Hall-Men, you must thinke, were not idle, for their Great Peices went off continu∣ally, from such of their Shippes as could con∣ueniently discharge, because our Shippe lay betweene them and the Fort; and they so closely plyed their worke, that at this Battery were discharged from the Ordnance,4000 Bullets at the Battry of the Fort. at least foure thousand Bullets. The Castle being thus quieted, (though as yet not yeilded) the Earle of Essex, about twelue at noone,Earle of Essex his Regiment Landed. landed his Regiment close by the Fort, the Spaniards looking ouer the Walles to behold them: Vpon sight of which, many of those within the Castle (to the number of sixe score) ran away;Spaniards ran from the Castle, wee pur∣suing them with showtes, hollawings, and lowde noises, and now and then a Peice of Ordnance ouertooke some of the Spanish
Hares, and stayed them from running farder. Part of our Men being thus landed, they marched vp not aboue a flight shotte off, and there rested themselues. Then about sixe at night the Castle yeilded, vpon composition,Castle of Pun∣tall yelded, to depart with their Armes, and Collours flying, and no Man to offend them; which was performed accordingly. The Captaine of the Fort, his name was Don Francisco Bustamante,Bustamante, and his Men put ouer to Port Reall. who presently vp∣on the deliuery, was carried aboard the Lord Generalls Shippe, where he had a Soldierly Welcome; And the next day, He, and all his Company were put ouer to Port Reall, vpon the mayne Land because they should not goe to Cales, which is an Iland. Monday. October 24. On the Monday,On Monday all our Forces Landed. hauing begun early in the morning, all our Forces, about noone were landed, and presently marched vp to a Bridge, betweene Puntall and Cales; In going vp to which, some of our Men were vnfortunately and vnmanly surprised, and before they knew their owne danger, had there their Throates cutte; Some hauing their Braines beaten out with the stockes of Muskets; others, their Noses sl e'd off; whilst some Heads were spurned vp & downe the Streets
like Footeballs, and some Eares worne in scorne in Spanish Hattes: For when I was in Prison in Cales, (whether some of these Spa∣nish Picaroes were brought in for flying from the Castle,) I was an eye witnesse, of English Mens Eares worne in that despightfull man∣ner. What the Forces being on Shore did, or how farre they went vp, I can not tell, for I was no Land-Soldier, and therefore all that while kept aboard: Yet about twelue of the clock, when they were marched out of sight, I (knowing that other English Men had don the like the very same day,) ventered on Shore likewise,Richard Peeke on Shore. to refresh my selfe, with my Sword only by my side, because, I thought the late stormes had beaten all the Spaniards in, and therefore feared no danger. On, therefore, I softly walked, viewing the desolation of such a Place, for I saw no body: Yet farre had I not gon from the Shore, but some English Men were come euen almost to our Shippes, and from certaine Gardens had brought with them many Oranges and Ly∣mons. The sight of these, sharpned my stomach the more to goe on, because I had a desire to pre∣sent some of those Fruites to my Captaine. Hereupon, I demanded of them, what danger there was in going? They sayd, None, but
that all was husht, and not a Spaniard stirring. We parted, they to the Shippes, I forward: And before I had reached a mile, I found (for all their talking, of no danger) Three English-Men starke dead, being slayne, lying in the way, it being full of deepe Sandy pittes, so that I could hardly finde the passage, and one, some small distance from them, not fully dead. The groanes which he vttered, led me to him; and finding him lying on his belly, I called to him, and turning him on his back, saw his woundes, and sayd; Brother, what Villaine has done this mischeife to thee? He lamented in sighes and dolefull lookes, and casting vp his eyes to Heauen, but could not speake. I then resolued (and was about it) for Christian Charities sake; and for Countries sake, to haue carried him on my back to our Shippes, farre off though they lay, and there (if by any possible meanes it could haue bin done,) to haue recouered him. But my good intents were preuented; For on a sodaine, came rushing in vpon me, a Spa∣nish-Horseman, whose Name, as afterward I was informed, was Don Iuan of Cales, a Knight; I seeing him make speedily and fiercely at me, with his drawne weapon, sud∣denly whip'd out mine, wrapping my Cloake about mine Arme: Fiue or sixe Skirmishes
wee had, and for a pretty while, fought off and on. A Fight be∣tweene a Spa∣nish Horse∣man, and an English Foot∣man.At last, I getting with much adoe, to the top of a sandy Hillock, the Horseman nimbly followed vp after; By good Fortune to me, (though bad to himselfe) he had no Petronell or Pistolls about him; and therefore clapping Spurres to his Horse sides, his intent, as it see∣med, was, with full careere to ride ouer me, and trample me vnder his Horses feete: But a Prouidence greater then his Fury, was my Guard. Time was it for me to looke about warily, and to lay about lustely, to defend a poore Life so hardly distressed: As therefore his Horse was violently breaking in vpon me, I struck him into the eyes, with a flappe of my Cloake; vpon which, turning sideward, I tooke my aduantage, and as redily as I could, stepping in, it pleased God, that I should pluck my Enemy downe,The Horse∣man dismoun∣ted. and haue him at my Mer∣cy, for Life, which notwithstanding, I gaue him; He falling on his knees, and crying out in French to me: Pardone moy le vous pree, le suis vn buon Chrestien. Pardon me Sir, I am a good Christian. I, seeing him braue, and hauing a Soldiers minde to Rifle him, I searched for Iewels, but found, onely fiue Peices of Eight about him, in all amounting to twenty Shillings English:
Yet he had Gold, but that I could not come by; For, I was in hast to haue sent his Spanish Knight-hood home on Foote, and to haue taught his Horse an English Pace. Thus farre, my Voyage for Oranges sped well, but in the end, prooued sower Sawce to me. And it is harder to keepe a Victory, then to obteyne; So, heere it fell out with mine. For, fourteene Spanish Muskatiers, spying me so busy about one of their Countrey-men, bent all the Mouthes of their Peeces to kill me, which they could not well doe, without endangering this Don Iohns life; so that I was inforced (and glad I scap'd so too) to yeild my selfe their Prisoner. True Valour (I see) goes not alwaies in good Cloathes; For, He whom before I had surprized, seeing me fast in the snare, and (as the euent prooued) disdaining that his Coun∣trey men should report him so dishonored, most basely, (when my handes were in a man∣ner bound behind me) drew out his Weapon, (which the rest had taken from me, to giue him) and wounded me through the Face,An vngentle vnworthy base Spaniard. from Eare to Eare, and had there killd me, had not the foureteene Muskatiers rescued me from his Rage. Vpon this, I was led in Triumph, into the Towne of Cales: An Owle not more won∣dred and hooted at, a Dog not more cursed.
In my beeing ledde thus along the Streets, A Flemming spying me,Wounded basely by a Flemming. cryed out alowde; Whither doe you leade this English Dogge? Kill him, kill him, hee's no Christian. And with that, breaking through the Crowde, in vpon those who held mee, ranne me into the Body with a Halbeit, at the Reynes of my Backe, at the least foure inches. A Noble Spa∣niard.One Don Fernando, an antient Gentleman, was sent downe this Summer, from the King at Madrill, with Soldiers; But before our Fleete came, the Soldiers were discharged; They of Cales, neuer suspecting that we meant to put in there. Before him, was I brought to be examined, yet few, or no questions at all, were demaun∣ded of me because, he saw I was all bloudy in my Cloathes, and so wounded in my Face and Iawes, that I could hardly speake: I was therefore committed presently to Prison, where I lay eighteene dayes: The Noble Gentleman, giuing expresse charge, that the best Surgeons should be sent for, least, being so basely hurt and handled by Cowards, I should be demanded at his hands. I being thus taken on the Monday, when I went on Shore,The Fleetes departure. the Heere departed the Fri∣day following, from Cales, at the same time when I was there a Prisoner. Yet, thus honestly was I vsed by my wor∣thy
Friend Captaine Portar; He aboue my deseruing, complayning, that he feared he had lost such a Man:The Lord Ge∣neralls loue. My Lord Generall (by the solicitation of Master Iohn Glanuile, Secretary to the Fleete) sent three Men on Shore, to en∣quire in Cales for me, and to offer (if I were taken) any reasonable Ransome: But the Towne, thinking me a better Prize then (in∣deede) I was, denyed me, and would not part from me. Then came a Command to the Teniente, or Gouernor of Cales, to haue me sent to Sherrys, (otherwise called Xerez,) lying three Leagues from Cales. Wondrous vnwilling (could I otherwise haue chosen) was I to goe to Sherry, because, I feared I should then be put to Tortures. Hauing therefore a Young man, (an Eng∣lish Man, and a Merchant,Goodrow a Merchant, Pikes Fellow Prisoner in Cales. whose Name was Goodrow,) my fellow Prisoner, who lay there for Debt: and so I thinking there was no way with me but one; (That I must bo sent pac∣king to my long home,) Thus I spake vnto him. Countrey-man, what my Name is, our Partnership in Misery hath made you know; And with it, know that I am a Deuonshire-Man borne, and Tauestock the place of my once-abiding. I beseech you, if God euer send you Liberty, and that you saile into Eng∣land,
take that Countrey in your way; Com∣mend me to my Wife and Children, made wretched by me, an infortunate Father, and Husband: Tell them, and my Friends, (I intreate you, for Gods cause) that if I be (as I suspect I shall be) put to Death in Sherris, I will dye a Christian Soldier, no way, I hope, dishonouring my King, Countrey, or the Iustice of my Cause, or my Religion. Anon after, away was I conueyed with a strong Guard,Pike Prisoner in Sherrys. by the Gouernour of Cales, and brought into Sherrys on a Thurseday, about twelue at night. On the Sunday following, two Friers were sent to me, (both of them being Irish Men, and speaking very good English;Two Friers sent to Con∣fesse him.) One of them was caled Padre Iuan, (Father Iohn.) After a sad and graue Salutation; Brother (quoth he) I come in Loue to you, and Charity to your Soule, to Confesse you: And if to vs, (as your Spirituall Ghostly Fathers) you will lay open your Sinnes, wee will forgiue them, and make your way to Heauen, for to morrow you must dye. I desired them, that they would giue me a little respite, that I might retire into a priuate Chamber, and instantly I would repaire to them, and giue them satisfaction: Leaue I had; Away I went, and imediately returned: They asked me, if I had yet resolued, and whe∣ther
I would come to Confession: I told them, I had been at Confession already: One of them demaunded, with whome? I answe∣red, with God the Father: And with nobody else (sayd the other?) Yes, (quoth I,Pike at Con∣fession, but with no Friers) and with Iesus Christ, my Redeemer, who hath both power and will, to forgiue all Men their Sinnes, that truely Repent; Before these Two, haue I falne on my knees, and Confest my grieuous offences, and trust, they will giue me a free Absolution, and Pardon. What thinke you of the Pope? sayd Father Iohn: I answered, I knew him not: They, here∣upon, shaking their heads, told me, they were sorry for me, and so departed. Whilst thus I lay in Sherrys,The Captaine of the Fort a Prisoner. the Captaine of the Fort (Don Francisco Bustamente) was brought in, Prisoner for his Life, because he deliuered vp the Castle; but whether he dyed for it, or no, I cannot tell. My day of Triall being come, I was brought from Prison,Duke of Me∣dina, D. of Macada,D. Ferdinando, Giron, Mar∣quesse De Al∣quenezes, &c. into the Towne of Sherrys, by two Drumbes, and a hundred Shotte, before three Dukes, foure Condes, or Earles, foure Marquesses, besides other great Persons; the towne hauing in it, at least, fiue thousand Soldiers. At my first appearing before the Lordes, my Sword lying before them on a Table, the Duke of Medina asked me if I knew that Wea∣pon;
It was reached to me; I tooke it, and embraced it in mine armes, and with teares in mine eyes, kist the Pomell of it. He then de∣maunded, how many Men I had kild with that Weapon? I told him, if I had kild One, I had not bene there now, before that Prince∣ly Assembly, for when I had him at my foote, begging for Mercy, I gaue him life, yet he, then very poorely, did me a mischiefe: Then they asked Don Iohn (my Prisoner) what Woundes I gaue him; He sayd, none: Vpon this he was rebuked, and told; That if vpon our first Encounter, he had run me through, it had beene a faire and Noble Triumph; but so to wound me, being in the hands of others, they held it Base. Questions by the Spaniards.Then sayd the Duke of Medyna to me; Come on English-Man, What Shippe came you in? I told him, The Conuertine: Who was your Captaine? Captaine Portar: What Ordnance carryed your Shippe? I sayd, forty Peices. But the Lords looking all this while on a Paper, which they held in their hands: Duke Medyna sayd, In their Note, there was but thirty eight. In that Paper (as after I was informed, by my two Irish Interpreters) there was set downe, the Number of our Shippes, their Burden, Men, Munition, Victuall, Cap∣taines, &c. as perfect, as wee our selues had
them in England. Of what Strength (quoth an other Duke) is the Fort at Plymouth? I answered, very Strong: What Ordnance in it? Fifty sayd I: That is not so, sayd he, there is but seuenteene: How many Soldiers are in the Fort? I answe∣red, two hundred: That is not so, (quoth a Conde) there is but twenty. Marquesse Alquenezes asked me, Of what strength the little Iland was before Plymouth? I told him, I knew not: Then (quoth he) wee doe. Is Plymouth a Walled Towne? Yes my Lords: And a good Wall? Yes sayd I, a ve∣ry good Wall: True, sayd a Duke, to leape ouer with a Staffe. And hath the Towne, sayd the Duke of Medyna, strong Gates? Yes: But, quoth he, there was neither Wood nor Iron to those Gates, but two dayes before your Fleete came away. Now, before I goe any farther, let me not forget to tell you, that my two Irish Confes∣sors, had been heere in England the last Sum∣mer, & when our Fleete came from England, they came for Spaine; Hauing seene our King at Plymouth, when the Soldiers there shewed their Armes, and did then diligently obserue what the King did, and how he car∣ried himselfe. How chance (sayd Duke Giron) did you not
in all this Brauery of the Fleete take Cales, as you tooke Puntall? I replyed, that the Lord Generall might easily haue taken Cales, for he had neere a thousand Scaling Ladders to set vp, and a thousand Men to loose; but he was loath to rob an Almeshouse, hauing a better Market to goe to: Cales, I told them, was held Poore, Vnmand, and Vnmunitio∣ned: What better Market, sayd Medyna? I told him, Genoa, or Lisbone, and as I heard, there was instantly, vpon this, an Army of sixe thousand Soldiers sent to Lisbone. Then, quoth one of the Earles, when thou meetst me in Plymouth, wilt thou bid me wel∣come? I modestly told him, I could wish, they would not too hastely come to Ply∣mouth, for they should finde it another man∣ner of place, then as now they sleight it. Many other Questions were put to me by these great Dons, which so well as God did enable me, I answered, they speaking in Spa∣nish, and their words interpreted to me, by those two Irish Men before spoken of, who al∣so relate my seuerall answers to the Lords. And by the common People, who encom∣past me round, many ieerings, mockeries, scornes, and bitter iestes, were to my face throwne vpon our Nation, which I durst not so much as bite my lippe against, but with an inforced patient eare stood still, and let them
runne on in their Reuilings. At the length, amongst many other repro∣ches, and spightfull Names, one of the Spani∣ardes called English Men Gallinas, (Hennes;) At which, the great Lordes fell a laughing: Herevpon, one of the Dukes (poynting to the Spanish Soldiers,) bid me note how their King kept them; And indeed, they were all won∣derous braue in Apparell, Hattes, Bandes, Cuffes, Garters, &c, and some of them in Chaines of Gold: And asked farther, If I thought these would prooue such Hennes as our English, when next yeare they should come into England? I sayd no: But being somewhat imboldned by his merry Counte∣nance, I told him as merily, I thought they would be within one degree of Hennes: What meanst thou by that, sayd a Conde? I reply∣ed, they would prooue Pullets, or Chickens. Darst thou then (quoth Duke Medyna, with a brow halfe angry) fight with one of these Spanish Pullets. O my Lord, sayd I, I am a Prisoner, and my Life at Stake, and therefore dare not be so bold to aduenture vpon any such Action: There were heere of vs English, some foure∣teene Thousand, in which Number, there were aboue twelue Thousand, better, & stou∣ter Men then euer I shall be; Yet, with the licence of this Princely Assembly, I dare ha∣zard
the breaking of a Rapier; And withall, told him, Hee was vnworthy the Name of an English Man, that should refuse to Fight with one Man of any Nation whatsoeuer. Here∣vpon, my Shackells were knockt off, and my Iron Ring and Chayne taken from my Neck. Roome was made for the Combatants, Rapier and Dagger the Weapons:A Fight be∣tweene Peeke, & a Spaniard. A Spanish Champion presents himselfe, Named Signior Tiago; When after wee had played some rea∣sonable good time, I disarmed, him as thus. I caught his Rapier betwixt the Barres of my Poniard, and there held it, till I closed in with him, and tripping vp his Heeles, I tooke his Weapons out of his hands, and deliuered them to the Dukes. I could wish, that all you, my deere Coun∣trey-men, who reade this Relation, had either bin there, without danger, to haue be∣held vs; Or, that He with whome I fought, were heer in Person, to iustifie the issue of that Combat. I was then demaunded, If I durst Fight a∣gainst an other? I told them, my heart was good to aduenture; but humbly requested them, to giue me pardon, if I refused. For, to my selfe I too well knew, that the Spaniard is Haughty, Impatient of the least af∣front; And when he receiues but a Touch of any Dishonor, Disgrace, or Blemish, (especi∣ally
in his owne Countrey, and from an Eng∣lish Man,) his Reuenge is implacable, mortall, and bloudy. Yet being by the Noblemen, pressed agen, and agen, to try my Fortune with an other, I (seeing my Life in the Lyons paw, to strug∣gle with whome for safety, there was no way but one, and being afrayd to displease them,) sayd, That if their Graces, and Greatnesses, would giue me leaue to play at mine Owne Countrey Weapon, called the Quarter-Staffe, I was then ready there, an Opposite, a∣gainst any Commer, whome they would call foorth; and would willingly lay downe my Life before those Princes, to doe them Ser∣uice; prouided, my Life might by no foule meanes be taken from me. Herevpō, the head of a Halbert, which went with a Screw, was taken off, and the Steall deliuered to me; the other But-end of the Staffe hauing a short Iron Pike in it: This was my Armor, and in my place I stood, expecting an Opponent. At the last,The Quarter-Staffe against three Rapiers. a hansome and well Spirited Spaniard steps foorth, with his Rapier and Po∣niard: They asked me, what I sayd to Him? I told them, I had a sure Friend in my hand, that neuer failed me, and therefore made little account of that One to play with, and should shew them no Sport.
Then, a Second (Arm'd as before) presents himselfe: I demanded, if there would come no more? The Dukes asked, how many I de∣sired? I told them, any number vnder Sixe: Which resolution of mine, they smiling at, in a kind of scorne, held it not Manly, (it see∣med,) nor fit for their owne Honors, and Glo∣ry of their Nation, to worry one Man with a Multitude; and therefore appointed Three onely, (so Weapond) to enter into the Listes. Now Gentlemen, if here you condemne mee, for plucking (with mine owne hands) such an assured danger, vpon mine owne head; Accept of these Reasons for excuse. To dye, I thought it most certaine, but to dye basely, I would not: For Three to kill One, had bin to Mee no Dishonor; To Them (Weapons considered,) no Glory; An Ho∣norable Subiection, I esteemed better, then an Ignoble Conquest. Vpon these Thoughts, I fell to it. The Rapier Men trauerst their ground, I, mine; Dangerous Thrusts were put in, and with dangerous hazard auoyded: Showtes ecchoed to Heauen, to encourage the Spani∣ards; Not a shoute, nor Hand, to hearten the poore English Man; Onely, Heauen I had in mine Eye, the Honor of my Countrey in my Heart, my Fame at the Stake, my Life on a narrow Bridge, and Death both before me
and behind me. It was not now a time to dally, they still made full at me; And I had beene a Coward to my Selfe, and a Villane to my Nation, if I had not called vp all that weake Manhood which was mine, to guard my owne Life, and ouerthrow my Enemies. Plucking vp therefore a good heart, seeing my selfe faint and wearied, I vowed to my Soule, to doe something, ere she departed from me: And so setting All vpon One Cast, It was my Good Fortune (it was my God did it for Mee) with the But-end where the Iron Pike was, to Kill one of the Three; and within a few Boutes after, to Disarme the other two, causing the One of them to fly into the Ar∣mie of Soldiers then present, and the Other for refuge fled behind the Bench. I hope, if the brauing Spaniards set vpon England (as they threaten,) we shall euery One of vs, giue the repulse to more then Three; Of which good Issue for the Publique, I take this my Priuate successe to be a Pledge. Now was I in greater Danger, being (as I thought) in Peace, then before, when I was in Battaile: For, a generall Murmure filled the Ayre, with Threatnings at me; the Soldiers especially bit their thumbes, and how was it possible for me to scape? Which, the Noble Duke of Medina Sidenia
seeing, called me to him, and instantly caused Proclamation to be made,The braue minde of Medina. that none, on paine of death, should meddle with mee; And by his Honorable Protection, I got off; And not off, onely with Safety, but with Money. For by the Dukes and Condes, were giuen me in Gold, to the value of foure Pounds tenne Shillings sterling; and by the Marquesse Al∣quenezes himselfe, as much; He embracing me in his Armes, and bestowing vpon me, that long Spanish Russet Cloake I now weare, which he tooke from one of his Mens backs; And withall, furnished me with a cleane Band and Cuffes; It being one of the greatest Fa∣uours, a Spanish Lord can doe to a meane Man, to reward him with some Garment, as recompence of Merrit. After our Fight in Sherris, I was kept in the Marquesse Alquenezes House, who one day (out of his Noble affability) was pleasant in speech with me; And by my Interpreter, desi∣red I would Sing: I willing to obey him (whose goodnesse I had tasted,) did so, and sung this Psalme: When as we sate in Babilon, &c. The meaning of which being told, he saide to me, English Man, comfort thy selfe, for thou art in no Captiuity. After this, I was sent to the King of Spaine, lying at Madrill;Peeke sent to the K ng at Madrill. My Conduct being foure Gentlemen of the Marquesse Alquenezes; He
allowing vnto me, in the Iourney, twenty Shillings a day when wee Trauelled, and ten Shillings a day when we lay still. At my being in Madrill, before I saw the King; My Entertainement (by the Marquesse Alquenezes appointment,) was at his owne House, where I was lodged in the most sump∣tuous Bedde that euer I beheld; and had from his Noble Lady, a Welcome farre aboue my poore deseruing but worthy the Greatnesse of so excellent a Woman; She bestowing vp∣on me, whilst I lay in her House a very faire Spanish Shirt, richly Laced, and at my parting from Madrill, a Chayne of Gold, and two Ie∣wells for my Wife, and other pretty Thinges for my Children. And now that her Noble Courtesies toge∣ther, with my owne Thankefullnes,A Noble Spa∣nish Lady. leade me to speake of this Honorable Spanish Lady; I might very iustly be condemned of Ingrati∣tude, if I should not remember, with like ac∣knowledgement, another rare Patterne of Fe∣minine goodnes, to me, a distressed, misera∣ble Stranger: And that was, the Lady of Don Iohn of Cales; She,Another. out of a Respect she bare me, for sauing her Husbands Life, came along with him to Sherrys, He being there to giue in Euidence against me; And as before, when I lay Prisoner in Cales, so in Sherrys, she often relieued me with Money, and other Meanes;
My Duty and Thankes euer wayte vpon them Both. Vpon Christmas-day, I was Presented to the King, the Queene, and Don Carolo the Infante. Being brought before him, I fell (as it was fitt) on my Knees: Many Questions were de∣manded of me, which so well as my plaine witte directed me, I resolued. In the end, his Maiesty offered me a Yearely Pention, (to a good Vallew) if I would Serue him, eyther at Land or at Sea; For which his Royall Fauors, I confessing my selfe infinite∣ly Bound, and my Life indebted to his Mercy, most humbly intreated, that with his Prince∣ly Leaue, I might be suffered to returne into mine owne Countrey, being a Subiect onely to the King of England, my Souereigne. And besides that Bond of Allegiance, there was another Obligation, due from me, to a Wife and Children; And therefore, most sub∣missiuely beg'd, that his Maiesty would be so Princely minded, as to pitty my Estate, and to let me goe: To which he at last granted; Be∣stowing vpon me, one hundred Pistoletts, to beare my Charges. Hauing thus left Spaine, I tooke my way through some part of France; Where, by occasion, happening into Company of seuen Spaniards, their Tongues were too lauish in
Speeches against our Nation; Vpon which, some high words flying vp and downe the Roome, I leaped from the Table, and drew. One of the Spaniards did the like (none of the rest being Weaponed, which was more then I knew.) Vpon the noise of this Bustling, two Eng∣lish Men more came in, Who vnderstanding the Abuses offered to our Countrey, the (Spaniards in a short time, Recanted on their Knees) their Rashnesse. And so hoysing Saile for England; I Lan∣ded on the three and twenty day of Aprill, 1626. at Foy in Cornewall. And thus endeth my Spanish Pilgrimage: With thankes to my good God, that in this extraordinany Manner preserued me, amidst these desperate Dangers. Therefore most gratious God, (Defender of Men abroad, and Protector of them at home,) How am I bounden to thy Diuine Maiestie, for thy manifold Mercies? On my Knees I thanke thee, with my Tongue I will praise thee, with my Handes Fight in thy Quarrell, and all the daies of my Life serue thee.
Out of the Red-Sea, I haue escaped; From the Lyons Den, bin deliuered; I rescued from Death, and snatcht out of the Iawes of De∣struction, onely by Thee, O my God; Glory be to thy Name, for euer, and euer. Amen.
Certaine Verses, VVritten by a Friend, in Comendations of the Author Richard Peeke. SEldome doe Clowdes so dimne the day, But Sol will once his Beames display: Though Neptune driues the surging Seas, Sometimes he giues them quiet ease; And so few Proiects speed so ill, But somewhat chaunceth at our will. I will not instance in the Great, Placed in Honors higher Seate; Though Vertue in a Noble Line Commnds i, and the more doth shine: Yet this is procu'd by Sword and Pen, Desert oft dwells in priuate Men. My proofe is not farre hence to seeke, There is at hand braue Richard Peeke, Whose worth his Foes cannot reuoke, Borne in the Towne of Tauystoke In Deuon, where Minerua sitts Shaping stoute Hearts, and pregnant Witts.
This well resolu'd and hardy Sparke, Ayming at Fame, as at a Marke, Was not compell'd against his will, In Mars his field to try his skill: As Voluntary he did goe, To serue his King against his Foe. If he had pleas'd, he might haue spent His daies at home, in safe content: But nurcing Valour in his brest, He would aduenture with the Best, Willing to shed his dearest blood, To doe his Prince, and Countrey good. Thus bent, he adding Winges to Feete, Departed with the English Fleete: There was no rub, nor stay at all, The Shipps saild with a pleasant Gale: In setting forth they by their hap, Seem'd lul'd in Amphitrites lap. At length they did arriue at Cales, Where restles Peeke against the Walles Made fouresccore Shot towards the Shore, Making the Welkyn wide to rore: He kept his standing in this strife, Setting a straw by losse of life. Into a Vineyard afterward He marcht, and stood vpon his guard; There he an Horse-man did dismount, By outward port of good account: But did on him compassion take, And spar'd his life for pitties sake.
The next assault, vneuen he felt, For with twelue Spaniards he dealt At once, and held them lusty play, Vntill through odds, theirs was the day: From eare to eare they pearc'd his head, And to the Towne him Captiue led. In Prison they him shut by night, Loaden with Chaines of greiuous waight, All comfortlesse in Dungion deepe, Where Stench annoyes, and Vermines creepe: He grouel'd in this loathsome Cell, Where gastly frights and horrors dwell. Yet nothing could his courage quaile, Hunger, nor thirst, nor wound, nor Iayle: For being brought before a Don, And askt, Why England did set on A scraping, not a pecking Hen? He answer'd, staine not English-men. That England is a Nation stoute, And till the last will fight it out: My selfe could prooue by Chiualrie, If for a Captiue this were free: Why, (quoth the Duke) darst thou to fight With any of my Men in fight? Of thousands whom in Warre you vse, Not one (quoth Peeke) doe I refuse: A chosen Champion then there came, Whose heeles he tript, as at a game, And from his Hand his Rapier tooke, Presenting it vnto the Duke.
Then three at once did him oppose, They Rapiers, he a long Staffe chose, The vse whereof so well he knowes, He conquerd them with nimble blowes: One that beside him playd his round, He threw as dead vnto the ground. The Noble Duke who this did see, Commended Peeke, and set him free; He gaue him Guifts, and did commaund That none should wrong him in their Land; So well he did him entertayne, And sent him to the Court of Spayne. There he was fed with no worse meate, Then which the King himselfe did eate; His Lodging rich, for he did lie In furniture of Tapestrie: The King what of him he had heard, Did with his Treasure well reward. Our then Ambassador was there, Peekes Pike and praise he doth declare: At Spanish Court whiles he attends, He thriues for Vertues sake: as Friends Foes sent him in triumphant sort Home from a Foe and Forreigne Port. If thus his very Foes him lou'd, And Deeds against themselues aproou'd; How should his Friends his loue embrace, And yeild him countenance and grace? The praise and worth how can we cloke Of manly Peeke of Tauystoke? FINIS. J. D.
