19626 99847196 12219
¶An excelent com∣fort to all Christians, against all kinde of calamities: No lesse comfortable, then pleasant, pithy, and profita∣ble: Compendiously compiled by Iohn Perez, a faithfull seruant of god, a Spaniard (in Spanish) and now tran∣slated into English by Iohn Daniel, of Clements Inne, with diuers ad∣dicions by him collected and therevnto annexed. ❧MARKE. XIII. ¶ All men shall abhorre you for my names sake (sayth Christ) but he that endureth to the ende shalbe saued. Perused and alowed. AT LONDON. Printed by Thomas East, for William Norton: The .ix day of August. An. Do. 1576.
blazon or coat of arms SCENTIA EIVS MVNDVS TRANSIT ET CONCVPI 157 O thanckes be geuen to God our Lord, that of his grace hath geuen: A key for vs to ope the lock and let vs into Heauen.
TO THE RIGHT reuerend Edmonde by the diuine grace of the deitie, Archbi∣shop of Canterburie, Primate of Eng∣lande, and Metrapolitane of the same: Grace and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Iesus &c. REmēbring my selfe (right Reuerend) of the cōiunc∣tion or knitting togither of the members in one perfect body, and finding that by the health some health that is had in eue∣rie of them, they haue the greater ioy togither vvith their head, and so plūged in mule of the same, I called to mind the maimed & bruised bodie of Iesus Christ (vvhereof vve all are members) And vvhen I had vvel considered the goodnes of almigh∣tie God our purest and principallest Phisiti∣on, & seene that he had ministred such me∣dicine therevnto, as made suche true health so flantingly to florish in so many and such a number of the members thereof, I vvas moued to an exceeding delight: And as one delight oftentimes bringeth in an other, so did it happē vnto me, bicause of the perfect health and soundnesse (vvhich I assured my
self of by faith) that I vvith all the rest shuld see in the end, to come and be vppon euerie perfect limme, of the sayde spirituall bodie, from the head to the foote. But vvhen I had perused and perfectly beheld, hovv our most mercifull father vvas glorified, in that Sodo∣mitticall countrey, so sinfull a sincke of sin, the countrey of Spayne, by so faithfull a fel∣lovv as vvas and is the Aucthor of this my trauaile, in vvhom so valiantly the fountain of faith dyd flovve, I vvas vvholy rauyshed vvith ioyes: But as the foote helpeth the left hand, the left hande the right hande, and so all togither do help their head: Euen so I an inferior member, thought it good to pertici∣pate parcell of these my ioyes vnto your grace: vvhom I knovv to be a principal mē∣ber in Christes churche for a certaintie. I could declare vvherein if Ars Adulandi, had not abhorred me, vvhom also I haue ben al∣vvayes at defiance vvith. But he needeth not heere, for that it hath pleased the almightie Iehouah that self sayd Phisitiō so to encrease your spirituall health, that suche like fruite hath so corespōdently proceeded, as by fame hath bene manifested to many: and especi∣ally in that it hath pleased hym the foun∣tayne of all goodnesse, so to blase your faithfulnesse to the Queenes most excelent maiesty, that hir highnes setting you in that self same seate, which your grace (vnder God and hir excelencie) now sitteth & possesseth most worthily, your perfectnes is made ma∣nifest to all. I am sure that some amongst
such a multitude as shall & wil scan my do∣ings herein, will accompt me fond, rude, and prodigally presumptuous, bicause that I (so simple) haue taken vppon me to present my selfe vnto your grace, with this so vvorthie a vvorke so rudely translated and penned: and so esteeme the lesse thereof bicause it is done by me, vvho of late (vvhilest mine exhibition lasted) did studie the commō lavves of Eng∣land, & say by me as I haue heard a number of them say by others the professors of true religion: Lo, behold I pray you, heere is to bee seene a sedicious sovver of errors in the church, he vvas of late a student at the lavv, a lustie youth, and novv for lacke of lyuing hee is become a clavvebacke amongest the heritikes & a prating protestant, (as though it vvere not possible for a youth, or a student at the lavv to be a true professor of christian religion) although that a great number of Lavvyers be obstinate Papistes (the more is the pittie) yet thankes be to God, a many of them (to small) are verie zealous of the true Religion (In Clements Inne the most parte are) But for an ansvvere to all suche as shall thus impudētly defame me, I say as follovv∣eth. Am I fonde doe they say, bycause I haue dedicated it to your grace, no surely: for vvhie, I am vvell aduised and doe knovv that you vvill accept it in good parte, for that I haue seene and marked very vvell, euer sithēs your G. comming to the Bishoprick of Lon∣don, hovve that all the enimies to idlenesse and vice (or as many as you knevv) vvere ad∣uanced,
and for the contrary the louers ther∣of and abhorrors of vertuous exercise, vvere supressed. Your setting forth of vertue, and punishing of vice hath much moued mee to looke vppon my self, and made me to forget that braine sicke and that lewde rule of lyfe vvhich I haue ledde in the company of some of those that vvil so play the gnatoes against me behinde my backe: and hath altogither moued me to this enterprise. I (though rude) haue not done it vppon any point of prody∣gall presumption, but most humblie haue I done it, bending my selfe with all humilitie to a bide the gentle correction of your grace, if in any thing I haue offēded therby (vvhich my hope is I haue not) And although I bee poore, doe lacke the vvorldes goodes to lyue vvith all, and therefore doe novv and then a∣bide the bitternesse of the crosse of pouertie, yet what then, it hath not made me a clavv∣backe of heritickes. A clavvbacke I abhorre, and so I doe an heriticke also: the vvant of liuing, I thanke God for, if it vvere his plea∣sure I shuld haue it, he hath inough for me, I seeke not for it by flatterie, neyther am I a flatterer. And agayne, I knovv that by so ho∣nest a qualitie, so godly an exercise as this is, there is verie little to be gottē of the vvorld, or of any of the ministers therof: as of late I proued by dedicating of a small translation out of Spanishe (as this was) to the Lorde Maior, and maiestrates of the Citie of Lon∣don, it is intituled a generall pardon for sin,
it vvas vvell vvorthie to be receiued, and so it vvas of a certaine of the chiefest of them, and I cōtented thervvith: but yet there vvere some, that vvhen I vvas so readie to deliuer it, they vvere as slovv to receiue it, and had as little leysor as those vvhich are spoken of by Christ in the xiiij. Chapter of S. Luke: they vvere so busied vvith buying and assu∣ring of lande, of farmes, of yokes of Oxen, vvith marying of vviues, & vvith vsurie, that they had no leysure to loke vppō my booke, nor yet to giue me God a mercie, and much lesse any part of their pursse for my paynes, but haue rather hated me euersithens. The vvhich hath not made me to think to gaine any vvorldly liuing to enrich my selfe heere∣by, neither haue I done it to please heritikes vvith all, nor yet doe I think that my profes∣sion herein is herisie: for vvhy I am sure that heritikes vvill be angrie vvith me for it: And as for the booke I vvill iustifie it vvith and against all Baalits, that vvill any vvay backe∣bite me therefore) to be true and perfect re∣ligion (vnder your graces correction) accor∣ding to the truth & true meaning of Christ our head. And as for the name of a protestāt (though not a pratling protestant) I am very glad to beare it at theyr hands: for in deed, I do protest & before god do vtterly abādō & forsake the diuil and all his vvorks as I haue professed in my baptisme: and also I do pro∣test, forsake, and (by the helpe of God) for euer doe renoūce Antichrist & all his mem∣bers vvith all their diuilish doctrine and de∣lusions:
in such sort that if (as S. Paule saith) my soule bee not ouersoone desolued from my bodie, by the grace and fauour of God I vvill compyle and translate togither greater volums, notvvithstanding that the dispite of my backebiting enimies bee neuer so great. And yet surely there be these and suche lyke coūterbuffetings of Sathan, as are sufficient (if the strength of Gods spirit vvere not) to discourage mee, and one cause is amongest the rest, for that heere in England, vvee are grovven to be lyke vnto the children of Isra∣ell, they did loath & abhorre Māna, a most precious foode sent them dovvne from hea∣en: and vve doe begin to loath the diuini∣tie of the scriptures, as svveet a foode for our soules sent vs from the same place: so as the vvryters of diuinitie can scarce obtayne to haue their coppies printed: for vvhy, the prin¦ting of paganicall histories & toyes to mock Apes vvith all, are more profitable vnto the printer tovvardes hys charges, then are the bookes of godly instruction, suche is the va∣nitie of vs, the Lorde for hys mercyes sake a∣mend it, and graunt your grace some polli∣ticke deuyce to redresse it if it bee possyble. Amen. It may be, novv that I haue made this an∣swere, to these and such lyke good fellowes as I haue before spoken off: that they vvill assalt me a freshe and saye, that I haue spent this trauayle for an other purpose, and that is, bycause I would shewe my skill, and so
finde falte with mee, for that I haue vsed no more eloquence. But yet they are deceyued, I haue not done it to any such ende, bicause I haue it not. I want the eloquēce of Tullie,A God of the Poets fayning. and the helpe of Mercurie the God of that Arte: And againe wee neede none of them not their helps herein, for that a professor of diuinity ought to speak properly & not elo∣quently. And also it is not skil but good will that bringeth men vnto God. And therefore they that shal say, that I haue don it for any of those causes doe mee great wrong. I haue don it for three other causes, which is to say, for pollicy, loue, & hope: for policy, bicause I haue seen proued by experiēce, that he which is a weak Soldier, speedeth best vnder the en∣feign or bāner of the best, strōgest, & valyan∣test Captaine: I thought it good to play the lyke part, and so to shroud my self vnder the banner of your Graces protection, thynkyng thereby to be sufficiently armed at proofe, to defende my selfe from the worst that eyther Zoylus, Momus, or Baalit,Rom. 12.13. 1. Cor. 13. Ephe. 5. Iohn. 15. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Ioh. 3.4. with all theyr companie can doe to mee. For loue, bycause of the exhortations that the Apostles Paule, Peter, & Iohn, haue in diuers places of theyr Epistles, incited me vnto: S. Iohn in the first Epistle and the third Chapter, after that hee had strongly perswaded that we should loue in veritie, & not in words, said: that vvhoso∣euer hath this vvorldes goods, and seeth hys brother haue need, & doth shut vp his com∣passion from him, hath not (& is vvithout)
the loue of God in hym. I haue none other riches, wherfore I thought it good to bestow and distribute this amōg my bretheren, tru∣sting they wil take it in good part. For hope, bicause I am persvvaded that your grace vvil so vvell like of the booke, that my hope is I shall be greatly incouraged, so vvell to spend time heereafter, that in all godly doinges I shal reape the commoditie of so godly a pa∣tron. And that although my vvell doing bee not so vvel as I vvish, yet that your grace vvil say for mee, in magnis et voluisse sat est. And thus bicause you should not say vnto me, ne quid nimis, I vvill grovve to an ende: And though I haue not nor cā not so purely pol∣lish it as I wold, yet what thē, I do not dout but that it vvilbe vttered vvel inough, bicause vino vendibili suspensa hedera nihil opus, vvher∣fore I doe fully finish. Praying, you of your gracious pardō for my tedious rudenes, and that it may please God to graūt you as much ioy, and felicitie as may be vvished to any, the true teaching of the scriptures, the loue and fauour of God and our most gracious Queene, long life, prosperous successe in all your graces affaires. And after the change of this life the greatest happines of all, which is life euerlasting. Amen. The .ix. day of Au∣gust. ¶ Your graces most humbly to serue obediently, Iohn Danyell. Egroto dum anima, spes est.
❧To the Reader. MY mazed mynde (O friendly Reader) is so fearfull yt I am halfe afrayde to let you sée this my finyshed tra∣uaile: not for that I haue any doubt of your ioyfull recey∣uing of the same, bicause I know the title therof, will draw you to the per∣using of it thorow out: the which don, I presume it will be ye rather excep∣ted and deteined, in especially of such as be or haue bene afflicted with any kynd of the crosses of Christ whatso∣euer. Bicause yt any such a one, should finde great profite therby: for why, in déed it is an excelent comfort against any kynd of calamitie. But surely if it happen into the hands of some such as I know: it wil be estéemed euē as pearle among swyne, & so to be com∣pelled eyther to frye in the fyre, or els to rotte vppon the donghell. This (gentle Reader) is the cause of my feare: for that in the translatyng of it, I dyd fynde so precyous a
Iewel therof as for a certeintie, if I should by fortune sée it so euilly in∣treated, it would bryng mée into an excéeding griefe & collor for the same: the cause why, is for that I am in a merueylous loue therewith, for the great profit I haue had therby. This tyme twelue moneth by the greate goodnesse of God, I was visited with a gréeuous sicknes, the which (as ma∣ny a one can tell) did tye and compell me to kéepe my bed and chamber viij. or ix. wéekes, I had read this booke in Spanish diuers times before, and had begunne to translate a parte thereof, the which, with the whole matter (deare friendes) in the booke contay∣ned, was no small pleasure for mée to remember: Surely it was my excée∣ding comfort. I vowed then to finish the translation therof, the which now I thanke God is done & ended, with a generall publication therof among you: beséeching you and euerie of you to whose handes it shall come, to per∣vse it diligētly ouer, that ye may per∣fectly haue the same in mynde, so that
if néed be, you may therby receiue cō∣solation, & answere in my behalfe a∣gainst as many as shall reprooue mée in myne absence for my trauail ther∣in. I am sure that some will reprooue me and say, quam quisque norit artem, in hac se exerceat, let euerie man exercyse him selfe in the arte or facultie which he knoweth, Sed stultus stulta loquitor, but a foole speaketh foolish things. And therfore as one that passeth not great∣ly what be sayd against me by any of them, I doe banish all feare and waxe sturdie, considering that Audaces fortu∣na Iuuat, fortune helpeth men of good courage, for Timidi nunquam Statuerunt ad tropheum, cowerdes neuer got vic∣torie. And therefore as one thus im∣boldened, I rest to abyde the batterie of any assalter whatsoeuer, trustyng of your ayde as necessitie requyreth, the which if I haue, you make me yet more boulder to gyue a greater at∣tempt. Thus fare ye well. Iohn Daniell.
Faultes escaped in the printing. Leafe lyne page fault. Correction. 7 9 1 Ioquitor Ioquitur 14. 16 2 not our selues we our selues, 15 20 2 satissie satisfie, 16 24 2 know knew, 18. 11 2 is mercy, his mercy, 36. 14 2 see him, see in him. eodem 27   vnhappie happie, 40. 3 2 tosse, toase, 50. 5 1 as vs, 52. 9 1 dootst dooest, 57 8 1 we depriued we be depriued, 87 6 2 captiuitie, captiuate, 110 8 1 tryed, tiered 112 6 2 so to be poped so all to be poped, 113. 6 1 masters, master 215. 25 1 were are 128 6 1 we die it die 132. 2 2 by their by the 134 10 2 deserneth, deserueth, 137 17 2 blasphemie blasphemors, 142 23 1 Hrophet, prophet, eodem 20 2 cares, cares from vs 145 5 2 triant, tirant, 148 22 2 perisheth, perished, 152 11 1 also, and also, 153 20 1 There is, (we be not ignorant of that) which is superfluous bicause it is printed twise. 154 9 1 doeth he, he doeth, 155 27 2 sodaine, so disdaine, 157 10 2 sheetes, sheates, 158 3 1 byause, bicause, 159 14 1 Membrothe, Nembrothe, eodem 5 2 much, is much, 160 2 1 to the Israelits his Israelits,
The Argument of the Booke. THe Aucthor heereof was a Spanyard, and liued in Spaine a coūtrey of great persecutiō, by the spirit of God he did rightly vnderstand the scriptures, bee∣ing greatly persecuted, hee doeth verie diuinely comfort hym selfe, giuing heereby the lyke vnto others in any kinde of calamitie, ex∣horting therwith patience, and doeth proue that patience bringeth experience, and that experi∣ence bringeth hope, and so loue &c. with a con∣clusion that great blessednesse is the ende of all. Also he doth expresse by shadowes, diuers kindes of cruelties practised by diuers Tyrants in par∣ties beyond the Seas: with a plaine declaration of the constancie of diuers Martirs, that haue dyed by many kindes of death, truely testified by aucthoritie sufficient, so comfortable & delight∣full as is possible. &c. In Mundo in coelis in perpetuisque tenebris est labor est requies et sunt sine fine dolores hunc fer, vt hanc speres illos conamene vites. G. R.
¶Of the wyll of God, an entry into the comfort, with a per∣swasion to know the will of God perfectly. The first Chapter. THe grace and peace of God our father, and of our Lorde Iesus Christ, be with you al that trust in his mer∣cy, and that call vpon him with a pure hart, desire his com∣ming, and the setting forth of his glo∣ry. By the which may it please him to comfort vs all, and to geue vs strēgth by ye vertue of his holy spirit, againste all the common temptacions, that we (which are partakers of his reconsili∣ation) are afflicted with in this world.1. Peter . &. 1.9.10. For that by thē we might not be dis∣couraged, but rather made constant til the end, in the grace yt god hath geuen vs to know his sonne Iesus Christe for the aucthour of our saluacion:Hebr. 7. &. 25. and
euerlasting aduocat before his diuine maiestie, bicause we might haue by his onely rightuousnes, a firme & sure hope, to enioy wholly ye eternall inhe∣ritāce, promised to all those which are sātified by the word of trueth. Amen. 1. Cor. 10, &. 13,God is so faithful that he wil suffer nothing to touch vs, without his ex∣presse wil,Math. 10. &, 29 30.31 Psal. 113, & 4.5, whose potēcy & might, is wt∣out any determinate ende, equal with his wil, for that he may & can all yt he will, & wil nothing that doth not serue for his honour & glory,Rom. 8. & 17, 29, & for ye helth of his chosen, which maketh yt al things how aduersse so euer they be, do serue vs for our helth,Collo. 1. &. 18, Ephes. 1. &, 22. welth, & prosperitie. And for ye god hath giuen vs of his cle∣mēcy Iesus Christ his sonne to be our head, & made vs all mēbres of his holy body, it is not possible (so being) but yt one of vs shuld féele spiritually ye pain & trouble of another, how far soeuer we be distant a sondre corporally, bi∣cause ye spirite of Iesu Christ (by the which we his mēbres do liue) hath cō∣ioined, knit & vnited vs more nigher & closer togither thē is ye soule to ye body Forasmuch dearly beloued brethre,
(according to my hope) yt I am parta∣ker of the mercy yt we all shal receue, in the name & behalfe of ye lord yt dyd giue his lyfe for ours, I haue thought it good to cōfort you in your afflictiōs, with the which you are troubled and oppressed in this world,2. Timo. . &. 11.12, only bicause you wold liue faithfully in Christ Ie∣su. For ye quickned & strēgthened by ye word of trueth, I am partaker of the ioy of your consolacion & comfort, & al∣so of the firmnesse of your faith, for ye I haue hope in his goodnes,Rom. 14. &. 8, yt he wyll make perfect his worke in euery one of vs,Philip. 1. &. 20.21.2. in such maner & sort that by all wayes & meanes possible, he may be glorified, all be it we liue or dye, bi∣cause yt in lyfe & death he is our gaine & we his glory. The persecutiō yt we suffer now at these dayes is cruel, ve∣ry perilous & dangerous, for that they which persecute vs, are no Turks nor Pagās in their professiō, but baptised as we are, and that saye they haue a zeale and loue to god as we haue, and in that they vse and put in vre to af∣flict vs with, they doo it to serue god &
to merit or deserue Heauen. (But greatly deceaued no doubt) wherefore we ought to procure to be so much the more certaine and sure of our vocaci∣on and calling, & of the good will that God had and hath vnto vs, and that we doo not doubt by no way nor mea∣nes of the immutabilitie and firmnesse of his diuine councel,Ephes. 1. & 4.5 Collo. 2. &. 5.15. Iohn. 17. &. 5. with and by the which he dyd determine before the be∣ginninge of the worlde to saue vs in Christ Iesu, in knowledge of whome dothe concist all our wealth, comfort, and consolacion. The want of knowledge & the doubt had hereof, is wont to, & dooth engen∣der great amasednesse, dismayinges, & troubles, in the myndes of some of the faithfull, it dooth make them fearfull, weake, full of cowardise, sad, discom∣forted, mistrustfull, and doth put them into great forgetfulnesse of the bene∣fits which they haue receiued of God. From hence dooth also arise, growe, & springe, those déepe moorninges, gro∣ninges, and sighinges, with the which many séeinge themselues afflicted for
the trueth, doo repent them that they haue vsed their eares, heard, and be∣leeued the voyce of the Lord. Bicause that they séeinge the aduersities that doo succede & follow, by reason of pro∣fessing and confessing the name of Ie∣su Christ, they call it guile and deceit, and doo retorne againe to wallow in the dirtie mire of their olde errours,2. Pet. 2. &. 22. and supersticions in which they were before their calling, & doo become more enemies to God, and more cruell a∣gainst the trueth,Math. 12. &. 45. 2. Pet. 2. &. 20. by meanes wherof their last ending is worser then theyr beginninge. And for the contrary, to know the trueth thereof aright, and well, and to haue the same printed in the hart, it dooth make the good christi∣an the stronger againste all kindes of aduersities, and the more mightie to warre and fight, magnanymousely & manfully, against all the might & force of hell, and neuer more to turne his shoulders to the enemie, but doth be∣come from day to day ye more inriched with heauenly giftes whereby he is made the more exceptable to god. All
that is agaīst Iesus Christ in ye world maketh war & contradiction againste him, but yet he ouercommeth all vic∣toriously, and most triumphantly, by the vertue and strength of his perfect knowledge thereof. And how much ye more as it is printed in his heart, so much ye more shalbe increased his cō∣fort in the time of affliction & persecu∣cion, more strong firme & constant in aduersitie,Math. 7. &, 24 more burning in desire to be with god, greater in disdaine of the worlde,Luke, 6, &. 48. and of all the delights ye reig∣neth therein, & know the better how to sanctifie the name of the Lord, and to demaunde with more feruent zeale that his kingdome may quickly come, bicause his enimies might be destroi∣ed wholly, and that he alone might be obeyed and reigne in the consciences of all those which he hath redéemed with his most precious bloud. What we were before our being re∣duced to God. Cap. ii. IF we dyd vnderstād how the sinne which we dyd commit against God in the beginning dyd leaue vs, after
it had once gotten power & emperye ouer vs, we should vnderstand aswel how great the loue & goodnesse of him was, that dyd redeeme and take vs out of the same, and deliuer vs from ye condēpnacion, so iustly due vnto vs for it. The diuell by sinne dyd breake in and destroy all goodnesse that God had indued vs with, by the which we were cléerely knowen to be his owne workmāship, he did blot out ye Image of god which was grauē in our soules so that ye likenes of him by whom we were created, was taken quite frō vs,Genes. 3. & 2.3, 4. &c. & we depriued of all kinde of holines & rightuousnes, & also made strāgers to all trueth & cleannes. He did leaue vs without ye direction & libertie yt we had to cōfort our selues wt, in all thīgs by ye diuine wil of god. Finally we did remaine voyde & emptied, of all those gifts & graces, wt the which God had adorned, bewtified, & enritched vs, to be serued by: Bicause we might haue him euermore to be our god, and yt we might be known to be his childrē, & by ye effect of those his wicked works in ye world,
he dyd destroy in vs all ye good that god had geuen vs:Fruites of the Image of the diuel so that we remayned full of all euill, that is to be abhorred, and cōtrary to god. For that the diuel in place of the perfect picture, Image, and likenesse, of him that was in vs, did put his owne. And so we were ful of all vnrightuousnesse of life, hipocri∣sie,Rom. 8. & 29.30. &c. fornicacion, mallice, couetousnesse, enuie, guyle, hatred, wickednesse, ab∣hominable abhorrours & haters of god and his trueth,Titus. 3. & 2.3. &c. proud, vaine glorious, disobedient, vnfaithfull, without vn∣derstandinge, altogether blynde and without mercy, made at the last a pe∣stilent picture euen like vnto the di∣uell, whose captiues we were. Ephes. 2. &. 1 2.3. Collos. 2. &. 22.23.In the Epistle to them of Ephesus, Sainct Paule declareth, and in them to vs, that such was our condicion be∣fore God did call vs. And you sayth he were dead by your owne delightes of sinne, in the which sometyme ye walked according to the course of this world, after the prince and gouerner that ruleth in the Ayre, which is the spirit that now worcketh in the chil∣dren
of vnbeléefe, amonge the which we all in tymes past haue béene con∣uersant, in desires of the flesh, and ful∣fylled the wyll and mynde thereof, so that by nature we wer the children of wrathe. And thus he concludeth that in vs there was not one spot of goodnesse, nor rightuousnesse, but that we were in all subiect to the diuell, & that all our delightes and pleasure, was in naughtinesse and infidelitie, so that all our works were of ye flesh, corrupted and accursed.Rom. 8. &. 8 Bicause that if the flesh be an enemie to God, and not subiect to his lawe, nor may nor can be. All the worckes that procéede thereof is so likewise, and plaine de∣mōstracions of the hatred of ye truth, wherewith the hart should be posses∣sed. And if that all humaine thoughts (or thoughts of men) doo from the be∣ginning tend to euil,Genes. 6. &. 2.3. all workes done by them, be of the same qualitie, euil, cōdempned, lost, & prouokers of gods great indignacion and ire: so that all our euil commeth by nature. At the first we were the childrē of god, now
by sinne we are the children of his wrath,Ephes. 2. &. 1. that is, wholly lost, banished, & disinherited of his riches & goodnesse, & moreouer enimies to all that dooth please him.Psal. 14. & 2 Psal. 53. &. 2.4. All of vs are corrupted & abhominable (saith ye Prophet) there is none that dooth good, there is none, no not one. Then being by sinne and ye flesh al corrupted, what may spring & come therof but curssed stick of such efficacie, ye it corrupteth all goodnesse by ye which it passeth. By reasō wher∣of we are compared by the same pro∣phet to an open sepulchre wher ther is nothing but bodies dead & rotten,Psalm. 5. &. 10.11. & ful of worms,Psal. 104. &. 3. frō whēce may nor can come nothing, but suche cruel stincke as dooth infect, corrupt and kill. The mouth of this sepulchre is our throfe, as the said Prophet saith,Psalm. 10. &. 7. & ye we cary ye venome of waspes vnder our ton∣gues, bicause all ye commeth out of the mouth is of such force that it killeth. Our mouthes are full of curssing and bitternesse:Prouer. 1. &, 16. we haue our féete swift to runne to shed bloud,Psalm. 14. &. 5, 6, our wayes & manners of liuing are mortal & dead∣ly
aswell for that they kill, as also for that there is nothing in them but ca∣lamities and griefes, misaduentures and mischiefes, which are plaine testi∣monies of our perdiciō.Rom. 3. & 16, 17, &c, For in yt mise¦rable seruitude of sinn, in ye which we wer tyed & deceiued, we did not know the way of peace, for yt we did know nothing that might please god, wher∣by we might be reduced or brought a∣gaine to his fréendship, we were de∣stitute of the feare and rightuousnesse of God. We dyd runne lyke vnbryd∣led horses, into all kinde of wicked∣nesse, if it had not béene for the vaine feare of men, we had cōmitted openly and publickly all kinde of vice, which was hidden in our hartes. A man after that the soule is depar∣ted from ye flesh, ther resteth nothing but to bury the body, for that it is wormes meate. Euen so we, be∣inge deade in sinne and sinfull de∣lighte, and God seperated from our soules, there remayneth nothynge but to be buryed in Hell, and to be made foode for eternall Deathe which we
haue most iustly deserued, in suche wise, that if god would geue sentence definitiue against vs, & shut vs from the processe of his goodnesse and mer∣cy, we should be constrained, by our owne proper consciences, to confesse and yelde our selues, to be well and rightuously cōdempned. Bicause our workes, our thoughtes, our desires, hartes and all that we haue within vs, hath condempned vs and forced God vnto it: who will not suffer so much vnrightuousenesse, nor yet tol∣lerate so great and monstrous slande∣rours of his truthe, and bewty of his worke, the which wer not our selues, before our fal into that estate so mise∣rable, all that was in vs, was matter and cause of iust condempnacion, and to sturre vp the wrath and iudgemēt of God, by ye which all shalbe destroy∣ed and cōsumed,Iohn. 1. & 5.6.7. &c. bicause that all was darcknesse, malediction, sinne, and the fruites of sinne, deformed, and ex∣treme contrary, to that which God doth require of vs, in such maner that we had not nor cold not, doo any thing
that was good:Math. 12. &. 33, for that we were euil tréese corrupted & rotten, which colde not bring forth good fruite, by reason whereof we haue bene wholly subiect to all the foresayde paynes and pu∣nishments, cursse & malediction that was due vnto vs, & there hath rested nothing but to be cut of from all the goodnesse of God, and put in the com∣pany of the diuel and of his ministers all redy condempned. Of our blyndnesse in times past. The third Chapter. THose workes which we hild for good, wherein we busied our selues most earnestly, in those tymes passed when as we dyd thinck to doo god good seruice thereby: they were of such condicion and qualitie, that by them we dyd so offend him, yt we brought our selues more déepely into the lake of perdici∣on. Then we fasted,Math. 15. &. 7. we vsed discipli∣nes of mens tradicions,Esai. 2. &. 1. we caused masses to be sayde, & often tymes we
dyd heare them, we erected chappels & chāteries we prayed with prime and howers, we were full of deuocion for soules in purgatori, we did chuse dead saints to be our aduocates, to ye deitie, that we might escape from ye wrathe & condēpnacion therof, by meanes of them. We dyd make vnfaithfull pro∣mises and vnlawful vowes, we tooke Bulles, we walked stacions & pilgri∣mages, we sought for pope antichrists pardons, we were awriculerly cōfes∣sed, & dyd receue the Sacrament the oftener, that we might be accompted the more holy, & merit saluacion the rather. We had them yt would lende or sell vs merits or deseruinges, bi∣cause that Death should not take vs vnprouided. But what had we here∣by to present to god for to satisfie him for our sinnes, these and other the like thinges we did for to serue him with, & to obteine grace & glory at his hāds. But with thē all, although they were séene & allowed of men, yet it dyd not open the kingdome of heauen, but ra∣ther cause it to be shut vp, & the gates
of hell to be set wide open. Bicause, that all that is most high, sublimate,Luke, 16, &, 18, & supreme, in estimaciō amōgst men, is greatest abhominacion before God. Who dooth neither allowe nor yet is well pleased with any thinge that he dooth not commaunde.Deut, 12. &, 8, 16, Esai. 1. & 14. Neither dooth any man doo any thinge at all accor∣ding to his will without his spirite & norishment. Those things which we doo to serue him cannot please him, bi∣cause he hath condēpned them by his worde alredy for sinne.Rom. 14. & 1.2. &c. For that they procéede of our own opinions, and the opinions of our fleshly teachers, & not of the knowledge and loue of his holy will. For all that commeth not therof is sinne, as the holy Apostle dooth te∣stifie.Math. 22. &. 37. The summe of all that the lawe diuine dooth aske and require of vs,Math. 23. &. 23, is to loue God with all our hart, and our neighbours as our selues, to doo right, to loue mercy, and to haue faith. The works yt we doo vnder yt tytle & name of holinesse,Hebre. 11. & 1.2. &c. are not comprehendid in the lawe, they procéede not of rightu∣ousnesse, mercy and faith, without the
which it is impossible to please God, and therefore he dooth throw them a∣way as wicked and euill, and we our selues for most wicked and euil with them.Ea. 1. &. 11. Iere. 6. &. 20. And then if the worcks and sa∣crifises that he dooth commaūd in his lawe, be not done according to his cō∣maundement, he dooth cast them out for euill and abhominable, and sayth that he is angry with them, & so an∣gry at them that he can suffer them no longer. How much the more then may he be angry, & accompt for euill, those worckes which he dooth not cō∣maunde,Math. 5. & 19. &c. but by his word dooth rather expressely forbyd them. So that all our fayned holinesse, is testimony or witnesse againste vs, of our greater blyndnesse and condempnacion, and will cause the wrath of God, to come the sooner to rest vpon vs.Iohn. 9. & 18.19. &c. Bicause it was all idolatrie with the which we dyd our deuocion. It was not to the true God,Gal. 4. &. 8. for that we know him not, but to those which were gods of our owne imaginacion, fayned according to our own inuencion and false gods,
yet dyd we beare the marcke of the true God, which was his holy Bap∣tisme, in signe of fayth and fidelitie, & not to haue none other gods, but one, (the true liuing god) nor to serue him by none other rule, thē by that which his word teacheth, yet we wer to him traytours, rebells, vnfaithfull Idola∣tours, alyed and confederate with his enimies, and giuen to all vnrightu∣ousnesse and wickednesse. So that we might say with ye Prophet, that if the onely mercy of God wer not, we had béene for euer vtterly consumed and perished together. Of the loue of God, and of our cal∣ling, and the cause thereof. The .iiii. Chapter. BVt persisting and going fore∣warde in suche estate as then was ours,Ephes. . &. 12. which was with∣out Christ, reputed as alients and straūgers to the common wealth of Israell, and to the couenaunts con∣teyned in the testament and promise
of reconciliacion, voyde of hope, and without God in this worlde.Ephes. 2, &. 4, 5, 6, It plea∣sed him who is most ritche in mercy, thorough his great loue wherewith he loued vs, euen whē we were dead by sinne. To quicken vs againe in Christe together with him, by whose grace we be saued, raysed vp & made to sitte together in heauenly thinges through him, & notwithstādinge (as I say) that we were dead by sinne,We were called by the mercy of God. and at the brimme or brincke of our con∣dempnacion, yet he called vs to his knowledge that we might haue lyfe together in Christ Iesus, and beinge so farre from him, he called vs nigh∣er by the power & vertue of his most precious bloud:Rom. 5. & 8.10. And so sayth Sainct Paule in another place, that God dyd set out and cōfirme his loue and cha∣ritie in vs, for that we as yet beinge sinners, enimies vnto him, and so iust∣ly condempned, he dyd giue his own sonne to most direfull death, to recon∣cile vs vnto him therby: and to make vs partakers, of his rightuousnes and sanctificacion. So that the whole
cause of our perdicion, was in our selues, bicause that by vs, sinne had his first beginninge, for that we dyd throw our selues,Gen. 3. &.  so voluntaryly into his cursed handes, who dyd dispoile and robbe vs of all goodnesse. Wher∣fore God so louing vnto vs, thought it most necessary for our saluacion, to take all vpon him selfe, for that wée might thereby, obteine remission and forgiuenesse of all our transgression for euer. And that being at the first true, the condempnacion that we had deserued, it might aswell be true, the healthe and saluacion graunted to de∣liuer vs from the same. So the ho∣ly Ghost dooth testifie vnto vs by the Prophet Osea, sayinge,Osea. 13, &. 9. from thée thy selfe O Israell, doothe proceede thy perdicion, and from mée onely doothe come thy saluacion. And by the holy Apostle sainct Paule it is sayde:Titus. 3. &. 4.5, that when the beninge kyndenesse and loue of our Sauiour God to man warde apeared,Ephes. 9. &. 2. he sa∣ued vs,22. Tim.  &. 10 not by the workes which we
had done (and are vnrightuous) but conformable to his mercy, by ye wash∣ing of the regeneracion or new birth, and renewing of the holy ghost, the which he hath shedde abundantly vp∣pon vs by Iesu Christe our Sauiour,From hēce dooth pro¦cede our saluacion. for ye iustifyed by his grace, we should be made heires thorough & according to our hope, of the lyfe eternal. Wher∣by it apeareth that of ye calling by the which God dyd by is mercy most piti∣fully call vs vnto him, dooth procéede all our health and saluacion. Bicause as at the beginning God did make vs of himselfe (without receiuinge any helpe of our partes) and so gaue vs ye being of men,Genes. 3. &, 7. that we might be whol∣ly his owne pure woork. Euen so hath he now called vs, and now that we be called, he hath reformed and sāctifi∣ed vs, without our helpe in any thing, that we might be his children.Iohn. 11. &. 17, 39. If La∣zarus were dead, foure dayes buryed and stincking in his graue, and coulde not frée himselfe therefro, but ye God dyd rayse him from death, & giue him a newe lyfe. Much lesse may we frée
our selues from death, for that we be captiuated and buryed so, by ye help of sinne that we are much more deade & stincking before God, then was ye cor∣porall body of Lazarous to the sighte of men. But as by the might, strēgth, vertue, and power, of that voyce, with the which Iesus Christ dyd call him, he was set frée from ye prison & stinge of death, purifyed of all corrupcion, & restored to a new lyfe: euen so we, by the voyce of the same Lorde, are ray∣sed againe to a new lyfe.Rom. 4. & 17, 19, 24. Bicause god dooth call those things which are not, as though they were.Ezech. 39 &. 21, For by the effi∣cacie and strengthe of the voyce with which he dooth cal, he doth giue a new being. For the euill being of a sinner, is as no being before god. But in cal∣linge himselfe to mynde to call vpon God, with a feruent, fearefull, and lo∣uing heart vnfayned, his louinge al∣mightifull kindenesse will giue him a diuine essence, participated & ioyned with the same woord, with the which he called him, when as he had no suf∣ficiencie at all, to doo ye woorks of lyfe.
We our selues, in the estate which we were, could not by any meanes doo any kinde of thing, that might be plea¦sant or acceptable to God:Psalm. 55. &. 2.4. &c. but dyd cō∣tinue still sléeping, possessid of deathe, without any féeling of lyfe. We dyd not call nor séeke vpon God, but were of the numbre of those which Dauid hath spoken of before, which haue not knowen God, bicause we called those dead which liue, & dyd séeke the things we knewe not. And therefore it was sayde by the Prophet Esaye,Esai. 65. &. 1.2. Rom. 10. &. 20.22, I am founde of them that haue not sought me, & haue apeared manifestly to those which haue not asked after me. For that we should vnderstand yt he onely did séeke vs, dyd call vs, and giue him selfe to be knowen vnto vs. Yet we in ye meane tyme were dronken with obliuion,Iohn. 8. &. 1 .3. &c. buried in sinne & in all kinde of wickednesse, & also were possessid with the diuel, whome we dyd obey: in such sort, that we accoūted his coū∣sell and workes, for the vphouldinge and rule of our lyfe. The cause why, that God dyd so call
vs,Osea. 2. & 23. out of that duskye darckenesse in the which we were, to his admirable light,1. Peter. 2. &. 9, 10. was onely the loue that he had to vs in his sonne Iesus Christe: by whome he dyd determine to saue vs. By Christ Iesus sayth S. Paule we are chosen, to the inheritance,Ephes. 1. &. 4.5. prede∣stinated accordīg to ye purpose of him,Colos. 1, & 26, 27, which dooth & will all thinges, confor∣mable to ye councell of his diuine wil, so that we which doo put our trust in him, should be in all thinges for ye set∣ting foorth of his honour and glory. Of the cause of our calling and redempcion. Cap. v. BY the purpose & coun∣sell of GOD, which he dyd ordeyne before the beginninge of the world, that we might be partakers of his healthe and saluacion, is the cause why he suffered vs to fall, that wée might be made knowen vnto his son: by whose merittes we should be made
acceptable vnto him.2. Peter. 1. &, 2.20. Sainct Peter sayth, that we haue béene elected and chosen according to ye foreknowledge of God the Father in sanctificacion of the spirit, to obey him and to be clean∣sed & washed in the bloud of his sonne Iesus Christ. Sainct Paule conside∣ring ye goodnesse of god, for his benefits (so much vndeserued of men) dooth giue thankes vnto him for himselfe,Ephes. 1. &, 3 4. and for all the faithful, that haue béene called to the participacion thereof, and sayth:2. Cor. 1. &. 3.4, Blessed be God the Father of our Lorde Iesus Christe which hath blessed vs with all maner of spiritual blessing in heauenly things by Christ according as he had chosen vs in him before the foundacion of the worlde was layde,1. Peter. 1. &, 3.4. that we should be saincts without blame and irreprehēsible be∣fore him through loue, and ordeined vs before through Iesus Christ to be heires vnto himselfe, according to the pleasure of his good will to prayse the glory of his grace, wherwith he hath made vs acceptable in his beloued. Our callīg is groūded vpon the election of God.So by the meanes that god hath elec∣ted
and chosen vs from ye beginninge in Iesus Christ, is the foundacion vp∣on the which is grounded our vocaci∣on, by ye which we wer called in time, to inioy a participacion of that ioy and those good thinges,Math. 26. & 1.2.3, &c. for the which we were elected, whereby we may per∣ceiue that how firme soeuer the foun∣dacion of our blessednesse is: euen so firme and sure is our vocacion & cal∣ling, so firme & true is also the iustice, rightuousnesse and holinesse, of heauē, which by meanes of our calling is cō∣municated vnto vs. We could giue nothing to god for our election, bicause that he dyd electe vs before our essen∣ciall beinge, and when as we were not. All the whole cause of our electi∣on was onely in Christe Iesu,Christ is ye onely cause of our elec∣tion. there was nothing in vs wherby we might be called, nor yet nothinge whereby we might be iustified. Bicause (as it is afore sayde) we were so fully pos∣sessed of the diuell, and of sinne: that euen of iustice we were allotted to an estate, so naked and miserable as might be thought. Wherefore of force
we must néedes conclude, yt it is only the grace and good will of God, that hath called vs by his Gospell, for al∣though we be callid, we mai not come to Christe Iesus if that the Father drawe vs not, giue vs eares to heare his voyce and a heart to conceiue and vnderstande what is his wyll.Iohn. 14. & 6, 21, For that he himselfe sayth, none can come to me if my Father draw him not, he dooth drawe vs vnto him bicause we should be pardoned by his rightuous∣nesse,Colos. 2. &. 23. & that the bond should be broken wherwith we were so surely bounde to euerlasting death.Ephe. 1. &. 7 For that (as the Apostle sayth) by the bloud of Christ Iesus, we had our redempcion, which is remissiō of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace, which he is moste aboundantly full of.1. Cor. 1. &. 30. He was made to vs by God, onely wisedome, rightu∣ousnesse, sanctificaciō and redemption, for that he which neuer dyd sinne,2. Cor. 5. &. 21 was made a sacrifise for our sinnes: bicause god would haue vs made righ∣tuous by him, so that he is our whole rightuousnesse, and ful satisfaction be∣fore
the diuine iudgement of his Fa∣ther.Esai. 51. & 6 Bicause (sayth Esay) the euer∣lasting God dyd put vpon him all our sinnes, which by the potencie, power,Rom. 4. &. 25 and might of his deathe, he dyd de∣stroy, and dyd satisfie wholly to the di∣uine iudgement of God the Father, and so obteyne full forgiuenesse and Remission of sinnes for vs.Tne righ∣tuousnes of Christe is more migh∣tie then the mallice of the diuell. Thus that by him we are made rightuous and beloued of God, for that if the di∣uell were so mightie to put vs in such condempnacion, againste the which we had no remedy in our selues, much more mightie without comparison, is the rightuousnesse of Iesus Christ, to giue vs true and perfect libertie and forgiuenesse, of all the wickednesse with the which the diuell had fraught and filled vs. Bicause (as Sainct Paule sayth,) if for the delight,Rom. 5. & 10, 12.13. &c of∣fence and transgression of one, deathe dyd rule and reigne by one, muche more they which receiue the aboun∣dance of grace, & the gyft of rightuous∣nesse shall rule and reigne in lyfe by one, only by Iesu christ. As by ye offēce
and transgression of one man, con∣dempnacion dyd come vpon all men: euen so by the rightuousnesse of one man, is come iustificacion of lyfe vnto all men. And as the sinne of Adam dyd condempne to eternall deathe, all that dyd discende from him:Rom. 8. &, 1.4. euen so the rightuousnesse of Christe is cause by the which are iustified,Gala. 4. &. 7. all that be∣leue in him, & are made heires with him of his heauenly kingedome. Of our iustificacion, by the righ∣tuousnesse of God. &c. The .vi. Chapter. By fayth we doe im∣brace christGOd dyd not onely call vs & giue vs his woorde, but also by meane of the operacion and workinge of the holly ghost, he did ingendre fayth in our hartes: the which is armes and handes, vnto vs, to imbrace Iesus Christ, with all his riches & blessings. And in this maner we are brought vnto him,Gala. 3. &. 13, the which doothe confirme in vs the sayinge of Sainct Paule,
Christ did redéeme vs from the cursse of the lawe, & made himselfe a cursse for vs, bicause we should receiue by fayth, the promise of the holy Ghoste, for that we had sinned all, and were naked of the glory of God,Rom. 3. & 24.26, &c. we were graciously iustified by his grace, & by the redempciō gotten by Christ Iesu, the which God dyd purpose for propi∣tiacion by faythe in his bloud, to the ende that he would be founde iuste, & a iustifier of them that haue fayth in him. Of grace you haue béen saued by fayth (sayth Paule to them of Ephe∣sus) and this doothe not come of your selues, for it is the gyft of God,Ephes. . &. 8, not by our workes for that we should not boast, bicause we are his workes cre∣ated in Christ Iesus. Wherby it doth and may apeare that our iustificacion is a new creacion, and a worke onely of god, who, as at ye beginning he dyd create vs by the sounde of his word: So nowe by the vertue, potency, and might of the same, he dooth forme and make vs a newe in his sonne.Iohn. 1. &, 12.1. He dyd giue them saith S. Iohn, power to be
made the children of God, to as many as doo receiue him by fayth, that is to saye, to as many as doo beléeue in his name. The which are not borne of bloud, of the wyll of the fleshe, nor of mans will, but by the will of god. Whereby we sée that to be iuste and rightuous, commeth not by nature, nor by humaine industrie, but by the frée gift of our Lorde God that of his owne proper good will doothe regene∣rate vs by the woorde of trueth.Rom. 5. & 15. Ieam. 1. & 18. All of vs (saith S. Iames) be the children of god, bicause we haue beléeued in Ie∣sus Christ, and for that we doo know that man is not, (nor cannot be) iusti∣fied by the woorkes of the lawe, but by fayth in Christ Iesus.Gala. 2. & 16, And Sainct Paule sayth we haue also beléeued to be iustified by fayth in him, and not by the workes of the lawe, for no flesh shalbe iustified by the woorkes of the lawe. And so the Apostles dooe con∣clude, that the benediction of Iesus Christe, which was promised to A∣braham and his séede, should perteine
onely to them which doo receiue him by fayth, beléeuing in his diuine pro∣mises and doo aply vnto him all that is conteined in them.Gala. 3. &. 9 (Sainct Paule to ye Galathiās sayth again) all those that haue faith, are blessed with faith∣full Abraham: bicause all that are of the workes of the lawe are vnder the cursse and malediction thereof. So that it remayneth manifest, that all those which dooe not receiue Iesus Christ, the remission of sinnes, and the reconciliation that is gotten for vs by him, with the handes of faith, may not nor cannot receiue him by meanes of any other woorcke that they can dooe: but are euermore in their sinnes and subiecte to eternall malediction. We may not haue peace with GOD by any other way or meane, then in that we are acceptable vnto him, by fayth: we are acceptable and admyt∣ted vntoo hys fauour and grace by fayth in Iesu Christe. He is by and by (& alwayes) pleased wt vs, & we haue
rightuousnesse before him? as the A∣postle teacheth saying: we being iu∣stified by fayth haue peace with God by our Lorde Iesus Christ,Rom. 5. & 51 by whom we haue a waye through faythe vnto this grace, the which must be firme & surely fixed in vs. Whereby it is de∣clared that Iesus Christ, is the onely aucthour of our rightuousnesse, & that we be made partakers of his health, by the fayth we haue in him. By the which we be surely certified, that we be all ready reconsiled to God, & that he is in peace with vs, & by this rea∣son we are assured that we possesse lyfe euerlasting. The diuine Scrip∣tures doo teache vs the same, all the Prophetes (sayth sainct Peter) beare testimony of Iesus Christe,Acts. 10. &. 43. and that through his name, all that beléeue in him shall receiue remission of sinnes. Also S. Paule in the Actes of the A∣postles,Actes. 13. &. 38, 39. (speaking of Christ) sayth, by him is preached vnto you remission of sinnes, and by him all that beleue are iustified in all thinges, from ye which ye could not be iustified by the law of
Moyses, wherefore all that beleue in Christ Iesus are iustified by fayth in him. So that it must néedes be that remission of sinnes, and all other be∣nefites promised of God, we receiue them of him, by fayth in his Gospell. Dauid taught by the holy ghost,Psal. 142. &. 2. dyd sée that all that was in him, and that he might doo, was cause of condemp∣nacion at the handes of God: beinge seuerely examined by the rigour and iustice of his Lawe. He had his re∣course to the Almightie God and dyd take him for his Patrone in iudge∣ment, and dyd pray to him with great vehemency, besechinge him that he should not iudge him according to his law: enter not into iudgement (saith he,) with thy seruant, bicause that no flesh is to be founde righteous in thy sight. So that he confessith that we are iustified onely by grace, and mer∣cy, and by the pittie and loue that god behouldeth in his sonne Iesu Christe for and towardes vs. For that by the loue that he hath to vs in him, he hath called vs & put from before him quite
away, all our sinnes, offences, & wic∣kednesse that euer we committed, and hath forgiuen vs all our disobedience and graunted vs true obedience and satisfaction neither more nor lesse then as if we had gottē it our selues. For to take vs out of all doubts, and to the ende to deliuer vs from our olde wicked lyinge errours, in the which vntill now we haue liued,Esai. 43. & 1.25. the Lord & mightie Iehouah, sayth, by ye Prophet Esay, it is I, it is I my selfe (O my people) that haue blotted out all thy misdéees and wickednesse, for the loue of my selfe, and for myne owne sake, I haue done it, & will neuer remem∣bre them againe. So that it is he that deliuereth vs from our sinnes, and in∣iquities, without any merit or desert on our behalfe,Ezech. 16. &. 60.61. Iere. 3. &. 12 13. yt is any thing auaila∣ble at all. And of his owne frée will, loue, and liberalitie doothe vse ye same towardes vs. Of an excelent comfort by the loue of God. Cap. vii.
SO it restith, yt all that men can doo, or may or can inuent to work, by any kinde of meane: by this scripture it is ex∣cluded & condēpned for most horrible, wicked, & abhominable. For why: ther is but one Iesus Christ who is the pardener of our sinnes by god ye Father, there is no cause why without Christ, that we should be par¦doned by god the father for them. By Christ onely are we pardoned, we are the vnrightuous, & he ye onely aucthor of rightuousnesse. In vs there is no cause why, but that we should be most iustly cōdempned, and in him onely is there great cause why, we should by him be saued. S. Peter saith,Actes. 4. &. 1 there is none other name vnder heauen giuen vnto men wherby we should be saued but onely ye name of Iesus Christ. In an other place. S. Peter saith again,Actes. . &. 10. yt neither we can not, nor our forefa∣thers could not, beare the weigh∣tie yoke of the Lawe, yet we are in béeléefe to be saued by our Faithe in
Iesus Christ our Lord, & by his grace as well as they. For as by fayth God dyd purify their hartes,Iohn. 15. &. 3, 4. &c. so likewyse dooth he purifie ours. Christ sayd vnto his disciples that by the word which they had heard and beleued, they wer made cleane, and thereby had purified them of their sinnes, and made them freindes with God. So that we haue rightuousnesse and diuine holinesse by fayth that doothe remaine to vs in the promises of god, and the hope that we haue in his mercy and trueth, with yt which he doothe promise vs to be our fréendly Father and pittifull for the loue of Iesu Christ: From hence it is that the Prophet Dauid doothe ac∣knowledge that there is but one righ∣tuousnesse,Psalm. 61, &. 16, that is of any valour at all before god, and that may apeare and come valiently before him in his di∣uine iudgement. The Prophet sayth, I will thincke and all wayes haue in remembraunce thy onely iustice and rightuousnesse. By which reason he dooth recken, houlde, and account, all humaine and carnall rightuousnesse
and holinesse for most wicked and vn∣rightuous. Bicause they are so filthie,Esai, 64, &, 6. fowle, and spotty, that men may haue no help of them, to satisfie in part nor in all, before the diuine iudgement of God. But of necessitie they are to retourne againe condempned eternal∣ly, bicause they ioyne ye cleane works of the Lawe, with the vncleane and filthy fowle spottid woorkes of the fleshe. Wherby we sée derely beloued bre∣thren, that there is no more but one Iesus Christ redemer of the world, wherfore we can haue no more righ∣tuousnesse but that which is his, by the which we are to be saued. Nor there is no other meane and waye to obteyne a pardon generall for our sinnes, and reconciliacion with God, then the fayth and hope whereby we doo beleue his diuine promises, and do assure our selues of all that, which by those promises are declared vnto vs. Wherby we haue frée libertie giuen vs to call and saye, O our Father. &c. The holy ghost doothe teach vs in his
Church, the doctrine of this true ca∣tholicke. And therefore as taught and guided thereby, let vs imbrace & fo∣low him, by whose word we haue re∣ceued this reuelaciō & clearnesse. For this cause dyd Iesus christ giue thāks to god ye father in the name of all his faithfull,Math. 11. &. 25. and therewith together dyd shewe ye cause of so supreme a benifit. Sayinge,Luke. 10. &. 22. I giue thée thankes O Fa∣ther, Lorde of heauen and earthe, bi∣cause thou haste hidden these thinges from the wyse & prudēt of the world, and openid it vnto babes, euen so fa∣ther, for so it pleased thée. The cause of this benefit and of all ioyned with it, commeth to vs by the great good will of God, and the delight which he hath in his sonne. (As before it is sayde,) & forasmuch as we doo knowe it is so, let vs desire that we may be of that numbre of the lyttle ones, that our Sauiour Christe dyd giue thankes vnto his Father for, and not leane to any false & variable doctrine,Hebre. 13. &. 9. whose ende is to bringe them that doo
beleue in the same from the vnitie of the true faith, which the prophets, Apostles, and Iesus Christ himselfe hath taught vs. Wherefore, being partakers of the fruite of redempcion, that our sauiour and Lorde Iesu Christ hath redemed vs with, and by fayth that we haue in ye Gospel: let vs concider wel what we haue to doo: that to our best pow∣er, we may perseuer and increase, in that rightuousnesse and holinesse that he hath communicated vnto vs. Be∣fore we were called, and when we had not receiued pardon for our sin∣nes, we were such, and euen the lyke as the children of perdicion were. But now being reconciled to GOD by his sonne Iesus Christe we are taken foorthe of the Empire, rule, and dominion of the diuell, and re∣ceiued of GOD by the holy Ghost:Ephes. 1. &. 22. and by the vertue of the same, ioyned with Iesu Christ, & made one body wt him. From whome as from our head
there is deryued into vs membres with lyfe and spirit, by the which we ought to doo the works of lyfe, for that thereby is a plaine testimony, yt Iesu Christe who dyd pardone vs of our sinnes, and paye his moste precious bloud for a raunsome for ye same, dooth liue in vs, and that he onely is ye foun∣dacion of our hope and affiaunce, and also that of him and by him we are be∣loued of god the father as his childrē. As teacheth sainct Peter saying,1. Peter. 2 &, 4.5.9, 10, that Iesus Christe is the liuinge Stone, refused of men, but elected, chosen, and precious with god, and sayth further, you also as liuing stones, are built in one spirituall buildinge, and one holy presthoode, for to offer a spirituall sa∣crifice acceptable to god by Christ Ie∣su, and a little after that, you (that be∣léeue and trust in Iesus Christ) which in tymes passed were no people, are nowe the people of God: but before now you had not obteined mercy, yet now you haue, and are a chosen lyn∣nage, a royall presthoode, a holy naci∣on, a peculiar people, for yt you preach
and shew the vertues of him that cal∣led you, from the darcknesse in which you were, to an admirable & most mer∣ueilous light. In this he dooth giue vs to vnderstand, how we ought to spend our whole lyfe tyme: and that is in perpetuall sacrifise of prayse vnto the Lord, for that he hath béene so merci∣full and pittifull towards vs, so that all our woorks ought to be wt a chear∣full voyce singinge and makinge pro∣clamacions, of his glory, & of his ver∣tuous prayse.Titus, 2, &, 12, 13, For to dooe this (saythe Sainct Paule) we ought to renounce and deny, the vngodly & worldly desi∣res of the flesh, and in this transitory lyfe to liue temperatly, in rightuous∣nesse and godlinesse, tarying and loo∣king for that blessed hope & glorious apearing of the mightie God our Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ. So that we ought to put away all kinde of supersticion, false religion, all desires and concupi∣sences of the flesh, and the worlde, and to liue a godly lyfe according to ye wil of God: the which is declared vnto vs by his worde.1. Peter. 1. &. 18.19, But sith that we are
bought with the inestimable pryce of the most precious bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ his sonne, & so made his seruants, we ought not to serue him in anye other maner, nor with any other thinges then those which hée hath commaunded by his worde and lawe. The Lorde dyd call and electe vs for that we should be holy, and without reprehencion,Ephes. 1. &, 1.2. &c. but we be prophane before him, and no such saints, if we serue him with any other thinge then that which his lawe dooth commaund, or by the rule of his cōmaundements. For that we be called in Iesu Christ, (as Sainct Paule sayth in the same Chapter) bicause we should dooe the good workes that God dyd ordeyne for hs,Note which are good wor∣kes. and that we should walke in them, for those onely are good that he hath commaunded by his worde: we ought also to imploy our whole stu∣dies in those workes.Titus. 2. &. 14. For the apo∣stle dooth teache vs, that Iesus Christ
dyd giue him selfe for vs, to redéeme vs from all kinde of wickednesse, and to purify vs that we might be a pecu∣lier people vnto him, and that we might be onely dedicated to his ser∣uice & feruently giuen to good works. All true beleuers sayth the Prophet Esay are tréese of rightuousnes, and planted by the heauenly Father,Esai. 61. &  that he might be glorifyed in them. Wherefore we ought to adresse our whole myndes, all our affections, and all our desires and thoughtes, to glo∣rifie him: with all those things which we are sure and certeine he dooth and will allowe. But sith he, euen our God, hath opened our eyes for to sée the lighte, it were not iuste nor rea∣son that we should walke any more in darcknesse, (that is to say,Rom. 14. & 2.3.4. &c.) thinck∣ing falsly that those thinges will con∣tent his goodnesse, which dooth content vs, or those thinges which are al∣lowed of men, without the holy Ghost.
Of the cause of Christes comming, and of the fruites of christians. The .viii. Chapter. Math. 17. &. 18.GOd hath giuen vs Ie∣sus Christe to be our onely maister and tea∣cher,Mar. 9. &. 29. and doothe com∣maunde vs to heare him,Luck. 9. & 21.22.23. &c bicause he is the onely expositer & declarer of his wyll and most mightie power, and to direct vs for the accomplishment of ye same. So yt they yt doo heare ye woorde of god and kéepe it for a rule in their doings and workes, doo shewe themselues to be tréese of rightuousnesse, planted & beloued of him: and that his spirit is resident and remayning in them. But of them that teache and doo to the cō∣trary,Mat. 15. &. 13. (he sayth by Sainct Mathewe,) they are plants that his heauenly Fa∣ther hath not planted, and althoughe they florishe for a tyme and be séene, yet in thend they wilbe withered dry and rotten. Thus Iesu Christ doothe
testifie, that those which are gouerned and séeke to serue him by the commaū∣demēts of men, are none of his plāts. We ought to abhorre and houlde for abhominable, all such maner of serui∣ces, for that we are instructed by the word of trueth, that al they which doo delight in them, are subiect to the con∣dempnacion wherein they were firste borne. The hatred of them with all the rest that god hath forbidden, and the obedience of his commaundemēts diuine, are those fruites which we ought alwayes to accōpt for his plāts, with a dayly study to be of that num∣bre which the Prophet Dauid spea∣keth of,Psal▪ . &. .. that haue all their affection & delight in the lawe and ordinance of ye Lorde, and doo meditate and walke in the same bothe day and night, bicause we might fructifie and bringe foorthe good fruite in dewe season. God dyd plant vs in his sonne, giuing him vn∣to vs, to be our redéemer, the foote∣steppes of whome we should followe, and with whose rightuousnesse our faults were couered. And therfore we
ought to haue a constant faythe and beléefe, that he is such a one as wée confesse him to be in our Créede or twelue Articles of our Faythe, and reioyce that we haue him to be our eternall highe Preste, Kinge, and Sauiour,Hebr. 7. & 2.21.25. that liueth eternally to be an intercessour for vs, and to fulfill for vs all that God dooth commaunde or aske:Colos. 2. &. 3, for that in him is hidden all science, treasure, and wysedome. This is the faythe that muste be in our hartes by the which we are ioy∣ned to Christ Iesus, and dooe knowe the sufficiency that we haue in his ritches by him, to whose goodnesse we must be appendant, but not as in the tyme of our blindenesse,Titus. 1. &. 16 when we confessed him with our mouthes and denyed him in our workes.A lyinge layth and false reli∣gion. We confessed that wée dyd loue and be∣leue him but it was a lye, false, and nothinge so. We sayde that we dyd beleue he was our sauiour, but it was not true: for why, wée sought healpe and healthe in vaine thinges,
that he dyd, neither commaunde nor yet alowe, and also dyd liue in the beléefe, and follow those vaine vani∣ties vntill now of late. We confessed him to be Christ, King of all Kings, and principall highe Preste, and yet we gaue no place vnto the fruite of his Gospell in our hartes, where it should haue béene, and he also haue liued. We sayde hée was a highe Preste, but yet we accounted better of Ante∣christ, and made him our high Prest. Of him onely dyd we séeke pardon for our sinnes and sinfull delightes, we set a syde Iesus Christe our true remitter, whome by his moste pre∣cious deathe and passion dyd make and fulfiill suche satisfaction to our GOD his Father for our offences, as none but hée coulde doo the like. Yea, although the wrath and heauie displeasure of GOD, were neuer so fully satysfied, yet wée dyd thincks, our selues to make satisfaction by our owne deuised merittes, and nothing
estemed the merites of Iesus Christ which were of a most infinite and vn∣speakeable vallour for the healthe of his elected beleuers. Yet (now déerely beloued) let vs account for vaine, all our owne deseruinges, and all mens merites so full of vnrightuousnesse, & trust onely to his mercy in his diuine iudgement, in which none may per∣fectly percist but onely his owne. He was giuen vnto vs for our onely euer∣lasting Aduocate to God the Father: commaūding vs that we should aske any thinge that we haue néede of at ye handes of god ye Father in his name.Iohn. 14. &, 13, 16. But making little price hereof, & lesse regarding him, we sought other me∣diatours: as to this sainct, and by the diuillish helpe of that relique. &c. What was this, but to denie ye fayth by ours workes which we confessed with our lippes, bicause therein we would be accompted christians, & yet in our hartes we were condempned for vngodly. For why with our mou∣thes we made confession to serue and honour Christ, when as in déede with
all our workes and studies we serued curssed Antichrist and walked in er∣rors,Hier. 2. & 28. euery man after his owne way and accordyng to our owne inuenti∣ons, as sayeth the Prophet Esay.Esa. 53. & But now sith it is so apparant, that by the great goodnes and singular be∣nifit of the almightie God, we doe be∣leue truely in Iesu Christ his onlye sonne our sauiour. Let vs according∣ly liue in that godlinesse and trueth, that he hath taught and shewed vnto vs, by his word and spirite: hée hath marked vs for his owne, with ye same signe & seale, the which he hath mar∣ked his chosen? They which doe per∣secute vs, doe not knowe vs, but doe both holde & accompt vs for aliaunts and straungers vnto themselues, they maye nor can not suffer vs in the world, no more then they might suffer our Lord Iesus Christ who hath done such a benifite for all mankinde, and of whom assuredly we are.The cause of the faith fuls afflicti∣ons. So that we ought to vnderstand, and accompt for most certeine and sure, that all the causes of our troubles wherewith
we are so hated, afflicted, & persecuted in this world,2. Tim. 4. &. 3. is as S. Paule saith, bi∣cause we trust & beleue in the lyuing God, who is the sauiour of all ye faith∣full. Notwithstāding the false coulers which they vse in their quarelsome war yt they make with vs, they couer thēselues wt a cloak, & say yt we are he∣ritikes, & that they are holy, it is so in déede, but yet it is but a fayned holy∣nesse, ye which God by his worde hath cōdempned for abhominable. Wher∣fore let vs arme our selues with a firme & sure hope, ye God, yea, our God, will bée our sure helper & defender a∣gainst thē in all our troubles, for that we be ye worke of his handes, he hath made vs, redéemed vs, and we be his owne, the cause is his, and will suffer no harme nor euil to touch vs. Let vs not fal from, nor yet be weake in this truth which God hath reuealed vnto vs,Ro. 1. &. 18. but let vs be fully assured yt it is his might, power, & will, ye deliuereth vs & saueth all beleuers. We are set sure therby from all perils & dangers, and taken out of all afflictions. S. Si∣mon
in ye gospel of S. Luke doth pro∣phesie,Luke. 2. &. 34. that Iesus Christ was sent for the rysing & falling of many people in Israel, & that by him are reuealed the thoughtes of meny hartes, & that wée should be saued from all that hate vs. Euen now in these dayes is this pro∣phesie fulfilled. Assoone as ye worde of the Gospel was preached amōgst vs, and yt it did reueale vnto vs & thē our lord Iesus, both they & we might haue séene the effect of this prophesie,1. Pet. 1. &. 12. (euen so it may be still,) some of them he did please to condempne, for that they did resist furiously, & did persecute & con∣dempne him: Others, which were thē that did beleue, were reysed, edifyed, and saued by him, for whose sake they are hated, held, & accoūted, for abhomi∣nable in ye world. And ye thoughtes of some yt were holy hallowers & sancti∣fiers of mē were, & are discouered and shewed to be of such cōditiō & qualitie, that they cānot suffer ye holines of our Lord & sauiour Iesus Christ, but do so rebell against him that they vse their vttermoste force wyth crueltye to throw him out of the world.
Of a great cause of comfort, by reason of the crosses of Christ. &c. Cap. ix. BVt sith it hath pleased God, that our lotte hath bene so luckye & our happe so happie, as to make vs of the number of them that doe beléeue, and are builded in Iesus Christ: let vs not doubt the causes of our afflictiōs, for before yt he did giue vs his lighte to beléeue in hym and to knowe him, the diuill did possesse vs in peace, so that we had a very perfect friendship with the worlde.Luke. 11. &. 53.54. But he who is most strong, being come as he is, hath got∣ten the victorie, and taken his spoyle from him, for which cause that enimy doth so bray, bluster and roare out his warres against vs: and to make a re∣couery of vs, he doeth arme all his ar∣mie with so great crueltie as we sée. So that the cause of our persecution is not as they professe which are the ministers therof,Math. 13. & 37.38. &c. it is but only for the word of the Gospell, as testifyeth Ie∣sus Christ, in his owne preachyng to them that he hath called to him self. And for that we be most assured and certeine of his truth, we may wel su∣steine
and beare, the extremitie of the crosse that is layd vppō vs by ye hands of God: and neuer bee dismayed nor fainte, for althoughe that wee of our selues be weake, we shall be streng∣thened by hys force and magnificall might: with his wisdome shall be o∣uercome our ignorance and foolishe∣nesse,Psa. 52. & 7. with his rightuousnesse shall be blotted out our sinnes and wicked∣nesse, with his light shall be lightned our blynde darkenesse, with his bles∣sing shal be ouercome and vndone our cursse & malediction, with his mighte shall bée distroyed our infernall hell, with his holynesse we shall be made holy, and finally by his merits, & with his benifites, we shall be made rych in suche maner of wyse that it is im∣possible of our selues, to be suche lyke as he wil make vs. And therefore let vs not bée hindered by any kynde of crosse, but the rather made more per∣fect and clearer with constancy in be∣léefe of the trueth which hée hath taught vs. To this ende doeth the Apostle set
out our estate in this maner & forme.Ephe. 2. & 19 20. &c. You be (saith he) Pilgrims & straūgers (as we were in tyme of our ignoran∣cy) & you are now saints and citizens with ye houshold seruants of god, buil∣ded vppon the foundation of the Pro∣phets & Apostles, yt is Iesus Christ: in whom you are builded togither ioint∣ly to be the house & dwelling place of God in spirite. Whereby we may sée that all the vertue that is in vs, whi∣ther it be by good workes which are the fruites of faith, or by suffring the griefes & afflictions of this world, the which we are subiecte vnto: yet both the one and the other came from our foundation, whiche is Christe our head. Yea, & also they doe, both ye one and ye other, serue to clense vs frō all the contaminate filthie foulenes of the flesh,2. Cor. 7. & 1.2.3. &c. & perfectionate & make perfecte our myndes & spirit with the feare of God, and the sanctification of his holy name, whereby we might be cleane & cleare frō any kynd of thing, yt may of∣fend ye eyes of his diuine maiesty that dwelleth in vs. So yt we haue ye entrie
made plaine vnto vs,Hebr. 3. & 1.2.3. &c. to enter & treate with God familiarly, and aske of him all those thinges,Leuit. 11. &. 44. Leuit. 19. &. 2. 1. Pet. 1. &. 15 which be necessarie for vs to folow Iesu Christ with, & to be wholy holy as he hath commaūded vs by his spirit, saying: be ye holy bi∣cause yt I ye Lord your God am holy. God did know saieth S. Paule and predestinate all his chosē, to make thē cōformable & like to the image of his sonne, bycause they should be,Ro. 8. &. 29. (Primo∣genitus) the first begotten among many brethren. So yt in making vs cōforme & like vnto him, he did iustify vs, whē he pardoned vs of our sinnes, and did make vs pertakers of his redemptiō. Euen then he did begin to reforme in vs the image of his sonne, which re∣formatiō is yet but begun: But yet it goeth forwarde from day to day, in∣creasing by degrées vntil we be all to∣gither lyke vnto him, yea euen to be a very perfect pictor & liuely like him. For ye as by Christ ye father is known, so by vs shuld ye son be known also: for we shuld be like vnto hī in al things as wel spiritually as tēporally, celestially
as terrestrially, and as we did beare the Image of the earthly Adam:1. Cor. 15. & 49. euen so should we beare the image of the celestial Adam, which is Iesus Christ that came downe from heauen. All that God doeth vnto vs is to the same end and purpose: and therfore Christ doeth incite vs,Math. 5. &. 48. saying: be ye perfect as your father in heauen is perfect. It is notorious to sée and wonderfull to consider, howe farre of wee bée from this sanctitude, and perfection, to the which wée haue béene called. Euerye man may sée him self a great contra∣diction, in comming to the same: wée may sée also what great resistance the worlde and all the ministers thereof, doth make against vs to kéepe vs from it: for which cause God hath taken vs in charge, to make his worke per∣fect in vs. What thyng more amyable, may ther be, or what more may be desired, then to haue ye image of ye son of God, conformed and made perfecte in vs: there is nothynge that can bée more blessed and vnhappie for vs then this,
that God doeth loue vs so much, as to shewe and cast vppon vs such copious aboundancies of hys heauenly plea∣sures and good will: if we loue riches and honors those be the true ones: If we desire to be sure against all euilles and temptatiōs of the diuil, ye world, and the flesh, in this doeth consist the suertie thereof. Howe much the more that we are lyke vnto God, so muche the more mightie wée are by him in our owne defence, against all maner of temptations, afflictions and perse∣cutions. If we will inioye the riches that God hath prepared for his faith∣full, thys is the way to come to the possession of them. And therefore wée ought not to be feareful off: nor to re∣fuse any thing that God doth chastise vs with. And sith hée hath giuen vs Christ his sonne to be our head, it is a thing conuenient that we which bée his members be lyke vnto him, and that we goe togither with him, trea∣ding in hys owne steppes: Bycause the self same end that he had him self, his members must haue also, and for
that cause, & to the self same ende, that we should passe both by one way, and haue one ende and inheritance, God did so vnite & knit vs in him.The pur∣pose of god Wher∣fore we ought to vnderstand well the purpose of God, & to haue alwayes in remembraunce ye effect therof, bicause we should not faint, waxe weake, nor feare ye troubles & afflictions, that the striuing therwith, & mistaking therof, doeth bring vs vnto. The end wherof being wel & rightly cōsidered, with the knowledge of ye same, we ought rather to imbrace, thē stifly to stād against it. Hovv that the estate of Iesus Christ is com∣mon to the faithful, & doth exhort vs to an excelent comforte. The x. Chapter. OVr conditions, qualities, & estates in this world, is common and ac∣cording to ye same, which Iesus Christ him self had when he was therin. For that ye same causes yt he did suffer for, euen the lyke doe wée suffer for also. The cruell intreatie, that was vsed
and done vnto him in the world, was bicause that he was ye sonne of God, faythfull to his father that sent hym, did séeke in all things his glory, and teach vnto men suche holines & righ∣tuousnes as God his father dyd alow.Iohn. 1. &. 12 For the same cause doe we suffer also,Rom. 6. & 11.22. for that by hym made the sonnes of God, we doe allow none other holines and rightuousnes, then that which he doth incite vs vnto. So that according to the cōmunion yt we haue with him, we doe séeke in all things hys glorie, doe hate them that abhorre it, and doe condempne by his word all ye which he holdeth condempned.Math. 5. &. 10. Luke. 6. &. 20. This is ye onely cause that he commaunded his discy∣ples, & in them vs to reioyce: saying, and assuring thē with vs, that theirs and ours is ye kingdom of heauē. We ought to ponder this in our myndes, and to think of it in our afflictiōs, that although they bée neuer so great, our afflictors can not let vs from the king∣dome promised vnto vs, for ye God is disposed & hath purposed that we shal inherite it by them.
Christ Iesus is the chiefest and the greatest amongest the childrē of God, which are his bretheren: Euen so he is the first, principallest, and greatest in all things. The afflictions, passions and persecutions yt he did suffer were in the supreme & superlatyue degrée, greatest of all: his dishonour grea∣test, his pouertie most déepest, all kynd of hatred was had against him in most brauest maner, his persecutions most violent and cruell, the wrath of God wherewith he was charged, dyd lye most heauily vppon him, and so heauy a burthen in déede,Luke. 21. &. 44. as euen the verie toyle and trouble in bearing therof, did make him to sweate by extremi∣tie water and bloud.Esai. 53. &. 12. He was not only held and accompted for wicked with the wicked?Marc. 14. & 36. but amongest them, hée was thought to be most chiefe & prin∣cipall, chiefteine of sinne, wickednes, and vnrightuousnes. Though he wer the onely wisdome of the deitie: yet they intreated him as one most igno∣rant and diuilishe.Col. 2. &. 9. Yea, and although it was he onely, that was, chiefe and
principall pacifier and accomplisher of the lawe and maker of peace and amitie with God hys father for all mankynde,Ephe. 2. & 15.16. yet he was condempned for the chiefest breaker of the lawe, and greatest rebell to God. And also: though he were the first begottē sonne of God, his best beloued,Psal. 2. &. 2.4. Psal. 69. &. 7. and the Lord of all: yet he was accompted for such a straunger and so vnknowne to the people, that he sayde of him self I am a shadow and no man, but am rather a mocking stocke to men and cast out of my people.Psal. 22. & 7.17. Phi. 2. & 7. And S. Paule sayeth of him, he did adnichilate him selfe, ta∣king vppon hym the forme of a ser∣uaunt, and made hym selfe a man a∣mongest men, and humbled him self to be obedyent vnto death: yea, the death of the crosse. He was brought so lowe, that he discended to the dée∣pest of all euils, and did abide the ex∣tremitie of all paine and punishment, that was due for our sinnes & offen∣ces. We did sée him sayeth Esay,Esai. 53. &. 3.4.5. &c. and he was disfigured, we did desire hym, and he was the last, and the most sim∣ple
amongest men, full of griefes and infirmities, there was nothing in him wherby he might be knowne. So that we did not knowe what he was, hée was loaden with all our sinnes & of∣fences, hée was whypped & wounded for vs, as though he had bene the one∣ly offender, & that none had offended the maiestie of God but he. Here wée may sée that he was ye greatest passio∣ned & persecuted that could bée, wher∣by as by degrées he did ascend to god, to be also the greatest in glorie,Iohn. 1. &. 14.16. ye ful∣nesse whereof he doeth participate to all beleuers. And therfore for that he hath bene so passioned for our causes, sinnes and offences, it is iust reason & necessarie that we doe not will nor desire to be of better estate then he was him self in the world, and sith he was iniured and mocked it were not reason yt wée should be honored and praysed, sith he was so poore that he had not where on to laye his heade,Mat. 8. & 20 Luke. 9. & 85. but was forced to weare a crowne of thorne, it were not conuenient that we should abound
in riches that doe perish,Mat. 27. & 28.29. &c. nor yet that wée should goe apparelled in delicate, royall & gorgious rayment. Hée was reproued of meny, in séeking the glo∣rie of his father, we ought not there∣fore to thincke to be allowed & pray∣sed of men in séeking of the same, let vs be contented that God doth allow vs & accompt it good to fauour ye righ∣tuousnes of our cause. And also let vs not peruert ye ordinance of God, sith he doth giue vs a cōforter in our passiōs, for yt we should be imitators & folow∣ers of his sonne: bicause in allowing yt which ye world doth allow, wée should forsake ye imitatiō of him, & the effecte of our doings therin,Math. 10. & 24. Luke. 6. & 40. Iohn. 13. & 16. Luke. 9. & 23. were none other but to leaue our being his seruāts, and séeke to be his superiors: or being but disciples, to shew our selues to be more fauored & greater thē our master. We cānot haue more honor nor more firm and certeine securitie, thē to tread the steps, & to passe ye same way yt he him∣self wēt. Although to our fleshly iudge¦mēt, & to ye iudgemēt of ye world yt in ye way which we haue to passe after our
Lord, and sauiour Iesus Christ, there be many stones, blocks, and bryers to stumble at, and more readie to tosse and teare vs in péeces yt are to passe by them, then to let and suffer vs to atteine to the ende of our iourney: yet in truth, there is none more certeine sure and substanciall passage then the same is, to bring vs to that blessedest ende and moste glorious inheritance. And sith our swéet sauiour hath gone and made the same so playne before vs,Iohn. 10. &. 4.27. there is no cause at all that shuld make vs to doubt of any daunger ther∣in. Let vs consider that the crosse and bitternesse thereof is ended quickly, and in bearing, passing, and comming foorth of the same with loue and cha∣ritie, we doe presently enter into an inestimable glorie as our most louyng swéete sauiour hath promised, & doeth vndoubtedly accomplyshe and fulfill the same dayly from day to day, in all those that doe suffer persecution and are slayne for the profession of his ho∣ly and blessed name. It is greatly necessarie that all the
ordinaunces of god,The crosse of Christ & of the faithfull is ordeined of God. be fulfilled in and by vs, as was by Iesu Christ, all that god had determined in his diuine coū∣cell from the beginning, and before a∣ny thinge hapned vnto him. It was saide by the Prophetes, that God dyd ordeigne Iesus Christ to be glorifyed and lifted vp aboue all creatures: So that it was conuenient that he dyd suffer before he entered into his glo∣ry, or tooke possession of his kingdome. He himselfe dyd declare the same to his desciples, sayinge:Luke. 9. &. 22. it is necessary that the sonne of man doo suffer many thinges and that he be reproued of the elders and high prestes, that he be slaine, and doo arise againe the thirde daye.Luke. 14. &. 26. After that he sayde to them that went to Emaus: that it was conue∣nient that he should suffer, and so en∣ter into his glory.Acts. 4. &. 10, All the church doo witnesse the same by the holy ghost: when Christe was greuously afflicted he vsed this prayer and sayd?Act. 4. &. 24. O Lord thou that art the God of heauen and earth, the sea and all that is therein, which diddest say by the mouth of thy
seruant Dauid,Psalm. 2. & 1.2. why haue the Gen∣tiles fretted, and shewed the people vaine things, the kinges of the earth haue conspired, and the princes haue gathered themselues togither against the Lorde and againste his Christe. I pray you swéete fellowe membres, is not this truely come to passe: dyd not Herode, Poncius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israell, conspire and gather themselues togi∣ther to doo all that God in his diuine councell had determined, against the holy anointed Christ Iesus. For why: it was onely by the determinacion & ordinance of God, that Christ dyd suf∣fer, and also that all those which be his membres should doo the same, and so be like vnto him in all that may be. And as he dyd suffer a many of persecutions, passions, and tribulaci∣ons before that he could reigne in his kingedome: euen so must we suffer a great moultitude of persecutions, af∣flictions and troubles before that we be glorifyed and reigne with him, bicause he dyd predestinate vs to be
like vnto him in the same. For if we did not beare many crosses and tribulacions, we should then in no point beare his true similitude and likenesse: so that then there would be great dysconformitie betwene him our head and vs his membres. But suffering first with him, and so made like vnto him by bearing of his crosse, of necessitie we are to reigne with him in glory,2. Tim. 2. & 3, 10.11. &c. bicause that those which doo accompany him in suffering, may not be seperated from his company in reigninge, for that bothe the one and the other is the ordinaunce of God, the which he will not lette to fulfill to the vttermost, as he himselfe hath sayde by the Prophet Esaye,Esai. 46. &. 11. that his councell shall bée firme and sure, and all his wyll shalbe done, the Lorde of Hostes dyd ordeigne it, and who can derogate his ordinaunce.
Of the prouidence of God for them which are called. &c. The .xi. Chapter. THere is nothinge more salu∣dable or healthful for vs then to submit our selues wholly to the diuine counsell of god, bicause he dyd determine by the same to make vs partakers of his heauen∣ly kingedome. And for that, that god dyd ordeigne for vs, that we should passe by this way, we must néedes be∣leue that there is nothing in ye worlde whereof he doothe make so particuler accompt, nor whereof he dooth esteme so much, as of his beleuers. Of all li∣uing thinges that he created he hath a care: yet much more greater care without comparison, hathe he of vs which be called to his knowledge, and that doo trust onely in his mercy. So likewise dooth the Lord declare to all his faythfull (saying) that the celesti∣all and heauenly Father hath such an inestimable care of them, that he hath
numbred euen ye very heires of their heads,Math. 10. & 29.30. &c. so carefully that he will not one of them shall perrishe.Act. 21. & 34. And sayth further, if your father which is in hea∣uen haue so muche care ouer little Sparrowes, whereof two are soulde for one farthing, and that he wil not suffer one of them to fall from theyr nest or pearch and perish without his will: much more greater care with∣out comparison will he haue of you, which are of much more vallew and estimacion then many sparrowes. If the diligence of ye fawckners or fow∣lers doo not preuaile, except God dooe helpe them to their game, much lesse shall the persecutours of the Gospel preuaile against vs, if the ordinaunce of God be not to permit them accor∣dingly: for his owne glory, & for our health and saluacion. In the generall gouernement of this world, nothinge may be done if it be not first determy∣ned in the consistory of god & doo passe by the consent of his owne will: much lesse can or may any thinge hurte or much them which he hath elected and
called, onelesse that he will and com∣maunde it.Sapi. 14. &. 3. The booke of wisdome dooth declare, thy prouidence O Fa∣ther dooth gouerne all thinges. From the beginninge,Sirac. 11. &. 14. the Lord hath made all thinges and they doo come to vs by his will, both good and euill, lyfe and death, pouertie and riches, come from him.Esay. 45. &. 7.12. I am the Lorde (sayth Esay the Prophet) and there is none but I, that formed the light and created the darckenesse, that dyd make peace and create the euill: I am the Lord that dyd all these thinges. And it is sayde further, behoulde: I am onely, and a∣lone, and there is none other gods but me: I will kill & make a liue againe, I will wounde, & will make whole. Reioyse in thy riches in the tyme of prosperitie (sayth the wyfe man) and haue thou pacience in the daies of ad∣uersitie,Eccle. 7. &. 14. bicause as god made the one, so dyd he make the other. The holy Ghost dooth teach vs, that all and eue∣ry thinge that dooth happen vnto vs, aswell aduersitie as prosperitie, the good as the euil dooth passe and come,
by the prouidence and will of God: and that without his ordinance no∣thinge taketh effect.Colo. 1. &. 9 Ephe. 1. & 4.5.7. Bicause he dooth all thinges in all, accordinge to the counsel of his diuine will & pleasure. And therefore sith it is so, that he is the author of all, and dooth nothinge without it be first ordeined, & that his prouidence is so vigilāt ouer vs: it re∣steth then yt all is saludable & health∣full for vs, yt he of his good will doothe make to take effect in vs, and that we must take all in good part which dooth succede and happen vnto vs (not as of or from the handes of an enimy or tyrant) but as of and at the hands of a true louing father, which dooth loue vs most tenderly.VVe must take al our afflictions from the handes of God. When we do sée our selues oppressed with diuers kindes of calamities & afflictions, let vs surely thinke & be resolued yt he himself doth afflict vs, he dooth imprison vs, he doth make vs poore, he dooth depriue vs of our worldly honours, he himself doth make vs sicke, & doth heale vs againe, he dothe kil vs, and reuiue vs againe, there is nothinge that doothe happen
vnto vs, (how aduersse or cruell so euer it be,) but is by him ordeyned, to that ende that we might thereby be brought to great ioye and felicitie. Let vs not deteigne nor withoulde our selues from them that doo execute vnto vs our afflictions, griefes and ca∣lamities. Let vs not doo so much as lowre or looke with an euill counte∣naunce therefore: bicause they are but instruments very necessary, that God dooth vse as scourges & ministers of his will. For that we may behould yt he doothe chasten vs but as his chil∣dren with them, for his vncurelesse care & thought is otherwise towardes vs, then our persecutours doo thincke for: bicause all that God dooth vnto vs is for our euerlasting delighte. That which they doo vnto vs is no∣thing but euill. God dooth chastise vs bicause he loueth vs, they doo afflict & persecute vs, bicause they horribly hate and abhorre vs, and to the ende that they would vtterly and wholly destroy vs. Great were the losses, troubles,
calamities and causes of calamitie,Iob. 1. &. 15.16.19. (to the sighte of men in this worlde) that happened to that holy man Iob,Iob. 2. &. 8.10. and diuers were the afflictions and persecucions that he dyd suffer, the ministers whereof were the diuell & his seruantes. But that faythfull fel∣low of ours, did take it neither of him nor them, but at the handes of God, bicause that he knew that all did pro∣céede from him. If we receiue (sayth he) the good thinges from the handes of the Lorde, why should we not re∣ceiue the bad also, yea how aduersse so euer they be, the Lorde giueth and also taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lorde, and so he dyd conclude with giuing of thankes, aswel for the worst, as for the best. So likewise let vs doe, no lesse for our afflictions and troubles, then for our ioyes and pros∣peritie, bicause all are the benefits of god, and giuen to one selfesame ende, for them that be called and elected to his knowledge and grace. Iesus Christ our redéemer and sa∣uiour, dyd acknowledge his father to
be the onely authour of all the trou∣bles,Math. 16. &. 23 crosses & passions that he did suf∣fer, he did take them as from ye hands of him, & not from the handes of his enimies. He sayd to S. Peter, whē as he went about to resist against, and to let his aduersaries,Iohn. 18. &. 11. and to make other lets yt he should not suffer (as it were rebuking him, & beinge angry & offen∣ded) what Peter I say, wouldest thou let it: shall not I drinke of ye cuppe yt my father hath giuē me. Surely with a harty and singuler good will dyd he drinke it, for that it came from ye hāds of his Father. So that we may see, he looked for, nor desired nothing at all, but euen as his father would, & that he ordeigned, that he himselfe should beare and suffer.1. Pet. 2. & 20.21.22. He was not angry, he dyd not persecute againe, he did not speake euill, nor vsed any kinde of in∣iury for any part of reuenge to them that crucifyed and intreated him so cruelly and vngodly.Luc. 23. & 24. But he was ra∣ther sory for them and loued them, al∣though they were wicked,Luke. 22. &. 41. and with a great affection dyd pray to god ye father
for them, in taking the cuppe or chal∣lis from the handes of his Father, he neither did, nor saide any thinge con∣trary to his will, nor yet contrary to the healthe and saluacion of them for whome he dyed, (sée and behoulde my dearely beloued bretheren & fellowe membres (what an example this is yt he hath here shewed vnto vs, (so di∣uine) if we vnderstande well what paines and passions he our head dyd suffer, we that are his membres of force shall vnderstād what we ought to doo. His very footesteppes must we followe, trauaile & passe by, if we wil∣be in conformitie with him. We be now afflicted as euil doers, we are cō∣dempned for common barratours, and curssed & abhorred so horribly as may be. Shal we cursse, abhorre, & do ye like to thē, no, no, not for thought: god for bidde we should. As they desire all the mischiefe that may be to vs, shall we doo ye like vnto them, no: in no maner wise. But rather sith yt we be ye sonnes of god, let vs kepe his cōmaundemēts which are cleane to the contrarye.
Math. 5. & 44. &c.Loue (sayth the Lord) your enimies, blesse them that cursse you, doo good to them which abhorre you and doo you harme,Luck. 6. & 26.27. &c. praye for thē which persecute you, for that you be sonnes and chil∣dren to your Father which is in hea∣uen, that maketh the Sunne to shine vpon the good and euill and dooth send his reigne vpon the iust & vniust. Let vs consider how louingly our Lorde & sauiour Christ Iesus, dyd answere to so and such curssed works, and to such obstinate and euill myndes, and how truely he dyd loue his euill doers. Al∣though they were giltie & had great∣ly offended, he dyd excuse them before his father, sayīg, they know not what they doo,Luke. 23. & 34. O Father forgiue them for thy name sake. Oh immensable cha∣ritie of God, Oh celestiall & heauenly example worthy to be followed.The voca∣cion of god If we doo consider attentiuely, our voca∣cion and calling with the which God hath called vs to his knowledge, we shall fynde it in this like maner that he dooth teach vs.
Of the propertie of persecutours with a perswasion to pa∣cience. &c. Cap. xii. GOd dyd call and vnite vs to his flocke,Iohn. 10. & 1.12.15. & dyd put vs in his fowlde which is his Churche catholicke,1. Peter. 3. &. 14.18. for that we should be his shéepe, & might haue his sonne Iesus Christe to be our shéepeheard. We were wol∣ues before we were called, but nowe are we shéepe, and the shéepe cannot, nor dooth not knowe how to dooe any kinde of euil, but yet is subiect to take & receiue any euill that is offered. She hath no tongue to cursse nor speake spitefully, no téethe to byte, no nailes to scratch, no anger to be irefull, no hatred to abhorre, and finally she hath nothinge wherewith to doo euill but hath many thinges wherewith to doo good. Euen so it ought to be with vs, bi∣cause we beare the name of christi∣ans,
the which doothe import in all points asmuch as I haue spoken of. Men doo persecute vs like fearce Ly∣ons, they doo afflict vs with fury lyke raueninge Wolues, they dooe teare vs in péeces lyke Tygers, they search vs by suttelties and wyles lyke fine fickle Foxes. They doo leaue neither arte nor crueltie vnvsed, nor vnprac∣tised against vs. Is it méete or were it well that we should pay them with theyr owne mony, or with the lyke a∣gaine. No, God forbid, for why we were not called to be lyke vnto them, but for that we should be lyke vnto himselfe.Iohn. 1. & 21.27. He dyd call vs to be his chil∣dren,Iohn. 3. & 36. so that we must be like vnto his sonne Iesus Christ, he is our head, God hathe bidden and commaunded vs to be guyded by him.Mar. 10. &. 29.30. And bicause we should learne of (and followe) him, Christe (saythe Sainct Peter) dyd suffer for vs,1. Peter. 3. &. 14. geuing vs example to followe his footesteppes. In what should we follow them: mary in suf∣fering ye euil which our enimies offer
vs, and in answeringe them againe the best we can therefore:1. Peter. 4. &.  what with enuie: no, none, but with charitie, for that is our callinge,Hebr. 12, &. 7.28. and therein are we taught, bothe by the wordes and workes of Iesus Christe our swéete sauiour, redemer, pastour, and shéepe∣herde. Let not vs take any regarde at all of the euill and harme that our persecutours vse towardes vs, but let vs chiefely regarde and looke dili∣gently to that which Iesus Christ did amongst vs, and commaund vs vnto. The imitacion of him let vs not ab∣horre, condempne, nor speake euill of, but rather let vs doo the contrary. Let vs loue to imitate him, and let vs doo the workes of loue. The cause why that our enimies and afflictours dooe persecute vs, is declared by our Saui∣our & Lorde Iesus Christ, who sayth,1. Iohn. 2. & 15.16. they shall cast you out of their Sinna∣gogs, excomunicate you,Iohn. 16. &. 3.3. & persecute you vnto deathe for my name sake, & shall thincke they doo therin to God very great seruice, & they shal do these
thinges bycause they haue neyther knowen me nor yet my Father. There is not nor can not be a grea∣ter mischiefe, then to be ignorant of (or not to know at all) our God and Father almightie, nor yet his sonne Iesus Christ.VVhat it is to know God. The want of know∣ledge hereof maketh all them which lacke the same, to be possessed of the diuell, seruaunts of sinne, and heires and inheritours of hell. And also dooth make them to beare, carry, and main∣teine continually, a curssed & cruel ca∣pital war, against god, heauen, and all yt is his. The which dooth bring vnto them their vtter distruction & perdici∣on for euer. Their hell, they doo al∣wayse carry with them, their owne consciences doo condempne them, bi∣cause the worme thereof, euer dying and neuer deade, doothe and will for euer accuse them. The iudgement of GOD doothe lye very heauy vppon them, the Lawe hathe curssed them, and the woorckes and déedes which they dooe in persecutinge the faythe∣full, are euident tokens & testimony of
their vtter condempnation. Bycause that those whom they persecute, (with persecutions, slaunders, condempna∣tions, curses, cloathed with saint Be∣nits crosses, shut vp in close prysons, and afterward burned,) are little or nothing touched thereby,Iesus christ persecuted in his mem∣bers. but Iesus Christ in them. It is he, it is he that beareth the spitefulnesse of their pas∣sions and Persecutions: as hée hym∣selfe did declare to Saint Paule be∣fore his conuersion, for when that he had cruelly persecuted the Christians, (our sauiour Christ sayde with a ter∣rible voyce) Saule Saule,Act. 9. &. 4. why perse∣cutest thou mée. What greater euill may be thought then to persecute our swéete sauiour and redéemer, how can the wrath of God be more euident vn∣to to them, then when they may sée that he careth not for them, but suffereth them to fall and runne headlong into that loathsome lake of perdition, and yet in vsing ye same, they think them∣selues in suche securitie of saluation, that they solemnise their tiranycall dispositions, as if they did solemly ha∣low
some festiuall feast. And doe think they doe God good seruice. Oh lamen∣table case that they know not ye truth in those their wicked doings.2. Thes. 2. &. 3.12. Esay. 5. & 20 Sin hath so captiuated and blynded them that they estéeme light for darkenesse, the truth of God for deceyueable errours, and the rightuousnesse of heauen for iniquitie. And therefore with the bo∣wels of pitifull compassion we ought to pray to God for them, beséechyng him of his mercy, that hée will take them out of that so mortal, deadly, and dampnable estate. Now then sith it is God that is the aucthor of our afflicti∣ous,Psal. 115. & 12. calamities, and griefs, if we take them at his hands, they wil be health∣full for vs, and make vs to be true i∣mitators and folowers of Christ hys sonne, so that we shall not at all dys∣daine our enimies, nor shal in no wise vse them euilly for euil, but rather de∣sire that they may be brought into the bowels of his loue, and so reduced in∣to the way of health. With faintnes are we filled with e∣dible wrath & indignatiō against thē,
bicause we thinke yt with their irefull hatred, their caluminate strifes, & flaū∣derous reportes, their false testimo∣nies and burning desires to shead our blud, they doo, or can do as much grief or harme. But if we doe vnderstande Gods diuine counsell a right, & doo not looke a wrye from his worde, we shall and may know perfectly wel, how im∣possible it is for thē to doo vs any kynd of dammage, with all yt euer they can doe or imagine, whatsoeuer it bée. If we doe but heare the words that the holy Ghost speaketh by the Prophet Dauid, we may wel vnderstand & sée, that they can not preiudice vs in any thing at all. An excelent comfort to the afflicted. Cap. xiij. HE that dwelleth (sayeth he) vnder the defence of the highest,Psal. 91. & 1.4.10. shall be sure vnder the shadow of the almigh∣tie.The secu∣ritie of the faithfull. The defence wherin doeth consist our sureste securitye, is the fyrme truste and affyaunce that the Lords
hath giuen vs to haue in him. By the which we are made partakers of hys omnipotencie, and as his omnipoten∣cie is in securitie from all kynde of euill, euen so are we thereby bycause he is onely our hope, our foretresse, our strength, and God in whom wée chiefly trust. And the chiefe ground of his promise is, that he will deliuer vs from all euilles, and that hys trueth shall be vnto vs a buckler and shield. And also the Prophet sayth in ye same Psalme, Bycause thou haste put thy selfe vnder the guarde and custodie of the most highest, there shall no euill happen vnto thée, neyther shall any plague come néere thy dwellynge. Whereby it appeareth playnly, what vayne traueyles our enimyes take in hand, when they séeke rather to afflict vs, or fight so furiously as they doe, a∣gainst the truth.Mat. 16. &. 24.28. For that as they can not preuayle against the truth, so shall they not preuayle against them that folow it, bycause the auctthor thereof is their mightie defendor. Héere the Lord doeth promyse and certifie that
no euill shall happen vnto vs, nor plague come to our dwelling or Ta∣bernacle, if we know and feare hym. So that it followeth the euilles and mischiefes that our aduersaries doe séeke towardes vs,The faith∣full mem∣bers of Christ. cannot hurte vs if we be faithfull. Bycause the elected whose tutor and gouernour is God, are not, neither riches, honor, dignity, high estate, bodily or corporal health, lyfe, nor any thing els, whereof there is any vertue or power giuen to the wicked. But are the liuing members, of Iesus Christ vnited and knit vnto him most surely, and therefore inuisi∣ble to the children of this world, as is the same Lord. And bycause the wic∣ked should not sée howe to doe them harme in that true being which they bee, God did so fauour them, that by hym they were incorporated in Iesu Christ, for that as hée is firme sure, substanciall, strong, and may not bée throwen out of the throne of his ma∣iestie. So be those his members of such strength and force in him, that they may in no wyse be separated frō him.
That which by tirannie of Tirants is to be taken from vs, is but lent vs in this worlde. But that which God hath giuen vs for our owne, I meane ye celestial riches which we are heires vnto, to inherite for euer, they can not be taken away, although they doe the worst they can.That is the riches of his king∣dome. That which is ours is giuen vs for our owne with a pryui∣ledge, irreuocable, that we be his chil∣dren, inheritors of his kingdom, and partakers of his glory. That we also be his inheritance, & a dwellyng place for him to dwell in for euer, with our selues also in him.1, Pet. 1. &. 3.4.5. S. Peter doeth re∣ioyce yt we doe liue in him eternally, and doe holde and account him for our God & father, and doeth giue thanks, saying: Blessed be God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, ye which accor∣ding to hys aboundant grace and mer∣cy, hath regenerated vs agayne to a lyuely hope, by the resurrection from death of our Lord Iesus, to enioy an inheritaunce immortall, not conta∣mynate but incorruptyble and vn∣defiled,
reserued in the heauens for those which are kept by the power of God thorough faith, to obteine salua∣cion. So that being kepte by the power of God which passeth strength of ca∣stles, or any thing els, what euill or harme can come or happen vnto vs. Thou dootst hyde them in the secret of thyne owne presence priuilie,Psal 30. &. 22. from prouoking the pride of men (sayth the Prophet Dauid) also (further) thou doost hide them as in a tabernacle frō the stowte caluminate,Psal 27. &. 5 strifes of euil tongues. So that the greate brauery and boy∣steous bragges that the wicked doe braue with all, it cannot hurt vs. For that their pride, theyr peuishnesse, their caluminates, their strifes, theyr subtilties, nor yet theyr generall and wicked coūsells cannot gréeue vs. No more cannot the gréedye gréeuous rauuen, nor hawtie hate of the diuel, pearce nor penitrate the place where GOD dooth hide vs.
That which did happen or fall out to Iesus Christ,Iesus christ is alwayes a God al∣mightie. the same shall happen vnto vs. For as he was whipped, spoi∣led, spitted on, bloud drawen from, nayled vppon the crosse, otherwise in∣iured, and blasphéemed, & did remaine the sonne of God, and could not bée taken away nor let from callyng and acknowledging of hys God & father, and continued the redéemer of the world. So lykewyse the faithfull, the more they bée dishonoured,The faith∣full are al∣wayes the childrē of God. dispoyled, condempned, cursed, and iniurioustie handled, the more they remayne al∣wayes the children of God, and hys spirit doeth lyue the rather alwayes in them,Rom. 8. & 15. by the which they inuocate, call, and acknowledge hym for theyr father. So that it foloweth that the worlde and all the greatnesse thereof (I meane the tiranous tirany of the persecuting wicked worldlings) with all the tirany and cursed crueltie they can doe,Gala. 4. & 5.6. Hebr. 3. &. 1. can not hurt vs. To confirme & make vs more strong in our faith, the holy ghost by the pro∣phet Dauid doeth declare vnto vs,
that all which our aduersaries dooe commit, thonder out, and threatten a∣gainst vs and the Gospell is in vaine. (For he saith) the gentiles fret, rage,Psal. 2. & 1.2. &c. and fume furiously, and the people in∣uent vaine thinges. The kings of the earth doo conspire, and the princes and rulers of the Earth doo gather them selues together, against the Lord and Christ his annointed. It is vayne and shall take none effect at any tyme in vs, nor yet nothinge at all, that they can afflict vs with, be it interior or ex∣terior.Iohn. 16. &. 14. Apoc. 17. &. 14. Bicause the Lord our god hath ouercome all our enimies, aswell those which are visible and séene, as those which are inuisible & not séene. And hath ouerthowne them in suche sort that they shal neuer more lift vp their heads against vs. And thereof it accreweth and groweth, that all is in vaine that they doo or can doo against him, that hath ouercome them.All that the wicked doe against the faithful is in vaine, And moreouer all is in vaine that any fu∣ry can doo against the faithfull, so that their iudgements and condempnaci∣ons are all in vaine. For that if the
iudgement of God can not preuayle agaynst them, bycause they (as the Apostle sayeth) are knitte in Iesus Christ.Rom. 5. & 2.3. &c. Howe can any of the iudge∣mentes of theyr enimyes in any point preuayle agaynst them. Vaine are their sentences and excommunicati∣ons agaynst them, for that God hath communicated them in Christ, and made them partakers of his ryches. It is a common practise among them to confiscate, spoyle, & robbe the fayth∣full of their perishing ryches. But yet in vayne, bycause that Iesus Christ who is their true ryches will not bée robbed from them. Their bodies are imprysoned, yet hée reigneth in theyr liberties, to ioy, reioyce, comfort, and recreate theyr hartes. Moreouer, they are burned, and re∣ceyue other kyndes of death, to the imaginations of the persecutors, by∣cause they should not lyue: but they shall neuer dye. Rom. 6. & 7.8.9. &c, Colos. 3. &. 3.For Sainct Paule sayth, your liues are hydden with Christ in God. Fynally, theyr instrumentes and
other weapons the which they take vp to vse theyr cruelties with,Psal. 2. & 4. it is but in vayne agaynst them (I meane agaynst the faythfull) for that he that sitteth and is resident in the heauens (sayeth the Prophet) shall deryde and make a mock at their folly: the Lord will laughe them to scorne for theyr great foolishnes. They doe think them selues to be of the number of his cho∣sen, and yet the more they doe impry∣son and kill the very chosen in déed, so muche the more soouer they thinke to recouer his heauēly kingdom: a great mockery no doubt: and is no more but as it were an Emmet should fighte with an Elephante, or a foolishe flea with a foule Cammell. Were it not also foolishe phoprie for a man to fight with a shadowe, thinkyng it to bée a man of might. Surely they doe none other, which persecute & fight against the faithfull. Of whome the Prophete speaketh: saying, God hath put his faithfull in safetie, so yt no harme can touch them,
and where in no wise they may perish by the peuishnesse of any pelting per∣secuter. There is none that séeketh to hurt or harme them, but playeth the part of him that pusheth and fighteth with his owne shaddowe.2, Cor. 7. &. 5. Against the Gospel, the kinges, princes, the wise, learned, and holy, in the world haue discouered and shewed openly, some of them their knowledge, suttelties & threats: othersome their valiency & might: and all of them doo affirme & say, that they doo nothinge but vpon a zeale of christianitie. But that is such a zeale, as he ye gouerneth the Gloabe and in the heauens dwellith, doth de∣ride,Psal. 2. & 4. laugh and make a mocke at. And doth threaten that in place and lue of the same, he will speake to them in his ire, and vex them in his heauy dis∣pleasure. And also chastise them with an horrible and terrible chastisemēt, as he hath done from the beginning, and that hath béen séene in our daies. But sith it is so, and that all is vaine that they doo or can inuent against vs that dooe knowe and beleue in Iesus
Christ, & that he dooth deride & mocke them in their doings. Let vs not feare their foolishnesse and folly in their cō∣spiracies which they vse against vs, to deuide apart and seperate vs ther∣by from gods trueth. But let vs laugh at their folly wt our good father who dooth nothing but laugh at, and deride them for the same. Of gods exceding loue greatly to the comfort of his people. &c. The .xiiii. Chapter. ANd also, sith that those fonde foolish fooles cannot harme nor gréeue vs, and that we cannot be harmed nor gréeued by any kinde of calamitie. For that we be in such securitie with God, and that we be not made by our naturall weake∣nesse to follow their vanities, and so brought with them to be subiect to the wrath and ire of God. Let vs assure our selues of the great loue that god hath towardes vs, & consider the cau∣ses of our afflictions, and so giue him
thanckes accordingly. And also let vs loue him as his true children, for the loue of Iesus Christ, with ye same loue that his father hath loued him.Iohn. 17. &. 11.10.. &c. Of all those that were and should be his dis∣ciples he spake to his father, the night before he should suffer, saying, O Fa∣ther thou hast loued them with ye same loue yt thou hast loued me. The loue with the which God loued his sonne is perpetuall and euerlasting, and yet with the same loue hath he loued vs. As it is sayde by Ieremy the prophet I haue loued you sayth the Lord with a loue & charitie euerlasting.Iere. 31. &. 3. Though all thinges perish, vanish, consume, & vade away, yet this loue neither pe∣risheth nor vanisheth, but indureth for euer in one most mighty force & be¦ing, whether it be in prosperitie or ad∣uersitie, God dothe loue and except vs as his owne. The which is verifi∣ed, experienced, and proued, by the Prophet Dauid:Psal. 1. &. 7. which being in the toppe and chéefe of his tribulacions, GOD dyd knowe him and deliuer him.
So that hée puttinge hys truste in him, sayde, althoughe my fréendes haue forsaken mée,Psal. 27. &. 2.3.4. and my parents haue cast mée foorth, yet the Lord my God wil deliuer mée and take mée vp. Iesus Christe was loaden with all the sinnes of mankynde, and with paines and passyons moste bytter, intollerable, and cruell for the same: he was forsaken of his fréendes, o∣uerwhelmed with enimies, and ex∣tréemely persecuted,Psal. 21. & 6.7.8. yet GOD dyd loue him moste déerely, was alwaies with him, and dyd not nor wyll not, neuer forsake him, but dyd heare him in all his agonies and troubles. Also he sayde to his Disciples,Iohn, 16. & 32. euery one of you shalbe afrayed of mée and scattered awaye and I shalbe left a¦lone, yet I am not alone bicause the Father is wt mée.Psal, 16. & 9. Also the Prophet sayth: sith god is on my right hande, I will not faynt nor feare what men doo to mée. Wherby it apeareth that God dooth loue them that be his, and wilbe alwaies on theyr right hande, when they be in greatest agonyes,
troubles and distresses. How Iesus Christ dooth loue vs he himselfe dooth testifie and saye,Iohn. 15. &. 9. as the father hath lo∣ued me, euen so haue I loued you. He loued me most dearely vpon ye crosse, euen so doo I loue you. He dooth loue vs as himselfe,Ephe. 5. &. 30. bicause we all which beleue, be membres of his body, of his fleshe, and of his boanes. There is no man that will forget and abhorre his owne flesh, for when any part or mē∣bre of the body is wounded and most sicke, then, yea euen then, is his loue the greater and greatest of all, & with greatest tendernesse, doothe shew his might, & loue without forgetfulnesse. So that in our greatest calamities & afflictiōs, we are of him best beloued, for that, he cannot nor will not forget vs.Esay. 49. &. 15. By the Prophet Esay he sayth, can the mother by possibilitie forget hir selfe of hir owne onely sonne which she dyd beare in hir belly, and bringe vp with milke euen from hir tendre breast. Is it possible for hir so to forget him,Esay. 49. &. 16. yt she should neuer more take pitie vppon him. If she doo forget
hir selfe, yet will I neuer forget you. Bicause I haue you written in my handes at my fingers endes. O wor∣thy wordes spoken with suche a ma∣iestie, let vs not be mistrustful of thē, for that God dooth speake them him∣selfe: and to vs he doothe directe his speache. And therefore when we de∣priued of our wealth and worldly ri∣ches, most cruelly afflicted, and héeld and accounted for abhominable. Let vs thincke that God dooth and wil go∣uerne and helpe vs, and will not for∣get but remembre vs, as a thing most dearely beloued of him. He sayth, that he dyd write vs in his fingers endes and handes, bicause that as the hands & fingers endes be alwayes in sighte, and cannot be forgotten: So thereby doothe be giue vs to vnderstande, that he dooth alwaies looke vpon his elec∣ted and wyll neuer forget them. Bi∣cause he dooth loue them with an af∣fection more tēder a great deale, then is that of the Mother towardes hir childe.Iohn. 13 & 33.34. &c. The which he declared right well to his disciples, when he should
depart from them by death, he made a great many of very louing & comfor¦table countenaunces vnto them, and dyd promise great consolacion & com∣fort, in all their griefes and calami∣ties, though they wer neuer so great after his departure. And therefore as assured of this great loue and charitie that the Lord our God hath towards vs perpetually. Let vs not giue place to any thinge that is (contrary to vs) against him, for that our firmnesse, cō∣stancy, and perseuerance dooth concist therein. The conformitie which god dooth pretende, that we which be his should haue with Christ, by meane of ye cros∣ses and afflictions that we are to passe through: is a sure and manifest signe and token of this his great loue with the which he loueth vs. Bicause the effect thereof is so admyrable,Colos. 1. & 8.24. that it cannot procéede but from so high prin∣ciple,Ephes. 1. &. 4.18. grounde or beginning as is our election, & the vocation with ye which God dyd call vs, doothe procéede from the loue which he hath towards vs in
Christ. So yt all ye meanes & practises, that he dooth vse towards vs, to bring vs to the ende of our election, which is to be gloryfied with him, of necessi∣tie must néedes procéede from ye same originall. When he dyd open our eies to sée our perdicion in the which we were, and did giue vs the power and vertue of his spirit to imbrace and re∣ceue his sauing health, it was a per∣fect sure signe that he dyd loue vs, & that we should not doubt thereof, bi∣cause he had done so great a pleasure for vs. And therefore let vs now not feare that, which thē we wer put out of doubt of, bicause that all those af∣flictions & calamities, which now wée suffer from our Lord god, are fruits & a confirmacion of our calling. And bi∣cause we are so called & beloued of him we are therefore so afflicted & hated of the world. Yet let vs not faint nor fal from ye trueth, bicause that which the holy ghost doth testifie to all ye mēbres of ye holy body of Christ in general, he dooth testify & say ye same to euery one of them in particuler. And therefore
euery one perticulerly ought to apply and assure himselfe to him, in none other maner nor forme, then of him onely it was sayde and spoken, by Sainct Paule,1. Cor. 2. &. 21. who saythe, we haue not receiued the spirit of this world, but the spirit which commeth of god, bicause we might knowe the thinges which are of him, that he doothe geue vs, and not be ignorant therein, nor yet doubt thereof. Of Purgatorie and the causes of calamitie. &c. Cap. xv. BIcause we that are of the nū∣bre of the faythfull, are suche a perticuler worke of GOD, that of his goodnesse he wyll not that there be any thinge in vs which he loueth not, but that we be wholly cleane: & also that with our holinesse and cleannesse of lyfe and doctrine, we dooe declare our selues to be his children: and therefore wyll destroy in vs all the workes of the di∣uell,Iohn. 3. & 16.19.20. which are so repugnant vnto
him, as are the wicked inclinacions of the fleshe, and all whatsoeuer els that doothe let our true obedience to his holy heauenly will. To ende and consume it altogether: he dooth laye his crosses vpon vs, to be as it were a Purgatory in this world to purifie vs,No Purga∣tory but in this lyfe. and he will there with that we take it as a testimony of his loue, and that we be his verye familiars and fréendes. I, sayth the Lorde,Pro. 3. &. 11.12. dooe re∣prehend and chastise those whome I loue. And hereof it groweth,The causes of calami∣tie to the faithfull. that the more he loueth vs, so much the more he hateth & abhorreth the sinne that is in vs, and also so much the more he will correct and chastise vs. And as there is none that he dooth more loue then those which he hathe called and incorporated in Iesus christ, so is ther none yt is more afflicted in this world. Euen as a carefull Father that hath many children, and one among thē more beloued then the rest, whom he will make his heire, and the more he loueth him, so much the more vigi∣lant he is, to kéepe all vice & daunger
from him, that might depriue him of his inheritance, & yet the sonne with dolefull dollour & griefe that he dooth féele, dooth bewayle and thincke in fée∣linge his fatherly correction, that it doothe procéede of ire, and doothe not consider his fathers pure pretence, but rather taketh it for a signe of ha∣tred, which for a most sure certeintie, is a true testimony of loue & good will. Euen so it dooth fall out, betwene god the celestiall father and vs, for that we doo not vnderstande the intent of him in his fatherly reprehensions and chastisements, ye which of truth (deare fellow membres) are bicause he doth loue vs most singulerly, as childrē to dispose vnto vs, his most inestimable and blessed inheritāce, and to destroye in vs all ye vices yt should let or hinder vs frō ye same. We do sorrow & gréeue at his friendly & fatherly correctiō, we doo not estéeme it as we ought to doo, nor as instruments ye tend to so ioyful an ende. And therefore let vs heare & follow the counsel of ye holy ghost, spo∣kē by & out of ye mouth of ye apostle S.
Paul.Hebr. 12. & 5.6.7. &c. My sonne despise not ye chastinīg of ye lorde, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him,Prou. . & 11.12. for whome he loueth him he chasteneth and scourgeth euery sonne yt he receueth. If we can endure his correctiō, he offereth himselfe vnto vs as vnto his sonnes, for what sonne is yt whom his father chastiseth not, & is beloued. He yt is not vnder correctiō (wherof we all be partakers) is a ba∣stard & not a sonne. Wherby it appea∣reth, & we may plainly sée, yt it is he ye scourgeth vs, bicause he loueth vs, & dooth certeinly assure vs yt we are his children, for yt by his crosses and cala∣mities with ye which he scourgeth vs, he will distinguish vs frō those which are none of his, but are reprobats. So yt if we should be frée frō his paternal or fatherly correction, we should also be set voyd & frée from ye inheritance of his blessed kingdom. And moreouer it were then made manifest vnto vs, yt we were bastterds illegittimate and not sonnes lawfully begottē of our lo∣uing father. But sith that by his singu¦ler & infinit mercy, he hath made vs
legittimate. Let vs like lawfull loo∣uing children put aside all pusilanimi∣tie, weakenesse, and cowardise, and withall earnestie and firme zeale, sub∣mitte our selues, to the ordinaunce & will of the eternall God our heauen∣ly father,Rom. 8. & 15.16.17. and let vs vnderstande fur∣ther the saying of S. Paule. We haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare any more, but we haue receiued the spirite of adoption, by the which we crye & call Abba, father, the same spirit certifieth vs that we are the sonnes of god, and therby heires with Christ, & therefore let vs suffer with him that we may bée also glorifyed together. And forasmuch as we dooe knowe the effect of the benefit of his amorous and louely correction, let vs suffer as sonnes and heires, to the I∣mitacion of his eldest sonne our head & eldest brother Iesus Christe, which being best beloued dyd suffer most ex∣cessiue paines & passions. And as the greatnesse of the same was a true te∣stimony of the loue with the which he loued (& was beloued of the) father:
Euen so, how much ye greater our af∣flictions, troubles & calamities are, so much the more testimony haue we of his excéeding loue & good wil towards vs.Sirach. 2. &. 2.6.12. For it is written (by Iesus ye son of Sirache) that the crosse is mercy. So yt the more greater yt our crosses & calamities are, so much more ye clear∣er demonstracion haue we, ye god doth loue vs the more profoundly, hath the more pittie of vs, & maketh vs liue in disdaine with ye diuel & all his workes. From whence it springeth, that how much more we be oppressed with per∣secucion or any kinde of calamitie, so much the nigher are we at an ende of ye consumption & destroy of all ye euil & mischiefe yt is in & towards vs, against the which ye Lord our God dooth make batteile, warre, & fight for vs. And for this cause, in the most extremitie of al our troubles and calamities whatsoe∣uer. We ought to haue greatest con∣tent, comfort, & ioye,1. Iohn. 3. &. 2.7, bicause then our most franke, frée, & ful libertie, for the knowledge of God draweth neare, whereby we shall sée him face to face,
& shal know him as he doth know vs. Let vs not thē as yonge babes, blush, feare, stoppe or staye, from the feeling of those troubles & calamities, which are present in the world. But let vs passe to the consideracion yt god doothe pretend by them,Colo. 1. &. 5 which is to make vs wholly rightuous,Ephe. 5. &. 9. and that there re∣main not one spot of vnrightuousnes nor corruption in vs,Hebr. 12. & 10.11. but yt we should be the irreprehensible sonnes of god, without spotte or wrinckle. So that we might come to enioy ye most bles∣sed fruite thereof, which is as a thing of inestimable vallew appendant and regardant or belonging to the excer∣cisours of the same. A great comfort to the Christian, with a terrible threate to the vngodly and wicked. &c. Cap. xvi. ALso God would haue vs to vn∣derstand thereby, how great & how vile a villanous euil, sinne is. And how great wtout mea∣sure the rewarde thereof is, to those
vnfaithfull ones that will not know him, for that thereby, of a suerty they are set a farre distance from god, and brought in hatred with him. For if god haue loued vs so much, yt he hath all ready pardoned,Rom. 5. & 10. and reconsiled vs to him by the death of his sonne, then for the rest of the sinne that remay∣neth in vs, he dooth with the greater iustice, treate and deale with vs so se∣uerely, as to make vs liue and dye in crosses and calamitie. And therefore what a wonderfull correction or pu∣nishment, may we thinck that he wil vse, to them that are so fully fraught with mischiefe, that they be euen the seruants of sinne, and of the diuell, & enimies to all kinde of rightuousnes. But yet for all this god dooth not pu∣nish vs for sinne, bicause that Christe hath bene punished therefore already. But he dooth punish ye sinne that dooth alwayes reigne in vs, not for the ha∣tred he hath vnto vs, but for ye mallice that he hath vnto sinne. And if we beinge sonnes & children,
be put in such a streight by our father, that for the sinne that is in vs we be iudged of men to be stranges and for∣riners to him, what shall be come of those, or them that beléeue not ye gos∣pell, but are rather enimies thereof. He will not onely punish the sinne yt is in them, but also will of necessitie consume them and their sinnes toge∣ther to euerlasting destructiō, for that they cānot abide so rigorrous a iudge∣ment of God, (who most horribly ha∣teth sinne) as is due for the same. 1. Peter. 4. &. 17.18.The tyme is already come (sayth S. Peter) that iudgement must begin at the house of God. If it begin first with vs, what ende will then come of thē, which haue not nor doo not beléeue his gospel, nor yet wil be none of his hous∣hould. If the rightuous can scarsely be saued, what will then become of sinners, or where shall they appeare. If amongst vs (I say) which are his temple and holy habitacion, he doo be∣ginne to punishe with suche rigour: what wyll he then dooe when as his wrath and ire shalbe inflamed against
all, both one and the other. That is to say, as well the househould of god, as the houshould of the diuell. When he beginneth to take vengeance of that house where the diuell dwelleth, is obeyed, and all his will fulfilled,Psalm. 75. & 9.10. he will take in his hand the cuppe of his wrath against sinne, & all shal drincke thereof, for all are sinners. But the children of God shall drincke & tast of the first, best, & purest thereof, bicause they may vnderstande what enmytie they ought to haue to sinne. Sith god doth abhorre it so much that he will punishe it first in vs, it is a great sig∣nificacion, that the rest (I meane the reprobate) shall be also punished, tast of his wrath, and shall not escape, al∣though they thincke themselues at li∣bertie, and loose there from. And if we the sonnes of God be subiect to suppe the first and best thereof, it cannot be but that the other must néedes drinck and swallow vp the dregges, last and worst. But for the childrē and sonnes of God (I meane ye faithful) to drinck of that cuppe in such maner of wyse,
and to that ende that God hath deter∣mined:Psal. 115. & 12.13. me thincketh it is more salu∣dable and healthfull to them,Psal. 116, &. 12. for that the lorde will vse suche moderacion & so much alay the extréeme bitter taste thereof: bicause he giueth it them to none other ende, but to bring them to humilitie, yt being humbled & brought low in mynde, they might with more greater earnestie in christian affectes, imbrace the benefites of him already receaued, & open their eyes with such clearenesse, that they might the more soner sée and behoulde, how dearely & louingly he loueth & fauoureth them. So that thereby he hathe made them more capable of his riches (as Dauid sayth) although ye Lorde doo cast them downe neuer so déepe,Psal, 119. &. Esay. 23. &. 6. Luke. 1. & 5.52. Psal. 145. &. 14. Psal. 113. &. 6. yet he leaueth them not therein but lifteth and exal∣teth them thereby into his great glo∣ry, bicause it is his condicion and qua∣lite to exalt the humble and méeke, & to reise the poore from the dounghill. Sith the determinacion of the al∣mightie Iehouah, is so fatherly & frēd∣ly for vs, let vs drinke with a good wil
of ye cup that he dooth giue vs, be they crosses or griefes, whatsoeuer, for yt thereby he dooth call vs to his know∣ledge, which for our ingratitude & o∣ther vices were seperated frō him for a season, with deseruing of most rigo∣rous pain & punishmēt for ye same. And therefore I saye we ought yt rather too take in good part ye bitter tast of being tost in the floud of any affliction. We haue deserued to be chorlishly cheined in perpetual prison world wtout ende, yet god is so mercifull & louing vnto vs, yt without respect of any thinge, he hath allotted vs but a lyght penance, wt suffering a few, of short sorrowes & calamities. But we moste stobbernly refuse thē wt al our strōgist forces yt we haue.Math. 16. &. 22.23. Yet for all that sith Iesus Christ hath called vs to ye crosse we ought not to grudge at ye bearing therof,Luke. 9. &. 55.56. but ac∣cept it paciētly, bicause of ye cōdiciō wt it, alredy performed. If we wold looke and sée about vs, we should sée, finde, & know, yt it is not we our selues yt bear these crosses alone,Esay. 9. &  but he himselfe in vs: for (the prophet Esay saith) yt it is
he, it is he himself, that dooth carry his kingdom vpon his shoulders. Whom shal we vnderstand for his kingedom: but the persecuted, ye imprisoned, the abhorred, and condempned, that are kylled for his name sake. It is he him selfe that they persecute and punishe in vs his membres, for the hate they haue to his inheritance which he bea∣reth on his shoulders. So ye althoughe he doo giue vs to drinck of his wrath, yet he dooth mynister with it, such mo∣deracion and gentlenesse as is possi∣ble: for in the ende all commeth to rest vpon his owne shoulders, and so we by him are vnleaden and dischar∣ged. And therefore let vs loue him and giue him thankes, sith we haue deser∣ued to drincke of the extreme bitter∣nesse of his wrath, and yet he giueth vs the purest with the moste lenitie and gentlenesse that may be. But the dregges, which is all the rigour of his wrath, of his indignaciō, his fury, his condempnacion, his cursse eternall, & sentēce irreuocable are kept for thē to drincke which haue not beléeued the
Gospell: but in stéede of the worship, and due obedience to be done therby, they did afflict and grieue with perse∣cutions, him in his members. The which will take effecte (as S. Paule sayeth,2. Thes. . &. 7.8.) when our Lorde Iesus shall manifest and shewe him selfe from heauen, with his mightie holy An∣gels in flames of fyre: then will hée take vengeance of those that doe not know him, nor obey not the Gospell of our Lorde Iesus Christ his sonne: and will giue them punishment of e∣ternal dampnation from the presence of our Lord God, and from the glorie of his potencie, when he shall come to be glorifyed in his Sainctes, and bée made admirable to all those whiche stedfastly beléeue. An Inuectiue against the vvicked, vvith a merueylous comfort to the god∣ly Christian, &c. Cap. xvij. ALthough that God for a tyme doe staye, and doeth not shewe his vengeance presently, that hee hath prepared agaynste
them that condempne his rightuous∣nesse: yet he doth not allow any thing which they say or doe against him. His patience and long suffering, is no cer∣tain signe nor seale that may confirm them any sufficient acquittance from him, for condempning of them whom he doeth best loue in the worlde: nor yet for any other kynde of their wic∣kednesse vsed. But he is mercifull to all: yea euen to them, although they dispise and disdayne hym, hys mercy and all that is in him: and doe truste to theyr owne penitenciary merites. They doe thinke to haue a prosperous successe in all their doings,Iere. 19. & 15 and why: mary, bycause sinne is so setled in thē, and hath such rule, Lordship, and po∣wer ouer them. But all their prospe∣ritie and good successes,Rom. 2. &. 2 3.4. &c. is nothynge but a heapyng vp, of the fulnesse of the measure of the Lordes wrath, till it bée so full in déede, as vppon the sodayne when they looke not for it, it must and will runne ouer (or turne the bottome vpwarde) vppon them: and destroye and dryue them to the
déepest dungeon in hell: and they shall be suffered stil to ryse the higher, that their falles may be the greater. And therfore the holy ghost doth commaūd the faithfull, that they should not flie from the truth, although their aduer∣sities bée neuer so great, nor thoughe the prosperitie of their aduersaries be neuer so sublimate and high. By the Prophet Dauid he sayeth:Psal. 37. & 1.2.3. &c. Fret not thy self against the vngodly, neyther bée thou enuyous agaynste the euyll dooers, for they shall sodeynly be cut downe lyke grasse, and withered like the gréene hearbes.Sirach. 2. in all. Obey the Lord with patience, bycause the wicked shall be deuoured and destroyed, and they that trust in the Lorde shall in∣herite the earthe. And therfore let vs be firme in righ∣tuousnesse and feare, as the spirite of God doeth commaunde vs. For sithe that wée can not, nor maye not, e∣scape the afflictions and calamityes in this worlde, muche lesse shall our persecutors escape: but our temporal tribulatiōs are nothing to be cōpared
to their paynes eternall. Temporall tribulations, are but momentary, to the eternall troubles, which are to touche the vngodly in tyme to come, for that they beléeue not the Gospel, and are persecutors of the rightuous. (As S. Peter sayeth) be ye mery and glad to be persecuted,2. Pet. 4. & 12.13. that you may be partakers of Christes passions, and so be glorifyed in him: for by that mean shal we be strengthened to withstand the feare of any present euil.Esay. 30. &. 20. Esay. 30. & 29. Sylence and hope (sayeth the Prophet) shall be your foretresse and bulwarke. Howe much the more we are sylent & trust∣full in tolleratyng of trouble in our trials. So much ye more are we strēg∣thened and anymated to drinke of the clearenesse of the cuppe which the Lord shall giue vs. So that it shall be no detrimēt nor harme to vs, more then is already spoken of by his word. 1. Cor. 11. & 32.The Apostle S. Paule in the Epi∣stle that hée doeth wryte to them of Corinthe, sayeth: when that wée bée iudged of the Lord, we are but chasti∣sed, bycause wée should not be damp∣ned
with the world. In this the spirit of God doeth testefie vnto vs, that by the means of those tribulations which we doe suffer, we be made frée from the condempnation of the world, the which of necessitie is to bée condemp∣ned. So that the punishments & per∣secutions which we suffer, God doeth not suffer vs in them to loose vs, or se∣perate vs from him and his trueth, as our flesh and the world doe iudge or imagine: but to correct and consume in vs, all those things which are lets and stumbling blockes, to put vs from the similitude or lykenesse that wée ought to haue vnto his sonne Iesus Christ our Lord & redéemer. Bycause that howe muche the more we bée af∣flicted and troubled, with so much the more affyance and trust in his mercy, we should deplore and bewayle our sinnes and wickednesse: lyke his chil∣dren of mercy, and so be banished from the participation or part taking, of the condempnation of the world.Iohn. 17. & 11, 20.23. &c. And this is the effect of the supplication or prai∣er, that our Lorde Iesus Christ dyd
make at his last supper, when he dyd pray to hys father, for thē onely which did beleue in him by his worde, and he was hearde. But sithe he dyd not pray for the wicked which he calleth the worlde) wée oughte not to mer∣ueyle at theyr peruersenesse, for that all the peruersitie whiche they doe vse, doeth leade them with stealyng steppes, to the brincke of theyr per∣dition and dampnation. Hée did pray for vs that wée myght be deliuered from euil: and euen now boholde howe by afflictions, he doeth deliuer vs from the condempnation, due for sinne and wickednesse, and doeth reserue the same onely for the children of vnbeliefe. And therefore it is sayde by the Prophet,Psal. 94. & 12. Blessed is the man that thou haste chastened (O Lorde) and instructed in thy law: that thou mayest gyue hym patience and reste in the tyme of aduersitye, vntyll the pitte bée dygged vp for the vngodly. Héerein are we surely certified of our blessednes, by the afflictions yt we suf∣fer,
for yt we are corrected of the Lord, that we should not be cast of but inioy our porcions of his sauing health. And therfore ye holy woman Iudith sayde:Iudit. 8. &. 27. Let vs beleue that the Lord doth cor∣rect vs but as his seruauntes, not to our losse, but to our gain: not to spoile vs, but to amend vs.4. Esdr. 16. & 20. And Esdrasse a man of God sayeth, the hunger, the plagues, the tribulations, and the vexation of mynde, with the whych the Lorde doeth scourge vs: they are but to correcte and purge vs, of and for our sinnes. And therefore the Apo∣stle Paule sayeth to the bretheren of Thessalonia,1. Thes. 5. & 6.8. &c. ye are the children of lighte, and of the day: and not of the night, nor of darkenesse. Wherefore let vs not sléepe as others doe, but let vs watche and bée sober, armed with the brest plate of fayth and loue, and with the helmet of hope of saluation. For God hath not appoynted vs to wrathe and condempnation, but to obteine saluation, by ye meanes of our Lord & sauior Iesus Christ which died for vs: ye whither we wake or slepe we
might liue togither with hym.2. Thes, 1. & 4.5.6. &c. Also the same Apostle sayeth to vs: The persecutions and troubles which you suffer, are tokens of the rightuous iudgement of God, that yée may bée counted worthie of his kingdome for the which you also suffer. It is (veri∣ly) a rightuous thing with God, to recompence them with tribulations againe, that trouble the faithfull, and rest vnto them so troubled, with hys chosen at the last day, when the Lord shall come in the maiestie of his glo∣rie to iudge the worlde. Whereby it appeareth: that the persecutiōs which we suffer, are to vs a sure and moste firme zeale, of the saluation & health that we haue by Christ, that wée bée frée from fynal and euerlasting damp∣nation,1. Pet. 1. & 6. and also, they are sure testimo∣nyes of the swéete rest, which is for vs to haue after thys lyfe in our Lorde Iesus. And therefore we ought to suf∣fer them with a ioyfull mynde, by∣cause it is a priuiledge not incident to all, but to vs only which beleue. For which cause the Apostle sayth to them
of Philippia,Phil. 1. & 29. it is not onely giuen to you, to beleue in Iesus Christ: but also that you suffer with him. Bycause as faith is not giuen (sayeth S. Paule) to all:2. Thes. 3. &. 20. no more it is not giuen that all should suffer for him.The Priui∣ledges of thē which suffer for the gospel. Wherfore it is most manifest, ye to suffer for Christes sake, is a great and principall pryui∣ledge, giuen to vs by God, by meanes wherof all they which suffer are assu∣red of their frée libertie in Christ Ie∣sus. And for this cause it is graunted vnto them that are faithfull to suffer in him, and to be so euil intreated and desolued of and from eternall damp∣nation, before hys dyuine iuste iudge∣ment. As euery father doeth gyue to his children that which hée knoweth to bée most best & profitable for them. So God doeth gyue vnto vs that bée his, paines, calamities, afflictions, and persecutions, bicause he by his diuine wisdom doth know, that they be most best and commodious for vs. Aduersi∣tie and persecution is muche better then prosperitie: bicause affliction for the worde of God is onely perticuler
and priuate to the rightuous, but pro∣speritie in worldly delightes are pub∣lique and common to all people wic∣ked and sinfull. What things may or can be more profitable & healthfull to vs, then those by ye which we are cer∣tified & assured, of the great good will and loue, which god hath towards vs: and ye we are frée of and from, the con∣dempnation due vnto the world, what thing is there better, that we can de∣sire here whilest we liue in this vale of miserie, then to passe our tyme in the company of Iesus Christ, clothed with his liuery, coate, & cognisaunce: which is fayth and loue, to suffer, in, for, & with him. What greater prospe∣ritie can be imagyned or thoughte of, thē to be saued with eternal saluatiō, and to haue a déed (as ye cōmō lawyer of englād saith) of cōfirmatiō, to assure vs yt we shal enter into a ful possession of his holy heauēly kingdō: purchased and fully bought of him for vs, by the most precious bloud of his son our sa∣uiour Iesus Christ. God our blessed father, in sēding vs calamities, afflic∣tions,
& tribulatiōs: & in suffring vs to be persecuted for his name and gospel sake, doth it to none other end, but vp∣pō purpose, to cōfirme vnto vs all his promises, & to assure vs yt it is necessa∣rie for vs to suffer as his sonne did. And therfore S. Peter doth admonish vs to reioyce,1. Pet. 4. &. 13. in as muche as we are partakers of Christes passions, yt whē his glory appeareth we may be mery and glad: if we be railed on in ye name of Christ, we are happy: bicause ye spi∣rit of glorie & the spirit of God resteth vppon vs. S. Ieames,Iames. 1. & 1.2. considering the great riches, that God doeth commu∣nicate vnto his people, in their af∣flictions, and griefes, sayth my brethe∣ren: accompt it great ioye when yée fall into dyuers temptations, bicause that you know, the triall of your faith bringeth patiēce. Let vs reioyce (saith S. Paule) in ye hope of ye glorie of God for yt he hath made vs,Rom. 5. & 2.3.4.5. partakers of the grace & reconsiliation of Christ, & yt we beleue in him. And not only this: but also yt we reioice in tribulatiō, by∣cause we know ye tribulatiō bringeth
pacience: pacience bringeth experiēce: experience bringeth hope: The which hope shall neuer be confounded. Of pacience and an exhortation there∣vnto, &c. Cap. xviii. NOw (dearely beloued bretheren & swéet fellow mēbers) let vs sée and behold how God loueth vs: in gi∣uing vs such a benifite accompanyed with so many riches. Surely there is nothing that we haue so greate a ne∣cessitie of in this lyfe, as of pacience: that we might fructifie and increase in the fruites of the Gospell, to the o∣bedience wherof we are called.Marke. 4. &. 20. Luke. 8. & . &c. There be many that doe heare the worde of God: yet for all that there is none that doeth fructifie thereby, but those which are armed with pacience and doe suf∣fer the hand and chastisement of the Lord. Wherefore the Apostle sayeth: truely you had néede of pacience,Hebr. 10. & 36. by∣cause that after you haue done ye will of God you may obteyne the riches of his promise. Wherby appeareth that
without pacience we cannot obteyne them: and also if wée haue not pacy∣ence we can not doe as we ought. But bycause we shuld haue pacience, God doeth suffer vs to be troubled,Tribulati∣on doeth engender patience. for that by tribulation, is wonted to spryng and growe pacience in those that bée his children: who knowing the good will and loue of him wherewith they are beloued, do perswade themselues that from his hand can come nothing, how aduerse so euer it be to ye worlde, but of force it must be to a profitable end vnto them, and serue greatly to the glorie of God: and also as they doo sée them selues beloued: they doo loue him, and doe accept all things in good and ioyfull parte that he doeth myni∣ster vnto them, be it afflictiō, trouble, calamitie, sorow, persecution, or other passion whatsoeuer. For by his Gos∣pell is reuealed vnto them and vs, all his good will, if we doe receiue it: and the full certeintie thereof to some more, to some lesse, euen as it pleaseth him, and séeth conuenient, Of this pacience is begotten expe∣rience:
the which is ye touchstone frō whence & wherby our faith is exami∣ned,Patience bringeth experience prooued, and tryed: whither it be weight & measure, yea, or no. Deare∣ly beloued (sayth S. Peter,1. Pet. 4. & 1.13.) be yée not troubled, nor do ye not merueile whē you doo sée your selues tryed by fyre, as if there had happened any straūge thing to you which were not commen to the faythfull? For by the patience which God doeth giue vs, is prooued, experienced, & tryed, whither our faith that we haue of him, bée true or fay∣ned. Bicause we be ye children of light he will not yt we walke in ignorance and darknes, but yt we haue experiēce, to know wherfore we shuld loue him, and he loue vs. For so did God proue Abraham,Gen. 15. &. 5.6. & found him faythfull. And he was so faithfull in déede, as was possible:Rom. 4. &. 9.13. wherby he vnderstoode that by the same fayth which God had gy∣uen hym he was made rightuous be∣fore his diuine maiestie, & that it was a true fayth, and did vse all his loue, and procure all that he loued, and did delight in all things, to doe and fulfill
hys holy commaundements. In Ma∣thew and Marke,Mat. 13. & 4.5.6. &c. Mark. 4. & 3.4.5. &c. vppon the Gospel of God which they did write: it is sayd: that there be foure kyndes of people which did, (and doe,) heare ye word of God, & all of them sayd they beléeued: but when tribulatiō came vppō them for ye words sake, & that they wer try∣ed therby, there was but one parte of them foūd yt had receiued ye truth, and they were thorowly tried by passing the pikes of persecution with patiēce, and did fructifie aboūdantly, some thir∣tie fold, some sixtie folde, some more, some lesse. So that in such maner (I mean by persecution) ye Lord doth try out & distinguishe the true beléeuers, from ye false & fayned. As when by a blast of wynde ye wheate is discouered from the chaffe, & so known to be per∣fect: Euen so by puffes of persecution, care, & calamitie, trouble, & other the scourges of God: a perfect & true Chri∣stian is certeinely & surely tryed and knowen. Wherefore it is written in Iesus ye sonne of Syrache,Sirach. 54. &. 10. as follow∣eth: what knoweth he that was neuer
tempted, and he that was neuer try∣ed nor experyenced. What can he vn∣derstand: such a one is as a man that sléepeth, & doeth not know nor estéeme christianitie without a tryall or expe∣rience.Thus com∣meth expe∣rience Before that we be experienced by patience in bearyng the crosse: will any of vs, bée so bolde as Peter was, to resist agaynst the enimyes of our master, and the trueth: till he sée him∣self out of daunger of imprisonment, peril, and persecutiō, by such like per∣secutors, no surely: it is muche to bée doubted. But yet when God hath sent vppon vs persecutions and troubles, and of his mercy hath gyuen vs paty∣ence and constancie, wherby we haue confessed before our aduersaryes, the fayth which by the gospel we haue re∣ceiued: and when that to folow our Lord & maister we haue put in proofe to aduenture our lyues, and so passe thorough all the euils and afflictions that can be offered to vs: Euen then (and not til then) we doe remayne, try∣ed by the touchstone of trueth, and doe know by experience, that our fayth is
firme, true, and of great effycacie and valour before God. Bycause then wée are by him so vnyted in Christ, that neyther Castles, prysons, tormentes, threatnings, dishonours, losses of sub∣stance, nor yet the same death that hée him selfe dyed, can seperate vs from hym. So that then haue we suche ex∣perience as Peter had,Iere. 9. &. 24. and then dare we to strike of Malchus (ye high priest his seruaunt) his right eare if néede were. But yet the experyence that Peter had, was not altogither by the persecution which hée suffered hym∣selfe, but rather by that which he had séene hys pure good master to suffer, &c. So that this experience and firme knowledge that we haue to know the good from the euill, and wherevppon to grounde our fayth, that wee might boast and reioyce in God for: it is in∣gendred and begotten of that constant pacience which by fayth wée haue to tollerate and beare the tribulations that we are brought into for the pro∣fession of his name. Paciēce also brin∣geth vnto vs experyence of the pure
goodnes & truth of our faith: & doth as∣sure vs yt we ar not deceued, nor liue by ye vain imaginatiōs of men: but by the word of God. Wherby Christ is reuealed vnto vs, & we doe know our saluatiō. Also there is verified herein, that which is spokē by S. Peter:1. Pet. 1. & 6.7. in the last tyme ye shal reioyce, though now for a season ye be in many temptati∣ons: yet your fayth once tryed, being muche more precious then Goulde that perysheth, (thoughe it bée tryed with fyre) you shal be found in lande, glorie, and honor, at the appearing of Iesus Christ our sauiour. Hovve that good experience bringeth forth hope, & of a shadovv of certein perse∣cutions. Cap. xix. EXperyence gotten by patience, doth beget and bryng foorth hope, for hauyng experience in the might and potencie of God, wée come and grow to haue a sure hope in hym, bycause that how much ye more & greater our trial & experience is: so much the more
firme, certeine & sure is our hope: as Dauid, Danyell, and many other ho∣ly men, which hauing prooued, and be∣ing experiēced by great & terrible tri∣bulatiōs, haue passed thorough ye pikes of thē with great hope: for yt they had a feeling of ye power & presence of God in them, & thereby assured of ye fauour of him, yt they were imboldened and brought into so sure a hope, yt none e∣nimy nor nothing, could ouercom nor preuaile against them. Dauid beyng moued with the féeling of this fauor, and full of firme hope in the goodnesse of the Lord, which did susteine him a∣gainst his enimies, & bring him forth of all his troubles with victorie, sayd:Psal. 18. & 1.2. with all my hart haue I called on thée O Lorde, and I will loue thée O my strēgth: O Lord thou art my strēgth, my Rocke, my defēce, my libertie, and my god. And I wil put my whole hope and trust in thee my buckler and my shield, I wil call vppō thee, & so I shal bee deliuered from myne enymyes. The troubles & sorows of death haue invironed & cōpassed me round about,
but I called vppon the Lorde, and hée hath hard me from his holy Temple. In lyke maner it happeneth and fal∣leth out to all the faithfull: for after that our faith is proued, experienced, and founde good, by the pacience & suf∣ferance that God hath giuen vs: Euen then our hope doeth so increase, that we conceiue a moste firme securitie and certeintie of our saluation. And so: by means therof, we begin to féele and know without doubt that we can not be lost nor forsaken: but that for a more certeintie, we shall obteine and come to ye pure port of eternal health. And hereof S. Iames speaketh and sayeth.Iames. 1. & 12. Blessed and happie is the man that suffereth temptations: for when he is tryed he shal receiue the crowne of lyfe, which God hath promysed to them that loue him. In varyable and firme is this hope, bycause it is foun∣ded & grounded vppon Iesus Christ, of his wordes and promises. Wher∣of it is spoken in Mathew and Luke,Mat. 5. & 5. &c. Luk. 6. &c 20. &c. (in Christes Gospell by them wryt∣ten) Blessed arte thou that mournest,
for thou shalte be comforted: Blessed arte thou when men reuyle and ab∣horre thée, persecute thée, and speake all maner euill sayings of thée, for my name sake: Blessed arte thou ye wée∣pest, for thou shalt laugh: Blessed art thou when men hate thée, thrust thée out of their company, and rayle & ab∣horre thy name as an euill thing, for the sonne of mans sake.1. Pet. 2. & 4.5.6. Reioyce you all then and be glad for beholde your rewarde is great in heauen: For so persecuted they the Prophets. The foundation of our hope beyng grounded vppon these promises and such lyke: The Apostle sayeth it shall neuer be confounded. For that if wée beleue and trust firmely in the fulfyl∣ling of thē, we shall neuer be defrau∣ded from the fruites of our hope, nor shall not be confoūded before the chil∣drē of this world: nor yet haue shame of our hope and trust, in those diuyne promises. For that we shall be assured to obteine the fulfilling of them, and besides remayne without feare of our worst enimyes: for they shall not bée
able to say yt our hope is had in vaine, but shall with their owne eyes, full surely sée vs saued therby.Psal. 31. & 1. &c. Psal. 71. & 1. &c. Dauid doth declare and confirme this vnto vs by his owne experience, saying, in ye Lord haue I trusted, & I shall neuer be cō∣founded.Esay. 28. & 16. And Esay sayeth, he that be∣leueth in the Lord shall not be cōfoū∣ded.Rom. 8. & 4. And by S. Paul it is said, by hope we be alreadie saued. Fynally by the holy ghost it is pretēded, to giue vs all to vnderstande, that as many as trust in God, shall bée saued & set frée, from all tribulations both temporall and eternall by Iesus Christ. So that being anymated and imboldened by this hope, wée may reioyce in them and say with Sainct Paule,Rom. 8. & 1.32. &c. if God bée with vs, who can bée against vs. Hée that spared not his owne sonne, but gaue hym for vs all: howe is it possible that hée shoulde not gyue vs all thyngs in hym. Who shall ac∣cuse or laye any thyng to the charge of the chosen: it is God that iustifi∣eth, who shall then condempne: it is Christ that is deade, yea rather
rysen agayne: which is also on the ryght hande of God, and maketh in∣tercession for vs. Who shall seperate vs from the loue of hym: shall tribulation, anguyshe, persecution, hunger, nakednesse, pe∣rill, or the sworde. No: God forbyd,Psal. 44. & 22. for that it is written, for thy sake are we killed all ye day long, & are accoun∣ted as shéepe appoynted to be slayne. And yet in all these things we are vic∣tors, & victorious, by yt good god our fa∣ther who so loueth vs. Thus if ye foun∣dation of our hope be by faith, we are thē perfectly sure we shall neuer come to confusion:Rom. 8. & 35.39. and that no creature can parte nor seperate vs from the loue and charitie of God, which is in Iesu Christ our Lorde. Bycause of necessi∣tie by hys rightuousnesse, he is to ful∣fill in vs all things, as the holy Ghost hath spokē. That is to say:. Tim. 2. &. 7.10. &c. Rom. 8. & 11.12.17. &c. if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reigne with hym, and if we be dead with him, we shall lyue togyther with him also. And therfore if we doe communicate togither in his passions, and do suffer
and be killed with him, we may assure our selues, that we shal also liue with him for euer. So that the tribulatiōs and persecutions which we suffer for his sake, with pacience, is a frée con∣firmation, and full assurance of our hope in his eternall kingdome, of the which he hath alreadie taken possessi∣on, is glorified, and doeth reigne ther∣in to his owne vse, and ours. So that we may sée, that all that God doeth, is to assure vs, (& to make confirmation accordyngly) of our sal∣uation: the which hée hath giuen vs in Christ. And to confirme in vs also, the rest of the effect of his diuine coun∣sell which was determined before the beginning of the worlde. And as this his counsell is mutable, so muche the more is the fuming furie of his eny∣myes and of the diuill their capteyne, set agaynst vs: who as he is the prin∣cipall minister of all the mischief and tribulatiōs that we suffer. So he doth as muche as in hym is to obteyne the victorie of vs, as wel in administring temptations to vs interiorly, as exte∣riorly:
wherby he would by one mean or other, plucke and seperate vs from the right way. When he doeth come to the combate to fighte for victoorie: the villayne is so nymble, dyligēt, and subtil as is possible: all his armye of Soldiors and warriours are armed and set in aray for the best aduaun∣tage as hée thynketh: And all to de∣riue vs from the firmnesse of our faith that we haue in Christ. He doth shew vs the greatnesse of his estate, and of all his furniture, for that hée woulde make vs afrayd, to faynt, and bée dis∣mayed at the full fiersenesse of hys force. And when as this is thus she∣wed vnto vs, there is a certeyn num∣ber of vs, that are troubled, and doe thinke them selues as shéepe among Wolues, & in ye mouthes of Wolues. When as they sée them selues forsa∣ken of theyr friendes and famyliars, abhorred & denyed of theyr kinsfolks, forsaken and without helpe of them that were déepest in debte for theyr friendship. And that all the world doth reioyce to sée them so afflicted, as whē
the sentences of their condempnors thunder out so terribly against them, as though it were from the mouth of almightie God pronoūced. Thē great are the troubles & sorowes that they suffer in their myndes: it séemeth then vnto them, that both heauen & earth is beset wt ire & wrath against thē,O great Ire of the diuil and his seruāts. & that god & his creatures make mortal war euen to distroy them. Thē for another practise may they sée ye kings Princes & rulers (which ought to be their defē∣dors in Gods causes) to rise & stand vp against them, & doe say all wt one voice togither: kill thē, kil thē, as traytors & enimies to God & our kingdō. On the other side they sée torments, tortures, and stout sturdy stomackt tormētors, stād redy prepared for them, wt shame, infamy, cōfusion, & reproch, to be recei∣ued before their friends, familiars, & enimies, they doo sée ye terrible & fear∣ful face of direfull death, & the slauish hāgman or executioner ready to light ye fire to burn them, & to stretch ye roape to strāgle them. In all these troubles, there is not one to cōfort them, but in
stead & place of cōfort, they doo vse ex∣ortatiōs to blaspheme (or speake blas∣phemy of ye redēption obteined by) Ie∣sus Christ. These I say: these are wō∣derfull anguishes, sorows, & troubles in their thus troubled minds. And yet they doo increase frō degrée to degrée, for all this time,Psal. 43. &. 1.2. they either thinke ye God is a sléepe, there is no God, or els yt he hath forgotten them. And then the diuil plyeth him by all the meanes he may, to bring them to dispair: he doth procure persuasions vnto them yt they would deny, abhorre, & cursse God: thē he doth leaue to entreat them in this maner, & will suffer no man to succor them. So yt more gréeuous is this an∣guish to ye mynde of those members, thē were presēt death to their bodies. A pure proofe vnto vs, that vve are belo∣ued of God in our greatest griefs &c. The xx. Chapter. ANd yet al these mischieuous thīgs are but mystic cloudes of darke∣nes, cast out by the diuyll hym selfe, by meanes of the miscreaunts his mi∣nisters:
and can not be encountred to any aduaūtage, but onely by the light and presence of the promyse of God. If we happen to fall into any of these clapses, or to com into such a streight: the first thing that wée oughte to doe is, not to stoppe, impope our selues with poperie, nor to dasell our eyes with any thing yt we sée, but to passe with expedition as much as may bée, to those things which with corporall sight may not be séene. (Which is to a sure hope and trust in God,) and thē no doubt of necessitie we shall be suc∣cored in the middest and extremitie of all our sorowes and troubles, suche lyke or whatsoeuer. God sayth by the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 91. & 4. &c. I am with the af∣flicted in all their troubles. I wil de∣liuer them and bring them to honor, and they shal glorifie me. So that, thē it is not God that séemeth to make this warre against vs, but assuredly he is with vs and doth aide and assist vs therin, giuing vs a secret power, ver∣tue, and strength, which in the ende doeth deliuer vs.Luke. 12. & 32. Christ sayde to hys
disciples, and in them to vs: feare yée not my little flocke, for it is your fa∣thers pleasure to giue you a kingdom. So that all the mischiefes and euils, as many as we sée or féele, whither it be interiorly or exteriorly: and all that Sathan & his mischieuous ministers doe or can doe, cannot let vs, from en∣tring thereinto. We shall neuer féele our selues forsaken: but if we do leane to him and to his diuine promises with a sure fayth and hope we shall fynde and féele that God is alwayes within vs, and will neuer fayle vs.Iosu. 1. & 5.9. Hebr. 13. &. 5. As it is written, I will not leaue nor forsake thée sayth the Lord. Let vs heare that which he doeth commaund vs by the Prophet Esay:Esay. 26. &. 20. in tymes of tribulati∣ons goe my people, enter into thy chā∣ber and shut thy dore after thée, hyde thée a little for a moment, vntil myne indignation be past. To withdraw our selues into our chamber, is to flée vn∣to the promises of God, in the which he hath promised vs, that he will loue and fauour vs perpetually.Mat. 6. & 6.7. To shut the doore is to renounce and forsake
our corporall féeling & sences in tyme of affliction. And not to be ouercom by any thing yt thē we féele interiorly or exteriorly, inwardely or outwardely. Nor doubt of gods truth, but suerly be leue yt he wil fulfil & accōplish all hys promises: for yt we liue eternally with Iesus Christ by whom they were pro∣mised, whē & in such tymes as we can sée nothing but darkenesse, heauines, sorow, & the wrath of God, & we doe iudge yt al of it is for & against vs. But then, yea euen then: he doth acknow∣ledge vs for his people, & doth cōmaūd vs yt we shut ye doore a while that his anger may passe ouer. Wherefore doth our good God thus much for vs: For our deseruings, no truly: but e∣uen of mere loue. So yt it foloweth, though he be angry yet he loueth vs, and is not wrath with vs, but with our aduersaries & condempnors, of whom he wil take vēgeance for their vnbeliefe sake, although for a tyme hée suffer them to vse their worst cru∣elties.Esay. 27. & 3.4. By the Prophete Esay thys is confirmed vnto vs, that the Lorde
hath no wrathe nor indygnation a∣gainst vs. But to the thornes and thistles hée hath a furious dyspleasure, for that they are enimyes both to hym and vs.2. Cor. 12. &. 7. Sainct Paule was greatly afflic∣ted and buffeted with many counter buffettes of Sathan. But euen then was hée fauoured & beloued in God. As he heard him selfe with his owne eares, when the Lorde sayde vnto hym, my grace is sufficient for thée. Dauid féelyng him selfe in the like fa∣uor of God sayde,Psal. 31. & 26. Esay. 27. & 3.4. the Lord doeth loue all hys saynctes, and doeth kéepe all the faythfull. And also doeth recom∣pence the proud aboundantly for their pryde. By our hope in hys promyses we doe fynde this light and comforte in the middest of the darknesse of our tribulations. But when in the vnder∣standyng & folowing of his preceptes, we do vse and take our own reason, of necessitie we muste giue a wronge iudgement, for that if we féele not fa∣uour diuyne, we think presently yt god is fallen a sléepe, farre distāt from vs,
and hath forgotten vs.Psal. 53. & 1.2. And bycause we sée not openly the libertie that we desire, we iudge euen thē that he doth not sée vs.Psal. 31. & 1..14. &c. As Dauid did which being gréeuously troubled. He then present∣ly according to the iudgement of the flesh, sayd: that God had forsakē him. But presently by the word of God, he was shewed the error and falsitude of his iudgement. When I was in hast I sayd I am out of thy sight, but thou neuerthelesse hast harde the voyce of my prayer: when I called vppō thée. Dauid held him selfe cast out and for∣saken: but God did heare and deliuer him, when hée was in greatest trou∣ble, and thought least of helpe. So in our iudgementes (which are fleshely) we thinke that all our tribulations are long without measure, and that they will neuer haue ende. But the Lord hath sayde vnto vs, they shal en∣dure but a whyle: for that in com∣maunding vs to shut the doore a mo∣ment, he doeth giue vs to vnderstand that they are but momentarie & shall ende verie quickly.Psal. 30.5. As Dauid sayth al∣so:
his ire shall passe away in a mo∣mēt or the twinckling of an eye. Our tribulation (sayeth S. Paule) indu∣reth but a little,2. Cor. 4. & 17.18. and is lightly passed ouer. And therefore we ought to suf∣fer it constantly, not considering the things visible to be séene, and that pe∣rishe: but the things inuisible, and eternall.Gen. 15. & 6. Rom. 4. & 2.3.4. &c. For that if we be the sonnes of Abraham, bicause we beleued as he did, let vs then appeare in déedes as he did, or lyke vnto him, for hée was extréemely tempted, but yet hée: put his trust wholy in God, and dyd not doubte of his promyse. And therefore was strengthened in his faith, & dyd giue thanks to God. And was persua∣ded that although he saw nothing (that shewed apparant cause) wherein to trust: yet he did consider ye God which had promised, was of power almigh∣tie: and therefore of power suffitient to performe any thing promised. Euē so wée, when our tribulations séeme most gréeuous, and that we doe think there is least possibilitie to get out of them: let vs then thinke it but mo∣mentary,
& the rather haue hope with the greater firmenesse, and be assured that the potency of God is alwayes ready to performe his promise, & let vs not giue any héed at all to our own reason, vnderstanding, and iudgemēt. And although we sée not our libertie, yet let vs be assured and make full accompt yt we are frée.God is not angry with vs that are his. Let it be that it séeme that God do hate vs, and that his creatures make warre agaynst vs. Yet for our owne partes, let vs beleue with faith (although our trou∣bles be of neuer so great a shew) that it is not against vs: nor yet that hée is angrie with vs:Iohn. 3. & 15 16.17. &c. bycause he can∣not let be, nor leaue beare, the father∣ly affection that he hath towards vs. Let vs enter into the withdrawyng place or chamber that hée doeth com∣maunde vs, and then although hée séeme neuer so disformed outwardly, yet we shal finde him inwardly, such as he hath shewed hym selfe to bée in Christ, that is to say, a father full of mercy, whose bowels doe burn with loue (for and) towardes vs. So that
then we need not to dispaire, nor yet be dismayed in our selues. Although the warres and contradictions of the wicked worldlinges and the worlde béee neuer so great agaynst vs, or the misformed and the ilfauored face of death be neuer so gréeuous to our bo∣dies which are mortall: yet our most louyng father God almightie: will not leaue, but be wt vs in the middest (and greatest) of all our temptations, troubles, vexations, calamities, and outragious griefes: yea euen to their vtter confusion. To all the faithfull that are vexed, troubled, & surcharged, or ouerloadē with the crosse: the holy ghost doeth giue aduice by Esay the Prophet in this maner.Esay. 37. & 4. Say vnto the weak and faint of hart, comfort your selues and doe not feare, behold the Lorde your God that wil take vengeauce on your enimyes, and gyue vnto them pay∣ment accordyng to their deserte: the same God shal come in proper person and saue you. This is as much as if he had sayd, I
pray you heare me my dearly beloued friendes, the troubles which you doe suffer is bycause you are myne, and gouerned by my worde: and for that you haue cast away the yoke of impi∣etie and false religion: and haue re∣ceyued myne: looke not in exterior things which are troubles vnto your fleshe onely, but know for a certeyn∣tie that as there is nothyng that the worlde doeth more abhorre, (or that doeth more suffer the rage and furye thereof) then you: So for the contra∣rie, there is nothing in the world that I loue better then you.Iohn. 17. & 4.9.20. And therefore my children, haue you a sure trust in me, for I haue alreadie ouercome, all those thinges that doe torment you, and sith your enimyes doe not feare to molest & make warre against you: doe not you cease to receiue comforte in the ryches of my promyses whiche are yours, and are for you. If they doe accompt you for cursed and abhomy∣nable, doe you praye for them, I saye pray and bée not wéery, let not your hands be loosed, but holde fast ye sword
of your defence, which is my worde: be of good cheare, feare not, bée stoute and of a good courage, for why your e∣nimyes doe fable and lye in all that they tell you, I am not absente from you as they say: but am alwaies with you present, apte and ready to defend yon as I haue promysed. I doe not abhorre you, nor yet I haue not forsa∣ken you, but doe loue you, and am so nigh: that those which touch you, doe touche euen the very balles of my eyes. I euen I saieth the Lord:Zach. 2. & 5.9. will take vengeance of them that trouble you. I my selfe in myne owne person will deliuer you: perseuer and goe forwarde constantly in a sure fayth and affiaunce in my loue, for your ad∣uersaries haue done what they can, and yet know not what they haue don against you in me, let the eyes of your harte be setled in me. Although your sences be shut vp with smoke, ashes, and flames of fyre: yet doe not think that I am fled or from you one ynch, or any thing at all. For I will not leaue you, but bée alwayes present
with you, although you sée me not, I my selfe am hée that doeth fight for you: although you féele it not, feare you not that your enimies shall ouer∣come you, according to their determi∣nations assure your selues that I wil giue you the victorie in the ende, I haue promised it: and I my selfe will fulfill it. These and such lyke are the louing words of our good God and sa∣uiour, vnto vs that be his chosē, such louing & swéet amorous spéeches doth he vse vnto vs, notwithstanding that we bée persecuted and afflicted with fyre and other kinde of crosses before we can come to him. A persuasion to trust only in God, and to a∣voyd all vaine trust, had in any humain helpe. &c. The xx. Chapter. SYth therefore, that we sée that our swéete God is so present with vs, when we think him to be farthest of: that he doeth loue vs dearely, when wée thynke our selues forsaken and
abhorred: and that hée doeth not for∣gette vs, when we thinke our selues farre out of fauour & remembrance. Let vs put our whole truste and con∣fidence onely in hym, for that he is altogither sufficient to (and wil) stād with vs for our defence in all our troubles and aduersities. And also let vs saye with holy Iob,Iob. 13. & 15. Although he giue me vnto death, I will not leaue to trust in him. As our fleshe is the greatest enimy that wée haue, so is it that,Rom. 8. & 1 3.5. &c. which doeth make the greatest warre with vs. Bicause it doeth not onely deny this fauoura∣ble presence of God, but also doth not let, to fyght agaynst it: that is to say, against the promises of God: and doe leane, and trust to things which are vaine, thinkyng to bée defended, and deliuered by the helpe thereof, from all the harme, calamitie, and griefe that it doeth féele. And so doeth not onely fall out to the contrarye, but also is an occa∣sion why, that greater griefes doe fo∣low: And therfore it behoueth vs to be
vigilant and to take héede that we doo not tempte God, with puttyng anye vayne trust or hope in men, (whither they séeme or shewe to be good or bad, faithfull or vnfaithfull) for any thing touching saluatiō or dampnation. For so the wicked by their wickednesse, would deuise and be of strength and efficacy sufficient, to blinde and bring vs into doubtes, and like to dispayre by means of our doubtfull and weake beliefe. Bicause that all of vs are full of that monstrous masse of sinne, euer fallyng, and in déede fully subiecte to fall, into all kinde of miserie. But let vs giue héede to that which the holy ghost doth commaund by the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 146. &. 2. doe not trust in Princes nor in the sonnes of men, bicause there is no health nor helpe in them. Misera∣ble are the successes of suche as put their trust in men. For that (as the Prophet Ieremy sayeth) cursed is he that putteth his trust in man.Iere. 17.5. There∣fore let vs put our trust onely in God, and depend and put our trust onely in his moste faythfull promises. And so
shall we be sure that he will fight for (help and defend) vs, against ye world, the flesh, & all other the snares of the diuill. As the Prophet Esay sayth,Esay. 32. & 13.17. Iosuah. 1. & 5.6.7. &c. Iohn. 5. & 4. if we beleue this word of the Gospel we haue obteyned victorie alreadie. By∣cause as S. Iohn sayeth, our faith is the victorie that ouercōmeth ye world.Act. 6. & 11 13. &c. Act. 8. & 51.58. Saint Steuē, being armed with this faith, which was communicated vnto him by the Gospell, did ouercome hys enimies furies so, that they could not resist the wisdome and spirit with the which he spake.1. Sam. 17 & 32.33. &c Dauid a verie yoūg man, of small age: what maner of weapon had he to fight against Goli∣as that mightie capteine of the Phi∣listines: hée sought no helpe of Saul, nor could not abyde his Armour and weapons, nor yet did not fauour any kynde of humaine counseile, nor hys own force which was nothing in com¦parison, to the strength of that migh∣tie Gyaunt. But onely armed with a sure faith, affiance, and hope, in God, he fought couragiously, did ouerthrow him, cut of his head, and so set the cho∣sen,
(hys fellow members) at liber∣tie. In this is and shall bée for euer, verified to all the faythfull, that God wil fulfil and performe his promises. And so he sayeth by the Prophet Da∣uid:Psal. 91. & 1.2.3. &c. hée that trusteth in mée, I will kéepe and deliuer him for that he hath knowen my name. Iohn. 4. & 2.3.And therfore, sith he is greater that is in vs, then he that is in the world, let vs forsake all humayne counseill, strength, industrie, prudencie, and wis∣dome in the same, for that how much the lesse we estéeme and depende vp∣pon them, so much ye more is the effi∣cacie, strength, & power of God in vs: and our sight ye clearer & perfecter, to sée the great & admirable works, don in his elected by his most mightie po∣tencie, & might. Euen then doeth God discouer to our weaknesse, the great∣nesse of his most mightie power and strength, to our health and saluation. For when we think our selues most strong,2. Cor. 12. & 7.20. & depend most vppō terene and earthly defence: euē thē are we most weakest, and our hope most frustrate.
Bicause those things in the worlde, we accompte and holde most sure for our reliefe, in our greatest necessitie falleth from vs: and so we left at the worste, and in displeasure with God. For that we so vaynely dyd forsake him, and slée to vanitie (which are the things of this world) for our help and defence: & so are we left & forsaken, both of God & man. Bicause we made a God of those things, the which wée trusted in, & therein did forsake ye true God. Those which doe put their trust in worldly things, doe it bycause of the fayre shewe thereof to their car∣nall or fleshly eyes: but so they make a deuision of that hope, whiche they ought to haue in God, & put aparte or péece therof into those which are of the worlde: which is vanitie, and of no value at all. Our filthie flesh is fond∣ly ledde to trust, and hang all hope on creatures, in place and steade of that hope which is due vnto God the crea∣tor. Suerly it is such a subtle snare of the father of all subtelties & lyes, that it often deceyueth manye, and
continually it deceiueth it self. For it hath alwayes a custome to couer in∣fidelitie and hipocrisie, with some one craftie cloaked colour or other, that may not easily be knowen. So that when wée bee beguyled by the same, we doe thinke our selues in such secu∣ritie that we sléepe therein, as though fortified with suche humayne helpe, furniture, and fauour, as none might be the like: when as in very déede by the ende of experience, we may & shal, finde our owne weaknesse to be such, as is of no validitie at all. Whereby is manifested that these carnall fur∣nitures, weapons, & armour, in which we hope and trust to be succoured by, doe not onely serue vs nothing at all for our helpe and defence, but also is and are extréeme lets and hynderan∣ces, to kéepe vs from ye doyng of that, which we ought and are bound to doo, by the commaundementes of God. And therfore in this lyfe, which is a tyme of trouble, tirannie, battail, and warfare:1. Sam. 17. & 32.3. &c. let vs be imitators and fo∣lowers of Dauid, who neuer did bear
other armes nor weapōs against his enimyes, then onely his sure trust in God, wherewith he alwayes got the victorie, and ouerthrew them all. How we oughte to doe and behaue our selues, to our enimyes as wel vi∣sible as in visible, corporall as spiritu∣all: God doeth teache vs by hys Apo∣stles. All the wyse, holy, and mightie of the world: All the riches, aucthori∣tie, dignitie, exelencie, greatnesse, hu∣maine strength, and policie, that was in the same: was against them, in such sorte that it séemed inuinsible. There was very fewe (scarce none) neither Lordes, Earles, Dukes, Princes, Kings, and Emperours, kingdomes, nor countreis but were against them: with most cruell warres and persecu∣tions. But yet they (I mean the chil∣drē and disciples of God) armed with confidence and affiance in God, and pacience by the onely wordes of the Gospell, did convince and ouerthrow to the grounde, all the power and po∣tencie of them all:Iohn. 14. &. 1. Ephe.  & 13.16. aswell the princi∣palles as the reste. And by beléeuyng
truely in the Gospell, they did fyght with (and ouerthrowe) all the subly∣mate and supreme highnesse, that dyd rise & repugne against them: & Christ their heade in them. They did ouer∣come captiuitie, & bring a great num∣ber to be ruled, by (preaching ye pure Euangelie of truthe in the Gospell: and to the obedyence of fayth therin. By force wherof: they made ye world to tremble, and did work marueilous works most worthy of memory. The world was not so strong, nor Sathan so mightie, nor yet his ministers so subtil, that they altogither with their strength, mighte, policie, and subtil∣tie, could let or hinder ye small grayn of musterd séede,Mat. 13. & 32. (the fayth in the Go∣spell) but that it did increase, florysh, and growe, into a great and mightie trée, the braunches wherof did extend into all partes of the worlde, so, that the byrdes of heauen might buylde their neastes therein at hys plea∣sure. The diuill & all his vaseilles & bōd∣slaues are beaten down daily & ouer∣come,
with that Armour & weapon wherwith God hath armed the faith∣full, & elected. If those,Apoc. 13. & 17. which serue the prince of darkenes, & that are marked with the mark of the beast, which S. Iohn speaketh of, could make that the sonne did not aryse and shewe it selfe so, that dayly he did not or might not dryue awaye the darkesome nyghtie cloudes, & so spread his beames into all parts of the world, wherby ye force may bée felte of the heate and light of the same: they might as well, let and hinder the shyning sonne of the Gos∣pell, that the splendant light thereof,Luke. 1. & 31.33.79. should not shine and shewe his inesti∣mable brightnesse, to giue light vnto the blynd: that they might goe and be guyded thereby, in the righte way of truth.Esay 9. & 2.3. &c. Esay. 60. & 1.2. &c. And also let that the potencie of God therein, shoulde not take the cap∣tyue out of captiuitie, open the pry∣sons to the prysoners, and that the contrite of hart should not receiue frée lybertie thereby. Let them goe to heauen if they can,Psal. 52. &. 2. &c. and throwe the sonne downe oute
hir place vsuall, vnto the earth: or let them let & hinder the shining of the Gospell of glorie,2. Cor. 4. & 3.4.5. &c. which doeth many∣fest that God is the Lord, and that by his worde he ought to be serued and worshipped of all mankinde: I say, let them doe it if they can: but in de∣spight of them I say againe they can∣not. For all that euer they doe, is no more: but as if by spetling, they shuld prooue or goe about to pearse the hea∣uens, and so spitte vpward according∣ly, and then the same fall backe again into their owne faces: whereby they are filthily fouled to their owne re∣proche. Wherefore let vs not feare them in none of their bragges, but let vs put on the armour of the Apostles, and throw away all humain affiance: Let vs assure our selues that by our afflictions and death, are distroyed and ouerthrowen the enimies, contrady∣tors, and geinsayors of vs & the Gos∣pell. For God doeth deale with our e∣nimies nowe in the same order, ma∣ner, and forme, as he did with them in tymes past, which persecuted & spake
against the Prophets and Apostles: bycause that they taught the same go∣spell of lyfe, which we now haue and teach: by Christ we liue, and for him we suffer persecutiō, euen so did they: yet he hath alwayes gotten the victo∣rie, as well for them, as for vs. And therefore let vs not tempt God, but let vs trust wholy in him, his mercy, power, and strength: And also haue in hatred all humaine helpes and fa∣uours whatsoeuer. What is the cause that so many do fainte, fall, & become amased in their mindes so, that they can not perseuer in that trueth which God hath com∣maunded: And also that some other being wonderfully lighted with the cleare and pure light of the Gospell, and séeing the workes and wonders so admirable, that God doth shew vn∣to them by the same, are so sluggyshe and colde that they stande at a staye, and care not whither they goe fore∣wardes yea or no: Surely and with∣out doubt there is none other cause, but that onely by the instigatiō of the
diuill, they are so deceiued, that they robbe. God of his honour, & put their trustes wholy one in an other, taking men for their staffe to staye vppon, to the end they might stande in all their troubles: regardyng humayne fauor so muche, that they leaue God, and flye therevnto for refuge, in all theyr aduersities and calamities. Some doe trust in their ryches, others in theyr honours: some in the friendshippe of great men, other some in that they be Gentlemen and of the noble bloude: and so foorth in other the lyke prero∣gatiues. What other thing is thys, but as if one should trust in a shadow, or a smoake which vanysheth, almost so soone as it is seene. When that we consider the causes, for which we are afflicted,Esay. 36. & 5.6.7. (whereof God is the author from whom we flée) and doe put our trust in men, or in any thing that they can doe for vs: is as muche in our ayde as to truste vnto Egipt or to the strength of the Egyptians, or as in a broken Réede whiche one holdeth to staye him selfe by, and it doeth not
onely suffer him to fall, but also with the slyuers thereof, doeth so prick and hurte hys handes, as maketh him re∣pent, that he had no more vnderstan∣dyng in tyme, then to trust thervnto. It belongeth to one that is a Christi∣an and faythfull, to bée buylded and firmely founded, vppon that fyrme Rocke or stone which is Christ, and not to flee from the same, to any hu∣maine helpe or succour that perisheth:Math. 7. & 24.26. for that against this true foundation, the wyndes of tribulations, tempests of torments, nor stormes of mischiefs and wickednesse, cannot preuayle a∣gaynst it, or make it to remoue or al∣ter. And therfore hauing so sure a founda∣tiō as Christ, let vs assure our selues, that there is nothyng in the worlde, that can remoue vs from it. As the holy Ghost doeth testifye, saying,Psal. 125. & . &c. hée that trusteth in the Lord, shal ne∣uer bée confounded, but shalbe alwayes firme & sure as the holy hyll of Syon.
Hovv vve ought to bee instructed in trueth and veritie, and to haue no confidence in mens traditions. The xxij. Chapter. GOd will that we beliue, trust, and be ruled by him and his word, one∣ly, and not in no maner of wyse, by the aucthoritie of men, although they séeme neuer so wyse, holy, and fayth∣full: if they teach and instruct not, by the prescript worde of God, wherein is all trueth. Bycause if our trust in God, be accordyng to (& had by) theyr outward fained holines and goodnes, it serueth for little or nothing, but to make vs so weake and féeble, that we cannot tast the drink of the liquor of lyfe: which is the fruit of the Go∣spell: with so stiffe & stoute a stomake as we oughte: And also yt the rather our weakenesse shall bée made more weake, & our infirmitie more infirme and sicke. But if we belieue onely in Iesu Christ, & trust stedfastly in him, we shall be necessarily instructed and strengthened: not to dismaye vs, but to be more firme and strong, agaynst
all kynde of euill and wickednes. Yet for all that the ministers of God will onely teache according to the worde, that mē should repose their trust who∣ly in Christ (as aforesayde,) and that he is the aucthor of all truth and righ∣tuousnesse. Their intent is nothyng but to be faithfull to the Lord which sent them. And to prepare his waye, teachyng and shewyng vnto men by the law the condempnation in which they were by sinne, and howe seuere God is in his iudgementes to the vn∣beléeuers, and superstitious aucthors,Luk. 3. &. 4. of guyle and deceipt, (and the folow∣ers thereof) contrary to true religion: they will reduce, and induce as ma∣ny as they can, to Iesus Christ their master by the gospell onely, as to one in whom is alwayes a remedie for a∣ny kynde of mischiefe. For that from him the elected doe receiue all things, and doe know by him yt God is theyr father almightie: they do not, nor wil not, sel nor giue them selues for gods, nor yet maintain themselues for gods Viccars generall vppō earth: nor one
of them doeth not chalenge more au∣thoritie in bynding and loosing, bles∣sing or curssing, nor in distributing ye word of God then an other doth: they shewe them selues for men, subiecte to all humaine infirmities, as wel one as another of them. They doe teache and preach yt our faith must not come from men, from them, but from God: the word of truth doth teach them this doctrine and vs also. And therfore let vs not attribute any kind of thing vn∣to any maner of mā, neither faithfull, holy, nor Saincte, but vnto God who giueth lyfe to ye dead, & some time con∣uerteth the hartes of (and calleth) our persecutors into the way of rightu∣ousnesse and truth. Although ye men be weake, lacketh strength, & doth often stumble, to do a∣ny thing that is good, yet Gods truth which they teache is not so: Although they be discoraged & afraid, bicause of the persecution which they sée, yet the word of trueth is almightie, & fayleth not.Mat. 26. & 62.63. &c. All ye disciples themselues fainted and feared at ye death of ye redéemer of
the world,Luke. 22. & 51.52. &c. & yet he fainted nor feared not in his truth to shew what he was: nor yet did his truth loose any parte of the valor, for all ye terrible trouble, and pagan passions, and persecutions that happened vnto him. So true, so good, so iust a iustifier, so immutable, so al∣mightie was he, as was none: & yet his own denied him, & were in such feare and doubtes of his doings, as though they had neuer knowne him. So yt the truth of God dependeth nothing vppō men, although they be euen his verie disciples & ministers: but on him selfe onely. Although they fainted, feared, and doubted of him, bicause of his pas∣sions & persecutiōs which he suffered: yet for all yt did not he forget, put out of knowledge, abhorre, nor deny thē, but did most louingly reduce thē, and bring them again vnto ye truth & true knowledge therof: And there where now he is, sitting on ye right hande of his father, he hath not altered his cō∣dition, nor yet hydden hys accustomed loue from them that be his. Although they were weake, strayed
out of ye way, stombled, & fell with the weight of the crosse of cruell persecu∣tion, yet did he make them partakers of his mercie, with a free forgiuenes or pardon generall, and did giue them strength and force a freshe, to ouer∣come all their weakenesse. And there∣fore he being such a one as he is, that did loue the weakelinges so, that hée would nor did not cast them away, for all their weakenesse & rebellion.Rom. 14. & 8.2. &c. Wée also being lyke vnto them, oughte to loue him & not to forget nor forsake him: but to hope and trust that he wil doe with vs as hée dyd with his fyrst disciples, which had the first fruites of the spirite. Let vs not be of the num∣ber of ye enimies of God, nor of those which haue any enmitie vnto hym or hys, which doe take and vse all hys workes so, that it is an occasion why they are set farther distant from him, doe refuse to loue him as he ought, and in the company of his aduersaries doo blaspheme his holy name: But rather as obedient and faithfull children, let vs vnderstand the intent of our cele∣stiall
father, and take and gather out of his workes only, all such fruite as he doeth pretend in them. Which is the better to knowe him, the more to submit our selues to his good pleasure and will, and not to flye further from him as the wicked doe, but to cleaue more nigher vnto hym by fayth, that by recouerie of newe force, wée maye perseuer in the way of truth. Now if there be any weakenesse in any of vs, (as no doubt there is, con∣trary to our expectation,) that weake∣nes commeth not of nor from ye truth: but from our selues & our filthy flesh. Let vs not think it a straunge thing, that there is such weaknesse in man, for that all of vs in as muche as wée are men, and of the fleshe, our delight is in nothing but in weaknes & things of no validitie nor force but of ye flesh. Here we may all of vs vnderstād and sée, what great necessitie we haue (as well those which stande vpright, as they which bend and fall) of the helpe and power of Christ, without whome we can in no wise indure to doe any
parte of our dueties. And therfore let vs be vigilant & looke vppō the weak∣nesse & falling one of another as in a glasse: bicause therby we might know our owne weaknesse: & so humble our selues before God as we ought, for of our selues wée are cleane repugnant vnto him & to all goodnes whereof he is the author. And sith that we are all called to the crosse of affliction and ca∣lamitie, and to fight against the pride and presumption that is in vs, and so to be occupyed in contemplation ther∣fore: Let none of vs iudge a wrye or amisse of those which are fallen or doo fall, but let him which is vpright and on his féete, take héede he fall not also. Bycause that God is almightie, and wil raise vp and cast down whom him lifteth, & will not forsake, but rayse vp them that fall, will exalte the hum∣ble and méeke, and knit & close theyr cracks and breakings most sure. The cause whye, hée doeth not forsake them that are fallen, is for that they bée his children, and that he wil make hys glorious workes to illustrate and
appeare more brighter in thē by the meanes thereof,Rom. 5. & 20.21. bycause where as sinne doeth abound there doeth grace superabound, and his mercy and good∣nesse is shining the brighter. The wicked worlde cannot abyde that any man shuld repugne or gein∣say agaynst his iudgement: nor yet allow any thing that is condempned therein. But the children of God,1. Cor. 2. & 8.9. 1. Ioh. 5. & 4.5. as they haue a sence & féeling of Christ, so they doe allow by Christ, all which God doth commaund. And so likewise by him doe they reproue & cōdempne the iudgement of the world for abho∣minable and wicked. And therfore the worlde and his worldlings togither doe against them, all the mischief they can: to the ende to banish from them this féeling of the truth, and so by con∣sequent to dispoyle them from God whose they are. But in consideration thereof hée will confounde both the worlde, worldlings, and their iudge∣ments altogither. And if it happen that the chyldren of God, doe stumble and fall with the
weight of the crosse of cruell persecu∣tion, & giue wrong iudgement, disa∣lowing the truth which they ought to alow, and doe alowe a lye, which they ought to reproue: yet their louing god and father wil bring it so to passe, that it shal serue them for their best & grea∣test cōmoditie, to bring them to be en∣riched with true humilitie:Psal. 33. & 20.11. with their onely trust in God, whose goodnesse is wonte to ryse, stirre, and take out of greatest euilles and wickednesse, most great blessednesse and happinesse. For that those which loue him,Rom. 8. & 9.11.13. &c. he doth cō∣uert vnto them all things for the best, yea euen out of sin he doth take great riches to glorify them with. As he did to Noah,Gen. 9. & 21. Dauid, & to Peter: after their fals, he tooke such occasiō therby, as he turned many thinges to their greate goodnes,Psal. 51. & 1.2.3. &c. Iohn. 21. & 7.. 2. Cor. 2. & 6.13. Gala. 6. & 14. & commoditie, & did make to shyne in them great light out of the darkenesse the which they were in. By meanes hereof, wée béeyng for∣saken of the world, and crucified ther∣in. And also the worlde béeyng for∣saken of vs, wée shall come to great
knowledge by experyence, that ney∣ther honors, riches, noblenes of birth, humayne fauour, wisedome, nor yet estimation had of men, is of no force nor valour in our spirituall batteile. But onely a sure fayth and hope in God our Lord. And so beeyng made mightie, méeke, and hūble, in this maner, we remain vnited and suerly knit with the vine, which is Iesus Christ,Iohn. 15. & 1.2.3. &c. & more prompt and ready to receiue his gifts then at the first. The cause why ye father doth so picke, prime, purge, and make clean the braūches (which are we his faith∣full) by ye way and mean, is onely that we might bear & bring forth, more co∣pious, plentious, & aboundance of true fruite.Ioh. 15. & 2. So that Christ is he by whom we gaine, & Antichrist is he by whom those that folow him doe loose. And Christ is hée that gayneth, and Anti∣christ he that looseth. Bicause yt where he thought & thinketh, yt by his tirāni∣call meanes, he had and hath gotten, a number for his owne, of those per∣secuted lambes out of the handes of
God, he was and is deceiued: for that Iesus Christ doeth possesse them most mightifully, who will in no wise loose them. He doeth vnyte and knit them with him selfe most streightly, in and with the cheine or bonde of most vn∣fayned loue, for that he will not vary from the truth of hys promyse: with the which hée sayeth,Ioh. 10. &. 5. A promise of great comfort. that neyther the force of hell, the diuil, death, sinne, An∣tichrist, and all that they can doo, with the helpe of all their mynisters, is not so muche to preuayle agaynst them that bée elected,Ioh. 8. & 12 23.31.32.51. as is his strength to preuayle in defence to kéepe them for the inherytance of lyfe euerlastyng, which hée hath alreadie gyuen them from the fyrst day of theyr calling. The wysedome of God is suche, that hée knoweth perfectly that of or amonge all those which hée hath cal∣led, there is none without sinne: but are most subiecte and apte therevnto, and to all kynde of wickednesse. Rom. 14. &. 1.7.6.And yet notwithstandyng hée doeth accept them for hys own: and know∣ing of theyr great féeble weakenesse,
will not the losse of one of them. Ie∣sus Christ dyd know right well, that all his disciples would feare, faynte,Ioh. 14. &. .3. &c. Ioh. 15. & 7.8. Ioh. 16. & Ioh. 17. &. 1.2 4. &c. forsake, and deny hym, yet although he knewe it, at hys laste supper with most firme loue and fauourable affec∣tion, he made them promises of per∣formance of the whole summe of hys goodnesse tyll the end: and in the end lyfe euerlastyng.Hebr. 9. & 11.26.27. &c. And did also declare vnto them that his death and passy∣on, should bée to distroy sinne in them, and their discendentes or successors, and that they with them therby shuld receyue eternall lyfe. How be it for all that, afterwardes they did all fall, feare, faint, & did haue a doubt in him: But yet for that he had taken charge ouer them with promyse of forgyue∣nes, he did not deny & forsake thē, but had regard vnto them wt such a loue, yt he would not suffer them to perish.Mat. 26. & 31.45. &c. Marc. 14. & 27.41. &c. Al∣though yt wilfully wt a wauering mind they had gyuen them selues into the perdurable estate of perdition: yet hee with a francke, frée, and euer∣lastyng pardon, dyd restore them
to strength from thencefoorth, against all kynde of weakenesse and infirmy∣tie. Vppon vvhat condition God receiueth vs, vvith an excelent comfort to the Christian. &c. The xxiij. Chapter. SO that nowe, although ye ouercome with weaknesse, we haue fallē vn∣derneath the crosse of froward & fury∣ous affliction and persecution: yet God will not forsake vs, bicause he hath e∣lected, accepted, and taken vs for hys owne,Ioh. 15. & 7.8. with promise of lyfe euerla∣sting. Those which he at any tyme of his mercy doth take charge of, he will not at no time suffer to perish, but wil helpe them in all their necessities, and cure theyr woundes to the glorifica∣tion of hym selfe therein: & also giue them life euerlasting. Ioh. 6. & 35. &c.Bycause that when he doeth receyue vs, he doeth it not with any such cōdi∣tion yt we should doe any good of our selues, be faithfull, or perseuer in any
goodnesse for it: for that he knoweth our natures, to be to, to much corrup∣ted, whereby of force it doth and will doo, to to much to the contrary.2. Cor. 2. & 6. &c. But he dooth receiue vs with condicion, that we should onely truste in him that he wilbe our lyfe, remittour, pardoner,Iohn. 10. &. 5. and forgeuer of our sinnes: our strēgth and perseuerance, our Phisicion,Esay. 61. & 2.3.7. and medicine, our maister, our teacher, our saluacion, and perpetuall redée∣mer. It is a most greuous offence, to de∣ny the truth of God, and to giue our selues vnto lyes and errours: It is most execrable before God to bereaue him of all worship due vnto him, and giue the same vnto a beast:Apoc. 13. &. 4.12. it is a true testimony of our ingratitude, and that we haue forsaken the lorde,Vnthank∣fulnesse. by whose liberalitie we haue receiued so great and mightie a multitude of benifits.Iere. 2. &. 20.11 Go my people (sayth the Lord by Ie∣remy the Prophet) into the Ilelandes a farre of, sée and consider attentiue∣ly, and behoulde? If the people there dooe like vnto you, if any of them doo
change their owne proper gods for o∣thers, which in déede are no gods: yet you haue changed the glory of your god for an Idoll. God dyd call vs bicause we should accompt him for our father, that we should loue and worshippe him as our father: he dyd take vs out of the most darcke and drowsie cloudes of deceit and errours, and dyd discouer vnto vs, that onely Iesus Christe is our moste gracious saluacion.Act. 14. & 15.16.17. When that we went lyke children of per∣dicion,Acts. 17. & 30.31. worshippinge of stockes and stones, he dyd reduce vs into the right waye: when we were posses∣sid of the diuell and of sinne, he did deliuer vs from theyr mischeuous ti∣ranny:Deut. 4. & 20. being a lost people he made vs his people, treated and vsed vs, as his owne people,Psal, 14. & 3.6. geuinge vs his worde for our spirituall sustenaunce. He beinge our onely Lorde GOD and Father, we dyd denye him in an Idoll: the glory which he had ge∣uen vs beinge his people, we chaun∣ged
for vainest vanitie, takinge in and allowinge of false doctrine, and forsakinge of the trueth. We haue left and forsaken our true and lawefull spouse Iesus Christ, with whome we dyd contract ma∣trimony by fayth in him (as saythe the Prophet Oseah) and haue com∣mytted fornicacion,Oseah. 2. & 5.6. in seperatinge oure selues from and denyinge the faythe that wée dyd vowe to haue in him, when we receiued our Bap∣tisme. The Turckes, nor the Mores, doo dot refuse theyr religion, no more dooe the Indians, nor the slauishe subiectes of Antechrist denye theirs, and yet is it false, abhominable, and full of lyes. But we hauinge a religion,True reli∣gion. so di∣uine, and pure as is possible, and also suche a benefite thereby, as is wholly holy and trwe, euen come downe from heauen: (the authour whereof is the LORD GOD al∣myghtie, maker of all thinges,)
doo deny it most shamefully, for a vain feare of loosing our liues, and yet our liues without gods true religion what are they better then liues of brute beastes, (surely nothinge at all) what doo we differ from all other nacions vnder heauen, but onely in that we doo know Iesus Christ the sonne, by the reuelacion of the father,Esay. 45. &. 24. and that we haue by him lyfe euerlasting. And where as they walke in the darcknes of theyr misticall errours, we (if we be ruled by this true doctrine which he hath giuen vs) doo walke in ye light of lyfe by the worde of truth. By ver∣tue whereof, and to be conserued and kept thereby,2. Pater. 1. &, 12.13. God created all things. If God had béene our enimie at any tyme, if he had béene a tyrant or had béene cruell vnto vs,Esay. 8. & 14.20. or if he had at a∣ny tyme deceiued vs, then had we had some reason to forsake him, to flée frō him, and to leaue him: to the ende we might get out of his wily deceits and tyranny. Psal. 67. &. 1.2.3. &c.But beinge alwayes a God vnto vs, so louing as he hath beene, a God that
hath sauid vs, and brydeled the diuell, so that he cānot hurt vs.God is our sauiour. He that hath commaunded his creatures for our su∣stenaunce, (when we were his eni∣mies) he that hath deliuered vs from so many great perills and dangers of death, and hath béene alwaies our tu∣tor, gouernour and defēdour: and we without shame so to deny and forsake him, most greuous is our folly & falte therein: and so greuous that we haue deserued thereby, that he should for euer forsake vs and condempne vs to be vnder the tiranny of the diuel and antichrist eternally. To forget so ma∣ny vndeserued benefites, as he hath preferrid vs vnto, and to leaue him for so small and light troubles and af∣flictions, as are those which we haue suffered and are to suffer for the pro∣fession of his name: it is a thing wor∣thy of most gréeuous punishment. If Iesus Christ had not beene first cruci∣fyed himself, and made a cursse for vs,Math. 10. & 19.24. and for our transgression and sinne, & so callid vs to the crosse of worldly tri∣bulacion,Luke. 12. &. 11. &c. we might well haue béene
deceiued or thought our selues so:Gala. 3. & &. 1.2. &c. but that is moste infallible and cer∣teine, for so he called vs to the pro∣fession of the same, and therefore to crosses and tribulacions, and not to worldly honours, ritches, and de∣lightes of this lyfe. What a gréeuous thing were it ther∣fore to deny him: from whence may or can there arise, accrewe, or grow, and procede, suche a masse of misery as that, and that we dooe not (nor haue not) vnderstande and knowen aright the ende of our calling: which was especially and vppon purpose to make vs like vnto himselfe by passi∣ons, persecucions and afflictions sure∣ly it is a most monstrous offence. For that to forsake the trueth, thereby to eschew the crosse: is none other but to forsake Christ our onely Sauiour, bicause there is no way to Christ Ie∣sus, without heauie crosses of afflicti∣on and persecution: nor yet no true crosse of calamitie and persecucion, but is a way to passe by vnto him. So that it resteth, and is moste fit and
conuenient for vs, to haue a great and greuous gréefe in mynde, with repen∣tance, that euer we dyd forsake or de∣ny him:Perpetuall penance. and to leade the residue of our lyfe in a perfect and perpetuall repen∣tance for the same. And therefore let vs be conuerted and torne vnto him, and behoulde at∣tentiuely that he (although offended with vs) is not our enimie, nor doothe not desire, nor procure our perdicion: but is our good GOD and Father, which doothe desire (and wyill per∣forme) our perfect health and salua∣cion. As truely as I dooe liue (saythe the Lorde) I wyll not the deathe of a sinner,Ezech. 18. &. 21.2. but rather that he torne from his wickednesse and lyue. It is god our Father that we haue denyed in our dooinges and sore offended, we haue moste worthely styrred hys wrathe to bée wreaked vppon vs, and yet hée spareth vs. He is allwayes oure Father, and loueth vs as a moste louinge Fa∣ther,
and also dothe greatly reioyce at our conuercion from wickednesse, he dooth séeke and vse great meanes to induce, reduce, and bring vs again vnto his house and presence, after the wasting and quite consuming of that good porcion, that he dyd giue vs for our parpetuall patrimony. We dooe imitate ye apostles altogether in fain∣ting and fearing at ye crosse of Christ, and doo flée from it, and denye him as they dyd, for the vaine feare of death: let vs also doo as they dyd in conuer∣ting againe vnto him, for as he dyd receiue them, euen so will he receiue vs, and will comfort and imbrace vs with no lesse loue, then he dyd vse & shew vnto them, for that he is aswell our maister and redéemer now, as he was theirs then, he is our good God, a god almightie, and doothe loue vs as∣well sithens we fell, as he dyd before we dyd fall: for that the naturalnes, and burning bowels of loue that is in the father, is not nor wilbe remo∣ued, by the infirmities and weaknes of the children. The prodigall childe
after that he had consumed and wa∣sted quite,Luke. 15. & 18.20. &c. the goods and substanciall ritches of his father, (or that his fa∣ther had giuen him,) dyd retorne a∣gaine vnto him, with a most humble submission and confession of himselfe with repentaunce, to be vnworthy to be called his sonne.A token of true repen∣tance. But the father sée∣ing him come a farre of, did méete him on the way with such a feruent ioye, that the sonne, had scarce opened his mouth to confesse his sinne and dys∣obedience, when he fel vpon his neck, imbraced and kissed him with great ioye, most zealously and gladly, and commaundyd him to be clothed with new and costly ritche garments, ma∣king moste merueilous feast with re∣ioycing, for his so penitent a conuer∣sion. Behoulde here the father was found no lesse louing to his sonne beinge pe∣nitent, at the last, then he was at the first, notwithstanding so great a diso∣bedience and contemptuous offence. He was alwayes a father vnto him, aswell before his folly in falling and
offending, as afterwardes: he was not thereby remoued nor altered one iote from his fatherly goodnesse, ney∣ther in loue, qualitie, nor condicion: he dyd not vpbraide nor caste him in the téeth with his falts, although they wer most greuously great in his sight, but dyd rather reioyce for his penitit conuercion: so muche that his ioye would giue no place to his sonne to confesse his faltes and offences. Bi∣cause he had already (pardoned and) put them quite out of memory,Ezech. 18. &. 22. and dyd wyll and commaunde that he, with all the reste in his house should reioyce with him for the happy reco∣uery of his sonne that was first dead and then aliue.Iere. 31. &. &. 34. An excelent kyndely and comfortable perswasion of the faythfull to re∣ioyce in any calamitie. &c. The .xxiiii. Chapter. TO vs (my bretheren and fellow membres) that haue played the
part (vppon this worldly stage) of ye Prodigal childe, in wasting, spoyling, and consuming of our porcions of the ritches, goods, and goodnesse of God our father, the holy ghost dooth speak. Propoūding this example, the which we ought to follow after our fallinge, bicause we might féele by experience, the loue so ardent which he hath now towardes vs, I say now, when as we be wounded so full of shame and con∣fusion, that we doo abhorre sinne and conuert. Therein he dooth confirme and assure vs, of our francke and frée pardon and remission for all our sinfull fallinge, how great so euer it be or haue béen, as a thinge due vnto all that are pe∣nitent. Bicause if our hartes he woū∣ded with true griefe, and repentance, and doo with a hart vnfayned earnest∣ly loath and abhorre the sinnes that we haue committed, he dooth present∣ly pardon vs for them with suche a dexteritie, that he is so redye to im∣brace, kisse, and otherwyse to com∣fort
vs, with his pure peace, that we cannot so soone open our lippes to con∣fesse our offences, as he is redy to per¦forme the effect of his grace, & to giue the guardon thereof vnto vs. By the which he dooth discouer himselfe to be no lesse our father then, then he was before our falling. His ioye is such for our saluacion then, that the accompt which he hath of our offences,Ezech. 18 &. 28. is as if we had neuer offended. Haue we lost and spoiled our spirituall ritches and substaunce that he hath geuen vs for our patrimony? yea: it is euen so, we haue most retchlesly done it, yet what then, in his heauenly house or habita∣cion he hath much and many more ri∣ches, to help and inrich vs with. And therefore let vs remoue our eyes frō our owne misery and nakednesse, and leaue the regarde that we haue ther∣vnto, and let vs firmely fix our sight & looke wholly on him with hart, mynd, and strength, for that he is our onely lyfe, health, remedy, redéemer and sal∣uacion, & none but he. For in vs there is nothing that is any thing auailea∣ble
therevnto. It is a bitter torment of mynde & christian conscience, to consider how many are made affraide, discouraged and driuen to doubte, by our denega∣cion or deniall of our Christ. (For al∣though they were tender younglings in the knowledge of him at the first) now condempninge (through vs) the trueth which before they did allowe. This will wounde our weake consci∣ences wōderfully which doo so reuolt. And therefore (I meane, to the ende we should doo so) doothe sathan make such continual warre against vs. But therin (to such lyke reuolters) it hap∣peneth as it did to the Apostles which dyd deny their maister, and made ma∣ny to faint, feare, and doubt (in and) of him. But although as weake & vn∣trained souldiers to such lyke warres we be often put to scilence and made to breake aray by our enimies. Yet it is very conuenient & fit that we ga∣ther a new force vnto vs, and once a∣gaine to confesse the trueth stoutely which we haue staggered, fallē from,
and denyed: and with a couragyous mynde and constant fayth, aduenture our lyues for the same, as the Apo∣stles did. Although before they had denyed it, yet they conuerted and dyd returne agayne to réedifie by their dealinges that which they hadde distroyed (in séekynge mortall lyfe) by denegati∣on of theyr maister. If with weake∣nesse wée doe commit this as they dyd, we haue the like vertue, and as full power to repent, pray to God and conuert as they had. And therefore the holy Ghost saithe, (and dooth commaunde vs by Sainct Paule,Hebr. 5. & &. 1.2.3) wée haue not a highe priest that can not take compassion of our infirmyties, but we haue suche a one as was tempted in all thinges lyke vnto vs: and yet without sinne. Let vs go therefore boldlye vntoo and béefore the throne of that good highe Priest,Hebr. 4. & 16. that wée may receyue mercy and fynde grace to helpe vs in tyme of néede. Math. 9. &. 12.And Christ him selfe sayeth that the
whole or healthful néede not the Phi∣sition, but they that are sicke. And therefore he doeth call them vn∣to him saying,Math. 11. &. 28.29. Come vnto me all you that labour and are loaden, and I will ease you, take my yoke vppon you and learne of mée, that am gentle & méeke in harte, and you shall finde rest (or refreshing) for your soules. So that when wée are sicke and oppressed in conscience, let vs runne vnto him, that the rather we may come to our reme∣die, bycause wée are those which are called of hym, that hée might vnloade and heale vs. If they haue taken away our honour, or spoyled vs of our goods. If they haue shut vs vp in prisons and strong Castles, or haue condempned vs for heresie (as they terme it) yet for all that, it is no let at all, but that we may come vnto hym: and receiue other goods, honours, and libertye, muche greater wythout compary∣son, then are those whych are vi∣sible.
For although that of men we are cō∣dempned as enimies, yet God dooth loue and allow vs as his children and frendes. And therefore dooth commaūd vs to come to be refreshed of his son. If he dyd not loue vs, he would not deale so diligently for our remedy, our sinnes cannot be so great, as is the health and helpe that he hath already prouided for them: he hath destroyed and ouercome sinne, and will that we enioy the benefit of his victory. If we thincke our selues vnworthy, yet our vnworthinesse shal not hinder vs, for that his worthynesse is sufficient.2. Cor. 1. & 20.21.22 Let vs therfore shut our eares to the rea∣sons of the worlde and the fleshe, and let them be onely opened to this amo∣rous voyce which doothe call vs so lo∣uingly. And sith that onely in God (who is the fountayne of all goodnesse) there is mercy, let vs not thincke to fynde it in any other but onely in him, in those that haue his spirit,The condi∣cion of the mercy of God. and be membres of Christ his sonne. It is the propertie of true mercie to deliuer ye miserable
from their myserie and euill, and in place thereof, to communicate vnto them aboundance of true ryches and goodnesse. And also it is most certayne,Prou. 11. & 17. that how much the greater, the euils and miseries are, of the which he doth deliuer his faithfull of: So much the more brighter doth remaine the shew and setting foorth of his glory in them, who is most worthie of the same. Then howe can we call that mercie, that doeth (all that may bée) depryue vs of so many benifites as is possible, and doeth put vs into a déepe dungeon amongest a mightie multitude of mas∣sie myseries and euilles. In good sooth, this can be none other, but a most straunge and curssed cruel∣tie,The mercy of men. cloathed but with a coate or cloke and name of mercy, the aucthor wher∣of for a certeintie, is the diuil and his members. The persecutors of the go∣spel doe accompt and call it mercifull dealyng to constraine the electe & cho∣sen to deny both God and his word, to spoyle them of the fruites of their re∣demption, and in place thereof to put
them into the handes of the diuill. Is this any thing els, may we think: thē to depryue them of an innumerable number of benifites, and to put them into an infinite and vnmeasurable many of mischiefes: for that in place and stéede of inioyning and hauing the lyues of their bodies, they doe nothing but reape the benifite and fruite of vanitie it selfe. Which indureth not a moment, but vanysheth awaye with them selues lyke a scrow in the fire, or as a vapour in the ayre: and so they with it, is cō∣sumed and commeth to naught for euer. How can there rest, remaine, or be any mercy, in place where as the trueth and rightuousnesse of God is condempned: How can those be mer∣cifull that condempne the innocents, and doe accompt it as a most curssed cryme (worthie of the moste spyte∣full death of the crosse) to professe the name of Iesu Christ,Colos. 1. & 14.15.16. and to acknow∣ledge and confesse that hée onely is the redéemer, heade, and quyckner of his church.
Amongest such audiences and iudge∣ment places of mischieuous mercy∣ful (nay rather mercilesse) men, there doeth aryse, spryng, procéede,Ephe. 1. & 4.16. &c. and growe, nothyng but homicyde, and suckyng of bloud from the beginning. And therefore there can be nothyng in them but vnrightuousnesse & cru∣eltie, which shineth in them according to the doctryne which they teach. And how much the greater and more their tiranny is, & braueth against ye faith∣full, & their doctrine which is a moste pure truth: So much ye more pure, ce∣lestiall, diuine, & comfortable is it to the author therof, who is Iesu Christ.Ioh. 8. & 44 Colos. 2. &. 4. And therfore (my dearely beloued,) be no more deceyued by reposing any truste or confidence at all, in their mercy so mischieuous. For whereas they so mercifully (nay mercilesly) doe suffer you to inioy ye liues of your bo∣dies, they doe therein dispoile you of the liues of your soules, which is the true fayth of the Euangelicall Gos∣pell.
The maner of parte of the persecution in Spaine, vvith a comfort against the lyke. &c. The xxv. Chapter. THe signes tokens and fruites that commeth, groweth, and are shewen of them, is verie like vnto the mercie which is in them. They giue for a liuery Saint Bennets coate, which is in signe of pennance, about a yarde and a halfe of yellow cloth with a hole cut in the middest thereof, where through ye re∣cantantes doe put their heads, so that the one halfe thereof is worne before on the brest, the other halfe behynde on the shoulders, the which hath twoo red crosses, called by them S. Bēnets crosses, the one before, the other be∣hynd, this they do appoint to be worne for certaine yeares, within a certaine precinct, vppon payne of death. To sig∣nifie that by them and the wearers thereof, the fayth of Christ is denyed, that they bée wholy guided, by the di∣uilish
doctrine of Antichrist, and the di∣uell his fellow, to whome they are faythful with a fayth vnfayned, most vnfaythfull to God,Prou. 11. &. 19. that they haue chaunged the ioyes eternal, for vaine ioyes and vanitie it selfe,Prou. 26. &. 11. 2. Pet. 2. & 22. which peri∣sheth, and haue (according to the pro∣uerbe) like a dogge, torned againe to theyr vomit: or like a sowe well wa∣shed, torned againe and wallowed in the myre. So that this signe or liuery is a perfect shew, signe and token, of ye mischeuous minde that is in them, and of theyr mercilesse mercy so vne∣quall to the true mercy which GOD dooth shew vnto his elected, persecu∣ted by them, (beinge his enimies) wherefore we ought not to séeke, nor trust to any other for mercie, but one∣ly to god, nor to change his mercy for any feare, flattery, or crueltie, whatso∣euer of men, nor the diuell: although they doo thonder it out with theyr dis∣sembled sounde or voice neuer so fiersly. Let vs vnderstande that the mercie which god dooth shew vnto his people
is very great: when that for his name sake our liues are taken from vs, by such or those which ought to doe their best to kéepe lyfe in vs, we may bée bold to take it to be a substancial and most certayne and sure signe that wée are partakers of, (and doe perteyne to) the kingdome of God: when that for his loue, or for the confession of his name, we be euill entreated, and condempned of men and the worlde,Mat. 5. & 11.12. Luke. 6. & 22.23. let vs not feare nor flée away so fast from death, yt for to liue eight dayes longer in this lyfe, we will loose the lyfe euerlasting, which is ye true life, a lyfe perdurable which neuer will haue end. What other thing is ye lyfe which they graunt vs by their mer∣cy, (as they say) but a cruell continu∣all death, full of sorowes & troubles, & of no cōtinuance to true life, but ma∣ny times taken away & dispatched by light occasiōs.Mat. 5. & 6 0. Luke. 6. & 21.22. Wherfore, for yt for so short a thing, a thing of so momētary a béeing, we aduenture our humayne liues, for eternall blessednes, & a lyfe yt neuer shall haue end, our lot or hap
is ye better, & more blessed in yt we dye with such dishonors, thē is ye lotte of our persecutors, though they lyue with neuer so muche péeuish popishe pompe. Our death here,Iohn. 11. & 16.25. &c. 2. Thes. 5. &. 5. is a true testi∣mony of ye life which we haue in christ with eternall resurrectiō by him: and wher as they cruelly kil, & craftily cō∣dempne vs, it is an infallible signe, & testimony most true, yt they be clean from Christ, & haue no parte wt them. Blessed are they (saith S. Iohn) ye dye in ye lord. And ye prophet Dauid saith,Apoc. 14. & 13. Psal. 116. & 13. the death of ye Sainctes, are precious in the presence and sight of God. And therefore (our death) béeyng a thyng which ye Lord doth loue, & a testimo∣ny yt we are blessed, we ought not to feare it in no maner of wyse, béeyng his children:Iohn. 21. & 7.8.9. &c. but rather to glorifie hym in the same, to the imitation of the Apostles. Let vs giue attentyue eare to the wordes of our sauiour Christ Iesus, directed to them yt will folow him.Mat. 10. & 37.38.9. He that loueth father or mother more thē me, is not worthy of me: & he yt will
not take vp his crosse and folow mée, is not worthy of me:Mar. 8. & 34.35. &c. Luke. 9. & 23.24.25. For whosoeuer will saue his lyfe shall loose it, but he that wil loose his life for my sake, the same shall saue it. For what auay∣leth or profiteth it a man to win the whole world, & then to loose his owne soule, or what may a man giue to re∣déeme his soule from death.VVhat it  to be a∣shed of Christ. Rom. 1. & 16. And also he that shall be ashamed of mée or of my worde, before the men of this ad∣ulterous and sinfull generation, the sonne of man shall bee also ashamed of hym, when hée shall come before mée in hys glorie, accompanyed with holy Angelles. So that the forme and order of keping & sauing our liues according to ye doctrine of Iesus christ, is to loose them by affliction for hys sake, & for the profession of his name. And thereby it is manifest, yt we kée and saue our liues most sure, whē as, and at such time as they doe take thē from vs: for that by the meanes ther∣of we are put in the hands of God. Let vs not be ashamed of Iesus Christ nor of his word, although they dishonour
vs neuer so muche therefore, but let vs rather account theyr most dishono∣red spite vsed towardes vs, for our most triumphant honour and victory: yea lette vs accompt euen the verye sweardes, axes, fleshookes, strangge∣ling stringes, paynted myters, liue∣ries of mockery, faggots, fire, rackes, boiling leade, pitche, rosen, and tarre, tortures, and all other their instru∣mentes of torment, to be enseignes of honour vnto vs, & badges of the eter∣nall kingedome, to the which we be brought by bearing and sufferinge of them.Esay. 61. & 1.2.3. &c. Psal. 72. & 6.7.8. &c. Iesus Christ was the sonne of God and kinge of all creatures, such a one as was promised by the Pro∣phets.Psal. 45. & 2.3. &c. Esay. 35. & 9.10. Mat. 27. & 28.29. Marc. 15. & 16.17. &c. But yet his crucifiers in moste dispiteous or spightfull maner & signe of mockery dyd make him naked, dis∣poiling him of his apparreile, & cloath him at theyr pleasures with purple, and put a réede in his hande and a crowne of sharpe thornes vppon his bare tender head, they dyd wounde & boffet his tender body with most cru∣ell blowes and strypes of fistes and
whips, they made as it were a may, game of him, a king in mockery, mis∣construing the accompt which ought to haue bene had of him, and accomp∣ted hym a man deceyued in his opy∣nion, a deceyuer of the people, and not the sonne of God.Sap. 2. & 1.2.3. &c. Of the same sorte and in the lyke maner doe they deale at this day with and to the faithful, the members of his blessed bodie our bretheren: onely bycause they call them selues the children of God, (as in truth they are) they doe spoile & per∣secute thē euen vnto ye death. But they shame not to shew themselues (if they be faithful in déed,) & therfore they be not apparelled, nor doo not were (nor yet delight in) ye ornaments of honor, which are vsed in the world: bicause they be not thereof. They doe onely apparell thēselues wt the spitefull dis∣honors vsed vnto Christ in thē & no∣thing ashamed therof, they are hidden therby, couered & shadowed from the spite of wicked worldlīgs, as he hym self was: they are cloathed by their foes ye enimies of God, wt S. Bennets
liuery coate in significatiō yt they are only allowed & known of god, though the world doe ye contrary, yt he doeth loue them as childrē though ye world doe abhorre them as fooles full of fol∣ly, deceyued in their opinions of the truth, & great deceyuors. Then are they tryed with a certaine kynde of thing on their heads lyke vnto a my∣ter, & that is painted full of diuilles, which doth signify the kingdom that Christ Iesus gayned for the elected, when as hée did were the crowne of thorne, & did suffer his passion & pre∣cious death so spitefull vppō ye crosse: by the diuilles painted theron we may vnderstād, ye sin, hell, death, & the diuil are already ouercome & killed: they haue no more force against them, nor can doe no more harme vnto them, then those vaine painted pictures. Bi∣cause euen as Iesus Christ dyd lyue héere vppō earth, & dyd wear those (or such like) cognisāces or badges of dis∣honor himself. So now he doeth liue & reigne vnder those ornamēts & appa∣rels in thē his own: so scorned, spited, &
crucified for his loue and professyng of his name. Sith he then is thus ly∣uing in them, then by him in them, is distroyed all the workes of the diuill: Bycause (as S. Iohn sayeth) Christ came into the world to the same end.1. Iohn. 3. & .1.5. Whereby it is manifest, that those things by the which our persecutors doe thinke to dryue vs from ye know∣ledge of God, (for that they know him not them selues,) are sure signes and perfect tokens of our probation & try∣all, and of the certeine inheritance of his blessed kingdome. Wherein after the ende of a fewe houres (a moment or twinckling of an eye in effect) wée are to enter, and shall reigne most tri∣vmphantly in great glorie for euer world without ende. It is gréeuous vnto vs (the faithful) when in béeyng persecuted with the peruerse and crooked crueltie of men, if any of vs doe happen to faint, and for feare renounce to trust vnto the mercy and ayde of God,The mercy of God to the penitēt is alwayes readie. yet by the gift of his holy spirit we doe not onely re∣pent presently, and are greatly grée∣ved
in déede, to thinke that so fondly we followed the foolish fleashly folly of our enemies, and forsooke the bles∣sed banner of Iesus Christ our care∣full captaine. But also we are then fresh of force in faith and are litle or nothing discomforted thereby, nor do not thinke that much is lost, (though we did stumble, stagger and fall by the crosse as aforesaide, and so did doubt in the truth of Christe) no nor yet we do not looke for our redirecti∣on from men nor momishe mamotes the piuish puppetly pelting patchery priests of Baall.Of the loue of God. It is altogether by the good will and loue of God, that we do remēber our selues, how that we were not onely without sinne, but also subiect greatly vnto ye same: and not onely to the euils of vs, had in experience, but also to all kinde of wickednesse by vs vnexperimented. And also by his like loue wee do re∣member, that God did make promise vnto vs, that his mercy should be e∣uerlasting to the humble and peni∣tent, with a speciall pardon and for∣giuenes
of sinnes, without any more remembrance of them. For as the fa∣ther hath pittie and compassion vppō his children:Psal. 105. & 21.22. &c. Euen so hath the Lord almightie pittie and compassion, vp∣pon all them that feare him. Bycause he doeth knowe right well of what a myschyeuous massye moulde or mettall we are made off, and doeth consider that wée are but dust. And therefore sith that our Iehouah, our most almightie God, as a most lo∣uing father hath alwayes had mercy vpon vs, let vs be most certainly assu∣red that euen so he wil haue now: and alwayes for euer. Wherefore let vs forsake and cast of that curssed and ex∣ecrable mercy offered of our aduersa∣ries the condempnors of the Gospell, otherwyse we are to forgo our partes and porcions of the true mercye of God, which is at as greate enmytye and contrarie (with and) to their mer∣cie as can bée.
Of the true similitude of the true church. The xxvi. Chapter. FRom hēceforth (neither) let vs not feare nor doubt the trueth of Iesu Christ that is crucyfied, nor yet be∣leue as the blynde doe: for amongest the christians at this day, the conditiō of Christ, and the true doctryne of the Gospell, is euen as it was when hée him selfe was conuersant on earth a∣mongest our predecessors. The righ∣tuousnesse & truth preached & taught vnto vs now, is so, & the very same, that it was then, & all one: Abhorred and euil spoken of by the world, now as then. Of those that be giuen to su∣perstition & holines, such as the world doeth allow, he is condempned to bée false & fained:1. Cor. 1. & 26.27.28. And of those yt be fully fraight wt worldly affects & wisdom, he is condempned to be foolysh & very ful of folly, & all of thē, both one & other doe condēpne him for an heritike & ful of errours. And also, as at the fyrste
he was condemned by the sayde holy and wise of the world, the doctors of the law, the learned, the Bushoppes, Prouisors, Inquisitors, Pharises, & Iudges of religion. Euen so now, are their others like vnto them, so to be poped, that they condemne both hym and his gospel together,Mat. 21. & 37.38.39. Mar. 12. & 6.7.8. and as much as in them is, they vse and set abroch to kill the heire (our principall men∣ber) and to throwe hym out of the Viniarde.Psal. 118. & 13. 1. Pet. 2. & 4.5. And suche as goe aboute to reedifye, and builde againe the Temple so longe layde waste, they do reproue and séeke to dispoile them, of the chiefe and principall corner∣stōe of their buildīg. Also those which haue already finished their building: & reedificatiō, they do greuously gain∣say & persecute: for why ye gospel hath neuer ben, yet is, nor neuer shall bee till the ende? withoute Annasses, Caiphasses, Pilates, Pontifices, high Priestes, Iudasses, and Pharises: to kicke and sporne against it. And therefore doo the Discipls of Iesus Christ, euen now go on begging it∣ting
from place to place without any worldly abyding, and driuen to hyde them selues bicause they haue profes∣sed and confessed the trueth, of theyr master, the Iudasses do abhorre them and their masters so much, that they doe what they can to the vttermoste of their power to betraye them, and to make a great gayne thereof. They doe vse their greatest cruelties, not onely agaynst them, but also euen a∣gainst the verie walles of the secrete houses where they haue preached the Gospell, if they take them, they put them in prisons with great extremi∣tie, till they haue done what in them is to ouerthrow them quyte. And therin it is to be séene that the church of ye faithfull (which is ye true church) is of and in the same estate and condi∣tion that it hath béene from the be∣ginning in the worlde, and therefore the Prophet Esay,Esay. 54. & 1.2.3. &c. doth call it a poore afflicted and beaten batred churche, with the tempestuous stormes of per∣secution, without all comfort and con∣solation, euen lyke vnto the churche
which was of the Apostles somtimes in Ierusalem. And therfore when it shall happen or fall out at any tyme to any of vs the members of the same church, to be imprysoned and presented before the audyences and curssed congrega∣tions of cruell persecutors: Let vs not looke to finde any other pietie, nor pit∣tie amongest them, thē Iesus Christ dyd amongest his condempnors: whē he was tyed before them, and moste cruelly passioned. But let vs remem∣ber the wordes which our Lorde Ie∣sus Christ spake to his disciples, whē as he commaunded them to preache the Gospell of his worde throughout the whole world.Math. 10. & 16. Beholde (sayde he) I doe send you forth as shéepe among Wolues: It is the propertie of the Wolfe to shewe very little mercy, fa∣uour, or curtesie to the shéepe, if he do shewe any at all, it is but feigned to bryng hys mischieuous mynded pur∣pose to passe, the sooner to make a spoyle of his pray. Let vs remember also that (as before repeated) we be
called to be conformeable and lyke vnto Iesus Christ. As hée, after hée was taken, and vntill he had aspyred to ye crosse, he did finde no hamanitie, no charitie, no compassion, no pittie, comforte, nor consolation amongest men, more then if they had bene most wylde, fierce, cruell, and brute beasts. Euen so it shall happen vnto vs, if as we ought, we be folowers of Iesus Christ in all our persecutions and crosses. But contrariwyse: if théeues, rob∣brs, runnagates, Sodomites, com∣mitters of Symony, homicides, mur∣derers, committers of Sacryledge, fornicators, adulterers, and such like, when they be taken and put in pryson there is one or other founde present∣lye that prayeth for them: wyth workes of charitie, vysiting them in pryson, helpyng them in their busy∣nesse and trauayle, gyuing them com∣fort, counsell, & strength towards their discharge or setting at libertie. But if any of the children of God, happē to be had in their hāds, they put thē presētly
in pryson, where they can neither sée nor be séene of any man to help them: there is no man that doeth or dareth helpe, ayde, coūsell, comfort, or streng∣then them: there is none that may humainly helpe, speake, vse any kynd of friendship, pittie, gentlenesse, or o∣ther good intreatie (as commonly is v∣sed among the worldlinges one to a∣nother) to them. But contrariwyse, they are shut vp alone, one of them seperated from an other, vsed and in∣treated with a kynde of crueltie as if they were Turks, or among Turks. And for what cause, cryme, or offence I pray you? Surely none at all, but onely bycause they be rightuous and iust, and haue their whole faith, hope, and confidence onely in Iesu Christ, and doe trust to be saued by his mer∣cy and merites in the bloud which he shed for them. But then if they be brought and doo appéere before the Iudges, they finde them furious, fierce, and merueilous wylde: euen lyke vnto rampant Ly∣ons, full of subteltie lyke Foxes, with
wyles to take them in trips by words and so to gather and get greater mat∣ter and cause agaynst them, then be∣fore they were accused of: And doe forbid all, and commaund that none, shall visit them neyther with words, workes, nor mercifull meane to help them any way, although that God so straightly haue commaunded it. If that any man (which is not altogither spoyled of all humanitie) doe speake friendly vnto them, and so visit them with friendly communication: they are presently had in suspition, and pu∣nished therefore. If there bee anye knowen to be so, or otherwise moued with compassion & doe pray for them, they are takē for complisses, consorts, and confederates of the same cryme, which is nothing but to confesse the name of Iesus Christ, and not to be a∣shamed of him being crucified in thē. And euen as Christ was couered with all kynde of heauynesse and trouble vppon the crosse, so were they made naked and vncouered of all humayne consolation and comforte, and as hée
hauyng great thirst and drynesse by the agonie of death, had giuen hym by them to drinke vinager and Gall, So all yt those faithfull afflicted ones,Math. 27. & 48. receiue of theyr persecutors, tormen∣tors, & troublers in the tyme of theyr agony and thirst, is nothing but gall and bitternesse, the more and rather to grieue them, for that they bée as shéepe of Christes flocke, among the Wolues of this world, who can giue them none other thing, bicause of the enmitie they haue vnto them, & theyr pastor or shéepeheard. Yet all that they doe or can doe a∣gainst vs though it be neuer so much, it is so regestered and set downe in Gods diuine coūseil that they cannot nor shall not, varrie one iote, nor yet passe on whit beyonde it. Wherefore with all humylitie let vs runne vn∣to hym, whoe will turne all their tiranie, and crueltie so pagan lyke vsed against vs, to our comfort, health and profite, notwithstandyng all our solitarie shuttyng vp neuer so sepe∣rately and secretely alone.
Let vs imitate and followe the children of Israell, and doe as they did when they were captyues in E∣gypt: who beyng vsed and intreated wt as much crueltie & tirāny as might be, wtout hauing on their behalf, either king, prince, lord, or other earthly ma∣iestrate, vngouerned of humayn help, and banished frō all maner of fleshely fauor, yet they had recourse vnto god onely: & with such sorowful sighs and tears did confesse & bewail their sins, wickednes, & offēces, (& did desire help & ayd for his promise sake so faithful∣ly,Exo. 2.3.4. Chap.) that all of their meanes togither both of penitencie and prayer, did as∣cend vp to ye throne of the most high∣est: and with those cries (I say) & hea∣uenly hope yt they had, did pearce the boiling bowels of his loue and mercy: And did obtein the fruit of their faith∣full desires. So that when the curssed crueltie and tirannie of the Egipti∣ans, was at the full, ye highest, and the greatest, euen then did God extende hys mightie arme from heauen so: that they being without any humain
helpe or remedie at all, he did deliuer them, onely by his own mightie po∣tencie and power. There is no tiran∣nie nor persecution that can continue long, for looke how much the more it is malicious out of measure, so much the nigher is the ende and distruction thereof. As did appeare by Pharao: for when that the crueltie and tiran∣nie of him & his ministers was most extréemest agaynst God and his peo∣ple, euen then did it perishe and ende with most cruell distroy thereof, and the executioners togyther: for there is nothing that will more sooner di∣stroy and consume the euill tyrannie and crueltie of the tiranicall persecu∣tors, then the pacience and humilitie of the Sainctes, with submitting thē∣selues, in harte and mynd, to the one∣ly will and pleasure of God: askyng of him succour and ayde with fayth in his promise. There is no suche whet∣stone to blunt nor beate downe the rasor, sharpe edges of the sweards of the Tirantes, nor no suche water to quenche the burnyng flames of fyre
which they vse for the faithfull, as is a sure faith and hope in the Lord: bi∣cause as all the enimyes that doe af∣flict and torment vs be deade: Euen so (althoughe wée sée it not with our bodily eyes) he doeth kill them styll for vs. And notwithstanding that they doe séeme to our carnall fight to bée a¦liue, yet for the hatred they haue to the truth, they are dead in the presēce of God. And howe muche the greater their frensie furie is towardes vs: So much the surer is the signe that theyr vtter distruction is at hand.Exo. 14. & 3.4, 5. &c. The peo∣ple of God were so occupied and dry∣uen vp against the read Sea, & in such a streight thereby, that the weaklings amongest them faynted, feared, and began to yéelde them selues for dead men, by the handes of their enimyes the men of warre: who so fiersly fo∣lowed them as was possible, makyng accompt of the same: they were ar∣med in all points for the purpose, but God prouided a present remedie for his people, to put their appoyntment cleane to the contrary. He diuided the
hugie heapes and waues of waters, so that they stood stil on eche side like stone walles, till his people (the chil∣dren of Israell) had passed throughe the myddest thereof drye footed: And presently passing the same, (and loo∣kyng backe to beholde the huge armie of Pharaoes hoast their furious foes, that folowed so faste for filthie thirst they had after bloud,) they sawe the waters agayne kéepyng their course in a most swifte maner, and coulde sée nothing els, but the ouerwhelmed and drowned bodyes, of those fury∣ous fightyng fellowes who folowed them so fiercely. Those fonde furyes were blynded so, that they could not sée till they came to that distruction, the which then they would haue fled from, but it was to late, they were mightie and most magnanimous and valiant till then. But being thus kil∣led dead, distroyed, and ouercome by him that mightie Iehouah, he discoue∣red the same to them his most louing people: bycause they should not feare nor fainte at the lyke agayne, though
it séemed neuer so mighty or terrible.Psal. 82. & 3.4. &c. Euen so, those (which persecute vs at this present tyme so trimly, lyke as they would roote & cast out the name of God from the earth, yea and out of heauen also, that he myght neuer bée neyther knowen nor professed) are dead and killed by the same our most myghtie and eternall God: though to our foolishe fleshe it séeme to the contrarie and to the sight therof. And therefore (dearely beloued) there is no cause at all, that may make vs, (by any iust reason, that our enimies can vse,) to fainte, feare, or leaue, the true professing of our fayth in our master Christ, though they doe threaten it out neuer so lustily: for that we bée∣ing once passed the seas of sorowes in thys worlde, by suche crosses and calamities as it shall please God to vse for a meane to passe vs ouer the same. Shall haue lykewyse discoue∣red and shewed vnto vs, that those which now séeme vnto vs liuing, & doo intreat vs so euill without pietie or pittie, blasphéeming ye name of Christ
and his holy Gospell, are not in truth but dead bodies which can nothing hurt vs. If it should be great & foolish folly to feare the pictors paynted (in parishe churches) of images, or the puppetly Idols set vp in popish tem∣ples, as though they might helpe vs to good, or saue vs from euill. It were and should be ten tymes treble grea∣ter folly without comparison to leaue and renounce the friendship and obe∣dience of faith in him, which is an e∣uerlasting mansion for vs in all ioye and felicitie. If there were any cause at all, to fear those dead bodies, which can doe vs neyther good nor harme. The holy Ghost would not giue such counsell cleane to the contrary:1. Pet. 3. & 14.15. Say∣ing, feare you not any thing that they can doe, nor be you not troubled, but sanctify the Lord God in your hartes. So that it is a plaine consequent, that as (by sure fayth and hope that the children of Israell had in almightye God, with their incessant and humble prayers and petitions which they v∣sed vnto him,) he did distroy and ouer∣throw
ye Egiptians,Exo. 14. & 27.28. Exo. 15. & 2.3.4. &c. (Pharaoes hoast) and that they were so set at libertie, celebrating of Sacrafice with himnes and songes of prayse and thankes gy∣uing vnto him the onely aucthor ther∣of. Euen so nowe in these present tymes, by the lyke faith & hope which they had, and that we oughte to haue in his mercie. And by the power and strength of the same God, shall perish all those that persecute vs for the pro∣fession of his name and Gospell, for they are no lesse enimyes and rebelles to him and his people, thē was Pha∣rao and his vaseils or subiects.Hebr. 10. & 22.35. Wher∣fore let vs bée firme and constant in the trueth, and in no wyse leaue the communion or congregation of ye true catholike church, but with a sure hope belieue in Christ Iesus: By whome we shall as well be defended and de∣liuered from harmes, as were ye chil∣drē of Israell.Psa. 7. & 14.16.17. Psal. 9. & 15. And all those mischiefs which our persecutors doe threaten and thunder against vs, ye most migh∣tie God will confound, and conuert or turne them vppon their owne heads,
as the holy Ghost hath promysed by the Prophet Dauid. Of Predestination and of glorificati∣on thereby. &c. The xxvij. Chapter. JF we consider the end, and what stoppe and stay we are brought vn∣to by abiding so bitter crosses & perse∣cutions: no doubt we shal finde ther∣by great occasion to passe in sufferyng them with great ioye.Rom. 8. & 50. S. Paule doth declare vnto vs ye effect of ye end ther∣of and what it shal be: Those whom I iustifie (sayeth hée) doe I also glo∣rifie. So that the ende thereof is to be glorified, as Iesus Christe was when God the father did put hym in hys kingdome, and there made him Lorde ouer all hys enimyes, by the afflictions and crosses which hée had suffered & passed. And as ye way which our redéemer Tetragramatō tooke to be glorified by, was crosses of persecutiō: whereby he passed and tooke possession
of his heauenly kingdome. In lyke maner by those persecutions whych now we suffer, is the most perfect way for vs to bée glorified by also. As wée may be well assured, by Iesus Christ our head who is alreadie gone before vs by the same way: whose footesteps of force we must follow. This way is so direct yt whosoeuer passeth by it, it is not possible (so he do it with faith) that he should misse, but with all per∣fectnesse enter into his kingdom. Bycause as those that passe any other way, doe walke till they loose them selues, so those that kéepe this way which is the true way, cannot but bée glorified (in suffering) with Christ: for that they did perseuer in his truth and true religion till the end. And therefore all those which shall suffer & dy for so iust a cause, let thē re∣ioice & be glad, assurīg thēselus of their glorification wt Christ Iesus for euer. For why:Math. 19. &. 6. Gods truth cānot alter nor chaūge, nor yet any thing yt is ioyned therwt, cānot be seperated by mā. The holy ghost saith by ye apostle S. Paule,Rom. 8. & 29.30.
that all those which God dyd knowe and acknowledge, he did predestinate, bycause they shoulde be conformable and lyke in shape vnto the image of his sonne. And those which were pre∣destinate he did call, those which hée called, he also iustified, & those which he iustified, he did glorifie. So that of necessitie those which he did predesti∣nate, he did also glorifie, and the way and meanes to come to be glorified, is to be called and iustified, by passions and crosses, to be conforme and lyke vnto his sonne. Wherefore those two things be so vnyted and knit togither, that the one is comprehended within the other, for that in suffering with Christ, and to be made lyke vnto him, is comprehended the ioyntely beyng glorified with him. And therefore all them that suffer afflictions and cala∣mities in this world, may assure them selues that in the ende they shall bée glorified in Christ, for whome they were afflicted. Beloued bretheren we haue béene alreadie called of God by the Gospel.
And although that before our callyng we were loste, yet nowe, we are wa∣shed, sanctified, and iustified by ye bloud and name of our Lord Iesus: and by the spirit of our God. This is a plaine testimony, that we haue all our secret election from one, and that is Christ, by whom we doe certifie our selues thereof. Also the world, by the perse∣cutions and sorowes that we suffer in it,1. Cor. 6. & 11. and by the hatred that it vseth towardes vs, doeth manifestly shew, that by the diuyne mercie of God we are called and iustified. For why the world can not abyde vs, nor none but his owne. Whilest we were of the worlde, hée made vs many delycate deintie delightes, and trimly intrea∣ted vs, as if we had bene his owne. But afterwardes whē God had giuē vs the true light of his Gospell, and so seperated vs a sunder, that it was euident and apparant vnto all, yt we were the true members of Christ our head, and none of his. Then he bluste∣red and blowed against vs: he rufled, roared, brayed, and rayled at vs, and
did so extréemely abhorre vs: that he did (nor will) not rest, to vse all kynde of crueltie that he can, to cast vs out quyte from hym. And so our sauiour Christ doeth confyrme vnto vs by Sainct Iohn,Ioh. 15. & 19.20.21. saying, if the world doe abhorre and hate you, then remember howe that fyrst it hated mée. If you were of the world, the world would loue you as hys owne: But bycause you be not of the worlde, and that I haue chosen you to my self, the world doeth hate and abhorre you. Remember the wordes which I haue sayde vnto you, the seruaunt is not greater then his Lorde, if they haue persecuted mée they will also perse∣cute you. Wherby it resteth mani∣fest, that those which be persecuted, killed, and abhorred of the world, are alreadie taken & called by God from the worlde to him selfe, and washed and purified with the bloud of hys sonne Iesus Christ: So that we are to acount our selues glorified, if we be hated & doe suffer in such maner. And therefore sith we be so certified, and
shewed by such signes and tokens so euident, that we be elected and chosen eternally in Christ Iesu, and that wée be partakers of his rightuousnesse, let vs also be assured of it, that we shall atteine to the ende of our election in dispite of the world and all the mini∣sters thereof,Our electi∣on and gal∣ling. and of all their false and curssed religion. When that men without God and hys Christ will (and doe) burne vs, or giue vs any other kynde of death: let vs vnderstand that it is the check∣mate and ende of all our troubles and calamities, and that then is set open vnto vs the gates of the glory of God, that we might enter in & enioy with him for euer, the inestimable ryches of his eternall kingdom. When the e∣nimies of God and his Gospell perse∣cuted S. Steuen to the death, euen whē he was in ye most chiefest checks,He. 7. & 5 tauntes & troubles, amongest them he sawe the glorie of God, & did sée heauē open, & Iesus Christ sitting on ye right hād of ye father, ready to receiue him & to crown him as his martir & faithful
witnesse. So that in the strongest tor∣ments, and most cruell deathes, hea∣uen is opened vnto vs. And therefore we ought not to be abashed, to faynte nor to feare at any of their torments, but to stand strongly, and go forward with a good stomake and courage, and neuer to looke behynde vs: that wee might ouertake, attain to, and appre∣hend (or comprehende) the resurrecti∣on of Christ Iesus,Luke. 9. & 62. Phil. 3. & 11.12. accordyng as wée be in him comprehēded. Our enimies are vnwilling herewith, but god wil∣leth and hath ordeyned that there is nothyng that may or can, be any let, hinderance, or impediment, to kéepe backe that hys election and eternall counsell,Rom. 6. & 5. wherein he loued vs, should not take effecte accordingly: that wée might be made conformeable and like vnto his sonne, as well in his death as also that we should be pertakers of his glorious resurrection. All the euill that men doe against the faithfull, is to none other end, but to let and hyn∣der (if they could) the predetermina∣tion of God. Thinking to make them
beléeue that there is no other way to bring the same to passe, or that it pas∣seth by none other meane or rule, thē by those which they doe allowe, (and not by ye truth which they cōdempne,) after their owne fantasies & delights. No, no, God, nor no pointe of hys go∣uernement and will, is not nor shall not be directed by them: neither hée, his people, nor yet his doctrine, is, nor are not guided by any parte, péece, or pointe, of their wayes or teachings. As great distance are,Esay. 5. & 9.10. betwéene my wayes and yours (sayeth the Lord,) as is betwéene the heauen and the earth. God wil not haue to deale with the wicked, least it be to vse them as the vessels of his wrath,Rom. 9. & 20.22.23. for the health and wealth of his chosen. For whn, by their wayes, institutions, and de∣crées, they goe about to blotte & rase vs out of the memoriall of God, that we might not attaine to the lande of the liuing. But in that mansion and most mightie monarchie God hath vs in remembrance, and doth lift vp, en∣riche, and glorifie vs, with his inesti∣mable
giftes and riches,Psal. 45. & 6.7.8. &c. where our ende will be to rest shyning in great ioye and glorie, lightned by the lyght of truth in all heauenly felicitie. Gen. 37. & 18.28.The bretheren of holy & blessed Io∣seph, what did they leaue vndone and not put in practise, to punish, let, and hinder, ye comming to passe of ye coun∣sel of God, wherby he had determined to lift on high & glorifie his seruant: they persecuted him,Gen. 45. & 8. iniured him, moc∣ked him, stripped him, & sold him as a slaue: he was caried into straūge coū∣treis, & there vsed & intreated most ex∣tréemely and hardly:Gen. 41. & 40.41.42. &c. But whē they thought no more to haue hard of him, behold, he remayned lifted vp by the handes of God, and made a mightie maiestrate in Egipt, and a superior Lord and ruler ouer his byers & sel∣lers. All yt they did against him, was onely and vppon set purpose, a pre∣tence to hinder him, that hée should not atteyne to any parte thereof (I meane that glorie) but they could not in no one iote,Psal. 79. & 7. let or hynder the good will of God, nor yet coulde vse no im∣pediment
in his loue towardes Io∣seph, nor in guyding him (as a shéepe that had bene among Wolues) from all his troublesome enimyes and per∣secutors, till hée had performed hys great glorification in this world, and in the worlde to come inherited hy∣porsiō, of those inestimable treasures prepared (by the loue and good wil of God) for the faithfull from the begin∣ning. Thus it appeareth, how he tooke hys steppes into all hys troubles, and doynges by degrées, as it were vp a ladder or paire of stayers) til God had assumpted and lifted him vp, into the toppe of all his glorie, accordyng to his determination before the foun∣dation of the world. So that, as these carnall and worldly bretheren did a∣gaynst Ioseph, euen so at this day doe the children of this world against the faithfull: in beating downe and per∣secuting them by all the meanes and wayes which possibly they can: but therein God doeth lifte them vp tyll they be glorified in Christ Iesus.
Of the mightie povver and exceeding loue of God. The xxviij. Chapter. Ioh. 11. & 47.50.57.THe Hipocrites, scribes, Pha∣rises, and other the enimyes of God, were greatly against the glorifycatyon of Iesus Christ: and to conclude him from the same, they persecuted hym with so great and gréeuous furie,Ioh. 15. & 28. Ioh. 19. & 1.2.3. &c. and also condempned hym to death, beastly be∣léeuing that after ye same, there would nor coulde bee no more noyse of hys name, that wholy he should peryshe for euer, and so be (most out of memo∣rie) altogither in obliuion: that they should holde his kingdome in peace, and haue his people subiecte to theyr tirannie. But the dyuyne meaning of God and hys prouidence was cleane to the contrarie. By those meanes and wayes which they wrought to o∣uerthrow hym, he lifted hym vp in such maner that there is nothing in
heauen nor earth more highe, subly∣mate and supreme then he. Where they sought all ye mischieuous meanes they could, to darken and hinder hys glory, it was to no purpose, God made it with maiestie the more to shyne, and did spred the beames thereof the farther throughout the vnyuersall world.Esay. 53. & 1.2.3.4.5. &c. They did crucifie hym in most cruellest and most spytefullest maner, and killed hym with the most vylest death, & such as was most infamous: bycause he myght be the more hated, and the lesse accounted vailable for the health and saluation of his cho∣sen. But in thys was fulfilled that which was spoken by Esay the Pro∣phet,Esay. 53. & 11. Psal. 21. & 5.6.7. Psal. 22. & 7.8.9. Esay. 61. & 9.11. Hebr. 2. & 8.12. Psal. 46. & 7.8.9. &c. the father shall drawe vnto him an innumerable number of disciples that neyther shall nor will loue nor séeke after none other helpe, holines, nor rightuousnesse but his owne. And also it is written, that God by hys death vppon the crosse dyd cause that his sonne should haue emperiall, rule, and be the onely Lord, ouer all his e∣nimyes. It was a thyng which they
could not conceiue in their hard har∣ted harts & mindes: But in that they thought by their doinges to deface and foredoe for euer, the name of our swéete sauiour Iesus Christ, it is fal∣len out quyte to the contrarie: and so altered and turned, that there is none other name in the worlde, where to, or to which, all creatures shall bowe but onely his.Pil. 2. & 9.10. &c. Ioh. 12. & 16.23.28. Ioh. 13. & 31.32. Ioh. 12. & 32. So that where they did their best indeuour, to spoyle all hys honour and dygnitie, it is nowe so come to passe, that therby he is most gloriously glorified, hath greatest su∣premisie, and a name aboue all names the greatest. As it is (of his owne wordes) writ∣ten by S. Iohn? If I be lifted vp from (or aboue) the earth, I shall and wil drawe vnto me all things. Meanyng that by his death he should gayne and win the victorie, and bryng all things in subiection vnder hym. As hys e∣nimyes and rebellious aduersaryes, could not with all the force and po∣wer they had, preiudise or hinder his glorification: no more can those ter∣rible
tormentors, that séeke to perse∣cute & kill vs, let nor preiudise ours. Bycause it is dependant vppon hym, and altogither his owne: for that the glorification of the head,1. Cor. 12. & 12.26. is also com∣mon to the members vnited and knit therevnto. Euen as at those dayes the crosse and passion of our Lord, did Annunci∣ate, and declare his glorie, potencie, and might, to all beléeuers? So ye per∣secutions, calamities, and afflictions that we doe suffer, & also those which an innumerable number of our fel∣low members and bretheren, haue suffered sithens, haue bene, bée, & shall be for euer, publishers, proclaymors, and preachers of the same glory. The enimies of ye gospel, aduised & taught by ye spirit of Sathan, when they doe lead vs to the place of the execution of our death, they doe tye our tonges (an act as diuilish & pagan like as possible) bicause that we should neither speak, nor yet that they woulde heare, the laude and prayse of Iesus Chryste our maister: but those tyinges
or strings wherewith our said tonges be restrayned, shall be tonges to talke and speake agaynst them, as agaynst the greatest enimyes to the glorie of God: and vse a new language, wher∣by shall be vnderstoode and knowen, the vertue and mightie power of the highest, vnto them that he hath ordei∣ned to health and saluatiō. It is great∣ly necessarie that all be fulfilled that the Lord hath spoken of,Luke. 19. &. 40. to or against his enimies: he him self sayth, I say vnto you that if my disciples holde their peace in preaching, yet the very stones in the stréetes shall giue their voices, and sound my glorie. And now is the same in fulfillyng amonge the faythfull, for that, our aduersaries, e∣nimies, and persecutors, doe what they can, and doe vse as many lettes and impediments as may be, to defēd vs from speakyng with our proper tonges, the commendation, praise, and glorie, of our sauiour and iustifier Ie∣sus Christ. But he himselfe in place of one tongue which they tie, wil loose, vntie, and commaunde, a number in∣numerable
to speake, prayse, and glo∣rifie him, worlde without ende. The long beardes of the persecuted ouer growen so greatly: their garments to vncleane, rotten, and torne, with the filthie vncleane filthinesse of the pryson: the biting bitter taunts their enimyes byte them with, the cordes halters, and stringes, they tye them with, & the engines they vse to stran∣gle them with: they all, will God cō∣uerte into tounges, which with one voice shall vse so great a harmonie as is most wonderfull, to the superla∣tiue prayses of our moste benifitiall brother and head Iesus Christ: And shall discouer that hée onely is our Lord and redéemer: and we so perse∣cuted, the faithfull witnesses of hys truth and rightuousnesse. Those ty∣ranicall tirantes and pestilent perse∣cutors can not heare thys heauenly harmonie that so highely soundeth with so excelent an accorde, bycause their owne impietie hath so deadly be deafed them. Yet all those whiche are sanctified by Iesu Christ shal hear
it, and also some of them being waked by it, will desire to be consortes, com∣plisses, and companyons with vs in our crosses, vppon cōdition they might be made mates with vs in so greate delight, & witnesses of so beautifull a rightuousnes & dyuine sanctification, the which the Lorde hath giuen vs to possesse. 1. Pet. 2. & 21.Our death shall be no more bar∣rein thē was the death of Iesu Christ whose footesteppes we must follow. God will make that the verie ashes of our bodies, shall fructifie and bée a cause, to make many faythfull chosen children to shewe themselues. By∣cause that many hearing and séeing our firmenesse in fayth of the gospel, and vnderstanding our constancie (at our death) wherewith we are streng∣thened from aboue:Act. 1. & 8. will open their eyes for to sée it, and so acknowledge him the author thereof for their fa∣ther. And reduce thēselues to his obe∣dience, renouncing ye seruice of Ima∣ges & Idols, & leaue altogither ye false religiō of Antichrist & his cōfederates.
For that the wordes of our sauiour Christ must néedes be fulfilled (who sayth) if a grayne of wheat being cast into the earth doe not dye,Ioh. 12. & 24. it remay∣neth alone whole & fructifieth not: but if we die, it bringeth foorth much fruit (as to vs is wel experiēced) likewise if it be in the garner, or sheafe in the barne, it abideth barren, & beareth no fruit. So that to die & suffer in ye Lord, increase commeth therof, as of a grain of wheat, that dyeth in the earth: and more aboundantly manifold. To the iudgement of the worlde and of our flesh, by our death we are drawen in∣to perdition: but it is verie false and an vntruth, for in very déed we die, to arise againe, to beare and carry most copious & aboundant plentie of fruit, to our glorification with God the fa∣ther, and to the imitation of his sonne Iesus Christ, who brought forth more aboundancie and plentie of fruit by his death, then he did by his lyfe. So that those which suffer doe fulfill that which the holy ghost speaketh, of
the faithfull: they which haue béene called and iustified (sayeth he,) it is conuenient that they be also glorified, bicause that by their death they might fructifie to the glorie of God,Ioh. 21. & 19. and bée ioyned togyther and glorified with hym. God hath ordeined to sublimate and exalt them that be his, So that not onely their persons be liuing instru∣ments of his and their glorie, but al∣so their passions serue to the same ef∣fecte. And thus euerie one of them doeth verifie that which the Apostle S. Paule speaketh of him self,Colos. 1. & 24. saying: I doe suffer and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my fleshe, for his bodies fake which is his churche or congregation. So that the passions that euerie one of vs hys members doe suffer is to the filling vp of ye mea∣sure of conformitie, that euerie mem∣ber of the same bodie oughte to haue with the head. Wherefore euery one that is persecuted and killed for the truth, endeth the filling vp of his part of that measure, and remayneth who∣ly
made conformeable vnto Christ: he hath distroyed the whole bodie of sinne,Rom. 6. & 2.6. Rom. 7. & 4. and left a confirmation to the rest (his fellow members) of his pati∣ence and constancie, bicause they are to passe by the same way after Christ, and so come togyther to bée gloryfied with him, in his kingdom. It appea∣reth howe our troubles, paynes, and passions are dignified, by reason of the communion that is betwéene the head and his members.Act. 9. & 4. The holy Ghost doeth call and terme them the afflic∣tions and passiōs of Christ. For as by the calamities which he did suffer in his own proper person, God was glo∣rified & he him selfe lifted vp on high: So that by those which we suffer be∣ing his faithfull, shall we be glory∣fied togyther in (and with) hym. By∣cause that as he dyd suffer bée∣ing our heade, we must also suffer that be his members.
An excelent comfort against the feare of death, vvith a confutation of his povver. &c. The xxix. Chapter. ANd therefore sithe hée hathe thus honored & exalted vs,Act. 10. & 3 9.11.28.34.5.41.42. yt he hath made vs wytnesses of hys trueth, and of the sauing health that hys sonne dyd bryng in∣to the world, and hath sublimate our passions in such sort, (as consecrating them in his own person) that he doth call them his owne,Psal. 125. & wilbe glorified in them: And also for that our death is so precious before him, that he wil take from the world so many liuyng instruments (into his presence to hys glorie: there is no cause to the con∣trarie, but that we should stifly stand to the professon of hys truth, & the gi∣uing of our liues ioyfully for ye same. There bée some which for the vani∣ties and thyngs of thys worlde, will ventour lyues, goodes, and all that they haue, & yet it sodeinly perisheth.
The truth of God neuer perisheth,Ioh. 12. & 28. no more can none ye trust therein. Why doe we then flye from being glorify∣ed with him, sith we are no lesse cer∣taine thereof, then we are of our pas∣sions, persecutions, troubles, & death. He loued vs with so feruent an effect,Rom. 4. & 24.25. and so serued vs, that he did not rest till tyme that he dyed with wounds of our loue. And shall wée bée so vn∣grateful, as to saue or kéepe our liues from him, & not to venter them with the lyke loue, to honour hym likewise with them, (if we could.Rom. 8. & 29. Colos. 1. & 5.20.) Shal we so forget God, (that did remember and know vs, before the beginning of all things visible, and did determyne all these his blessings for vs,) yt we shall for euer be buried in obliuion, and re∣fuse so smal a thing as worldly afflic∣tion.Ephe. 1. & 4.5. Iere. 2. & .34. I pray you deare friends & bre∣theren, wherfore serueth our liues (if we will be saued) but to glorify him: did we not promyse hym to aduen∣ture all things to his glorie and ho∣nour, wherfore then shall we reserue any thing to the detriment thereof.
Hée him self went before vs and dyd passe first, thorough the pikes of perse∣cution and affliction in the world, hée is our head, shall we thē stagger, stop, or stay,Colos. 1. & 4.16. Hebr. 2. & 8.14. in following him, beyng hys members: whose is the wealth and riches that we haue? whose is our life? or who did giue vs our honours: did not he giue vs all, bycause wée should glorifie him, as his chosen faithful and beloued, then for what cause should we let to glorifie him in all that euer we can or haue. Haue we not sayde that with all (and in all) thinges Ie∣sus Christ did glorifie his father, and that we were chosen to be conforme and lyke vnto him. And therfore sith we sée it is our duties, let vs doe (and indeuour our selues) all that possiblie we may, to accomplish the same: at the least a parte that we mighte the sooner attayne to the whole, in i∣mitatyng, that we might be glorified alyke with him. For when wee serue him doubtfully, and follow him wa∣veryngly, as if wée thought all to no purpose, all that we doe in such sort,
is but in vayne, of no validitie nor ef∣fect, but rather falleth out cleane to the cōtrarie, for that in doubtful dea∣ling, can no true seruice be done, nor yet he be glorified. So that all maner of doings or workes which are not to his glorie, are lost, of none effect, nor valour: but yet all that is done in true faith, is of muche validitie, and verie effectuall thervnto. The which he will neuer forget, bicause he doeth so loue vs that he is verie vnwillyng we should loose our labours in anye thing, or spend our traueils in vaine. He accepteth all that possibly may a∣grée with his iustice, for the great de∣sire and good will hée hath to bée our guarder, sauiour, kéeper, and defen∣der. He asketh of his father for vs, all things, as well honour, wealth, and riches, as healthe, lyfe and salua∣tion. There is nothing that he taketh into his handes for vs, but it taketh effecte in vs, there is nothyng in the handes of our persecutors that hath any effect at all or securitie. Why doe the foolishe phoppes infected with fyl∣thie
incredulitie and misbeliefe, loose their lyues euerlastingly, but onely, bycause they trust not in God, & ra∣ther would saue their lyues to serue the world, then lightly to loose them, and to glorifie God: and yet therein they loose for euer, both lyfe and loue of him. By ye ryghtuousnesse of fayth, (sayeth Sainct Paule) we are consti∣tuted and chosē heires of the world,Rom. 4. & 20.22. euen lyke vnto our father Abraham. Then being heires thereof, why doe we feare to put into the handes of God, all that we haue: Sith wée are sure to receiue it again, bettered with so great aduantage. Apoc. 21. &. 7.He that shall ouercome (sayeth the same Lord) shall possesse all things, I will be his God, and he shall be my sonne: Thus if we dye for his loue, we doe ouercome, & in ouercommyng, we enter into ye possessiō of all things, we haue God for our God,Rom. 8. & 15.17.18. Gala. 4. & 6.7. and we be his true children: if we be children, we be also heires, both in heauen and earth. In what then should we doubt, sithe to make so great and good an
exchange, we giue him nothyng, yet we remayne with him, and receyue all things. We gyue nothyng vnto God, bycause we haue nothyng that is our owne, all that wée haue is his,1. Cor. 4. &. 7. so that in giuing him all, we giue him nothing. And therefore let vs not be vnwillyng to yéelde all that we may vnto him, sith he is so liberall & mag∣nificall in giuyng vnto vs all things, yea euen till he had giuen hym selfe for vs: but let vs loue hym accor∣dyng to our callyng, as Iesus Christ our onely sauiour & redéemer, health, saluation, and reconciliation, and in any wyse let vs loue his honour, and glorye, more then anye worldlye thing. Haue we not hearde of many of the Gentyles, that dyd offer them selues vnto death and so desyre it, that they kylled them selues wyth theyr owne proper handes, onelye vppon desyre to bée delyuered from the paines and trauayles of ye world, & their liues in it. And vppō some vain
hope which they had, and thought to finde by their immortalitie of ye soule. This they did vppon a certayne opy∣nion, which was foolishe, & had amon∣gest a number of them: yet they were not onely frée from worldly traueils, by this immortalitie, but also by their desperate dealinges to departe from their lyues in suche wyse, they ene∣red a new into ten tymes treble more torments, (yea a number infinite) e∣uerlastingly. God doth not commaūd of vs any suche maner of death, but doeth most ernestly forbid it: yet bée∣ing animated by true faith, (as thus,) if we beléeue that our lyfe is his, and that he is our lyfe, so that when our tyme shall come, and he shall call vs, to render our lyues agayne to him of whom we hold them, (as tennants at his will) that then we doe obey hym, and yéeld them vp, be it by fire, sword, halter, presse, Racke, by wyld horsses, Tigres, Lyons, wilde beastes, or any kinde of crosse, we doo but our duties, and no more then we are bounde vn∣to. And in so doing, we shewe ye fruits
of our fayth & hope in him, proclaime, crye out, and preach vnto the world, and shewe vnto the braue ministers thereof, that we be none of theirs, but his owne who hath bought and best payde for vs. In this maner we shall also openly appeare, to haue more e∣stimation of his glorie, and rather to fulfill his heauenly holy will, then to séeke the maintenance of our liues in this world, which perisheth togither with the people thereof. He will not in any maner of wise, that we run into any kynde of daun∣ger rashly to procure our death. Nor yet that we denie and so blasphéeme him to eschue or escape the same.Luk. 12. & 32.35.36. &c Luke. 22. & 14. But rather that as tyed on a string wée should bée prompte and readie lyke faithfull seruaunts to follow hym,Mat. 24. & 22.34. so soone as he plucketh or calleth vs: we may certainly assure our selues, that hée hath counted and numbred our dayes, and hath made such a determi∣nation for vs, as we may in no wyse passe. Hée hath put and inclosed our soules in our bodies, as in a taberna∣cle
to the end they should be wel kept and preserued, vntyll hée hym selfe which put them there shall returne againe to call and receyue them. So then, in being called, we ought not to refuse our filthie lodginges in thys worlde, for that we are to receiue a farre better in the worlde to come both in being and suffering. It is not lawfull nor requisite to depryue our selues of our liues, nor yet to desire death for any euill that happeneth whatsoeuer, for whye, it perteyneth onely vnto God, to take and giue life accordyng to hys good will and plea∣sure. Hée dyd make vs, and can vnmake vs when it pleaseth him, hée willeth and desireth nothing, but one∣ly that wée be readie, and doe gyue our selues wholy, to his honour and glorie, in suche sorte as he hath pre∣scribed vnto vs by hys worde. Why∣ther it be with losse of life (if néede requyre) or worldly possessions.Luke. 14. & 26.27. It maketh no matter, bycause that so is executed the offyce (indéede) of true and perfect disciples.
What reason haue we thē to feare death, for a thing so holy and of such rightuousnesse, if it were not for that wée thynke that hée with his vglye and lothsome lookes would haue seig∣norie ouer vs, and take vs into hys rule or Lordship, when they so cru∣elly kill vs. If we will giue credit to the word of ye Lord, we shal clear and plainly sée, yt then we die not & we can not die.Ioh. 5. & 24. (These same are ye words) ve∣rily verily I say vnto you, he yt hea∣reth my word & beléeueth in him ye sēt me, shal haue life euerlasting and shal not come in cōdempnation. But hath alreadie escaped from death to life.Ioh. 11. & 25.26. He saith also I am the resurrection & the life, he yt beleueth in me although hée were dead yet shall he liue. And also, all that liue & beléeue in me shall ne∣uer (tast of,) sée death, nor yet dye. These are the true wordes of Gods owne mouth, by the which we be ful∣ly assured, that there is no death at all, to them that beléeue in Christ Ie∣sus, and that in béeing his, he hath al∣readye dyed for vs, and wée shall
dye no more. For that by him death is alreadie distroyed, and hath no more but as it were the name thereof, one∣ly to the faithfull.Apoc. 14. & 13. S. Iohn in his re∣uelation, calleth death to the faithful a rest from traueils. And in deed to die or departe this lyfe, is onely to vs, a rest most comfortable with God our Lord. The lyfe which we liue in this world, diserneth not the name of life, bicause it is so full of perils & daun∣gers, but by death (as our enimyes terme it) we are vppon a sodaine ta∣ken foorth of them and deliuered from all, and so brought into rest and ioye eternally.Phil. 1. & 20.21. 2. Cor. 5. & 1.2.3. &c. And therfore S. Paul right wel, did desire to be desolued or loosed from his bodie, and to be with Christ, to ioye of that full libertie alreadye spoken of. Iesus Christ dyd distroye death, and as death had no power o∣uer hym, no more hath he in none of his members. He him selfe sayeth by the Prophet Osée,Osee. 13. & 14. 1. Cor. 15. & 54.55. &c. death, I will be thy death, & S. Paule writeth, that death hath lost the victorie and is swallow∣ed vp therein. And death where is thy
sting, hell where is thy victorie,1. Ioh. 5. &.  the sting of death is sinne, and the power of sinne is the lawe. But thankes be to God that hath giuen vs the victory by our Lorde Iesus Christ. So that death hath no power nor naught els wherewith to hurte the faithfull, for sinne is the weapon wherewith hée woundeth, the which is distroyed by Christ, & so is death ouercome, thus the lyfe that is in vs is eternall and we shall neuer dye. And that which our aduersaries offer vnto vs is but a representation of death, the which alreadie wee haue ouercome by our conseruator and heade Christ Iesus, by whom we possesse the victorie. Of the cause that Christ did feare death, and hovve constant diuers martirs haue bene sithens in their martirdome &c. The xxx. Chapter. THe cause why that our saui∣our séemed to fear death, was onely to shewe him self in his manhoode, and that he had ta∣ken
vppon him the sinnes of all man∣kinde, bycause he would winne the victorie of all his enimyes, & so dryue away the doubt that was in ye amased myndes of the faythfull. And also to shewe that bicause de dy∣ed, death was kylled thereby, and could haue no more power ouer vs. The true credite and beliefe héereof (dearely beloued) is verie requisite and necessarie for vs. It hath béene séene, that many ser∣uants of God animated by beliefe or faith in the truth of the same, haue ta∣ken their crosses with great courage, ioye, and contentment of mynde, as if they had gone to feastes of greate honour: or as if they ledde a tryum∣phant Bryde by the hande to sette hyr in some beautyfull throne with the Brydegroome. Agatha.That vertuous Virgyne Agatha, when shée was caryed to death out of pryson where long shée had bene (with no great worldly delyghtes I warrant you) for professing the truth in the Gospell which faithfully shée
beléeued, sayde: that euen then, shée went to feastes or a feaste of greate ioye. Saincte Vincent or that good holye confessor,Vincent. being laide vppon hoat bur∣nyng coales a broyling for the same trueth, made a mocke at his masking persecutors, and sayde: that the like crosse and death to any Christian was great cause of ioye to hym, and all his companion members. The godly man Ignacius Bishoppe of Anty∣oche (in the persecution that the ter∣rible Tyrant Traiano committed and vsed against the christians) beyng by him an Infidell,Ignatius. and his fidell confe∣derates, condempned to bée throwen vnto wylde beastes, to the ende that most terriblie hée should bée torne in péeces by their terrible téethe: Hee hearyng the roaryng of the Lyons prepared amongest other their pany∣ons, to execute the sentence gyuen so against him, said: with great ioy, I am ye wheat of Iesu Christ, which shal be ground by the téene & sharp téeth of
those execrable beastes, to bée made pure and cleane vnto the Lorde. And by report of an english mā my friend, (this translator,) there was in Essex where as he was borne (in England) diuers faithfull witnesses, as, Wats, Hawkes, Pigot, Cawson, Ardely, Sympson, with many others, (there: and as well in other countreis with in the sayd Realme,) did most ioyful∣ly receiue, (& valiently stande to their tryall by) the fire: and in the myddest thereof, with great gladnesse of their forewardnesse in getting the victorie dyd imbrace the golden flames of the same, eche of them saying, with great courage: O Lord receyue my soule: and Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou hast redéemed mée O Lord God of truth. Moreouer, ma∣ny of them in going therevnto, gladly, and in a most triumphant maner, like men goyng to moste gladsome ioyes, would with great and mightie good will bid their friendes farewell, and so in token therof, and of the sure hope which they had in the méeting of God
and his heauenly company, (as well those gone before as they that were to come after) would drinke a cup of burned wine vnto them, as wel ther∣fore, as also to moist a little their sen∣ces whereby they might be the more ayte to set forth wholy togither, the glory of him for whom they suffered. But herein a number of Papists and diuill Antichristes companions, found great occasion to vse many false re∣portes, saying (of such a one as did so) surely it is easie to be iudged the faith of such Heritikes, sée I pray you, doth (or did) he not drink wyne to be drū∣ken and so to dye desperately, (such blasphemy, my translator telleth me, he cā finde out an number: to many.) But truely, truly,Mat. 15. & 13. suche Trées suche fruites, by the diuill planted, and by him they beare & bring forth. What: mary abhominable lyes, wherof he, that filthie feend and diabolicall beast is the author and father. Lykewyse and the verie like hath bene, in most partes of the worlde, as well héere with vs in Spaine, as in Italie, Ger∣many,
Portugall, Fraūce, Flaūders, Brabant, Zellond, Hollond, & other countreys many mo. Thys vertue and strength com∣meth vnto them by Iesu Christ, and by ye faith they haue in him & his Go∣spell, which will alwayes continue amongest them that bée his. What a number more haue we séene with our owne eyes consumed with the fyre, what admyrable workes of God haue they shewed in the middest of their greatest passions, and how haue they gone to theyr martyrdome. Surely many, as well men and woe∣men in olde age, as younglings, and tender impes, both young men and maydes, chast bachellers, and damo∣sell vyrgines. The men, as if they had gone to great Tryumphes, the maydens, as if they had bene ledde to be maried vnto the greatest Lords and Prynces in the world. Yea, euen in the middest of the fyre, and torments, dyd they eleuate theyr handes to the heauens with great ioye, singyng Psalmes of thanks gy∣uyng
vnto the Lorde, for that he had made them worthie for to suffer for hys names sake. What is this but fruites of beliefe in the trueth of the Gospell,Act. 5. & 29.41. and also that both the one and the other of them were fully assured by the holy Ghost that they went to bée glorified, and to ioye of the whole fulfilling of the dyuine promises of God. Those had effectually, perfectly, and fully prynted and grauen in theyr heartes, that Iesus Christ is the re∣surrection and the lyfe,Ioh. 11. & 25.26. and for that they haue beléeued in him, they shall neuer die. Whereby wée maye sée that the ef∣fycacye and force of Gods worde is of no lesse effecte, nor doeth worke no lesse in them that receyue it, at this daye, then it was to those which receyued it in olde tyme, for that it is the same nowe that it was then. So that there is no cause to fear death
at all:Mat. 11. & 28.31. and therefore Christ saith vn∣to his disciples, that they should not feare them which kill the bodie, and haue no power to touch ye soule. The power of the Tirants our aduersa∣ries is so weake, that it can not reach nor touch but our bodies onely, which are mortall and must néedes dye by one meane or other. And yet not nei∣ther, tyll the tyme which God hath appointed, and the dayes which hée hath numbred, be fully determyned and ended. Iesus Christ hath promi∣sed and assured vs that they shall not kill our soules. Then what doeth it auaile or profite them though they kill our bodies, or what regard néede we to haue thervnto, considering that in so little a tyme being seperate from the soule, it ioyneth therewith again to immortalitie, & to be no more sub∣iect to the trauayles and troubles of life in this miserable world.1. Cor. 15. & 38.52.53. When we haue a Iewell of golde or siluer, if it be olde or broken, of a verie good will we deliuer it to the workeman that made it, for him to put in his fur∣nace
and so to trie it, and forge it a∣gayne a new. So likewise our bodies whither they be olde or young, yet so crooked and subiect to sinne,Math. 13. & 21. and to fall on euerie side as is possible, wherfore should we doubt to giue them vnto God that made them, that they may be forged and framed a new, for the soule to receiue againe to immortali∣tie, to bée incorruptible,Dan. 12. & 1.2.3. voyde of all corruption, shyning as cleare as can be. The celestiall and heauenly truth teacheth vs, yt our soules are in safe∣tie, so that they can in no wise perish and dye, nor yet be hurte with all the tyrannie that our tyranicall persecu∣tors,Ioh. 6. &. 35. Rom. 6. & 8.11.23 Colos. 3. & 1.2.3. Gen. 4. & 8. Hebr. 11. & 4. the Pope and hys darlings doe or can doe. Bicause as God can not dye nor bée killed, no more can they kill our soules the members of hys sonne our heade, for that the lyfe that we haue, is by and of him. Rightu∣ous Abell was killed in his bodie, by the crueltie of hys curssed brother Caine, yet hys soule dyd lyue by the faith and hope which he had in God. So at this present day, the séede and
posteritie of Abell,Rom. 8. & 6.7.8. &c. Apoc. 6. &.  10. are killed and slaine by the crueltie and tirannie of Caines successors, but for all that, their soules doe liue by the faith and hope which they haue alwayes had in God, abiding the glorification of their bodies. And therefore sith our soules can not dye nor be killed, why should we feare them which can but kill the bodie for a tyme. There is none but God onely that did giue vs thys lyfe, why should not he then haue it when and howe it pleaseth him. Bycause that hée onely is both lyfe and death for all, without his license and good will, our enimyes can not harme nor gréeue vs if they doe ye best and worst they can: for hée hath so restrayned them in suche a brydle, that vnlesse hée loose and let flippe the reines therof, they can doe nothing. For the Lord hath sayde,Dan. 3. & 17.22.2. I will kill, and I will giue lyfe: So that as we haue our lyues from him, euen so commeth our death. Wherfore let vs onely feare him and
not thē, for yt if they doe their worst, yet they can not doe that they would. The diuill that mischieuous malici∣ous olde Dragon,Apoc. 12. & 1.2.4.6. &c. doeth alwayes de∣sire wholie to distroy and ouerthrow quyte the church or congregation of Christ: but God by his mightie po∣tencie doeth so restrayne the reignes of the brydle wherwith hée hath bri∣deled him, that hée maketh hym e∣uermore to recoyle and stande back, and in no wyse will suffer hym to haue anye parte of his will: nor yet passe nothyng that God hath appoin∣ted. Of the goodnesse of God in our de∣fence agaynst our persecu∣tors. &c. The xxxj. Chapter. HOw often would the aduersaryes of Iesus Christ haue killed hym: into how many coūsayls & cōsultatiōs haue they entred, to ye same effect, but
they could not bring any part of their purposes to passe,Luke. 22. & 53. Math. 26. &. 55. vntil his houre was fully come, and that God the father had let loose the power of darkenesse. How many times, or how oftē (saith he him selfe) haue I bene with you in the Temple, teachyng and talkyng with you, and ye haue not taken mée. I am sure they had such hatred to him and his Gospel, that there wanted no good will in them to haue done it, but (they had no power to doe it) theyr strength fayled them. Doest thou not knowe saide Pilate that I haue po∣wer to loose and frée thée,Ioh. 19. in all. and also to crucifie and kill thée. He answered and saide, thou haddest not (if it were not giuen thée from aboue,) so muche po∣wer as to touche mée. No more can those which now doo séeke to afflict the faithfull, they can not so muche as fil∣loppe them with their finger, if God woulde to the contrarie: for that hée hath not so little regarde vnto theyr liues corporall, that hée will deliuer them ouer to their foes, vntyll their full course be come, runne out, and ex∣pired.
From the time that Iesus Christ dyd first manifest himselfe (by preaching) vnto the world, they dyd abhorre him till they had most cruelly condemned him, and deliuered him vnto deathe, yea, euen the spitefull death of the crosse. The will and mynde they had to kill him, when he was crucified, had contine wed of olde, but the exe∣cucion thereof was then newly in∣uented, but yet they could not atteine vnto it without the will of God. Euen so euer sithens the first hower that the worde of God, and the true light thereof, entred into Iermany, England, France, and this our realm of Spaine, and dyd begin to shine as the Sunne, there were persecutours which did abhorre it, and so doo con∣tinewe vntill this daye, most mortal∣ly and cruelly: and dyd, and dooe, kill all Christians, which are quickned thereby with most extremitie. They dyd alwayes will & wish that which now they doo most wickedly, they wer euermore enimies and contrary both to him and vs, but they could not at no
time conclude their desires, till such tyme as God had let loose the power of darkenesse:1. Pet. 1. & 4.7. bycause thereby wée might bée examyned, purified, and tryed, and then put into eternal glo∣rie, prepared for vs from the begyn∣ning. And our persecutors, afflictors, and killers, in all their persecuti∣ons and tirannie, doe no more but fill vp the measure of impietie and sinnes of theyr fathers so full,Mat. 23. & 31.35. Luke. 13. & 24.34.35. that they will make it runne ouer and bring vppon them selues, all the bloud of the Sainctes which haue bene si∣thens the death of rightuous & iuste Abell. And therefore sith that men can doe nothyng, and that man is no bodye nor nothyng of him selfe, and also sith the power which they haue is giuen them from God, onely to execute his will, let vs not feare them. Bycause that God hath commaun∣ded vs not to feare men, for that they can but kill the bodie, wée can not feare them without greate of∣fence.
Wherefore let vs giue eare & heare that which the Lorde sayeth by the Prophette Esay, and assureth vs of:Esay. 4. & 9.10. thou shalte bée my seruant (sayeth hée) I haue chosen thée, feare not for I am with thée, doe not declyne from mée, for that I am the Lorde thy God, and will fortefie and streng∣then thée. Thus wé sé that there is no cause whie, wée should feare any humaine power, hée doeth sure∣ly certefie vs that wée are hys ser∣uantes, that hée hath chosen vs, and that hée is our God: So that wée doe iniure hym greatly, and fil∣thilie offende hym, when that in a∣ny poynte wée doe feare the myni∣sters of death corporall. What other thing commeth by fea∣ring of them, but in giuing honour vnto them, to dyshonour God who doeth defende and forbyd it: But let vs beléeue hys promise and say with the Prophette,Abac. 1. &. 12. thou arte our GOD, and wée shall not die though our killers and persecutors doe neuer so much against vs. Let vs beare this
faith as a shield,Ephe. 6. & 13.14.15. &c. & let vs not declyne from ye right way, nor yet be dismayd neither for feare of death, nor yet of our persecutors. For that therein is fulfilled all which is spoken of by S. Iohn:Ioh. 6. &. 2.3.20. which is, that our heauinesse shall be turned into ioye. By death is ended all our heauinesse and mour∣nyng, and there doeth succeede such ioye as no tongue can tell, the which can not be taken away. So that when the worlde doeth make greatest ac∣counte, that we are kylled, lost, and for euer vtterly distroyed, and hath raysed vp enseignes of our greatest dishonour and infamie.Esay. 25. &. 8. Apoc. 7. &. 12. Euen then (sayeth the holy Ghost by hys Pro∣phet) God will wype the teares from the chéekes of vs his chosen: and wil take all our dishonours and cares. He will turne all dishonour to the dis∣honorers, & infamie to the infamors, and the abhorrors shall bée possessed with their own hatred. The cōdemp∣nation shall reuert to ye cōdempners, and theire, cursse, maledictiō, & death to the termygauntes theyr executio∣ners.
But the faithful deliuered from all kynde of calamyties and aduersi∣ties,1. Ioh. 3. & 14. Esay. 25. & 5.6.7. and the couertures of their ho∣linesse and rightuousnesse béeing di∣stroyed, and they wholy taken out of the power of their enimies, shall bée put where shall be no more death, no more plaintes, cryes, calamities, nor griefes: but where shall be the throne of God and of the Lambe, and where they shall serue hym, sée hys face, and haue hys name in theyr fore∣heades. And the Lord God shall lightē them,Apoc. 2. &. 3.4.5. &c. and reygne for euer with them, as it is written by Sainct Iohn. And sith it is so, what is there lost by leauing so tenebrous and darke a dungeon, as is the filthie pryson of our bodyes, so stinkyng as they are, and by leauyng the world where all thynges are corruptible. Shall wée feare those which séeke to kyll vs for. Christes cause, séeyng they procure vs thereby so blessed an exchange, that our corruption shall bée turned into incorruption, our
mortalitie into immortalitie, pouer∣tie into ryches, dishonour into ho∣nour, imprysonment into libertye, confusion into glorie, heauinesse into ioye, and our solitarie béeyng into the companie of God and his Saynctes for euer, and to bée of the same num∣ber and equall with them in glo∣rie. Wherefore shall wée refuse to goe from this lyfe so abhominable, to goe to that goodly mount Syon: to goe to that beautifull Citie of God, the newe and celestiall Ierusalem,Hebr. 12. & 22.23. into and among that innumerable many and multitude of blessed Aungelles and Archaungelles, the holy and true common wealth of the chosen: where as without contradiction is alwayes done the good will of God. Shall we feare to come to this felici∣tie, to the which we were borne and redéemed by the inestimable good wil and loue of God, whereas we shal be made perfectly lyke to hym who dyd redéeme vs: No, let vs put away all those vain feares of the euils present
in this world,Hebr. &. 3. Hebr. 12. &. 3. & of the ministers ther∣of, and assure our selues to be ioyned with Iesus Christ whiche is ascen∣ded into heauen, where as he sitteth on the right hande of God in hys ma∣iestie, with his right hande extended readie to take hold and receiue vs vn∣to him. We holde it impossible, in our car∣nall sence of vnderstandyng to suffer the fire and the terrour thereof that they vse in persecuting ye little flocke of vs at this daye, for that in bur∣ning vs, they doe it by little and lit∣tle, the more to increase our tormēts, for theyr reuenge: onely bycause we confesse the trueth of Christe our maister whome they can not abyde. Howe can it be (sayth our blynd flesh∣sences) but that suche crueltie must néedes ouercome our patience. What other thyng may this bée cal∣led, but a blasphemie wherewith we denie, the myghtie potenciall po∣wer of God, yt which he is to vse to all ye trust in him: & a mean to seperate vs
from his crosse, to which he dooth call vs so amorously and louingly, bicause we might be gloryfied with Christ. And therefore let vs not heare, nor yet giue credit to any suche leasinges and errours. Worldly men doo easily suffer those thinges wherin they féele some grief for their gain. By these fi∣ry tormēts, wherof we haue such hor∣rour, there can be no kynde of harme nor griefe that is euill, but rather a great and mightie blessednesse, much more to our gayne: wherefore wée ought not to beleue nor thincke that our pacience which God giueth, wil∣be ouercome thereby. From syx trybulacions the Lord will deliuer thée, and in the seuēth no ma∣ner of euill shall touch thée, (sayth the holy ghost by iust Iob) the seauenth is the very last instant howre or tyme of death.Iob. 5. & 19.26. So that, when it séemeth to sight that al our euills are heaped vp∣pon vs, and that our enimies, doo vse theyr greatest tiranny, and make ac∣count to haue gotten the victory, and that wée remayne ouercome & swal∣lowed
vp with all maner of mischief: Euen then the same holy Ghost doth assure vs, that no maner of euil doth touch vs. What occasiō is ther thē for vs to flie frō yt which hurteth nor toucheth vs not, or to make accompt yt humain per¦secution will or can ouercome our pa∣cience, or th our patience is not a∣ble to abide .Mar. 9. & 23. All things are possible to them that beléeue (saith the Lord). So that vnto such, it is also certainly possible to haue patience to abide the extremitie and furie of the fyre, and to suffer the same with great constan∣cie. It was patiently passed ouer by the Prophets in the olde time: Euen so it is now to them that be holy, faith∣full, and beléeue. Bycause that which the Apostle sayth concerning ye same,1. Cor. 16. &. 13. must néedes bée true therein. God is faithfull (sayeth hée) and will suffer no man to bée tempted, more then he will make him able to beare: but ra∣ther with our temptatiōs he sendeth good successe, bicause we may suffer. Wherby it is most manifest & plain,
that christian patience doeth not one∣ly ouercome death executed by extre∣mitie of fyre, but also all the moste cruell kynds of deaths and torments, that any Triant and all the Tirants in ye world can vse & deuise. Bycause that with all ye tyrannie they can exe∣cute, God will not alter his purpose, from accordyng to his worde, nor leaue to admynister some one secret vertue or other, to them that be his, whereby they shall ouercome death, tirannie, hell, sinne, the diuill, and all other kynde of mischiefes. Hebr. 4. & 14.15.16. Hebr. 2. & 17.18.So full of compassion & pittie is our high priest Iesus Christ, that as hée ouerpassed temptations which hap∣pened to him selfe, so will he also, by hys power and might ayde & streng∣then all those which are tempted. As the Apostle sayth: if Iesus Christ in whom wée beléeue and for whom wée suffer, doe knowe by experience our griefes and troubles, and is not onely moste myghtie, louyng, and good to vs in our helpe, but also doth suffer with vs as the heade with the
members: shall he be so weak in vs that he can not abyde the fyre, or (be∣ing strong as hée is) will not he help vs in the middest therof,Act. 9. & 4.5. béeyng prin∣cipall in persecution and suffering the same with vs. Is it possible that God will forsake and leaue vs, (or that we should fear or doubt the same) when that for pro∣fessyng of hys name wée are by our enymies throwen into the myddest of the fyre, or that wée should thinke God to bée forgetfull of hys louing chyldren, and that hée loueth vs in wordes and not in déedes, and truth: Surely in so dooyng wée should much iniure hym, and gyue hym greate cause to bée gréeuouslie offended with vs for it. For vs to thynke that hys almigh∣tinesse will forsake vs in any necessi∣tye, it were an abhomynable acty∣on of vs, if he haue not (as in déed hée hath not) forsaken but remembred vs in the greatest matters, of a suer∣tie hée will not forsake but remēber
helpe and deliuer vs in and from such trifles: it were abhominable to think the contrarie, much more worsser to beleeue it. Well, my dearely belo∣ued bretheren and sweet fellow mem∣bers, I trust there is none of vs, that doeth eyther beléeue or thynke any such thing, but rather my hope is that we thinke and surely beléeue, to féele his goodnesse,Esay. 43. & 1.2.3. &c. according to the saying of the holy Ghost, by Esay the Pro∣phet: who sayeth, the Lorde God thy creator sayeth, feare thou not, for I haue redéemed thée, and called thée by thy name, thou arte myne, and when thou passest by the water I will bée with thée, the ryuers shall not ouer∣whelme thée, when thou passest by the fyre thou shalt not be burned, nor the flames thereof shall not bende them selues against thée, for I am the Lord thy holy God of Israell, which kéepeth thée God hath alwayes in re∣membrance the benifite which he v∣sed, in calling and makyng vs parta∣kers of his redemption, and in adop∣ting vs hys children neuer to leaue
vs.Psal. 91. & 5.6.7. Psal. 33. & 12.17. So that when it shall séeme to the iudgement of the world that hée hath left vs, (& that is when he suffereth vs to passe into the middest of ye fyre or any other torment) euen then is he most nighest vnto vs, and so nyghe in déede, that he is closely ioyned with vs, and temperating the furie of the fyre, bicause it should doe vs no harm: and for that it might appeare that he is both God and father to all his, and will kéepe and defende vs from all e∣uill in all tymes of torment and tri∣bulation.Mat. 16. & 18. If the gates of hell may not preuayle agaynst vs, how can the fire which is visible and corporall preuail against vs: if eternal and euerlasting death haue no parte in vs, how can a∣ny thing that is temporal and momē∣tarie harme vs: will God deliuer vs from the greatest euilles, and suffer vs to perish in the little ones, no for a certeintie, his euerla∣sting promise is to the contrarie.
A meruailous comfort to those that are afflicted eyther by fyre or o∣thervvise. The xxxij. Chapter. THe fyre and all things tere∣striall are creatures of God, and serue for the health and wealth of his chosen, and al∣so for the distruction of his enimyes. (As it is written in the booke of wis∣dom,Sap. 16. & 16.22.23.) Bycause the iust should bée su∣stayned and vpholden, the fyre doeth loose his force & furie, (for that it bée∣ing a creature, in seruing him that is his creator and maker, doeth vse hys furies and inflame hym selfe to the distruction & torment of the vnrightu∣ous & wicked onely.) And doth mitti∣gate his mood, onely bicause they trust in the Lorde. Whereby it appeareth, that the poore afflicted chyldren of God, are not bur∣ned with the fyre, nor hurt with any kinde of torment: no not scarce tou∣ched therewith, and therfore nothing gréeued. (As sayth our Lord God, his
creatures euerie one of them are in such a consorte, and so agréed togither amongest them selues, yt all of them with one common accord & cōsent, wil be and are ministers for vs of greate health and comfort:Osee. 2. & 18.21.22. and also wil and doe vse them selues vnto vs with a gentlenes most louyng: bicause being faithful, we are so wel beloued of god, that he bindeth all his creatures so, that of force they can not be, but for our benifit in all things accordyng to his will. Gold burneth not in the fire, but is fined and purified thereby from all things that are of lesse value, and so it selfe made more precious and of greater value and substance, then before. Euen so the good christian brought to the fyre by persecution, burneth not, but is the rather purify∣ed from all that fowleth, blotteth, or burneth his christianitie, and so re∣mayneth more precious and beauti∣full in his substance thē before. Wher∣by it séemeth yt the childrē of God, whē they suffer ye force & heat of ye fire, they féele it not, or els it hurteth them not,
but rather harmeth the executioners thereof. The fyre to the faithfull is as it was in the bushe, which Moy∣ses sawe: it flamed and yet it burned not,Exod. 3. &. 2. bycause that the Lord God was in it. The fyre hath a force and ver∣tue that burneth and consumeth vt∣terly, but whom: mary, euen the im∣pious, vniust, & vngodly. And although they séeme liuing (these which are the afflictors of the faithfull) and without harme, yet for a certaintie with the same fire, which they prouide & make for others, they are (before God) bur∣ned and consumed them selues: Al∣though they beléeue it not,Dan. 6. & 16.26. yet it is so. The Prophet Daniell when he was throwen into the denne amonge the Lyons which were made extreemely hungrie vppon purpose to haue de∣uoured him: bicause he was founde faithful before God, he perisheth not, they touched hym not, nor did hym harme: but rather in their kynde re∣ioysed and made great feastes and ioy with him, for that God vppon whom he did inuocate & call, and in whome
he trusted did deliuer him (as in the vj. Chapter of the same Prophet, and the xvj. and xxiiij. verse is well decla∣red) but those which had bene the ex∣ecutioners of all his trouble and tor∣ment, being throwen into the same place, euen among the very same Ly∣ons: they could scarce fall among thē so soone as they were torne and pluc∣ked in péeces and deuoured vtterly. The thrée young men of Babilō,Dan. 3. & 13.16.17. &c. Si∣drach, Misach, & Abdenago, seruantes of God, did not perish whē they were put into a hot burning furnace, made seuen tymes hotter then euer it was, bicause they would not worship wic∣ked King Nabuchadonaser his Idoll, which he had caused to be set vp: they surely trusting in the liuing God, fea∣red not hys furyous furie in all hys threatninges nothyng at all, but an∣swered him saying, we are not care∣full to answeare thée (O King) in a∣ny thing concerning this Idoll, for let thy highnesse vnderstande, that our God whom we serue, can deliuer vs from thy whot burning furnace, and
from thy handes, but if hée will not (the whiche wée doe not doubte off) yet (O King) hold thou for a certain∣tie yt we will not worship thy Gods, nor yet the Image of gold which thou hast caused to bée set vp, béeyng for this cause put into the sayde furnace so hot, they were not onely frée from all kynde of harme by fyrie, flame, or smoke, but also they were refreshed from heauen by the hands of ye sonne of the lyuing God, who was him self amonge them, in the lykenesse of an Angell: Euen in the middest of the most whottest flames, wherefore it hurt them nothing at all: but yet it burnt and consumed quyte the mys∣chieuous ministers ye makers therof. So that thereby was approued that the fyre could not harme them in no poynte, no more can it not (nor no∣thing els that God hath created) doo any thyng hurtfull agaynst the chil∣drē of God, for whie all yt cā be done agaynst them, bée it with fyre or a∣ny other kynde of torture is for their cōfort. Thē wherfore should we faint
feare, or flée, at or from the crosse of the Lord: for yt he will examine and purge vs therwith, from all kynde of causes of corruption: So that it may be consumed quite by the means ther∣of: that we might be enryched and remaine glorified with God for euer. All that is written,Rom. 15. & 4. is writen for our learnyng, bycause that by pati∣ence and comforte in the scriptures we might haue hope. And therefore let vs vnderstand that as in tymes paste it passed and hap∣pened to Danyell and the reste the seruantes of God, (and also to hys enimyes) Euen the lyke commeth to passe at thys day both wc the one and other, for that nothyng can hurt them that put their trust in the Lord: but all serueth them for the best.Iob. 5. & 17.19. &c. Osec. 2. & 18.21.22. Rom. 8. & 28. And as for the wycked, all thinges are to the contrarie, they prouyde nothing to punysh the rightuous with, but they peryshe therein themselues. Wherfore let vs bée imitators of the saincts, as of Daniel, & of ye thrée yong
men of Babilon, and others more a great many, which nothyng estéemed torments, tyronous threats, killings nor commaundements of any vngod∣ly Tyrant: but constantly continued in confessing of Gods true religion for euer, without any looking backe. And as they did honour him in being faithfull, so did he honour them in be∣ing by thē in all their distressed daun∣gers, to their ayde, strength, consola∣tion, continuall comfort, and deliuery most merueilous: in such sort that no parte of their hope was frustrate in any thing. Euen so will hée doe and deale for vs if we bee faithfull. Let vs not feare therefore the tirannie (that so potencially appeareth of prin∣ces;Mat. 11. & 12.28.29. nor the crueltie of Kings, the ty∣rannie of any kynde of Tyrant, of in∣quisitors, of correctors, of Iudges, nor yet the torment of the executioner, the infamy of mē, nor any other kynd of crueltie that in our eyes is euill: least that so we forsake and renounce our faith, and the true knowledge of our sauiour Iesu Christ the sonne of
God. Let vs onely feare God,Mat. 10. & 19.26.28. who can and will deliuer vs from all kind of torments, and from the handes of all Tyrants. And although that wée doe not sée thys libertie of deliuerie, with our corporall eyes, yet (for the loue of our sauiour Iesu Christ) let vs not consent vnto them, nor follow their impietie and vngodlinesse: let no braue nor gallant shew of or from them allure vs vnto them,Deut. 12. & 2.8.11. &c. Math. 15. & 9.13. let vs not worship the creatures, nor yet truste in any other then the creator: Let vs not accept any other rule to serue him by, then that which he doth cōmaund and teach for a rule, by the holy ghost: Let vs not feare the creatures, but the creator onely. Let vs not take héed nor make accompt of things that be visible, but of things which are in∣uisible: Let vs not meruaile, bée dys∣mayed, nor afrayde,2. Cor. 4. & 17.18. of the crueltie of men: but let vs behold, and be inamo∣red of the clemencie and goodnesse of God our good and louing father. Bi∣cause that he in all things is true, let vs be louers faithfull and true vnto
him.Rom. 8. & 29.30. Hée dyd not forget that he did knowe and elect vs, to bée made con∣formeable and lyke vnto hys sonne, hée doth alwayes remember and will neuer forget that hée called vs,Rom. 3. & 1. 1. Cor. 6.11. Ephe. 2. & 14.16. of his owne singuler mercie to vs warde, and dyd let others alone in the same condempnatiō in the which we were: and béeyng vnrightuous as we were in déede, he did iustifie vs & washe vs by the bloude of Christ, bycause wée should be holy in his presence. Let vs remember all this, & how he loued vs in Christ, when we were his enimies and would not pardon him in his pas∣sions one iote. Yet he did pardon vs, and gyue hym self vnto death, yea the most vile death on the crosse to distroy sinne, the which but for hys mercye and loue had distroyed vs vtterlie: and all bycause wée should haue life in hym. Rom. 5. & 1.8.9. Rom. 8. & 17.30.Syth hée loued vs so, then béeing so horrible sinners, and hys cruell eny∣mies, it is most sure and certain that he loueth vs nowe muche better, for that he hath so rebuked and killed sin
in vs, yt we are reconsiled vnto him: and hath also made vs the children of his mercie. And therefore for that hée doeth so loue vs, with the burnyng bowels of his true loue, he will also gloryfye vs in Christe, for why all that he doth vnto vs is to the same ende: wherefore he wyll that we suf∣fer whilst wee liue in this worlde,Rom.  &. 5. that we might be partakers of the crosse and death of Christe, also of his resurrection and gloryficacion. So that to be like vnto hym in suffering heere,2. Tim. 2. & 3.9.10. Act. 14. & 12. he gueth vs to vnderstand that we shall be with him, and like vnto hym in his kingdome: and therefore it is very necessary that wee passe many tribulationes in entring ther∣into. Wherefore with shuttinge our eyes to all the impedimentes of our glori∣ficacion,Hebr. 12 &. 2. and with geuing no eare to the resons of our flesh and the world, let vs run with pacience to the bat∣tayle wherevnto we are so louingly pressed, lookinge to our chieftaine
Iesus Christ, who hauing before him (as we haue) such ioy as is vnspeake∣able, did willingly suffer his crosse: no∣thing regarding the dishonor of hys death, and is set on the right hande of God in his inestimable glory. Thus considering the contradiction that his enimyes vsed to him selfe, whilest be was on earth amongest them, let not vs be troubled nor faint in our minds at any kynde of calamitie: but with a great and stout courage let vs go for∣ward and not stay to rest,1. Cor. 9. & 24. &c. Mar. 13. & 13. till that we haue gotten that Iewell which is his blessing, and set vp for a pryse or re∣warde for all those which perseuer vpryght and in the true know∣ledge of hys trueth and o∣bedience of the same till the ende. An entrie into the conclusion vvith many godly exortations. The xxxiii. Chapter. ANd therfore let vs haue alwayes before our eyes, the admonytion
and counsaile that our onely sauiour Christ did often exhorte hys disciples with: saying,Luk. 21. & 19. let your myndes bée possessed with patience and be ye pru∣dent and wyse as Serpents,Mat. 10. & 16. and sim∣ple and innocents as Doues. Let vs be therfore, so wyse and prudent that we doe vse all things at all tymes to the glorie of Christ our redéemer. Wherefore let not our wysedom bée cautelous and subtile with malyce a∣gaynst God, according to the worlde,Rom. 11. & 25. but according to the knowledge that we haue from God by his good will, so that we may be guyded by the holy Ghost in all that we doe or suffer. And let our innocencio bée no other∣wyse, but in such maner as wée may vouchsafe with good will to tast of the bitter gall, hatred, and enmitie offered vs by men, so that we be not ignorāt of that we be not ignorant of yt which belongeth to christianitie, bicause that to be otherwise simple, were but rude∣nesse and bestiallitie and no simplici∣tie euangelicall. Let vs not be slow nor colde in the
workes of the Lorde,Phil. 2. & 1.2. Ma. 10. & 8.11. Mat. 7. & 6. Col. 4. & 6. Ephe. 4. & 25.29.31. 2. Tim. 2. & 16.23.24. but with a fer∣uente zeale to GOD with know∣ledge and Christian modestie: Let vs follow our forefathers the Prophets and Apostles in our vexatiō & calling, that wée may haue all, one selfesame féeling in Christ Iesus: Let vs all and euerie one of vs confesse hym in all places, and the rather that edificati∣on might come therby, so that we cast not pearle amōg swine: Let our com∣munication be seasoned with salte of knowledge, of fayth, & with the word of god, so yt it may be gracious & accep∣table to ye hearers: And let thē not be to scorne, mock, and murmour at the ignorant, blind, & such as be alwayes vnder ye clouds of errors & curssed cap∣tiues vnder ye emperie & gouernmēt of ye diuil:1. Pet. 2. & 11. but alwaies let vs speak with grauitie & christian honestie in ye fear of ye Lord. Let vs vse our words wt all honor & reuerēce,1. Cor. 6. & 20. 1. Pet. 4. & 11. bicause we may stop ye mouthes of euil & curssed speakers, & constrain thē to say & cōfesse ye God hath his dwilling in vs. Behold what ye Apostle Peter writeth & saith, ye hée that speaketh, let him speak ye words of God, & let him not onely pronoūce
with hys mouth, but also let ye same come frō his hart. So yt whē we speak we should thinke bona fide from our hartes to be beléeued therby, & not to be hard onely:2. Cor. 4 &. 2. bicause God is neither contented nor any thing pleased, yt we should onely haue him dissēblingly in our mouths, & nothing in our hartes, wherfore doth he cōmaūd vs earnest∣ly to engraue & print his picture, law, & gospel most déepely in our best booke of remēbrāces, (which is our hartes) for yt from thēce it might come to our tonges, bicause it shuld not happen to vs, as it doth to many, which for ye ther haue him but in their toūgs to talk of, if they chaūce to be examined by their enimies what Christ is,Mar. 4. & 17.18.19. they do easly deny, forsake, fear, (& remain doubtful of) him, & are occasiō by their incōstā∣cie for others to do ye lyke, bicause so shamefully & slēderly they let slip their faith, & do doubt of Gods most mightie power. But although ye some of these weaklings do so, let vs be firm in our faith, & not faile to shew the same in profession of true religion, which as∣suredly came downe from heauen.
It is not the religion of men, which is contented with wordes onely and outwarde shewes, but it is of God which asketh first and principally the harte,Pro. 28. & 20. Gal. 6. & 7. and secondly all that his worde teacheth to belonge vnto it. Let vs heare the wordes of the Apostle at∣tentiuely, who sayeth, be you not de∣ceiued, for God wil not be mocked as men are, if be haue ordeyned that wée shal professe Iesus Christ openly and publiquely, and that we shall suffer for his rightuousnes, let vs doe it in such order as it may appeare ye Gods good admonishion hath taken place in vs. 1. Pet. 4. & 15.16.As Sainct Peter exhorteth: saying, let vs leade a life so holy, and worthy of the Lord which called vs, that none of vs be afflicted as an homicide or a théefe, blasphéemer, adulterer, or one that hath committed sacraledge, one full of strife, an euill doer, or a person that is couetous of the goods of other men, least our harmes happen to vs by a iust occasion: for if we suffer for any of these crymes, we doe dishonor
and vse greate iniurie to our father which is in heauen: bycause béeyng his children we must néedes dishonor him greatly,Mat. 6. & 9 where as otherwyse we ought to honour and sanctifie his ho∣ly name, according to our calling by him. Let vs so rule our selues that the wicked haue none occasion to per∣secute vs, but onely bicause wée doe abhorre vyce & loue vertue, doe séeke and desire the light, which they flée from, and bicause wée flée from that filthie darkenesse which they desyre to imbrace. Let vs so doe, that they may haue no other cause to abhorre vs,1. Pet. 4. & 3.4. but by∣cause we will not be conuersant with them in dissolution, in concupiscence, in surfeting, in gluttonie, in drunken∣nesse, and abhominable Idolatrie: and that we doe not runne with them in that vnbrideled lyfe so full of insolen∣cie and dissolute, that we bée lyke to them in nothing, nor that we be not as they are which can not suffer the light of Gods trueth,Ioh. 3. & 19.20.21. bicause it disco∣uereth all their wickednesse and vice,
as the sūnne doth discouer the drousie darknes of the night. Also let vs take héede that we be not lyke to many, that bée so wyse, and prudent, that they will suffer nothing for Christes sake in his beloued church, and so be∣ing full of fleshly prudencie,Psal. 94. & 3.4.7. 1. Cor. 3. &c Mat. 25. & 18.24.25. Luke. 19. & 20.21. Rom. 8. & 0. they doo accompt it christian & spirituall wise∣dome, as though God did not knowe howe to fynde out the subtelties of those wyse and subtile dissemblers, as if Iesus Christ had allowed them place among the louers of the gospel, or as if they might burie their talēts which God had giuē them in ye groūde of forgetfulnesse, lyke vnto the slouth∣full and disobedient seruant spokē of in the euangelical scriptures. Bicause by such kinde of bestiall blindnes we may sée a many of them, vse ye know∣ledge that God hath gyuen them so peruerslie, that they thinke thēselues satisfyed in theyr owne opinions, and so doe yéelde them selues euerie day most beastlye and blyndly to bende theyr knées before blockish Baal: and sodain Iesus Christ, being most sham∣fully
ashamed both of him and his go∣spel. And not contented with this mis∣chieuous & monstruous doings in this dishonoring of him & his trueth, they doe the worst & best they can to driue by their diuillish dealings (in that or∣der) all those which are the simple ig∣norant & know little, into merueilous doubtes. And moreouer we may sée thē with great rage & rashenes, iudge and condempne the innocentes, onely for their firmenesse in faith, and con∣stancie (to maintaine the same by Ie∣su Christ) who yéeld their liues ther∣fore most magnanimously. Therfore let vs runne away & flée most feruētly from them, and let vs not allow their counsailes and prudencie, nor yet fol∣low none of their workes. Bycause that all their pretence is nothing,Mat. 16. & 6.11.12. but to plucke & appart vs secreatly from the crosse of Christ, and from our glo∣rification thereby. Let them alone in their way by wicked Antichrist: let vs kéepe our way, by our sauior Iesu Christ who hath called vs to ye same. Let not vs vse ye grace & goodnes of god wickedly,1. Pet. 2. & 1 . for a cloake to couer our
vice and iniquitie,Rom. 2. & 8.9. and so make our concupiscences full of lycencialitie, which the spirite of God doeth com∣maund vs to refrain:Colos. 3. & 5.8. But let vs mor∣tefie our terestriall and earthly mem∣bers, and cast of our olde corrupted A∣dam,Psal. 90. & .2.3. &c. so that in tyme of tribulation when we be tempted out of the way on the lefte hand, wée may call vppon God and desire of hym strength to stand, that we fall not vnder the far∣dell of affliction, nor fainte not in the worke of the Lord. The which is not better for vs to be thought vppon and done, in the tyme of aduerse necessi∣tie, then when we are in purest pro∣speritie. Bicause it is much more dif∣ficult and harde, to continue in fyrme fayth in tymes of prosperitie, then in the cruell tyme of aduersitie. Amon∣gest the people of Israell (which are as a myrrour or glasse for vs to looke in so, for the gouernement & guyding of our humaine liues) we haue diuers examples of the lyke, King. .  &c. (one of Dauid) which suffitiently and singularly she∣weth, the vnloyall or desseall trueth
that he vsed to God in the tymes of his princely prosperitie, many crimes of adulterie, incestious fornication, and homicide, did he most wickedly commit, whilest he forgot his louing Lorde who had elected hym to glorie notwithstanding. Verie godly exhortations for all men that are afflicted, and also for those vvhich are in prosperitie. The xxxiiij. Chapter. ANd therefore if it happen that we liue in rest and quiet with∣out any aduersitie or persecu∣tion, let vs not forget ye Lord, but follow his counsaile deuised and published by his diuine wisedom:Eccle. 18. & 23.24. &c. let vs then remember also the dange∣rous dayes of dollor, trouble, and ad∣uersitie,Deu. 16. &. 1.12. that the children of Israell had in the land of Canaan: let theyr bondage and captiuitie in Egipte bée had in remembrance of vs: let vs bée vigilant, watche, and pray more then
in ye prosperitie of ours,Mat. 26. &. 13. then at any other tyme. Let vs not lyue to our selues in leasings, sléeping in ye cradle of securitie, as some of the Israelites did, promising thēselues rest fantasti∣call: Let vs be alwayes as men on the Seas which are good & expert sai∣lors, although it be calme & that no wynde doe blow, yet they haue theyr hallyards, shéetes, sayles, tackes, and bowlines in a readynesse, yare to strike, hoyse, hall, and set, in any tem∣pestious time of tossing ye troublesome Sea of tribulation most dangerous. Likewise let vs watch & be in a rea∣dines what (tempest of tribulation) so euer shall happen in these dangerous seas ye world,Mat. 7. & 15. wherin we do liue and saile, let vs set hope to the healme, let faith stand to let flie the sheat, let humilitie strike the sayle, and let our fre affiance and trust in God be our pilat to invocate and call for helpe to the tacke and Bowlyne to straine and grype thorow ye tempest of trou∣bles into the porte & hauen of health. Let vs not let slippe this prouision,
least we bée taken voyde and without those helping mates our mariners to stand by our tackling.1. Pet. 5. & 8.9. Biiause our ad∣uersarie the diuil goeth rampāt about lyke a roaryng Lyon séeking whom he may deuour, whom we oughte to resist by force of faith in christ Iesus. Let vs remember our selues of the dayes of Noah, and of Lottes wife.Mat. 24. & 37. Luk. 17. & 32. 1. Thes. 5. &. 3. And let vs be afrayd that when they say vnto vs peace and securitie, that euen then death and distruction is at hande, will runne vppon vs hastily, and kyll vs without repentance, lyke as a womon with chylde whome hyr trauaile taketh vppon the sodayne, and turneth hyr to sorow, or as care∣lesse byrdes that fall in the Net vn∣wares. Least that when we think no∣thing of it, wée bée taken with some horryble tempest that maye trouble and distroy all. Let vs bée as Soul∣dyors, wyse, prudent, well exercy∣sed and trayned vp in warre, that wée runne not out of arraye, but that we alwayes be prest in order lookyng to our chiefetain: & listen to ye alarme,
if it be striken vp by our enimies) that we be not taken vpon the sodaine, as no doubt they will if they can: when we thinke our selues most surest. And also let vs alwayes laye vppon our shoulders our beardes lookyng backe to sée when our Lord commeth: And moreouer, in tyme of aduersitie when any thing happeneth vnto vs, why∣ther it be oppression by pouertie, mi∣serie, infamy, imprisonment, sicknes, or any other exyle, or any other kinde of calamitie, let vs vnderstande, that first we haue deserued farre greater griefes and troubles then (any what∣soeuer or) we are able to beare: Se∣condly, to consider that wée ought to vse for our remedie a sure truste in God, with repentance, confessyon to him, and contrition. Fynally, let vs accept them as gentle scourges, a fa∣therly chastysement, gyuyng hartie thankes for them, that they tende to our ioyfull and comfortable end: and also let vs be so firme and constant, (that whatsoeuer terror or trouble do shewe him selfe vnto vs,) that we doo
not faynt in our true fayth. What a number of enimies hath the Gospell had from ye beginning,Psal. 9. & 5.6. that God hath punished, caused them to be lost, to bée consumed and perish with great my∣serie, and little or none the memorie that is had of them. But those which were in fayth, and did perseuer con∣stantly in the trueth,Psal. 111.6.6.7. and did not se∣perate them selues from the Lord, doo remaine in eternall memorie before him in hys heauenly habitation.Gen. 4. & 13. 1. Paral. 10. & 1, 4.13. &  3. King. 22. & 34. 4. King. 15. & 5.3.21. & 1.16. &c. & 24. &. 9.15. &c. & 25. & 7.8. &c. In olde tyme, what became of Caine, Membroth, Saule, Senacherib: and also of many others that were ye Em∣perours of Roome. What was the end of Herode, Achaz, Antiochus, A∣chab, Zedechias, and many others of their tiranicall fellowship, that perse∣cuted the faithfull Prophets and chil∣dren of the Lord: what was the end of all these furious fellowes: Surely by the true scriptures it is made most manifest, that they were all vtterly distroyed, by the same worde of God, for whose trueth they persecuted hys people. Wherfore let vs not dismay
our selues, be faint harted, nor weaks in mynde, how mightie & magnificall so euer they show them selues, that so persecute vs:Sap. 6. &. 4.6.8. &c. bycause that God who doth and will defend vs, muche more mightie thē they are. And those migh∣tie monsters wil he make the vesseils of his wrath, and distroy most migh∣tifully. Let vs with all bening humi∣litie follow ye exāple of Iesus Christ, so that if we be persecuted euen vnto the death with most vylest persecuti∣ons, let vs not be troubled at all, but be assured that the laste day,1. Pet. 5. & 3.4. we shall resuscitate & ryse agayne in immor∣talitie,Rom. 8. & 11 & incorruptiō, with the prince of pastors Iesu Christ our Lorde: by∣cause yt he him selfe is the resurrecti∣on,Psal. 93. & .3. he shall quycken our mortall bo∣dies, by his spirit yt dwelleth in vs. Although that sometimes we be so euil intreated by our enimies,Eze. 7. &c Psal. 102. &. 19. wt ma∣ny kinds of calamities, yet let vs not thinke that God is a sléepe, or hath in any poynt forgetten vs: but be we all fully assured, yt he will not close an eie nor winck on whit, but wil watch
alwaies to kéepe, saue, and deliuer vs to ye Israelites. Although their halles or house of audience and iudgement, (grounded vppon vnrightuousnes) where they most gréeuouslye heare, condempne and iudge the faithfull for confessinge and professinge the truthe (come downe from Heauen) be neuer so fully fraughte wt curssed cruelties,Psal. 37.8 12.13. &c. yet what then they are to no purpose at all: for that our father which is in heauen, hath such an au∣ditory, as also farre passeth theirs in all poyntes as is possible, where as we may fully assure our selues that he will sit in iudgment, and confound their deuises, who wil ese our griefs, and cōdempne our condempnors, al∣loting them their porcions among the scribes and pharasies and hipocrites.Mat. 23. & 29.0. &c. And wheras he our mighty god hath chosen his church, his faithful people, & appoynted thē to iudge & cōdempne the impious and vngodly which now are their condempnors as it is writ∣by S. Mat. Wherfore wt pacience let vs beare and suffer our present con∣demnations,Mat. 9. & 28. because in time to come
we may iudge our condempnors, for by that truthe which now they con∣dempne in vs, they remaine for euer condempned. Psal. 3. & 1.2.3. &c.Let not vs meruell at the perse∣cutors whiche at these dayes doe trouble vs, nor yet at the innumera∣ble number that rise against vs, ney∣ther let vs faint nor feare to sée that we are in number nothing to be com¦pared against them: Let vs content our selues onely (and thereby be en∣couraged) that we are acceptable to God, and yt he hath loked vppō vs in Christ, for whose sake we ar alwaies in fauour with him. By the same way that we do passe many saynts haue passed before vs. All the faithfull (sayth holy Iudith) haue bin acceptable to God,Iud. 8. & 22.23.24. &c. and pas∣sed by many tribulations. Gen. 4. & 8. Gen. 9. & 22.25.Righteous Abel was persecuted and killed by his brother Caine: Noah was mocked of his sonne Cham: Sem, how was he afflicted. Gen. 12. & 6. &c. Gen. 13. & 14.What a number of troubles did A∣braham suffer, who was faithful and
the father of all beléeuers:Gen. 19. & 4.5. &c. & 22. & 6. & How was Loth, tormented and afflicted in So∣dome? what sorowes suffered Isack, when his father went about to sacra∣fise him?Gen. 22. in all. Psal. 28. & 5.7.8 what persecution did Iacob suffer by his brother Esau? what an innumerable number of noysom trou∣bles did Moyses suffer,Iudge. 16. & 12, 21. &c. bycause hée was faythfull to God? Dyd not the foolish Philistians afflicte Samson so sore, that they put out both his eyes?Iob. 3.4.. in all the Chap. That holy and iust man Iob, was not he terriblie tormented and troubled, both of friendes and foes?3. King. 17. & 4. &c was not the Prophet Elias wonderfully vex∣ed and persecuted by curssed Quéene Iesabell,3. King. 1. & 2.3.4. and wicked King Achab hyr vngodly husband? what troubles was there, that King Dauid (so beloued of God) was not subiect vnto? how the Prophets were murdered,1. Sam. 19.20.21.22, the Apo∣stles persecuted and killed, all ye scrip∣tures doe declare. Howe brauely dyd the diuill, the world, and the flesh, be∣stirre their stumps stobernly to strike and beate downe Iesus Christ, tyll they had taken away his lyfe, yet for
all yt they remained vnpossessed of his death,Osee. 13. & 4.5. for that he him self triumphed alwayes ouer that, & lo passed to hys kingdom, where he reigneth in glorie with all those hys members, which haue followed him, sithens the begin∣ning, in crosses of passion and persecu∣tion: And therfore though we be but a little flock, let vs be firme & cōstant till the end wt patience, for that Iesus Christ is our onely victorie and victor. So yt although our aduersaries be ne∣uer so many in number,Rom. 8. & 31.38.39. & of neuer so great a degrée in the world, yet of ne∣cessitie they must perish & passe after theyr forefathers which persecuted the Prophetes,Mat. 13 & 29.30.31. &c Apostles, and the rest the faythfull seruants of God. They doe not presently sée any thing of all this, they doe neither sée our glorifica∣tion, nor their own perdition, & yet the scripture doeth discouer the same both to vs & them. Whereby we may bée as sure both of the one and the other, as we be of their cruell persecutions which we suffer. Thereby doe they pluck the iust iudgement of God with
vengeance and ire vppon their owne heads, So, that they shal féele his hea∣uie displeasure, and in the end shal sée our blessednes now couered wt mour∣ning, & their owne perdition & damp∣nation now couered with pagain and popishe pleasure. For proofe whereof, let vs pervse that which is written in the booke of wisedome as foloweth in the next Chapter. An end, vvith a true declaration vvhat the being shalbe in the end, as vvell of the faythfull as the reprobate. The xxxv. Chapter. THen (sayeth the wyse man) shall the rightuous appeare with great constancie,Sap. 5. & 1.2.3.4, &c. before those which did persecute thē, and those wicked ones séeing the righ∣tuous, shall be tormented with great feare and horror, and shal be astonied to sée them saued, & them selues with∣out any hope thereof. Sore sighing for sorow, and their mynds full fraught
with bitternesse, saying beholde, these are they which sometimes past, wée mocked and scorned & against whom? we made songes and sonnets of great dishonor as we thought, and we, in∣senssed with errors accompted theyr lyues and doctrine for fond foolishnes, and procured their spoiles with spyte most spitefull. Yet we may see them héere accompted among the children of God, and haue their parte with his Sainctes. But we haue gone a stray farre from the way of truth, the light of rightuousnes hath not lighted vs, nor the sonne of vnderstanding hath not shyned vppon vs, we were weri∣ed in the way of wickednes and wal∣ked in by pathes, and did not know the way of ye Lord: what hath pryde profited vs? or what wealth hath our worldly riches & arrogancie wrought vs. All these things haue passed away as a shadow, as a correo that runneth post, or as a shippe that sayleth on the Seas full before the wynde, and no print or pathe are séene when shée is once passed. So that wée as soone as
we were born, wexed weak, and now we can shewe no signe of vertue the whiche is accordyng as a speiciall friend of this translator did write in his absence, (as an olde prouerbe) vp∣pon the first page of the coppie here∣of. As foloweth. Who so beleueth as he is borne in hande, Forovveth in the Sea, & sovveth in the sand. It may bée iudged hée ment this text (for that it is so with the wicked) but to the purpose, if doeth not greatly degresse from the meaning of ye wyse man who sayeth further, the wicked are consumed in their wickednesse,Sapi. 5. &. 5 6.7 Psal. 1. &. 5. and their hope is as the dust or chaffe which the winde scattereth abroade, or as the remembrance that a well guested host hath of euery guest that commeth to his house, which can not be possibly. But the rightuous shall liue for euer, their rewarde shall bée in the world, & the highest shall haue charge ouer them. Wherefore they shall receiue a kingdom of honor, and a beautifull diadeame at the handes of the Lord. For he will couer them
with his right hand, & wil defēd them with his holy arme as with a shield. Héere we may sée that those which now persecute vs for the truth, shalbe forced and dryuen to confesse them selues incenssed with errors, & loste, allowing the cause, for which so cru∣elly they persecute vs. And therefore sith they shal allow our rightuousnes and truth in such maner, & cōdempne them selues and their doinges for wicked and vniuste. And sithe it is so manifest a testimony, that our cause is such now, as they shall confesse to be true and iust then: And that nowe we be such by Christ as they shall sée vs then. And also for that we shall be equall parteners in cōmune with the Sainctes alreadie gone before vs: Let vs (dearely beloued) perseuer al∣wayes in Iesus Christ and his truth, without fayntyng or fearyng till we haue obteyned hys eternall kingdom: bicause the Sainctes our bretherē are gone before vs, 6. & and doe tarrie tyll the tyme that wee and the rest doe come and fill vp the number that God
hath appoynted, and that then wée might togyther enioy (and reioyce of) the riches and possession of the same, with Iesus Christ who is there, alrea∣die abydyng to crowne vs with cele∣stiall glorie for our victory. Very short are the pleasures and prosperities of our aduersaryes, as they shall their gyue testymonie, (accordyng to the saying of the booke of Sapience) but much more shorter are our troubles and aduersities,Sap. 5. & 7.8. &c. Esay. 54. & 7.10. (as the holy Ghost gyueth testimonie by the Prophet, Esay,) hée sayeth they are but mo∣mentarie. And also, he sayeth fur∣ther (to hys people) I will leaue thée a little, sayeth the Lorde thy God. But with great mercyfulnesse I wil receyue thée agayne, a little, (as it were a moment or ye tyme of twinck∣lyng of an eye) in indignation I wil hyde my face from thée. Yet I haue pittied thée with mercie sempiternall, sayeth the Lorde thy Redéemer, for although the moun∣taynes shoulde remoue, & the valleys should tremble and fall downe, yet
shall not my louing kyndnesse be re∣moued, nor the bond of my peace shal not fall from thée. Here God doth con∣firme vnto vs, that all our tribulati∣ons indure but a moment, and that his mercy and peace with vs is sem∣peternall. And although yt all thyngs in the world doe perish, yet his blessed promyses vnto vs shall neuer haue end. Therefore let vs not change the mercie and peace of God which is e∣ternall, for the prosperities of ye wic∣ked world which are shorte, and so so∣dainly passe away. Let vs content our selues though they florishe neuer so al la flanta and gallantly, that are of of the world. Let them reigne lustily, for that the more high they arise and clyme against God, so much the grea∣ter will be their fall at length. The holy Ghost sayeth by the mouth of the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 90. & 6.7. the wicked shall flo∣rish as the gréene grasse, and so shall all the works of iniquitie, but sodein∣ly after shall they perish togither for euer. The prosperitie which they passe in, is but a slumber, in awakyng
out of the same,Esay. 29.2. they shall sée them∣selues perishe, without the view of armes or handes to touch them. If we fortune to fall into any other kinde of aduersitie, as by mischance to be maymed in our flesh, to be sick, oppressed with pouertie, or banished into exile, yea, or otherwise punish∣ed for hate the world hath vnto vs. Let vs consider that it is but the lo∣uing chastisment of the Lord our fa∣ther, who doth and will scourge and correct euery sonne that he receueth, as before is sayd sufficiently. And sith all and euery kinde of cala∣mitie that happeneth or can come vn¦to vs is momentary,Psal. 75. & 9.10.12. let vs suffer the same with pacience and thanksge∣uing,Esay. 54. & 10. and put our sure hope and trust in god, who hath sworn wil he neuer be so angrye that he will take away his mercy from vs, but at all times powre it vppon vs aboundantly. And therefore for that he is our fa∣ther by Christ for euer, let vs like lo∣uing children, be faithfull vnto hym accordingly in all times and places.
Bycause that after lyfe loste for hys loue, and the conquest so ouercome, we shal fynde lyfe in him, whole, safe, and sound, frée from all kynd of daun∣gers of calamitie, and from all kynds of grief or annoy. And shal hear from his holy mouth,Ma. 25. & 24. the words wherwith he wil receiue all that be his: saying, to all and to euerie one of vs, I am contented with thée myne owne good seruant, bycause thou haste continued faithfull vnto mée ouer much. Enter into the ioye of the Lord which hath bene prepared for thée from the be∣gynnyng.1. Pet. 5. & 10. The God of all grace who hath called all hys chosen by Iesus Christ to his eternal glorie after that they haue suffered a little time of per∣secution and affliction, doe make you all perfecte, and doe incorporate and establish you in him selfe. To whom be all Emperie, rule, dominion, pow∣er, laude, praise, honor, and glorie, for euer and euer, worlde without ende. Amen. FINIS.
❧ A TABLE OF all the Chapters in this Booke. OF the will of God, an entry in∣to the comfort, vvith a perswa∣sion to knovv the will of God perfectly. Cap 1. Fo. 9. What we vvere before our be∣ing reduced to God. Cap. 2. fo. 11. Of our blindenes in times past. ca. 3. fo. 15. Of the loue of God, and of our calling, & the cause thereof. cap. 4. fo. 17. Of the cause of our callinge and redemp∣tion. cap. 5. fo. 20. Of our iustificatiō by the rightuousnesse of God. &c. cap. 6. fo. 22 Of an excelent comfort by the loue of god. cap. 7. fo. 25 Of the cause of Christes comming, and of the fruites of christians. ca. 8. fo. 30 Of a great cause of comfort, by reason of the crosses of Christ. ca. 9. fo. 34 Hovv that the estate of Iesus Christ is com∣mon to the faithful, and dothe exhort vs to an excelent comfort. ca. 10. fo. 37 Of the prouidence of God for them which are called. &c. cap. 11. fo. 42 Of the propertie of persecutours, with a perswasion to pacience. cap. 12. fo. 47 An excelent comfort to the afflicted. cap. 13. fo. 50
Of gods exceding loue, greatly to the com∣fort of his people. cap. 14. fo. 55 Of Purgatory, and the causes thereof, &c. cap. 15. fo. 58 A great comfort to the christian, with a ter∣rible threate to the vngodly & vvicked. cap. 16. fo. 61 An inuectiue againste the wicked, vvith a merueilous comfort to the godly christi∣an, &c. cap 17. fo. 65 Of pacience, and an exhortation therevn∣to, &c. cap. 18. fo 70 Hovv that good experience, bringeth forth hope, and of a shadovve of certaine per∣secution. cap. 19. fo. 75 A pure proofe vnto vs, that vve are beloued of God in our greatest griefes, &c. cap. 20. fo. 78 A persvvasion to trust onely in God, and to auoyde all vain trust had in any humain helpe. &c. cap. 21. fo. 83 Hovv vve ought to be instructed in truth & veritie & to haue no confidence in mens tradicions. cap. 22. fo. 90 Vppon vvhat condicion God receiueth vs, vvith an excelent comfort to the christi∣an, &c. cap. 23. fo. 96 An excelent kyndely and comfortable per∣svvasion of the faithful to reioyce in any calamitie, &c. cap. 24. fo. 101 The maner of part of persecutiō in Spaine. vvith a comfort against the like. Cap. 25. fo. 106
A true Simylitude of the true church &c. cap. 26. fo. 112. Of predestination and of glorification ther∣by. &c. cap. 27. fo. 119. Of the mightie power, and exceeding loue of god. cap. 28. fo. 124 An excelent comforte againste the feare of death, vvith a confutacion of his povver, &c. cap. 29. fo. 129 Of the cause that Christ dyd feare death, & hovv constant diuers Martirs haue beene, sithens in their martirdome. ca. 30. fo. 135 Of the goodnesse of God in our defence, a∣gainst our persecutours, &c. ca. 31. fo. 140 A merueilous comfort to those that are af∣flicted, either by fire or othervvise. cap. 32. fo. 147 An entery into the conclusion, vvith many godly exhortacions. cap. 33. fo. 152 Very godly exhortacions for all men that are afflicted, and also for those vvhich are in prosperitie. cap. 34. fo. 157 An ende, vvith a true declaracion vvhat the being shall be in the ende, as vvell of the faithfull as the reprobate. cap. 35. fo. 162 FINIS.
