23411 S117936 99853145 18513
Metallica. OR The Treatise of Metallica. Briefly comprehending the Doctrine of diuerse new Metallicall Inuentions, but especially, how to neale, melt, and worke all kinde of mettle-oares, Irons and Steeles with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell. Also a Transcript of his Maiesties Letters Pattents of Priuiledge, granted vnto Simon Sturteuant for the said Metallicall businesses, for one and thirty yeares. Published in Print before the last day of this pre∣sent Easter Terme, as the said Simon Sturteuant was by his Highnesse inioyned. Imprinted at London by George Eld. Cum priuilegio. Anno. 1612. May. 22.
The Preface to the Reader. GEntle Reader, I am not igno∣rant, how they that are willing to apprehend and assist new bu∣sinesses, are desirous to be satis∣fied in these points. First concer∣ning the perfect and exact knowledge of that Inuention wherein they are to deale and ne∣gotiate, for as the common Prouerbe saith; Ignoti nulla cupido. The second is, touching the worth and goodnesse of the businesse, and how the benefit thereof may bee raised. The third is the habillity of the Inuentioner, to effect and performe his proiect propounded. The fourth is concerning the manner of con∣tracting or bargaining; In all which, I will endeauour to giue the best satisfaction that I may, out of the praecepts and grounds of this present Treatise of Metallica. And therefore concerning the first point. The Transcript of his Maiesties most gratious grant and priui∣ledge doth euidently shew and informe the Reader, that amongst many other inuentions
granted for one and thirty yeares, my Selfe, my Executors, Deputies and Assignes, may onely make, practise, and put in vse, within any of his Maiesties Realmes and Dominions, the working, melting, and effecting of Iron, Steele, and other Mettles with Sea-coale, or Pit-coale. The principall end of which inuen∣tion is, that the Woods and Timber of our country might be saued, maintained and pre∣serued from the great consumption and waste of our common Furnaces and Iron-Milnes, which as they are now ordinarily built and framed, can burne, spend, and consume no other fewell but Char coale. The which de∣uise if it may bee effected accordingly (as I make no doubt but by Gods blessing I shall) will prooue to bee the best and most profi∣table businesse and Inuention that euer was knowne or inuented in England these many yeares. For (to speake nothing of the great benefit, and profit which may bee raised and made by twenty other Inuentions comprised and
comprehended vnder the Pattent) the yearly vallew of this mettle-businesse alone, will amount vnto 330. thousand pounds, per annū, after the second or third yeare, as appeareth by this calculation. A Calculation shewing how the Mettle Inuention or Art, which maketh all kinde of Mettles or Metalique substance, with Pit-coale or Sea-coale, will bee worth per annum. 330. thousand pounds, immediatly after the two first yeares, which are the allotted times for Tryalls and Conformities, without any charges, (except the charges of Tryalls) to the Pat∣tentees, Partners, Assistants, and Dealers. THere are planted already in Eng∣land and Wales, eight hundred Milnes for the making of Iron, for there are foure hundred Milnes in Surry, Kent, & Sussex,
as the townesmen of Haslemore haue testified and numbred vnto mee, there are also 200. Milnes in Wales, and 20. in Nottingham∣shire, as the Author hath beene credibly in∣formed. Now wee may well suppose, that all Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland (besides the fore∣named shires) will make vp the number of 180. Milnes more, being in all 800. Milnes. Moreouer one Milne alone spendeth year∣ly in Charcoale 500. pound and more, as di∣uerse Clarkes and workmen in Iron businesse, haue credibly testified, which in pit-coale will be done with the charges of 30. or 40. pounds, after the Inuentioners manner and inuention, or at the most with 50. pound, where carriage is farre and chargeable. So that this new Inuention in the 800. Iron milnes, will saue and gaine de claro the owners of those milnes 320. thousand pounds yearly, ouer and aboue their ordinary and annuall gaines, as it appeareth by this proportion.
One Milne alone saueth yearely 400. li. Ergo, 800. Milnes saue yearly 320. thousand pounds. Againe the said Metalique inuention, beeing put and conuerted to Lead, Tinne, Copper, Brasse, and Glasse-mettle, in all the seuerall Mineralls of England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales, will questionlesse cleare yearely, by meanes of Fewell, aboue ten thousand pounds more; ouer and besides the ordinary gaines in the said businesse. So that the yearely Iron reuenues, added vnto these other Metalique reuenues, doe amount vnto 330. thousand pounds, as was said before. Now out of these Metalique gaines of 330. thousand pounds yearely, the owners of the Milnes, Hearths, and Furnaces, may haue and receiue liberall rates and proportions al∣lowed and allotted vnto them, ouer and be∣sides their ordinary gaines, onely in lieu of conforming their Furnaces, Fineries and Chafferies to this Inuention of Pitt-coale
and Earth-coale. And also the Kings most excellent Maiestie, the Prince his Highnesse, the Duke of Yorke, the Lord Vicount Rot∣chester, and other parties interressed in the Pattent, may by their Composition and agreement with the said Owners and Iron-Maisters, yearely receiue, by way of rents and licences, the residew of that gaines which remaineth ouer and aboue that which was allotted and allowed to the Iron-Mai∣sters, for applying of this Inuention to their ordinary way of making of Iron, as more fully shall bee specified, shewed, and prooued in the Apendix of this Treatise, which I am now preparing for the Printer and the Presse with all conuenient speed. This may suffice therefore, to giue the Rea∣der satisfaction, concerning the two first points, for the knowledge and the worth of the businesses, and concerning the manner how certaine yearly annuities may bee raised to the dealers and assistants.
Now to perswade the third point, that the Authour is able to effect the worke vnder∣taken, in as ample manner as hee propoun∣deth; wee plead and alledge as followeth. First the Inuentioner by his study, indust∣rie, and practise, hath already brought to passe and published diuerse proiects and new deui∣ses, aswell Litterall as Mechannicall, very be∣neficiall to the common-wealth. His Lite∣rare Inuentions doe appeare and are knowne partly by his Printed Treatise of Dibere Adam, which is a Scholasticall engin Aucomaton, and partly in diuerse other Manuscripts which he hath to shew. His new Mechanicks already performed, are to bee seene in the Inuentions which hee calleth by the names of Presse∣wares, Wood-pleits, Ballance, Engin, Baramyha, and Hubla, of all which in priuate speech hee is ready more largely to conferre, and to ma∣nifest their truth and goodnesse at his Worke∣houses at Islington and Highbury. To con∣clude,1. Sam. 17.34. Thus Da∣uid reaso∣neth from the Beare and Lyon to Golyah the Gyant. therefore he doubteth not but (by Gods blessing & assistance, semblably with successe)
to effect his Inuention of Iron-works, as also al his other Metallique deuises and Inuentions, heere contained in the Patent, or Priuiledge of Metallica. Secondly the consideration of thinges in the like nature with it, are good inducements to perswade vs well of this proiect, for Brick∣making, Brewing, Dying, Casting of Brasse∣workes, &c. were (not many yeares since) done altogether with the fuell of wood and Char∣coale; in stead whereof Sea-coale is now vsed as effectually and to as good vse and purpose. Againe (that which is somewhat neerer the marke) the Blacksmith long agone forged all his Iron with Char-coale (as in some places where they are cheape they continue this course still) but these many yeares small Sea-coale hath, and doth serue the turne, as well and sufficiently. Adde heerevnto, that very lately by a wind-Furnace, greene glasse, for windowes, is made as well with Pit-coale at Winchester house in Southwarke as it is done in other places with much wast & consuming
of infinite store of Billetts and other Wood∣fuell. Thirdly the Inuention hath already experi∣mented and made tryall of the cheife particu∣lar meanes and Instruments of diuers cheape waies of making of Irons in reall and substan∣tiall moddles to him-selfe (though in small things, according as his meanes would giue him leaue.) And this of his credit and honesty he auoucheth and protesteth: wherefore hee more confidently presumeth to worke the same effects in grander Instruments and meanes of triall, after that hee hath receiued allowance of the dealers and assistants for it. Fourthly there can bee no doubt of perfor∣ming the matter propounded, if the Inuentio∣ner can but make, or cause Sea-coale to be∣come as seruiceable for Metallique purposes as wood & Char-coale is: The art and skill wher∣of consisteth cheifly in three points: The first is to bring Earth-coale to that equallity of heat that Wood or Char-coale hath; That is to say, that it make neither hotter nor coulder
fier then the Wood or Char-coale doth: The second meanes, is so to order and prepare Pit-coale, that all malignant proprieties, which are aversse from the nature of Metallique sub∣stances, may bee extracted from it, or at least destroyed in it: The third meanes is, the addi∣tion and infusion of those deficient proprie∣ties, which as they are in Char-coale, so ought they to be found in Pit-coale. Now this three-fold mistery and secret, the Author can certainly performe and atchieue, by the powerfull efficacie and meanes of his dexterous prerogatiue instruments, deuised for this purpose; as more at large is shewed, both in this Treatise, and in the Apendix, which very shortly shall come forth, and also shall be further confirmed and iustified by his dayly experiments and tryals, which hee will bee ready to shew to them whom they shall any wayes touch or concerne, or to them who are otherwise desirous to assist and deale for the experimenting and accomplishing of these so worthy good businesses. And then
also they shall know my purpose for Con∣tracting and bargaining by word of mouth, as it is best fitting for priuate dealings and nego∣tiatings. And thus (hauing briefly touched these foure premised points) I conclude and shut vp this Preface of Metallica. Humbly and vn∣feignedly beseeching the Lord, who by his holy spirit inspired * Bezaleel,Exod. 31.1.2. Aholiab and * Hiram, with the light of Mechannicall In∣uentions,2. Cro. 2.7.14.and in all manner of workemanship, for his effectuall blessings in these our enterprises,Nisi dom. aedi∣ficauerit. Psalm. 127that that which was begun in his feare, may be prosecuted & fully accomplished and built by his heauenly & helpful hands, to the glory of his name, and for the good well-fare and emolument of the Kings most excellent Ma∣iestie, the Church and the Politicall estate wherein wee liue. Amen. Simon Sturteuant.
To the Reader, concerning the Errata. TO pretermit the correction of the lesser literare faults, read and place, I pray you, the foure first lines. pag. 73. immediately before the 61. question, for they are misplaced. Errata. Pag. 17. l. 12. 31. parts, for 33. parts. pag. 45. l. 11. Ignime∣tallica, for In-ignimetallica. pa. 56. l. 17. Instruments for Em∣poreuticks. ibid. l. 21. Instrument, for Emporeutick. pa. 73. l. 13 consisteth, for consisting. pa. 76. l. 7. diuers meanes for diuers things. pag. 77. l. 11. bee incroached, for bee not incroached. pa. 93. l. 26. edge, for edge-toole. pa. 94. l. 3. fier, colouring, for fier-colouring. pa. 108. l. 10. alter-slagge, for after-slagge. In the Epistle to the Reader, in some copies, pag. 1. of A. l. 11. Dibere for Dibre. l. 12. Aucomaton, for Automa∣ton. l. 18. Hubla, for Lubla.
Metallica. CAPVT. 1. The Transcript of his Maiesties Indenture. Reader. AS I vnderstand, you haue promised and couenanted in your Pattent more fully and euidently to expresse and enlarge in a Printed treatise, to be called Metalli∣ca, euery point and part of your priuiled∣ged businesse, to the intent that the Rea∣der might the better conceiue and iudge of the Inuenti∣ons propounded, and might the sooner also bee induced to assist, and set forward, so good and worthy workes: First therefore I demand of you by what name and appellation you entitle that generall head, vnder the which you re∣duce and comprehend all the seuerall Arts and Inuenti∣ons of your Pattent. Author. The generall, that comprehendeth all the other perticular Inuentions, is called Metallica, which is a word deriued and deduced from the Greeke and
Latin words Metallon, and Metallum, which signifie, in English, Mettles, which properly are Minerall sub∣stances, digged and taken out of the earth, of which sort, are Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, Brasse, Gold, and Siluer, &c. R. 2. Doth your Pattent of Metallica, onely containe the making of mettles by the meanes of Sea-coale and Pit-coale, and with your other Metallicall instruments which you haue deuised for that purpose. A. His Maiesties gratious grant is very large and ample, for it doth not onely comprehend and priui∣ledge the making of all kinde of mettles, after the manner prescribed, but also equally authorizeth and licenseth any other Mechanick inuentions compre∣hended vnder the generall definition of Metallica which is mentioned in the Schedules or Manuscript treatise annexed to the Pattent, which Schedules haue the same force and validitie as his Maiesties Indenture it selfe. R. 3. Then that I may certainely know and vnder∣stand the extent of your priuiledge, repeate, I pray you, word by word, the definition of Metallica, as it is written in the said Schedules, annexed to your Pattent. A. Metallica mentioned in the petition, is thus de∣fined. Metallica is an Art or Inuention, shewing how diuerse things and Materials, now made and atteined vnto, in a very chargeable sort, after the ordinary way, may be made and atteined to after a more chea∣per manner, and as with the helpe of common instru∣ments: so more especially by diuerse new deuised
Metallicall instruments and meanes. From these Metallicall instruments, the Art is ge∣nerally called Metallica. R. 4. This summary definition giueth mee some ge∣nerall light and vnderstanding into your businesses, but that I may bee the more fully satisfied, I pray you re∣hearse also the tenour of his Maiesties grant, as it is vnder the broad seale of England.
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
James R. THIS Indenture made, the xxix. day of February, in the yeares of the Reigne of our Soueraigne Lord Iames, by the grace of God, King of Eng∣land, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, &c. of England, France and Ire∣land the ninth, & of Scotland the xlv. Betwene our said Soueraigne Lord, of the one party, and Simon Sturteuant Gentleman of the other party. WHEREAS the said Simon Stur∣teuant, by long his study & great charge, hath atteined vnto diuerse new exact Mechanick Arts, Mysteries, Waies and Secrets of his own Inuention, whereby all kind of mettles, works, and other things and materialls, as namely Irons, Steeles, Leads, Tins, Coppers, Brasses, and such like. Secondly all kind of Metalique concoctions, as Sand-mettles, Ash-mettles, Ammels, and such like. Thirdly, all kinde of Burnt-earths, as Tiles, Pauing-stones, Bricks, and such like. Fourthly all kind of Pres-wares, as Prest-tiles, Prest-bricks, Prest-monions,
Prest-stones and such like, with diuerse other things and materials now made after the ordi∣narie course, with Wood-fewell and Char-coale, may be aswell made, wrought, and effe∣cted, as the said Simon Sturteuant affirmeth, with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, whereby the Woods now gene∣rally wasted, in all the chiefe wood-land coun∣tries of this realme of England by Iron milnes, and such other Metallicall Furnaces and hearths, may be preserued from the great con∣sumption thereof, and saued from like incon∣uenience in other his Maiesties dominions, all which premisses, so by this new Inuention to be made, the said Simon Sturteuant hath vnder∣taken, shall be in substance and for vse as suffi∣cient and as good as the other like Materialls now made and wrought with the chargeable and excessiue waste of Wood and Char-cole. AND whereas also the said Simon Sturteuant, for the better making, working, effecting, bea∣ting, burning, melting and effecting, the said mettals, workes, things, and Materialls, by and wth Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and
Brush-fewell, hath by his said Inuention and skill, inuented diuers Furnaces, hearths, tests, tooles, engins, milnes, and other instruments and meanes, new, and of his owne Inuention, neuer heretofore vsed or put in practise by any other. And hath also by his said Inuentions and skill, attained to the knowledge how to vse and imploy diuerse other common in∣struments, to the making, working, and effect∣ing the said mettles, workes, materialls, and things, which other common instruments haue bin heretofore, and are vsed in other arts, sciences, and manuell occupations, but were not, nor haue bin as yet conuerted, vsed, or im∣ployed, to, for, or about the making, working, effecting, & producing the said mettels, works, materials and things: which said skil & Inuen∣tiōs of the said S. Sturteuant, & the said mettles, workes, things, and other Materials, and the meanes and instruments whereby to worke and effect the same, are in some measure men∣tioned and expressed in the Schedule or Sche∣dules, to these presents annexed, and shall bee more fully, amply, and perticularly demon∣strated,
specified, described, and conteined in a large treatise, which the said Simon Sturteuant hath already conceiued, and shall bee put in Print, and so published before the last day of Easter terme next ensuing the date hereof, which Treatise so to bee Printed, shall be inti∣tuled, A Treatise of Metallica: which said Inuen∣tions of the said Simon, may and will prooue beneficiall to the common-wealth, both in re∣gard of the abundant plenty of the said things and materials which it daily will bring forth, as also because it saueth and preserueth abun∣dance of Timber, Char-coale, Wood-fewell, and other things and commodities wastefully consumed and spent, the generall want where∣of already is felt. AND, for asmuch as our said Soueraigne Lord is giuen to vnderstand, that this art, skill, industrie and inuentions of the said Simon Sturteuant, of making, casting, founding, working, and acquiring of the a∣foresaid mettles, workes of Iron, materials, & things by Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell, and all and euery, or any of
them, and also the making of the said new deuised engins, hearths, furnaces, and other meanes and instruments, and the imploying of the said instruments, vsed in other sciences and Arts, to the making, working, effecting, and producing the said Mettales and other workes, materials and things, is a thing not yet practised nor brought into any trade, occupa∣tion or mysterie, within any of his kingdomes, but is an Inuention in substance new, and which shall not preiudice or crosse any from priuiledge or grant by his Maiestie heretofore made or granted vnder the great seale of Eng∣land, for the vsing and making of any former Inuention, and therefore fit to bee priuiledged for a certain time, the rather for that his High∣nesse conceiueth, that the said inuentions and skils, may and will become profitable and good for the common-wealth of these realms, and also augment his customes and impost, in regard it bringeth forth great and aboundant store of the aforesaid Materials and things, not onely for the vse of his Highnesse realmes
and dominions heere at home, but also for trafficke and Marchandize into forraine Con∣tries abroad, which are customeable. In regard whereof and also for, and in consideration of the good, faithful and acceptable seruices heer∣tofore done and performed vnto his said Ma∣iesty, by the said Simon Sturteuant, As also to the end that the said Simon Sturteuant may re∣ceiue some conuenient recompence, benefit and profit for his said seruices, as also for his studies, laboures and charges in perfecting these Inuentions, to the Common good, which may ensue heereby to his Highnes Realmes and Dominions. THIS INDENTVRE WITNESSETH that our said soueraigne Lord the King, of his especiall grace, certaine knowledge and meere motion, and of his pre∣rogatiue royal, hath giuen and granted, and by these presents for him, his heires and successors doth giue and grant, vnto the said Simon Stur∣teuant, his executors, administrators and as∣signes, and his, and their Deputy and Deputies the sole, full, absolute and free power, liberty
and authority, to make, worke, produce, acc∣quire and bring forth, all kinde of the afore∣said mettles, and other the materials, and things, by, and with Sea-coale, Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, Brush-fewell, and all, euery, or any of them, in all parts and places of his Maiesties realmes of England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, and also within all the same places and dominions, to make, frame, erect, acquire, and prouide, or cause to bee made, framed, erected, acquired, and pro∣uided, all necessary Instruments and meanes. As namely, all Worke-houses, Furnaces, Hearths, Milnes, Structures, Engins, Ves∣els, Tests, Tooles, Instruments, Deui∣ses, or things of Iron, or other stuffe or sub∣stance whatsoeuer, which are already in vse, in any other trade, mysterie, arte, or occupati∣on, and as yet not exercised or vsed, in, or a∣bout the making, working, casting, found∣ing, acquiring, and producing of the sayd mettles and other materialls and things, for, and to the end and purpose aforesaid, viz.
to make, worke and effect the said mettles, and other materials, and things, by, and with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewel, and all, euery, or any of them. And also in all the said places and dominions, to make, frame and erect, vse, and imploy, or cause to be fra∣med and erected all the said new Furnaces, hearths, deuises, instruments and meanes, which are meerely of the new Inuention of the said Simon Sturteuant, to, for, in, or about the making, working, casting, founding, ac∣quiring, and producing of the said mettles, and other the said Materials and things, and to all or any other purpose or purposes vse or vses, whatsoeuer, in as ample sort and manner as they or any of them are described, expressed, or mentioned in the Schedule to these presents annexed, or shall be more fully demonstrated, specified, or mentioned in the Treatise of Me∣tallica, which shall bee as aforesaid Printed, be∣fore the last day of Easter Terme next ensu∣ing. AND our said Soueraigne Lord doth further by these presents, for him, his heires, & successors, assigne, appoint, ordaine, constitute,
licence and authorise the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators, and assignes, to haue the sole power, liberty, and authority, by and with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, and all, euery, or any of them, and by his said Inuentions, arts, and skills in∣uented and deuised for the making of all kinds of the said mettles, and other the Materials and things, and also for the making, framing, and erecting of all such Instruments and meanes, as Worke-houses, Furnaces, Milnes, Quernes, Structures, Engins, Vessels, Tooles, Instruments, Deuises, and things heretofore vsed in any other Arts or Sciences, to bee im∣ployed or vsed in or about the making, work∣ing or producing the said mettals, things, and materials, or any of them, as aforesaid, and also to haue the sole power, liberty, and authority, for the making, framing, erect∣ing, or producing of all the said new deuises, instruments, and meanes Metallicall, as afore∣said, in what sort, or about what thing soeuer the same or any of them shall bee vsed or im∣ployed: and that the said Simon Sturteuant, his
executors, administrators, assignes, and his & their deputy & deputies, & none other, without his, or their speciall licence or tolleration, shal or may make any kind, or kinds of the said me∣tles, & other the materials & things, by, or with sea-coale, pit-coale, earth-coale, & brushfewel, or al, some, or any of them, by means of, or by vsing & imploying the said Inuentions of the said Simō, or any part or parcel of thē, or any of thē, or make, frame & erect, any the said work∣houses, furnaces, hearths, milnes, structures, engins, tests, vessels, tooles, instruments, deui∣ses & things heretofore vsed, in any other arts, or sciences, which by the said inuentions of the said Simon, shalbe transferred or conuerted, or turned to be vsed, exercised & imployed, in, or about the making, casting, foūding, working, acquiring and producing of the said mettles or materials, things and deuises, by, or with Sea-coale, earth-coale, pit-coale, and brush-fewell, or all, some, or any of them, or to make, frame, or erect, any of the said new deuised instrumēts and means of the said Simon, either to the mak∣ing, casting, working, or effecting, all or any the said works, metles, or materials, by or with
sea-coale, earth-coale, and brush-fewell, or all, some, or any of them, or to any other end or purpose whatsoeuer. TO haue and to hold, vse, exercise and enioy, the sole making, casting, founding, working, tempering, acquiring, and producing of all and euery the said mettles, and other the said premises, in maner & forme afor∣said, and to the end & purposes aforesaid, vnto the said S. Sturteuant, his executors, administra∣tors and assignes, and by his and their deputy & deputies, for & during the time and terme of 31. yeares, now next cōming, immediatly from & after the date of these presents. Yeelding, ren∣dring & paying therefore, yearly & euery yeare immediatly, from, and after the date hereof, for, and during the said terme of 31. yeares, to our said Soueraigne Lord, his heires and successors, at the receipt of his Highnesse Exchequer at Westmin. alwaies in the terme of S. Michael, ten parts of such sum or sums of money, and other cleare yeerely profits, in 33. parts to be deuided, as he the said Simon Sturtenant, his executors, ad∣ministrators, or assignes, shall yearely haue or receiue, during the said terme of one and thirty years, by way of composition or otherwise, for,
or by making, framing, or erecting, casting, founding, and acquiring, or otherwise, for li∣censing or authorising any person or persons whatsoeuer, to make, frame, cast, erect, found, or acquire, any of the said Materialls, Worke∣houses, Furnaces, Hearths, Milnes, Stuctures, Engins, Vessels, Tests, Tooles, Instruments, deuises, and things aforesaid, The charges and expences in and about the same, and euery of them, expended out of the said thirty three parts, alwaies deducted and allowed to the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators and assignes, And likewise yeelding, rendring, and paying, vnto the most excellent Prince Henry, eldest sonne of our said Soueraigne Lord, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornewall, and Earle of Chester, & his executors or admi∣nistrators, yearly and euery yeare, during the said terme of one and thirty yeares, in the same termes of Saint Michaell fiue parts of the said summe and summes of money, and other cleere profits in thirty three parts to bee deui∣ded, to bee alwayes paid and deliuered to such
person or persons as the said most excellent Prince shall appoint to receiue the same, at his highnesse Pallace of Saint Iames in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex. And also yeelding, rendring, and paying vnto the most high and mightie Prince Charles Duke of Yorke; second Sonne of our said Soueraigne Lord, vnto his execu∣tors and administrators during the said terme of thirty one yeares in the same tearmes of Saint Michaell the Arch-angell, two parts of the said summe and summes of mony and other cleare profits afore said in 31 parts to be deui∣ded to be alwaies paid and deliuered, at the said Pallace of Saint Iames, to such person or per∣sons as our said Soueraine Lord the King, du∣ring the Mynority of the said Duke of Yorke, and after his full age hee the said Duke shall appoint to receiue the same: And moreouer yeelding, rendring, and paying vnto Robert Vicount Rochester Baron of Wainick his ex∣ecutors and administrators in the same termes of Saint Michaell and at the said, Pallace of S. Iames one part of the said sum and sums of
money, and other cleere parts to be deuided. AND as concerning the residue of the said summe and sums of money, and other cleere profits to be deuided, it shall and may bee law∣ful, to, and for, the said Simon Sturteuant, his ex∣ecutors, administrators, and assignes, to re∣taine and keepe one part thereof to his or their owne propper vse and vses, and for the other fourteene yearely partes of the said thirty three partes of the said yeerely summe and summes of money, and other cleere yearely profits; It shall, and may be lawfull, to, and for the said Simon Sturtenant, his executors, ad∣ministrators, and assignes, at his, and their discretion, and in such manner and forme, and by such rates and proportions, as he, and they, shall in their discretions thinke meet to dispose thereof and to expend and distribute the same, and euery part and parcell thereof, amongst such person, or persons, as shall ad∣uenture, ioyne, be asisting, aiding or helping to the aduancing, or setting forwards of the
workes and inuentions afore-said, or any of them, and amongst such person or persons as shal be owners of the said work-houses, furna∣ces, hearthes, milnes, structures, engine, ves∣sells, tests, tooles, instruments, deuises, and things before mentioned, or any of them. And the said Simon Sturteuant, for him, his heires, executors, administrators, and assignes and for euery of them, doth couenant, and grant, by these presents, to, and with, our soue∣raigne Lord, his heires, and successors, that he the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, admi∣nistrators, or assignes, shal, and wil, yearely and euery yeare, during the said terme of one and thirty yeares, well and truely yeeld, render, satisfie, content and pay, or cause to bee con∣tented and payed, the said tenne partes of the said cleere profits, in maner and forme afore∣said, vnto our Soueraigne Lord, his Heires, and Successors, and shall, and will like-wise, du∣ring the aforesaid Terme of one and thir∣ty yeares, well and truly yeeld, render, satisfie,
content and pay vnto the said Prince of Wales, his executors or administrators the said fiue parts of the said cleere proffits, in manner and forme afore-said, And also to the said Duke his executors or administra∣tors the said two parts of the said cleere prof∣fits in manner and forme afore-said, And also to the said Lord Vicount Rochester, his executors or administrators the said one part of the cleere proffits in manner and forme as the same one part is formerly in these presents apointed to bee yeelded, ren∣dred and payed to the said Lord Vicount Ro∣chester, his executors and administrators; AND for asmuch as when the said skill, worke, and Inuentions of the said Simon Stur∣teuant, which hee by his great industry, cost and expences hath attained to, shall appeare and bee made commonly knowne, it is very likely that many persons will without the priuity of the said Simon Sturteuant his execu∣tors, administrators or assignes, make, frame,
and erect the like, and peraduenture hauing his Platforme, adde therevnto some further new inuention for their gaines, or otherwise put the same in practise at their pleasure, and make the said mettles, and other materials and premises aforesaid, thereby reaping the fruits of the labours of the said Simon Sturteuant, and so defraud, both our said Soueraigne Lord, and the said Prince, and the said Duke of Yorke, and the said Lord Vicount Rochester, and al∣so the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, ad∣ministrators and assignes, and such others, as shall aduenture therein, of a great part of the benefit and profit which might otherwise ac∣crew vnto our said Soueraigne Lord, and to the said most excellent Prince, and Duke of Yorke, and to the said other parties by such skill, worke, and Inuention aforesaid. Our said Soueraigne Lord therfore, fauouring the good endeuours and studies of the said Simon Sturte∣uant in the premisses, and his former seruice done vnto his Highnesse, for him, his heires and successors, for the better encouraging of
him the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators and assignes, in the same, and the better to enable him to vnder-goe and beare the burthen and charge thereof, and to auoide all deceipt that any way may hinder our said Soueraigne Lord, or the said most ex∣cellent Prince, or Duke of Yorke, or any of the said parties aforesaid, doth by these presents declate and signifie, that his Maiesties Royall will and pleasure is, and our said Soueraigne Lord doth hereby streightly will, and com∣mand, all, and euery person or persons, of what state, degree, or condition soeuer, that they, nor any of them, during the said terme of one and thirty yeares, shall not presume or attempt, by any arte, deuise, skill, or cunning, directly or indirectly, without the speciall licence, allow∣ance, and consent of him the said Simon Stur∣teuant, his executors, administrators, or as∣signes, or of his, or their deputie, or deputies, there-vnto by him, or them lawfully authori∣sed, to make, frame, erect, contriue, or per∣forme any kinde, or kindes of the aforesaid
mettles, and the other Materialls and things, or any of them, by, or with Sea-coale, Pit-coale, Earth-coale and Brush-fewell, or all, some, or any of them, by all, or any the said Inuentions, or meanes, inuented or de∣uised by the said Simon, or by vsing or ex∣ercising any part, or parcell of the same, or to vtter, or sell the said mettles, or other mate∣rials, or things so made, framed, or perfor∣med, or any of them, or to make, frame, worke, erect, vse or imploy, within any the said Realmes and Dominions of our said So∣ueraigne Lord the King, any such or the like engins, instruments, or workes heretofore vsed in any other Artes or Sciences, for, or to the making, founding, or effecting the said mettles, things and materials, by and with Sea-coale, Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, and all, or any of them, or any of the sayd new deuised Instruments and things, either too, or about the making or working the said mettles, things, and
materials, as aforesaid, or to any end or pur∣pose whatsoeuer, or to make or doe, any act or thing, whereby, or by meanes whereof, our said Soueraigne Lord the King, or the said most excellent Prince of Wales, or the said Duke of Yorke, or the said Simon Sturteuant, his executors, administrators or assignes, or other the said parties, shall or may sustaine any preiudice, losse or detriment, in the said Inuen∣tions or workes, or in any profit or commodi∣tie which they, or any of them, may or might otherwise haue, receiue, or enioy, by meanes of the same inuentions or workes, or any of them, vpon paine of the high displeasure of our said Soueraigne Lord the King, and vpon paine of imprisonment of their bodies, and forfeitures of all, and euery the said materials, instruments, and things aforesaid, which shal∣be wrought, framed, or made, by any person or persons, contrary to the tenour of these presents, and Royall prohibition therein, with such further penalties, paines, and forfeitures, as by the laws and statutes of the said Realms,
can, or may be inflicted, vpon them, or any of them, for their wilfull and obstinate disobe∣dience, and contempt of his Highnesse said commandement and prerogatiue Royall. And if it shall happen that any person or per∣sons, contemptuously neglecting this his Ma∣iesties will and pleasure, in these presents decla∣red, after notice therof giuen, shall make or ac∣quire any kind or kinds of the afore-said met∣tles, and other the materials and things, by, or with Sea-cole, Pit-coale, Eearth-coale & Brush∣fuell, or all, some, or any of them, by any of the said meanes and Inuentions, or any part or parcell of them or any of them, or shall frame, worke, erect, vse or imploy any such or the like engins, instruments, tooles, imple∣ments or workes, for, and to the purpose and purposes aforesaid, the same, and all, and eue∣ry of them shall bee taken and seized, by the Constable or other officer, dwelling neerest thereunto, to, and for the only vse and behoofe of our said soueraigne Lord the King, his heires and successors, AND further our said soue∣raigne
Lord the King of his more abundant grace, certaine knowledge and meere motion doth by these presents for him, his heires and successors, giue and grant full power and au∣thority to the said Simon Sturteuant, his execu∣tors, administrators, and assignes, and his and their Deputy and Deputies and euery of them with the assistance of a Constable, Tithing∣man, Headborough, or any other ordinary officer in any Citty, towne, place, or places, as well within the liberties as without, within the said Realmes and Dominions, at all and e∣uery time and times, to haue accesse and entry into any house, place, and places, where such mettles and other the premisses shall be made and wrought or otherwise layd vp contrary to his Maiesties grant, and there to search, pro∣uide, and see, that during the said terme of 31. yeares, no manner of such or the like Inuenti∣ons, workes, or practizes, of making, or e∣recting, any kind, or kinds, of the said mettles and other the premisses to be made, wrought, sould, vsed, or imployed, within the said
Realms contrary to the true meaning of these presents, and by all lawfull and conuenient waies and meanes to search, see examine and find out, all offences during the sayd time that shall bee committed contrary to any guift, li∣cense, authority, commandement, prohbiti∣on, or other thing in these presents mentioned, specified, and to seaze, as aforesaid, such instru∣ments and other things whatsoeuer, made, fra∣med, or erected, vsed, exercised or occupied contrary to the true intent of these presents or any clause heerin cōtained. And his Highnesse will and pleasure is, and by these presents for him, his heires and successors, his Maiesty doth streightly charge and command all Iustices of peace, Maiors, Sherifs, Bailifes, Constables and al other Officers, ministers and subiects of his Highnesse, his heires and successors for the time being, that they and euery of them, du∣ring the said terme of 31. yeares, or the dupli∣cate exemplification or the enrolement there∣of, shal be aiding & asisting to the said S. Stur∣teuant, his executors, administrators, assignes & deputies & euery of them in the due execution
of all and euery the said grants, authorities, commandements, licences, priuiledges, inhi∣bitions, prohibitions, and euery other thing in these presents mentioned and specified, or any of them. PROVIDED alwayes, that this Indenture, nor any thing therein contei∣ned, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to restraine or hinder any person or persons, for vsing, or exercising any their owne Inuenti∣ons or Artes heretofore exercised, put in vse, and priuiledged, by any his Maiesties Letters Partents, heeretofore made and granted to them or any of them, but that it shall, and may be lawfull, to and for all and euery the said person or persons, to exercise, vse, and put in practise all and euery the said inuentions heer∣tofore practized, put in vse, excercised, and priuiledged by any of the said Letters Pattents, to them, or any of them, made or granted, in as ample sort, and manner, as they might, or may, exercise, practise, or vse the same, if these presents had neuer beene had, or made any in these presents to the contrary notwithstand∣ing.
IN WITNES whereof, to the one part of these Indentures remaining with the said Simon Sturteuant, our said Soueraigne Lord the Kings Maiestie, hath caused the great Seale of England to bee put, and to the other part thereof remaining with our said Soue∣raigne Lord the King, the said Simon Sturtenant hath put his seale. Yeouen the day and yeare first aboue written. Exam. Henry Hubbert.
The Docquet to the Pattent. THis is your Maiesties part of the Indentures, whereby your Highnesse doth grant, licence, and priuiledge vnto Simon Sturteuant Gentle∣man. That bee, his executors, deputies, and assignes onely, and none other, shall and may, during the terme of 31. yeares, make, practise, and put in vse, within any your Maiesties Realmes and dominions, certaine Inuentions, Furnaces, and Instruments, deuised and inuented by himselfe, for the working, and effecting with Sea-coale, Pitt-coale, Earth-coale, and Brush-fewell, diuers things and workes heretofore done with Wood-fewell, as namely Irous, Steeles, Leads, Tinnes, Coppers, Brasses, Glasse∣mettles, Mines, Tiles, Bricks, Potter-ware, and such like. And there is reserued to your Maiestie vpon this grant, ten parts in thirty three parts, to bee de∣uided of the cleare yearely profits that shall bee made by the said new Inuentions: and to the Prince his Highnesse, fiue ef those parts: and to the Duke
of Yorke two of those parts, and to the Lord Vi∣count Rochester, one of those parts; and to the said Simon Sturteuant one other of those parts, and to the disbursers of the moneys for the tryall and effecting of the said Inuentions, foureteene such parts, and the declaration and discouering of this Inuention, is partly set down in a certaine sckedule, which is to bee annexed to these Indentures. And the full and plaine manifestation thereof is to bee sett forth in Print, by the said Simon Sturteuant, before the last day of Easter terme next, and conteineth a prouiso, that this new grant shall not crosse any former grant, hereto∣fore made to any others.
And is done vpon signification giuen vnto mee by Christopher Perkins, Knight, of your Maiesties good pleasure in that behalfe. Exam. Henry Hubbert. It is his Maiesties pleasure, that these doe passe by immediate warrant. Robert Salisbury. Receiued 29. of February 1611. An Indenture betweene the Kings Maiestie, and S. Sturteuant. COPPIN.
The Manuscript Treatise of Metallica. CAPVT. 2. Reader. 5. IN the Transcript of his Maiesties Indenture, which you haue rehearsed, there is further referrence vnto a manuscript Treatise, or certaine schedules which are annexed vnto the grant, which I pray you also re∣hearse vnto mee, according to the Tenour of the words in the originall. A. The manuscript Treatise of Metallica, which otherwise is termed by the names of schedules in the Indenture, is comprehended in these ten Sections fol∣lowing. SECT. 1. Metallica, the generall of all Metallicall Arts. MEtallica, mentioned in the petition, is thus defined. Metallica is an Art or Inuention, shewing how diuers things and mate∣rials, now made and atteined vnto in a very chargeable sort, after the ordinary way, may be made and attained vnto after a more cheaper manner, and as with the help of common instruments, so more
especially by diuers new deuised Metallicall Instru∣ments and meanes, as in the printed treatise of Metallica, more at large shall bee mentioned and expressed. From these Metallicall Instruments the Art is gene∣rally called Metallica. The doctrine of Metallica cannot distinctly be known or methodically expressed, except that the Art which prescribeth precepts, general to all Arts & inuentions called Heuretica be first precognized. R. Define Heuretica. Heuretica is the Art of inuentions, teaching how to find out new, and to iudge of the old, and so forth, as followeth in the printed treatise of Metallica. Metallica, thus generally described is of two sorts, Ignemetallica, which worketh with fire and hearth, or Inignemetallica, which vseth not the meanes of fire, for to attaine to the thing or materiall intended, yet it vseth the other Metallicall Instruments, wherevp∣pon it is called more propperly Metallorganica. Ignemetallica, comprehendeth many generall inuenti¦ons, which are reduced into these 7. heads, first Me∣tallica, propriae dicta, secondly Pressoria, thirdly Terrica, fourthly Hydrelica, fiftly Hydrometallica, sixtly Hydro∣pressoria, seauenthly Hydroterrica. SECT. 2. Metallica proprié dicta. MEtallica, in the propper and strict signification is thus defined.
Metallica is an Ignick inuention, for the cheaper making of all kindes of mettles or Metalique con∣coctures, by the meanes of cheape firing, and other Metallical, instruments, wherevpon the materials and things made by this Arte, are called Metaliques. The contents of Metallica, proprie dicta, in the se∣uerall Materials which the Art maketh. The Me∣talique Materials are as 1. All kind of Met∣tles as 1. Prepared or roasted oares, Mine-stones, or Mettle-stones beeing the fitt matter of Me∣tallique liquours. 2. Irons, Steeles. 3. Leads. 4. Tins. 5. Coppers, brasses. 6. Any other new kind of met∣tles, which may hereafter bee found beeing made and wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and In∣uention. 7. All compounded mettles of the same kind, as Pewters, Bel∣mettles, Sodars, Candle-stick∣mettle, beeing made and wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Inuention.
All kind of Me∣talique concoc∣tures & their cō∣creats, as 1. All kinde of Sand-mettles, or Ash-mettles. 2. All kind of Ammels, Beugles, or such commixtures. 3. All kind of Metallique slagges or cinders, if (perhaps) they may be turned to some profi∣table vse. 4. Other compounds of the fore∣named concoctures, beeing made and wrought after the said Simon Sturteuant his man∣ner and Inuention. And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 3. Metallicall Instruments. THe Instruments and meanes Metallicall, which are vsed for the producing of metallique mate∣rialls or things, are of two sorts, common or peculiar. The common instruments are such which are bor∣rowed from other trades, occupations and mysteries, amongst which wee haue especially vse of Ioyners, Smiths, Turners, not onely of their Instruments and Tooles, but also of their Emporeuticks which they ordinarily make, as Presses, Vices, Screwes, Bellowes, Tongs, &c. made either of Iron and Wood, or of both together.
The peculiar instruments are those that are of the Authors Inuention, beeing of chiefe and principall vse, for the working of Metallicall effects. The peculiar Instruments of inuention, are princi∣pally of three sorts, Lenick, Plegnick and Caminick. Lenicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which worke their opperation and effect by pressing, im∣pressioning, or moulding, and that either by thrusting or drawing. All the kindes of these Lenick instruments, are at large described in the doctrine of the arte Pressoria, which is part of the Printed treatise of Metallica. There is great vse of these Lenick instruments, for the tempering and commixing of Sea-coale and Stone-coale. Plegnicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which performe their opperation and effect, by their dexterous and artificiall ioynt-moouing. All the kinds of Plegnick instruments, are at large described in the doctrine of the arte Plegnica, which is part of the Printed treatise of Metallica. There is great vse of the Plegnick instruments for the making of Eumechanick and reformed Milnes & Bellowses. Caminicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which performe their opperation and effect, by the new kind of Furnacing and Hearthing. All the kinds of Caminick instruments, are at large described in the doctrine of the art Caminica, which is part of the Printed treatise of Metallica.
The instruments Metallicall, although they are of cheefe vse in all the Metallicall arts, yet are they more peculiarly belonging to Metallica, proprie dicta, and for this cause they are anexed to it. And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned, and inlarged in the printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 4. Pressoria. PRessoria is a kind of Ignick Inuention, which by the meanes of cheape fiering, and by other Metal∣licall Instruments and meanes, maketh all kinds of Press-wares or Mould-wares. Press-ware or Mould-ware is any thing that can bee made, wrought, or formed of clay and earth, not by hand, and the round table (as the Potters vse) but by Presse and Mould, or by pressing and moulding, and that by the help of Metallicall Instruments and meanes. There be many sorts and kindes of Press-wares by reason of different figures and diuers vses vnto which they are to be applied, all which kindes are reduced to these two heades of Rude-ware and Polisht ware. Rude-ware are such sorts of Press-ware, which af∣ter they are pressed and moulded, require no further ornament; as Prest-pipes, Prest-tiles, Prest-brickes, Prest-stones: and such like, expressed in the printed treatise of Metallica.
Pollisht-ware, are such sorts of Press-wares, which after they are pressed and moulded, doe receiue fur∣ther ornament or beauty, as prest-monions for win∣dowes, and prest-columnes, and such like, described in the Printed treatise of Metallica. And so sorth, as it shall bee further mentioned and enlarged in the printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 5. Terrica. TErrica is an Ignick inuention, for the cheaper making of all kinds of Burnt-earths, by meanes of Metallicall instruments, wherevpon the Materialls made by this Art, are called Terricks. The contents of Terrica, in the seuer all Materialls which the Art maketh. The Terrick Materials, are all kinde of burnt-earth, as 1. All bricks burnt or baked, after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and inuention, though made and moulded according to common order of Brick-makers. 2. All kinde of Tiles burnt or baked, after the said S. Surteuant his man∣ner and inuention, though made, and moulded according to com∣mon order of Tile-making. 3. All kind of Potter-ware, burnt or baked after the said S. Sturteu. his maner & Inuention, though mol∣ded according to common order.
4. All kinde of limes, plaisters, alla∣blasters burnt, after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Inuen∣tion. 5. All kinde of Way-stones, Way-grauels, Way-earths, burnt and made after the said Simon Sturte∣uant his manner and Inuention, This arte is called Itineraria. 6. Lastly, any other kinde of burnt-earths, that here-after may be de∣uised, as good and profitable for the common-wealth, being made, burnt, and wrought, after the said Simon Sturteuant his manner and Inuention. And so forth, as it shall bee further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 6. Hydrelica. HYdrelica, is an Ignick inuention, for the cheaper making of all kindes of hotte liquids, or li∣quoures, by the meanes of Metallicall instruments, wherevpon the materials made by this arte are cal∣led Hydrelicks.
The contents of Hydrelica in the seuerall Materials which the Arte maketh. 1. The Hydre∣lick ma∣terials are, as All kinde of Hydre∣lick waters and their concreats, of which there are diuerse sorts, as 1. All bathing waters, for wa∣shing of the body. 2. All kind of washing, scou∣ring waters, for washing of foule vessels, foule linen and other cloth. 3. All kinde of hot-borne, or liquor, for making of beare or ale, or any other kind of Beauoridge. 4. All kinde of hot or warme waters for dying of cloth, silke, or leathers, &c. 5. All kind of hot-waters for Felt-making. 6. Lastly, all hot-waters for o∣ther trades, occupations or mysteries, as the Treatise further expresseth. 2. Al kind of Hydre∣lick vnctions, li∣quids, or liquours, which flame or burne, and their concreats, as 1. Oyles, Tallowes, Fatts, Marrowes, and such like. 2. Waxes, Rossens, Pitches, Tarres, Turpentines, brim∣stones, & such like vnctions, gummes.
3. Al kind of Hydre∣lick liquors which are mixed and com∣pounded of wate∣rish and vnctious li∣quids & their con∣creats, as. 1. All kind of Sopes, whe∣ther they bee black∣sopes, sweet-sopes, or white-sopes. 2. Any other compound Hydrelick, which here∣after may bee deuised or found out, by the said S. Sturteuant his inuentiō. And so sorth, as it shall bee further mentioned and enlarged in the printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 7. Hydrometallica. HYdrometallica is an Ignick inuention, which with the same furnace, maketh at the same time, Me∣talique Materials, and Hydrelick Materials, both to∣gether, by meanes of Metallicall instruments, where∣vpon the Materials, made and brought forth by this Art, are procreated as pares, twins and couples, and are called from hence Hydrometalicks. The contents of Hydrometallica, beeing an Inuention compounded of two kinds, is diuerse and manifold, according to the seuerall coupling and ioyning of the opposite simples together.
As for example 2. Mettle-stones prepared and hot-waters. 1. Irons and hot-waters. 3. Leads and hot-waters. 4. Tins and hot-waters. 5. Glasse-mettle & hot-waters, and so other couples of opposite Metaliques and Hy∣drelicks. And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned, and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica. SECT. 8. Hydropressoria. HYdropressoria, is an Ignick inuention, which with the same fire, and the same furnace, maketh at the same time Pres-wares & Hydrelick Materials both to∣gether, by the meanes of the Metallicall instruments, wherevpon the Materials made and brought forth by this Art, are procreated, as pares, twins, or couples, and are called from hence Hydro presswares. The contents of Hydropressoria, beeing an Inuention compounded of two kinds, is diuers and manifold, according to the seuerall coupling and ioyning of the opposite simples together. As for example. 1. Prest-pipes and hot-waters. 2. Prest-tiles and hot-waters. 3. Prest-bricks and hot-waters. 4. Prest-monions and hot-waters. 5. And such like combination & couples. And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica.
SECT. 9. Hydroterrica. HYdroterrica is an Ignicke inuention, which with the same fire, and the same furnace, maketh at the same time, Terricke materials, and Hydrelicke materials both together, by meanes of metallicall instruments, whereupon the materials made, and brought forth by this art, are procreated as pares, twins, or couples, and are called from hence Hydroterrickes. The contents of Hydroterrica, being an Inuention compounded of two kinds, is diuers and manifold, according to the seueral coupling, and ioyning of the opposite simples together, as. Burnt-earth, and hot-water. As for Example. 1. Bricks, and hot-water. 2. Tiles, and hot-water. 3. Potter-ware, and hot-water. 4. And such like combination, & couples. And so forth, as it shall be further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica. Note also that the compound arts, being rightly and discreetely performed, are farre more profitable,
then the practise of the single arts alone, and the rea∣son is, because that by such a compound furnace, two different workes are done at once, and in a manner with the same charge. And these are the seuen seuerall heads, and kindes of inuentions: The generall whereof is called Ignime∣tallica. There are also diuers other new Arts, and inuenti∣ons, which worke not with fire, al which arise (in respect of the meanes and instruments) from the former, And therefore, the generall of them all, is called Ignime∣tallica, or Metall-organica, as was specified before. SECT. 10. Metall-organica. MEtall-organica is an inuention Ignicke, for the cheaper making, & acquiring of diuerse profitable things, workes, and materials, by the meanes of the Metallicall instruments, fire onely excepted, whereup∣on, the things made and acquired by this art, are cal∣led Metall-organickes. Metall-organica, comprehendeth many worthie in∣uentions, whereof these seuen are principall, euery one of them making royalties a peece, excepting the wood pleite art. First, then there is a new art and inuention, Metal∣lorganicke, with cheifely, by meanes of Plegnicke in∣struments, maketh a new kinde of water-milnes, wind-milnes,
and winde water milnes, and a new kinde of horse-milnes, and hand-milnes, for the grinding of corne, tanners barke, brazill, for the sawing of woods, making of oiles, battering of Irons and coppers, and for tuckeage, and fulleage of wollen cloath, or yeallow oyled leathers, or for any other vse or purpose what∣soeuer, which other milnes are ordinarily turned in∣to. And these Metalorganicke milnes, are lesse charge∣able to make, set vp, keepe and repaire, and yet more necessarie and conuenient, then the ordinarie sort of milnes, which be now in vse. Secondly, there is another new art and inuention, Metallorganicke, which chiefly by meanes of Plegnicke instruments, maketh also an artificiall kind of water∣worke, for the aboundant raising and mounting of wa∣ter, after an easier order, then those that are already in vse in the common wealth. Thirdly, there is another new art and inuention Me∣tallorganicke, which chiefly by meanes of Plegnicke & Lenick instruments, ioyntly together, maketh singular, effectuall and most excellent deuices. and meanes for the dreyning and drying of marshes, fennes, and low-grounds. Fourthly, there is another new art and inuention Metallorganicke, which chiefly by meanes of Plegnike and Lenicke instruments, ioyntly together, maketh sin∣gular, effectual & most excellent deuises & meanes for the ridding, clearing, and mounting of waters out of Colepits & Minerals, the like was neuer in vse or prac∣tize before.
And here the Ballance engin, made of presswares, is of great and worthie good vse. Fiftly, there is another new art and inuention Me∣talorganicke, which chiefely by meanes of Plegnicke, Lenicke, and Caminicke instruments, ioyntely together maketh singular, effectuall and most excellent deuises for the firtelizing, hartening, and improuing of pas∣ture ground, corne ground, and all other barren grounds whatsoeuer. Sixtly, there is another new art and inuention Me∣tallerganicke, which chiefely by meanes of the Pleg∣nicke instuments, maketh very effectuall and benefici∣all instruments of fishing, as new kinde of Burces, new kinde of Nettage, and Bateage, by which new deuised meanes great aboundance of fish may be caught with farre lesse charges, and in shorter time, then by the ordinary arts of fishing. Seuenthly, there is another new art and inuention, Metallorganicke, which chiefly by meanes of the Pleg∣nicke instruments maketh diuerse kinds of househould moueables, as artificial Dores, Windowes, Curteines, Presses, Tables, Stooles, Beadsteds, Hangings, Chests, and diuers other things, handsomer & more conueni∣ent then heretofore is done by the ordinatie way of o∣ther stuffe. Where note, that the Materials made by this Me∣chanicke art, are called wood-pleits. And so forth, as it shall bee further mentioned and enlarged in the Printed treatise of Metallica.
CAP. 3. Heuretica defined and deuided into his reall and Tecknick parts. R. 6. SIR yoù hauing thus set downe both the Transcript of his Maiesties Indenture and the Schedules anexed, I pray you proceed more fully to entreat of the doctrine of Metallica, which seemeth to be handled in the next place. A. It appeareth out of the first Section of the Sche∣dules, annexed to the Patent, that the doctrine of Me∣tallica cannot distinctly be knowne or Methodically expressed, except that the art which prescribeth pre∣cepts, general to all arts and Inuentions, called Heure∣tica, be first precognized. R. 7. Define therefore breefely Heuretica. A. Heuretica is the Art of Inuentions, teaching how to find out new, and to iudge of the old. R. 8. What deuision is there for Heuretica? A. The doctrine of Inuentions hath two parts Re∣all and Technick. R. 9. Define the Reall part. A. Reall is the first Part of Heuretica, which treateth of the Instruments and Reall things, which belong to the Inuentions. R. 10. How is the reall part deuided;
A. The Reall part spreadeth it selfe into two bran∣ches, whereof the first is called Organick, and the o∣ther Emporeuticall or Polecall. R. 11. Define the Organick part. A. The organick is a part of Heuretica, which set∣teth downe the meanes and Instruments, whereby the work of Art, intended, is brought forth, made and effected, R. 12. Define the Emporeuticall or Poleck part. A. The Emporeutick is an Organick part of Heure∣tica, which treateth of the worke of the art, which are commodities and wares for vse and sale, wherby pro∣fit is raised. Where note that the comodities, wares and things of euery inuention, for generall vse, are called from this part Emporeuticks. Note also, that Emporeuticks, being things artifici∣all, are also fitly called materialls, but if they be natu∣rall, they are called things accquired by the art. So fish and foule are the Emporeutick things, acquired by the art of fishing and fouling, but lead and Iron are Emporeutick Materials made & wrought by Me∣tallicque art. R. 13. Define the Technick part. A. The Technick is that habituall part of Heuretica, which treateth of the dexterous habit and faculty wherewith all the Artizands are to be quallified and endowed, who are apointed to make the Emporeutick workes of Inuentions,
CAP. 4. Another partition of Heuretica and an Inuention Mecha∣nick defined. R. 14 WHat other diuision is there for Heuretica? A Heuretica in respect of the worke inten∣ded is diuided into two parts, namely, into the Scientiffick part and Mechanick part. R. 15. Define the Scientiffick part. A. The Scientiffick is that part of Heuretica which prescribeth prceepts generall to all liberall arts, the end of which Arts, is cheefely Science or knowledge and not any reall visible worke, or sensible thing. R. Define the Mechanick part. A. The Mechanick part is that part of Heuretica which prescribeth precepts generall to all illiberall arts, the end of which arts is cheefly a reall visible work or sensible thing. And the Inuention in this kind is called an Inuen∣tion Mechanick. R. 16. Define therefore an Inuention Mechanick. A. A Mechanick Inuention is the art of the Inuen∣tor, which by effectuall Instruments and meanes brin∣geth forth some new visible or sensible worke good and profitable to the common-wealth.
So the Inuention of printing is the skill and art of Faustus Guttenbergius, which mistery (by the effectual deuised means of the Presse, the Incke, the Characters and paper) bringeth forth impressions and Bookes, which Mechanick workes are profitable and good for mans vse. Where note, that, First the Mechanick Art, second∣ly the Instruments and meanes, thirdly the worke of the art, made by those Instruments, and meanes, are all called Mechanicks, and are all Inuentions in respect of the Author that deuised them. R. 17. Expresse further euery word and clause of this definition, to the intent that I may the better vn∣derstand them. A. Your desire shall bee satisfied. First then to speake of the thing defined, you must note that any other de∣uice, course or way which bringeth forth no externall or Materiall worke, are also in respect of the Inuentor tearmed Inuentions. So the first discouery of the west Indies by Colum∣bus, (in respect of him) is fitly called his Inuention, and the turning point of Nauigation called the Cape of bona Sperança is Gaymus his inuention the like may be said of fretum Magellanicum, and fretum Dauies, which although they are laudable Inuentions, disco∣uered by ingenious & venturous persons, yet cannot they be said to be Mecanicks. because they produce or leaue behind them Mechanick work, nor had any Me∣chanick instruments made by hands of man directly,
and of purpose for the performance of them, for these Mechanicks are onely propper to these kinds of inuentions which wee treate of. R. 18. Wherefore call you an inuention a Mecha∣nick Arte. A. To put a distinction betweene these inuentions Mechanicall, and other inuentions of the liberall Arts and Sciences, of which sort are Logick, Rheto∣rick, Grammer, and the Mathematicall sciences, all which had their first Authours and Inuentors. R. 19. Wherfore say you the art of Inuentioner. A. To shew that there is no Inuention without re∣lation to the Inuentioner. R. 20. Why then it seemeth that all Arts, sciences, mysteries, trades, crafts, things and deuises, which are now extant in the common-wealth, are, and may bee called Inuentions. A. Yea verily so they may, if wee respect the In∣uentioner, and first Authors of them, but if we re∣spect the persons that vse and put in practize the said Inuentions at the second hand, as we say, such as are the Artificers, Tradesmen and others that make the said Mechanick workes, in respect of these secondary persons they are called Arts, Trades, Crafts, Sy∣ences, Misteries, Occupations, Professions, and slightes, &c. So the printing, as also the Presse, the Paper, the Characters, together with the works done, as impres∣sions, bookes, and vollumes, in respect of Faustus are his Inuention, but in respect of Printers, which now
a dayes worke by his inuention, Printing is rightly called an arte, trade, or mistery, the like may bee said of all other Mechanicall trades now extant in the common-wealth, and of all other profitable inuenti∣ons, which here-after may be brought to light in the common-wealth. R. 21. To what vse serueth the knowledge of this. A. This fitly serueth to refute the erronious folly of such shallow simple persons, which cannot abide any new inuentiō, which this our age bringeth forth, they vtterly distaste both the proiects and Inuentors, they forsooth (as they say) will giue no assistance, they will not meddle nor deale with them, they will not vse their new worke, though neuer so good and pro∣fitable, nay they say more, after their fond fashion, it will neuer prooue good, or come to passe, with a hundred such like speeches, tending to the dispraise both of the Inuentioner, and of things deuised by him, but being demanded for their reason, they haue none to alleadge, except onely a womans reason, like vnto that of the Epigrammatist: Non amo te Volusi, non possum dicere quare, Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te. But if these men, who so much spurne at inuentions, did well consider, that all ancient Mechanick trades, occupations, professions and workes, which now are in vse in the common-wealth, were new at the first, and had their beginning and infancy, and how they
were then the peculiar inuentions of some ingenious wits, who trauelled with all their endeuours to bring forth the said inuentions, to the good of that age wherein they liued. If I say they did well, consider and ponder this, they would not be so auerse and bitter against laudable, and good proiects, brought forth now a dayes, for with as good reason they might en∣ueigh against printing, shipping, milning and buil∣dings, against the ordinary waies of making of salts, alloms, coppresses, and saultpeeter, against the trade and art of making of hats, and knit-stockings, shooes, bootes, and apparell, against the art and trade of ma∣king of saddles, carts, ploughes, harrowes, and a∣gainst the art of melting, founding, and casting of mettles, of forging, hammering, and battering of irons, brasse, peuters, siluer, and gould; and final∣ly against all other trades, occupations, vocations, and professions in the common-wealth, as so basely to regard and esteeme the proffitable and new in∣uentions of our daies. Againe, in scorning, and con∣temning of profitable businesse of late inuention, they set themselues not onely against man, but also against the spirit of God, who is the authour of the said gifts, and first worke of them in man, as it is expressely taught in the 31. of Exodus: in the example of two worthy inuentioners, and artificers, the wordes of the text are these. Behold (saith God to Moses) I haue called by name Bezaleele the sonne of Vri, the sonne of Hur, of the tribe of Iuda, whom I haue filled with the spirit of God in wisedome and
in vnderstanding, and in knowledge, and in all worke∣manship, to finde out curious workes, to worke in gold, in siluer, and in brasse. Also the Art to set stones, and to carue in timber, and to worke in all manner of workemanship. And behold I haue ioy∣ned with him Aholiab, the sonne of Ahisamah of the tribe of Dan, and in the hearts of all that are wise-harted, I haue put wisedome to make all that I haue commanded thee. Out of which words of holy Scripture it is apparent that all Mechanicke Arts and Inuentions, as well as the graces of saluation, are the peculiar workes, and gifts of Gods holy spirit in man, which bloweth where, and when he listeth, and powreth out his spi∣rit, vpon some men in euery age. CAP. 5. Transient instrumentall meanes. R. 22. In the definition of the Organicke part, you say that the worke is produced by instruments and meanes, I would therefore know of you, how many kindes of instruments and meanes there are to effect a new businesse. A. The Organick things for the effecting of a new Inuention are of two sorts, Permanent or Transient. R. 23. Describe the Transient Instrument and meanes.
A Instruments and means are said to be Transient, when in respect of their vse, they serue but once for that imployment for which they were appointed, so fuell and oare are Transient, because they wast and consume in that Materiall which they make. R. 24. How many kindes are there of this Transi∣ent sort A. Two: Efficientall, or Materiall. R. 25. Describe the Efficientall Instruments. A. Efficientall are such Transient Instruments and meanes as vanish and consume away in their first vse, whilst they are performing their operation and efficiency to produce the pretended Mechanick work, as namely the fuell or fiering in euery businesse. R. 26. Describe the Materiall Instruments. A. Materiall, are such Transient Instruments and meanes wherof the Instruments consist and are made, not vading or vanishing away, but remaining trans∣formed or altered in the substance of the thing ef∣fected, as namely the stuffe and matter of euery Me∣chanick instrument. CAPVT. 6. Permanent Instruments and meanes. R. 27. I vnderstand well the Transient instruments, with their seuerall kindes, pray you describe the permanent. A. Instruments and meanes are said to be perma∣nent when as they serue to performe their operations
diuerse times (to wit) in this thing, in that thing, and in many others, of this sort are all tooles in euery trade, all kilnes, furnaces, ouens, hearthes, in euery trade. If we respect the first making and creation of permanent instruments, then must we consider their efficientall, and materiall meanes also. R. 28. How many kindes are their of this sort. A. Two, for these permanent meanes, are either personall, as namely the workeman and artificers in euery action; or else impersonall, of which sort are all other instruments of the businesse. R. 29. How many sorts of workemen are there for euery inuention. A. Two, primary, and annuall, primarie as the in∣uentioner to guide, and artificers to make, the annuall are the daily workemen which make the Mechanicke. R. 30. How many artificers are necessarie for the prymarie, and first foundation of mechanicke inuen∣tions. A. These subsequent are most necessarie, as namely; Ioyners, Carpenters, Smithes, Brickelayers, Masons, whereunto in seuerall inuentions, diuerse other Arti∣ficers are to be added, as occasion serueth, as Shoo∣makers, Glouers, Bellowes-makers &c. R. 31. How many sorts of annuall workemen are necessarie for the yearely managing of an inuention. A. Two, the maister and ouerseer, or his appren∣tices, or seruants, which make the mechanicke worke, And secondly, the repairationers, which maintaine and mend the instruments and meanes which at the
first they made and formed. R. 32. What distribution haue you for imperso∣nall instruments. A. The impersonall instruments, are either gene∣rall or speciall, the generall is the worke-house where∣in other instruments doe their operations, worke and imployment, and vnder this head we comprehend the ground, place, yard, or roome, where the Mechanicke businesse is wrought or done. The speciall impersonall instruments, are all other impersonall instruments, besides the worke-house or place. Amongst which impersonall instruments furnacing may here bee briefely touched as being a necessarie instrument in most inuentions. R. 33. How define you a furnace. A. A furnace is the artificiall receptacle, which beareth and conteineth fewell and the fire. R. 34. How may kindes are comprehended vnder this head of furnacing. A. Diuerse, as namely all kinde of ouens, lamps, stoues, kilnes, hearths, all which we generally com∣prehend vnder the name of Furnacing. CAP. 7. Instruments and meanes procured and meerely opperatiue, monies and charges of a businesse. R. 35. WHat other distribution haue you of instru∣ments, and meanes of a busines, in respect of charges.
A. Organicke meanes of a Mechanicke, are either procuring, or meerely opperatiue. The procuring meanes is monie to be impended and disbursed in charges. It is the instrument of instruments, and meane of meanes, procuring all other instruments and meanes meerely opperatiue, and when once they are procured and prouided by it, it measureth their worth and val∣luation, whereupon Aristotle calleth it, communis men∣sura omnium. R. 36. What is generally to be knowne and con∣sidered, concerning the monies to be disbursed in a busines. A. Monies or charges of a busines, are either pri∣marie and once impended, or else annuall, and at cer∣taine times to be renewed. R. 37. What differēces are their of primary monies. A. Primary monies are either disbursements about the first foundation, or about the tryall. R. 38. What call you fundamentall charges. A. Charges of foundation are all such primary monies which are to be disbursed at the first erection or setting vp of a new businesse, or of grand Mecha∣nickes, in some one conuenient place, whereby a worke-house is furnished with all permanent necessary tooles and instruments. R. What call you charges of tryall. A. Charges of tryall are the primary monies which are bestowed and disbursed about the tryall and experimenting of an inuention or new businesse.
R. 40. Wherein consisteth the chiefe charges of tryall. A. The triall monies are to be disbursed first about the Theoricke instruments, and meanes of an inuenti∣on, that is the whole description of an inuention. Whether it be by way of manuscript writings, or prin∣ted treatises. Secondly, about the moddles of an inuention, whe∣ther they be superficiall, or reall, motionall or directi∣onall. And lastly about the erection and foundation of the Protoplast, vnto which al the other grand mecha∣nickes are to be conformed. R. 41. Concerning the charge of tryall, what is fittest for an Inuentioner to demaund of them that are willing to deale in a new businesse. It is the wisest, safest, and most credible course for the Inuentioner, not to aske vnder-hand, whereby he shall be driuen to repaire to them againe the second time, but rather at the first let him aske and agree for more monie, and not for lesse then will serue the turne. R. 42. What other chiefe rules ought an Inuenti∣oner carefully to obserue in the practise and tryall of any new inuention. A. That he may make tryall and put in practise his new deuise and inuention with good successe and to purpose, let him alwaies well remember these sub∣sequent rules. 1. Make things stronger, then that exact strength
which the thing is to haue. 2. Make things greater then that exact greatnesse which the thing is to haue. 3. And therefore make thinges longer, broa∣der, thicker and wider, then that exact length, breadth, thicknesse and widenesse that the thing is to haue. 4 Make more in number then that exact number which is required to serue the turne. 5. Take longer time for a new busines then will serue the turne. 6 For quallities as hardnes, softnes, drinesse, moistnes, stiffnes, toughnes, &c. obserue this Rule. Let things be tempered to a greater quallity then will serue the turne. 7. Yet if the Inuentioner can make the thing in the exact truth, then let him do it accordingly, for this is alwaies least chargeable. R. 43. In the first triall of things can the Inuentio∣ner perfectly hit on the exactnesse of euery particular instrument and means belonging to the new busines. A. The Vndertakers and dealers are to expect some losse in triall of new businesses, be the Inuentio∣ner neuer so perfect in his Theorick; for although he do his best indeauor, and giue perfect directions to his workmen and Artificers, yet they will often faile and erre in their worke, by which meanes the instru∣ment being experimented and put to triall, becometh
insufficient, for the appointed vse, and many times the Inuentioner in some one point may faile himselfe; for which there is no helpe but only to redresse and amend the fault in the instrument, or else to make a new instrument in the others stead, neither of which can be done but with further charge. R. 44. What call you the Annuall charges of an inuention. A. Annuall, are such monyes which from time to time, vpon occasion, are bestowed after the first Plan∣tation vppon the repairing, maintaining, and conti∣nuing the said primary instruments belonging to the said new businesse. CAPVT. 8. Inuentions intermixtand pure moddle, Protoplast and grand Mechanick defined. YOu haue handled the doctrine of the generall meanes and Instruments of Inuentions, proceed I pray you to speake of the differences and diuers kindes of Inuentions, and First therefore I desire to know.
R. 45. How many sorts or kindes of Inuention are there being compared or considered one with an∣other? A. Two, An Inuention is either pure or intermixt, an Inuention is said to bee pure and entire within it selfe, when as none of the parts essentiall are common to any other Inuention for the same vse. Intermixt when as some of the parts are found in some other former inuention. So a Windmill is an intermixt Inuention, because some of the partes, as namely the Milne stones, the rong-wheeles and the Cogg-wheeles were first ex∣tant in awater-milne or horse-milne and quernes. But a hand-Querne was a pure and simple Inuenti∣on because none of the parts there of were formerly extant in any other Mechanick. And so printing is a pure and simple Inuention, be∣cause none of the essentiall parts thereof were taken from any former Inuention, where they were appli∣ed to the same vse. Where note that the common parts of an inter∣mixt Inuention are to be esteemed as propper and peculiar to the same Inuention, when as they are conioyned and mixed in with other new things Instru∣ments and meanes, which are the essentiall parts of the new deuise. R. 46. What other distribution haue you of an in¦uention in respect of magnitude. A. In respect of greatnesse or quantity, there are
three sorts of inuentions, namely the Moddle, the Protoplast, and the grand Mechanick. R. 47. Describe the Moddle. A. The Moddle is a Mechanick, which onely re∣presenteth and decyphereth, in some little platforme, the true part and lineaments of the Mechanick in∣uention, beeing insufficient to yeeld any Emporeu∣tick vse of the inuention. So the Moddle of a winde-milne, representeth the failes and other parts of Fabrick and structure, but grindeth no corne. Where note, that some times the moddle is to be made greater then the Mechanick, esp ecially in small curious things, as in a watch, and such like. R. 48. How many sorts of moddles are there. A. Two, Superficiall and Reall. The Superficiall describeth onely the parts and line aments in paper, bordes or past-bords, by lim∣ning, drawing, or painting, shewing no action or opperation, nor corporall dimensions of the parts. A Reall moddle is that which sheweth euery part of the greater Mechanick, in a true and liuely (though little) proportion, hauing his parts fitted for motion, action, or opperation: Neuerthelesse it is not so effectuall or fully vse-full, beeing onely re∣presentatiue, as was touched before. So a little ship, which you haue hanging vp in a marchants house, is the Reall moddle of a grand ship or sea vessell, because it representeth euery part and action thereof.
R. 49. What is the principall vse of a Reall Mod∣dle. A. The cheefest vse of a reall moddle is that the Inuention may thereby more perfectly and exactly direct both himselfe, and also guide his workmen for the finishing of any grander Mechanick of the same kind, thereby the better to produce and bring forth the Theorick conceiued in his mind into the grand Reall Inuention. So the vse of a small reall moddle of a Wind-milne serueth uery fitly to direct both the Inuentor himselfe and likewise all his Carpenters and other workmen, to proceed infallibly to build and set vp a reall and grand windmilne intended to be made. R. 50. How many sorts of reall moddles are there. A. There are two sorts, for either they are meerely directionall or also motionall. Directionall is that moddle which is made only to direct and guide the Artificer in the dimensions of all the parts, as also for to direct them for the kinds of the matter and the stuffe that they are to haue to make the engin intended. R. 51. What is the fittest and cheapest stuffe to make a directionall moddle of. A. Past-boordes and reedes are the fittest either for Iron-works or woodworks, wherof the Past-bords are in stead of boordes, plancks and bed-sides. And the Reeds are to represent round Cylindriack timber, as also other square timber, as namely single
quarters, double quarters, puncheons, rafters, tran∣summes &c. So that of these the Inuentioner may fitly and spee∣dily make and contriue the fabricke and structure of any directionall moddle. R. 52. What call you a motionall moddle. A. A motionall is that moddle Reall which is made compleat in euery part, hauing his true vse, op∣peration and motion, as in the grander Mechanickes, yet hauing no Emporeuticke commodity, but onely for shew and tryall, and not for sale and vse. There are three degrees in this motionall moddle, the meane moddle, the lesser then the meane, the greater then the meane. The meane moddle is a motionall, which hath his magnitude and greatnesse betweene the other ex∣treames, being the least chargeable to be made. And it is alwaies greater then the lesser motionall, and lesser then the greater motion all: and there is but one meane modle to be found in the progressiō of the same degres Where note that it belongeth principally to the Inuentioners skil and care to set forth the dimensions and parts of his moddle, intended with the least ex∣pence of charges that may be, and in the easiest and rediest manner for his workemen to vnderstand and imitate, or else he hitteth not vpon the meane mod∣dle, but vpon some other extreame. R. 53. Define the Protoplast. A. The Protoplast is an Inuention mechanick which first is set vp of that kind, and seruing to profitable
Emporeuticke vses, hauing all the principall parts, actions, and perfections, which all other subsequent grand Mechanicks ought to haue of the same kinde, which afterward are to be made and framed by it. So the first windmilne that the inuentioner euer set vp to grinde corne was the Protoplast and example from whence all other wind-milnes sprange and were deriued, the like may bee said of the first of euery kinde of Mechanicke, as of Faustus his first Printing Presse, &c. R. 54. Define a grand Mechanicke. A. The grand Mechanicke, is that which is set vp after the forme and tipe of his Protoplast, for the same vse and purpose, onely differing from the Protoplast in greatnesse, or with some profitable additions which later experience hath taught. So the Windmilnes in More-fields are Mechanicks of that kinde of inuention, for they are builded after the Archerype of the Protoplast which the inuentor first inuented and erected, seruing to the same vse of grinding of corne; they differ onely in this, they haue a deuise called the Crampe, which will sodenly stay (in the face of the storme) the violent motion or cir∣cumgyration of the wheeles, vntill the sales are taken downe or fardled vp.
CAP. 9. Innentions Heterocresious and Homocresious, primatiue, and deriuatiue, defined. Reader. 55. VVHat other distribution haue you of a Me∣chanick inuention, considered one with an other. A. Inuentions considered compasatiuely one with another, haue two differences, for they are eyther Heterocresious, or else Homocresious. Heterocresious, are inuentions which produce diffe∣rent Mechanick workes, wares and commodities. So milning and shipping are two Heterocresious in∣uentions, because the worke of the one is meale or flower, and the worke of the other is carriage or transportage. R. 56. Define Homocresious Inuentions. A. Homocresious inuentions, are such which pro∣duce and bring forth Emporeuticall workes for the same vse. So a horse-milne, a water milne, a wind-milne are Homocresious, because they all grinde flower, though after different manner and wayes. R. 57. What distribution haue you for Homo∣cresious. A. An Inuention Homocresious, is either primatiue or deriuatiue, the primatiue is that which was the
first in vse in the world of the same kinde. So a Pestle and a Morter is a primatiue inuention, because it was first vsed for to beat and bruse corne in∣to meale and powder, and at this day it is still vsed to grinde eaten grotes, but a hand-querne, a hors-milne, a winde-milne, and a water-milne, are Inuentions de∣riuatiue, all which were found out in succession of time, long after the pestle and the mortar. R. 58. Giue some other illustrious examples of primatiue and deriuatiue inuentions. A. In matters of literature, the Art of writing with the pen, is a worthy primatiue inuention, both for writing and reading, found out by Moses, that learned Leuite and thrice holy Prophet, the deriuatiue inuen∣tion, whereof is Printing, a far more exquisite mistery deuised of late yeares by Faustus Guttenbergius. So in husbandry the Spade, the Rake, and Shouell, was a worthy primatiue inuention of Adam, for the tillage and sowing of the ground, according to that ancient and old prouerbe. When Adam digged, and Eue span, Who was then a Gentleman. But the Plough and the Harrow are their deriua∣tiue inuentions, which for the vses of husbandry doe farre exceed them, for by them more worke of tillage of the ground may be done in one day with the same charge, then could be done by their primatiue inuen∣tions in twenty dayes.
Againe the Barrow which carrieth burdens from places is a primatiue inuention, but the Cart with wheeles is a far more excellent deriued Mechanick, be∣cause it carrieth more in one day, then the primatiue can doe in ten dayes with the same charges. And this Inuention of round wheeles to draw and carry loades with a small strength vndoubtedly was grounded on this Geometricall axiom, Circulus tangit planum vnico puncto, for if the wheeles should haue beene made square, trencher wise, or in any other po∣ly-angle, forty horses would not so easily draw them beeing laden, as two doth now with both speed and ease. And thus much for the example of primatiue and deriuatiue Inuentions. Where note, that the deriuatiue must alwayes bee of a greater vse, and doe more good in the common wealth, then the primatiue, or else it is not to bee receiued. Note also, if there be many deriuatiues in the same kinde, the latter inuention must alwayes better the former, and beeing all of them compared and ranck∣ed with their primatiue, they make an Inuentionall progression, one exceeding an other, in goodnesse and vse, amongst which, the last of all ought to bee the best, and is therefore called the Eumechanick in the progression of that kinde. R. 59. Giue some examples of Inuentionall pro∣gression. A. I will satisfie your desire, and first in matter of husbandry, for the making of bread, which maintei∣neth
the life of man, there is a progression of these fiue Inuentions. First the Mortar, secondly the Hand-querne, thirdly the Horse-milne, fourthly the Water-milne, fiftly the Winde-milne. To which if we adde the inuention of the Plegnick Milne, it maketh vp the sixt, and is the Eumechanick of that kinde. Secondly, in hose or stockings, there is a progressi∣on of three, cloth or kersey stockings, which were first in vse: Secondly in knit stockings with Needles: Thirdly, and lastly, in knit stockings with loome, which is a late Inuention of one Maister Lee. Thirdly, in vessels of drinking, there is a large progression. For first, to pretermit the cup of the hand, out of which Adam and Gedeons three hun∣dred Souldiers dranke, Iudg. 7.6. There is secondly the earthen Pitcher, which the Samaritane woman had at the Well: and the third roome came vp the vse of the black Leather Iacks, an ancient drinking vessell of our natiue countrymen, and the fourth place sprung vp the vse of Tankards and Wodden Kans, in the fift out of Hornes, in the sixt Silues, Gould, greene-Glasse, Venice glasse, and Peuter. All inuentions, for the most part, of latter times, are deriuatiue, & the Inuentioners are to make choice of this kinde, and needeth the lesse to spend his time about any primatiue deuice.
CAP. 10. Inuentions organicall and emporeuticall: The parts and adiuncts: The Theoricke and Prac∣ticke of an Inuention Organicall. R. 60. VVhat other distribution is their of an inuenti∣on Mechanicke. A. An inuention Mechanicke, in respect of vse is either Organicall or Emporeuticall. An Inuention Organicall is that artificiall fabricke or structure compacted of all impersonall instruments and meanes which make the Emporeuticke comodi∣ties. So the windmilne considered in it selfe is the com∣pact, structure or fabricke, which comprehendeth all permanent instruments and meanes which produce, yeeld, and bring forth meale or flower. But the flower and meale thus ground and made by the windemilne Engin is fitly called the inuention emporeuticall. So likewise the whole structure and complement of all the permanent, and impersonall instruments, and meanes which make vp the Ferricall furnace, is ter∣med the inuention. R. 61. What differences haue you for the parts of an Inuention Organicall. A. The parts of an inuention Organicall, are ei∣ther essentiall or inessentiall, comon or peculiar Orga∣nicall.
But the earth-coale iron which is made by the said complement, and panoply of instruments is fitly called the Emporeuticall inuention of the Author or Inuentor. R. 62. Describe the essentiall parts of an inuenti∣on Organicall. A. The essentiall part of an inuention Organicall is any maine and chiefe member, whereby the engin is well enabled to performe his worke and operation, which being lacking, the other parts of the engin be∣come ineffectuall, and inoperatiue, for the producing the Emporeuticke intended. So a windmilne consisteth of all hisessential parts, besides his crosse sales is ineffectuall and not able to grinde corne, the like may be said if it lacke a cog∣wheele, a ronge wheele, a milne-stone, or any other essentiall part. R. 63. Describe an inessentiall part of an Inuenti∣on Organicall. A. An inessentiall part is an additament, which in∣deede somewhat bettereth and helpeth the Inuention, when it is added to the maine complement of the Ma∣chin, or Engin, yet being lacking and not vsed, it taketh not away the opperation or worke of the inuention or engin: of this sort, is the crampe of a windmilne, which is a very good and worthy addittament, found out by some ingenious Milner of late, and it is able to hold the crosse sales immoueable, euen in the very blast of a storme.
Yet wind-milnes which haue not nor had not this later addition of the crampe doe daily grinde corne aswell as other wind-milnes which are there withall furnished. But in a storme they are driuen to this inconueni∣ence: that three or foure must presently goe downe to turne their crosse failes out of the winde, that they may take downe and fardle vp their sailes. So likewise the brasse plate and the rouling girth are necessarie and conuenient additions in the engin of the Printing Presse, and both of them were of late yeares first deuised (as it is said) by one Maister Haruie an ingenious Printer in Lon∣don. Yet before they were added or vsed in the mistery of Printing, Faustus his inuention was absolute and compleate of it selfe. R. 64 Describe the common parts of an inuenti∣on Organicall. The common parts are such as are borrowed from other trades, occupations and misteries formerly in∣uented and in vse, and now adioyned and mixed in, amongst the new parts of the Inuention. R. 65. What call you the peculiar parts of an in∣uention. A. The peculiar parts are such as are proper and of the essence of the inuention, not being taken from any other Mechanicke, formerly in vse. So the sayles, the milne-post, the spurs of a wind-milne are his peculiar parts, but the cogge-wheeles,
ronge-wheeles, and milnestones are common parts as being assumed and borrowed from the horse-milne and water-milne formerly in vse. R. 66. What differences haue you for the ad∣iuncts of an inuention Organicall. A. The adiuncts of an inuention Organicall haue the same differences, which the parts of an inuention had before. For the adiuncts are either essentiall or inessentiall, common or peculiar, the nature and distinction of which differences may be easily conceiued and vnder∣stood by the descriptions of the former seuerall parts. R. 67. What other differences haue you for the adiuncts of an inuention Organicall. A. The adiuncts of an inuention Organicall are also necessarie or lesse necessarie. Necessarie adiuncts are all such which of necessitie are to be vsed for the producing of the intended Me∣chanicke. And the lesse necessarie are all such which bringes some small helpe to make and bringe forth the Em∣poreuticke. R. 68. What distribution haue you of an inuenti∣on Organicall. A. An inuention is said to haue a Theoricke or a Practicke. R. 69. What call you Theoricke Inuention. A. The Theoricke of an inuention is the decla∣ration of the contents thereof by a plaine and fa∣miliar discription, and that either by manuscript
writings or by printed treatises. R. 70. What Arguments are cheefe for the de∣scription of an Inuention. A. The arguments of the parts and adiuncts, or the Arguments of Instruments and meanes. R. 71. Do the parts, and adiuncts, and Instruments, and meanes, expresse diuers meanes. A. No, for by parts and adiuncts are vnderstood the selfe same things, which are meant by instruments and meanes, but yet in diuers and different respects: for they are called parts and adiuncts in respect that the Mechanick Engin subsisteth & consisteth of them, but in respect of the Emporeutick, which is made by them, the said partes and adiuncts are fitly called In∣struments and meanes. So a printing Presse hath his seuerall parts, whervp∣on it doth consist, as the screw, the nut, the pare-tree and the chase, &c. it hath also his adiuncts belonging to it, as the Inck and the Inck-bals &c. which said parts and adiuncts of the Presse considered, with the prin∣ted papers, bookes and impressions which are the sale∣able Emporeutick workes. I say in this respect they are called Instruments and meanes whereby printed Bookes are atteined vnto. R 72. Define a practick of an Inuention. A The practick of an Inuention is that which is made in reall parts and adiunct, according to the de∣scription of the Theorick of an inuention. So if you describe an Iron furnace by euery part and adiunct which belongeth therunto, such a discrip∣tion
is called the Theorick of a Furnace, but afterward if you make a real Furnace, either of moddle, stuffe or of brick, clay, or earth, according to the description & Theorick proportions, then such a Furnace is called the practick of a Furnace, the like may be said of any other Mechanick or Engin. R. 73. What cannons haue you of an inuention in respect of the Theorick. A. The Theorick of an Inuention is to be descri∣bed by his parts and adiuncts that other mens labours and indeauors bee incroached vppon or forestalled thereby. CAP. 11. An Inuention triable and vntriable conforma∣ble and inconformable, Royall and Coppy-hold. R. 74 WHat other kindes or sorts haue you of an In∣uention. A. An Inuention is two fould, An Inuenti∣on of discouery, or an inuention of experiment, or an Inuention is triable, or vntriable. R. 75. What call you a triable Inuention. A. A triable Iuuention is an inuention whose worth and goodnesse cannot certainly appeare be∣fore trialls and experiments be made, not only in the moddles thereof, but also in the Protop last it selfe. Of this sort, are all the Inuentions Metallicall, comprised in the Patent and also the Inuention called the Register for generall commerce.
R. 76. Define an inuention vntriable. A. An vntryable inuention is a new proiect or discouery, whose worth and goodnesse requireth no tryals, but may bee iudged and discerned onely by the discription or declaration of the plot and pro∣iect. Of this sort are all Monopolies, new customes, im∣posts, taxations, subsidies, statutes, with fines, and diuers other state businesses, discoueries and inuenti∣ons, which are ordinarily propounded or petitioned of his Maiestie. Of this sort is Sepherica, a late inuention of the Authours, the proiect and contents whereof shall be handled in a treatise called Sepherica. R. 77. How many sorts of tryable inuentions are there. A. An inuention tryable is either conformeable or inconformeable. R. 78. Define a conformeable inuention. A. A conformeable inuention is an inuention try∣able which reformeth and bettereth a former inuenti∣on (requiring but some small and not chargeable alte∣ration) after that the new is vnited to the ould. So the Iron furnaces, fineries and chafferies may be much reformed and bettered with small charges, hauing our Ferricall inuention vnited to them, and therefore the Ferricall inuention is fitly called a con∣formeable inuention. R. 79. What Cannons or rules haue you for a conformeable inuention.
A. Conformeable inuention being priueledged is farre more beneficiall and commodious to the Pat∣tentees & the dealers in that busines, thē an inconfor∣mable inuention, and the reason is because that ime∣diatly after the grand tryals are brought to passe and performed in the Protoplast, they may choose whe∣ther they will be at any further charge, and yet they may raise present rent and benefit by conforming of the former inuentions to the Protoplast, and not at theirs, but onely at the charges of the owners of for∣mer works and inuentions. R. 80. Define an inconformable inuention. A. An inuention is said to be inconformable whose Protoplast being erected and set vp, cannot be con∣formed to any former inuention in vse, where by yearely profits of conformity may be raised without charges to the Pattentees and dealers. So the presseware inuention maketh tiles and brickes, and all other clayworks, after a farre more gainefull and beneficiall manner then by the ordinary course, yet neuerthelesse it is an inconformable inuen∣tion, because that the ordinary Arts of tilemaking and brick-making cannot bee conformed vnto the Presse-ware Protoplast with some small alterations and small charges. R. 81. What Cannons or Rules haue you of an inconformable inuention. A. An inconformable inuention requireth a great stocke and great disbursements for the Pattentees,
to lay out, aswell for the Protaplest as also for some two or three grander Mechanicks thereof. Secondly an inconformable inuention after the e∣rection and perfection of the Protoplast in continew∣ance of time, may raise great rents and fines by licen∣ces, leases and deuises though no by present confor∣mity. R. 82. What other distribution haue you for an inuention Mechanicke. A. An inuention Mechanicke, is either priuiledg∣ed or vnpriuiledged, againe it is either a royaltie or a coppy-hould. A royaltie is such a new businesse, which in regard of the greatnesse thereof belongeth peculiarly to the King. Or a royaltie is an inuention Mechanicke which produceth extraordinarie and worthie yearely profits and reuenewes, whose valuation exceedeth the summe of ten thousand pounds. per annum. R. 83. Define a coppy-hould inuention. A. A Coppy-hould is an inuention whose yearely valuation and worth exceedeth not the summe of ten thousand pounds. per annum. 84. What cannons or rules haue you concerning royall or coppy-hould Inuentions. A. These Cannons belong to a Royall Inuention, first, no subiect or subiects, of what estate or degree soeuer by his seruice or demerit, except the Queene mother, the Kings children, is capeable of a whole en∣tire royaltie, and therefore if the King haue passed a∣way
way a royaltie, ignorantly, he may iustly recall and reuoke his graunt. Secondly, a subiect may by his seruice to his Prince and Country, demerit part or portion of a royaltie, it being no greater then a Coppy-hould. R. 85. What Cannons or Rules belong to a Mechanicke in respect of priuiledge or impriueledge. A. First, it is most reasonable and fitting that a Mechanicke inuention should be priueledged for a certaine time wholly to the Inuentioner & Authour, if so be it be but of the yearely valew of a Coppy-hould. Secondly, the first Inuentor of a Royaltie though of meane degree hath as great demerit in the inuenti∣on, as any other subiect of what estate or degree soe∣uer, excepting Royall persons. R. 86. What Cannons or rules haue you concer∣ning Royalties. A. There are diuers other rules and obseruations which I spare to speake of at this time, because at fur∣ther leasure I purpose to Print a little Tractate of Roy∣alties and coppy-houlds, which is a parcel of this trea∣tise of Metallita. CAP. 12. Cannons or rules seruing to iudge of the good∣nesse of a deriuatine Inuention Emporeuticall. R 87 How may those who are willing to deale in the triall of new inuentions iudge of their goodnes.
A. There are many infallible Rules by which if a diriuatiue Inuention be examined, wee may easily iudge of the goodnesse thereof, but to reduce this doctrine to some head, we are to consider both the generall vertues, and generall faults in inuentions. R. 88. What are the generall virtues by which an Inuention is to be examined. The vertues of an Inuention are of two degrees, the lesser and the greater, and each degree is three-fould. R. 89. Which are the lesser virtues of a deriuatiue Inuention. A. These three, Equi sufficiencie, Equi-cheapenes, Equi excellency. R. 90. What meane you by Equi-sufficiencie. A. Equall sufficiencie is when the new Inuention or Emporeuticke is as sufficient and as good for vse as the ould. So Printed bookes are as sufficient and as good to reade as written Manuscripts, and the meale grinded by the winde-milne, is as good and sufficient to make bread as that which is grinded by the water-milnes, and earthen pipes by the Pressorian Art, being well made are as strong to hould and conuey water as leaden pipes or potters pots, which two kindes of water conueiances werein vse long before presse-ware pipes were inuented. R. 91. What meane you by the second virtue which you cal equi-cheapenesse. A. The new Emporeuticke is said to haue equi∣cheapenes,
cheapenes, when as it may be sould and vttered as cheape as the ould commoditie or inuention which was in vse before. So if Printing bookes be but as cheape to be sould as manuscript bookes, then they are said to haue equi∣cheapenes. And if Tiles made by the Pressorian Art may bee afforded to be sould and vttered as cheape as the tiles made by the ould and ordinary way, then the Presse∣ware Tiles may well be said to haue Equi cheapenes with ordinary Tiles. R. 92. What meane you by the third virtue which you call Equi-excellency. A. The new Inuention is said to haue Equi-excel∣lencie with the ould, when it hath in it the same beau∣tie and perfection that the ould commodity of sale hath, and in the same degree, measure and equallitie. So if Muscouie glasse be as cleare, transparent and excellent as greene glasse for windowes, then in re∣gard of the beautie and perfection of the substance it is said to bee Equi-excellent. R. 93. Which are the greater virtues of an inuen∣tion. A. These three, more sufficiency, more cheapnesse, more excellency, all which are easie to be vnderstood, by their lower degrees described before. R. 94. Which are the lesser faults of an Inuention deriuatiue. A. There are three in number, lesse sufficiencie, lesse cheapenesse lesse excellency.
R. 95. Which are the greater faults of an Inuen∣tion. A. There are also three, insufficiency, exceeding dear∣nesse, exceeding basenesse, vglinesse or ill fauoured∣nesse, R. 96. What Cannons or rules haue you to iudge of a deriuatiue Inuention, by comparing these vertues and saults to gether. A. There are many, whereof these following serue to iudge of the vnworthinesse. R. 97. What is the first Cannon. A. If an Emporeutick haue only in it all the smal∣ler vertues, although it may be esteemed commenda∣ble for a new inuention, then surely it will do no good to be set vp and followed: So if any clay-worke made by Presse-ware art, as namely tile, slate, free-stone, paning stone, ar∣chings. &c. or greene glasse made by Seacoale, If these two new inuentions fal out to be but Equi-suffi∣cient, Equi-cheape and Equi-excellent, with old In∣uentions of tiles, slates, free stone, pauing stones, archings &c. then surely there will be no good to be done by them, because they yeeld no benefit to the common wealth. R 98. What is your second Cannon to iudge of the worthlessnesse of an Inuention. A. If a new Inuention of sale haue in it but all the smaller faults only, it is not to be commended nor e∣uer will prooue good, for example, if one should de∣uise a Water-worke, to raise waters, which is lesse
sufficient for that purpose, and more chargeable to be erected, and in regard of excellency more imperfect then the ordinary raising of waters in vse, I say such an Emporcutick is to bee iudged a worthlesse Inuen∣tion. R. 99. What is the third directory Cannon. A. If a new inuention, compared with the old, be found to haue in it but one of the grander faults, al∣though it be accompanied with some one or two of the grand, vertues, yet is it to be reiected for starke naught, for there can no good be made of it, for in∣stance sake say that one hath deuised to make window∣ing of the pure mettle of Venice-glasse, or of the pure substance of Christall, which is not impossible to be done, This his sale Mechanick will be exceeding deere and costly, And therefore although it be more excel∣lent or stronger, or more sufficient then the ordinary kind of windowing by greene glasse, yet the Inuentio∣ner will neuer do good of it, except it bee to begger himselfe, and all that shall deale in it: for a scrap of co∣loquintida, I say, marreth a whole messe of good pot∣tage. R. 100. How many directory triplicities is there of this Rule. A. There are, First exceeding deerenesse, more sufficiency, more excellency. Secondly insufficiency, more cheapnesse, more ex∣cellency.
Thirdly vnsightly basenesse, more sufficiency, more cheapnesse. This last triplicity although it hath two good grand vertues, yet the buyers of this Emporeutick will not deale with it, because they cannot abide to behold it. R. 101. What other triplicities are there of this Cannon. A. Three by one grand vertue, and three by ano∣ther, which for breuities sake I omit. R. 102. What other Cannons haue you to iudge of the worthlessnesse of an Inuention. A. If an Inuention containe all the grander ver∣tues, and yet tend to the vtter confusion of Kingdoms and Ciuill Estates, then is it by no meanes to bee at∣tempted or enterprized by any Inuentioner, Of this kind is the Inuention to walk inuisible, if such a deuice may be attained vnto, to make a barge or ship to flye as well in the ayre as to saile vpon the water. R. 103. What Cannons or Rules haue you to iudge of the goodnesse and worth of a deriuatiue Inuention. A There are many Cannons likewise for this purpose, all which are grounded vpon triplicities of the former vertues or lesser faultes, or intermixt of both. R. 104. What is the first Cannon. A. An Inuention that hath none of the grand faults and hath at the least one of the grand vertues, or more in his triplicity, then is it to be esteemed good and va∣luable as it apeareth by al these subsequent triplicities.
R. 105. Recite the triplicitie of this Cannon. 1. A. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, Equi-ex∣cellency. As for example, earthen tileage is more sufficient and durable, equi-cheape and equi-excellent then the old way of couering of houses by woodden pannells, when wood and timber was then as plentifull in En∣gland as is now in Virginia or new found land, and therefore a very good Inuention. 2 Equi-sufficiency, more cheapenesse, Equi-excel∣lency. 3. Equi-sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, more ex∣cellency. 4. Equi-sufficiency, more cheapnesse, lesse excel∣lency. 5. Lesse-sufficient, more cheape, Equi-excellent. Of this sort is Lees Inuention of loome stockings, and the tillage of ground by Plough and harrow, comparing it with Adams old tillage with spade and Iron rake, which Gardners still vse. 6. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, lesse excel∣lency. 7. More Excellency, lesse-cheapnesse, Equi-ex∣cellency. 8. Equi-sufficiencyl, esse cheapnesse, more excel∣ency. 9. Lesse-sufficiency, Equi-cheapnesse, more ex∣cellency. 10. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, Equi-excellency. 11. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, less excelency.
12. Equi-sufficiencie, more cheapnesse, more ex∣cellency. 13. Lesse sufficiencie, more-cheapnesse, more-ex∣cellency. 14. More sufficiency, Equi-cheapnes, more ex∣cellencie. 15. More sufficiency, lesse-cheapnesse, more-ex∣cellency. 16. More sufficiency, more cheapnesse, more-ex∣cellency. Which is the best and most eminent of all other triplicities. CAP. 13. Metallicall Instruments defined with their seuerall kindes. Lenicks, Presse-wares and mouldes described. Reader. 106. THe Manuscript Treatise or Schedules an∣nexed to the Indenture, as it seemeth, com∣prehendeth many worthy matters and excellent in∣uentions, but it is some-what obscure and obstruce, both by reason that some points are implicitely set downe, and also in respect of some strange and hard words which I doe not perfectly conceiue or vnder∣stand: I pray you therefore enlarge and describe the same Materiall points, in a more familiar phrase and stile, that such plaine men as my selfe, who are willing to deale and aduenture in these your inuentions, may
more fully vnderstand the purport and goodnesse of your businesse. A. Sir you neede not be offended with the scho∣lasticall tearmes, for it hath alwaies beene lawfull to the Authours of new Arts and inuentions at their owne pleasure to giue names to their new Arts, in∣struments and deuises which are not so vulgarly knowne. Goe but to a Printer, and you shall heare many strange words of his inuention and misterie, as namely Charrecters, the Compositer, the Long-primer, the Pica, the Italica, the Chase, &c, the like tearmes you shall finde in diuerse other trades in Lon∣don. I hope therefore I shall not be barred or denyed of that libertie of making choice of words of Arts, for new matters, which is giuen and allowed vn∣to euery tradesman in his owne scyence and mi∣stery. Indeede I confesse that some points are more closely and briefely touched of purpose, and the rea∣son was, because I had often promised to explaine and illustrate them in the printed treatise, and it would haue bin both tedious and more chargeable to haue drawne the manuscript in a prolixe and ample sort. Neuerthelesse to the intent that no iust exceptions may be taken, and that the meanest capacitie may perceiue my meaning, I will be ready to explaine and amplifie the seuerall contents of my Pattents in as plaine and easie mannner as I can thinke or de∣uise.
R. 107. It is euident by your Pattent, that all Me∣chanick Artes and Inuentions which performe their worke by the helpe and opperation of Metallicall Instruments, are all of them priuiledged businesses vn∣to you. Wherefore I pray you describe at large all the sorts of Metallicall Instruments and meanes, which are the strength, nerues, and sinewes of your priuiledge. A. The Instruments and meanes Metallicall, which are vsed for the producing of Metalique Materialls, or things are (as it was shewed before) of two sorts, Common and Peculiar. The Common Instruments are such which are bor∣rowed from other trades, occupations, and mysteries, amongst which wee haue especially vse of Smithes, Ioyners, Turners, not onely of their instruments and tooles, but also of their Emporeuticks which they or∣dinarily make, as Presses, Vices, Screwes, Bellowes, Tongs, &c. made either of Iron and wood, or of both together. R. 108. What call you the peculiar Metallicall Instruments. A. The Peculiar Instruments are those that are of the Authors Inuention, being of chiefe and principall vse for the working of Metallicall effects, when they are vsed and conioyned with other Common Instru∣ments, and they are of two sorts, Principall, and Lesse principall. The principall are those which in the Manuscript are called by the names of Lenick, Plegnick, & Camminicks.
R. 129. Define the Metallicall Instruments, which are called by the name of Lenicks. A. The Lenicks are peculiar Metallicall instru∣ments, which worke their opperation and effect, by pressing, impressioning or moulding, and that either by thrusting or drawing. R. 110. What call you the Emporeutick materials which are made by these Lenick Instruments. A. The Materials that are made and brought forth by these pressing & moulding instruments, are called Press-wares or mould-wares. R. I pray you set downe the definition of Presse∣wares or Mould-wares together, with their seuerall sorts or kindes. Presse-ware or Mould-ware, is any thing that can bee made, wrought, or formed of clay and earth, not by hand and the round table, as the Potters vse, nor after the common manner of Tile-making and Brick-making, but by presse and mould, or by pressing and moulding. There bee many sorts or kindes of Press wares by reason of different figures, and diuerse vses vnto which they are to bee applied, all which kinds are re∣duced to these two heads: Rude-ware and Pollisht-ware. Rude-ware. RVde-ware are such sorts of Presse-ware which after they are pressed and moulded, require no further ornament.
Pipeage is the principall branch of Press-ware, and it is nothing else but the making of earthen pipes, for the conducting and sweeter conueighing of fresh waters, for the seruiceable vse of houses. Field Pondeage, is a kinde of Pipeage, which from higher springs and fountaines conueigheth and di∣stributeth water into seuerall pastures, closes and fields, and in euery one of the said places, maketh and leaueth a pond of water for cattle and beasts to drinke in, this kinde is very necessary for country townes, where there are but some few springs, and many hun∣dred of inclosed pastures, which in the heate of Sum∣mer want waters. And Kennellage is one of the chiefe kinds of Pipeage which passeth and voydeth away the stincking and fil∣thy waters of citties and townes vnder earth into the common ditches or sewers, and this kinde is very ne∣cessary for the auoiding of noysome and infectious ayres, especially in the heate of Summer. Of Presse-wares also are made Pumpes, as sufficient as those of Lead or Wood, and farre lesse chargeable. Welleage is a kind of Press ware for the speedy mak∣ing of Wells, farre cheaper then the rounds, which are made of Brick to keepe the earth from falling downe. Priuy Funnels or Vaults, may aso bee made by the Press-ware Art so close and so sweete that there can no annoyance or vnfauory smels euapoure out or presse through them. This kind of Presse-ware is very necessary for many houses in the citty, which are
much annoyed by the leaking and sincking through the funnels of Brick. As Walls are made of ordinary Bricks, so may they be made of Press-wares more handsome, cheaper and dureable. Open Gutters are made by the Press-ware way, which may serue betweene houses instead of Lead, or in Fields to conduct and lead away water, or on the Eues of houses or Pent-houses. The Press ware Arte-likewise, ministrech a kinde of Tiling and Slates for the couering of houses more substantiall and dureable then those that are made by the ordinary way of Tiling, or then those blew and hewen Slates which are digged out of the Slate Quarries. Spouts ordinarily are made of Lead, and hanged on the out-side of the walls, but Spouteage may more conueniently be made of pipes, brought downe with∣in the middest of the Brick walls, for to couueigh raine water into the sincks vnder the earth. Pollisht-ware. POllished-ware, are such sorts of Presse-wares, which after they are pressed and moulded, receiue further ornament and beauty, by Turners, Ioyners or engra∣uors tooles, or by Turning, Planing, or engrauing, and there are three degrees of this ornament, for else it is meerely by cutting off the edge, when the Presse-ware of Clay is liuer dry, or else by repressing againe,
which is when they Presseware is figured or fashioned the second or third time with the mould againe. The third degree is by fire, colouring, which is the glar∣ing, glazing or leading of the Presse-ware, this ad∣deth a super-excellent grace and lustre to the worke, if it be well and curiously done and performed, and it hath in it this singular prerogatiue. For whereas free∣stone greeneth presently with the first wet and raine and after in continuance of time becometh ouer∣growne with mosse, or else moulteth or crometh a∣way, but this sort of Pollished ware continueth alwaies in his natiue and liuely hew, neuer tainting or altering with any weather, no more then the stone Iugs or Cruses, which we vsually drinke out of. Of Pressewares also we may make all kinde of pa∣uingstones larger and greater then those which are made by Potters or Tilers, which kinde is very seruice∣able. for pauing of houses, galleries, ouens, courts, and furnaces. Fish-ponds may be both flored in the bottome and wainescotted on the sides by the Presse-ware Art, so sufficiently, that neither the earth can fall downe, nor the ouse or mudd to swell vp within. So likewise for bathes and baynes. Spouts, ordinarily are made of leade, and hang∣ed on the out-sides of the wals, but they may bee made of turned Pipes being also beautified with gla∣zing, leading, or other ornaments, stamps or im∣pressions.
The like may be said of Windowing and Menyons for windowes, which may be made and cast of white clay, as sufficiently and substantially as of hewen bricke or Freestone. Gardens, Squares, and Walkes are vsually compassed and inuironed with railes and pales of wood or stone, this may also be done by Presse-ware, cheapor, stron∣ger and handsommer. In a word there is no part or appurtenances in buil∣dings, which is made either of Bricke, Tile, Lead, Wood, Tarras, or Free-stone, which cannot more conueniently be made by the Pressing Art of casting, and the reason thereof is, because that mouldes may be made to cast all kinde of Solid shapes, figures, and bodies whatsoeuer. So that from hence also we may make Bullets, Globes, Coping stones, Archings, Pillars, Columnes, Finishings Chimney Fannels, Mantletrees, or Cla∣uels for Chimnies, Cesternes, Coppers to brew in, Wainescoaring for Chambers, and such other like things, and Vtensils. R. 112. What are the generall and chiefe instru∣ments of making of Pressewares- A. The instruments of Pressing and moulding, which are vsually called by the names of Presse and mould. R. 113. How many kinde of Presses or Pressing Instruments are there. A. Pressing or impressioning of things is perfor∣med by diuers meanes, as namely by beating, stam∣ping, knocking, or falling.
Secondly, by screwing or viceing. Thirdly by the drawing of flexible girths or cordes. Examples of all which sorts, are to bee seene at my worke-house at Highbury, in the parish of Islington neere London. R. 114. What call you a moulding instrument, mould or moulder. A. A Mould or Moulder, is an artificiall instrument which mouldeth, figureth, and proportioneth the tem∣pered earth, which beeing forced, passeth thorough the mould. R. 115. How many sorts are there of Moulds or Moulders. A. Moulds are of two sorts, for either they are as long as the Pressware, which they make and figure, of which sort are all those which are called by the names of scouring moulds at the Worke house at Highbury, or else they are shorter then the presse-wares which they make, wherevpon they are called Short Mouldes. Diuers sorts both of long mouldes and short moulds, are to be seene at the said Workehouse, and therefore I will not further enlarge or describe them heare, but referre the Reader to see them at the place afore∣named. R. 116. When a presse and a short mould are in one frame vnited together, what is the fittest name to call that instrument by. A. It may aptly in a word be called a Presse-mould, which is further described and handled in the next chapter.
CAPVT. 14. The Pressmould: and the Plegnick Instruments defined. R. 117 DEscribe therefore the Press-mould by his end and vse. A. A Press-mould is a pressing and moulding In∣strument for the making of all kind of Press-wares, that is to say, all kind of tiles, bricks, pauing-stones, fur∣nace-stones, or any kind of clay-worke or tempered earths whatsoeuer. R. 118. Describe the Press-mould by his parts and adiuncts. A. The Press-mould consisteth of these generall parts. 1. Two clay-boxes. 2. Two Receit tables. 3. One Screw. 4. Two Pressours. 5. Foure Anti-pressoures. 6. Two Nutboxes. 7. Two squease tables. 8. Two Coane spits. 9. Two Screw posts. 10. Frames for the said parts. 11. Driers and Rammers, which are adiuncts. There are many sorts and differences of Press-moulds, euery sort consisting of different parts and adiuncts,
All which shall be at large described in the second e∣dition of Metallica, or in the Appendix, or addition vnto this treatise called Pressoria. In the meanewhile if any be desirous to see both this Presse-mould, Engin and the working thereof, at Highbury, and at Islinton, he may haue diuerse sorts of them, which in an Artificiall manner doe make all kinde of Clayworkes with extraordinary speed and readinsse. R. 119. I vnderstand what you meane by Lenicke Instruments, I pray shew what vse they haue in Iron businesse. A. First, the Lenicke Instruments ferue very fitly for the tempering, stamping, and comixing of Sea∣cole, or Stone-cole, that a kinde of substance being there made of them like vnto past or tempered clay, the Presse-mould may sorme and tranfigure that clay-like substance into hollow pipe. cole as it doth earthen pipes. Now this pipe-coale is of very good vse for the making and working of some kinds of Irons and steeles. Secondly the Lenicke Instrument serueth very fitly for the breaking and brusing, stamping and beating, tempering and impastening of all kinde of Iron oares, whereby they are prepared for the Furnace in a very beneficiall manner and course, for when this impast∣ed oare is by the-engin of the Presse-mould Intubated and formed into pipes, as if it were Clay or loame, These oare-pipes being made hollow and full of holes are sooner melted and consumed by the heate of the
furnace and with farre smaller charges of fewell or fi∣ring then the ordinary oare which Founders put into their furnace in peeces or gobbits as great as wall∣nuts. R. 120. You hauing handled sufficiently the doc∣trine of the Lenickes or Pressing instruments, I pray you proceede end shew me what you meane by Pleg∣nickes, which your Maunscript maketh the second kinde of your Metallicall Instruments. A. Plegnicks and Metallicall instruments which performe their opperation and effect by meanes of their dexterous and artificiall ioynt-mouing. R. 121. How many kindes of Plegnicke instru∣ments be there. A. There are fiue kindes of Plegnicke engins or Machins, the Plegnicke Bellowes, the Plegnicke Milne the Plegnicke Schrew, and the Plegnicke Rombus, and the Reciprocall Plegnicke. R. 122. What odds and prerogatiue differences is there betweene the ordinary bellowes (which Smithes and Mettle-founders daily vse) and your new deuised Plegnicke bellowes. A. There are many differences, first the Plegnicke bellowes is more handsomely and strongly made, then ordinary refining bellowes, and with farre lesse expence of leather, for here the leather is not closely nailed vpon the wood, but strongly grasted and in∣corporated into the very substance of the timber, so that by this meanes the ioytning of the leather and the wood together, is as thite and close as the sub∣stance
of the boords themselues. Secondly the Plegnick bellowes may be made to blow and streame forth not only could wind and ayre (which is all that ordinary bellowes can doe) but also to blow and send forth flames of fire, water, vapours and dust, all which is very necessary for the blowing of Metallicque substances, as shall be at large shewed in the second Edition or in the Appendix called Pleg∣nica. Thirdly the Plegnick bellowes may so be made and contriued, to blow ten times more then the ordinary bellowes, and that either by moouing ten times faster, or else by being made ten times greater. R. 123. What odds and prerogatiue differences is there betweene the ordinary Milnes and your new deuised Plegnick Milnes. A. The Plegnick Milnes haue many prerogatiues and conueniences which the ordinary Milning lacketh: and to begin with the Wind milne. First the ordinary Wind-milne hath nor only his sailes mounted vp in the wind, but also the work-house wherin the Milne-stones and the Cogg-wheeles grind the corne, by which meanes they are subiect to bee blowne downe with stormes, but the Plegnick Wind-milne hath his worke-house vpon the firme ground, by meanes whereof you may make your Roomes as wide and as large as you will without any hazard or danger of blowing downe. Secondly the crosse sailes of the Wind-milne doe mooue verte callter, as they cal it, or through the ze∣neth
or the nader; wherevppon ariseth this inconueni∣ence that the Wind-milne must be turned and haled about continually as the wind changeth, but the Pleg∣nick Wind-milne hath his crosse-sailes ouer the top of the work-house, and they flye round about with a circular motion, paralel to the Horizon: whereby it is ready for all windes without turning or haling about. Thirdly this Plegnick deuise may be made to go with three or foure paire of Milne-stones at once, whereas the wind-milne can go only but with one paire, and by this meanes the Plegnick Wind-milne will grind three or foure times more meale in an houre, especially in a good gale of wind. Fourthly the Wind-milne grindeth only corne, and cannot be made to do any other worke, as the water-milne doth, but the Plegnick engin doth all manner of workes, it will grind corne as well as the Wind-milne, it will serue for the Iron furnace to blow the bellowes as well as the ordinary Water-milne, and finally to do any other worke which the Water-milne or Horse-milne doth. Fiftly the Wind milne standeth still in a calme and when the wind serueth not, for there is no meanes to make it goe but by wind, but the Plegnick milne is perpetuall, for when the wind serueth not, it is made to go with horse, and in a small gale of wind the horse may help to draw and mooue it faster. Sixtly there are also many other conueniences in the Plegnick Water-milne ouer and aboue the ordinary water milne as more at large shall bee shewed in the
second edition of this treatise. R. 124. How many sorts of Plegnick milnes are there in regard of the force that mooueth the En∣gin. There are fiue sorts of Plegnick milnes, The first is called the Horswin because it mooueth both with horse and wind, the second kind is called the Horsewa∣ter because it goeth both by horse and water, The third kind is called the windwater, because the Wind and the water mooueth the engin ioyntly toge∣ther. The fourth kind is called the Horswinwater because it is mooued with horse, wind and water alltogether, and at one time. The fist kind is called the water Pleg∣nick which mooueth either inuisibly and secretly vnder the water and by the water with one rong wheele or elce with two Horizontall wheeles aboue the water. R. 125. Did you euer make any of these Plegnick milnes to experiment their goodnesse by triall. A. I haue made diuers milne engins to go both by wind and water, in the moddle, but not in the grand Mechanick, and I haue at this present a horswin now framing at Highbury, which the next terme God wil∣ling shall stand vppon some Turret in London neere vnto the Thames side, where all passengers by water may see it goe and mooue continually. I haue also at Pickle herring ouer against the Tower a water. leg∣nick which mooueth only by the water, and goeth very swift with two paire of Milne-stones, whoso∣euer
is desirous to see it may haue it there at a ship-Carpenters yard vppon the Wharfe. And thus much of the Plegnick milne. R. 126. Define the Plegnick Screw, the Plegnick Rhombus, and the reciprocall Plegnick, which are the three last kinds of your Plegnick Engins. A. The plegnick screw is an engin whose spirall line mooueth with one motion, two vice nutts or Matrixes at the same time, which no other screw did before, This plegnick screw is very auaileable in Me∣tallicall workes, aboue any other ordinary screw, which hath beene vsually in the common wealth, but especially it is very conuenient for tempering, bea∣ting and impastening of all kind of oares and pit∣coales The plegnick Rhombus is an Engin of extraordi∣nary and admirable power and faculty, and in re∣gard of quick and speedy motion there was neuer any Machin yet deuised, which commeth neere vnto it. The Reciprocall Plegnick is an Engin that hath wheeles running reciprocally, turning back∣wards and forewards by one great wheele that mooueth but one way at the same time which kind of reciprocal motion was neuer done or performed be∣fore by any other Engin. This reciprocall is of great vse for the battering and beating of Iron, lattin, plate, copper, or any other mettles.
If any be desirous to be further certified concer∣ning the truth of the admirable motions, opperati∣ons and workes of these three engins, let them re∣paire to Highbury, and it shall be enidently shewed and demonstrated vnto them, in diuers reall moddles and examples. CAP. 15. Caminicke instruments, as fewels, liquours and furnaces defined. 127. Hauing described the Lenicke and Plegnicke in∣struments, I pray you proceed to the third kinde of Metallicall instruments, which you call by the name of Caminicks. A. Caminicks are peculiar Metallicall instruments, which performe their opperation and effect by their new kinde of furnacing and hearthing. R. 128. How many kindes of Caminicke instru∣ments be there which serue for the making of all kinde of Irons and other mettles and materials. A. There are three kindes, the fewell, the liquor, and the furnace. R. 129. Define fewell. A. Fewell is any substance combustible being apt or fit to burne, or to make, or take fier. R. 130. Rehearse the seuerall kindes and sorts of fewell.
A. There are three sorts of Fewell, whereof fire is made: Wood-fewell, which is either Char-coale or vnburnt Wood-fewell. Secondly Pit-coale or Earth∣coale, and thirdly Brush-fewel. Char-cole is the Principall and best for vse, but by reason of scarsity it is growne very deare in our country. Earth-coale is that kinde of fewell of siring, which is digged out of the bowels of the earth, or else vpon the superficies of the earth, of which sort also there are many kindes, hauing difference in their burning. The Scottish coale is the best flamer, and consumeth away into white ashes, as hauing in it more vnctious∣nesse then sulpharousnesse. The New-Castle coale, vsually called Sea-coale, is more lasting and dureable then the Scottish, for beeing stirred vp, it will make a secondary or third fire, whereas the Scottish-coale consumeth at once; For which cause all Brewers and artificers of London rather vse this sort. Howbeit it is not so fit for some Metalique purposes as Scottish-coale, by reason of the more aboundant heauy sulphe∣rous substance remaining in it. Turffe and Peate maketh a third kinde of earth-coale, and if they haue any sulpharousnesse in them, it is not so heauy and fretting as that which is in the Sea-coale and Stone-coale, the Low-countries vse for the most part this kinde of fewell, insteed of wood & sea-coale. Brush-fewell is the third kind of firing, which is nei∣ther of the inward substance of the earth, nor of the vpper superficies as Sea-coale and Turffe is, but grow∣eth vpon the earth in a brushie or twiggie manner, of this sort is all kinde of stubble, Baueings, Straw, Furs, Fearne, Ling, Heath, with other stalkes, of hearbes,
weeds, and vnder-shrubs, all which burne with great flames, yet are they of no great heate or long conti∣nuance. Vnder Brush-fewell, wee comprehend also an other sort, which is not so much vsed for firing, as for lights, as namely, oyles, tallowes, waxes, which are vsed in lampes and candles. Secondly, pitch, rossen, turpentine, tarre, mastick, with such like liquids and gums, as issue and proceed from trees beeing combu∣stible. This kind of fewell is most fit for the Ventignoll Mechanick, which hath good and profitable vse for many purposes, where other fewell is not so fit. R. 131. What meanes are to be vsed to make earth-coale as seruiceable for Metalique purposes, as wood or Char-coale. A. There are three sorts, the first is to bring earth-coale to that equallity of heat, that wood or charcoale hath, that is to say, that it maketh neither hotter nor coulder fire then wood or Charcoale doth: the second meanes, is so to order and prepare pit-coale, that all nociue proprieties, which are aversse from all Meta∣lique substances, may be abstracted from it, or at least destroyed in it. The third meanes is the Addition and infusion of those deficient proprieties, which as they are in char-cole, so ought they to be found in pit-cole. R. 132. What meane you by Caminicke-liquores. A. By Caminicke-liquores I vnderstand diuers kinds of intermixt and compounded waters for the lauing, washing and steeping of all kinde of mettle-Ewres to cause them the better to yeeld and giue downe their liquid mettle from their slaggs and cinders. So that as the Gould-smith hath his waters which will segar gould from siluer, and the Allom-maker his vrines for the segaring and bringing downe of his al∣lomes,
so these Caminicke-liquoures are very behoofe∣full and effectfull for the steeping and tempering of oares, which being thereby prepared, they will the more easily let downe their pure mettle being seuered and abstracted from the recrement and drosse of the cinder and the slagg. R. 133. Define a furnace. A. A surnace is a Caminicke instrument made and built of furnace-earth; or a furnace is the Artificiall receptacle of fier and fewell, for boyling, nealing, and backing of all kinde of Rawe-materials or Rawe-mat∣ters. R. 134. How many kindes of Rawe-matters are there for furnaces to worke vpon. A. There are fiue sorts of Rawe-matters, the met∣tle-matter, the liquour-matter, the fiery earth-matter, the dry matter and compounded-matter. R. 135. Describe more plainely these seuerall kinds of Rawe-matters. A. The Mettle-matter is that Mettellar substance which is put into the Furnace to be baked, boyled or nealed, which in one word may be called the Met∣tellar. R. 136. How many kindes of Mettellars are there A. There are three sorts of Mettellars. The first is the raw or baked oare, as it is digged out of the earth, which being put into the furnace melteth downe into two substances, the one is called the Glass-slag, and th'other the Sowe-liquour. The Glasse-slage is a liquid materiall of a glassie sub∣stance being tough, thicke, and ropy, like bird-lime, it swimmeth vpon the superficies of the sowe liquour, as barme doth vpon beare, or creame vpon milke.
The second kinde of Mettellar is the sowe of Iron which when the hearth or furnace hath receiued it, it melteth downe into two substances, whereof one is called Ferrica substantiae, or the Iron substance, the o∣ther is called the cinder or after-slagg. The after-slagg is a liquid materiall which inhereth in the Ferrica-substantiae, as whey doth in a posset, or crudds. The Ferrica-substantiae is tougher then the liquour of the alter-slagg, which when it is battred vnder the stroke and presse of the hammer, the after-slagg is squeased and pressed out, and so the substance is made and becometh good Iron, euen as the whey is wrung out by the violence of the Presse, and so the cruds are made into a cheese. The third kinde of Mettellar is the could Iron, which when the fordge, furnace or hearth receiueth it, it is nealed and heated into glowing Iron, which glowing Iron afterward is forged by the Smith into diuers Emporeutickes for many-fould vses and pur∣poses, as namely into kniues, horse-shooes, Iron-wea∣pons, windowe barres, window case-ments, and into a thousand such like Emporeuticks, whereby Smiths get their liuing and maintenance. R. 137. In the definition of your Furnace, you make mention of Furnace-earths, I pray you what meane you by them. A. Furnace-earth, is any earthy substance, beeing made and prepared of stone, clay, or lome, that so it may become the fit and sufficient matter for the Cami∣nick Furnace. R. 138. How many kindes of Furnace-earths are there where, withall you build vp your Furnaces.
There are three sorts of Furnace-earths. The first is the clay-pipes made of white clay, being tempered, wrought, and impastned with the dusts and pouders of diuers other things. The second kinde of Furnace-earth, is the clam∣my morter, which is of the same substance and temper that the Clay pipes are. The third kinde of Furnace earth, is the Furnace-stone, which is made into diuers figures, formes and proportions by the Press-mould Art, and of the same matter that the other two kinds were made of before. R. 139. Define the second kind of Rawe-matters, which you call the Liquour-matter. A. The liquor matter is any kind of liquor or liqueable, whether it be cold or hot, which is put into the Furnace Pot, Kettle, Caldron or Copper, to be further heated, and boyled, as namely, all kinds of fatts, tallows, oyles, and all kinds of waters, whether simple or compound, as fresh-water, Sea-water, Alloms-water, Coppresse-water, and a thousand such kindes of liquours. R. 140. Define the third kinde of Rawe-matters which you call fiery-earths. A. Fiery-earth is any kind of earth or earthy substance besides the Mettler which before was described, as namely all kind of Rawe Presse-wares and burnt-earths, before they are burned, baked or nealed, neuerthelesse the Rawe∣oare if it be but nealed or baked belongeth to this kinde. R. 141. Define the fourth kinde of Rawe-matters which you call dry-matters. A. Dry-matter is any kinde of Rawe-matter besides the three former which were described before, vnder this head wee comprehend all kinde of pastes for bread, malts, sa∣frons, papers, wet cloathes &c. R. 142. Define the fift kinde of Rawe-matter which
you call compounded matter. A. Compounded matter is any two or more of the former kindes, comming and issuing from one furnace and from one fire, together, and at the same time. R. 143. Hauing thus handled and described the seuerall sorts of Rawe-matters, which are the things that the sto∣mack of the Furnace worketh vpon, labouring to digest boile, and concoct them, I pray you now proceed to the distributions of the Frunace. A. The Furnace in respect of the seuerall kinds of Raw-matters which it boileth and baketh, is likewise of fiue sorts and kinds, namely the Mettelar-furnace, the liquor-furnace the fier-earth-furnace; the dry-matter-furnace, and the compounded-furnace. R. 144. Define these fiue seuerall sorts. A. The Mettallar-furnace heateth, melteth & nealeth all kind of Mettallers, and so worketh them into their Empo∣reutick Materials, vnder this head is comprehended all kind of Iron Furnaces or hearths, for any other kind of mettles. The descriptions of the other foure kindes of furnaces may easily be gathered by this, and therefore I referre the further explication of them vntill some other time. R. 145. What odds and perogatiue differences are there between the ordinary furnaces which refiners and mettle-founders daily vse, & your new deuised Caminick furnaces. A. There are many differences both in regard of the forme & figure of making of them, as also in respect of other con∣ueniences and prerogatiues, whereof these are principall. 1. First our Caminick Furnace is made and built vp of such dureable Furnace-matter, and continually maintai∣ned with such fier-resisting meanes, that it cannot possibly melt or burne down by any reuerberating flames or heates whatsoeuer. 2. Secondly, our Caminick Furnace is alwayes built
with some moueable part, as namely the dores, Fewel-beare, matter-beare and the Ash-beare, or any other part as wee please. 3. Thirdly our Caminick Furnace is built vp with glasse windowes for euery seuerall roome, so that thereby the Furnar may continually see and behold both his Rawe-matters and his Emporeutick Materials, and how his fire and Furnace worketh vpon them, which is a singular con∣uenience which our ordinary Furnaces want. These forenamed differences and conueniences, with many others, shall be truly shewed and demonstrated in the seuerall examples of our Caminick Furnaces, which very shortly (God willing) shall be raised and built vp at Highbury and at Islington. R. 146. What & how many are the generall parts of your furnace, which are to be foūd in euery kind of your Camin. A. These fiue, the dores, the windows, the fewell-beare, the Matter-beare, and the Ash beare. 1.2. The Dores are to shut and open, and so are also some of the Windowes. 3. The Matter-beare is a generall part of the Furnace, which bereth & holdeth the substāces of the Raw-matters. 4.5. The Fewell-beare, is a generall part of a Furnace which beareth and holdeth the fewel and fire, and the Ash-beare beareth the Ashes. R. 147. What and how many are the roomes of your Fur∣nace which are to be foūd in euery kind of your Caminicks A. There are foure seuerall roomes, which are to bee found in euery Furnace, the Ash-roome, the Fewell-roome, the Matter-roome, and the Vent-holes. The ashroome receiueth and holdeth the ashes, the fewell roome, the fewell and firing. The matter-roome receiueth and holdeth the raw-matter. The lower-vent holes receiue and take in the aire, and the vpper vent-holes lets out the smoake
R. 148. Hauing thus described your three principall Metallicall Instruments called by the names of Lenicks, Plegnicks, and Caminicks, I pray you describe your other Metallicall Instruments which you called before the Less-principall. A. There are indeed diuers other Metallicall Instruments which are propper and peculiar of the Authors Inuention, all which shall be shewed and described vnto you in the second Edition. R. 149. To what end and purpose do you publish the treatise of Metallica in print, which describeth and disco∣uereth all the cheefe Instruments of your Inuentions. A. There are diuers reasons which mooued the Author to describe publiquely to the view of the world these his Metallicall Arts and Inuentions. Frst that it might appeare that his inuentions are new, and of his owne deuising, and not stolne from any other. Secondly it is fit and reasonable that that which was granted in the Pattent by generall wordes and in an impli∣cit manner should be so specially exprest and defined, that the endeauors and Inuentions of other men being different from his, might not be preuented by him. Thirdly that none heereafter should presume to peti∣tion or trouble his Maiesty concerning any kind or kindes which are described and comprehended in his printed trea∣tise of Metallica, which are all priueledged businesses vnto himselfe. And lastly because the Author by Indenture from the Kings most excellent Maiesty is tied and enioyned to print and publish his booke of his new Metallicall Inuenti∣ons before the last day of Easter Terme, whereas he is not tyed to any time for the triall of his Inuentions.
