26079 99847079 12089
THE Castell of Courtesie, Whereunto is adioyned The Holde of Humilitie: with the Chariot of Chastitie thereunto annexed. Also a Dialogue betwéene Age and Youth, and other matters herein conteined. By Iames Yates Seruingman. 1582. Reade but not deride, Accuse not without cause: Such hastie doome accordeth not With reason, nor her Lawes. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, neere vnto the Signe of the Castle.
TO THE WORSHIPFVL, his approoued good Master, and Friend, Master Henrie Rey∣nolles, Esquire. ESpying by apparant shewe (worshipfull Syr) the greate good will you beare vnto those that abā∣don idlenes, and applye themselues to some kinde of exercise, where, by often frequenting, it may bring vnto them (hereafter) such praise and profite, as they shal haue singular occa∣sion to pray for those friendes, which lende them ayde in the same. It is not materiall to amplify, or glose vnto such, whose iudge¦ment is vniuersall, whose foresight in mat∣ters, hath great foreshewe of silent interpre∣tation. I am to craue at your worshippes handes, three things. First, not to condemne my boldnesse. Secondly, not to repulse my rudenesse. And thirdly, to accepte my sim∣ple good wil, who wrote this with as zea∣lous
affection, as euer Paris bare vnto faire Helena. This simple peece, which by my simpl industry I haue pēned, is vtterly voyd of eloquence: For why, it was neuer (as yet) my chance to haue any conuersatiō, where such societie accompanied together. For Pallas will not be seene to intermeddle her selfe where Pan so peartly preaceth in place. I am perchance too tedious vnto your wor∣shippe, and make a long Oration vnto litle effecte. But as a shameles crauer hath not the ciuilitie to make an end: So I the skilles writer haue not the perseuerance of inough. I therfore to be short, make this my present vnto you, intituled, The Castle of Courtesie, whereunto is adioyned, The Houlde of Hu∣militie, a matter not so worthie, as you are worthy to be a Patrone off. But fame hath so spread your courtesie and humility, your ciuilitie and humanitie, as it abasheth me to speake: because I wante the skill accor∣ding. I beseech your worship not to weigh the worke but the wil: not the matter but the maker: vvho vvil during life, rest at your
commandement, vvishing vnto your vvor∣shippe vvith vnfayned faith, your hearts re∣quest (in vvhat soeuer,) and eternall felicitie in the vvorld to come, Amen. Your worshippes seruant dayly at commandement: Iames Yates. Verses on his name That vvell deserues the same. Hee merits praise, who vertuous life doth leade, Experience shewes the bountie of his minde: Neglecting not, if he may stand in steade, Redelie prest his friendlie ayde to finde. Yn time of neede be stayeth not his hande: Regarding those which in distresse doe stande. Excluding coynesse from his courteous brest, Yf Fauour faile, in him it may be found: Not skornefullie the simple to detest, Or with disdaine his phrase of speech to sound: With modestie he meekelie markes the ground, Looking into true meaning of the hart: Such as it is, he takes it in good part. FINIS.
Iames Yates Seruingman, to the Courteous and Friendlie Reader. IF my request may stande in steade, to craue this at thy hande: Then let (I pray) with courtesie, this simple worke be skande My paine is for to pleasure thee, ingratefull doe not seeme: Least that thou doe discourage me, if skoffingly thou deeme. This skillesse worke which I commi vnto the open view of those, whose vpright meaning is inclyned to be true: I boldly venture to present a one that hath good will. To gratifie those that deserue, though simple be my skill. Presuming that all Zoilus sect, are sunke, and vnder ground, And that there are no SICOPHANTES, (I hope) for to be founde: But such as rather will amende, fiue faultes ere they finde one. O Lord it were a golden world, if SICOPHANTES were gone. I cannot couer nor conceale, the fruites that I doe gaine: But publikely must them display, though they be base and plaine. And as by tracte of time we see, rare matters worke effecte: So I in time may chance on choise, some better to selecte. In meane time my request is thus, accept these as they be: And you perchance ere it be long, shall haue some more of me. Which better shall content conceite, receiue these as the first: Good wordes (they say) as soone are sayde, as are the vile and worst. Farewell.
¶The Author to his Booke. I Stande in doubt that some dispitefull mat Will closelie carpe, concealing no dispraise: But in contempt of thee and of thy state, Will goe about discredite for to raise, To seeke and search by all the meanes they may: Thy true intent to murther and to slay. But see thou seeme obedient and milde, Beake thou and bende, no hautinesse doe haut: Confesse the trueth, thy Author is a childe, Who wanteth wit, and so thou maist them graunt. Yet willingnes should be esteemed as well: As those whose phrase doth seeme for to excell. No, no, not so, therein you doe digresse, The pregnant pate doth purchase all the praise, Whose fluent vaine doth make the minde apresse, By deepe delight alluering alwaies Attentiue eares to listen and to barke What such repeate (me thinkes) I see them mark. Alas my booke, thou art not for their frame, Thy skiliesnesse must trouble no such place: Be patient although thou suffer blame, And be content though girded with disgrace, I am disposed, to deeme of thee what dout Thou shalt sustaine by this thy going out. Yet when I had perfectionated thee, And brought to passe that which was somes desire: Sende it abroade, they straight waies saide to me, My friend vnsained, of you wee doe require. I readie was withouten stay or stint: To giue them leaue thee for to put in pint. FINIS.
The Booke to the Author. WHat doe you meane (I pray) Such kinde of speech to say? Doubtfully to display What shall of me insu Theres none will goe about, To mock or for to floute: Except it be some loute, Of trothe I tell you true. And as for such as those, The trueth for to disclose, I cannot fayne ne glose, I passe them not a pinne: I am not in their dette, Wherefore they cannot let, That which I downe haue set, Sith nought by them I win. And though their cunning be Superior ouer me, Yet (Sir) for ought I see, They faile though they be fine: I would I had the skil According to my will, Their curious cup to fill, I would my selfe incline. To speake in your defence, With you they may dispence, Esteeming your pretence, Is for to gratulate: Those to whom you are bound, For fauor you haue found, Whose friendship to resound Hath holpen your estate. I loue not much to tell, For why, it were not well To seeme to chat or mell Least that I purchase blame: But I will beake and bende And none I hope offende, If iustly they intende, Their sentence for to frame. FINIS.
The Castell of Courtesie. Anno.1582. AS I alone abroade did walke, bethinking how I might Come nigh some place that worthie wr for me to view by sight: I walked long with weary limmes, my tyered steps did faint, And Pilgrim wise I traced still, not feeling of restraint. I made no force, although I felt a feeblenes of strength: But hoped for to haue good hap, to ase my minde at length. So onward still I iorneyed, through many a Forrest thick: Through many a thornie prickie place, and many a bushie Quick. I marueyled much (good reason too) that all the way I went, I found no one to parle with, or vtter my intent. Thus damped all with dumpish doubtes in Forrest I alone, Began to sende out soaking sighes, in token of my mone. I saide, O cursed haplesse wight, what haue I now intended? This venture much disturbes my minde, my senses be offended. But since I haue so farre gone foorth, I forward will goe still: Sith only he hath set me on, whose name is cal'd Goodwill.
For where good will familiar is, there nothing seemeth hard: No venture strange can once afflight, or footing can be bard. The earnest zeale of deepe Desire, if it haue taken roote: It is but vaine to let the Spring, it were but litle boote. Or who will say he'l force the Sun to coole his parching beames? I meane, who can perfourme the same in any Christian Realmes? The whireling windes by Aeolus sent, can any man allay? Or Neptunes force in foaming flouds, which doth stout ships decay? No, no, as these thinges seeme but vaine, for any worldly wightes: So is it vaine to stop the minde, in iorney that delightes. I forwarde went, till at the length I was so rounde beset On euery side with pricking thornes, I knew not out to get. And then in agonie of minde I shriked out so hie: As that the Eccho did ascend vnto the loftie skie. And thus in all my deepe distresse, as one whome fancie lost: I laide me downe as desolate, by frowarde Fortune toste. The gushing teares came flowing out, my eyes all dim were made: And I alone in thraldome throwen, did tarry in that glade.
For out I knew no way to get, (of troth I tell you true:) For euery side was closed vp, as seemed to my view. And as I howling lay alone, (oh God vnto my griefe:) I prayde, helpe me, a Pilgrime loft, who craueth for reliefe. The earnest prayers that I made, with faithfull fixed hart: Did giue me hope that Ioue would send a remedie for my smart. For in dispaire he onely is the rocke, the ayde, and trust: On whome eche creature doth repose, as duetie willes, and must. At length, by chance, I cast mine eye full watchfully aside: And by good hap (oh God be prais'd, on sodaine I espide: An aged man with griesled beard, and countenance full milde: Which when he came, his words were these: how now, what newes my childe? What mak'st thou in this wildernes, how didst thou finde the way: Or to what place wouldst thou haue gone, what mean'st thou here to stay? At these his wordes I rose vpright, and did my duetie doe: And craued for his earnest stay, as will did moue thereto. My childe (quoth he) thou seem'st but young. and much in minde I muse, What mooued thee to range abroade. in this thy kinde of vse.
Assure thy selfe what I can doe in any thing, I will: Because it seemes thou hast a minde, to learne a farther skill. With bended knee I gaue him thankes, and did require his name: Forthwith he tolde me presently what was the very same. My name (quoth he) is called Ayde,Aide the con∣ductor to Youth a helper vnto those That haue a willing minde to learne, rare secretes I disclose. My yeeres they carry credite true, no man hath me disprooued: Wherefore at large disclose thy minde, if thou thereto be mooued. Then I began for to relate the depth of all my minde: Wherefore I wandered so abroad, and what I crau'd to finde. Good Sir (quoth I) and Father eke,Youth decla∣reth the occa∣tion of his iorney. because your yeeres are so: I had desire to goe seeke some noueltie to know. Thus haue I wandred witlesly. a iorney past my skill: And who did sende me first abroade, but one they call Good will.Goodwill the procurer of his iorney And I woulde very fayne goe on, to finde some worthie place That might reuiue my wearie bnes, and yeelde my minde solace. Why then (quoth Ayde) I shall thee bring vnto a noble seate: The place it selfe so gallant is, as tongue cannot repeate.
And if thou wilt bestowe thy time, a Castle Ile thee shew: The which is called Courtesie, and a courteous Knight doth owe. I answere made with lowely minde, I am content to goe To any place, where as I may a farther matter knowe. For in your handes (O Father Ayde)Youth com∣mittes him selfe wholy vnto Aide I doe repose my state: I hope you will conduct me safe, from any force or hate. Yes (trust me) that I shall (quoth he,) and brought me to that place: To viewe the Castle which to shew, doth beare a gallante grace. Upon the Castle gate was set as we did enter in This superscription graued in stone, the which did thus begin. The sentence ingrauen in Stone vpon the Castle Gate. NO hoggish hob, nor currish carle may once presume so bolde To enter here within this Gate, this Castle to beholde. For why, it serues for courteous wight, they shall haue passage free: To enter in, and to abide if so their pleasure be.The end of the sentence. And so the sentence made an ende, that was vpon the Gate: And Ayde and I got leaue to goe,
and viewed in eche state. But Lord to tell how gloriously this Castle is addrest: It would amase my wittes too much, and craue a greater rest. The Rooffe by Geometrie is hangde, most brauely caru'd to see: Wherein hath Arte as much declard, as euer needes to be. Most gallantly be painted eke, with Painters cunning hande: And gilded so, as like the Sunne it shineth where you stande. The Chambers large, and all the Roomes are wonderfull to tell: I promise you I neuer sawe a thinge I lik'd so well. Although my trauell it was great, I holde it well bestowed: Because by Ayde I had such helpe, to haue this Castle shewed. Alas, if I shoulde enterprise, each thing to set to view: I had neede to haue Homers head, my witte for to renue. O Courtesie beholde how Ioue prouided hath a seate: More glorious then thought can thinke, or tongue can well repeate. O Courtesie, thy Castle braue is of so great a price: As scornes Apelles paynted peece, or Cesars rare deuise O Courtesie thou geuest ayde, to euery stllie Elfe: That is of small abilitie,
for to maintaine him selfe. Thou frownest not with furious face nor look'st with churlish cheare: But mildlie doest accorde to stande, the simple sorte to heare. Oh noble Castle, what good hap had I to see thy ground: O Father Ayde, I yealde more thankes, then out my tongue can sounde. If I had lurked in my den, with laysie loytering lust: I neuer had seene such a sight, as chaunce hath now discust. And yet to speake the veritie, I roame not farre from home: My yeeres be not expyred yet, that bound me for a mome. By stelth I did this iorney get, by leaue I had no scope: But hab or nab I prou'd to play, and past my boundes did lope. But whisht, no more of this fonde speech, quoth Wisdome vnto mee: Holde still thy tongue, and slay thy selfe from such a kinde of glee. Of tatling oft doth tumulte rise, and therefore trust not much: T'is harde to knowe a faithfull friend of truth the world is such. The place wherein the Castle standes, None-such is calde they say: And by my trothe it may well be, I thinke ther's none so gay. Not furious force of Cannons strength, nor dente of pellets blowe: Ne subtile sleight of Captaines head
this Castle can bring lowe. Not twentie thousande Soldiers prest in strength will ought preuaile: This Castle once for to assault or once it to assaile. The Captaine which this Castle keepes hath ClemencieClemēcy cap∣taine of the Castell. to name: His Soldiers they be pittifull, no stranger the'le dfame. It bootes as much for to assay with force to winne this place: As it doth boote, to stay the streames that be of rageing race. No, no, the Courteous ciuile wight shall easilie enter in: He needes not vse great force or might, that not preuailes a pin. And as for Grombould groyny groutes and solemne sullen squires: No strength, no force, no courage stout ne yet their deepe desires, Shall once haue entertainement here, adue, goe pack you hence: Your hoggish nature cannot serue with mildenesse to dispence. You not regarde the simple suite of poore and needie soules: Oh fis, beware, take heede of that: for nothing it extoules As you doe thinke, I'le say no more, it is not to my matter: Ne will I praise the vse of some least they esteeme I flatter. The Orcharde that is finely deckt with goodly trees to shew:Praise finally preuaile, ex∣cept proofe be present. It were but vaine to prayse too far,
for who the best will know, Let them goe taste and eate the fruite, and then they shall perceaue: That which is best, and which is worst, and which to take and leaue. For though vnto the view of eye, a tree be streight and faire, And growing in most gallant wise full right vp to the aire: Yet may the fruite be sowre as Crabbe and bitter eke of taste: Wherefore the fruite doth tell the trueth how ere the tree be plac'd. By outward gesture, harde it is the inwarde thought to knowe: For sundrie men haue sundry mindes, and sundrie Natures growe. But where as conuersation is, there knowledge doth not want: And presence ofte doth tell the trueth, when Absence makes it skant. Who is familiar with a wight, may soone his nature finde: And trustie trueth doth credite winne of each well giuen minde. The Courteous doe the Courteous loue, good Reason so to be: And I as glad as any one, that happie hap to see. For Courtesie and Crueltie neuer agreement haue: The one the other seemes to skorne till both be layde in graue. The Tyraunt doth not loue the kind, the kind the Tyraunt hates: Because they be not both of minde;
each one the other rates. For looke where meekenesse is in place, there crueltie doth quaile: And scorneth much the others case, because he will not raile. In spitefull wise with crueltie prest and venemous trickes to shew To make Debate, and great vnrest, such mallice there doth grow. In furious wise, with frowarde fittes and termes as harde as steele: And many other priuate partes, that simple soules doe feele. Wherefore to Magistrates I speake, and such as Rulers be: Shew mercie now, respect the weake that are in miserie. Stretch out your helping handes with speede, to succour needie soules: If poore you ayde, God hath decreede, you shall be in h roules. For if you giue vnto the poore, Christ saith you shall him please: And he hath dayly helpe in store, your doubtes for to appease. The greatest praise to any wight is meekenesse to imbrace: For so he sittes voide of despight, vnto his great solace. For he that troubleth so his minde, in Raging wise to grudge: His neighbours count him much vnk, and deemes him but a snudge. Whose paunche is fraught, with puffed spite, whose head doth foster newes: Whose eares doe daylie still delit
to heare wordes of abuse. Whose heart retaines the Enmitie as Crueltie woulde haue: Who doth reiect Sinceritie that vices doth depraue. What should I say, or more explaine, to further mine intent: How should I write, in prayse of those that are to Mildnesse bent. The flying Fame: with huffing winges that is in euery coast: Doth sound their praise sufficiently among the best and most. And I that haue by Aydes good helpe attain'd to this rare show Could not in couert keepe the fame from some that I doe know For why, I thinke it is a thinge that worthie is to rest: Within some place voide of Disdaine, meete for a Curteous brest Which I will not (so long as life) neglecte to decke with praise: For Courtesie I euer lou'd, and so haue done alwaies. And will doe still, till Sisters three my fatall dayes vnbinde: And ridde me of this worldly yoake, a quyet life to finde. Though I at first,He was pinch with priuate pangues being desolate, vntill oue sent Aide to assist him. disquyet was in minde, for being lost: Yet see how Ioue did sende me Ayde, which shewed me all the Coast. As by the heau'ns vnfayn'd I sware I would not for any thing: But that I had this iorney tra'st,
this newes abacke to bring. And vnto you (O father Ayde)Youthes thāk vnto Ayde. a thousand thankes I render, I will your Beades man, euer rest, alas my wealth is slender. For to requite your trauaile great, and paines that you haue taken: Amid'st the wilde and sauage woods, and trees that windes haue shaken. But haue respect to my good will,Good will is to be wayed though welthe doth want. my heart is set on fire: And for to make some recompence I haue a great Desire. My Youth (quoth AydeAydes replie vnto Youth.) what do'st thou meane, these wordes for to repeate: I looke not for thy recompence, my pames are not so great, But that I can with willing minde, bestow ten times as much. But soft (quoth Ayde) I haue not done my purpose nowe is such: As that I will thee farther tract vnto another place, And shewe thee there a noble Houlde which standes with goodly grace, As I beleeue thou wilt be glad, when as thou dost it view, And thinke thy paines not to be much, I knowe it now for true. For I perceiue thou tak'st repasse, my matters for to learne: Wherefore by my intelligence, thou better shalt discerne. For that I am acquainted with these partes in euery state: And trauail'd haue these countries long,
from force of any hate. O father Aide,Youth. and shall I thus much trouble you in deede: In truth I am at your commaund God send vs both good spéede. I will euen go, where so you please a better loades man sure: In all the world I could not haue my purpose to procure. This place (quoth AideAide.) that I will shewe, it is not very farre: A helpe it is to Courtesie, and saues it many a arre. It is the Hold, the which is cal'd, Humilitie in deede: Not distant far from castel here, to helpe them at their neede. For since thou arte to iorney bent, I will the same now show: And then thou maiest retire thee backe. thy wonted place to knowe. I am right glad it was my happe,Ayde. in wildernesse to finde Out such a one, as for to see, hath such a willing minde. And I (O father) am as glad, oh gentle Aide and trust:Youth. The Gods will giue thée recompence: for thy desertes are iust. Wherefore now let vs hast away, this Hold for to discrye: For euery hower twentie is, vntill it féede my eye. For I have such an earnest zeale, as sure I maruaile much: Wherefore (O father let vs go,
for my request is such. Come on my Childe let vs away, O Castle now farewell: Of all the sightes that euer I sawe, thou surely doest excell. FINIS. The Authors Farewell, to the Castle of Courtesie: 1582. IF pregnant were my pate, to penne a glorious verse; If Pallas would permitte me Ayde, in that I would reherse; If Cicero were aliue; of Virgil mought be found, I mean their personall presences (:) which is cōsum'd in groūd: Then would I sure repaire, vnto them for aduice. And craue assistance, at their handes, to pen some thing of price. But sithe they are consum'd, & brought whereto we must: Therefore vnto my simple Muse, I do commit my trust. Well though that they be gone, yet haue they lefte behinde Their works, to their immortal praise, as fame hath thē assignd. Yea that is true in deede, but to me that's no Ayde: Because in Latin they are pende, the trueth for to be saide, I not it vnderstande, wherefore my skille is lesse: I wante vnto my willing minde in that I would expresse. I cannot skale the Mount of pleasante Parnasse Hill: Wherefore in bone-gree now accepte the meaning of my will. A Farewell I should frame, or els I am diceaued A Farewell now I wil set downe, & so farewell, I leaue is. Then thus I will begin, farewell thou place of price: The onely Author, and the cause, of this my small deuice.
Farewell thou Courteous seate, thou Castle of defence: Farewell thou Friend, to those that want, esteeming the pretēce, of simple poore plaine trueth, which meaneth no disdaine: Nor hath not (Sir) the worldly wiles, to flatter, fliere, & faine. Farewell a thousande times, and yet I do protest A simple Soldiar to remaine, redie at thy request. Redie at thy request: nay redie is my intent, At all times redie for to be at thy commandement. Iames Yates,
THE Hould of Humilitie: Adioyned to the Castle of Cour∣tesie. Compiled by Iames Yates, seruingman. Captious Conceipts, good Reader doe dismis: And friendly weigh the willing minde of his, Which more doth write for pleasure then for praise, Whose worthlesse workes are simplie pend alwaies. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, neere the Signe of the Castle.
To the Courteous construers of indifferent iudgement. I See a sect, which leane to false reporte, And finde some cause to cauill in disdaine: I wishe they would leaue off that friendlesse sorte, And not triumph in vauntes which are but vaine. Their doubtful doomes delighting in disdaine, Might frustrate be from follie, trust me true, And not with contempt, the simpler sorte to view. To Courteous construers, I doe this commende, Which vvith good vvill, doe vveigh the vvilling mind, Indifferentlie their iudgement to extend, And yeelde reporte according as they finde: And so shall I at no time be behinde To vse my penne, and practise vvith my pate, In vvilling sorte my fancies to relate. A homelie Houlde for present I preferre: Requesting those vvhich doe the same expect, With Courtesie their iudgement to inferre. For I presume all vvill not it reiect But fauour finde, my indeuour to protect, From truthlesse tongues, vvhich tattle tales but fained And glorie great vvhen others are disdained. No dolor to disdaine. Iames Yates.
The Houlde of Humilitie. 1582. AS fixed minde desire hath, more noueltie to see; And wanton wittes are soone inti with such toyes as they be: So (trueth to tell) I must not faine, that were no honest part: I am as readie as the best to practice such an art. Small practise sure I thinke will serue, for nature hath vs taught: For to forsake that which is good, and take that which is naught. In deede more readie for the worst, then seeke the best to chuse: For nature is an enemie, her Impes for to abuse. The frailetie of our present Time is much for me to write: And silence seldome gets dispraise, when tatlinge moues despite. For little saide, a smalle amendes will serue to counter poyse: When too much mischiefe doth arise by talkers tatling noyse. But whist, me thinkes I heere a voyce which doeth commande me staye: And telles me flatt in fewe wordes, I am out of my waye. O Youth what should become of thee if Ayde were not thy guide: What way would'st thou haue wandred heere. how soone would'st thou goe wide?
Come followe me quoth father Ayde let vs this Houlde goe see: To view each parte and how it standes, in state and eke degree. So forth we went through forrest thicke, and many craching Bryers: Yet did we make no forse of them, such were our due desires. And when we had thus past the worst, at length that place we founde: The which did much delight our mindes, and pleasure did abounde. For loe, we sawe this passing Houlde, so finelis frma'd in seate: As in my minde I streight did muse to see a thing so greate. So hugs and monstrous of higth with Towers on each side: That gaue it sure a goodly grace, as did reporte my guide. The Situation of the same, vpon a pleasant greene: Where Tellus bankes so braue did shew, as like may not be seene. An entrie of Trees did growe, so streight vp to the skye: As made me meruaile very much, to see their length so' hye. And moated round, where pleasant springer, doe yeeld a rare delight, And him that gets a sip thereof I count a happie wight. Pernassus Hill where Muses keepe, and ioyfull noates abounde: May not compare now with this Houlde, or pleasant fertle ground.
Apollo if he were in place, to take a view therof: Would presently, commend the same, I knowe I do not scoffe. The cost which Caesar did bestowe, within the walles of Rome: Is not coequall vnto this, as I suppose by doome. When we aproched neere this Hold,Resistance. there did a Porter stand:Porter to the Holde. Whose name Resistance (sir) was cal'd a greate clubbe in his hand. For Grimnesse sure he might be Mars, or Hercules indeede: Who did commaunde vs for to stay, whereto we both agreed. He asked vs, wherefore we came, and what was our intent: We vp and told him all our minde, and whereto we were bent. Quoth Ayde, we are both straungers we desirouse for to see: This noble place the which is cal'd the Hold of Humilitie. Then straight Resistance gaue vs leaue, to passe his watched place: But in my dayes I neuer sawe, so coucht a crabtreed face. Resistance sure he might well be, his face did shew the same: His gesture therto was alike, as nature well can frame. Thus onwarde still withouten stoppe, or any whit denyall: When we had past Resistance hard, we further put in tryall.
And venterously we did presume to come vnto the gate: Where as we met an other wight of meeke and comely state. Who asked vs from whence we came and what was our intent: We saide to see this noble Hold, our mindes were fully bent. Sir may we be so bolde (quoth Youth) for to demaund your name, He gently disclosed to vs what was the verie same. My name is Salutation, which neuer doth disdaine: The traueling wighte which worthie is, All times I entertaine. And as I was a going inYouth. by chaunce cast vp myne eye: And looking vp vpon the gate this verse I did espye. The verses vpon the gate of the Hold of Humilitie. I Am humilitie, the holde, the humble to receiue: The stubburne I renounce them quite, the froward I do leaue. Approch not nigh you currish carles, lest that my battering shotte: Dischardged be to coile your coates, and make your stomackes hote. O Master Salutation these verses carry fire:Aide. Theire sense is alligant and tarte.
theire meaning I inspyre. And when I came within The Houlde, how lik'st thou this quoth Ayde? Sir,Youth. I am euen Rauished, my senses be dismai'd. Dismai'd, why? Because I am in Paradise I thinke:Ayde. Oh God what Christall glimmering shewes doe make my eies to wincke. As Goulde surmounteth Copper base; or siluer passeth tinne: So doe these sightes (which I doe see) which are the house within. Whil'st Salutation, Ayde and I. were looking round about: I heard a dore which opened from whence there issued out, Another wight of comely hue, at which I stood apalled: And was Desirous for tokowe by what name he was called. And as it seem'd he did one heare, for why? he aunswere made: What be these wightes, which aske my name, or what Sir, is there trade? Quoth Salutation vnto him, they are both straungers (they) Resistance gaue them leaue to passe hether (as they doe say). I Sir (quoth we) straungers we are, but may we knowe your name: It is Sir Gratulation of trueth the very same. The Captaine I am of this Houlde,Oratulation Captaine of the Houlde. commanding euery man: (That is within my gouernment)
to shew you what they can. But by what meanes (I pray you tell) did you finde out this way. I shall declare the cause is such:Youth. I fixed was to stray, And like a yongling lost my selfe, in forrest thicke vnknowne: And crying out with ruthfull voyce, to haue my miserie knowne. By Gods assignement (as I must, of force confesse in deede:) Came then vnto my father Ayde, to helpe me at my neede. And to be short, I did declare, vnto him all my minde: How that I was affectioned some Noueltie to finde. Why then quoth Ayde, come on thy way, rise vp and go with me: And I will shewe you a Castel cal'd, by name of Courtesie. And were you at the Castel (Sir)Gratulation. the better now apaide: You are as welcome to this place, as can with tongue be saide. For I am (Sir) solemnly sworne, this Hold I do maintaine: To helpe the Castle when they neede, or do commaunde my paine. But Sirs, since that you come from thence, you be most welcome sure, And though you are straungers to me, yet what I can procure, You shall commaund vnfainedly sirs, with a willing hearte. Then Ayde and I both gaue him thankes,
and tooke it in good part. Forthwith he call'd a seruant out, whose name was Dilligence,Dilligence ser∣uant to Gran∣lation. And gaue him charge in any wise, as he woulde scape offence: To shewe vs what we did Desire within the Houlde to see: And charged him in any wise from vs two not to be. He well obeyed his Masters hest, he tooke great paines in deede: To shewe vs euery place within, that might our pleasures feede. Truely Dilligence delited much, to signifie and tell: To burnish out his Masters praise, it seem'd he lou'd it well. So vp and downe from place to place, by Dilligence directed: He was not slow to shewe vs all, no labour he detracted. But thus in briefe to cut it off, and make relation small: Of any sight that euer I sawe, it passeth most of all. Then Ayde and I, when we had seene enough to please our minde: We asked Dilligence if he could his Master for as finde, That we might yeeld him thankes, for this his friendship shewed: And alwaies resting to requite the Courtesie bestowed. Then Dilligence did bring vs both to Gratulation kinde: Who asked vs if we had found,
the thing to please our minde. I sir quoth we, we haue that founde. and seene we neuer sawe: And if we may stand you in stead, we sweare by faithfull lawe, You shall command vs at all times, and so we minde to parte: Protesting yours for to rest, with faithfull fixed hart. And truelie of your gentlenesse, we shall not let to tell: Sith you haue entertained vs, with faithfull minde so well. And thus adue, high Ioue of all be your chiefe guide and trust: For we will homewarde take our way, as needes of force we must. Quoth Ayde to me, my Youth marke this,An Informati∣on giuen by Ayde vnto Youth. in each time, state and season: For to requite where paines are tooke, me thinkes it were good Reason: Shoulde wee depart and nothing giue to Dilligence (O fie) Since he hath taken all the paines to seede and please our eye. I was forgetfull of the same,Youth. of Trueth I must confesse: I thanke you for remembring it my duetie to expresse. So then I called Dilligence, and gaue to him Rewarde: Who gaue vs thankes with open mouth, that easily might be heard. So we departed from this Houlde, and did retyre then backe: Unto the place from whence we came,
where I was in a wracke, And Agonie of pensiue minde, in place where I was lost: And houling lay, with yelling voyce, as one whome fortune tost. Quoth Ayde (my Youth) I found you heere,Ayde. and heere I will you leaue: And followe you this path before, and then you shall perceaue, Your homeward way from whence you came it doth Direct aright: And I will to my Cottage poore, to rest my Aged spright. Untill such time as fatall Mors, bereaues my drudging dayes: Unto whose pleasure I submit, not vsing of delayes. Oh father Ayde my onely guide,Youth. my faithfull Trust and stay: And is it thus nowe come to passe, that you wil needes away? Who hath since first our meeting heere, so faithfull to me beene: As euer was the trustie zeale, of Dido that was Queene.Queene Dido truer then Ae∣neas. Whose loyall heart was firmely fixt, to false Aeneas hee: That stoale awaye in truethlesse sorte, to force her Miserie. So trueth to tell I doe beléeue, since thus you doe departe: It will occasion be of griefe, and wounding to my heart. But Ayde will not be a frustrate quite, if vrgent cause require: But Ayde will be a meane to helpe,
the simple that Desire, Some knowledge of this waywarde world, which tosseth vp and downe: Like furious fretting foaming flouds, when Neptune gins to frowne. Perchaunce some mutall minde will Muse and murmure at this case, And say, what foolish fond Deuice hath semed such a place. To which demand I doe replie, the faithfull fixed heart: Did study for to finde out this, by Aydes good skill and art. Humilitie, a Houlde in deede, for those that humble bee: A place prepared for repasse In modest sort we see. Where Godly graces grafted are, with Impes of vertuous race: The buddes do burnish on the braunch with gallant goodly grace. Which Ioyes the heart of euery wight, Whome Natures forme hath framed: Whose lowlie life, with lenitie, deserues not to be blamed. The Loyall ore that linkes in loue, of force doth merrite fame: The good and well disposed minde is worthie of the same. But Amorous toyes of Youthfull youth respecteth not with care: The truethlesse troth, and friendlesse frau that some full closely bare. No sound nor sober counsell can, their wilfull minde affray: Esteeming it as speeches vaine,
wherein there is no stay.An . Wherfore (O Youthes) marke now a Youth. something to staiednesse bent: Which spyes that romers raunge in ragges: and lurke in deepe lament. Who findes that likely Fortune is, a fond incertaine Dame: Which heapes more hazzardes to the heart. then thought can thinke the same. Who sées the stoute and lustie bloudes, full etly abyde: When as the hote and furieuse force, is let out from their side. I not commend the fickle friend, that falles out for a strawe: Nor that will rangle for a Rushe, ne deale so like a dawe. For he that sweares by woundes and bloude, and lookes so like a Bull: When as he comes to doe the feate, his hart is in his skull. And hotest men of many wordes are slowe enough in deedes: And some will fainte that showe good face when but their finger bleedes. And he that doth prouoke so much. the sober man to fight: If he be entered in his acte. the lustiest blowes will smite. A prouerbe olde, in Englande here, the still sowe ea the draffe: And some do weep hich haue small cause, when some aga do laugh. I must needes no declare a thing. which comes within my minde: How some for to out face the worlde,
will seeme the world to blinde. And since of Castell and the Hould, I did at large display: Now somewhat of this craftie world I breefly minde to say. For I am priueledged in deede, since Aide hath taken leaue: A litle to disclose my minde, for that I do perceaue, The slily falshood now a dayes that restes within the lande: As trust me it was neuer more, the trueth to vnderstand. The counter feaing crookes to catch, and simple to allure: The faithlesse fond and filthie fraude, that dayly is in vre. When as that one shall come to you, and say he is right sad, And hartely sory in his minde, for ill luckes that you had. And by my troth I tell you true, I would I could know how: To helpe you in this your distresse, I make to God a vowe. Another comes professing eke, for to remaine a friend: And neuer to exempt his faith, vntill his dayes do ende. And saith, if I eke in stead may stand. I pray you to be bolde: But when in deede there commeth neede, his doings then are cold. Oh noble flattering flearing world, oh guilefull glowing heate: Oh subtle sounde, of truethlesse tongues,
that trueth doth nere repeate. Not knowing how for to dissemble, not knowing then to liue: But God for his greate mercies sake such filthie factes forgiue. And root the vipers from their vaine, of stinging at vnwares: By whom the simple sillie soule, is caught in doubtfull cares. And thus the Author makes an end, desiring each good minde: To thinke the best of this his worke, so further shall they finde. The end of the Hould of Humilitie. 1582.
A farevvell framed to the Hould of Humilitie. THe due Desire, that I haue to commend, Humilitie, I can not well expresse: Because that Pallas will not to me lende, Her cunning quille, therefore I do digresse, From curiouse verse, to feede such fancie fine, Where to some men their mindes do nowe incline. But pardon prayed, Presumption pusheth me, And bashlesse Boldnesse biddeth me proceedè, And Hope at hand my thinkes doth let me see, That small Disdaine, shall come by this my deede: Wherefore if I should loyter or not write, Small were Experience, and lesse were my delight. But loe behold my thinkes I can not tell, How for to frame, as I before exprest: Well (as I thinke) it should be a farewell, A farewell bee it, and so farewell, I rest From this deuice, and others take in hand To gratifie, and so it vnderstand. Finis.
A dialogue between Age & Youth, Declaring hovve vaine a thing it is to Presume on Youth, and how we must all yeeld to Age. Age. I Am for to be loued, for why? you must me proue: You youthfull laddes, that youthfull are, it doth you much behue. For I am grisseled Age, who striketh you with Ake: And make you yeeld though with ill will, your bones I doe so shak. Youth. It is not grisseled Age that Youth can now restraine: Nor make me subiect to your yoake, ne will I yet refraine, My youthfull Toyes that now I Youth, will vse in your despyte: For why? Sir Age you haue no force to banish my delite. Age. Haue I no force, to pull thy pride? well one day thou shalt see, That I will make thee for to stoupe and yeeld thy selfe to me: And shake as I doe now, when hoary hayres appeare, To make thee leaue of youthfull toyes, and dalling with thy deere. Youth. Nay Age it is not thou,
can make me leaue to Toye: For why? therein is my delight, I houlde it for my ioy. For I haue most delight, to talke with Venus Dames: For Cupid oft doth me moue, by force of fiery flames. Age. Those fiery flames that Cupid sendes, and doe in thee abounde: Thou wilt at length (I knowe) them leaue, incertaine is their grounde. For why? who can withstand when Age doth lay his yoake? Yeeld therfore now most willingly, to beare my staying stroake, Youth. To yeeld my selfe to thralle, nay Age that shall not be: It is not thou that can me hurte, I force not much of thee. For I will thee withstand inspite Sir of thy nose: And runne my race in youthfull wise, as I doe well suppose. Age. I doe not Sir say nay, but then maist runne a race: Yet vnto me thou must nowe bend, in spight Sir of thy face. For I can make thee come to Crouches, if that thou Be not cut by swinging wise: I make to God a vow. Youth. To Crouches, what are they?
I bid thee doe thy worst: I force thee not, doe what thou can, to me doe as thou dorst. For I am youthfull Youth, I force thee not a mite: Thy grisseled face, is not in minde, thou art not in my sight. Age. I am not in thy sight, till I doe make thee shake: As I will doe it one day sure, if life do not forsake. Then shalt thou see that I, haue altered thy will, To brydle fond affection, wherin thou stand'st so ill. Youth. To bridle my Affection, thou shalt it finde but vaine: Thy pourpose shall not came to passe, thou canst it not attaine. For I will houlde thee off, so longe as I haue life: My youth I knowe thou canst not quaile, I finde my selfe so ryfe. Age. Though youth in thee doth so abound, yet I Age will take place: And make thee wofull weary, I, when as I doe thee chase. And though thou seem'st to run at large, at length you shall come home: And bee as I am, silly Age, and counted as a Mome. Youth. Though thou art counted as a Mome,
yet wisedome doth me guide: That I haue ights to shift thee off, and put thy yoake aside. And though thou would'st so faine nowe catch me in thy trap: I am so light and quicklie gone, I rest not in thy lap. Age. Although thou rest not in my lap, yet I can catch thee in: And make thee subiect vnto me, when as I doe begin. With ach and paine to rouse thy Corpes, that youth did once professe: Such is the Strength sir, of my stroaks, when as I doe oppresse. Youth. Alas good Age thy strength of stroake, I feele vpon me nowe: It lyeth so heauie on my bones, it makes me for to bowe. And though I held thee off with talke, that was but vaine: Yet nowe I feele that Age can strike with greeuous ach and paine. Age. O lustie youth, is courage past, can you no more hold off? I thought at length you would come home, for all you did so skoffe, And yeeld your selfe to me, that nowe haue trapp'd you in, Although before that you did say, you forc'd me not a pin. Youth. Those vauntes were all in vaine,
my wordes they were but winde: But thine were trus, as I full well vnto my greefe de finde. Wherefore you youthfull laddes, that seeme to put Age by: You may as well presume to clyme, vnto the loftie skye. FINIS. Verses which were presented vnto the Patron of this booke at newe yeares Time. 1578. I Reade (right worthie Sir) an extant open thing: Of the rare shewe of Courtesie, in Artaxzerxes King: Who passing through his realme, greate men for verie loue, With presentes rare, presented him there good will for to proue. Whose giftes were of greate price, to shewe their welth and porte: The straingest things that could be got, of euery kinde and sorte. Which when the King receaued, great thankes to them extended: Their loyall heart, to duetie bent, most Princely he commended. But (ah) a silly soule whom pouertie nere pined: Be thought him to present his Prince, as duetie hath asūgned.
Not hauing welth at will, n Iuels that were trumne: Tooke vp his handfull of water faire, came running towardes him. And offered to his Grace, as Token to Forshow: Though welth he wanted, yet of good wil, his duetie for to know. But note the courteouse kinde, of this most prudent Prince: This present base, not to reiect, nor once it to conuince. But tooke it gratefully, for that he did beholde, The true intent, of simple soule, whom dutie made so bold. So Sir, I earnestly request this at your hand: My small present for to esteem, next this to vnderstand: My boldnesse to excuse, that saucely thus aspire, To write so pertely vnto you, before my state be hyer. And thirdly for to beare, my rudenes which hath raised: A matter here before your face, vnworthie to be praised. But forced by good will, something for to present: Esteeming not the thing it selfe, but simple true intent. The meaning voyd of fraud, composing voyde of guyle: For Groslum Caput giues no leaus, fine verses to compile.
But Tryall hath me Told, Experience hath me showen: That Artaxzerxes kinde in you, is easie to be knowne. The which did set me on, to shewe my true intent: Some verses (Sir) this new yeares time, vnto you to present. For it that I had skill, according to my minde: A matter that were worth the fight, your worship then should finde. But what needes all these wordes, as Preface now before: To signifie a long discourse, to trouble more and more. But God graunt you your health, his faueur and his aide: To sheelde you from each fayned friende, and make your foes dismaide. God graunt accomplishment, of that you most desire: In what so euer as it be, from heart I do require. God graunt that Enuie may, be voyde of her intent: Not to preuaile at any time, although that she be bent, God graunt Dissimulation may shine like Christall cleare: That vnto you each double hearte, may easely appeare. God graunt that Deepe Deceipte, at no time do preuaile: God graunt as much as he can graunt, God graunt no thing do quaile.
But all may prosper well, approching still to Fame: Whose worthie workes, haue merrited high prayses to his name. Whose happie helping hand releeuing those that neede: Doth winne the way to make you liue, for euer more in deede: Whose dayly deedes in vse abroade do so resounde: As passeth my Capacitie, or wisdome to expounde. Perchaunce your worship will condemne me in this sorte: And thinke I write in flattering wise, to make a long reporte. Not so (I doe protest) for why? I you assure: In that offence I guiltlesse am, my conscience it is pure. And as I scorne the vse, of flattering flearing fraude: So will I not, while I do liue, neglecte to giue you laude. Destring still of God, as erst I did before: Your ioy to ioyne with new yeare now, and many other more. Thus (Sir) I humbly ende, desiring God of grace: Your worship long for to preserue, in happie state and case. And when your fatall dayes, of force must yeeld to clay: Then for to rest, in heauenly place, that neuer shall decay. Finis.
Other verses presented vnto him, at new-Yeeres time. CLeanthes he, whom learnings lore held in such estimation, As for to find himselfe at schoole, he vsed this occupation: At morning soone, and euening late, he water tankards brought Unto those houses of such men, by whome hee vauntage cought. For being poore, vnable was to keepe in place of price: Untill he found, by taking paine, profit in his deuice. Whereby he kept himselfe at schoole, good letters to attaine: And although he was very poore. yet this way founde he gaine. And when he had sufficient, according to his will: He then presented to those men, some workes of better skill. Which shewed in him a due Desire his duetie to reserue: And also eke an earnest zeale, there fauours to conserue. Euen so vnto your worship now, my simple verse I send: My dutie bids me be so boulde, the same for to commend, Unto your courteous true aspect, to construe of the same: The which is ment for meere good will, more then for any same. For I haue not Cleanthes skill,
deepe matters to impart: But such as come from simple head, and eke a faithfull hart. Which caused me this neweyeeres Time newelie the same to write: They newe are of inuention, yet not newe of delight. Impute it not good Sir, for want of willingnesse in me: But want of learning is the cause no better verse you see. I cannot glose with gallant phrase, my bringing vp was plaine, And simple sense inforceth me to write in simple vaine, Which I present vnto your view, as heeretofore is saide, And although not seemely set out, yet willingnesse well weighed, Shall counteruayle the want of skill that aply heere might bee: But of an Ape impossible it is a tayle to see. The Lorde preserue your worship long, in health, in wealth, and peace, And graunt all thinges you take in hand, may haue there due increase. The Lord preuent each fauning foe, and faithlesse meaning minde: Who vnder shew of simplenesse, worke mischiefe in their kinde, God graunt vnto you glad new yeere, with long and ioyfull life: And likewise I doe wish the same vnto your worthie wife: Whome you and her the Lorde preserue:
so humblie I am bound, To giue you thankes (Sir) while I liue, for friendship I haue found. Resting at your commandement, Iames Yates. Verses on friendship. VNder the Cope and glittering hue of heauen, Are all the ioyes allotted by decree: Yet is there none, that may compared be, Unto a friend that neuer is vneuen: But doth remaine all one in constancie. But for such friendes, as are but friends in sight, They doe deceiue, incertaine is their trust, They proue vntrue, they moulder like the dust: But ah, a friend that standes in friendly right. He is a friend, as needes confesse I must. Now if one finde a faithfull friend in deede, Then keepe him still, as Ieuell that is rare, Be sure on this, to haue on him a care: For why? he will remaine a friend at neede: As Triall telles, and Trueth doth well declare. Verses on false Report. OH God hovv false report, doth vvinne a man Defame, And closely capeth at his life, to bring him vnto blame. It lovvring lurkes in Den of Dire Disdainefull Dole, And spyes a time to peepe abraod, as fire burnes the coale. No wight so vvise of vvill, so sber in his deedes; No one so happy in this vvorld, but false reporte him feedes.
For each day that he riseth from slumbring sleeping bed, And thinkes to spend, the cheerefull day deuoyde to Anger led: Then ere that arosie night, approach to take his due, He heares some false reporte in hand, which makes his heart to rue. But he that bends his care to euery atling tale, Shall neuer be without a cause to busie him with bale. And he shall haue conceipts to coople with his will, And some fond fancy put in vse, to feede his humour still. Wherfore a head that's stat'd with steady tamed braine, Is vvorth a Masly Mounte of mucke that worldlings seeke to gaine. For riches flieth loose, where Rashnes rules the band, And Right & Reasō is cut off, vvhere Rigor seemes to stād. But vnto false Report, that fables feine and finde, Esteeme of them no other vvs, but blastes of bootles vvind. Put finger in thy care, and harke not to there tale: For they are motions mou'd by those that loue to heare of bales. So shall each state standfast, and steady on his gound, He shall not be accounted wise, that folly doth confound. So shall he sovv in ease, and reape againe in ioy, So shall he vvin the wished hap that wresteth downe anoy, Wherefore I count him vvise, that bridle can his braine, And not too rashly rū in rage, thogh cause doth him cōstraine. Verses vnto his Muse. MUse not my minde of worldly thinges, Thou see'st what care to some it bringes. The merrist minde from folly free, Sometimes conceaues discourtesse, Which is the occasion oft of Ire, Through frowarde will which kindles fire. But if thou wilt liue well at ease And worldly wights secke for to please: Then frame thy nature to this plight, In each respect to deale vpright.
Thou seest my Muse, how Fancie feedes, And what Desire in some it breedes; Thou seest that those, which haue bene well, Hauenot the skill thereof to tell: But tinke to get a better place When as they worke their owne Disgrace For why? from heauen, they chaunge to hell In deepe despite for time they dwell, So is our fickle fancie fraught, Whom can we blame but tickle Thought. The sillie bird that dreedes no ill, But singes with ioyfull notes ful shrill: Is by the craft of brders arte Ketcht to her paine, and carefull smart. For why? the lime her winges doth charge, Who erst to fore did fly at large, And then she resteth as we see, To try the birders Courtesie: Euen so, if some do thee intrap, Thou must needes stay to trye thy hay. Wherefore who well can them content, Haue seldome cause for to repent. For if thou well doe feele thy selfe, Chaunge not that life, for worldly pelfe. You know the ease of quyet minde, Is happiest giste by Ioue assign'd. Admit that riches do encrease And then the quyet life surcease: What is't the better for the git, When fretting fumes, sweet rest haue spilt. To haue both welth, and quyet vaine, Oh happie wightes that it attaine: Oh golden dayes of quyet state,
When fortune giues no crabbed mate. And on the other side I say, O cursed life that euery day, Doth not escape from furious fittes, Which heates the hearte, & woundes the wites. The merry meane I hould for best, Oh happie wightes, that it inuest. The labouring man, with breade and drinks, Liues merrier in mind I thinke, Then some which feede on dayntie fare, Whose Corpes sufficed, yet haue greate car For sure that meate digestes not well, Where merrie measure doth not dwell. Oh Life most happie still I say, That liues at rest and hath to pay, And lyeth downe with quyet minde, The rest to take that Ioue asign'd. Verses vpon the troubles of this Worlde. OH troublesome world the worker of we & base, Of bitter blastes, of stormes that stint no stryfe Oh hazardes hard, which heape vp such a gale In furiouse wie, that greefe is greedy ryfe. In vaine with worldly welth is any wight indued: If that by mightie oue it e not still reneed. The caes are greate to cause the minde to muse, Of this and that, that happeneth oft awrye: The Fates be od, that doth vs est abuse, Wherein consisteth a greate perplexetie. For whilst with ioyes we seeke to haue relife, In meane time coms some cause of double griefe.
Thus sharpely shap'd are shimmering shewes that shine, To bleare the eyes that very faine would see: Such pleasant sightes, whose aspect doth incline, No wight to wo, nor moues to miserie, To carke, to care, to greefe, nor to disease. Oh happie wight whom Fortune so doth please. But for to tell for truth, now which be they, My wit is small, and cunning it is lesse. I cease to speake, my sense serues not to say: For if per chaunce, I should not name aright, They would me deeme some mome or doltish wight. But this to say, the wight that most doth spend His Time in ioy, hath some time care among. The world is such the best for to offend, To reaue their rest that would be free from wrong, So some do spend the Wicked World in feares, Which for one ioy doth bring a M. cares. Verses in declaration of a friend written at the request of P. W. MY Muse did moue me my pen in hand to take, In skillee wise vnsteady to endyte, But sith it is here written, for your sake: Accept it well and construe it aright. For of a friende, I do intende to treate, What is a friende, right well I can repeate. For to declare by iust probation true, What is a friend, and what a friend should be: A friend standes firme in causes olde or new, He flitteth not as fickle friendes we see, He keepes his oth, he fost ers eke no guyle, He laugheth not with face of craftie wile.
A friend is fraught, with faith and fastened stay; A friend kepes close, that is to him disclosed; A friend heares not, that may his friend betraye, But he declares, vnto his friend Deposed; A friend in woe which fayleth not at need: A friend so found, I call a friend in deede, A friend doth mourne, and languish in his heart; A friend lamentes, when as his friend doth fall; A friend doth muse, to helpe his friende in smart. A friend doth marke, and to his minde doth call, How to Disnull the dolours of Disdaine, Which he perceaues do put his friend to paine. Loe, this my friende, if that thou finde by Tryall That firme and fast is kept a vow once made: Thou canst not then, procure a wronge Denyall, But that he is a friend, of friendly trade. If such you finde, keepe him and be not straunge: For fickle friends, for euery folly chaunge. I hope this shall suffise to satisfy, This your request, I write it not for gaine, But glad if that herein I do discry Such wordes as do lay open verie plaine, The friendly factes, of those whose friendly lore, Doth winne them praise: and so of this no mor. Verses vpon Hope, declared by Motion and Answere. Motion. My hope, is helpe, which lendes my minde reliefe: Though care be cause, Some times, to force my griefe.
Aunswere. As griefe doth gripe, and moues the heart to moans: So hope is help'd, by priuie thoughts alone. Motion. By thought alone, is that soone help'd indeede? Ten thousand thoughtes, shall then my fancy feede. Aunswere. Well, if thou thinke with fastened minde and stay, Thy thought will helpe in thinking what there may: Motion. With time comes thinges, vnlike at first to proue: So hope of Time, when dolours doe thee moue. Aunswere. Such counsells good, I take in friendly part, And yeeld you thankes, with willing minde and hart. Verses written at the Departure of his friende W. . When hee went to Dwell at London. THe absence of a friend, is griefe vnto the hart: The presence of him worketh ioy, and putteth backe the smart: So will (my onely Will) the absence now of thee,
Doth make me waile in woful wise, to thinke that it should bee. But when thy friendly Corpes, shall present be to view: Then shal I ioy, as now I mourne, that absence makes me rue. But well, I must content my dolefull minde with this: We subiect are to fortunes lore, as certaine true it is. Yet this I doe persuade, that absence hath no force: A faithfull friend, to make vnkinde, that were without remorce. I doe not thinke that Will, will so his friend forget: But will remaine in former will, and be not ouer set, By any light conceipte, which doth procure vnrest, To bring disdaine, whereas delight should build within the brest. No no, I am disposed to speake this by the way: But Trust me Will, beleeue me now, I doubt not as I say. For I am firmely fixt, thy friendship will not faile, Although that absence might procure the same for to preuaile. Well, for a vauntlesse vow, accept this at my hand: As I haue beene so will I be, good Will so vnderstand.
Verses sent vnto Master P. W. to Cambridge. IF gratulations (Sir) from secret faithfull heart, May at your handes, accepted be and taken in good part; Or if a barren verse, wherein doth rest no skill, May yeeld vnto you such delight as Motions mou'd by Will: Then Sir: as Time outweares the length of euery life, Which bringeth some in happy blisse, and some in dole and strife: So Time oft takes in hand a matter of erection, And though at first it seeme vnlike, in fine it hath perfection. When this considered is, me thinkes it hath a grace: Which oft delightes the dolefull minde, and yeeldes it some solace. And though Sir I presume to take in hand the penne, I knowe full well to whom I writes and what conceaue I then? I straight persuade my selfe, as Triall hath me tolde: That there doth rest in Courteous brest, receypts tenne thousand fold. Which waied? who would not then, inforce his doltish braine, To wryte his verse, to such a one, who neuer will disdaine, The basenesse of the same,
though found it doe of paine; Whose Oaten pipes doe ioy such mates, as handle Flayle and Sawe. Your friendes are all in health, your foes God graunt them foyle: And figge for those that wish you ill, let grumbling snudge goe moyle. A letter I you sent, wherein I did discharge: To write effect of your request, and fathers speech at large, Concerning Master B. who nowe in Cambridge Towne, By fauours letter there receiued, God graunt he so sit downe, As when he ryseth vp: all wildenesse by exilde, Which is the grounde of gracelesse greene, where mischiefe seemes to buylde. Thus Sir I rest your owne, with true and faithfull hart: Crauing of God that you may liue, a life deuoyde of smart. Other verses written vnto him vvhen hee was at Ip∣svvich: With a Caueat vvhich was in Printe, sente at the same Time. IF will doe with, not want can holde me backe, Although I finde my cunning is but small: Or if I should Discourse what I doe lacke, As I haue cause, if well to minde I call: Then might I cease, and be content to stay, The skillesse verses which I ofte displaye.
I faine would frame some cunning in my ile, And Poet like to notefie my minde: I haue desire such matter to compile As may content, although in Trueth I finde I want Dame learning, which is the chiefest thinge Praie to procure, and credit for to bringe. But what meane I to be obedient Unto obliuion, so vyle a thinge? Why do I cease so longe for to present, That to withold, which I of right should bring? Belike it is, because the chaunged state, Hath chaung'd my Muse, and put in feare of rate. Some other matter Differing from the first, Auoyding sadnesse workes, a sudden feare, A sudden chaunge, from that which was the worst, Doth suddenly discharge the minde of care, And on the sudden seemeth such delight, As moueth mirth more then I can resite. But Sir, if I should breake my inwarde hearte, In secrete sort, as I do it inuest, I must haue Time for that I would imparte. But I do hope that this among the rest, Shall simply serue as Toaken which I sende, My Truth and troth to you for to commend. With vowes to vaunte the loyall loue I beare, To you, and all that is Sir of your name: It were but vaine for I Dare iustly sweare You do I hop, so conrue of the same. My duetie donne to you and all the rest: I you commend to him which is the best. Prouyder for all men: who alwayes prosper your proceedings
A caueat conuenient for younkers to see: How fickle Dame Fancie, doth chaung her degree, DRaw neere you Impes of youthfull race, respect my wordes a while: Beware in Time, turne from that place, where Fancie most doth smile. Let not the shew of smyling lookes, encourage ee to lust: Least thou be tooke, with poysoned hookes where most thou put'st thy Trust. Dost thou not see, it is not race, to vse deceiptfull wayes: For if thou rightly wilt compare, and marke well the delayes, Then shalt thou finde such craftie vaine, such soothing voyd of truth: As puts each honest heart to paine, and turnes their mirth to ruth. The modest mind which markes the lore, and state of this our time: Doth inwardly in hearte deplore, to construe of each crune, Committed thorow follie fond, The mother of Debate: Which makes no acompt to keepe the bond, of Truth, or trustie state. Yet marke how foolish wanton Will, by Fancie brought a sleepe, Will seeme to playe the noddey still. in daunger more to creepe: When as by proofe sufficient, it plainely doth appeare, How Lewdenesle leanes to theire intent, and it some will not heare. Though in their eares it sounded be,
eke each day in their sight: They blynded are they can not see, and why then shall I write? For sooth because they senslesse seeme being lulled so in lust, And yet they Prudently esteeme the factes of some vniust: And in theire heart do sacrifice, profoundly and deuout, As though in deede that might suffise, to bring their fetch about. Alas, a lack, I mourne, I waile, I sigh, I sob to see: That foolish fancie should preuaile, to winne the chiefe degree: In mortall mindes which are but clay. and flesh the wormes to feede, And like a shadow doth decay most true it is in deede. Then ere thy breath be spent and past, reuoke thy childish toyes: And giue thou ouer yet at last, that most was once thy ioyes. For why? fond Will thou canst not haue, that solely to thy selfe: When others may in time it craue as gayned with their pelse. Thou art of yeares to knew, this well, The Hauke whose gorge is full, Takes more delight to shake her bell, then on the lure to pull: Euen so conceyue this in thy thought. for why? thou maiest it see: The newest things are soonest bought, and are still wo to be. Then thus consider in thy minde,
Where thou thy fancie frames: Giue leaue let Nature showe hee kinde, but publish out no names. For Nature she, can not digresse, I speake not this to faine, But euen the truth for to expresse, to those who to that vaine, Doe seeme so much for to apply, their studie in their hearte: God graunte in fine such do not trie, a close vnhidden smart. And thus adue, I leaue this verse, to scanned be of some: Which often times do wordes rehearse, when as they might be name. Verses vvritten vpon this vvord, vvho doth refaine to faine, declared vnto him priuatly by his friende, vvhome he ansvvereth thus. WHo can refraine where flatterie beareth sway, Who doth not Sir Dissemble? for sooth y• vpright mind, Who hath ye harmles heart? not verteouse mē I say, Who mindeth most mistrust? the lewd, and truthles kind, Who fauours friendlesse fraud? the fickl flearring friend, Who most rebuketh vice? those that wish godly ende, A lothsome life it were if idlenesse were maintained, A brutish kinde of trade, to fauour a flithie fact, A mischieuous meaning man for most part is disdayned, An innocent to slay were but a cowardes acte, A pratler much to be, declares but simple sense, A drunkardes draught, to drinke, you graūt to be offence, Well Sir, as for offence, offenders we are all.
Aswell the riche as poore, the wise as is the foole: God graunt we may haue grace for mercy stil to call And with repentant hearts, to set a godly dole In place where we may see, and willing to amend, As we by nature ready are, Gods goodnesse to offend. Verses vvritten vpon a dreame which was drea∣med on Sundaie night, the x. of April, and written vnto Mistresse F. W. WHen darkesome night approched was, and Phoebus ceast to shine: Then went I to my easing bed. to rest this corps of mine. Wherein laide downe (before I slept) according to my vse: I craued pardon for my faultes. abounding in abuse. Thus when I had bequeath'd my selfe vnto high loue to keepe: My heauy eyes inforced me streight waies to fall asleepe. Then MorpheusMorpheus God of the Dreames he was courteous bent, to merry make my minde: And vnto me this Sundayes night a pleasant parte assignde. For so, beholde, one of my friendes, my thought thus tolde to me: That modest mistresse F. W. should most welthie married be, Unto a proper Gentleman, whose Parentes are of fame: And he himselfe by due deserte, doth merrite euen the same. Whose vertuous life from infancie,
hath wonne him such renowme, As Trust me friend, I want the skill, in order to set downe. Well friende quoth I, a thousand thankes for this thy happy tale: This may preuent the peruers pangues of bitter boyling bale. With that I wak'd from slothfull sleepe, and to my selfe did say: I craue of God with all my heart that Iames may see that day. And as this dreame of my delight did friendlesse feare reiect: So I doe wish, if you so please, that it may take effect. And thus I end, my duety done, your selfe I doe commend, Unto the heauenly Lord of hostes. who alwayes you defend. Verses vpon feare and Fury. FEare is a foe, as fury is a friend, And selfe cōceipt is worker of much harme; Disdainefull doubts, doe bring a man to end; And careful cold doth neuer keepe mā warme. Mistrustfull mindes haue euery houre care, As much as they can well vprightly beare. The quiet minde is neuer trobled much, But tries to take each thing in sober sorte: When frowad fancy fretteth, and doth grutch To see her selfe contemned in her sporte. Well, vaine it is heere much for to reueale, In close cōceipt I will the rest conceale.
Till Time doth serue, according to my minde, And opportunitie to open my intent: I see, yet seeme as though that I were blind, I ioy likewise, when as I might lament, I frame my selfe to vse such play and sporte, As others doe, which to the place resorte. Sighing is signe of sadnesse, As myrth is shevve of gladnesse. Verses vpon this Theame. Silence breaketh many Friendeshippes. Written vnto his friende G. P. IF Silence friendship breake, then silent for to be: Is euen the way to loose a friend, as seemeth vnto me. For when I call'd to minde how longe my pen did rest, From writing to him which deserues, as well as doth the best: Then saide I to my selfe, I am too silent I, That to my friend of all this time nothing I doe discrie. I doe consider thus, he is of courteous kind: Hee will haue no ill conceipt I hope within his minde. for I must needes confesse,
I haue not idle Time: So much as I had heeretofore, to write each thing in rune. I am inforced nowe, to bend both wit and will: For to discharge, that is my charge, and rest in fauour still. The which God graunt I may, for that is my Desire: The onely sore I seeke to salue, the right I doe require. The more of it I muse, the more I haue good cause, To try which way, and what to doe, to ponder and to pause, To print in priuate brest, and secrets to conceale: For why? it is a folly vaine, each acton to reueale. But whether doe I wend? I run beyond my reach: What doe I meane to write so much, as though that I should teach? O no, I not so minde, but this is my intent: Some verses to my very friend, my thinkes I must present. And thus I you commend vnto the Lord of all, Who readie is to heare and helpe, those that on him doe call. Verses written in a solitary suppose of a doubtfull Dumpe. I Sadly sitting in a Dumpe,
deuysing what to write: My Muse could not, aforde me that, which should yeelde me delight: Because she saw I was dispos'd, in solitarie sorte, With matter voyd of pleasant glee, to make a plaine reporte, Of priuate passions which procure, the inward wo and paine, The secret causes of contempt, the dolour and disdaine, The lingring hope that faintly fedes the mindes of many wightes, That passe their time in place, where grow but few delightes. And yet we see, it happens so, that in the mid'st of smart: They finde some causes of conceipte, which doe reioyce their heart. And trust me true that is the way, to mittigate the ill: Which other wise, might be the cause, of wounding of their will. To be disposed from delight, is meane to moue or mone; To constiue of each crosse conceipte, is guyder vnto grene: Wherefore to vse indifferently, the causes of ill lucke, Is meane to moue no inwarde hate, vpon our thought to sucke. We see by due examples shewed the chaunges of our time; We see ther's none so warely liues, that alwayes voydeth cryme; We see who most doth frame him selfe
to sober sorte of life: Is forced though against his will, to try and tast of strife. The most of all that we do finde, as hinderers of good happe: Are crooked causes which do come, our state for to intrappe. The daintie dayes of due delight, whereon some trust repose: Incertaine are, nothing so sure, as life and them to lose. The featured face which florisheth, in beawtie blasing braue: Shall wrimpled be when hoary Age, commaundes it vnto graue: The golden hayre which glittereth and showes so by in hewe: Shall lodged be in cloddes of clay, and kept from worldly view. The listening eares which do delight, in tales reporting pleasures: Shall become deafe, and brought to ground, when death doth find his leasure. The truthlesse tongue which doth agree, to flatter and to faine: Shall feede the wormes as it hath fed, a number with disdaine. The pleasant nose which takes repast, to smell each pleasant sent: Shall lose the profit of the same, and vnto death relent. The fingers that can finely frame, to strike the ioyfull Lute: Shall cease from pleasure of the same, when Death doth Life confute. The feete which wonted were to goe,
and vnto mirth resorte: Must be content to rest at home, and leaue off former sporte. The wanton wight which takes delight, to cut it with his blade: By tract of Time growes from that vse, whem Age doth him inuade. The Preacher (he) which feedes his flocke, with ghostly counsell pure: Must yeelde to death and be content, his pangues for to endure. The wise and worthiest wighte of all that euer liued here: Must be content to yeelde to Death, as plainely doth appeare. Thus to conclude, we may be bold each one of natures frame: Shall taste of Death, when mightie Ioue assigned hath the same. Verses sent vnto his friend, B. M. IN all thy deedes be circumspect, Thy secretes not disclose: But vnto such in whom thou dost, a faithfull trust repose. And if thou hast a faithfull friend, be loth him to offend: Accounte thou not of flattering friendes thy eares to such not bend. Serue God with faithfull fixed faith, and frame thy life so iust: As that thy carnall motions do, not moue thee vnto lust. Conceaue and way well thine estate,
take not too much in hand: Frame thy expences as thou mais, liue free from others band. In doing this with iust regarde, thou shalt auoyd much blame, And euery one that markes thy vse, will praise thee for the same. Verses written for one, who espyinge his friends fauour and countenance to be alte∣red from the former fashion, to satisfie his request, he wrote as followeth. I See and dayly spy, by open viewe too plaine, That those which once estem'd of me, begin me to disdaine And much I muse thereat: but my ill lucke is cause, I stand in doubt and dumpish dreed, and somtime in a pause, I sigh, I sobbe, I waile, I knocke vpon my brest, I tosse me here, I tosse me there, as one that takes no rest: I looke like sillie soule; with ruthfull running eye, And cast my head oft times abacke good countenance to espy: But Lord how coy it seemes, and squaimish to the showe, I neuer thought y• courteouse kind such malice once would owe. Oh Fortune fickle Dame, in whom remains no trust, Whose wauering chaunces are no stay to groūd vpō for iust, growes As thou procurest friendes, so thou procurest foes; As thou makes ch, so thou makes poore euē as thy pleasure As now to day to laugh, to morrow for to weepe, And those y• wake in pleasure sweet, at length in daūger sléepe Thus vpside down thou roulest y• whirlig wheele of chaūce, And I accompt them happilesse, that most thou dost aduaūce. As for my onely state I blame thee h of right, For sure none the causer was, but thou of this my spite: Thou broughst my liking first, and I was well esteemed, And had a contenaunce voyd of hate, & lely I was déem'd,
To be in presnce more, then euer since I was: But now a chaunce against me vnhappely doth passe, For why? I dare not halfe so boldely no waspire, I dare not once presume, to warme me by the fire, I dare not Parle nowe, so bolde as I was wont, For if I doe the aunswere comes both sharpe, both tarte and blunt: And head is hanged downe, and eyes doe looke aside, And faces of the other sorte are made as they woulde chide. Wherfore you flattering flurt, Dame fortune by your name, A vengeance take thy truthles trade, for thou didst cause the same: But though in thy dispight, yet will I vse my ioy, And neuer soake my heart with care, although they seeme so coy: For they are but thy fittes, I knowe it very well, When pleasantnesse is so disposed, such thinges he can expell: To which most happy time I trust, but not to thee, For thou art still of flitting kind and euermore wilt be. Verses declaring how each Desire Is satisfied in Time. THe hungery soule that wantes of foode his Corpes to fill: Is forced forth through ping to remedie his ill: And if by happie lotte, he lighteth in such place, Whereas is foode abundantly to helpe his dolefull case: Then you shall see this swame, whom hungers hate had hist, When he in Time hath had Desire doth skorne that ofte he mist: The wight that keepes in Court and viewes the gallant shewes Of Princes Pallace deerely dect whose eyes it dayly knowes:
Esteemeth not so much the sight, though it be rare, As e esteemes a new fond toy where on his eyes may star. What is the cause of this? because that he is fill'd, And hath enough euen of the sight As much as he hath will'd. The Goldsmith that doth worke, vpon the Diamond rare: Doth not so much esteeme the sight, as sequell doth declare. The Painter that doth make, with pencell in his han, Some passing peece of Portracture, like liuely shape to stand: At first time when he went with will to learne that art, Desire was a mate of his, and woulde not drawe a part: And marke how he (by Time) of it hath had his fill: He passeth more for greedie gold then he esteemes his skill. Thus is Desire at length by Time brought into vre: The Painter pleased is with Coyn, as well as Portracture. The Gentleman that keepes a Hauke for his delight, And taketh pleasure for to view the swiftnesse of her dight, With spannelles for to raunge, the game alofte to spring: At length we see, he wearily accompteth of the thing,
The greedy Lyon eke that roareth for her pray. Is neuer satisfied vntill Some faultlesse thinge she flay And then when she hath fed, and fulnesse her inuest, She neuer passeth more for it, till hunger doth request. The Cat will watch adn wayte, till she the Mouse hath got: And then when she hath fedde her ll a dewe, she careth not. The Scriuener that takes paine with painfull penne to please: Espieth not his labour wayed, so much the more disease. That company which keepes for a long time together. By time grows strange, as euer they were at first time comming hether. The booke that newe is mad is more esteem'd of price: And better liked on by some then workes of deepe deuice. Wherefore the way to haue a thing esteemed well: Is secretly to keepe the same and not abroade to tell. For why, I well perceiue, examples put before: That friendship failes, when fancy findes new liking for her store. Wherefore to learne to keepe in secret silent brest: It is a poynt of wisedome sure, in whom so ere it rest.
Thus is Desire fedde, thus is Desire strange: Thus doth Desire giue vs fill, and makes our friendes to change. Verses written vnto one which had wrote A Curious Commendation of his hap∣pie Exchange. VVHy dost thou vaunt, before thu owe? Why dost thou bragge before thou trie? All is not golde, that is of glittering shewe, Nor trust not that which pleaseth the eye: For in the same deceipte doth rest, As proofe doth make it manifest. For since thou wrot'st that glorious stile In praise of thy so good exchange: A frowarde fit some did compile, Which vnto thee did seeme full strange, That at the first it did befall, Such rough repulse to sleepe withall. Wherefore I counsell thus doe giue, To frame thy nature now to abyde, And see that thou discreete doe liue, And ainte not though some sondly chide: For why? thou wotst so much before. You knowe my minde, le say no more,
Verses written for a requisite remembrance of the earth quake which happened on wed∣nesday the 6. of Aprill. 1580. betwene 5. and 6 of the clocke at night of the same day. WHen man doth least accompt of this his end, And as he thinkes doth safely sit at rest: Then suddenly or euer he beware, Doth Death aproch, his corps for to inuest, And in a moment all his pompe and pride And glory vaine, is quickly laide a side. His house the which he takes for his Defence, And as it were doth make a sure grounde: Presuming that it standeth firme and fast, Foundation such no likely t confound By any chaunce, except the ground do fall? The which high Ioue hath  at his call. Oh gratious God how wonderful are thy workes, Thy secretes not known to mind of man: Thou send'st vs signes, and tokens of thy wrath, And if with grace we rightly do them scanne, We may thus thinke, and also vnderstand, Thy iudgemente day is very y at hand. Yet mercifully thou doest vs all fore warne, And wouldest not that we should sinke in sinne, But penetently thy merry for to craue, And leaue such leawdnesse as we do beginne Too much to vse, alas the more the doth, And God will scourge no doubt, for our vntruth. Oh sudden mosion, and shaking of the earth,
No blustering blastes, the weaher calme and milde: Good Lord the sudden rarenesse of the thing A sudden feare did bring, to man and childe, They verely thought, as well in field as Towne. The earth should sinke, and the houses all fall downe. Well let vs print this present in our heartes, And call to God, for neuer neede we more: Crauing of him mercy for our misdeedes, Our sinfull liues from heart for to deplore. For let vs thinke this token doth portend, A scourge nere hand, if we do still offend. Yet neuer was Gods word more diligently Preached vnto vs, then it is at this day: But out alas, what boote is it to heare, And presently forget what they do say. For he which layes his hand vpon the plow, And turneth backe, shall speed you know as how. The wantonnesse and lewdnesse now adayes, Is much to write, therefore it is but vaine To seeme at large the same for to expresse: The grauer sorte do much of it complaine, And wish there were amendment of ill life, Which euery where alas is too too rife. Pride is too peare and falshood florisheth much, Deceipte is deepe, good Lord how it is vsed: Enuy is rife, blaspheming doth not want: Wel, in effect each thing is now abused. Lord graunt we may conuert, and that with speede, For well we know, we neuer had more neede. Let vs not linger and driue from day to day, We haue beene warned sufficiently we know:
The Lord is angry, and not without good cause, And though he do but signes vnto vs shew: Well let vs thinke if we do thus exceede In sinne so ryfe, we shall it feele in deede. Amend your liues for the kingdome of God is at hand. Mat. 3. None good but God. Verses written vnto his friend W. C. of not, and nor. NOt boyst crouse winds of Aeolus force cāstir the hardy recks Nor wooden wedges can preuaile to cleane the knotty block. Not absence (he) to frendly heartes can any breach procure, Nor spiteful spite can do much hurte where friēdship doth assure. Not frowning lookes of frowarde Mars that can my pe restraine, Nor doubtfull speach can me reuoke, in verse to shew my vaine. Not want of good will ready prest shall be one let or cause, Nor yet the feare of any man shall make me for to pause. Not Time to tarry to deuise some pleasant thing to write, Nor yet to proue for to be sine, my verse for to indite. Not that I thinke my friend he will for rashnesse laugh at me. Nor that I stand in doubt, if that this thing he take in gr. Not that I am a Poet braue for to declare my minde, Nor that I haue a curiouse head some pleasant thing to finde, Not that my friend is scrupulousse, but friendly be will take, Nor that he is of Momus sect to mocks that I do make. Not that I know my friend will now accept my ragged verse, Nor I thinke he will reiect that which I do rehearse. Not that the Time doth let me now some farder wordes to vse. Nor that I meane in any thing my friend for to abuse. In steade of giftes to thanke thee for, Yake Yates his gifte of not and nor.
Verses written vpon the captiouse coniecture of one who not offended. THe state of worldly wightes is straunge, And mutall mindes, do passe my skill: The good haue bad, for their exchaunge, By cogitations wrong to will. The iniury hath small repay, Where maiestie doth beare the sway. The supreame rule supporteth much, Me thinkes it saith, why I am hee: Men know my nature to be such, As scant my like is knowne to be, For where I may I croppe, I loppe: I make them stoupe and bowe their toppe. But Iustice sittes with sword in hand, And Equity with ballance right: The cause and truth to vnderstand, To deale by equall Doome vpright: For sure the Gods they will not see. That worngfull iudgement geuen be. Then preace in place, thou guyltlesse minde Whose modest moode deserues no blame: God will all misbeliues vnbinde, And try thy truth with worthie fame: And like as Laurell kepes the hue: So truth the falshood shall subbue. Conceyne no cause of ponstue thought. In Nature good, each small is greate: The wise themselues, haue wisely taught, More then my pen can here repeat: Wherefore I cease, I stay to tell,
Hoping in end all shall be well. Verses written vpon a Question. I Being once occasioned Comparisons to vse: A friend of mine, a question put, to aunswere or refuse. The which was this: VVhat thing vvas that, vvhich longest doth remaine In happie blisse, but at the last it tasteth of some paine. Where with I grewe astonied, an aunswere streight to make: For why quoth I, deliberation in this I had neede take, Yet as my simple head a simple reason can render, I hope you will accept it well, though it be small and slender. Then (Sir) I thus confesse, as reason would I should, To tell my minde I am content, to speake the best I could. The happiest thing (quoth I) is Gods eternall grace. For that is that which doth remaine and stayes in happie case. For els I knowe no thing, that happie can be counted, No worldly wealth, no Towre high, that to the skye is mounted, No faith of any friend, for why it shall decay: We see it is like fortunes wheele, which turneth euery way. In faith my friend (quoth he) you haue me full resolued, It seemes you trust not much the world, from it you are dissolued. The fragrant florishing feates, and gallant glosing glee, Is like a blast or puffe of wind which blowes the leafe from tree. Esteeme it as it is, and weigh and ponder thus, That mindes of men change euery houre as fancie doth discusse: But ah, the changlesse state that euer shall endure, Is Gods eternall blisse on hye, of this we may be sure. Verses written vpon Desire, to vnload the minde. THe Bird that buildes her nest, doth order due obserue, And therein takes her rest, her younglings to preserue: As nature doth ordaine each thing by course of kind, So she doth them maintane till seekers do them find. Like so where worldly woes doe dayly still increase, And lucklesse chaunces shewe that sorrowes will not cease
Till happy hap doth hit, and course doth turn and change, And good lucke come to those, to whome she hath bin strange. Where want doth weaue the web, there sknt doth pleasure growe, Wher good  doth , there ill successe doth slowe, Where Patience perforce in spight must vsed be: Vnhappy is that course, such haplesse hap to sec. As pleasantnesse doth vade,Small differēce betwene plea∣santnes & ioy∣fulnesse. and dieth like the flowre: So ioyfulnesse consumes within one silly houre. Or what doth boote it nowe in myrth for to abound, When as we bend and bow to sorrowes sollemne sound. The head opprest with dumpes, the heart doth heauie make, And wayward chances come, our ioyes away to take. And as the Impe thats greene, is tender for the knife: So mirth is seldome seene, whereas such cares be rife. Verses vvhich signifie the ease, Hovv medling least, doth not displease. THe busie heads, whose harebraine wits, With causelesse cause will haue to deale: Doe often shewe but foolish fittes, For nothing they can close conceale. All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least doth not displease. The Royster and the quarreling foole, That standes vpon his garde of strength: May meete with one that shall him coole, And ouercome his pride at length. All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least, doth not displease. The pratler (he) cannot abstaine, No yet keepe in his tongue from prate: O blame him not for tis his vaine, He takes a glory in that rate. All you that meane to liue at case, To meddle least doth not displease.
Tis vaine to put our hand in fire, Or in a fray to take a parte, When as no cause doth so require, Perchance he comes vnto his smart, All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least doth not displease. The prouerbe often thus doth shew, Which warneth vs in this respect: Heere much but little seeke to know, That any tumult may erect. All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least doth not displease. By busie pates strife and Debate, Rancour and Rage be reared vpright: Enuie, Disdaine and cruell hate, Are put in vre by such a wight. All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least doth not displease, So may you well be bold of this, The loue of each man thou shalt winne: And haue likewise eternall blisse, For quiet state you liued in. All you that meane to liue at ease, To meddle least doth not displease. Of medling least I thus define: The happie state in it doth rest, And like a Iuell it doth shine, Among all Iuels of the best. All you that then wil line at ease, To meddle least doth not displease.
Verses written vpon Saint Iames his day. OH Blessed Sainte, whose glorious name doth shi Throughout the world with fame and honour ek: Whose wisdome rare, and modest life diuine, Doe shew thy felse to be both iust and meke. Thou follow'dst Christ, thou neuer wast to seeke: God graunt I Iames may euer doe the like, That Iames may ioy with Iames that was so pure, In heauenly throne, which euer shall endure. O Lord Direct and guide my steps like his, With harmelesse heart to treade so true a trace: Then shall my steps be steadie and not misse, But by good life to winne thy heauenly place. With courage bould to come and view thy face, For that I haue sincerely runne the race, And liu'd vpright in thought, in worde and deede, And in excesse of sinne doe not exceede. O Lord if I may iustly this approue, Then let me haue according to desert: Reiect me not but for thy tender loue, Reuerse the rage of sinnes infernall smart. And I protest to laude thee with my heart, O Lord I craue from sinne doe me conuert: That when my life no longer heere may bee. My soule may rest in heauen aboue with thee. FINIS. None good but God quoth Iames Yatis.
THE Chariot of Chastitie, Drawne to publication by Dutiful Desire, Good will, and Commendation. Also A Dialogue betwene Diana and Venus. With Ditties deuised at sundrie idle times for Recreation sake: Set downe in such wise as insueth, by Iames Yatis. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, neere the Signe of the Castle. 1582.
To the vertuouse and his approed good Mistresse, Mistresse Elizabeth Reynowls, wife vnto his approed good Master and friend Mster Henry Reynowls Esquire. COnsidering with my selfe (worshipfull Mistresse) the due desert preceeding to your person, the perfect proofe of pure preence, in supporting and holding vp of vertu∣ouse exercises: was and is the occasion to incourag me of presenting this vnto your view. I am though vnskilfull yet not vnmindful of your deserts, which if I should take in hand to penne, I were like him which  and  aduentured to reade the Maze, And being in, could not finde the way ot a∣gaine, but by long time and instruction. So if I should beginne to write, I must haue both long time, and also instruction in learne lore. This my present vnto you (being simply penned Intituled The Chariot of Chastitie) hath beene by forgetfulnesse kepte from my sight, and long hath lingered in the lodge of Lasinesse. But when requisite remembraunce had deemed of Delay: Then presently perswation  me to publish the same. But I stood in doubt whether I might present it vnto you: waying the insuf∣ficiencie of the deuice, but being imbouldened by  meaning, I was incouraged, and as I haue presented vnto your worships hus∣band, my simple Castell, making him patron of the same: So I thoght it good to vnite you together. Selecting you for Patrenesse of this my present, wishing vnto your Mistrishippe as dutie bindes me florishing felcitie in this life, and in the world to come Heauenly hap∣pinesse. Your seruant to command, Iames Yates.
Verses on the name of Mistresse Elizabeth Reynovvls. E Experience of your Courtesie imboldeneth me to write, L Long might you liue in loyall loue, vnto your faithful make, I I craue of Ioue for to vphold your dayes still in delight, S Sending his blessing on each thing, y• which in hand you take A Aduancing vertue, infamouse vice you euer did forsake: B Bearing a zeale to sober mindes, well giuen, voyd of ill, E Extolling good and godly workes to them you haue respect: T The modest Matrons you frequent which scorne at wanton Will, H Hauty hearts & pompiouse pride you always did reiect. R Regarding much the vertuouse chase of Diana & her Dames, E Expelling wilde & wanton workes, which vaūt of Venus hue: Y Yeelding no whit vnto the blaze of Cupids flashing flames, N Noting such matters as you finde by tryall to be true, O Omitting not to do each thing in time and season due, W Wisely waying what doth want, and it for to renew, L Lending reliefe, in time of need, to those that want the same: S Sure due desert doth well deserue to haue immortall fame. No fauour to fortune.
To the Courteous and Friendly Reader. GEntle Reader, I shall thee pray with courtesie to view this simple worke, & not to deride or skorne it because the basenes of it deserueth the same: for thē thou dost vtterly abash me, and make so to blush, as boldnes to attempt the like, shall not so easily be foūd. Thou maist account me more willing then wittie, but iudge vprightly and weigh my wel willing minde with courtesie, and say this I pray thee (in my behalfe) that my meaning was to please and not offend, as he that knoweth thy thought (& mine) doth know it ful wel, & therefore sith I meane well, I pray thee with willing minde receaue it well, so shall I be desirous to ende∣uour my selfe still dayly more & more to the accōplish∣ment of my well willing minde & earnest determinati∣on, such as heartie affection would set more vnto the view, but that skillesnesse doth hold me backe, & shut∣teth vp the gates of knowledge against me, & will not suffer me to haue aboade within that excellēt place, to the which is due such praise as my tongue hath not vt∣terance to commēd. But gentle Reader (to be short & knit vp the matter) I pray thee accept it (as it is) and beare an indifferent minde to iudge with modestie & not rashly to condemne me: let me not haue chaffe in steade of corne; that is skornes and mockes for good willes sake: but with a will receaue it well, & if thou well receaue it, my will shall not want to doe thee plea∣sure, at all times. Farewell. Iames Yatis.
The Authours Verdict of his Booke. THou little Booke, that thus presumes to raunge in open view: Thou shalt but get to me dispraise, and busie heads renew, To set these wylie wits aworke some foolish faultes to finde: We see it is the worldly course, some thereto giue their minde. I might haue kept thee still at home, but friendes did me require, To giue thee leaue to go abroad, I graunted their desire. And what by that now shall I get, a mocke of some I knowe: It is the state of worldly wightes their floutes for to bestowe. And as the Merchants mart for Coyne: So Momus mockes for spight, Whose Iolting toyes would be disnuld of euerie honest wight. Of trueth my Booke I do beleeu thou shalt not so goe free, But that there will some doubtfull speach be spread abroade of thee. God send thee lucke and me no ill, and so adewe, farewell: But I presume that vnto me thou something hast to tell.
The Booke to the Authour. WHat verdict doe you giue of me what wordes be these you vse? What follies fond doe foster forth these ill compacted newes: Why, stay your selfe for to surmise, the worst of me I pray? For none so ready faulte to finde, as Bayard blind some say: Whose faultes shall scanned be as thus with wise men well I wo: They will say, thou foole thou find'st a fault yet seekes to amend it not. But this I say in your behalfe: your youth and simple skill, Cannot accomplish that you would, although you haue good will. But truly (Authour) doe not thinke that I shall get thee blame: For in good sooth to tell my minde, thou not deserust the same. I knowe thy mind was bent to please and none for to offend, I knowe thou hadst a care to bring me thus vnto an end. I know thy friendes requsted thee that I abroad might goe: I know full well as true it is that trueth is very so. I knowe it is not Braueries bragge, to boast or vaunt of praise: Or Lucres craft, for profittes gaine, that thus me first did rayse.
I knowe that he requested it, who is thy very friend: Which hath requited all this paines, and will doe to the end. Wherefore if worldlinges vainely iudge as commonly they vse: You must contented seeme to rest sith so they will abuse. And maruaile not if I be blamed, when workes of greater skill, Haue had such hatefull speaches giuen, as trust me tis to ill. But I shall so my selfe behaue, and manner so my moode: As none shall iudge amisse of me, except be Robin Hood. And if that none do iudge but he, I doe not greatly care: I shall him aunswere well enough as time doth me prepare. In meane Time humbly I end, my selfe I doe commend, Vnto all those that wish me well, being loath them to offend. FINIS. Triall telles the Trueth.
The Chariot of Chastitie. A Carefull Commendation thereof, vvritten at the request of a verie Friend. OF all the happie giftes of God, bestowed on mortall wightes, Dame Chastnesse is a gift most rare, wherein God most delightes. For Chastitie doth purchase fame, And heauenly place aboue: Where Angels sing in ioyfull wise, as scripture plaine doth proue. All such as to their mates be true, with faithfull heart intire: Haue place ordain'd in heauenly throne, for to auoyde hell fir. But if that truthlesse troth be tried, vnseemely and vnmeete: That is no Matrons life I trow, n wisdomes lore discreete. Although blinde Cupid moue thy minde, some peeish partes to play: Dame Chastnesse if she be at hand, will streight such vse alay. Though Beawtie hath indued thee, if Chastnesse stand aside: That is but Beawtie to the world, Which can not long abide. Yet Beawtie is a blazing baite,Beawtie is brittle. to please each Amorouse eye: Whom Cupids knightes do oft frequent, experience doth it try. The which all Amored folke delight, and causeth much debate,
And forceth furiouse fretting fumes, and deepe disdamefull hate. O God when some behold and see the pleasures that abound, In such fond tyes and culling trickes, they say they are vnsound: They are not for a Matrons moode, Lucretia did not vse, But firmly did her faith obserue, till life did her refuse. What though that vile Tarquinius he,What will not  De∣e attempt. by force did her assay: She neuer ioyed afterward, but sought her owne decay. Quoth she, shall I remaine defiled, vnto my loyall loue? No sure, some way to end my dayes I do intend to proue. I feele such painfull passions, which do bereaue my rest: As with this blade now in my hand, I meane to pearce my brest. Wherefore this blade assuredly, shall end my lothsome life: So shall I then be free from feare, and voyde of this my strife. Lo thus the Matron slewe her selfe, because she would not haue: A body for her spouse vnchaste, but brought it to the graue. Oh Virgins let this be a glsse, to shew you honest life: Remember how that Chastitie, did rest in her most rife. It is the greatest praise (perdy,) that any wight can get:
It adorneth sure your life so braue, as pearle on you were set. You shine in world like Christall cleare, your praise is rife in minde: You duly do deserue such fame, as is for you assign'd. You shew no wanton countenance, you tattle not at large: You hold no parte of Cupids farme: you do deny his charge. You leane to Chastnesse steadfastly, as Rocke and bulwarke strong: You spend the day in vertuouse vse, as doth to her belong. For idle sportes decline from praise they hold no parte thereof: But cogingly do spend the Time, with many a girding scoffe. And if they chaunce to catch one in, who will come of in giftes: They Care not so they may it haue, though he be put to shiftes. Their conscience is large (God knowes) and handes are open still: For to receaue, what giuen is, such is their greedy will. Yet for all that they may be Chast, I do none here reproue: He knoweth all their secret thoughtes. that sittes in heauen aboue. There is none can hide their guile from him, hee knoweth all so well, As sure it passeth me to thinke, or ke my tongue to tell. I know for true as scripture saith, a chast and vertuous life,
Shall florish like the Oliue tree, whose leaues are euer rife. She shall accepted be of those, that Treade her honest trace: And not disdayned but much in price, a certaine sure case. But wanton wildnesse snuffes in nose, to see her giuen so: And often wisheth in her minde, her steppes to ouerthrowe. And Cupids knightes, do skorme this Dame, because she not repaires, Unto his Court, to be as one of not sufficed heires. And Venus frownes to see her so, high minded to abarre: And wisheth her to be vntrue, that breach might make a iarre. Such is the counsell of that court, light wantonnesse of kinde, Inducing her to loue one or two that pleaseth most her minde. Yea three or foure are not enowe, for some whose minde doth raunge, They haue no bloud within their Corps, to make them blush for chaunge. But constant Chastnesse simple standes, and shrowdes her heade for shame: She maruels much to see their mindes, so fixed on that game. Oh what a thing it is to thinke, of twentie euilles prest: That come of too much lauishnesse, disturbance, and vnrest. Pittie this case good Matrons graue, lend Aide it to disnull:
Helpe, helpe, for trust me it is Time such vices downe to pull. And if you knowe within your Towne one person of that set, Dame Chastnesse saith you should not leaue vntill you out her ge. Oh vertuous Dame how is thy mind, giuen vp to Constancie: Alas how should I pen thy praise, I know not well perdie. But sooth to say, the flying Fame, that is as swifte as winde, Hath bruted abroade sufficiently of Chastnesse and her kinde. One night Sir Morpheus did me leade, and then vnto me shewed: How Lucrese sate in heauen aboue her seate was there bestowed. And although she her life did end in such a desperate wise: Yet thou maist see she hath a roome. aboue heere in the skies. There saw I eke Zenobia that Gratious Queene so Chaste: Sitting aloft in heauenly Throne which neuer aye shall waste. And Etifriga sometime our Queene in England heere did reigne, I did behold her where she sate, aske Morpheus if I feine. A multitude of Matrons sure was there as I did see: Yet Morpheus tolde not me the names but onely of these three. For why (quoth he) I do not mind to tell thee any more:
If thou canst learne their names thy selfe, then keepe them for thy store: And write of them as thou thinkst good, (but what should neede so much) So busily to take in hand, It would but get thee gruch. I answered him with words most milde, and seemely countenance sure: I thanke you that you would vouchsafe these three to put in vre. And when these wordes I spoken had, sir Morphes did depart, And I awaked from my sleepe,Morpheus de∣parteth and maruail'd in my heart, What wight he was, and how I came vnto those ioyfull sightes, To view the place and to behold thse glorious heauenly wights: And now to tell the full thereof that I in eepe did see, I will assay with simple skil which rereth now in me. My thought I was thether by him led, since he is God of Dreames: Conuayed by him as I thought vnto the loftie heauens. Where I beheld most glorious Dames which shined like the Sunne: For by their Chaste and Vertuous life that heauenly place they wunne. There might I view the Angells face, there might I heare such songes: As did reioyce me very much, as right thereto belonges. There is no weeping any Time, but only myrth and ioy:
Who would not then lie Chaste to gaine, a place voyde of annoy. They shall behold our glorious God sitting in heauenly seat: There shal be such ioyes as doe passe my tongue for to repeate. There shal they liue a life for Aye which neuer shall surcease: Alas we liue heere mortally, our life doth soone decrease. We neede not boast, we are like grasse which withereth with the sunne: Alas how tickle is our life, how soone hath death it woone. Our life is raile, our dayes no stay, for vs to leane vnto: Incertaine is each thought we thinke, or what we els can doe. Well, if thou be esspoused once, and linck'd with wedlockes chaine: Conuert thou not to others vse, least hatefull be thy gaine. For looke what order thou dost vse, the same thou shalt imbrace: When as thou comes before that Iudge, that Iudgeth each mans case. Beware no wantonnesse be seene, O mayden some so pray: Liue as thou wouldst intend to liue in  for . Loue onely one  thought as heart and onely dre: So shall thy life be Chaste in deede, this sentence is most cleere: Yea cleere,  cleere, as cleere may be which  the
Bruted abroade by ying Fame which neuer shall be done. Beautie is but a blazing bayte, in high respect of this: Yet Beautie pleaseth mindes of men, as certaine true it is. Beautie is glorious in Attyre, according to her hue, Alluring the eyes of men vpon her for to view. Marke this I say you Cupids knights, esteeming Beautie so,Those which more account of beautie thē haue respect to Chastiti, are often re∣warded contra¦ry to their ex∣pectation. That it may happen for to hit to bring you vnto wo. Was not strong Sampson (he) beguilde when harlot clipt his hayre? Was not the valiant Hercules also ketched in snare? Did not Poore Paris buy it deere for Hellina so fine: When all the Troyans felt the smart as Terrour did assigne? Did there not rise Achilles wrath vpon him silly man, Which did conclude, in blooddy broyl a wofull cause to san? Did not the vitious Sodomites and Gomorians feele the smarte: Because they had not grace to turne, and from sinne to conuert? No preaching could them reforme til fiery lames from hye: Did downe descend, them to destroy, O ruthfull miserye. What was the cause? their fleshly liues, their vile and vitious deedes:
They follow not Dame Chastnesse steppes, whom Ryot onely feedes. But if they had addicted beene to chastnesse and good life, They had not felt the furtouse force of their deserued strife. But they were giuen ryotously, to pleasure and to pride: It is impossible well to liue, where grace doth want to guyde. Oh Chastnesse thou the floure of grace, the Impe of ioy so deere, The Lanthorne light of life so pure, which shines like Christall cleere. The proppe, the piller, and the stay, which holdes vp honest life: The hope of heauen, the hap of ioy, which euer shall be rife. Oh God what Beneficialnesse, by Chastnesse doth insue: Much more then I with tongue can tell, or pen can well renew. Or if I had Dame Pallas Ayde, or Poets learned stile: Yet trust me true I were too weake, her praise for to compile. Wherefore of Poets thus I craue. such pardon to attaine: Since that but skillesnesse doth leade in verse to shew my vaine. For surely I not presume in gloriouse title braue: But from my heart deuoyde of guile, pardon of them I craue. For to proceede as simple witt, shall lend me simple skill:
Where nothing wantes but learning she, to aide my readie will. The horse although his force be small, yet if he haue desire,A base compa∣rison. Is worthie simply of great praise, though he ly in the myre. Euen so I must confesse to you, I haue an earnest will: To praise this worthie gifte in deede though simple be my skill, Wishing I had beene learn'd in schoole, among the learned sorte: Then should I with lesse tediousnesse, haue made this my reporte. But truly I lament the losse, of that I most desire, Which to recouer by no meanes, I can not well require. But Lord it is a world to see, how foolish fickle youth: Accompts the schoole a purgatorie, a place of paine and ruth. And neuer are in quyet minde, till absent thence they bee: Youth onely mindeth playe and sporte, apparantly we see. But when that Time hath brought our yeares and some experience gayned: Then they lament the losse of Time, which once they so ddayned. A lamentation made to late, hsome to inuest: For to  the losse of Time, is pnsiue to the brest. What meane I thus to spend my Time, so fony to yte:
I see tis want of learned lore, to guide me now aright. Me thinkes I heare one say to me,A supposition. go too, go on, proceede: Of former matter to intreate. for this is more then neede. Praise thou Dame Chastnesse, as thou shouldst, Digresse not so aside: And to thy matter directly go, and in it do abide.Answere Wherewith I blusht and said againe, oh Sir I pardon craue: Accuse me not for slipping so, my matter to depraue. But giue me leaue to raunge a while, by foolish fancie fraught: So shall you pleasure me no small, since that my wittes be naught. But since I did digresse so much, I ten times praise this Dame: Whose Chastitie and vertuouse life, deserues eternall Fame. Her steppes are steady like the rocke, her fortresse is so stronge: As no assault of Cupids Crue, shalt enter in by wrong. And as the pleasant meades refresh. the flying foules in aire: So doth Dame Chastnesse comforte giue, to those that might dispaire. Which suffer many Derisious floutes and mokes, of ile and vitious kinde: Yet sure the chaste and constent life, all forrowes do vnbinde. A rich rewarde, by Due desert, to see such culling mates:
Be tinged about the towne in Cart, and pulled by the pates: When Chastnesse resteth like a Queene, In high Magnificence, With reuerence done of honest sorte, and scapeth such offence. As maketh them oft times ashamd, and shrinke their headee in hold: And chaunge in colours blacke and blew, as though they were acol: But Truth to say, they are a colde, in this chast honest lore: They are more hote in Venus flames, then honestie in store. Reuoke, recant, relent with speeds, least Time do come to late, I speake not to the honest Dames, but to the viciouse mate. For why, I neede no honest warne. then should I be too bold: And I were worthy to be blam'd, so much for to vnfolde. Oh worthie wightes you sporte your mindes, with sadde and sober sightes: Oh gloriouse Chastnesse how she shines, oh blest and happie wightes. O sacret Dame, by Ioue ordayn'd, to be in heauenly place: Where as no spot, of spotted life, thy seate shall once deface. But with a heauenly body thou, shalt there remaine for Aye: Where Angels sitte in seemely sight, which neuer shall decay. Why then who would not liue a life, as Chast, as Chast might bee;
For they shall haue as promise is, eternall blisse you see: Where contrariwise we purchase death, and flashing flames of fire: In Plutoes pit to spend our Time if grace we not require. There shall we see the broyling brands, and fendes of vgly hue: There shall we heare lamenting cries, with Torments that renewe. Upon such mates, whom Carnall Lust in life of fleshly will: They had not grace for to repent but did perseuer still. To greate confusion of their soule in euerlasting fire: Wherefore God graunt we may be Chaste for to avoyde his Ire, And that we treads Dame Chastnesse steps, and on her so repose: As we in end may purchase heauen when vitall life we lose. And there to rest in heauenly blisse and see our glorious God: Which hath authoritie vs to scourge for our offences od. Whe plagues y• Cupid knights with paine, and Bacchus drunken mates: And such as giue their minde to lust in end with scourge he rates. But Chastitie he doth alowe as vertue excellent: Who so doth frequent the same shall neuer sure repent. O Chastitie how is thy seat ordained in heauenly throne,
Assigned there by mighty Ioue, whereas there is no moane, For as Sainte Matthew doth discusse, a Chaste and honest mayde, Shoulde be content to welcome death and be no whit afraide. For why, saith he tis glory greate, to dye a virgin pure: So shall they gaine a precious place which euer shall indure. Her name shall grauen be in gold, or els in Marble stone: Which shall be extant to the world although that she be gone. Behold you Dames whose chastitie doth merrite well the same: And trust me, by your due Deserte, doth winne you endlesse fame: You get renowme immortall sure, for Time withouten minde: You doe as much as may be donne, or in that way assign'd. Wherfore keepe fast that key so rare the which no Smith can make: But onely he which on the crosse did buy it for your sake. Whose guiltlesse blood you know was shedde, though he did not offend: The cruell Iewes him to torment their mallice did extend. O onely sweete and Sauiour greate of all the world so we: How didst thou suffer paine for vs, with speare thrust in thy side. And all was for our sinfull liues the which we followe still:
But Lord graunt that we may conuert and if it be thy will. And with a true and faithfull heart as Marie Magdalen she: Did her repent of sinful life, euen so Lord graunt may we: And bring sweete oyntments to thy seate, and looke thee in the face: And hope to rest with thee in blisse which neuer shall imbace, But shall remaine tune out of minde, as trueth doth well relate: In place where as is nought but ioy, and at no time Debate. What say you to this, Dames so chaste, what say you to this newes? Liue chaste, hue chaste, and then be sure, you liue without abuse. For chastnesse is much honoured in euery place with Fame: And Castnesse of each man hath praise as worthie of the same. But where as Beautie ryotously with fleshly will indewed: Doth not regard her chastitie, marke then what is isued. For Cupids knightes spying that vent, doe thether streight repayre: And thinke it is a match obtain'd by foolish speaking faire. And when that once they finde the haunte with entertainement good: Then stay they still to spend their Time, in fleshly giddie mood. And vse such prancks as please them best: too much for shame to write,
Or more then wisdome would permit should come vnto the light. It were but vaine to meddle much or glose in glorious sorte: It were but vaine to praise and prate or make a braue reporte. It were but vaine so seeme to deale in place of great vnrest: It were but vaine to pinch the minde, and busie much the brest. It were but vaine to goe beyond our owne knowledge and skill: It were but vaine to meddle where we shall but get vs ill. Wherefore (my friend) sith I haue nowe performed as you see: That your request which long agoe you did make vnto me, In writing of Dame Chastitie according as you will'd: Accept of it in friendly wise, your request is fulfill'd. Desiring you of this deuice to iudge with equall mind, At all tunes for to pleasure you, you ready me shall finde. Although in deede I simple am for to performe the same: Yet willingnesse of my true hearte shall cleere me from the blame. That finding wittes deuising still to moue debate and strfe: Ile say no more, but God amend their lewd and wicked life. The end of the Chariot of Chastitie.
A Dialogue betwene Diana and venus: De∣claring what can be alleaged of eyther side for confutation. Venus THe gallant Youthes with bold attempt, my Darlings will defend: Theile preace in place with glittering blade, their blowes abroade to lend. Diana The modest Matrons then for me, my honour will vphold: By siuile sorte, and honest life, which shines as bright as golde. Venus Thy life, nay, nay, tis not like mine, I swarme in pleasure so: As that no day doth passe my handes, but new delightes I know. Diana Well, well, I force not for delightes, of those thy Courtly tranie: I do defy such pleasures as, in end do proue but vaine. Venus Oh, I am Lady of the world, each one to me consentes: They lust, they loue, to like my law, I know tis their intentes. Diana Thy law is Transitorie sure, but mine remaines for Aye: No discord doth arise by me, I do stay.
Venus Dost thou condemne me now of ill, by flatte and open speech: Declare and shew thy minde at full, I hartely beseech. Diana Within your court I dayly viewe, much ryot there abroch: With odiouse othes to please your Impes, and dallings that approch. Venus And your Impes, are circumspect, they will not looke awrye: Because you are a Goddesse Chaste, no ilnesse youle espye. Diana No ilnesse, yes I see too much, I would it were not vsed: I pray to Ioue for to reforme, the factes that are abused. Venus Abused, why, in what respect? you'ill count my lust a vice: Perchaunce you wil condemne my baites, that punkers do intice. Diana Condemne yea, and eke defye, I loth to see thy trade: I spight thy state, I scorne thy vse, that euer it was made. Venus To scorne my vse, it is but vaine, a figge for such a flurt: Now guppe you honest Goddesse you, you neuer do no hurt.
Diana Well, well, no doubt the mightie God, that doth vs goddesses guyde: Will pay with paine: Ile say no more, no longer Ile abide. Venus To proue perswations now with me you shall but lose your time: Farewell, adew, be honest still, to Riotte I will clime. Ditties deuised at sundrie idle times for Recreation sake, written by Iames Yatis. Dame Practise brings experience, Experience knovvledge gaines: Dame Idelnesse hath ill conceiptes, And loues To take no paines. Idlenesse is euill. A thankesgeuing vnto God for the happie, peaceable, and most gloriouse Reigne of our singuler Souereigne and Ladie, Queene Elizabeth. WIth humble heartes and faithfull mindes, assemble all and pray, And sing high laude, vnto our God, whose goodnesse to display,
Surmuntes the sense of mortall he to glorifie the same: With such desertes as rightly longes, vnto his blessed name. Oh England, ioy thou litle Ile, in prayers do not cease: Both day and night giue laud to God, for this thy happie peace, Inioyed vnder Perelesse Prince, Eizabeth thy Queene: Whose quyet raigne declares that God, his blessing would haue seene, Upon her grace and eke her realme, the which O Lord preserue: With Seemely Cepter in her Throne, thy Gospell to conserue. From forraine foe, and faithlesse friendes, from all that mischiffe workes: Lord breake the broode of Enuies wyles, in secretie that loorkes. Lay open to her Princly viewe, all tho se that faithlesse be In thought against her Maiestie, Lord let her highnesse see. We must confesse vnfainedly, we haue deseru'd thy ire: We dayly lord, be prompt to sinne, smale goodnesse we require. Yet haue compassion on our land, and do the same defend: From those which vnder shew of friendes, their mallice do pretend. Unto our Quene which raigned hath, this three and twentie yeares: In peacable Tranquillitie, as well to vs appeares.
God graunt Her highnesse Nestors yeeres ouer this Realme to Raine, Amen, Amen, for Iesus sake, amen: we do not fame. God preserue with ioyfull life, our Graci∣ous Queene Eliza∣beth. In the Commendation of a Godly and Vertuous Matron. AS I alone did walke in fieldes, I heard a thundering voyce: Which did descend from loftie skyes whereof I stood in choyse, For to conecture with my selfe what voyce should be the same: It answered me as I it heard, I am the flying fame. Which farther said, take pen in hand and proue thy simple skill: To blaze abroad a Matrons life whose minde doth meane no ill.The  cries it selfe & needes no Cō∣mendation. Her Vertuous life adorned is with Godly zeale and grace: Lucrese if she were aliue she could it not deface. No day doth passe this Matrons handes in any idle sporte: She to the Church to serue her God in due time doth resorte. If any wight shall purchase heauen for Godly life well spent: Fame told me that should be she, high Ioue did so assent.
And to conclude, if graftes of grace doe growe in any wight: Then in the Hinde you may be bolde they shine with vertue bright. Thus much as Fame commanded me I haue heere put in : With heartie prayers to the Lorde her life may long indure. Heauenly Happinesse is Due to the Hinde. In the Commendation of a Dame, Whose name is Elected with Fame. IF skill did rest within my head, or Poets cunning art: Then would I proue to write her praise agreeing to her parte. But Ladies if you doe deride and scorne a willing minde: Dame wisedome doth not teach you that, but Momus mocking kinde. For sooth the gallantst of you all. that be of Dians flocke: May seeme to let her haue a roome without dispight or mocke. For why? her fauour is as sweete, her Beautie is as faire: As any Dame in Dian Courte, I rightly may compare. Yea Chaste she liues I tell you true in spite of Cupids A Vertuous  she doth deserue if duety may require.
Foeli was not more faithfuller vnto his friend in heart: Then she is true vnto her make, her vertue hath desert. Which long the Lord preserue and keepe with his defending hand: From faithlesse friendes and fauning foes whose trust doth truthlesse stand. Praise is a preferring of the party: though needelesse. In the Prayse of a vertu∣ous Gentlewo∣man. IF Vertue praise gaine by desert: Or constant stay, or faithfull minde: Good Ladies let me in this part Some thing Declare for faithfull kinde, Let not my pen rebuked be, Though simple skill doe rest in me. But giue me leaue for to declare And speake my minde without offence. Such duetie I vnto her beare, As trust me this is my petence: To write some thing although I see, Unablenesse which rests in mee. A Lady I obey and serue With heart and minde and onelie will: Who hath done more then I deserue, For which I am her seruant still, To wish her well since wealth is small, And wishing i the most of all.
But if that within could aduaunce, My wishing should not come behind: But wishing i a  chaunce. Although we wish yet want we find, Wherfore to wish it is but vaine, When as we wish and not attane. If Courteous nature be on ground It is in her I dare depose: Whose grafted Impes of grace are sounde, As vertuous buodes at large disclose. Whose fragrant life, like Woodbine flower May seeme to decke a Matrons bower. I shall not neede to name her name: But priuately in fostering brest: I meane for to obserue the same With former minde, and so I rest. Whose life I wish, whose ioy I craue, Till breath from corpes death doth depraue. In the praise of Fennill and Woodbine. IN garden braue, when as I view'd and saw There euery herbe, that nature had bedeckt, And euery flower so fresh and red as Haw: I stoode in choyse of which I should elect: Yet could I none there finde that did me please, So much as two, by whom I haue found ease. And Fennill first for sight hath done me good, Whose water Stil'd did ease my pricking eies, Reuiu'd my heart & cheer'd my fainting blood, And made me laugh whē head was ful of cries. What say you now, can you expulsse my clause, May I not prae: yes sir when I haue cause.
Yes sure this earbe I like and like againe And i I had a garden as some haue, I would much plant, and take therein greate paine, To haue in store for such as will it craue. Yet some will say, that Fennill is to slatter: They ouer, eache, their tongues too much do clatter, The Woodbine leae, is good to ease the thorte, Or pame in mouth that comes by cronanes in drinke: I haue it tryed, I do not lye, for note: Seeth thou the leaues in water as I thinke, And wash thy mouth and thou shalt finde such ease, As will no doubte the former paine appease. For these same two, I pray to God from hearte, Their hewes may stand, in happie state and prime, And boysterouse windes may blowe from them apart, Who do good, though sillily they clyme. As helpe I finde, so helpe I ought to praise, That helpe may helpe, when helpe shall neede alwaies. Of a friende in prosperitie, and a foe in aduersitie. THat morning which so braue doth shine with Phebus glistering face: Eare darksome night approched is, a shower doth it disgrace. And yet Sir Phebus gallant hew in morning did displaye: Who seem'd to promise by aspect, to burnish out the day. Euen so of double harted friendes I rightly do compare: Which shewe a pleasant face vntill, his friend be caught in care:
And then as dimming of the Sunne, doth chaunge the former hue: So doth a double faced frend, returne againe a new. From faithfull friendship which as he, by promise should not do: But those that can dissemble Sir, they know what longs thereto. But whilest thou art in prosperouse state, and vod of Fortunes lowre: Then will they seeme to be thy friendes, in pleasant wordes each howre. But when Aduersitie that wretch, hath caught thee in his snare: Their friendship is forgotten then, of thee they haue no care. Wherefore who trustes a smiling face, may chaunce to be beguylde: And he that toucheth pich they say, shall there with be defil'd. A perswation patiently to suffer Affliction. TO mortall wightes what praise more due, then patiently to beare: Such crosses and afflictions, as Time doth bring with care. For sure it is a happie thing, for those that can vphold, And Patiently to beare ill happes: that Fatall Fates vnfeld. So shall they finde it best in end, as sequell iust doth try: And eke aduaunce their name with praise, Experience doth not lye.
But as for such as seeme to raue, for losse of worldly mucke: They are vnhappie in that case, I pittie much that lucke. For truth to tell I may be bold: I know not which is be, That Patiently doth beare his losse, for ought that I can see. But that he saith fy on this happe, the world doth frowne on me: I am not luckie vnto it, oh spitfull miserie. What mortall man can more be plagu'd, then haue such losses still: What sorrow comes by this despight, alas it is too ill. What braules do broile within my heade, what griping griues do nippe: What yerkes of worldly losse I feele, which smarteth like a whippe. But worldling thou content thy selfe. remember Christ did take: A percing speare into his side, and all was for thy sake. And can'st not thou prouoke thy mode, to beare a litle smart: And take thy crosse and follow Christ, to winne thee heauens Desert. And patiently with penitent minde, vnto the Lord to pray: That he would of his goodnesse greate, defend thee night and day. Wherefore this my aduise I giue in sicknesse or in health: In losse of fame in losse of friendes, or losse of worldly wealth.
Or losse of losse, that haplessy. vnto thy state may fall: In any losse lose not the Lord, but on him still do call, That it would please him thee to send, in mid'st of hardest happe: A merry hearte to praise his name, and ioyfull hands to clappe. How Time erecteth and destroyeth. When Musing minde had Fancie fedde to cogitate of Time, And I beholding then such things as pleasant, were in prime, And that the thing is come to passe, which I nere thought should be: Then straight waie to my selfe I saide, behold now may ye see, How Time hath wrought, by Tract of Time, such things as to the show, Did seeme vnlikely for to be, as verie well I know. For there are some of low degree, and Progenie but base: Are now come vp and set aloft, did not Time do this case? Yes surely beliue me now, for Time can mountaines moue: And Time doth worke much things that séeme, vnlikely for to proue. Within my time I haue oft seene, great things and many straunge: And dayly do still more and more. as Time doth worke a chaunge.
For Time will soften flinte so hard, by Time some doe aspyre, To winne the thing to please the minde, and get their heartes desire. And if their hearts Desire be got, thanke hap and Time therefore: If these same two doe faile our friendes, our purpose Gets no more. As Time hath brought many full low that were full high in hap: So Time diffused hath their state, that Fortune did bewrap. She altered hath most Famous thinges that some set vp for Fame: And did not thinke of Time I thinke when they began the same, But thought it should remaine for aye and Time could not deface: Such Monuments as they set vp to get a goodly grace. But sooth to tell, Time with her Time can euery thing bestowe: And those that are so high aloft she can bring downe full lowe. Time is Tickle. Of a smiling Countenance beguil∣ding the worlde. A Goodly house that seemeth braue and pleasant to the sight, With walles set out in goodly form and windowes trimme of light, May chance within for to haue a cracke which is vnseene,
And yet the world knowes not so much nor workeman as I weene. Euen so forsooth such flearing mates that shew a smiling face: I may compare them as before, for why? marke well this case. Thou seest them laugh and smile on thee, but what doth rest in heart? A mocke or tawine behind thy backe, I know some playe that part. And yet theile looke so faithfully and seeme so true to thee,A Parasites parte. And proffer out such sugred wordes and shew such courtesie, I meane in this, by speaking faire, but not in deedes Perdie: Wherefore take heede trust not their shew there may be Treacherie. An Apple seeming braue to view, may faultie be within: And Pewterers may play thee false, by putting leade in Tin. And he that writes, may place A. H. where as A. G. should serue: But Truth to tell A. F. were best, for some doe it deserue. And vnder fresh and fragrant Rose may lye a lothsome Toad: For to infect that flowre braue by hauing there aboad. Wherefore I count them happy sure that doe not trust the vse: Of Tickle flattering flearing friendes, in them doth rest abuse. Let these examples put before suffice to shewe the kinde,
Of Truthlesse troth, which readie is in each deceiptfull mind. No Foe to a Flatterer. When as occasion moueth, To answere it behoueth. WHen vrgent cause doth moue, who can withhold his hand: The Worme when she is troden on doth seeme for to withstand. The Owle of vgly hue, doth thinke her vires are best: The miser pincheth at his feast, although he bids his ghst. The windes that rise in skyes doe threaten surges sore: And tatling tales doe moue Debate where none was ment before. The valiant Champion Stoute, which hath a Victors minde: Doth thinke ther's none so good as he, vntill by proofe he find.An old saying: The foole will not leaue his Bable for the Tower of Lō∣don. The fop and fauning foole doth like his bable so: As for the Tower of great price, he will not let it goe. The Scholler younge in schoole, may proue a learned Clarke: The whelpe by Natures kinde we see, is giuen for to barke. The Scholler though but young hath wrote this verse to those. Which pleaseth for to answere him in Meeter or in prose.
But trueth for to vnfold, some loue to prattle much: And finde three faultes, yet mend not one, yea Minstrelles oft be such. At euery dog which barkes.If one shoulde throwe a stone at euery Curre  barkes, his Arme must needes be wea∣ry. if one should throw a stone: Perchance in end he would haue wisht to let such Curs alone. Hard hap causeth sorrowe, and breedeth disrest: Where griefe is not absent notes solemne are best. LIke as the Carren Crowe doth crie against the raine: So I which doe foresee my griefe begin for to complaine. Or as the snared Hare, lyes tumbling in the net: So I lye tumbling in my woe, which I cannot forget. For why, no neysome newes doth glad the heart of man: But doth reuoke his pleasures all on sorrowes for to skan. I see how spitefull Care doth looke out of her bowre: And Fortune with her smiling face beginneth for to lowre. The mistie cloudes of griefe doe dimme my cleerest sight: And haplesse hap doth take the place to worke my deepe despight.
The sweete and pleasant sentes, which I was wont to taste: Be cleane dismist and put away. my pleasures all do wast. The fine and flagrant smels, which did me recreate: Be noysome sauours vnto me, and worke me much Debate. Sir Phebus glistering hue, seemes nothing in my eyes: For why, I weepe and spend the day, with sorrowing sobbes and cryes. No maruaile though I write, with pensiue pen in hand: No maruaile though I waile in deede, when things be rightly skand. And marke now which be they, that do oppresse me most: Deride me not, though plaine I tell, you heades of finest cost. Lo thus I do beginne, they are in number three: The first of them, is losse of friendes, the next discurtesie. The thirde is not beléeue, the spitfullest of all: Which griues me more then former two, and bitter seemes as gall. But well, what remedie, Plaine patience is the best: For why by her, we dayly see, is got most quyet rest. What doth it boote the shippe, to saile against the winde: She must abide, for Time and Tide, els tarrie still behinde.
Or els perchaunce she drinkes, for enterprise so bolde: And layes her ribbes in foaming sea, of waters wanne and cold. What doth it eft preuaile, to striue to reach the skye? In my conceipte, it were but vaine, least some for it do crye. What though that smyling wordes, hath led me on the bit? Some froward speech shall loose the bond, if luckie chaunce so hit. A Prouerbe long  go, tels Faire wordes makes fooles faine: Which Sentence tries it selfe in me, the mor hath beene my paine. I stand to trye my Chaunce, as Fortune will alote: To see if that she white thee rede, or dimme it with a blot. And if she be so kinde, to take the blot away: Then will I sing some ioyfull songe, in praise of that good day. But if that it be so, the blot do still remaine: What remedie but Patience she, must medicine bee for paine: But if that spite will spitte, her spite in furiouse wise: Let all the spites do what they will, or what they can surmise. For by my Troth I am, as the condemned wight: Which thinkes his life is past release, and voyde is of delight.
So I am voyde of ioy, yet laugh I with the best: And smile it out in pleasant hu, as well as do the rest. But what of that, I know ther's many a smiling face: Beares heauie heart, in Carefull Corpes, which causeth their disgrace. Some laugh outwardly, Yet sorow inwardly. A Glasse for Amorouse Maydens to looke in, friendly framed as a caueat for a light beleeuing Mayden: which she may take as a requisite rebuke, if she modestly me∣ditate the matter. FY, Mayden fy, that Cupids flames, within you so abounde: To trust the tatling tales of some, whose wordes proue oft vnsounde? Should euery knaue intice you so, to talke with you at will? What be your wittes so simple now, and of such litle skill? As you can not discerne in minde, who leades you on the bit? Fy, fy for shame, now leaue it off it is a thing vnfit. I promise you it griues me sure, because I am your friend: That euery Iacke should talke with you,Let Iacke be a Iacke I pray you. and it is to no end. But for to feele and grope your minde, and then they laugh in sleeue:
And say it is a gentle maide. how she will men beleeue. Thus do the knaues so cogge and foyst, and count you as a foole: And say your wittes they be so base, as you may go to schoole. Wherefore loue no such steering Iackes, and giue to them no eare: And thinke this lesson to be true, which I haue written here. For well in Time you shall it finde, to breede in you vnrest:Good counsell would not be refused. Wherefore to leaue it of at first, I thinke it were the best. Giue not your mind to be intic'd, to heare each tatling tale, Where constant heades do not abide, what Hope doth there auaile: You will not warned be I see, vntill you haue a nippe: You know he horse which drawes in cart, is euer nye the whippe. But when too late, you do repent, repentance will not serue: Wherefore foresee, in time I warne, from falie fond to swerue. Take heede I say in time therefore, so shall your state be blest: And I shall cease, to write so much, my pen shall take his rest. A praise of friendshippe. OF all the Iuels vnder heauen, firme friendhipe is the best: Oh happie man, that findes the same, yea twse and double blest.
A trustie friend is harde to finde as Sages old doe tell: But flattering friendes attend at hand some profit out to smell. And when for greedinesse of gaiu his friend he doth forsake: That friendship is not faithfull fixt, but as the lurking Snake Lies hidden vp in leaues so greene, to sting a man vnwares: Euen so a fauning friend is found to leaue a man in cares. But faithfull friendship saith to him thou dost declare thy kinde: Thou shew'st thy nature and thy moode, and eke thy truthles minde. O faithfull friendship, high in hap thou dost no time Dissemble: Thou swaruest not in time of neede, though foes coulde make thee tremble. Thou standest like a steadie rocke, though friend be link'd in chaines: And if thou maist expulse his thralles thou thinkst it happy paines. And to redresse him of his greenes, and libertie to get: Such is thy faith and constanci as charge no time can let. Such is a faithfull friend indeede, but for a friend by shewes: He is a friend but flatteringly as well his conscience knowes. A faithfull friend is neuer tried till  be neare the brinke: And that his friend is like to fall, and if he then doe shrinke:
That friend will beare the name no more of faithfull friend I say: But counted as a fleeting friend wherein there is no stay. There are many kindes of frends god knows, more then I can well name: Thee are friends in words and not in deedes, and friendes that faile with shame. And friendes by former promise true till stone is roulde on necke: And then Godboy, they cannot stay, but seede thee with a becke. Such is the friendship of this world: O Lorde a faithfull friend, Is rare to finde, and daintie sure to haue vnto the end. For faithfull friendes were neuer more in scarcitie then now: Nor neuer harder for to finde, to God I make a vowe. For I my selfe not long a goe, by raunging wise did trie, What seedes were sowne in friēdships groūd, and where the chaste did lye. And as the triall telles the trueth, euen so I haue founde out: To settle thinges within my thought, which I tofore did doubt. For why? that friend that laughes on thee is not a friend in heat: But outwardly he seemes thy friend and inwardly the smarte. And suckes thee as the lurking Drone which doth beguild the ee: So he lyes linking in his den some spte to worke to thee
And yet with fauning smiling lookes. he laughes vpon thee so: To bleare thy eies, as who should say he cannot be thy soe. But trust him not for his faire lookes, ne for his glosing vaine: But vtterly detest such mates, as flatter, fleare, and faine. The greatest hap that God doth send, is faithfull friendes to haue: Whose constant stay doth not decline, till vitall breath depraue. Alas some kinde of friendes I knowe, when state impouerisht sore: Doe scornefully looke of that hap, and knowe their friendes no more. But faithfull friendship doth not vse to fleete and fall away: He saith I am a faithfull friend, and so I meane to stay. He doth not say it so in wordes, but deedes approue it true: A faithfull friend is faithfull still, as we may dayly view. Wherfore of faithfull friendship heere, this little Epigram: By vrgent cause did moue my minde, and so it hether came. And as of it in skillesse wise I some thing here haue saide: So of iust Dealing and Constancie, shal somewhat be displaied. As I doe hope no grudging minde shall murmure at the same: But if they doe, the faults not mine, for those that haunt that game,
Constantly leaue, although they know they offer open wrong: Well what of that, the time shall trie their trustie truth ere long. But this I say, who so doth finde a friend that is a friend: Then vse him so as thou maist haue his friendship to the end. A Prayse of Iust Dea∣ling. TO liue in worlde and not deale iust, a heynous faulte it is: A crime which God doth not allowe to come in seate of blisse. For why? to liue Deceiptfully is lothsome in the sight, Of sacred God that sis on high as Iudge of Prudent might Be iust in all thy dealings sure, so shalt thou purchase Fame: And win the praise of euery wight, as worthie is the same. For dealing iust doth carry laude in thought of honest minde: And lauding iust wilbe allowed, as trueth hath it assign'd. Preace not among Deceiptfull mates thy honest name to loose: Ne leape thou yet in dangerous place least thou thy selfe dot broose. But leape vpright, and swarue thou not ne leane no more then iust: For if thou wrongfully be spied deceiptfully to thrust:
Then shalt thou loose thy credit quite not comming in the place: Where as iust dealing doth abide, but rooted out of race. In dealing iust thy doings shall, so prosper and vphold: As all the world will lende thee praise, on it thou maist be bolde. And God will blesse thee in the same, and furtherance thee send: For who so iustly seemes to deale, doth neuer God offend. For why the iust and honest man, his handes are clasped still: He takes no bribes for to make good, a matter which is ill. He saith, if bribes that I should take, I do not then deale iust: I do offend my maker sore, of truth confesse I must. I shall be call'd vnto accounte, before the liuing God: Who dealeth as we giue desert, his dealing is not odde. And if I wretch haue not dealt iust, what answere shall I make: Oh how can I excuse my selfe, but fault vpon e take. Thus saith the iust and honest man, thus pondereth he in mind: Thus must it be and thus it is, so God hath it assign'd. And since by him commaundment is, no lucer for to take: My handes they shall be clasped so, uniust life none to make.
I  not of a scrupulouse kinde, so thus iust dealing sayes: Although that I derided be, of those that vse those wayes. I do defy them with my hearte, they shall not lodge with me: But be accounted as they are, for ought that I can see. The righteouse man doth them exclude, and puttes them out of minde: He doth eschewe their company, he forceth not their kinde. He saith I am as ill as they, if I vphold their state: Wherefore with willing heart I sweare, O Lord I them do hate. God let me neuer liue (saith he,) vniust'y for to deale: But graunt me grace for iustnesse I may vnto thee appeale. And when I shall yelde vp my life, a iust account to make: How that with iustice I haue dealt all briberie to forsake. For doubt we not, our heauenly God hath mercy still in store: And hath aboundance to supply, our want though it were more. But God forbid we should presume, vpon fond hope in vaine: It is the way to purchase hell, remission none to gaine. For he that sinneth still in hope, offendes the holy ghost: And he that doth offend that God. shall vengeance feele with most.
For why the sinne against that God, as Scripture doth declare: Is more offensiue then the rest: So Paul doth witnesse beare. Wherefore God graunt we not offend, in no respect with will: But with a hearte vnfaynedly aske pardon for it still. And craue of God, with faithfull hearte, his mercy may vs guyde: That when our life shall yelde to death, we may with him abide. And there to laude thy name with praise, which euer shall endure: Graunt this O Lord for Christ his sake, whose bloud made vs all pure. A praise of Constancie THe constant wight which doth possesse, that heauenly gift so rare: Is happie sure and blest of God, to haue it to his share. For constancie is such a gift, as doth surmount the rest: And much commended for the kinde, of rarenesse in the brest. To haue a fickle minde you know, it maketh oft Debate:
And causeth much Contentiouse trickes, which Constancie doth hate. Wherefore I count him happie sure, that doth that gift imbrace: He is much bound to thanke the Lord, for that his happie case. For Constancie is such a gift, as sure it doth excell: All Ryotouse trickes and wanton toyes Constancie doth expell. For why such braggers as do runne. vpon their giddie will: Are in the end suffyc'd with paine, and haue on it their fill. And paraduenture wish they would, their minde had Constant beene: And not so rashly for to raunge, in their deuises thinne. For Rashnesse doth no whit preuaile, when raging windes do blowe: The safest way to guyde thy shippe. is saile to beare a lowe. Experience tells and makes a proofe you see the sillie snaile: By slealing steppes will get alofte, and doth to toppe preuaile. When Rashnesse lyeth vnder foote, and cryeth O my bones: And doth repent him of his hast, with gryping greuouse grones. I may well say if that he had, with Constancie him prest: Then Rashnesse had not caus'd his hurt, to breede his greate vnrest.
For Rashnesse is not Constancie but giddinesse of braine: And misseth staying of his side and furthers foorth his paine: And heapeth more mishaps on head then pleasures doe abounde: That getteth giddie braines (I say) by Rashnesse so vnsounde. To be a Constant friend is rare: a Constant louer true, Deserueth praise amonge the best and worthie is in viewe. In euery thing to vse this Dame me thinkes is passing sure: And those that doe not her inuest haue not a life so pure, As I would wish (of God) they had or eke I had my selfe: For trust me true, the vaine of it cannot be bought with pele. But God must be the giuer (he) of such a gifte so hye: As passeth captious head of man, in heauens it doth lye. And when with earnest zeale we pray, God doth vs not reiect: But bendes his heauenly eares to heare, and hath of vs respect. Oh heauenly wightes that doe imbrace this heauenly gifte alway: No Rash aduice doth passe your handes, all Ilnesse you doe stay. But with a mild and modest minde you foster euery doubt: And take those chaunces well in worth which tune doth bring about.
What wished hap can better be, or what can please you more? But for to wish and haue at will, where plentie is in store. This plenteous place, that I doe meane, is vp aboue in skie: It restes in ste inuisible, yea frustrate from the eye. Yet not so harde for to attaine if deedes according be: A life well led in Godly feare, doth winne that place we see. If Anchor hold, and Cable strong, be fastned on with faith: That Hould shall not relent the Hould, as holy Scripture saith. Wherefore if Constancie be plac'd within thy brest so pure: Giue laude to God whose heauenlie giftes for euer shall indure. A presumptuous Poesie for Ponti∣ficall pates. LVcifer was once an Angell bright, And had his roome alofte in starry skie: But hawe Disdaine did put him thēce to flight, Throwne downe he was as truth doth testify, And from an Angel, a Deuill now is he: Captaine of Hell, and euer more shall be. Which vnder him hath a cursed crabbed crue, For to torment all such whose due Desert: Hath gain'd the same most vgly things to view, And hath delite to pay their paines with smart. The Proud (so vaine) is hated for that vice: A Deadly Sinne disdained of the wise.
Medusa she, preferred so her Pate, Prodigally with Golden lace to binde Her hayre on head: but marke the finall Fate. As she had wreathed y• same in curious kinde: Euen so the Snakes did winde about her head, Tormenting her vntill that she was dead. A right rewarde for such a proude Pretence. Oh due Desert, rewarded very well, Oh Peeuish pride, thou art of much offence, Thy Guerdon abydes in howling hel, Where Lucifer chiefe generall of the and, Is readie there to shake thee by the hand. High Ioue no doubt will not abide the vaine Of vaunting heades that glory without cause: Which inwardly doe seeme for to Disdaine Each simple soule. But stay a while and pause. Behold their end, and tell me how they speede. And you shall see their good successe in deede. Written vpon the departure of Care. AS Cruell Care Weare doth away, And pinching paines Refraines their place, And inward woes Growes to decay: So myrth we finde Minde to solace. The quiet life Strife doth refraine,
When heauie heart Smarte doth indue Then wailing woes Shewe out their pai, And glad if they May finde some cure. We may be bold, Cold is delight, Where sower sorrowe Borrowe doth a roome: She brings the braine Disdaine and spite, With griefe to passe As some doe doome. Who sadly sets Lets not to haue Most fearefull fitts Wits to a dull. Who markes each cares, Weares to his graue, To Fatall fine Resigne he will. With merrinesse Expresse thy state: And seeke for ioy Annoy to kill, And let thy minde finde to Probate Such myrth as may Defray each ill. So shalt thou be Free from the care
Of Froward Fate Hate to procure. Thy moode and mind Finde shall that state: Doubtes will appease, Ease to endure. Care is costly. Written vpon Chaunce. SOme Times a chaunce doth chaunce, by chaunce to please the minde: Some times againe, a chaunce doth chaunce, that no such chaunce we finde. If luckely there chaunce a chaunce to thy delight: Then I am sure that such a chaunce, is ioyfull in thy sight. If contrarie wise a chaunce, do chaunce to bringe thee smart: Then I am sure that such a chaunce, is dolefull to thy heart. Yet must we be content, as well in chaunce of care: As we are pleased in chaunce of mirth, or chaunce that brings no feare. For chaunces haue their chaunce, like chaunces as they be: And chaunce wil chaunce as chaūce doth please, and so much chaunce for me. Who seemes to wrest with chaunce, may chaunce for to repent: That chaunce hath so vnkindly chaunc'd, to chaunce to his lament. Then is it best Perchaunce, to be content with chaunce:
Wheather it doth Decrease thy state, or do thy state aduaunce. And ith of chaunce there is such chaunce of tickle state: In modest sorte receaue thy chaunce, as well of mirth as hate. For trust me touching chaunce, it chaunceth now a dayes: That such as gape for chaunce of Laude, they chaunce vpon Dispraise. It is a difficulte matter to please many. HOw should a man his vsage frame? to please each kinde of wight, The froward and the fickle friend, I see he takes delight. In ouerthwarting of the vse, of those he doth not loue: For where Affection is not firme, what will not mallice moue. Let one endeuour what he can, to satisfie their vaine: Yet shall he haue behinde his backe, some speach to his disdaine. The more a man is mou'd to shew, some fauour for his friend: The more he seemeth to be quoy, and fayleth in the end. what hap more heard then sue and serue, and yet to want good will: What paine more pinching to the minde, then wronged, yet doth no ill. What greefe more greate then secretlie, to be exclam'd vpon:
What hell more hatefull then vntruth where faithfulnesse is gone. What folly more then fleare and faune, yet altogether fayning: What Deede more Deuilish then Dispight, and alwayes still Disdaining. From such as do frequent the same, the Lord my friend defend: And eke conuert the fond intent, of those that doe offend. Yatis his song written presently after his comming from London. Why should I laugh without a cause? Or why should I so long time pause? My hatefull happes for to declare, Sith Cruell causes breedes my Care, And Deuilish Disdaine within my brest, Molesteth me with greate vnrest? Agree I must to Froward Fate And be content with this my state: Hoping in end all may be well, For Prouerbe ld thus doth vs tell. The Rowling one, doth get no mosse: The raunger much doth nought but tosie, In places fit for madding mindes, Till youthfull yeares the folly findes. But when that Age  call them backe, And youthfull trickes do finde the lacke: Then do  our youth ill spent. Which in our Age  do repent. But such is youth, and youthfull toyes, To follow fickle foolish ioyes.
How Fortune turnes, we neede not Muse, For dayly we may see in vse, How some are in great fauoure cast, Yet in the end are out at last. And small account of them is made. Such is the guyse of Fortunes trade: To place aloft, and to bring low, Euen as her fauour seemes to growe. For who so markes shall see in deed, Fortune to faile when most they neede. Content is best to please the minde By seeking yet some men do finde. By crouching low, to hy estates, Is good for to auoyd their hates: But he that hath so stubborne heart, As wilfull will, will not conuert: He is not wise in my conceipte, So much to stand in foolish sleight. The bowing Reede withstandes the blast, When stubborne oake is ouercast. If in this world we meane to liue, Such courteouse speach then we must giue, As we may winne the heartes of those, Which otherwise would be our foes. For sinyling lookes do not auaile, When friendship fauour seemes to quaile. The want whereof, doth vs molest, With pinching pangues in priuate brest. Yet from our hearte let vs require, We may haue patience in our re. To pleasure such as we are bound, That vnto them our heartes be sounde. And that no fayned speach be heard,
Least all our doings so be mard. For smiling lookes and hollow hearts, Be often tunes the cause of smarts. But we must needs commend of Right, All such as in the trueth delight. And say from heart and so consent, It is a heauen to be content. Of wayling, and not preuailing. I Waylyng, Yet not preuailing, In sorrow sayling, alas, I mourne: Such is the spight To dimme delight In me poore wight, almost forlorne. But God of grace Graunt me solace Within short space, to ease my griefe: And send release Where woes increase, I cannot cease to craue reliefe. For if the heart Feeles inward smart Without Desert Death it desires: The griefe of minde Much woe doth finde Their life resign'd, So some requires.
A Sonnet declaring what infortunate chaun∣ces doe happen by trusting to the slipperie stone. I Clim'd aloft and thought not of my fall, For slipperie stone alas did me beguilde: I fell so harde vpon the hardye hall, As breath from Corpes was almost cleane exlde. Lo, what it is to yeeld to wanton will, Whose want of witt to sorrow proues at last: Who would asspire may wish he had sate still, And so auoyde perchance an ouer cast. Yet youthfull toyes of giddy youth are such, Not for to care vntill the present time That griefe they feele, and then lament they much, That fondly they so Rashly seem'd to clime: Wherefore the meane, who so obserues in brest, Shall surely see he winnes a quiet rest. A Sonnet of a slaunderous tongue. OF all the plagues that raine on mortall wigtes. Yet is there none like to a slaunderous tongue: Which brings Debate, and filles each heart with spights, And Enemy is, aswell to old as young. In my conceipt they doe more hurte I sweare Then stinking Toads that lothsome are to ighte: For why? such tongues cannot conceale and beare ut vtte  that which workes most Despite. They do more  casting Mooles in mead, Which doe turne vp the blacke earth on the greene Their poysoned speach doth serue in little steade, They practise spite, as dayly it is seene. O Lorde I pray from singlenesse or heart, Such slanderous tongues, reforme, and eke conue.
Written at the Request of E. L. Vnto F. S. which he had Selected for his Mistresse. IF I a Poet were, or that vaine I could finde, I would declare some part of simple skill: To shewe abroade the lowly courteous kinde, Which seemes to be within my Mistresse will. Accepting so my seruice in good part, Although as yet it is not my Desert. But lo, as Time I say, each thing doth trie, Euen so shall Time declare I will not sweru: But alwaies will my seruice so applie, As that I may your fauour still deserue, Which is the thing I chiefely doe Desire, No worldly wealth at your handes I require. And as you finde my seruice to be true: So I doe trust your fauour shall remaine, Which taketh ioy your presence for to view, And glad if I through Dilligence may gaine The louing countenance of your friendly face, Which glads my minde, and yeeldes my heart solace. You courteously did yeelde to my request, And gaue me leaue you Mistresse for to call: Which thing to praise, my pen shall doe his best, Although my skill vnable be, and small. But Ladies all, a praise you may assigne, Yea and giue place vnto this Mistresse mine. And if you be destrous for to knowe My Mistresse name, or eke Sir what she is: Her Christian name begins with F. (I trowe,
Her surname. S. orel I am amisse. But I will sweare and vowe Permafoy, She is as faire, as was Hellina of Troy. Alas my pen vnable is to write The vertues all that seeme in her to be. Oh mighty Ioue which yeeldest bearly light, Graunt her long time her happy daies to see. And though my verse be not fram'd as the best, Yet  her, and so I meane to rest. Still and will: Till death me kill. The Carefull Complainte of a Dolo∣rous Dame. YOu Virgins pure of hearte, come mourne in doleful wise, Helpe me to sing this beauie song, let plaints ascēd y• skies. Oh pittie you my hap, that now doth liue in thrall, tofore was voyde of it & plai'd with pleasures ball. those which once were well, and could not thereof see. Must taste some sorrow for their myrth, and so it is with me. The fall of strately Troy, did not so much men greeue, As doth the fall of my good hap in thraldome now to liue. Nor yet the Aetna hils burnes not more worse with fire: Then I doe burne in flames of feare, yet voyde of my Desire. Wherfore Oh waile with me, Oh waile you worthy Dames, Desire of God I may haue helpe to quch my fretting flames. Oh if I had the skill of Dedalus his art, With winges I would deuise to fly to voyde me of this smart. Or if that I could rule, as Iuno (Goddesse she:) Then would I make them feele of griefe, that so agreeueth me.
But since it may not bee, I waste my life in teares, With soking sighes I spend the day, and so my life it weares. If pittie planted were, within his cruel brest, Then he might soone redresse my gréeues and yeeld me quyet rest. He cancell can my cares, he can inforce my ioye, He may surcease all these my wronges which breedes my great Anoy, But where as Boysterouse Winds, do beare such foce & sway It is in vaine to hoyse your saile least that the shippe decay. You know the sayling shippe mus tarry winde and tide, She can not saile, why then no doubt of force she must abide: So I that would fame go, do want a ight release, Wherefore I see I  abide though sorrowes do increase. My ioyes they vade awa, and wither doth my will, The greenesse of my yong delightes, is feare with inward ill. Well, well, what remedie, sith chaunced so do fall, But Patiently them for to beare, and be content withall. Yet still I hope the best, though present helpe I want, For why? it restes in oue his power some pleasure for to plant Within my broosed brest, that almost is consum'd, With greedie griefe, and cruell care, that hath me so perfum'd. Care is costly. An Epitaph vpon the death of Master Poolies wife of Badly. YOu Dames leaue off your bootlesse teares, Whose vaine complaintes can do no good, Since cruell Death hath forc'd your scares, And stroken such a noble blend. And though you waile and weepe your fill, Yet you can not reuiue your will. For if high oue doth so permit, That Dreedfull Death shall strike with dart,
It is in vaine to mourne for it, Sith he can ioy, and he can smart: He can graun life, he can graunt death, He can bereaue each Prince of breath. This worthie Matron wrapt in clay, Was wife to Master Pooly she: Whose noble race for to display,She was sister  to my Lady Wentworth. My witte vnable is I see. Alas my penne is nothing ryfe, For to Declare her veuouse lyfe. Wherefore twere vaine to pen her praise, Sith it abrode in world is knowne. Alas, that death did end her dayes, And hath her life so ouer throwne. Wherefore to mourne, it is in vaine, Since you no more her can attaine. Giuen vnto Mistresse F. W. when shee Went to waite. TO waite on Noble Dames, much attendance it doth craue: And searcheth out in each respect, the seruice that you hau. Attendance you must daunce, in chamber all the day: And not to walke abrode in fieldes, if truth Reporte doth say. Except my Lady go, then you must waite on her: Or els to keepe the chamber still, and not abrode to stirre. And when she playes at cardes, downe kneele you must on knees:
An so to sit there all the Time, vntill she winne or leese. Oh God this is no life, of Pleasure as I thinke: To waite in chamber all the day, till sleepe do make you winke. But Paraduenture you do thinke Preferment there: Will hoyse you vp to be aloft, and set you voyde of care. I do not I, say nay, for it is like to be: And I as glad as any one, that happie day to see. Thus gentle Mistresse mine, The Gods keepe you in rest: And graunt such pleasures to abound, as sorrowes not molest. Of one who had vitiously spent his Patrimonie. IF shriking plaintes of bitter brest, may yerce the loftie skye: Or heauie happes of Fortunes lore, that happen so awry: Then come drawe y, good minded wille, and marke this mournfull verse: Lend willing eares to heare short tale, the which I shall rehearse. It chaunced so by wanton will, a man that was in Prime: Whose witlesse race, did not regard, for substance of his time. But vainely he did spend his welth, in hugling pleasures sweete:
Yea not regarding honest lore, ne sober life discreete. He was worth thousandes by , this man in London soyle: Who there doth spend his dolefull dayes, ashamed of his foyle. His yonger Brother now , by taking honest Paine: For to disspend by land a , an hundred pound certaine. Oh Shamelesse Sauage elder thou, what shame falles to thy share: Sweete minching Dames haue pul'd thée so, as clothes are skant to weare. Happie is he whom other mens harmes do make to be∣. The wounded wight thus complayneth. NO ioy I feele since care doth gripe my hearte, No haplesse hap, could happen more amisse: Then for to liue in place of feare and smart, And spend my dayes where as no pleasure is. Such is the happe I see for me assigned, And for such happe, I wish my lyfe resigned. I being well and voyde quyte of this snare, Could not take heede, but headlong runne therein, Must for such hast, content my selfe with care, And take my happe, sith I did it beginne. For where I was, I liu'd and was well eas'd, Yet not content, my minde was no so pleas'd, If I were there, and absent from this place, I do beleeue, I would not fast returne:
Sith I doe feele my comming workes disgrace Within my minde, and makes my heart to burne. As pleasant springes, which springe in others soile Must quēch the heate, which in my brest doth boile. Unto which springs, God graunt I may repayre To coole my heate, and set my hearte at rest: To ease this minde, now dying in Despaire, And helpe to ioy my heart which is opprest. I craue this summe, with wet and waterie eyes With soaking sighes, and shriking voyce to skies. Tis wisedome some doe tell, To know when we are well: And so to rest Content, Least that we doe repent. Not Beautie but Bountie. THe Prime of yeeres delightes in Beauties blaze, And much esteemes the seemely shewe thereof: The pleasant hue inforceth many a gaze, To feede the eye on Dames, that loue to scoffe. But who can tell what gaine such Fancy breedes, Or what reward for due Deserte they get. With fruitfull graine, we see there comes vp weedes, And gasing eies are soonest ouer set. Yet trueth to tell, it is a bayte Perdie, Which doth intice the wisest wights of all: For well we see, experience doth not lie, They readie are to come when so they call. But I must say, though Beautie likes it least, Dame Bountie sure, in my conceipt is best. Dame Bountie sure in my conceipt is best, And so of trueth I may vphold for true: For Beautie serues for to intice a ghest To spend his Coyne, as well some doe it view.
When Bountie bids Expence to shutte his dore, And opens hers for to prepare with speede, With liberall hand to giue vnto the poore And meanest soules, which stande in greatest neede. Doth Beautie so? no, no, I thinke not much, For all is skant to prancke her vp in pride: Some vaine Desires we see are alwaies such, To haue delight in brauerie to abide. To shine in shew like Phoebus beames so bright, Which solace sendes to euery worldly wight, Which solace sendes to euery worldly wight, And yet perchance greate ruth thereby doth fall: Some foolish fond will drinke their owne Despight, That proues in taste as bitter as the gall. But let such mates as meddle in that lore, Abide the smart, and feele the worst for me: Yet some are greeu'd to see what griefe therefore, Is got vnwares, a meane to misery. For trust me true, who more esteemes the hue Of Beauties badge, then Bounties liberall hand: Hath not the hap that Good lucke might renew. Nor halfe the skill the case to vnderstand. Nor yet doth se the charge, the coile and cost, That Beautie bringes, yet in the end is lost. That Beautie bringes, yet in the end is lost. O Lorde why then doe worldlings so delight In that which is aswell a Care as Lost, The gaine they got, a simple Clarcke may wright. Oh Bounty thou, that Bountifully dost giue Of cost full free and neuer dost repine: Poore Simple I, am thine while I doe liue, Fall backe, fall edge till Fall my Fatall fine. I will remaine thy seruant ready prest, Yea readie sure at thy command to be:
Though Beauty blaze, yet Bountie is the best, And liked of for liberallitie. Bountie doth giue when Beautie doth retaine, To Prancke her selfe with Pride, that is but vaine. To Prancke her selfe with Pride, that is but vaine. For thats the way for to maintaine her glosse: What forceth she though others feele the paine, She sure is, she tasteth o no losse. Doth Bountie binde her Bounteous liberall hand, Or doth she force of coyne to keepe in store? No, no in deede, if truth be iustly skand, She rather lettes it flie at loose the more. The Bounteous Dame esteemeth not the shewe Of Beauties blaze, that glistereth to the eye: Some say Deceipt doth rest therin they know, Experience telles, and triall doth it trie. Wherefore to say now as my Theame doth moue, Not Beautie sure, but Bountie I doe proue. Not Beauty sure, but Bounty I doe proue. In this respect perchaunce I shall offend The Beautifull Dame, to mallice I shall moue, Because I seeme her for to discommend, And doe preferre Dame Bountie in her place, But beare with me my Theame pertaines thereto, You gallant Dames whose hue Declares your grace, Conceaue no ill for writing as I doe. For of my truth, if Theame had thus beene saide, Not Bounty Sir, but Beauty beares the bell: I must haue then her praise at full displai'd, To write wherein Dame Beauty doth excell. I hope I haue no Courteous Dame offended, For God doth knowe I neuer so intended.
A presumption of the Courtesie of Fortune. THough Fortune frowne, & looke with lowring face Upon my state to moue me to dispite; Though she oft seeme to galle me with Disgrace, And is the cause of dimming my delight: Yet I presume, as she doth worke annoy, In double wise she can aduance my ioy. And though I am thus spent with pensiue brest, Constrain'd to lodge the lookes of lowring hue In sullen soile, although inforc'd to rest, And kept in place where sorrowe doth renewe: Yet as the bird doth ioy at her release, So will I ioy when cares begin to cease. No wight I know but subiect is to Fate, Sith Destiny from byrth ordaines it so: What happy wight that neuer feeleth hate, Or findes the place where Pleasure still doth flow. Which place confused hath euer beene to me, And still refrain'd that pleasant place to see. Before my eyes I veiwe greate heapes of hap, Which big doe seeme, and yet I take no hould: I see how some are lul'd in Fortunes lap, And wrapped warme for feare of catching cold. But I at large vnbraced am, you see, And open lie to take in Miserie. Well, as I saide, I doe presume on this, That Fortunes face at length will change her frowne: And all such cares from me she may dismisse, Which heeretofore my pleasant state did drowne In wretched waues, which moued me to mourne, And often say: fy of that life forlorne.
Of Hope. TO liue in Hope is helpe, But Hope which feedes too long: And bringes no helpe vntill Distresse, Is rooted in among. ¶Then fy of lingering Hope, That feedes our fancy so: Yea fy of Hope againe I say, When Hope bringes helpe to wo. ¶I hope, I hope in deede, I hope what may befall: I hope perchaunce more then is cause, Tis that which marreth all. ¶Yet such are musing mindes, To make of Hope a God: Which say we Hope all shall be well, And nothing shall be od. ¶But ah, that helpelesse Hope, Tis that which I do blame: Which hateth helpe, and heapeth wo, Oh fy ou that for shame. ¶Yet still to Hope some be, In bondage and in thrall: By whom they Hope for to haue helpe, When so it doth befall. Hope is helpe. Of a happie exchaunge. LEaue of to muse my friendes, for to beholde my state: I liued once in deepe Disdaine, my hearte did burne in hate. The Tediouse toyling time. of my tormoyling dayes:
Brought sorrow inwardly to sinke, whose fittes a thousand wayes, Molested so my minde, bereaued so my rest: As often times I did accounte, my selfe to be vnblest. And pondering with my selfe, how vsuall constraint: Inforced me to seeke some meane, my greeues for to depaint. Then see how fortune fond, for me od put in vre: A faling out not by Desert, for me she did procure. Whereby I had iust cause, each thing considered right, To shake off belles whose sounde was greef, and proue another flight. And see if that I could, prouide so for my ill: As that contempte of my conceipte, did not offend me still. Not like the mounting Dorre, which buzzeth vp on hy: And falleth Downe (an homely tale) and all to be, doth lye. For some do chaunge in hope, of better happe and place: Yet finde it workes such is ill lucke, a lamentable case. But I may vaunte and say, more then I could before: I haue my pleasure but too much, and what doth youth wish more. Some profit eke withall, is matched for her mate:
The countinance of cheerefull hue, me thinkes doth blesse by state. The quyetnesse of minde, the fearefull feare excluded: The fond surmyses of my heade, with odiouse othes deluded. So much doth me reioyce, that all thinges past and donne: As to my selfe oft times I say, me thinkes I heauen haue wonne. For those which alwayes haue, beene pent in priuate paine: When as they haue release thereof, they double thinke their gaine. Lo thus I do conclude, in this my skillesse stile: And thanke the Lord whose goodnesse greate, hath holpen my exile. Of the Mutabillitie of this world. OH wauering world, vnconstant and vnkinde, Oh drudge to droyle and driuell to the minde. Oh toyle, oh paine, oh how by trauell tost: Oh waues of wo, that worke so for the most. Oh harde to please, and ready to offend, Oh quicke to sinne, and slowly to amend. Oh prompt to speake, our friend for to disease, Oh flacke to helpe, but quickly to displease. Oh eares to heare each tatling tale vs brought, Oh tongue to taunt whereby is mischiefe wrought. Oh gruppilouse mindes desirouse to haue gaine, Oh hazardes hard, which harbors in the braine. Oh how we are by fickle Fancie led, Oh how we seeke to haue our humor fed. Oh how we harke and listen vnto tales,
Oh ignorance, how she bringes vs vnto bales. Oh how we sigh, when as we feele the smart, Oh how before we thinke not of that part. Oh how this world, by Mutabillitie, Doth often chaunge and bringes much miserie. Many worldlinges be wilfull. It is a vaine thing to molest the minde with fortunes Inconstancie. MUse not a whit, though Fortune frowne, And turne thy ioy vnto dispight: She setteth vp, she pulleth downe, She moueth care, she brings delight. Thus to and fro this Dame doth tosse, To ouerthrow Our welth to losse. From welth to losse, is cause of greefe, And cause of greefe, procures paine: And paine is that would haue reliefe, And where reliefe, doth still refraine. What thinke you tho, Some sigh and say: Oh fy on wo, And wofull stay. And wofull stay, that onely is, The wretched wringer of the witt: The thing that lyfe would faine Dismisse, If Ioue would so alow of it. Where Reason failes, And Will is Iudge: What then Preuailes, But Wrath and Grudge.
But wrath and grudge? what life is that, Who would Desire there to bee? The silly Mouse doth drea the Cat, Because she feares her Crueltie: Euen so annoyes Which daily grow: ereaues the ioyes Of some I knowe. Of some I know, that daily tast The sower sauce of sorrowes still: And yet with griefe they take repast. And make a myrth of euery ill. For thats the way, As wisedome shewes: For to alay Dame Fortunes blowes. Dame Fortunes blowes which copled are With ouerthwartes that glutte the mind: And in the stomake make such warre, As life doth wish it were Resign'd. Yet onely this Remembring still: A tune there is To end all ill. He being very sicke, and finding greate courtesie at his betters handes, thereupon writth. LEt truth Reporte, what Triall findes, Conceale no praise where it is due: e bold to laude such courteous mindes, As that disdaine not for to view, As well the simple as the best, With sickenesse when they be opprest.
Not like the Proude Ambitious wights Which scorne the simple for their race: Where wisdome guides, there are no sight, For modestie supplyes the place, And pittie prickes their ruthfull eyes, To pittie him in cares that lyes. And Doubtles sure for their reward, High Ioue some heauenly hap will send: Besides, their Fame, which is Preferd Throughout the soyle where life doth lend. And for my parte while life doth well, I will not let the same to tell. As knoweth God Which sits on hye: Who euery secret thought Doth spye. If I dissemble Or do faine, God graunt good hap I neere attaine. A Question vnto true Mea∣ning. WHere hast thou beene so long, True meaning to me tell? Abroad in world to seeke and search where Faithfulnesse doth dwell. What hast thou found him out, and where he keepes his hould? I,  keepes a marrish place, that is both moist and colde. Who bringeth him his foode? firme friendes which neuer fayle:
And what is that they bring to him? Plaine proofe, which shall preuaile. Why doth he keepe away? because men should him craue: He saith that fewe now Desire his companie to haue. Who is the cause thereof? Dissembling deepe delight: Who doth allure the mindes of men to swerue from faithfull right. And doth Dissembling driue Firme faithfulnesse away? I. I. Truemeaning markes it well, he seeth it euery day. Let Flearing flatterie faune, Truemeaning is but plaine: Yet Truemeaning and faithfulnesse. were neuer found to faine. Truemeaning cannot glose, ne Faithfulnesse deceaue: Wherefore Truemeaning and Faythfulnesse of Dissembling take their leaue. Written vnto Master S. H. IF wealth agre'd vnto my willing minde. To gratify you as I doe Desire: Then trust me true some present you shoulde finde For recompence, but this I you require, For to accept these verses heere in place, Which simple be, and worthles in their grace. I cannot chuse exaction mouing me, But write I must, yet briefly I intend: I am Disposed (belike) that you should see
A fewe verses which I doe commend To your constructiō, vprightly for to Deeme: Then courteously see that you them esteem. It were a fault to flatter with a friend. A faulte, nay sure a villany, thats more: Where Trusty troth abids not to the end, Nor promise kept, as it was made before. If breach thereof be proued, then I say, Such well deserue to be put from the way. Where faithfull friendship walketh voide of guile And firmenes fixt, fond flattery to reiect: And Deepe dissēbling, with her glosing stile Is put apart, where Trust doth whole protect. Which Trust God grāt vntill our daies do end. Trusty to be, vnto a faithfull friend. No foe to a flatterer. A fancy vpon fortune SIth Fortune doth assigne, My ioyes they shall vntwine, And cares they shall combine, I must contented stand: Sith that she is my foe, Good lucke to ouerthrowe, And haplesse hap to shew, I take it at her hand. I take it at her hand, Perforce then I must stand, For to abide her band, Untill she me release: Her subiect and her thralle, Her vassaile at her call, Her innocent and all, So must I hould my peace.
Though wrong I do sustaine, Alas it is in vaine For me for to complaine, When Fortune knittes her face But beare it well in hearte, Although it be a smart, In faith without Desarte, More greeuouse is my case. But God that sittes on hy, And guydes the cloudy skye, And doth each secrete spye, Respect this ruthfull tale. Remember those in care, Whose backe is faine to bare, Untill their eyes do stare, And yet they not availe. How long will Fortune frette, How long shall I thus sette, How long shall sorrowes gette, For to bereaue my ioy? How long shall pleasure stay, How long shall mirth delay, How long shall I thus sway, In depth of myne annoy? Will Fortune neuer smile, Will Fortune wrong compile, Will Fortune still exile? O now I hope and trust, That fortune will me pleasure, Though not with wit or treasure, But quyet life and leasure, Lo thus I hope aud must.
A vowe prefixt. AS Tracte of Time, doth try each trade, And Triall doth disclose the truth, And truth is seene where proofe is made, And proofe explaineth ioy or ruth: So modest minde is bent to beare, The mirth, the mone, the wo and care, The mirth we easily can vphold, The more indifferently to tast: The wo is neyther hote nor colde, The cares be as the cause is plac'd. Lo one my friend, and three my foes, My pensiue pen doth now disclose. To take each chaunce and act vpright, To hears eache speache that shall be tolde: To laugh when cause is of delight, To smyle when Fancie things behold. Thus to behaue and frame thy minde, Shall make thee see when some are blinde. The sillie soule that droyles in durt, And drinkes the dregges of deepe Disdaine: Whose simple minde doth thinke no hurt, By Patience doth experience gaine: And closely doth conuey a smyle, To cheere his minde, betwene each while. Thus neyther for to feare the brunte, Nor yet to care for too much toyle: But patiently to take thy wunt, Till Tracte of Time do giue the foyle. And like as trees their Blossomes shed, So cares be past when man is deade Patience is profitable.
A quyet life is sure a world of wealth, A meane to mirth, a preparatiue for health. WHat's that hath chaung'd thy state, my friend to me What's that hath eas'd thy feare and toyles of What's that which makes thee now at libertie from ce? Doth pleasure now possesse the place, which greefe did No, tis a quyet life, which is the worlde of welth, A meane to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health. For where Discention digges, there Sorrow sowes his sodes, Where fearefullnesse is founde, there Where soaking sighes be sonke: what I me report to those, which he with those extreemes wealth. For sure a quyet life is euen the world of A meane to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health. The hearte which haunted is, with dayly Is in a prison pent in paine, : And when their happens ioy, tis deem'd for Fortunes As oft it is her propertie slyly to smyle and est. But sure a quyet life is en a world of wealth, A meane to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health. The shephearde poore and base,  his Is ioyfull for tsee, his nomber safe and well He eates with merry cheare, and iyfully deth He thinkes that trade of life, doth others farre excell. For sure a quyet life, is euen the world of wealth, A meane to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health What booteth Midas mucke, where Nero is at hand Whose pining trade doth reare  ruthfull rage, Is there a quyet life, how might one vnderst and? No, no, it is a hatefull happe vntill it doth aswage. But sure a quyet life, I count the world of wealth, A meane to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health. To liue in quyet state, each Godly minde Desires, To sue and serue the Lord his giftes of grace to gaine: To aske his heauenly helpe, tis most that some requires,
To way the worldly woes, is but a meane to paine. Then sure a quyet lyfe, I deeme the world of welth, A mean̄e to moue vs vnto mirth, a preparatiue to health. His farewell to Feare. FArewell Fond Feare which did my minde dismay, Whose peeuish pangues procur'd my priuate pains: The soaking sighes thou did'st in stomacke lay, Oft caud my minde to construe of disdaine. But sines I see that thou did'st me deceaue, Fond Feare farewell, of thee I take my leaue. I feared thée Feare, and why? because I hill'd Thy fearefull fittes as Master of my minde: I stood in awe to doe what so thou will'd, And was content to stoupe vnto thy kinde. But since I see that thou did'st me deceaue, Fond Feare farewell, of thee I take my leaue. Yet God forbid true feare I should exempte: The feare of God before myne eyes to be, If I neglect, I counte it but contempt, A gracelesse gift, from sinne it were not free. But when I saw Fond Feare did me deceaue, Fond Feare farewell, of thee I take my leaue. What lingring lyfe led I with doubtfull dayes, What heauy happes by thee were brought to passe: I feared thee Feare in hope to purchase prayse, But when I saw thy truth like tickle glasse, Then quoth I thus thou shalt not me deceaue, Fond feare farewell, of thee I take my leaue. God graunt to those, with whom Fond Feare will bee, A patient minde to suffer all their Illes: That Hope may helpe, and Comforte let them see: And Time may turne the worlde vnto their willes. But I say still, since Feare did me deceaue, Fond Feare farewell, of thee I take my leaue.
Of the burning of the eares. IF Talles so often told, may moue vs to beleeue, That trueth of force in them doth rest: then let it not me greeue, That I doe credite giue vnto the saying old: Which is, when as the eares doe burne, some thing on thee is told. Then trust me now for true, in me it is approu'd: For why, my eares haue burnt so hot as I thereby am mou'd, To write as heare you see, for to foreshew my case: That vnto fables fond and vaine, our nature giueth place. For if the right eare burne, then thus the saying is: No good on thee that time they speaks. but sure how true it is, I leaue it for to iudge, to those that knowe the same: For if I intermeddle farre, I shall but purchase blame. Well, when the left eare burnes, then doe they speake thee good: But surely I counte them both a tale of Robinhood. Belieue them who that lift: for I will leaue the same, To him which is the righteous Iudge, and Prince of peereles Fame.
A sorowfull Libell Exhibited to Ioue. OH mightie Ioue, whose powre is infinite, Which can release each captiue bound in thralle: Uouchsafe O God, to heare me which lament, And send redresse to ease me of this galle. Let me not thus in thraldome still be bound, Since thou art he can ease me of my wounde: But send me helpe from heauenly throne aboue, Where thou hast store, For griefe much more, If that thou please from me it to remoue. I doe confesse Oh God withall my hearte, I haue deseru'd this griefe, though it were more: Yet I doe hope thou wilt releae my smart, And ease my thralle which greeueth me so sore. Haue mercy Lorde, for all my sinfull lore. The Righteous man doth often times transgresse, As still I doe (O Lord) I doe confesse: Yet this I hope, thou wilt not haue respect Unto my Sinnes Which neuer linnes, Nor holy Lorde thy vassaile to reiect. Send libertie O Lorde, when thou shalt please Unto me nowe a wretch all wrapt in wo, And graunt Good Lorde vnto me now some ease, Oh heare me Lord, for now my griefe is so, As it is thou must make it from me goe, Or els my life will soone be laide in graue, Which Dollour (she) woulde gladly so it haue. Yet Lorde of helpe, let helpe extend a pace, And graunt reliee To ease my griefe, For Lorde I rest in lamentable case.
I wish my death, a hundreth times a day With faithfull hearte O Lorde, as thou dost know: I wish, I wish that I were laide in clay, Then thrall should cease, her seede in me to sowe, The winde of care should not vpon me blow, The galles of greefe should cease in their despight, If clddy clay had gotten once her right, And I should cease to make this my complainte Which greues me still, And so it will Untill high Ioue giue iudgement of restraite. Marke wellmy wo, marke well my mourning teares, Marke well O God my supplication here Which I preferre for riddance of my feares And turne my thrall vnto some ioyfull cheere, Els I do wish for to be laide on beare. Let not Dame thrall ein thraldome so me blinde, But graunt O God that I reliefe may finde, To ease me wretch which do make all this moe In sollemne wise With plaintes to skyes In euery place, where as I goe alone. Wherefore Oh Kinge ease me when thou think'st good, I yeelde my selfe into thy heauenly handes, I wish it God, for Christ thy Sonne his bloud, Who suffred paine vs to redeeme from bandes: So now good Lord ease me from thrall which standes, Within my Corpes which breedeth my decay, And hourely doth my sing minde affray. Haue mercy Lord some pittie on me take, And graunt redresse My thralles to lesse O Lord I pray, for thy greate mercyes sake.
The conclusion, wherein is included the Authors Name. I pardon craue of sober modest mindes. And sory am, if that I d offend: My will is glad,  happily it findes Indifferencie, where iudgment doth extend, Such censure as affection will permit. Yelding thereto, if reason iudge, and wit. A willing hearte is glad to gratify Those, whose desertes deserue full will the same. In whom consistes (as tryall doth it trye) Such worthie workes as merits mickle fame. Muse then no whitte at this my simple booke, A forde good wordes, as well as on it looke. Disdaine it not, although it want the file, Esteeme it well, hereafter you shall see More wrldly workes I meane for to compile: Experience may bring knowledge vnto me. FINIS.
None good but God.
