2729 99838086 2445
¶ The whole Psalter translated into En∣glish Metre, which con∣tayneth an hundreth and fifty Psalmes. The first Quinquagene. Quoniam omnis terre Deus: Psallite sapienter. Psal. 47. Imprinted at London by Iohn Daye, dwelling ouer Aldersgate, beneath S. Martyns. CVM GRATIA ET PRIVILEGIO Regiae Maiestatis, per Decennium.
Ad Lectorem. HEc quicun{que} legis, tu flexu & acumine vocis In numeros numeros doctis accentibus effer, Affectus{que} impone legens, distinctio sensum Auget, & ignauis dant interualla vigorem. To the Reader. OF thee good frend: thus muche I craue, These few requestes I say: No browes to bende: but first with saue, To iudge by like assay. And if ye spie: as much ye may, where strayd amisse I haue: To mend where I: went out of way, with art more sad and graue. But reade it round: and hacke it not, as iumblyng short with long: Expresse them sound: and racke them not, as learners vse among. Accent in place: your voyce as needth, note number, poynte, and time: Both lyfe and grace: good reading breedth, flat verse it reysth sublime. Obserue the trayne: the ceasure marke, To rest with note in close: Rythmedogrell playne: as dogs do barke, ye make it els to lose. Reade oft inough: well spell the lyne, less iarr to heare by vse: If verse be rough: no fault is myne, if ye the eare abuse▪
But princepall thing▪ your lute to tune, that hart may sing in corde: Your voyce and string: so fine to prune, to loue and serue the Lorde. Paule. Ephe. 5. Col. 3. SYng Psalmes and hymnes: and songes on hye, To God your selues among: But sing in hart: make melodye, To God geue thankes in song. Iames. V. IF sad ye be: and beare the crosse, In faith pray ye contrite: If glad ye be: and feele no losse, Sing Psalmes of thankes aright. Dauid. Psalme. 33.47.68. IN Lute and Harpe: reioyce to sing, Syng Psalmes in decachorde: Of all the earth: sith God is Kyng, Syng wisely feare the Lorde. Iesus Syrach. 44. THe fathers olde: both sought and found, Sweete musikes moodes full fine: The Scripture songes: they did expound, Their hartes were all deuine. Iesus Syrach. 32. WHo knowledge loueth: teach him thy lore, No musike hinder thou: Where hearyng wanth: spare wordes the more, And modestie allow.
Of the vertue of Psalmes. WHat man hath hart: in heauines With sundry cares opprest: And would haue helpe: in redines, To heale his thoughtfull brest. And yet by man: in suéertie, for Phisike want his cure: Thus set in hard: perplexitie, To God yet trusting sure. Let him beholde: the melodie, of Dauids blissefull harpe: In Psalmes there fynde: his remedie, He may of care so sharpe. If forreyne foe: or ennemy, Hath wasted all thy coastes: No helpe thou canst: haue suerly, more strong to dawnt his boastes. If theeues thy goodes: haue caught in net, And haue made thee ful bare: In Psalmes thy mynde: if thou do set, they will thy losse repayre. If wrung thou beest: by tyrannie, And banishte out of land: Thou mayst releaue: thy miserie, Content by Psalmes to stand. If trayne be layd: all craftely, In spite to trap thy way: Take Dauids lore: than redily, And bid thy foes go play▪
Thou mournst and sighest: in doulefull hart, by death thy children gone: If Psalmes thou takest: in ghostly part, They will asswage thy mone. In house and land: if poore thou lye, downe cast on both thy knees: Here maist thou haue: recouerie, for all that thou canst leese. If panges and paynes: both sharpe and fell, with gripes thy body wrynges: Sweete Dauids harpe: can ease thee well, for it good Phisike singes. If borne thou be: enuiouslie, In skorne and great disdayne: No patrone thou: canst better spie, then Dauids life and raigne. Thy hie degrée: is low deiect, by fortunes turnyng blast: If Dauids state: thou seest reiect, thou shalt be lesse agast. Thy fieldes lye all: in baren sort, by burnyng Sunne his heate: To Dauids welles: if thou resort, His dewes thy soyle shal weete. Agayne if they: be ouerflowne, By rage of water streames: If Dauids Psalmes: thou makest thine owne, Thy soyle must feele his beames.
(O foolishe men: that marke the skie, The Starres and Planets gate: By them to searche: their destenie, and so repose their state.) And thus what wo: or miserie, may moue or freat thy hart: In Psalmes thou mayst: haue remedie, to beare all payne and smart. Not beare them well: I onely saie, but them expell ful strong: Who like in hart: can them defraie, as Dauid did among. Not thus alone: hast thou thine ease, of worldly griefe and payne: But here thou mayst: all soules disease, by comfort sweete restrayne. So déepe in sinne: no wight can bée, no conscience so thrall: But prest reliefe: here may he sée, to reyse his deadly fall. No wight can be: so burdenous, mans senses harde to presse: But Psalmes that be: so vertuous, can soone the weight redresse. Now go and searche: the Discipline, of mortall men so vayne: Who taught by wit: or sort deuine, of them these helpes to gayne.
So foule shalt thou: deceiued bée, to trust their rules and lawes: As dreamers be: which thinke to sée, all wealth within their clawes. Go now to men: and beg their art, in sicknes thee to saue: By meanes vntrue: to heale thy smart, where God thy hart should haue. This Prophet here: forbiddeth thee, thus once from God to stray: Euen he that harpth: all melodie, of godly wisdomes way. For what thou readst: Saint Austen holdth, in law or stories true: In Prouerbs wise: or prophets olde, the Psalme doth it renue. Both what is past: and what to come, the psalme doth it perfourme: It is a law: in perfect some to maners them to fourme. Though Scripture booke: sayth Athanase, of vertue rule it bée: Status ani marum in Psalmis.Yet Psalter booke: of soule it hase, the state for eche degrée. In other bookes: where man doth looke, but others wordes séeth he: As proper hath: this onely booke, most wordes his owne to be.
It is a glasse: a myrrour bright, for soule to sée his state: A garden fayre: all fully dight, with herbes most delicate. A treasure house: ye may repute, this booke of all good lore: All wholsome salue: to distribute, to eche mans griefe and sore. For who delyghth: them well to sing: his mynde shall féele a grace: Of sinne both dulde: the cursed sting: and vertue come in place. The Psalmes sayth he: in verse be folde: and tuned by musike swéete: The eare to please: of yong and olde, so Dauid thought it méete. Iosephus sayth:Lib. 7. Iu∣da. anti. c. 12. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 16▪17. and Philo wrighth, That Dauid Metres made: Quinquemetres: some trimetres, by musikes tract and trade. For that that is: commended both, with tune and tyme aright: It sinkth more swéete: and déeper goth, in harte of mans delight. O wondrous fact: of God I saie, in his deuise so playne: Though we be séene: but sing and plaie, the soule yet winth his gayne.
The Psalter booke: of Psalterie, an instrument so namde: For that the Psalmes: most commonly, to it were tuned and framde. And who that noth: and hath it waighde, how Psalmes by Metre go: Can blame no art: by rythme so layde, nor musike squard therto. Thus Bernard swéete: in holy rede, Christes death reuolued in rythme: So Ambrose sage: and worthy Bede, thought this no shame or cryme. And what is verse: but rythme to name, in Lattine, Frenche, or Gréeke: Our Englishe verse: I count the same, though all men hit not leke. The Psalmist stayde: with tuned songe, the rage of myndes agast: As Dauid did: with harpe among, to Saule in furye cast. With golden stringes: such harmonie, his harpe so swéete did wrest: That he relieud: his phrenesie, whom wicked sprites possest. Both Powle and Iames: in their deuise, bid Psalmes with voyce to vse: In hymnes and songes: swéete exercise, To God in hart to muse.
Who tunes and rythms: as aske their kyndes, to Psalmes can frame I saie: The swéete in strength: for that he fyndes, must beare the bell awaie. The singyng man: and Poete must, with graue deuine concurre: As Dauids skill: all thrée discust, when he his harpe did sturre. Depart ye songes: lasciuious, from lute, from harpe depart: Geue place to Psalmes: most vertuous, and solace there your harte. Ye songes so nice: ye sonnets all, of lothly louers layes: Ye worke mens myndes: but bitter gall, by phansies peuishe playes. My readers all: now must I pray, in worth to take my payne: I ment but well: as well they may, meane well, and winne some gayne. As some beforne: the lyke hath playde, of Psalmes to pike their choyce: And them in ryme: so fyne haue layde, to sing with musikes voyce. Then some in prose: most learnedly, haue tournd the phrase and worde: Some glose haue made: full diuersly, yet sang in good accorde.
That some in verse: right latenly, haue strunged Dauids harpe: They haue their laudes: most worthely, their paynes ought no man carpe. Herein because: all mens delight, bene diuerse founde in mynde: I tournd the Psalmes: all whole in sight, in rythmes of diuers kynde. And where at first: I secret ment, but them my selfe to sing: Yet frendes requestes: made me relent, thus them abrode to bring. Expresse his pen: in exercise, who list, he may, that can: By this is wrought: no preiudice, I trust to God or man. Uerse cleare to frame: was first pretence, I followed Hierome next: Third Chaldey glose: fourth seuentie sence, rythme, tyme, were fift and sext. So Uatablus: and Pellicane, in truth were not reiecte: Nor Munster yet: or Pagnyne playne, in tonges were fled for secte. From Ludolfe that: Carthusian, the collect most deryueth: No prayse pardy: to any man, to hide, by whom he thriueth.
Who more will searche: how here it goes, let him the Hebrew trye: Where wordes were skant: with texts or glose that want I did supplye: And that in some: reportes be found, and wordes as spare put to: They may be lest: the sence yet sound, though Metre varyth so. If some be blamde: to rythme to thicke, transpose the wordes ye may: The lesse by right: may Momus kicke, the beame so soone away. If some will carpe: so light a warke, graue Psalmes in rythmes displayde:2. Reg. 6. Let Michol heare: before the arke, how Dauid daunced and playde. Where sences straunge: oft diuersly, be séene in writers skill: I did yet pen: my fantasie, let others do their will. Presuming not: yet thus in sight, as I could this do best: My Lute was set: in whole delight, these tunes deuine to wrest. And yet good frende: beare thou with mée, though wordes be straynd among: The verse and phrase: forst breuitie, I sude yet sence most strong.
Require not heere: great difference, In wordes so ofte the same: Although to féele: great violence, I might not chaunge the name. Conceyue in hart: no griefe to sore, wordes olde so ofte to vewe: Thy gayne therby: is wrought the more, though wordes be neuer newe. How can we féele: sacietie, in fourmes of godly speache: The soule which féelth: aduersitie, loues playnes health to seache. Among gay wordes: that hart were séene, therto she bendeth first: She doth not gase: on bushe so gréene, or suckth the post for thirst. Right path of truth: most earnestly, God graunt we holde in worde: To lyue co God vnfeinedly, In hart with one accorde. Us song should moue: as sprite therby, might tunes in concorde sing: God graunt these Psalmes: might edifie, that is the chiefest thing. So els if time: should reason rule, and senses brute haue will: To fleshly lust: might voyce recule, and soule bide barren still.
No pastime vayne: to sing in voyce, or thus to set in rythme: Repyne not frende: at this my choyce, vouch saue my restfull tyme. Uerse harde in mouth: while oft I chowde, I spied therin no wast: Cleare sent to mynde: more swéetely flowde, earst thus not felt in tast. Nor yet of this: I do repent, sith thus my hart I easde: Iudge Reader well: my good entent, so thinke that God be pleasde. All shrewd to iudge: thy neighbours cause, may thée the lyke befall: Euen feare thou God: and kepe his lawes, now this is ende of all.
Athanasius in Psalmos. I Do not a little meruel at, and commende thy constant purpose in Christe (trende Marcellyne) not onelye for that thou doost so valiantly beare this present aduersi∣tie,An. Dom. 79. wherin thou hast suffered right many paynefull dis∣plesures: as, for that thou hast not cast of & renounced thy continuall study: for when I enquired of the bearer of thy letters how thou spētst thy lyfe after thy sicknes, I vnder¦stoode plainly, yt thou wholy appliest all thy diligence to holy scripture, but more specially to the booke of ye psalmes labouring with thy selfe to this ende, that thou mightest comprehende the secret hidden sence of euerye psalme: for which thing I must loue thee so much the more, for that I my selfe beare so great affection toward that booke, as to none almost so muche in all the whole Scripture, the ra∣ther so enflamed therunto by the perswasion of that aunti∣ent olde Father Philoponus, who once in a learned dis∣course that he vouchsaued to make vnto me, made euident demonstration: that whatsoeuer was conteyned abroade in the whole Scripture, was fullye reported in the Psal∣ter booke: So that the matter of the v. bookes of Moses, the substaunce of the iij. bookes following, the bookes of the kinges with their supplementes, all the mysteries of Christ, & of the vocation of the Gentiles, which were trea¦ted by the Prophets in their bookes seuerally: The bokes of the Psalmes (beyng wel resembled to a pleasant garden of all deliciousnes) did vniuersally by Metre expresse them all, by playing them as it were sweetely vpon musicall in∣strumentes. In whiche his conference he also noted, that the booke of the Psalmes had this peculiar grace and ob∣seruation chieflye by it selfe, that beside other matters by which it hath an agreable proportion and fellowship, with other bookes of the scriptures, it hath this in a maruelous consideration proper to himself alone (sayth he) that it cō∣teyneth the motions, the mutations, the alterations of eue¦ry mans hart and conscience described and liuely paynted to his owne sight, so that if a man list, he might easely ga∣ther out thereof certaine considerations of himselfe as out of a bright glasse and playne paterne set before his face, so therby to refourme himselfe as he red therin: for in other
bookes (sayth he) onely we heare the preceptes of the law, what oughte to bee done, and what vndone, we heare the matter of prophecy, to the entent we should not bee igno∣raunt of Christes comming vnto vs in the fleshe: further∣more, we reade the histories, wherby the actes of kynges & holy fathers might be knowne & brought to remēbrance, but in the bookes of the Psalmes, ouer and aboue that, we learne and heare all these foresaid things sufficiently: ther euery one may see and perceiue the motions and affections of his owne hart and soule, both to see whereto he is incli∣ned, and where he is streyned and pinched, so that he maye haue a very good fourme of prayer therfore, not that these motions should lightly fal from his consideration, assoone as he haue hard them but to learne how he may heale these his affections and passions, by worde and by deede. There be in other bookes wordes and sentences, which forbid di∣uers vices and enormities, but this booke prescribeth a forme, how a man may be cleare of them, & how to auoyde them. As in example, we bee bidden to repente vs, & to do penance, & told further we be, that truly to repent vs, is to cease from sinning: but in this booke is there a forme set out vnto vs, how to do penaunce, and what is meete to be said presently at hand in that case and state. Furthermore S. Paule teacheth in his doctrine, that tribulatiō worketh patience, patience bringeth in probation, and probation breadeth hope, & hope is neuer ashamed, but in the psalme is set out, howe tribulation should be borne, and by what waies euery one of vs is tryed and proued, and what kind of prayer we may vse, to come by this hope in God. Also it is commaunded in precept, that we shoulde geue thankes in all thinges. Nowe doth the Psalme expresse, what is meete to be sayd when we do geue thankes. Moreouer, we heare of other places of Scripture, that all such as wil liue godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution & aduersitie: where in the Psalmes we learne how we should be affected when we be exilde, and there to flee from tyrannye. In them we learne who they be which suffer persecution, & what thank¦full prayers they ought to offer to God, whiche be escaped and deliuered from the pursute of their enemies. So like∣wise we be charged to blesse the Lord, and to laude him in all thinges, but how and in what fourme we should praise god, and what words we should pronounce in our laudes
singing, we haue that instruction in the Psalmes onelye. To be short, we may there finde in euery case as may ryse most deuine songes and ballets, perteinyng as wel to our selfe in person, as to our doynges and state whatsoeuer we be in. There is also in the Psalmes (sayd he) one other mer¦uelous thing to be expended: For when in other bokes of Scripture beside, we reade such thinges as the holy fa∣thers eyther spake in worde or did leaue in writyng (we so reade them as though we semed but to recite and rehearse them onely, and they which doo heare vs when wee reade such matters, straight way they conceiue in their imagina∣tion that they be other mens wordes and dedes that they heare, and in suche sort are they enflamed to those matters so rehearsed that they bend themselues to be as followers to them to counterfayte the like. But whosoeuer take this booke in his hande, he reputeth & thinketh all the wordes he readeth (except the wordes of prophecy) to be as his ve∣ry owne wordes spoken in his owne person, yea and who¦soeuer do but here them reade, he is so affected to them, as he were the very man that read them, or first spake them, and so is disposed to warde the wordes of the verses, when they bee vttered, as they were properlye his owne onelye wordes, first by him conceyued and pronounced. So that he shall not esteme thē in a singuler respect, referring those wordes to the persons of the Patriarches, or of Moyses, or of any of the prophets: for as much as the psalme without respect of persons do expresse as well the righteous man, which obeyeth gods precepts, as the sinners which trans∣gresse his preceptes, with all their deedes they do. So that all maner of men must needes be comprehended in them, as of whome the Psalmes make so plaine mention. And verely me thinke the psalmes be to him, which singeth thē as a glasse where he maye beholde the whole affections of his soule, which so vttered to his owne sight, he may de¦clare forth to other: for who that heareth a man readyng such kynde of poesie, vndoubtedly he taketh it so to himself as it were onely of himselfe, and so while conscience hathe remorse in the hearyng, he is therby compunct and styrred to repentaunce, & sometyme hearing what grace the psalm doth expresse as done by Christe to his electes, and what hope they may haue in him, he must needes in the contem∣plation
thereof begin to reioyce in his conscience and geue God his thankes. wherupon he which shall sing the third psalme, in beholding his owne aduersitie, he shall so re∣porte it, as though they were his owne very wordes, who that shall rehearse the 10. and 17. psalmes. He shall so vtter them, as he pronounced his owne hope and trust, who shal read the 51. psalme, so speaketh he the woordes of a penitent contrite harte, as they were his in deede. And who that prayeth the 54.56.57.142. he is not so dis∣posed in them, as though he should speake of some other which suffreth persecuti∣on, but as he himselfe felt the same in deede, and therfore, singeth to God those woordes as his very own wordes and petitions.
Of the vse and vertue of the Psalmes by Athanasius. ALl holye Scripture is certenly the teacher of all vertue and of the true faith: but the booke of the Psalmes doth expresse after a certaine man∣ner the verye state and condition of the soule. For as he whiche entendeth to present himselfe to a kyng, firste will compounde with himselfe to set in good order both his gesture and speache, least els he might be reputed rude and ignoraunt. Euen so doth this godly booke enforme all suche as be desirous to leade their life in vertue, and to knowe the life of our sauiour, which he led in his bodely conuersation, put¦ting them in mynde in the reading therof: First, of all their affections and passions, wherto their soule is inclined. Moreouer, the Psalmes forme and teache e∣uery man with diuers instructions, whereby he maye not onely espy the affections and state of his soule, & to winne a good paterne and discipline, how he may please God, but also with what forme of woordes he may amend himselfe, & how to geue God due thanks least if he should speake otherwise then were conue∣nient, he should fall into impietie by his vnreuerent estimation to God, for we must all make an accounte to the iudge, as well of our euill dedes, as of our idle wordes. IF therfore thou wouldest at any tyme describe a bles∣sed man, who he is, and what thing makethh hym to be so: thou hast how in these Psalmes. Blessed is that man which hath not walked in the counsaile of the vngodly. 1. Blessed is he whose vnrighteousnes is forgeuen 32. Blessed is he that considereth the poore 41. Blessed is the man that fea∣reth the Lorde 112. Blessed are all they that feare the Lorde. 128.
If thou wouldst rebuke the Iewes for their spite they  haue to Christ: thou hast: Why do the Heathen rage. 2. If thine owne familiars pursue thee: and if manye  rise against thee, say: Lord how are they encreased. 3. Heare my prayer O Lorde. 143. If thus in thy trouble thou hast cald on God, and hast  taried vpon his helpe: and wouldst geue him thankes for that he hath heard thee with his helpe, sing, Heare me when I call. 4. I am well pleased. 116. I wayted pati∣ently for the Lorde. 40. If that thou seest that euill men lay snares for thee, &  therfore desirest Gods eares to heare thy prayer, syng: Ponder my wordes O Lorde. 5. If thou feelest Gods dreadfull threates, & seest thy self  afrayd of thē: thou mayst say. O Lord rebuke me not 6. O Lord rebuke me not. 38. O Lord God of my saluation. 88 If any take counsaile against thée, as Achitophell dyd  against Dauid, if thou be admonished thereof, sing. O Lorde my God. 7. If thou in beholdyng the grace of our sauiour so spred  on euery side, specially for the restoryng of mankynde to saluation: and wouldst speake thereof in meditation to God, sing O Lord our gouernour. 8. If so agayne thou wilt sing in geuing thanks to God  for the prosperous gatheryng in of thy fruites, vse the same. O Lord our gouernour. 8. If thou wouldest haue thine aduersary kept back, and  thy soule saued, trust not in thy selfe but in the sonne of God which can do it: and say I will geue thankes. 9. If thou perceyuest God to be wroth with his people, as though he regarded them nothing, thou hast to pacifie him to complayne therof: Why standst thou so far of. 10. O God thou hast cast vs out. 60. O God wherfore. 4. If any mā would put thée in feare, haue thou thy hope  in God and sing. In the Lord put I my trust. 1. If thou beholdst the pryde of many men, and seest ma¦lice
to abounde, so that there is no godlines among men repayre thou to God and say. Helpe me Lorde. 12. If thyne aduersarye lye long in wayte agaynst thee, dispayre not as though God had forgotten thée, but call vpon the Lord, and sing. How long O Lord. 13. Heare my crying O God. 61. My God my God. 22. If thou hearest any to blaspheme god in his prouidēce be not pertaker with them in wickednes, but make hast to God and say: The foole hath sayd. 14.53. If thou desirest to know who is a Citizen of heauen: sing. Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle. 15. If thou hast néede of prayer for such as be against thée and haue closed thy soule on euery side, sing: Preserue me O God. 16. Heare the right O Lord. 17. Bow downe thine eare. 86. Lorde I call vpon thee. 141. If thou hast escaped from thine enemies, and art deli∣uered from them who pursued thée, sing thou: I will loue thee O Lord. 18. My song shall be of the louyng kindenes of the Lorde. 89. If thou doost wonder at the order of thinges created by God, consideryng the grace of the deuyne prouidence syng: The heauens declare. 19. and 24. If thou seest any man in aduersitie, comfort hym and pray for hym. The Lord heare thee. 20. If thou perceyuest thy selfe to be defended and fed by God, and to lyue prosperously, reioyce therin, and sing: The Lord is my shepeheard. 23. If thine enemies cōspire agaynst thee, lift vp thy soule to God and say: Vnto thee O Lord. 25. and thou shalt espye them to labour but in vayne against thée. If thine enemies clouster agaynst thée, and go aboute with their bloudy handes to destroy thée, goe not thou a∣bout by mās helpe to reuenge it, for all mens iudgemēts are not trusty, but require God to be the iudge, for he a∣lone is iudge, and say. Be thou my Iudge. 26. Pleade thou my cause. 35. Geue sentence with me. 43.
If they presse more fiercely on thée, though they be in  numbers like an armed host, feare them not, which thus reiect thée: as though thou were not annoynted and e∣lecte by God but syng: The Lord is my light. 27. If they be yet so impudent that lay wayte against thée  so that it is not lawfull for thée to haue any vocation by them, regard them not but syng to God: Vnto thee wil I crye. 28. If thou wilt exhort & prouoke kyngs & princes, to sub¦mit  theyr powers to God, and to regard his honor syng: Bring vnto the Lord. 29. God standeth in the congregatiō. 82 If thou renuest and builde thyne house: bothe of thy  soule, whereto thou receyuest God to host, and of thy tē∣porall habitation, syng: I will magnifie thee. 30. Great is the Lord. 48. Except the Lord build the house. 127. If thou séest thy selfe had in hate for the truthes sake  of thy frēdes and kinsfolke, leaue not of thy purpose, nor feare them which be against thée, but thinke on yt whiche follow: and sing. In thee O Lord haue I put my trust. 31 If thou beholdst such as be baptised and so deliuered  from the corruption of theyr byrth, prayse thou the boun∣tifull grace of God and sing. Blessed is he whose vnrigh∣teousnes is forgeuen. 32. If yu delightest to sing among many, call together righ¦teous  mē of godly lyfe and sing: Reioyce in the Lord. 33 If by chaunce thou fallest amonges thyne enemies, &  yet hast fortunably escaped them, if therfore thou wilte geue thankes, call together méeke men, and sing: I will alwayes geue thankes. 34. If thou séest wycked men contend among themselues  to do mischiefe, thinke not that theyr nature doth impell them by necessitie to worke sinne agaynste theyr wyll, as certaine heretikes suppose, but consider the psalme. My harte sheweth me. 36. and thou shalt perceyue that they be to themselues their owne occasion of sinnyng. If thou seest how wicked men doo much wickednes &
that yet simple folke prayse such, when thou wilt admo∣nishe any man not to followe them, to be like vnto them because they shall be shortly rooted oute and destroyed: speake to thy selfe and to other. Fret not thy selfe. 37. If thou hast decréed to take héede of thy selfe, and séest thyne enemy approch nye thée, as to such, the aduersary is more prouoked to come wyth assault, and therfore wilt prepare thy selfe syng. I sayd I will take heede. 39. If thou séest many poore men to beg, and wilt shew pi∣ty to them, thou mayst both thy selfe receyue them to mer¦cye, and also exhorte other to doo the same saying: Bles∣sed is he that considereth the poore. 41. If thou hast a desire to Godward, and hearest thine e∣nemies to vpbrayde thée, bée not troubled, but consider what fruite of immortalitie ryseth to thée for this desire: comfort thy soule with hope to God, and so therein relea∣uyng and asswagyng the heauines of thy lyfe, say: Like as the hart desireth the water brookes. 42. If thou wilt remember of Gods benefites which he dyd to their fathers, bothe in theyr out goyng from E∣gipt, as in the deserte, and how good God was to them, but they vnthankefull to hym. Thou hast: We haue heard with our eares. 44. Heare my law. 78. My song shall be alway of the loving kindnes of the Lord. 89. Heare my prayer. 102. O geue thankes vnto the Lord. 106. and 107. When Israell came out of Egipt. 114. If thou hast made thy refuge to God and hast escaped such trouble as was prepared against thée, if thou wylt geue thankes and shew out hys kyndnes to thée, syng: God is our hope and strength. 46. If thou wilt know how to geue thankes to God whē thou doost resort to him wyth vnderstandyng sound, sing O clap your handes together. 47. Great is the Lore. 48. If thou wilt exhort men to put to eir trust in the liuing God, who ministreth all things aboundantly to good mēs vse: & blameth the madnes of the world: which sueth
theyr God Mammon so inordinately, sing: O heare this all ye people. 49. If thou wouldst call vpon the blynde world for theyr  wrong confidence of their brute sacrifices, and shew thē what sacrifice God most hath required of them, syng: The Lord the mighty God. 50. If thou hast sinned and art conuerted and moued to  do penaunce, desirous to haue mercy, thou hast woordes of confession in. Haue mercy vpon me. 51. If thou hast suffred false accusation before the kyng, and séest the diuell to triumph therof, go aside and say. Why boast thou thy selfe. 52. If they which persecute thée with accusations woulde  betray thée, as the Phariseis dyd Iesus, and as the aly∣antes dyd Dauid, discomfort not thy selfe therwyth, but sing in good hope to God. Saue me O God. 54.69. & Be mercifull vnto me O God. 57. If thyne aduersaries which trouble thée do vpbrayde  thée, and that they which séeme to be thy frendes, speake most agaynst thée: wherupon if in thy meditation thou art somwhat greued therat, thou maist call on God, say∣ing. Heare my prayer O God. 55. If persecution come fierce on thée, and vnbewares  chance to enter into the caue where thou hydest thy self feare not, for in thys strayte thou shalte haue expedient wordes both to comfort thée, and to put thée in olde remē∣braunce with: Be mercifull vnto me O God. 57. I cryed vnto the Lord with my voyce. 142. If thou wylt confound hypocrites whiche make glori∣ous  shewes outwardly, speake theyr conuersion. Are your myndes set vpon right. 58. If thy pursuers commaunde thy house to be watched  when thou art escaped, geue thankes to God, and graue it in the tables of thy harte for perpetuall remembraunce and say. Deliuer me from myne enemies. 59. If thyne enemies cruelly assault thée, and would catch
thy lyfe, offer the subiection to God agaynst them, and be of good comforte: for the more they rage, the more shall God subdue them and say. My soule truely. 62. If thou flyest persecution, and gettest thée into wilder∣nes, feare thou not, as though thou were there alone, but hauyng God nye vnto thée, ryse to hym early in the mor∣nyng, sing. O God thou art my God, earlye will I seeke thee. 63. If thyne enemies would put thée in feare, and neuer cease to lay traynes for thée, and picke all maner quarels agaynst thée, though they be very many, geue no place to them, for the dartes of babes shal be theyr destruction, yf thou sayest: Heare my cryeng O God. 61. Let God a∣ryse. 68. Hast thee O God to deliuer me. 70. In thee O Lorde. 71. If thou wylt laud God wyth a Psalme or hymne, sing Thou O God art praysed. 65. O be ioyfull. 66. If thou askest mercy of God, sing: God be mercifull. 67 If thou wouldest syng to the Lorde, thou hast what to say. O sing vnto the Lord a new song. 96. and 98. If thou hast néede to confesse God wyth thankes, sing In thee O Lorde haue I put my trust. 71. Vnto thee O God. 75. It is a good thing to geue thankes. 92. O geue thankes vnto the Lorde. 105.118.136. O God my hart. 108. I will geue thankes to the Lord with my whole hart. 111. and 138. If thou séest wycked men prosper in peace, be not of∣fended nor moued there at, but say: Truelye God is lo∣uyng. 73. If thyne enemies haue beset the wayes whether thou fléest, and art thereby in great anguishe, yet in thys trou∣ble dispayre not but pray, and if thy prayer be hard, geue God thankes and say. I will cry to God. 77. If they perseuer still, and defile the house of God, kill hys elects, and cast theyr bodies to the foules of the ayre, feare not their cruelty, but shew pity to them which be in
such agany and say: O God the Heathen are come. 79. If thou wilt enforme anye man with the mysterie of  the resurrection, sing: Heare O thou shepeheard. 80. If thou wilt sing to the Lord, call together Gods ser∣uauntes  on the feastfull day, and sing: Syng we merely. 81. O come let vs sing vnto the Lord. 95. Beholde now prayse the Lord. 134. If the aduersaries flocke together on euery side, and  threate to destroy the house of God, and make their con∣spiracies against hys religion: let not theyr numbers and power trouble thée, for thou hast an anker of the wordes of thys Psalme. Holde not thy tonge. 83. If thou castest an eye to gods house and to his eternal  tabernacles, and hast a desyre therto as the Apostle had: say thou also. O how amiable are thy dwellinges: 84. If Gods wrathe be ceased, and the captiuitie ended, thou hast cause how to geue thankes to God wyth Da∣uid, recountyng hys goodnes to thée and others with this Psalme. Lord thou art become grations. 85. I beleued and therfore will I speake. 116. in the ende. In Iurye is God knowne. 76. If thou wilt rebuke Paynyms and heretikes, for that  they haue not the knowledge of God in them, thou maist haue an vnderstandyng to sing to God. Bowe downe thyne eare O Lord. 86. Not to vs O Lord, not vnto vs. 115. If thou wilte sée and know the dissent that the catho∣like  churche haue from schismes: and wouldest conuert them, or to discerne the church concernyng the outward appearaunce, and formes therof: thou mayst say. Her foundations are vpon the holy hils. 87. If thou wouldest know how Moyses prayde to God, & in hys meditation, recountyng the brittle state of mans lyfe, desired God to direct so his shorte life, that he might follow wisdome, read. Lord thou hust bene our refuge. 90 If thou wouldest comfort thy selfe and others in true  religion, and teache them that hope to God will neuer
suffer a soule to be confounded, but to make it bolde and without feare for Gods protection, syng: Who so dwel∣leth vnder the fence of the almighty shall abyde. 91. If thou wilt sing on the Saboth day, thou hast: It is a good thing to geue thankes to the lorde. 92. If thou wylt sing on the sonday in meditation of gods worde, desiring to be instructed therein, whereby thou mayst rest in Gods holy will, & cease from all the workes and doctrines of vayne man: reuolue that notable psalm Blessed are those that are vndefiled in the way. 119. If thou wilt sing in the seconde day of the Sabbothe, thou hast. O come let vs syng vno the Lord. 95. If thou wouldest syng to the Lord, thou hast what to say: O sing vnto the Lord a new song. 96. and 98. If thou wilt sing the fourth day of the Saboth, syng: O Lord God to whome vengeaunce belongeth. 94. for then whan the Lord was betrayed, he began to take vengeāce on deathe, and to triumphe of it: therefore when thou readest the gospell. Wherein thou hearest the Iewes to take counsail against the Lord and that he standeth bold∣ly agaynst the Deuill, then sing the oresayd Psalme. O Lorde God. If thou wilt sing on good Friday, thou hast a commē∣dation of the Psalme. The lord is king. 93. for then was the house of Gods churche builded and groundlye founded, though the enemies wente aboute to hinder it: for which cause sing to God the songes of triumphante victory, with the sayd Psalme, and wyth. Many a tyme haue they fought against me. 129. and wyth O sing vn∣to the lorde a new song. 98. If there be any captiuity wherin thy house is layd wast and yet builded agayne, sing: O sing vnto the lorde. 96. If the lande be vext wyth enemies, and after come to any rest by the power of God, if thou wilt sing therfore, sing: The lorde is king. 97. If thou considerest the prouidence of God in hys go∣uernaunce so ouer all, and wilt instructe any wyth true
fayth and obedience, when thou hast first perswaded thē to confesse themselfe, sing: O be ioyfull in the lorde. 100. melius. 147. If thou doost acknowledge in God his iudicial power  and that in iudgemēt he mixeth mercy, if thou wilt draw nye vnto him, thou hast the words of this Psalme to this ende. My song shall be of mercy and iudgement. 101. If for the imbecillitie of thy nature thou art wery with  the continuall miseries and griefes of this lyfe, and woul¦dest comfort thy selfe, sing: Heare my prayer O lorde. 102 If thou wilt geue thankes to God as it is most congru¦ent  and due for all his giftes: when thou wilt so do: thou hast how to inioyne thy soule therunto, wyth these. Praise the lorde O my soule. 103. and 104. If thou wilt prayse God, and also knowe how and for  what cause, and wyth what wordes thou maist best do it, consider. Prayse the lorde ye seruauntes. 113. O prayse the lorde ye heathen. 117. Behold how good. 133. Praise the lorde O my soule. 146. O praise the lorde for it is a good thyng to prayse. and Prayse the lorde O Hierusalem. 147. O prayse the lorde of heauen. 148. O syng vnto the lord. 149. O prayse God in hys holines. 150. If thou hast sayth to such thinges as God speaketh, &  beleuest that which in prayer thou vtterest: say. I bele∣ued and therfore I will speake. 116. in the ende. If thou féelest thy selfe to ryse vpwarde in degrées of  well workyng, as though thou saydst with S. Paule. I forget those thynges which be behynde me, and set myne eyes on thinges which be before me, thou hast in euerye exaltation of y progrese what thou mayest saie in the xv. songes of the syers. 120. If thou béest holden in thraldome vnder straying  and wandryng thoughtes: and féelest thy selfe drawen by them, whereof thou art sorye, then staye thy selfe from thenceforth, and tary where thou haste founde thy selfe in fault, set thée downe and mourne thou also as the Hebrew people dyd, and say with them. By the waters
of Babilon we sate downe and wept. 137. If thou perceyuest that temptations bée sent to proue thée, thou oughtest after such temptations geue God the thankes and say: O lorde thou hast searched me out and knowne me. 139. If yet thou be in bondage by thyne enemies, & woul∣dest fayne be deliuered, say: Deliuer me O lorde. 140. If thou wouldst pray and make supplication, say. Lorde I call vpon thee. 141. I cryed vnto the lorde. 142. Heare my prayer O lorde. 143. If any tyrannous enemy ryse vp agaynst the people, feare thou not, no more then Dauid did Goliath, but be∣leue lyke Dauid and sing. Blessed be the lorde. 144. If thou art elect out of low degrée, speciallye before o∣ther to some vocation to serue thy brethern, aduance not thy self to hye against thē in thyne owne power, but geue God his glory who dyd chose thée, and syng thou: I will magnifie thee O god my kyng. 145. If thou wilt sing of obedience praysing God with Al∣leluya, thou hast these: O geue thankes. 105.106. 107. I will geue thankes. 111. Blessed is the man. 112. Prayse the lorde. 113. When Israel came out of Aegipt. 114. I am well pleased. 115. O prayse the lorde. 117. O laude the name of the lorde. 135. O geue thankes. 136 Prayse the lorde O my soule. 146. O prayse the lorde. 147 O prayse the lorde of heauen. 148. O syng vnto the lorde. 149. O prayse god in his holines. 150. If thou wilt sing specially of our Sauiour Christ, thou hast of hym in euery psalme, but most chiefly in, Vnto thee O lorde will I lift vp my soule. 25. My harte is endi∣tyng of a good matter. 45. The lorde sayd vnto my lord. 110 Such Psalmes as shew his lawfull generation of hys father, and his corporall presence be these. In the lorde put I my trust. 11. Saue me O God. 69. Such as do prophecy before of his most holye crosse & passion, tellyng how many deceitfull assaultes he sustey∣ned for vs, and how much he suffred be these. Why doo
the Heathen rage. 2. Blessed are those that are vndefiled in the way. 119. Such as expresse the malicious enmities of the Iewes  and the betraying of Iudas, be these. Heare my prayer O god. 55. Hold not thy tonge. 109. The king shall re∣ioyce. 21. The lorde euen the most mighty god. 50. Geue the king the iudgementee. 72. Saue me O god. 69. Such as describe his agony in his passion, the cruelty  of the Iewes, the conditiō of his death and sepulture be: My god my god. 22. O lorde god. 88. and that he suf∣fred not for himself but for vs, is declared in the Psalme aforesayd 88. the seuenth verse sayeng: Thine indigna∣tion lyeth hard vpon me. & in the 69. psalme, in the fourth verse: I payd the thinges that I neuer tooke. Such as expound his dominion and his presence in the  flesh be these: Preserue me O god. 16. Suche as shew his glorious resurrection of body be: The earth is the lordes. 24. O clap your handes together. 47. Such as set out his ascention into heauen be these. The lorde is king. 93. O sing vnto the lorde. 96.98. The  lord is king, the people. 99. And that he sitteth on the right hand of his father: The  110. psalme maketh manifest saying: The lorde sayd to my lord, sit thou on my right hand. Such as shewe that he haue authoritie of his father to  iudge, expressing his iudicial power, both in condemning the deuill, and all wicked nations be these: 9. psalme, the v. verse: Thou shalte rebuke the Heathen and destroye the vngodly. Geue the king the iudgementes. 72. The lorde euen the most mighty god. 50 God standeth in the congre∣gation. 82. Thus thou mayst by readyng these, beholde Christes mysteries, and what benefites the Lorde hath geuen vs by hys Natiuitie and passion. Lo such is the style & fourme of the Psalmes for mans vse and commoditie. ☞It is to be remembred that the beginning of the psalms in this table, be according to the translation commonly v∣sed in churches, & not of the translatiō hereafter folowing.
Psalmi quodammodo sic constituti vt alij sint: Prophetici. Eruditorij: Consolatorij: Precatorij: Eucharistici: Mixti. 8 Prophetici Hij prophetant de Iesu Chri∣sto: ecclesia & etiam san∣ctorum afflictionibus. Dicuntur in narratione. Exponunt felicitatem Dei prouidentiam, &c. Con∣ti∣nen∣tes. Promisiones de libe∣randis pijs & perden dis Impijs Historia rerum descriptiones beatitudinis. 1 Narratorij   Expositorij 1 Eruditorij Hij docent quid faciendum quid omittendum. Adhortantur ad bona opera. Imprecantur impijs confusionem &c. Con∣ti∣nen∣tes. Commendationes verbi Dei, vitupera∣tiones traditionum. Condemnationes malorum hominum. 7 Adhortatorij 2 Comminatorij   Consolatorij Hij consolantur in aduer∣sis. Gratulantur in prosperis. Inuitant ad iustitiamgra∣titudum, &c. Con∣ti∣nen∣tes. Exempla consolati∣onū & tentationum patrum. Mutuas piorum con∣gratulationes. 4 Gratulatorij 5 Inuitatorij 6 Deprecatori Hij orant inuocant Obsecrantur & implorant opem Dei in necessitate. Expostulant de malorum prosperitate. Con∣ti∣nen∣tes. Petitiones, Deplorationes prop∣ter peccata & cala∣mitates. Accusationes, propter vim aduersarior 7 Obsecratorij 3 Interpollatorij 4 Eucharistici Hij gratias agunt. Con∣ti∣nen∣tes. Confessiones benefi∣ciorum Dei & mira¦bilium operum eius Exultationes de pr∣ta victoria & libe∣ratione.   Laudatorij Celebrant opera Dei. 5 Exultatorij Letantur &c.   Mixti Hij plures simul vel omnes locos habent.   Videlicet, propheti∣am, doctrinam, conso∣lationem, orationem, grotiarum, actionem
Qui prophetant 21.22.24.45.47.72.93.55.97. Qui denunciant & vaticinantur 11.110. Qui narrant 19.49.50.73.78.87.89.105.114.115.127.137 Qui narrant & confitentur 26.121.139.131. Qui describunt beatitudinem. 1.32.41.112.128. Qui docent virtutes 15.101.119.125.133. Qui admonent 37. Qui exhortantur 29.33.96.98.103.104. Qui exhortantur cum cantico 145.81.66. Qui minanter imprecantur. 109.64.94.120.74.70.71. Qui veterum exempla habent 60.77.108.135.80. Qui in domino gloriantur 23.27.40.42.62.76.84.99.122. Qui alacriter canunt 91.118. Qui prouocant ad iustitiam 58.82. Qui inuitant ad gratitudines. 67.95.107.134. Qui precantur 5.68.90.102.132.141.17.20.28. Qui confitentur & plorant peccatum, 9.51.6.39.38.75.106.136.143.130, Qui inuocant 4.54.142.3.69.123. Qui ad euentum votum & obsecra∣tionem 7.12.13.16.25.27.31.35.43.44.57.59.61.83.86.88.140. Qui ad euentum solum 3.26.69.70.71.79.80.123.130.131. Qui accusant impios. 2.10.14.36.52.53.79. Qui in actione gratiarum sunt 8.18.30.34.46.63.85.116.124.126.129. Qui cum hymnis canunt 48.65.92.144. Qui laudem anunciant 113.117.146.147.148.149.150.138 111. Qui exultat de resurrectione 56. Qui exultant tantum. 100.
VEteres quatuor tātum musicos modos (quos tro∣pos siue tonos vocarunt) celebres habuerunt. Sci∣licet Prothum: Dentrum: Tritum & tetradum, qui∣bus recentiores superinstruxerūt alios quatuor qua∣si collaterales, & hos ex gentium peculiaribus affecti∣bus sic vocabulis notarunt vt Dorium, Phrigium, Lydium &c. quibus modis maxime trahebantur. Nam morum similitudine molliores in molliore gau¦dent tono, & natura hilares, Iucundioribus, tristes grauioribus modis delectantur, iuxta innatam quan∣dam proportionem affectuum animorum, cum diuer sitate consonantiarum quibus occulta familiaritate excitantur. ¶ Octo tonorum distinctiones & proprietates. Prothus Dorius Primus, modeste & religiose graditur. Hipodorius Secundus, seuere cum maiestate tonat. Dentrus Phrigius Tertius, Indignatur & acerbe insultat. Hipophrigius Quartus, quasi adulatur & allicit. Tritus Lydius Quintus, Iucunde delectat & ridet. Hipolidius Sextus, Lachrimatur & plorat. Tetradus Mixolidius Septimus Incitate progreditur & imperios Hipomixolidius Octauus, decenter & moderate incedit.
ALl manner of Scripture for that it is inspierde from God aboue (as necessary for instructiō) is expressed by the determinatiō of the holy gost to the intent that all men in commen,Anno Do∣mini. 380. shoulde gather out therof (as out of a storehouse of Phisike for the soule) peculiar remedies, euery one of vs for our owne infirmities: for such Phisike as a certaine writer testifieth will restraine great and many sinnes. Now where as the Prophetes haue doctrine proper to themselues, and the bokes of the deuine histories matter by themselfe: the law haue his peculiar forme of teaching, and the Prouerbiall bookes haue their seuerall kinde of exhortations. The booke of the psalmes comprehende in it selfe, the whole commo∣ditie of all their doctrines aforesaid, for it propheci∣eth of thinges to come, it reciteth the histories, it sheweth lawe for the gouernaunce of life, it teacheth what ought to be done, and to be shorte, it is a com∣mon storehouse of al good doctrine, which doth apt∣ly distribute matter to euery man peculiar to himself for it healeth not only olde festured woundes of the soule, but also can geue quicke remedy to suche as be newly made. It stayeth and comforteth that member which is sicke and corrupt, & preserueth that which is whole and sound, it plucketh vp by the rootes (as much as is possible) all such euil affectiōs as do raign so tirannically in the whole course of mans life, which effect it worketh as it were with agreable delectation instilling pleasantly into our hart, all sober honestye. For where as the holy ghost perceiued that mankind was hardly trayned to vertue, & that we be very neg∣ligent in thinges concerning the true life in dede, by reason of our inclination to worldly pleasures & de∣lectations: What hath he inuented? he hath mixte
in his forme of doctrine the delectation of musike, to thintent that the commoditie of the doctrine might secretlye steale into vs, while our eares bee touched with the pleasauntnes of the melodie. Euen muche like as expert Phisitions vse to doo, when they mini∣ster their bitter potions to sicke children, least they should abhorre their helth, for the bitternes of their drinkes, for the most part they annointe the brinkes of the cuppes with hony. And for this ende bee these sweete and harmonious songes deuised for vs, that such as be children either by age or children by ma∣ners, should in deede haue their soules wholesomely instructed, though for the time they seme but to sing onely. Furthermore, we see commonlye that they which be of the vulgare people, or of rude and grosse nature, can not redely beare away and kepe in mynde the graue preceptes of the Apostles or Prophetes, where yet the deuine psalmes they synge at home in their houses, and abrode they can recorde them. And certainly though a man were neuer so furiouslye ra∣ging in ire and wrath, yet assone as he heare the swete tunes of the Psalmes, straight way is he asswaged of his fury, and must depart more quiet in mynd by rea∣son of the melodie. The psalme is the rest of the soule, the rodde of peace, it stilleth and pacifieth the ragyng bellowes of the minde, for it doth asswage and mol∣lifie that irefull power and passion of the soule, it in∣duceth chastity, where reigned wantonnes, it maketh amitie, where was discorde, it knitteth frendes toge∣ther, it returneth enemies to an vnitie againe: For who can long repute him as an enemy, with whom he ioyneth himselfe in lifting vppe hys voyce to God in prayer. So that the song of the Psalme worketh cha∣ritie, whiche is the greatest treasure of all goodnesse that can be, deuising by this inducement of concord singing the knot and bonde of vnitie, so ioyning the
people together after the similitude of a quiere in their vnitie of singing. The Psalme is an introduction to beginners, it is a furtherer to them which go forwarde to vertue, it is to the perfect man a stable foundation to rest on, it is the swete voyce, the onely mouth of the spouse of Christ the church. The psalme doth cheare the feast∣full day, the better to reioyce, it worketh that same heauines whiche is heauines to godwarde: for the psalme is able to plucke out teares of any mans hart: though it be neuer so stony harde. O wise and merueilous deuise of our heauenlye scholemaister, who could inuent, that we should both pleasantly sing and therwith profitably learne, where by wholesome doctrine might bee the deper printed in vs: for that which with violence and force is lear∣ned of vs, is not wont to abide long, but that whiche entreth into vs with pleasure, and by louing grace it continueth the lenger in our hartes, it sticketh the fa∣ster in our memories. Now as for the matter and content of the Psalme, what is there, but that a man maye learne it there? Is not there to be learned the valiauntnes of fortitude? The righteousnes of iustice? The sobernes of tempe∣rance? The perfection of prudence? The forme of pe∣naunce? The measure of patience? Yea and whatsoe∣uer soundeth to vertue or perfection is it not there taught? In the Psalme is conteined absolute diuinitie, both prophecy of christes comming in the flesh. The thret∣full warninges of the iudgement. The hope of our ri∣sing agayne. The feare of Gods punishmentes. The promises of euerlasting ioye. The reuelatiō of all my∣steries, all these be laide and couched vp in the Psal∣ter booke, as in a great treasure house common to al men. Which booke the Prophet Dauid framed most
aptly (among many instruments of musike) to agree with the instrumente called the Psaltrie. Signifieng therby (as I can iudge) the grace of God to come frō boue by the inspiration of the holye ghost: for thys onely instrumente of all other haue the cause of hys sounde from his vpper parte, where the harpe or the lute by their wrestes haue their sound cōming forthe out of the lower parte of them, but the psalterye put forth the swetenes of his harmonious melodie from the vpper part, teaching vs therby that we should set our whole study and meditation in heauenly thinges aboue, and not by the sweetenes of the tunes to bee borne downe to the sensuall affections and delectati∣ons of the fleshe. Chrisostomus. In Psalmos. to .2. ho. 15. AS this life is susteyned by meate, which it doth straighte way ministre after it be receyued, euen so if we bestowe our endeuour to vertuous actes, we shall obtaine Gods liue¦lye sprite, by the possession whereof, we shall flowe in all good workes, which on the other side if we performe not, the sayde sprite will flee from vs, of whome if we be destitute, we muste nedes halte in any doing we haue: for if this holy sprite should depart from vs, consequently wil the wicked sprite enter, which thing may clearely be learned in Saule who was sore haunted therwith. Now what should it helpe vs, though we be not vex¦ed so extreemely wyth suche a spirite, as Saule was vexed, if we bee tormented and choked by malicious actes and wret∣ched dedes: We haue therefore muche neede to haue Dauids harpe, to sing to our soule some diuine harmony, as well gotten out of the Prophet, as also flowing from good life, so that whe∣ther of them both we vse, that is either to sing some Psalme or song of Dauid, or yet to beginne a vertuous life, we shal therby destroy the deuils power in vs, as readily as Dauid was wont to asswage Saules fury with his harpe: And this shall be our principall remedy to obtaine all righteousnes to the healthe of
our soule, yea beside this the deuill shall rage so much the more in fury, when he seeth that for all his sinfull suggestions, we be nothing drawne to euill, for these vngratious and vncleane spi∣rites are euen in the beginning of their temptations afrayde, least we should haue occasion geuen vs by their wicked sugge∣stions to turne our whole entent the rather to worke some lau∣dable acte. So that when they see we stande and perseuer sted∣fastly, they rage the more, for that they bee so frustrate in all their busie care they haue to hurt vs. Wherupon, after our vic∣tory so gotten, let vs sing out some song of thankes, the farther to beate from vs that diuelish importune assault of our enemye for the deuill in deede cannot vtterly depriue vs of heauen, no, for many times he is a furderer to vs, by his warryng against vs, so that we be watching warely at him, and vse sobernes to winne heauen, from whence wilfully many be cast by their vn¦gratious and sinfull liuing. And verely, whatsoeuer he be that offendeth of purpose, and that of set will rageth in mischiefe, is a plaine deuill, and is not worthy to haue pardon or fauor of a∣ny man. Let vs therfore sing to that soule that is affected wyth other sayinges of holy scripture, specially Dauids Psalmes: In suche wise that the outwarde voyce maye edifie the inwarde mynde. Doubtlesse, when we instructe and frame our tongue thus to sing, the conscience of man must needes be ashamed if he doo not preserue that thing at the leact whiche he syngeth, though his disposition inclineth to the contrary. So that by this meane we shall not winne that commoditie, but manye other commodities, as we shall for example reherse. First, the pro∣phet Dauid wrote not onely of thinges that were to come, but he disputeth of these visible creatures, & of the inuisible forme of the firmament. Now if peraduenture thou desirest to be taught whether this firmament shal stand firmely in that same state that it is of now or no, will not Dauid straightway aun∣swer thee and saie. The heauens shall waxe olde as doth a gar∣ment, and thou O Lord shalt chaunge them as a vesture,Psal. 102. for they shall be transposed. Also if thou desirest to heare of the facion of the heauens, by him maist thou vnderstand it wri∣ting
thus. I stretcht out the heauens like a curtayne. Beside this, if thou wouldest knowe further of the backehalfe of the  heauens, he shall say to thee, whiche couerest the vppermost partes of heauēs with waters. And yet is he not content to rest here, but maketh mention of the bredth therof, declaryng that  both sides be of equall distance, sayeng. How much the East is from the West, so farre hath he put our sinnes from vs. And as hie as the heauen is from the earth, the Lorde hath so largely confirmed his mercy on them that feare him. Furthermore, yf thou wouldest searche for the foundation of the earthe, thou canst not bee ignoraunt thereof, when thou hearest him say.  For he hath found the earth vpon the seas. Also if thou desi∣rest to know the cause of the earthquakes, thou mayst vnder∣stand  it by him when he singeth thus. Who beholdeth the erth and maketh it to tremble, so that now of this thing he putteth thee quite out of doubt. Moreouer, if thou longest to know the course of the nighte, euen of him maist thou haue this know∣ledge.  In the night (saith he) all the beastes of the woode haue their walke, and to what vse the hils were made, he also telleth  it thee. The hie hils he appointed for hartes and hyndes. And wherfore the stony rockes serue, that he describeth also, sayeng.  The cliffes and rockes be the couert to conies. And why the  vnfruitefull trees be there growing, there (sayth he) shall the sparowes build their nestes. Why moreouer water springes be  flowing in wildernes, thus he sheweth. By them will the beasts of the field haue their abiding. Also to know why wine serueth not for to drinke onely, seeyng that water mighte supplye that want aboundantly: but for this entent, to make the more me∣ry  and ioconde. Wyne (sayth he) maketh glad the hart of mā wherby thou mayst consider, how far forth wine should goe in lawfull vse: Furthermore, of him mayest thou heare, howe oules and sauage beastes be nourished. They all O Lord set their eyes to thee that thou shouldest geue them meate in due season: And if thou askest a reason of the creation of thy household beastes, he will answer thee that these also were cre∣ated  for thy sake sayeng thus. Who bringeth forth grene herbe
and grasse for beastes to the seruice of man. Why the Moone  is nedefull: Heare of his worde. Who made the Moone for  distinctions of tymes, How beside all thinges visible and in∣uisible were made, he sheweth it clearely thus. He sayde the  worde and made they were: He commaunded, and by and by they were created. And that there shall be once a discharge from continuall dyeng, he teacheth thee after this sorte. God  haue deliuered my soule from the power of death, when he shal take me vnto him. Furthermore he enformeth vs, whence this our body had his originall, thus. I am (saythe he) in good re∣membraunce, that I am dust and earth, and shall returne a∣gayne to my dust whēce I sprong. Furthermore that all things were created for thy sake, thus he sayth. Thou hast crowned  him O Lord with honour and glory, and set him vppe ouer the workes of thy handes. And what similitude we mortall men haue with aungels, thus he sheweth it. Thou hast abased him  somewhat lower then the state of aungels. Also what loue al∣mightie God beareth to vs, thus he doth expresse it. Like as a  father pitieth his children, euen so hath the Lorde compassion on all them which feare him. What is layd vp for vs for here∣after, and what rest we shall haue in the ende of this life, thus he certifieth vs. Returne O my soule into thy rest and quiet. Furthermore, why the heauēs be of so huge compasse, he shew∣eth thus the cause. The heauens set out to sight the glorye of  God. Why the night and day were made, he telleth this also: not to geue light onely and rest, but beside this to instructe vs. There is (sayth he) no language or woordes in them, and yet  their voyces be heard. Finally, in what maner God doth walke in his compasse both on sea and land, he describeth it, as the e∣pistle to the Hebrewes auoucheth the same. The deepe is as his  garment. Thus taking a tast of those thinges that be said be∣fore, ye may coniesture other thinges higher and greater, that is to say, of Christ, of his resurrection, of the ioyes and paines to come: of inordinate affections of lawes and such other, so that ye cannot resort to Dauids bookes, but ye shall cary thence in∣numerable riches: For if thou shouldest fall into any heaui∣nes,
or into any euill affection of minde, these psalmes wil much auaile to thy comforte. If thou be sliden into sinne, there shalte thou finde many salues to restore thee, if thou beest ouerladen with pouertie, or with any aduersitie, in them shalt thou see to appeare many restfull hauens for thy refuge, if thou be in state of righteousnes, there maiest thou finde howe to keepe thee in suertie therof, if thou be in state of sinne, there shalt thou be put in much hope to be pardoned, & if thou sufferest many disple∣sures for righteousnes sake, thou shalte heare Dauid confesse  thus. For thy sake O Lord am I as daily appointed to death,  and againe. We be esteemed as sheepe prepared to the slaugh∣ter, all these thinges saith he, be come on vs, and yet we haue not forgottē thee, but if thou shouldst waxe proude by the sight  of thy good deedes, thou shalt heare him pray. Enter not O lord into iudgement with thy seruauntes, for no man on liue can be iustified before thy sight, and thus straightway shalt thou bee wonne to follow humilitie. Yea furthermore if thou hast com∣mitted any thing, wherof thou mightst take dispaire, thou shalt  heare him oftentimes to sing. This day if ye heare his voyce, harden not your hartes, the hearing wherof, will soone resolue the soule into repentance. Beside all this, though thou were a king gloriously crowned, and therwith hawtie and proude, yet  there shalt thou learne this: That a king is not saued for all his valiauntnes, nor the Gyant is in safetie by his great power and mighte, and so by this meane thou shalt be abated in thy pride. If thou flowest in riches and glory of this worlde, thou  shalt heare him againe singing. Wo be to them which trust in their power, and in the multitude of their goodes, and in an o∣ther  place. Man is in his dayes as grasse, whose pompe shal not go downe into the graue with him, and thus by such considera∣tions thou shalt repute nothing in all the earth much to be este∣med: for if thou despisest these two thinges (I meane power and glory) which exceed all other thinges in mens estimacion, what can there be beside, wherto thou shouldst set so much thy hart? Also if thou shouldst be ouercharged with any heaui∣nes  of hart, thou mayst here there. Why art thou thus heauy
O my soule, and why doost thou so vexe me? Trust in the lord for I will geue him thankes. Ouer this, if thou spiest manye men to haue great commendation, without any cause of deser∣uing, speake thou thus to thy selfe. Be not enuious at wycked  men, for they shall wither away like grasse, and shall fade to nought euen as the grene herbe in the field. If thou chaunce to marke how good men and euill men he both together afflicted, yet by Dauid thou shalt vnderstand, that the maner of theyr affliction is not alone, for he sayth that there be many scourges  for sinners, which yet he doth not affirme to be inflicted vpon good men, when he saith. That the iust man haue many tem∣tations, but out of them all God will deliuer him, and agayne. The death of sinners is odible. Where the death of his electes  is very honourable before the Lorde. Reuolue therfore such thinges as these be oft with thy selfe and by the instruction of them get thee some vnderstandyng, for there is a large wilde fielde of wise sentences comprehended in these sayinges aforesayd: yea in euery one of them thoughe they be brieflye thus vewed and perused by vs. But if ye will more exactly search out these sentences of Dauid, ye shall per∣ceiue that they wil sprede into plentuous store of gostly treasure. Ouer and beyond that, euery man that will, may by these say∣inges, purge himselfe of euill vices, how fast so euer they haue roote within them. If he will neither geue eare redily to enuye, neither yet to bitter malice, if he will despise riches, if he set light by aduersitie, by trouble, by pouertie, if he set not much by his lyfe at all. This maner of contemplation will far driue from vs all vice and sinne, for the subduing of which vices, we muste geue our thankes to God: and thus by despising these transitory goodes we may winne the goodes euerlastyng, and through patience in aduersitie, and by the consolatiō we haue in holy scripture, we may haue hope, and at the last to enioy the blisse to come thorough Iesus Christ, to whom with the father & the holy ghost, be all honor world without ende. Amen.
Augustinus. lib. confess. 10. cap. 33. THe delectation of the eares had once bound me strongly,Anno Do∣mini. 430. yea they had subdued me, but thou (O Lorde) didst vnbinde me, and madest me free. Now in these sweete tunes which thy holy scrip∣tures geue so liuely a grace vnto, when they be sunge with the sweete voyce of cunning men: I do confesse that I am somwhat delectably holden, but yet not for that I would dwell and abide still there, but that my affection might be stirred to rise vpwarde when I see my time. But yet these tunes and notes thus liuelye made by the dittie of thy worde, the rather doo they desire to haue place in me, yea they woulde my harte should haue them in great affiance, which yet I haue not peraduenture altogether as is most agreable. For sometime me thinke I esteme this musicall harmonie more hiely then is conueniēt, as when I feele my hart to be more vehemently stirred to ardent deuotion by those holy wordes, when they be so set out with song then if they were not so sunge: For this I perceyue, that all the affections of our sprites in their diuersitie of natural disposition, to haue their peculier proper∣ties and facions, as well in respect of the voyce, as of the tunes. So that by a secrete familiaritie and simili∣tude that is betwixt them, the mindes of men be di∣uerslye affected and rauished, but the delectation of my flesh, thoughe it ought not to subdue my mynde with to much vaine and feeble sensualitie, yet it ofte deceyueth me, in that my brute senses doo not wayte on Lady Reason, as modestlye content to come after her, but they striue to go before her & would be her guide, and other cause can they alleage none, but for that by her at the first they were broughte in and ad∣mitted. And thus I offend vnbewares, thoughe after∣ward I perceiue it. So againe while that I eschue this
suttle deceit of my senses, beyond due measure I erre on the other side, by ouermuch sower grauitie, yea so far otherwhiles, that I would all such swete harmonie of delectable singing, wherewith Dauids Psalter is v∣sed to be sung, vtterly remoued not from mine owne eares only, but banished out of the church to, as iud∣ging that waie to be more sure and furthest from pe∣rill of abuse, that I remember hath bene ofte told me done of Athanasius bishop of Alexandria,An. D. 379 who caused the readers of the quier to recite the psalmes in such euen equalitie of the voyce, that it appeared to bee more like a reading then a singing. How be it, when I cal to minde what teares I wept at the hearing of the songes which thy churche and congregation did vse to sing to thee (O Lord) what time I first began to re∣couer my faith vnto thee (as me thinke euen yet still I feele my selfe rauished, not yet with the singing, but with the sweete matter which is sung, specially, when it is sung with full expressed voyces and with decent harmonie) then againe I iudge this ordinance of sin∣ging to be much profitable and expedient. And thus am I tost betwixt the danger of vaine delectation and the experience of wholesome edification. But more am I inclined and induced to allowe this custome of singing in the churche (although I speake not this as in sentence diffinitiue) that the weaker sorte of men, might by suche delectation of the eare, rise vp to godly affection and heauenly deuotion. Not∣withstanding, when I fele this in my selfe that the melodie moueth me more then the matter of the dittie which is sung. I confesse then that I of∣fend mortally therin, & then wish I rather not to heare such singyng then so to heare it.
Iosephus. lib. antiq. Iud. 7. ca. 12. WHen Dauid was at rest from warres and o∣ther such daungers,Anno Do∣mini. 100. and had now peace at will, he composed songes and hymnes to God of diuers Metres, some trimetres and some quinquemetres, and caused diuers instruments to be made, and he taught the Leuites how they shoulde in their diuersities sing and playe hymnes on the Sa∣both and other feastiuall daies: Of which instrumēts some as the harpe were lowde and shirle made of ten stringes, which were touched with the one end of the wrest. Nabla was of xij. stringes and tunes, and was playde on with the fingers. There were also Cymbals of brasse both large and broade. Eusebius. li. 2. cap. 16.17. in hist. ecclesiastica. Anno Do∣mini 50.PHilo an Hebrewe borne, who as reporte goeth, came to Rome in Emperour Claudius daies, and saw Peter the Apostle, and was his auditor hea∣ryng the doctrine he preached, amonge other thinges that he wrate of the christian sect, sayth thus. The christen people haue in all places of their assem∣blies, houses dedicated wholye to prayer, into the which they resorte aparte by themselfe, and there vse to haue their mysteries ministred in most honest and chast life, wherein they bring nothing that serue for eating & drinking, or for any other corporall neces∣sitie of the body, but onely the bookes of Gods lawe and of the Prophetes, and hymnes made to God and such like things as these be, by which discipline & ver¦tuous exercise, they be together edified, & so by daily continual diligence they attaine to very perfect life. Furthermore, they do not onely vnderstand the aun∣tient hymnes of their Elders▪ but they themselues de∣uise
newe to Gods honour, whiche they sing with all kinde of graue numbers and rythmes in a comely ho¦nest maner, and with sweete harmonie. And further∣more Philo saith,Niceph. li. 2. ca. 16. our hymnes are so song with vs, that where one (as Chanter) singeth before one verse orderly and comely by obseruing the certentie of his numbers, all the multitude beside, secretlye geuyng eare vnto him, at the laste syng together the latter partes of the hymnes. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. in hist. eccl. PLinius the second, who bare office in a certen prouince vnder Traiane the Emperour,Anno Do∣mini. 94. per∣ceyuing how frō day to day were slaine great numbers of the christian people, being much moued at the slaughter of them: reported to the sayde Em∣perour that thousandes of people almost innumera∣ble were daily put to death, in whome was spyed no crime at any tyme done or committed, nor any thing els contrary to the Romaine lawes, sauing this onely that they vsed to sing before day to one Christ, as to a God their morning hymnes. But as for adulteries and such other crimes they vtterly abhord, and kept themselues clere from them, and liued otherwise cu∣stomably after the common lawes. Traiane the Em∣perour by this mans aduertisement made decree by authoritie of his rescript, that the Christians shoulde no more be serched for, and except that any of them offred themselues, els not to be punished. Hieronimus in prologo galeato. CErtaine Psalmes as the 36.110.111.114. & the 144. although they be writen and compo∣sed in diuers Metres, neuerthelesse they bee in∣terlaced wyth the Alphabet letters of all one number.
Eusebius de prepara. euange. lib. 11. ca. 3. WHo had the perfect skill of the Hebrues tonge should perceiue that they had among them many right eloquent oratours, for they haue verses and Poesies made by moste exquisite arte and cunning, as that great Canticle of Moses, & the 118. Psalme of Dauid, be composed in Heroicall Metre, which is called verse Exametre. They haue also such o∣ther, as well trimetres and tetrametres, which as concer∣ning the composition of them be deuised moste elo∣quently, substantially, and pleasantly, and as concer∣ning the sence and matter of them, no mans writing is to be compared with them, for in them are expres∣sed gods wordes, and wordes of mere truth, where in be conteyned godly doctrine, knowledge of notable thinges, and wholesome conclusions. Idem Eusebius. lib. 12. ca. 14. PLato that deuine Philosoper, iudged that Metres ought to be sung, for (sayth he) disciplines be fit for education and bringyng vp of Children, to traine them to a right life & lawful conuersatiō. To the entent therfore that childrens myndes might follow the lawe, that therwith they should both ioy & mourne, let them learne Metres and songes, and let them sing oft such. Wherein be conteyned the com∣mendations and condēnations of such things which the lawes commend and condemne, because the ten∣der wittes and yeares of children, can not comprise the reason of vertue, they be well prepared therto by play and song. Not without good skill therfore doo we (Christian men) vse, that children doo learne the the canticles of the Prophetes. ca. 15.Necessarie it were (as the saide Plato affirmeth) that Poetes (who be inuenters of such Meters) were
forced by lawe, that in their verses, when they be de∣scribing a blessed man in felicitie, to praise none o∣ther for such, but him that is a good man, modest & rightfull in his doyng, whether he be little or great, riche or poore. And that whosoeuer were a wrong doer, to call him miser, thoughe he were richer then Cresus or Mydas. Let these Poetes therfore call no man a blessed man, excepte he come by these goodes (which be so called of the vulgar people) both right∣fully, and also rightfully dispend the same. And suche matters beyng compiled in their rythmes and verses were good for the youth to learne. As Dauid inspierd with the grace of gods holy sprite so described a bles∣sed man in his Odys and songes longe before these dayes, teaching who is truely a blessed man, and who is contrary. In the beginning of his Psalter saying: Blessed is that man whiche walketh not in the counsayles of wicked men, &c. And furthermore writeth Plato, that it is a grace specially belonging to God himselfe,ca. 16. or to some per∣fect man chosen by him: well to vse rythmes & ver∣ses, and therefore it were good that there were dili∣gent law prouided for them that they should haue no other respect, but to set out vertue, to which ende all Musike shoulde be applied. As it was so prouided a∣mong the Hebrues, who were restrained from recey∣uing any other hymnes and songs, then such as were composed by the Prophetes, who were inspired by the holy ghost. Furthermore, I graunt to Plato in this thing which is commonly spoken, that delectation & plesant satisfieng of the eare is iudge to musike. But I say that is best musike, which delighteth good men & learned men, & specially such as excell others in ver∣tue. And therfore vertue must bee iudge in this case, specially fortitude and prudence, and not Musike to be estemed good by the allowance of the rude people
which be led and blinded with ignoraunce and wyth cowardly base affections. For so among the Iewes of olde time, the iudgement of diuine songes, was not permitted to the multitude, but some there were, thogh thei were but a few, which iudged these things by diuine inspiration, who had the authoritie to con¦secrate (as I might say) and to approue the bookes of the Prophetes, as also to disalowe and to reiect suche as they thought disagreable from Gods holy spirite. Basilius in concione ad adolescentes. Fol. 250.TImotheus the Musitiō, so excelled in that arte and facultie, that he coulde stirre vp a mannes mynde to anger by his roughe and sower har∣monie, & could asswage and release them agayne by a soft kinde of harmonie at his will and pleasure: Of whom it is writtē, that when he had at a tyme before Alexander sung the Phrigian harmonie, he excited him as he was at supper, to runne to warre, and again by his most gentle and easie harmonie, brought hym again to the table among his gestes. Such strenght & vertue is set in the true vse of musike. As Pithagoras once by chance was in cōpany among a sort of wantō & drunken folke, wherupon, he bad the mynstrell to change his song & to rebuke their dissolute wanton∣nes with playeng to them the Dorian harmonie, by which musike they were cast so in a shame of thēselfe, that they threw from thē their garlands, & fled home all confused for their lightnes, where before by the harmonie he played, they raged in fury as men out of their wittes. So muche auaileth it to haue our eares filled with vertuous or vitious songes, wherefore I would yong men should haue so little a do with such songes of musike, as nowe a dayes be moste set by as they would with any thing most monstruous and vi∣cious, ye let them ensue that other kinde of musicall
songes muche better then the other, and stirreth vs to better thinges. I meane that was vsed of Dauid the Poete of holye songes, by whiche he pacified the mynde of Saule when he was in his raging fury. ¶That the whole multitude of the church sang their Psalmes together, testifieth S. Ambrose li. exameron. 3. ca. 5. WHat other thing is this consent and congre∣gation of waters, but as it were the harmo∣nie & singing together of the people, wher∣upon, the church is well compared often∣times to the Seas, which churche by the first rushyng in & entrie of the people, gusheth out as it were wa∣ters about all the porches and allies of the temple, & after that in the prayer of all the billowes meting to∣gether make a great noise by the responsaries and an∣swers of the Psalms, as when there riseth vp as it were a concorde rebounde of the waters by the singing of men, women, virgins and children. ¶ Nicephorus telleth that the catholike church from the beginning, hath receyued the custome of singing Psalmes and hymnes. ANd the auntient church euen from the apostles haue receiued the maner of Anthems,Li. 13. ca. 8 that is, to sing their songes by sides and by course. And it is said that diuine Ignatius, which was the third Bishop in Antioche churche, from Peter the Apostle who liued also a long tyme with the Apostles, beyng in a traunse saw a new vision, how that the holy aun∣gels did extol in praise, the blessed Trinitie with their songs, by course one answering an other. Wherupon, he was the first that did deliuer this forme of singing to the church of Antioch, from whō as frō the spring this custome is spred throughout all churches.
Bernarde in his 312. epistle to Abbate Guido. IF song be had at any tyme, let it be ful of grauitie that it neither sounde out wantonnes nor rude∣nes, let it be so sweete that it be not light, let it so delighte the eares, that it moue the hartes in asswaging heauines, and tempering ire. Let it not depriue the letter of the sence, but rather aug∣ment it: For it is no light losse of spirituall grace, to be caried away from the profi∣tablenes of the sence, with the light∣nes of the notes, and to bee more carefull vpon the chanting of the voyce, then to geue heede to the matter. Lo thus you see what is comely to come into the hearyng of the church & what he is that is the author of the same. Henrie Haward Earle of Surrie in his Ecclesiastes. All such as enterprise, To put newe thinges in vre: Of them that scorne shall their deuise, May well themselues assure.
THis booke is called of the Seuentie Interpretres a Psalter, by the name of a Musicall instrument: Wher∣unto (as to some others) these Psalmes were sunge.Luke. 20.44. Peter act. 1. Math. 22. The Hebrewes name it a booke of laudes or prayses. Christ our Lorde cal∣leth it Psalmes and the booke of Psalmes: As dothe also Peter the Apostle, out of the whiche because our Sauiour Christe taketh hys testimonies, he sheweth that they were written by the inspiration of the ho∣ly ghost. ¶ This first Psalme is as a Preface of the booke to exhorte all men to the studie of Scriptures to get heauenly wisdom, and it teacheth that godly men be blessed of God, and wycked men be accursed of hym whose endes shall be thereafter. The first Psalme. ¶The Argument. Beatus vir.This Psalme in sence of men both good and bad: Triades.Shewth difference of men both good and bad: It shewth their fruites their endes both glad & sad Ambulare. Stare. Sedere.Their hartes pursuites their endes both glad & sad Impij. Pectatores. Derisores.1 MAn blest no doubt: who walkth not out, Consilia. Viae. Cathedrae.in wicked mens affayres: And stondth no daie: in sinners waie, nor sitth in scorners chayres.
2 But holdth euen still: Gods lawe in will, with all his hartes delight: And will him vse: on it to muse, to kéepe it day and night. 3 He like shall bée: the planted trée, nie set the riuers course: Which fruth in tyde: whose leaues abide, all prosperth what he doese. 4 Not so, not so: the wicked do, lyke dust or chaffe they bée: Uphoyst by winde: as light by kynde, from face of earth to sée. 5 Therfore these men: so wicked then, in iudgement shall not stand: Nor sinners bée: in companie, of righteous men of hand. 6 The Lord doth know: and will auow, mens wayes that are of God: Where shall decaie: the beaten waie, of wicked men so brode. ¶ The Collecte. O Blessed father make vs to be as fruitfull trees be∣fore thy presence, so watered by the dewe of thy grace, that we may glorifie thee, by the plenteousnes of sweete fruite in our daily conuersation, thorough Christ our Lorde, Amen.
¶The Argument. Psalme. II. Of Christ ye see Thus Dauid spake with vs: A Prophecie Thus Dauid spake with vs: As merueiling Should rage against him thus That earthly king Should rage against him thus 1 Quare fre∣muerunt.WHy fumeth in sight: The Gentils spite, In fury raging stout? Why taketh in hond: the people fond, Uayne thinges to bring about? 2 The kinges arise: the lordes deuise, in counsayles mett therto: Agaynst the Lord: with false accord, against his Christ they go. 3 Let vs they say: breake downe their ray, of all their bondes and cordes: We will renounce: that they pronounce, their loores as stately lordes. 4 But God of might: in heauen so bright, Shall laugh them all to scorne: The Lord on hie: shall them defie, they shall be once forlorne. 5 Then shall his ire: speake all in fire, to them agayne therfore: He shall with threate: their malice beate, in his displeasure sore.
6 Yet am I set: a king so great, on Sion hill full fast: Though me they kill: yet will that hill, my lawe and worde outcast. 7 Gods wordes decréed: I (Christ) wil sprede for God thus sayd to mée: My sonne I say: thou art, this day, I haue begotten thée. 8 Aske thou of mée: I will geue thée, to rule all Gentils londes: Thou shalt possesse: in suernesse, the world how wide it stondes. 9 With iron rod: as mighty God, all rebels shalt thou bruse: And breake them all: in pieces small, as sherdes the potters vse. 10 Be wise therfore: ye kinges the more, Receyue ye wisdomes lore: Ye iudges strong: of right and wrong, aduise you now before. 11 The Lorde in feare: your seruice beare, with dread to him reioyce: Let rages be: resist not ye, him serue with ioyfull voyce. 12 The sonne kisse ye: lest wroth he be, lose not the way of rest: For when his ire: is set on fire, who trust in hym be blest.
¶The Collecte. BReake a sonder O Lorde the bondes of our sinnes that we may bee faithfully yoked to the preceptes of thy law, to serue thee in feare and reuerence, to the laude of thy holy name. Through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. III. This Psalme endight may comfort haue of God. How troubled sprite may comfort haue of God. As woe be gone meke Dauid fled so brode. Domine quid.From Absalon meke Dauid fled so brode. 1 O Lord how ill: encrease they still, that trouble me so sore? Full many rise: in spitefull wise, agaynst me more and more. 2 Right many one: whan I do mone, alasse my soule they fret: SelaThey say I haue: no God to saue, oh this temptation great. 3 But yet O Lord: thou wilt accord, as shielde to fence my soule: My worship cleare: thou art full deare, my hed thou wilt extoll. 4 I did but mone: with voyce alone, to God my Lorde in will: He heard me iust: as I dyd trust, Selafrom his so holy hill. 5 I layde me downe: I slept full sound, and vp I rose agayne: For God me kept: where safe I slept, his grace dyd me sustayne.
6 To be afrayde: or yet dismayde, for thousandes ten, what néede? They go about: to driue me out, but God will dull theyr spéede. 7 Up Lord saue mée: my God most frée, on chéeke thou smitest my foes: Well hast thou chrust: theyr téeth to dust, of such as wicked goes. 8 Unto the Lord: by truthes recorde, belongth all sauing helth: Thy blessing hand: so nie doth stand, to worke thy peoples welth. ¶The Collecte. POure vs O Lorde thy heauenly benediction, that we may be armed with the fayth of the resurrec∣tion not to feare any army of men set against vs. Through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. IIII. The church in stress complaynth to God full sore. For heauinesse complaynth to God full sore. Cum in∣uocarem.The good haue ease they sacrifice therfore. Of their disease they sacrifice therfore. 1 O God so hie: heare when I crie, my right is all in thée: Thou takest me fro: al troublous wo haue mercy heare thou mée. 2 Ye sonnes of men: how long agayne, will ye blaspheme my name? Why triumphe ye: in vanitie? Selawhy séeke ye lies to frame?
3 Know this ye foes: that God hath chose, himselfe all godly men: And when I call: this Lord of all, he straight will heare me then. 4 Of wrathfull ire: refraine the fire, sinne not but muse in hart: Upon your beds: kéepe still your heds, deathes day recount in part. 5 Looke ye arise: in sacrifice, of righteousnes in skill: And put your trust: in God so iust, but tame your fleshly will. 6 There many bée: that say, O sée, who good to vs can do? Lift vp thy face: of cherefull grace, on vs O Lord to go. 7 Thou chearst my hart: as God thou art, with ioye of thy good sprite: Since corne and wine: with oyle so fine, of theirs increast in sight. 8 I will me lay: in peace I say, my sléepe to take full well: I hope for thou: O Lord as now, makst me most safe to dwell. ¶The Collecte. HEare vs O mercifull Lorde, and haue compassion on vs in our tribulations, and where thou alone art most worthely magnified in thy people: graunte that we may haue spirituall gladnes in our hartes, by the hope of the heauenly reward. Through &c.
The Argument. Psalme. V. The church in sprite, for all opprest in payne Maketh sute aright, for all opprest in payne Here Christ aduanceth the Iewes he blamth agayne. Verba meaHis heritaunce the Iewes he blamth agayne. 1 EXpend O Lord: my plaint of worde, in griefe that I do make: My musing mind: recount most kind geue eare for thine owne sake. 2 O harke my grone: my crying mone, my king, my God thou art: Let me not stray: from thée away, to thée I pray in hart. 3 My voyce and vowe: thou wilt alowe, betymes O Lord so frée: In spring of day: I thée will pray, and shall looks vp to thée. 4 This I may vow: the God art thou, which hatest all wickednes: No malice fell, with thée can dwell, thou louest no cruelnes. 5 Such foolish spite: can bide no sight, of thy good louely face: Thou doost defie: their vanitie, who wickednes embrace. 6 Thou shalt destroy: and them annoy, with lies who shame thy worde: Bloudthirsty men: which crafty renne, the Lord hath them abhorde.
5 Iust will I go: thy house into, in trust of thy great grace: In feare I will: do honour still, against that holy place. 6 O Lord be guide: defend my side, in thy great righteousnesse: Make playne the way: lesse I do stray, my foes shall brag the lesse. 7 Their mouthes expresse: no faithfulnesse, theyr holow hartes be vayne: Wide throte they haue: as open graue, theyr tonge but lyes do fayne. 8 Destroy their thought: O God for nought, theyr owne wayes be theyr shame: Expell them out: in lies so stout, who thus blaspheme thy name. 9 Let them reioyce: that trust thy voyce, aye thankes they shall extend: Who loue thy name: shall ioye the same, thou doost so them defend. 10 Thou Lord wilt than: geue rightwise man, the heauenly blisse from thence: Thy fauour kynde: is not behynde, as them with shield to fence. ¶The Collecte. O Mercifull father whiche knowest the lamentation of a sor∣rowfull hart and contrited spirite, before it be vttered, in∣found into vs thy holye spirite alway to sue vnto thee in all our troubles, defend vs with the shield of thy protection, that wee may be found daily attending to thy will and pleasure, to glori∣fie thy name, through Christ, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. VI. An earnest crie of men all wrapt in wo To God on hie of men all wrapt in wo Dominene in furore.At last they winne, and glad reioyce they so Gods helpe for sinne and glad reioyce they so 1 O Carpe not sower: thou Lord of power, my sinne in ire to sore: Nor chasten mée: in crueltie, I pray to thée therfore. 2 But mercy haue: my life to saue, O Lord for weake am I: My bones be vext: with feare annext, thy domes make me to crye. 3 My soule also: is full of woo, my conscyence doth quake: O Lord how long: thy scourge so strong, shall me thus fearefull make. 4 O Lord returne: thou seest I mourne, make free my soule to go: Oh saue me now: thy grace auowe, thy glory standth therto. 5 In death no man: remember can thy name to celebrate: What man thus bound: thy prayse can sound in pit and hell to late. 6 Of groning so: I weary go, my bed I nyghtly washe: My couch with teares: for sinfull feare, I water thus alas.
7 My beuty warmeth: my trouble standth, myne eyes for thought be dymme: My zeale for wrath: much magre hath, amyds my foes so brymme. 8 Auaunt ye all: to you I call, which worke all vanitie: The Lord of hostes: hath heard your bostes, and eke my weping crye. 9 This Lord I say: at néedefull day, hath heard my meke request: From hence he will: with mercy still, heare me to geue me rest. 10 Myne enemies: all hatefull spies, shall féele both shame and payne: Gods helping grace: them all shall chace, to flée swift backe agayne. ¶The Collecte. O Most mercifull father: which of thine owne ten∣der fauour art alway inclined to heare all mens peticions. Heare now the hūble voyce of our mourn∣full prayers, and graunt to our infirmitie health per∣petual, and as thou vouchsauest to accept the request of our prayers, so vouchsaue to comforte vs still wyth the continuaunce of thy mercy, through Chtist. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. VII. As Semei at Dauid shewed his spite Full wickedly at Dauid shewed his spite Domine deus meus in te.So who with lye may pray this Psalme aright. Is charged hie may pray this Psalme aright. 1 O Lord in thée: my trust I sée, for why my God thou art: From men vntrue: which me pursue saue me and take my part.
2 Lest he deuour: my soule so stoure, as Lyon doth the shéepe: Lest pieces small: he make of all, if none be me to kéepe. 3 O God my Lord: let truth record, if this in me do stand: Let it be sought: if guile I wrought, if euill done hath my hand. 4 If I good will: haue taken euill, to frende that frendly delt: Yea quit did I: my enemy, when causeles hate I felt. 5 Then let my foes: worke all their woes, and take my soule in spite: SelaLet them confound: my life to ground, my name in dust to wright. 6 O rise in ire: Lord I desire, my wrathfull foes represse: Stirre vp to me: thy set decrée, which once thou didst expresse. 7 So folke in stréete: on heapes will méete, in church to prayse thy might: For all their sake: my partie take, rayse vp thy selfe on hight. 8 The Lord iudgeth all: as truth befall: O sentence geue my side: To my desert: stand Lord in hart, as iust my workes be tried.
9 Let euill I pray: consume alway, of wicked men the traynes: Oh guide the iust: true God of trust, thou triest both hartes and raynes. 10 No helpe of man: obteyne I can, my God is all myne ayde: He them preserueth: that well deserueth, whose hartes to right be layde. 11 God iudge he is: full right iwis, both strong and patient: Who dare prouoke: his heauy stroke, to ire when he, is bent. 12 Except ye tourne: your life in fourme, his sword he myndth to whe: His bowe to bend: he doth entend, it is so ready set. 13 Deathes dartes most hard: he hath preparde, against their pride and wrong: His arrowes bright: be prest to smight, these persecutors strong. 14 Behold and sée: how traueleth hée, to do all wickedly: Conceyued hath hée: anxietie, but beare he shall a lye. 15 To delue and digge: a pit so bigge, his hart was wholy bent: But he in pit: shall fall in it, that he so crafty ment.
16 For iust in spéede: his wrathfull déede, with hym shall méete at gate: His wickednes: in spitefulnes, shall fall vpon hys pate. 17 In hart all whole: I will extoll, this Lord as he deserue: I will record: this heauenly Lord, his name I meane to serue. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God searcher of all hartes, deliuer vs frō all them that persecute vs, & graunt to our hartes stedfast perseueraunce in patience in the expectation of thy iudgement, so that we reuenge not our selues on our enemies, to preuent thy iudgement and com∣maundement, Through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. VIII. Here thankes ensue for his great giftes to men To God most due for his great giftes to men How Christ deiect and how he raignth agayne Domine Dominus noster.Of cruell sect and how he raignth agayne 1 O Lord our guide: thy name how wide in all the world excels? Thy glory great: thou hie hast set, aboue the heauenly cels. 2 Babes mouthes so yong: euen sucklings tong thy laude thou madest them tell: Thy foes to blanke: their threates to danke, to still thaduenger fell.
3 Thy heauens whan I: consider hie, thy mighty worke of hand: The Moone by night: of Starres the light, in order how they stand. 4 What thing is man: Lord thinke I than, that thou so him regardst? What is mans childe? so pore so milde? that thou so hym rewardst? 5 Thou didst abate: his porte and state, more lowe then aungels bée: Thou didst him crowne: in great renowne, aduanst in dignitie. 6 Thou madest him sitte: as Lord most fitte, of all thy workes of hand: And vnder cast: all thing thou hast, as his footestoole to stand. 5 Both shéepe and cowe: the oxe to plowe, thou madest for man his loue: The beast in fielde: both tame and wylde, that man might all improue. 6 All foules in skie: how hye they flie, yet stoupe for man his néede: All fishe in sea: how déepe they be, they ryse mans sonne to féede. 7 O Lord of power: our gouernour, how much excelth thy name? This world so wide: therin what bydeth, doth sprede thy worthy fame?
¶The Collecte. MOst puissaunt and bountifull creatour, we most humbly beseche thy maruelous name and power deuine, that where thou hast made all creatures sub∣iect to the vse of man. So vouchsaue to make vs mete and worthy subiectes to the lowly seruice of thy mer∣cifull goodnes: Through, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. IX. Thankes here be spyed for tyrauntes iust decaie: To God applyed for tyrauntes iust decaie: Who persecute good Christians all daie. consiteborIn hatefull sute good Christians all daie. 1 DUe thankes with song: I wil ful long in hart geue Lord to thée: I will endight: of thy great might, thy workes so wondrous bée. 2 I will reioyce: in hart and voyce, full glad in thée O Lorde: Thy name so hie: to magnifie, in song I will accorde. 3 For that in hast: my foes fled fast, and backe fell all their might: No better spéede: shall them succéede, but fall from thy good sight. 4 But thou in déede: hast maynteined, my right and eke my cause: Thy throne is true: thy sentence due, thou iudgest with equall lawes.
5 The heathen sect: well hast thou checkt, thou hast stroyd wicked men: Thou hast theyr name: put out with shame, for aye and euer agayne. 6 O thou so hye: myne enemye, thy wastes haue now their ende: As citie bée: destroyed by thée, theyr fame wyth them is shend. 7 But Gods deuise: shall stand and rise, the Lord shall still endure: In iust regard: he hath prepard, his seat to iudge vs sure. 8 For righteousnes: he will expresse, when he shall iudge the land: And iudge shall hée: in equitie, his folke by rightfull hand. 9 The Lord I say: will be all day, a fence for man opprest: A refuge swéete: in season méete, when griefe at hand is prest. 10 Who knowth thy name: will trust the same, for they thy worde do léeke: For their aduayle: thou wilt not fayle, all them that thée do séeke. 11 O prayse the Lord: in psalmes accorde, who dwelth in Zion place: Declare his strength: with wordes at length to folke of his good grace.
12 For whan in ire▪ he doth enquire, for bloud he them recounth: He will not yet: the poore forget, theyr cryes to hym do mount. 13 O Lord me saue: and mercy haue, expende my wofull state: How suffer I: myne enemy, ryd me from death the gate. 14 That I may tell: thy daughters well, of Zyon all thy prayse: To sprede in stréete: thy health so swéete, to ioye thy health alwayes. 15 The Heathen bée: sonke downe ye sée, in pit that they dyd delue: Their owne set net: theyr foote hath get, and trapt therwith themselue. 16 The Lord is séene: how he hath béene, true iudge to wicked bandes: The wycked is: well snarde iwis, wyth workes of hys owne handes. 17 The naught shall dwell: euen thrust to hell, if they wyll not repent: Yea all the rout: that put God out, of mynde shall foule be shent. 18 For God so wyse: wyll not despyse, alway the poore that wayle: The restfull harte: of mysers smarte, for euer shall not quayle.
19 Up Lord to stand: lest vpper hand, man get of thy good flocke: The Heathens spite: iudge thou in ight, wyth all theyr broode and stocke. 20 Put them in feare: thy dread to beare, O Lord themselfe to sée: As wretched men: how wyde they renne, Selain errour all from thée. ¶The Collecte. LOrde of all comforte and consolation, fulfill our hartes with thy heauēly ioye, to confesse thy name before the powers of this wycked worlde, and so assist wyth thy protection, that we may persist agaynst all our enemies, finally, to reioyce in thy helpe & sal∣uation. Through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. X. This Psalme dependth it prayth against the proude Of thothers ende it prayth against the proude Who vse theyr might theyr ende not so allowed. Vt quid Domine.To boste in spight theyr ende not so allowed. 1 WHy stondst so far: and art no nar? O Lord why hydest thy face? When trouble ryse: wilt thou deuise in néede to shew no grace? 2 Whyles men of pryde: so wycked byde, the poore in fire is brent: Let them in wiles: and all theyr guiles, be trapt wyth lyke entent.
3 Thungodlies actes: his bostes and crackes, be praysed at his desire: With prayse all rouse: the couetous, whom God abhorrth in ire. 4 The wycked wyght: so vaunteth in sight, of God to force right nought: He taketh no care: in welthy fare, no God in all his thought. 5 Hys croked wayes▪ all greuous layes, thy iudgements scape his eyes: He feareth no man: say what he can, all foes he doth dispise. 6 In his proud brayde: his hart thus sayd, tushe, who shall cast me downe? No harme or woo: can chance me to, my power kepeth my renowne. 7 His mouth euen flowes: with cursing throws he ioynth deceyt and fraude: Ungodlynes: in folyshnes, his tong hath vnder yawde. 8 He lurkth in stréete: as théefe is méete, so close wyth all the riche: The iust to kill: in peuishe will, the poore he marketh mich. 9 In denne he dwelth: as lyon fell, and lurketh the poore to snatche: The poore by might: to rauishe quyte, whom he in net doth catche.
10 He falth at eye: most fawningly, yet guiles be all his fruites: That this poore sort: myght so resort, in handes of hys deputes. 11 His hart sayth tush: he thinkth euen thus, that God forgotten hath: His face away: he turnth (he sayth) he séeth no poore mans scath. 12 Yet God and Lord: for thy true worde, arise, lyft vp thy hande: The poore defend: thy might extend, forget not hym in bande. 13 Why thus so loude: should men so proude, prouoke almighty God? Tush thou (they say:) wilt search no day, their hartes talke thus so brode. 14 Thou séest at eye: and markst full nye, to quyte all wrong and stresse: The poore doth stand: to thy good hand, thou aydst all comfortlesse. 15 Breake downe the power: the malice sower, of wycked man so blynde: If thou in tyme: wouldst searche hys cryme, no where thou shouldst hym fynde. 16 Our lyuing Lord: by truthes record, is kyng for aye no doubt: The heathen spyte: shall perishe quyte, from land of hys full out.
17 Thou Lord hast hard: in good regard, the sutes of all the poore: Theyr hartes in care: thou didst prepare, thou hardst both day and hower. 18 To iudge the stresse: of fatherlesse, to helpe the poore to right: That earthly man: agaynst them than, no more might rise in sight. ¶The Collecte. O God of all mercye open (we beseche thee) thyne eares to our meeke confession of thy name, thou neuer forsakest them that trust therto, graunt that we may be deliuered from the gates of perpetual death: and finally to escape the craftye traynes of the temp∣tour. Through &c. The Argument. Psalme. XI. Here hast thou proofe strong fayth in stormes to stand: How it behoueth strong fayth in stormes to stand: Agaynst the trayne of all the diuelishe band. In domino confido.Of errours vayne of all the diuelishe band. 1 IN Lord so great: my hope is set, why than my soule bid ye? That she should hast: as bird agast, to hils that desert be? 2 The wycked loe: haue bent theyr bowe, theyr shaftes in quiuer thrust: To shoote from hye: all priuelye, at men of hart so iust.
3 If earth the ground: tournd vpside downe, though heauen and earth should fall: The iust in woe: what should he do? but sticke to God in all. 4 The Lord is yet: in temple set, in heauen the Lord hath place: The poore he spyeth: as thence he trieth, mens childerns walkes and pase. 5 The Lord alowth: and iust auowth, the rightwise man full well: His soule defieth: whose hart applieth, in wickednes to dwell. 6 Downe he shall rayne: to theyr great payne, vpon th'ungodlies hart: Snare, brymstone, fyre: wyth tempestes ire, these stormes, theyr cup in part. 7 For as the Lorde: is iust in worde, so loueth he sothfastnes: Hys ryghtfull eye: will pleasauntly, behold all righteousnes. ¶The Collecte. DIrect thy mercifull eyes almighty God, vpon the humble state of vs thy poore seruauntes, & fence vs wyth the armour of true fayth: So that we es∣capyng the dartes of all wickednes may bee able to kepe perpetuall equitie and righteousnes, to the laud of thy name. Through, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. XII. This Psalme declarth for truth so falne to ground The poore mans care for truth so falne to ground When pride bearth sayle But God will it confound. Saluum me fac.No truth preuayle But God will it confound. 1 HElpe Lord so hye: this case, for why not one good man is more: The faythfull gone: scant any one, theyr children mynished sore. 2 They talke so frée: of vanitie, one neyghbour neyghbour to: In tong they glose: it double gose, their hartes dissemble so. 3 All lips so vayne: God will them strayne, and plucke them vp by roote: Oh that he wrung: the boasting tunge, to treade it vnderfoote. 4 For thus they rayle we wyll preuayle, our tonges must matters breake: For who dare thus: be Lord to vs, our tonges must onely speake. 5 For thys the stresse: of comfortlesse, for sighes that poore men make: Now ryse wyll I: sayth God most hye, and helpe theyr part to take. 6 Gods worde is sure: it is as pure, from earth as siluer quit: Though tryde be golde: in fire seuen folde, his worde yet passeth it.
7 O Lord so graue: thou vs shalt saue, and euermore preserue: From all thys route: that be so stoute, for euer thée to serue. 8 These walke most wyde: in wycked pryde, all cruelty they frame: Whyle they so far exalted are, poore men be put to shame. ¶The Collecte. HAue mercy of our frailtie most louing father, and graunte that we may keepe thy holy wordes with pure & chaste hartes, to escape the manifold deceites of mad and vayne talkers in errour. Through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XIII. For patience In trouble Dauid crieth For Gods desence In trouble Dauid crieth Lest deadly might Good hope in God he spieth Should blynd his sight Good hope in God he spieth 1 Vsquequo Domine.HOw long wilt thou: forget me now, for euer Lord, my guyde? How long wylt thou: not me alow, how long thy face wylt hyde? 2 How long shall I: thus heauely, in soule séeke counsayle so? How long my hart: shall féele this smart, to be thus vext wyth foe.
3 O Lord my God: represse thy rod, heare now, consider mée: Myne eyes wyth lyght: O cleare thou bryght, dead sléepe lest they do sée. 4 Lest that to hye: myne enemye, myght boast of hys preuayle: If downe I were: thys baratter, would ioye to sée me quayle. 5 But all my trust: lyeth fully iust, in thy good mercy still: My hart thy helth: shall ioy it selfe, Gods goodnes laude I will. The Collecte. TOurne not thy face awaye from vs O God of all might and consolation, lest our enemies preuayle against vs, and so endue the hartes of vs thy seruantes with the reioysing spirite of thy saluation, that we es∣cape the dreadfull sleepe of second death. Through Christ. &c. The Argument Psalme. XIIII. This Psalme set out of sinners obstinate The carelesse route of sinners obstinate Dixit insi∣piens.How far is syde which hold with God debate They wander wyde which hold with God debate 1 THe foole hath sayd: in hart astrayd, that God there is euen none: In workes they are: corrupt so far, not one doth good not one.
2 The Lord casth eye: from heauen to spye, the trade of Adams broode: If that as there: some wyse man were, which God would séeke so good. 3 But all astray: haue take theyr way, abominable made: There is not one: to do well, none they all from truth decayd. 4 For throtes they haue: lyke open graue, theyr tonges haue vsed deceyt: And vnderslips: theyr poyson lips, of Aspes the venome beyt. 5 Theyr mouthes do swim: wyth cursings brim all bitternes to fyll: Theyr féete make spede: mans bloud to shede, they force not whom they spyll. 6 Destruction: confusion, in all theyr wayes do ryse: Of peace no day: they know the way, Gods feare sée not theyr eyes. 7 Haue they no mynd: in hart so blynd, in myschiefe how they go? Who lyke as meate: my people eate, and God they call not to. 8 But they shall there: be once in feare, where nought they feard in déede: For God is spide: most strong to bide, wyth iust mans righteous séede.
6 Where vaynly now: ye mocke and mow, at poore mans purpose iust: When he is bent: wyth fast entent, in God to put his trust. 7 Who els can spéede: poore Iacobs séede, wyth helpe from Zyon hill: When God shall call hys people thrall, reioyce all Iury will. ¶The Collecte. VOuchsaue O Lorde to looke from thy holye hea∣uens vpon the children of men: and graunte vs to knowe the way of peace, that we auoydyng the bon∣dage of synne, may haue the fruition of thy habitatiō in heauenly Ierusalem. Through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XV. Here Dauid craueth whom God alowth in sight And answer haueth whom God alowth in sight Domine quis habi∣tabit.The sprite so sayth to worke by loue aright Who hath a fayth to worke by loue aright 1 WHo (Lord) shall byde: by thy swéete syde? In tabernacle sure? Or who shall styll: hold fast thy hyll, which holy doth endure? 2 Who walkth in state: immaculate, who blameles lyfe ensueth: And rightwise déede: fulfilth in spéede, who speakth from hart the truth.
3 Whose tonge in spyte: doth not backebyte, ne doth hys neyghbour euill: Who cannot beare: wyth quyet eare, hys neyghbour slanderd still. 4 And he whose eyes: the bad despise, and lawdth Gods fearefull men: Who swearth also: hys neyghbour to, and chaungth not it ageyn. 5 Who will not plie: to vsurie, hys coyne for lucres loue: Who bribeth nothyng: the iust to wryng, oh he shall neuer moue. ¶The Collecte. GRaunt we besech thee O bountiful lord & god im¦maculate, that we may walke in thy church with∣out spot, withdrawn wholy from the harmful workes of this wretched worlde, so that while we labour to obserue the preceptes in earth, we may at last attayne to thy heauenly habitation, where thou raignest eter∣nally one God the father, the sonne and the holy spi∣rite, to whome be all honour and glory worlde wyth∣out ende, Amen. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XVI. That Christ did pray and when himselfe did sue For his alway, and when himselfe did sue Conserua me Do∣mine.His buriall the Prophet told full true His rise withall the Prophet told full true 1 O God of trust: preserue me iust, In soule and body to: For why to thée: my hope doth slée, to none els will I go.
2 O soule in sprite: thou saydst aright, to God who thée so wrought: My God thou art: of faythfull hart, my goodes can vayle thée nought. 3 All my delyght: to sayntes full bryght, is set, which trauell here: In vertues all: celestiall, they do excell so clere. 4 Who multiplie: theyr Idols hie, and after them do gad: Their sacrifice: I whole despise I hate theyr names so mad. 5 The Lord alone: is porcion, of myne inheritaunce: My cup he is: my crosse to blisse, my lot he wyll aduaunce. 6 My lot ful brode: by lyne and rod, so fayre did fall to mée: That I reioyce: the goodly choyce, myne heritage to sée. 7 The Lord to blisse: I wyll not mysse, who gaue me counsayle so: My reynes by nyght: yet shewd me lyght, in thought to God to go. 8 In face I set: my God so great, he alwayes was my marke: For strong he standth: on my ryght hand, how can I fall in darke.
9 For helpe thus had: my harte was glad, my glory ioyed his fill: My flesh in graue: though earth it haueth, yet rest in hope it will. 10 For why in hell: my soule to dwell, thou wilt not leaue it there: The holy one: corruption to sée, thou canst not beare. 11 Thou shalt shew mée: lyues path  sée, and ioy in thy good sight: Thy ryght hand hase: all ioyfull grace, to stand for aye in might▪ ¶The Collecte. PReserue O mighty Lorde all them whiche trust in thee, & graue in our hurtes to fulfill  holy will, that whyle we be recomforted with the ioyfull re∣membraunce of thy resurrection, we may attayne to sitte on thy right hande, wyth thy blessed sayntes in ioy euerlasting, through Christ &c. The Argument. Psalme. XVII. That fayth myght stand the iust man praythfull fayne In vpper hand the iust man praythfull fayne And museth in part thus should be vext in payne. Exaudi Deus.That iust in hart thus should be vext in payne. 1 HEare thou the right: O Lord my might, consider my complaynt: My lippes be streight: and hate deceight, geue eare to my constraynt.
2 Geue thou assent: to myne entent, in hand my right to take: Let thy good eye: my cause discrye, for thée my iudge I make. 3 My hart thou tridst: by nyght thou spdst, thou scorndst me nye in déed: Thou foundst not yet: my fault so great, my thought to mouth agréed. 4 Mens workes ful nought: by them so wrought agaynst thy worde and wyll: Made me to marke: theyr wayes most darke, thy lawes who do but spill. 5 O stay my féete: of lyfe most méete, thy worde to holde the path: Least wrong I walke: thy truth to balke, to slip in thy great wrath. 6 O God of all: on thée I call, for thou my sute wy heare: Enclyne to mée: thy face so frée, my wordes in hearyng beare. 7 Thy mercies great: extend thou yet, saue them whych trust in thée: From such as stand: agaynst thy hand, and vayne resisters bée. 8 As ball of eye: O tenderly, kepe me my Lord and kyng: And shadow me: so close to be, hyd vnder thy good wyng.
9 Defend me quyte: from all the spyte, of them that me molest: My foes I sée: round compasse me, my soule to haue opprest. 10 So fat and fed: they iet so redde in wealth they stand full hye: Proud spéeche to séeke: euen what they léeke, they walke disdaynfully. 11 In wayes they wayte: to note our gate, so set on euery side: They bend theyr eyes: as crafty spies on ground to cast vs wyde. 12 Lyke Lyon slye: they priuy lye, which gréedy séekth his pray: As close it were: fierce wolfe or beare, or Lyons whelpe they lay. 13 For thy renowne: ryse, cast hym downe, destroy hys spyte O God: My soule O saue: from wycked laue. who is thy sword and rod. 14 From men so fond: that be thy hond, O Lord from worldly beast: Who make good chere: thou filst them here, they leaue theyr babes the rest. 15 And I shall bold: thy face beholde, in righteousnes so bryght: I shall in déede: be satisfide, thy glory brought to lyght.
¶The Collecte. COnuert the eyes of our faith O dere father, to be∣holde the truth of thy iudgement, that when wee be tryed by the spirituall fire of probation, we maye haue at the last fruition of thy glorious presence, to be satisfied wyth the fruite of thy righteousnes. Tho∣rough Christ our Lorde, Amen. The Argument Psalme. XVIII. Christ here in this geueth thankes to God aright, For hym and his geueth thankes to God aright, For that they bee from all vngodly spight. Diligam te Domine.Deliuered free from all vngodly spight. 1 I Will loue thée: most inwardly, O Lord my strength thou art: Thy mercies all: both great and small, do comfort much my hart. 2 My Lord is hence: my rocke and fence, my sauyng God I say: My myght and shield: my trust in field, my horne of health, my stay. 3 The Lorde alwayes: most worthy prayes, on hym I mynde to call: So safe shall I: most stedfastly, escape myne enemies all. 4 The greuousnes: of deadly stresse, dyd compasse me about: The streames of sinne: so whelmd me in, they troubled me full out.
5 The paynes of hell: that were so fell, dyd me inclose full fast: The trappes and snares: of deadly cares, preuented me in hast. 6 In troublous wo: I cald vnto, my Lord my God in feare: To heare my case: his will it was, my cry euen toucht hys eare. 7 The earth did shake: for feare did quake, the hils theyr bases shooke: Remoued they were: in place most faire, at Gods ryght fearefull looke. 8 Darke smoke rose so: hys face there fro, hys mouth as fire consumde: That coales at it: were kyndled bryght, when he in anger fumde. 9 The heauens fullow: he made to bowe, and downe dyd he ensue: And darkenes great: was vnder set his féete in clowdy hue. 10 He rode on hye: and dyd so flye, vpon the Cherubins: He came in sight: and made hys flight, vpon the wyng of wyndes. 11 His place he set: In darkenes great, as secret there to byde: Wyth cloudes about: he set it out, wyth waters blacke beside.
12 At hys great light: of present sight, the cloudes past ouer quight: As stones of hayle: do melt and quayle, by coales in fire light. 13 The Lord from heauen: sent down his leauen and thundred thence in ire: He thunder cast: in wonders blast, wyth hayle and coales of fire. 14 With arrow dartes: he gald theyr hartes, and scatterd them about: And forth he bringes: hys lightnyngs, the Lord destroyd theyr rout. 15 When he dyd thret: the waters set, theyr springes to be dewrayed: The blastyng breath: of hys great wrath, the worldes déepe botome shewd. 16 From heauen aboue: his grace and loue, to fetche me he dyd send: From waters déepe: he dyd me kéepe, he dyd me strong defend. 17 He dyd represse: I saw no lesse my foes that strongest be: And rid me quite: of all theyr spite, to strong they were for me. 18 They dyd preuent: with troublement, the day of my great stresse: Yet Gods good hand: dyd them wythstand preuentyng theyr excesse.
19 In libertie: he placed mée, and led me strayght thereto: He brought me out: of stresse no doubt, hys grace dyd loue me so. 20 The Lord dyd thus: most gracious, my dealyng he aloude: He dyd me quite: as he in sight, me innocent approued. 21 For Gods true wayes: I kept alwayes, Hys law I trustd therto: Wyth my Lord God: I still abode, the wycked do not so. 22 I haue an eye: hys law to spye, from mans tradition: Nor hys precept: dyd I reiect, to my destruction. 23 And pure I went: wyth true entent, before my God also: I iust eschude: my déede so rude, I gaue good héede therto. 24 For doyng iust: my Lord I trust, will frendly me requite: My righteous déede: as well did spéede, in hys approued sight. 25 As man is iust: so mayst thou trust, wyth good so good to bée: Wyth perfect man: so thou agayne, shall perfect be and frée. 26 And thus wyth pure: thou mayst be sure, thou shalt be pure and cleane: Euen so wyth euill: of froward will, euen froward shalt thou meane.
27 For thou to saue: wilt soone wyth saue, the méeke in all theyr wo: And shalt deryde: mens stately pryde, and make them low to go. 28 For thou dydst lyght: my candell bryght, and kéepst my fortune ryght: The Lord my God: dyd ease my rod, and darkenes tournd to lyght. 29 For strong to sée: I was by thée, whole hostes to dyng downe ryght: In God no dout: I was so stout, stone wall to leape it quite. 30 Gods way I wis: vnspotted is, hys worde is tryde in fire: He is a shield: to man in field, who trust to hym intiere. 31 What God is there: euen any where, but this the Lord of hostes? What rocke excelth: in strength so well, as thys our God in coste? 32 For God euen he: round girdeth me, wyth strength and feate of warre: He kéepth my way: in redy stay, lest vyce my lyfe should marre. 33 He makth my féete: as swyft and méete, as féete of hartes to sée: In perfect grace: he stayd my race, and sate me vp on hye.
34 My handes aryght: he made to fyght, both diuell and man to wryng: Myne armes in partes: did breake their dartes yea bowes of stéele wyth stryng. 35 Thy sauyng shield: kept me in field, thy right hand me sustaynd: Thy bounteousnes: dyd ease my stresse, though greuously it paynd. 36 Thou gauest me roume: where euer I come, to stand, to go, to ryde: Full strong to stand: on sea and land, my héeles dyd neuer slyde. 37 I dyd rechase: my foes in face, and ouer tooke theyr spyte: I dyd not stynt: wyth sword the dynt, till I had stroyed them quite. 38 I dyd them bray: in such aray, theyr woundes shall neuer heale: They could not ryse: in any wyse, but fall at myne owne héele. 39 Strait girdst thou me: wyth strength to be, to warre euen full inured: Thou threwest them round: vpon the ground my soule who thus pursude. 40 These noughty packes: did turne their backes theyr neckes thou madest me smight: My haters fell: thou didst them quell, downe thou dydst beat them right.
41 They cryde dismayde: and craued ayde, but none to helpe was there: Whan they did crie: to God so hie, then God did turne hys eare. 42 I dyd as small: thus beat them all, as dust before the wynde: As clay in stréete: oft trode wyth féete, I dyd them stampe and grynde. 43 Thou rydst my lyfe: from peoples stryfe, thou didst me sure preserue: To Gentiles bred: thou madest me hed, straunge people me dyd serue. 44 When me they heare: at sound of eare, they me now soone obey: Wher children strange: their frendship change all falshoode they dewray. 45 These children strange: which strangely range so vp and downe dyd fayle: They all afrayd: in fearefull brayd, in theyr great forts shall wayle. 46 The Lord lyue hée: most blessedly who was my helper strong: God rowsed bée: my rocke so frée, hym prayse I will full long. 47 This God of ours: he geueth me powers t'auenge my wycked foes: And doth subdue: my people true, that they like subiectes goes.
48 He daunted so: my cruell o, to them he made me head: From wicked spite: thou dydst me quite, theyr wickednes to tread. 49 For thys O Lord: in hart and word, I will geue thankes in song: Of thy great name: thy power to fame, where Gentils dwel among. 50 Hys kyng he sought: he health hym wrought, he shewed true loue in déede: To Dauid true: annoynted due, and aye to his good séede. ¶The Collecte. MOst louyng Lord and puissant protectour which art our refuge in all distresse and aduersitie, pre∣serue vs from all hostilitie, and frō the snares of death and hell, so that after we be drawne vp from the dan∣ger of all maner temptations, we maye deuoutly syng to thy holy name in all puritie of life. Through &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XIX. This Psalme deliteth who is to sunne comparde Gods worke to cyte who is to sunne comparde His law it treateth of his Apostles garde, Coeli enar∣rant.And so it speaketh of his Apostles garde, 1 THe heauens do tell: how God excelth in glory, power, and might: The firmament: so excellent, his handy worke endight.
2 For day to day: succéedyng aye, doth playne hys power declare: As night to nyght: ensuyng ryght, setteth out hys louyng care. 3 No speche, or tong: to them doth long, theyr voyce distinct not hard: To magnifie: theyr Lord so hie, by languages regard. 4 But yet theyr sound: as wordes rebound, on all the earth it strayes: To further cost: all vttermost, their noyse theyr maker prayse. 5 In them he set: the sunne so net, ¶ lyke bridegrome which procéedth: His chamber out: as Giaunt stout, reioyceth hys course to spéede. 6 His course goeth out: euen round about, the heauen and backe retreath: From East to West: it hath no rest, all thyng doth féele hys heate. 7 Gods law is iust: a law to trust, as spotlesse turnyng hartes: His wytnes pure: record is sure, to babe it wyt impartes. 8 The Lordes behest: is all the best, to ioy the hart in ryght: His biddinges be: so pure to sée, blynd syght they turne to lyght.
9 The Lord his feare: is cleane and cleare, which euer shall endure: His iudgementes bée: the truth most frée, and be themselues full sure. 10 They be to vs: more gracious, then gold or precious stone: To man more méete: then hony swéete, they passe the hony combe. 11 Yea more then this: thy seruant is, to kéepe them alway prest: And sure shall he: rewarded be, wyth ioy whych is behest. 12 Synnes which be wrought: in déed & thought, wythout thys law who knowth? Fro faultes that lye: oh secretly, thy clensing hand bestow. 13 From sinnes of pryde: thy seruanthyde, that me they do not guide: That vndefilde: and lesse beguilde, the great sinne myght I slyde. 14 My wordes thus said: my thoughts depe laid God graunt they please thy sight: O Lord my power: my rocke and wer, and my redemer quite.
¶ The Collecte. MOst mercifull and louyng Sauiour Christ, which once comming forth out of the virginal wombe didst proceede vp to the right hand of thy father: we beseche thee that we may be so conuerted by the law illightened by thy preceptes, and taught by thy holy testimonies, to be deliuered frō all straunge doctrine, and craftye inuasions agaynst our fayth: who lyuest and raignest, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XX. This prayth for kinges Good prosperinges theyr realmes to haue defence, Where Christ is ment Exaudiat te Domi∣nus.By fore entent of Dauids sprite in sence. 1 GOd graunt he heare: with blessed eare, the sutes in day of wo: Gods name so great: whom Iacob met, promoote thée where thou go. 2 God send thée ayde▪ where power is layd, from sanctuary place: He strengtht thée sure: full strong t'endure, from Syon hill of grace. 3 Let hym kéepe hye: in memorye, thy sacrifices all: The bullockes brent: so redolent, Sela.to mynde all them to call.
4 Graunt he thy will: of hart to fill, in sickenes eke and health: Confirme he shall: thy counsayles all, to worke thy peoples wealth. 5 In helth of thée: glad we shal bée, and triumphes make we will: In gods good name: his prayse to fame, thy vowes God shall fulfill. 6 I know that now: God will allowe, his Christ and saue him deare: To heare him nye: from heauen so hye, by healthfull hand he bearth. 7 Some trust their horse: some charets force, thus they presume of strength: But we wyll bynde: Gods name in mynde, for he is Lord at length. 8 For where we sée: how low they bée, and falne, so foule deceyued: We ryse in sight: and stand vpright, by myght of God receyued. 9 O Lord we sing: saue, kéepe the king, heare vs and saue vs aye: Both hym and his: preserue and blis, his realme defend we pray. ¶The Collecte. FVlfill O Lord all our peticions, and accepte vs as well allowed sacrifice to grace, that all the force & power of our aduersaries may bee resisted by thee, so that we may reioyce in the present ayde of thy sauing health, through Christ our Lord, who with thee, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. XXI. Here is exprest is hard which went beforne How that request is hard which went beforne Now thankes the more to see hys foes forlorne. Domine in virtute.He geueth therfore to see hys foes forlorne. 1 THe king with voyce: doth most reioyce, thy strength O Lord most kynde: For health so had: he is full glad, excedingly in mynde. 2 Thou hast him geuen: such helpe to wynne, in hart as he desyrde: For that he sought: by thée was wrought, Selaas full his lips requirde. 3 Thy good entent: dyd hym preuent, thy blessyng swéete thou gauest: Upon his hed: a crowne so red, of gold well set thou hast. 4 He asked lyfe: and lyfe ful ryfe, thou gauest him that will last: More hym thou gaue: then he dyd craue, euen lyfe that shall not wast. 5 His honour great: in thée is set, in thy saluation true: Thou didst him crowne: with bright renowne and glory hym dyd sue. 6 Thou hast againe: exalt hys raygne, wyth long felicitie: To glad hys state: most fortunate, with ioy thy face to sée.
7 The cause is thys: the kyng I wis, in God dyd put his trust: Hys louyng grace: so steyd hys place, no man could downe hym thrust. 8 Thy strong ryght hand: by sea and land, shall all thy foes confound: Thou shalt séeke out: thy haters stout, wyth power to cast on ground. 9 In thyne whote ire: as ouen wyth fire, thou shalt them make to fume: The Lord in wrath: shall stroy theyr pathe, the fire shall them consume. 10 Thou shalt supplant: theyr fruite to want, theyr rootes from earth full low: Theyr séede euen quyte: from all mens sight, no man thence shall them know. 11 For they entend: on thée to send, some euill in spitefull fourme: Theyr cursed déede: yet wanted spéede, they could not it perfourme. 12 For such a thyng: thou shalt O kyng, them all put foule to flight: Thou shalt bestow: thy stryng and bow, agaynst theyr face to smite. 13 O Lord of helth: exalt thy selfe, in thyne owne strength and might: So wyll we syng: to thée O kyng, to prayse thy power aright.
¶The Collecte. BLesse vs lord with the benediction of thy swete mer¦cy, and fulfil our desire to be alway set to thee, that where in our harmonie we extoll thy excellent power we may obtayn the perpetuitie of dayes in the world to come, through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXII. Lo Dauid here, in anguishe all be set Christes type doth beare in anguishe all be set For here in summe and rising iust be met Deus deus meus.Christes passion and rising iust be met 1 MY God my God: regard me God, why hast me left alone? To make so farre: my health to arre from wordes of my great mone? 2 My God I cry: as day doth pry, and yet thou geuest none eare: No rest by night I take in sight, no silence any where. 3 Yet holdst thy will: in thée so still? as onely good thy selfe? Thou Iacobs prayse: thy selfe vp rayse, they sang alwayes thy health. 4 Our fathers olde: on thée were bolde, to hope, and had theyr ease: As oft as they: to thée did pray, theyr troubles then dyd cease.
5 They cald on thée: and helpe therby, thou gauest to them anone: They layd theyr trust: on thée so iust, and scapt confusion. 6 Concernyng mée: a worme to sée, I am, no man of pryce: A scorne all day: a cast away, of men in theyr deuyce. 7 All they that mée: wyth eye dyd sée, hye scornes to me they layd: Wyth lips they mowd: with knées they bowd they shooke theyr hed and sayd. 8 In God he set: affiaunce great, let hym than rid hym quyte: Deliuer ée: to make hym frée, for hym he pleasth in sight. 9 Yet he thou arte that dydst depart, my mothers wombe from me: At both her brestes in quyet rest▪ thou nurst me tenderly. 10 I was whole cast: on thée full fast, from that my mothers pappe: No dout from thence: in sure defence, thou God keptst me in lappe. 11 Fro me to go: oh do not so, for trouble is at hand: No helpe of man: optayne I can, in thée my refuge standth.
12 Wylde buls most stout: flocke me about, by me full fierce they ryde: Fat buls in déede: as Basan féede, be set on euery side. 13 My death to shape: wyth mouthes they gape, on me they stare I say: They swell and stampe: as Lyons rampe, when they do rore at pray. 14 Out am I cast: as water wast, my bones in ioyntes be lose: My hart wythin: doth melt and pyne, as waxe by fier dose. 15 As potsherd dry: my strength doth lye, to mouth my tong cleau'th fast: To death in dust: thou hast me thrust, thus made I am agast. 16 Yea dogs full grim: haue closde me in, in councels mad they méete: Besiegd I stand: of wicked and, they pearst my hand and féete. 17 My bones to tell: I may full well, at me they gase and stare: They did delite: in my despite, they dyd deryde my care. 18 My clothes they part: wyth ioyfull hart, as spoyle the sowgiers do: For that my cote: they cast theyr lo, for that vnsowed was so.
19 But be not far: my gouerner, O Lord my castle strong: Thy mercy send: and me defend, in hast, no tyme prolong. 20 From sworde and knyfe: discharge my lyfe, my soule lest they deuoure: Kéepe well my soule: as derlyng fole, from dogges theyr handes and power. 21 O kepe in awe: the Lyons iawe, saue me from them that byte: From all the hornes of Unicornes, protect me Lord of myght. 22 Thy power and name: I shall declame, to all my bretherne met: Glad wyll I rayse: in church thy prayse, in congregation set. 23 The Lord who fearth: with lawds draw nere, all Iacobs séede hym prayse: Feare ye hym well: all Israell, hym magnify alwayes. 24 He wyll aduise: and not despise, the poore for low degrée: He hydth no face: in tyme and place, my prayer heard hath hée. 25 I purpose mée: to speake of thée, in church thy prayse to sprede: My vowes so plight: in iust mens fight, I will perfourme in dede.
26 The méeke his brede: shall eate full fed, and prayse the Lord all day: For God who séekth: hys prayse he kéepth, theyr hart shall lyue for aye. 27 The world so brode: will turne to God, whyle thys they call to hart: Before hys face: all folke in place, shall honour hym impart. 28 All kyngdomes stand: to God as bond, theyr trybes and kynredes eke: And them in raigne: he shall retayne, all quarters them to seke. 29 The fat shall fede: and serue in drede, they all shall worshyp ryfe: Yea dead men all: to hym shall fall, who gaue theyr soules no lyfe. 30 My séede and bloud: thys Lord so good shall serue in worship frée: And thus my stocke: as God hys flocke, shall iust reputed bée. 31 They shall procéede: to shew in déede, to people thence to come: Gods iustice great: from heauenly seat, what he to them hath done.
¶The Collecte. O God the heade and fountayne of all grace & mer∣cye which for our sake diddest descende into the wombe of the Virgine, was fastened to a tree, pierced through in thy handes and feete, thy garmentes par∣ted by lottes, and yet after all this done, thou dydst gloriously ryse agayne from death. We beseche thee so to beare in mynde this thy humayne conuersation among men, that thou mayst be alway to them which put theyr trust in thee a mercifull deliuerer, who ly∣uest and raignest one God wyth the father & the ho∣ly ghost, for euer in perpetuall felicitie. Amen. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXIII. The Christen man how God his lyfe doth guide Confesse he can how God his lyfe doth guide With meat so good from death his soule to hide. Dominus regit.of heauenly foode from death his soule to hide. 1 THe Lord so good: who geueth me food my shepeheard is and guide: How can I want: or suffer scant, whan he defendth my side? 2 To féede my néede: he will me lead, in pastures gréene and fat: He forth brought me: in libertie, to waters delicate. 3 My soule and hart: he did conuert, to me he sheweth the path: Of rightwisenes: in holines, his name such vertue hath.
4 Yea though I go: through death hys wo, his vaale and shadow wyde: I feare no dart: wyth me thou art, wyth staffe and rod to guide. 5 Thou shalt prouyde: a table wyde, for me agaynst theyr spite: With oyle my head: thou hast bespred, my cup is fully dight. 6 Thy goodnes yet: and mercy great, will kepe me all my dayes: In house to dwell: in rest full well, wyth God I hope alwayes. The Collecte. LEade vs O Lorde by the rules of thy comfortable preceptes, that when we haue optaynd the habi∣tation of thy euerlasting mansion, we may be fully sa∣tisfied with the cup of ioyful eternitie, through Christ our Lord. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXIIII. Of Christ to come his raigne this psalme doth preach All whole in summe his raigne this psalme doth preach How God will bee the letter this doth teach. Domini est terra.In temple free the letter this doth teach. 1 THe earth it is: the Lordes of blisse, wyth all the garnishyng: The world so round: he hath it found, and all that dwell therin.
2 This earth he cast: on seas so fast, as ouer them to stand: And floudes he made: for corne and blade, and eke to part the land. 3 Up who shall stye: on hill so hye, where resteth thys Lord of grace? Or who shall ryse: in restfull wyse, to that his holy place? 4 Euen he whose hand: and hart doth stand, in cleannes innocent: Who sought no gayne: in fansies vayne. nor othe hath falsly ment. 5 He shall posses: in stablenes, the Lordes swéete blessednes: Hys God of health: from euen hymselfe, shall send hym righteousnes. 6 And these be they: which séeke alway, in stocke theyr God in déede: Euen truely they: who seke I say, the God of Iacobs séede. 7 Lift vp your gates: you heades and states, ye lastyng dores aryse: In at this house: kyng glorious, wyll enter princely wyse. 8 What is this kyng: thus enteryng, wyth glory thus beset? The Lord is hée: full strong to sée, a Lord in battayle great.
9 Arise I say: thou temple gay, Or as the vij. verse.though I thée cannot builde: Yet ioyth my sprite: that God of might, hys arke shall be thy shield. 10 What is thys king: desiering, wyth glory thus to raigne? The Lorde of hostes: of glory most, Selathe kyng and soueraigne. ¶ The Collecte. EVerliuyng God the fourmer and maker of the worlde, to whome the whole ornament thereof is seruiceable and subiect: we praye thee to restore vs to the innocency of lyfe hat we may be able to folow thy steppes vp into holy mount, where thou raignest for euer almighty God in maiesty, through Christ. The Argument. Psalme. XXV. This cry and call as supplication graue Is Generall as supplication graue It doth confesse and pardon craueth to haue Atte Do∣mine.Done wickednes and pardon craueth to haue 1 O Lord to thée: my soule to flée, is set, my God thou art: I whole referre: my lyfe most nare to thée, wyth all my hart. 2 My God of fence: my confidence, on thée was alway borne: O let no shame: confound my name, my foes els will me scorne.
3 Who trustth in thée: ashamd to bée, can neuer man it spye: Who breake thy lawes: without a cause, confounded let them lye. 4 Shew me thy wayes: O Lord alwayes, of truth me teach the path: Thy word and way: is certayne stay, for that all vertue hath. 5 In truth me lead: teach me thy read, my God of health thou art: My trust doth lay: in thée all day, to thée is bent my hart. 6 Call thou to mynde: O Lord full kynde, thy louyng mercies olde: Thy bounties frée: which euer bée, as fathers them haue tolde. 7 Of youth my faut: so great and haut, such sinne O Lord forget: For mercy sake: O Lord awake, thy mynd vpon me set. 8 Both gratious: and righteous, the Lord is equall so: He teachth wyth rod: yet louyng God, by giftes he teachth also. 9 Who méeke abyde: them he will guide, in iudgement good and ryght: And whome we sée: most gentle bée, his wayes he teachth them lyght.
10 The wayes of God: be large and brode, both truth and mercy iust: Euen still to such: as loueth much, his hestes, and couenauntes trust. 11 For thy names sake: O mercy take, my Lord vpon my sinne: It is so great: it doth me fret, it boylth my soule wythin. 12 What man he bée: that feareth thée, O Lord thou wylt hym teach: The rightfull way: to choose I say, in sprite thereto to retche. 13 His soule shall dwell: at ease full well, in ghostly frée delyght: Hys stocke and séede: shall neuer néede, but hold the land to ryght. 14 Among them lye: Gods secrecy, to feare hym who that shall: In gentle fourme: he wyll perfourme, to them hys couenantes all. 15 Myne eyes entent: is euer bent to thée my Lord so great: For onely he: pluckth suerly, my féete from out of net. 16 Turne thou to mée: O Lord so frée, haue mercy, stay my fall: I am in state: all desolate, in misery full thrall.
17 My sorrowes fell: my hart doth swell, they be enlarged so: My troublous payne: O God restrayne, O quenche this deadly wo. 18 Attend I cry: my misery, my lyfe and state aduerse: Forgeue my fautes: which me assautes, my ioy to me reuerse. 19 Consider ryght: my foes theyr spyte, how they increase my feare, Theyr hate is thus: so tyrannous, at me that they do beare. 20 O kepe most dere: my soule intiere, and me deliuer iust: So let no shame: confound my name, for I in thée haue trust. 21 Let perfectnes: and rightfulnes, both guide and wayte on mée: My trust for ayde: in thée is layd, from me O neuer flée. 22 Deliuer well: all Israell, O God wyth all hys séede: From troubles all: that them may fall, in thée alway to spéede.
¶The Collecte. DEliuer vs from all aduersitie and danger O mer∣cifull God, for to thee onely haue we lifte vp our hartes, forget we besech thee the trespace of our youth, and the ignorance of our former age, & where as we haue negligently offended, thou of thy mercye forgeue it vs, through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXVI. The iust mans song for righteousnes beshent: Who suffreth wrong for righteousnes beshent: And prayth in will a lyfe leade innocent. Iudica Do∣mine.That he may still a lyfe leade innocent. 1 LOrd iudge my déed: as I haue lyued in thée my hope is all: For this my trust: in thée so iust, I neuer doubt to fall. 2 Lord proue my waye: and me assaye, by fire trye thou my reynes: And search my hart: my foe is smart, myne giltles life he straynes. 3 Thy clemency: was nye myne eye, to stay, me right to do: I dyd inure: my hart full sure, to truth from lyes to go. 4 Wyth lyers vayne: I would not trayne, my lyfe to follow such: Wyth crafty men: I would not renne, whose lyfe dissembleth much.
5 The wycked rout: that goeth about, to harme and hurt I hate: I will not set: in councell yet, wyth men of wycked state. 6 For washe I wyll: my handes euen still, wyth men of perfect lyfe: And thus shall I: O Lord so hye, frequent thyne aulters ryfe. 7 Where I shall rayse: thy worthy prayse, that men may loue the same: I wyll there sprede: thy grace in deede, the workes of thy good name. 8 O Lord the place: where restth thy grace, I haue the bewty loued: Thy heauenly house: so glorious, I loued as me behoued. 9 Wyth sinners great: Lord do not shet, my soule, wyth them to bée: Thy grace extend: my lyfe defend, all men of bloud to flée. 10 Theyr handes do presse: all wyckednes, euen guile prepensed o: Theyr better hand: corrupt doth stand, wyth brybes, euen thus they go. 11 But yet will I: most certenly, in truth my lyfe addresse: O make me frée: from them to bée, shew me thy tendernes.
12 My foote as yet: in ryght is set, in playne simplicitie: And still wyll I: in company, exalt thée Lord on hie. ¶The Collecte. GRaunt O Lord we besech thee thy mercy vnto vs thy seruauntes, and so ingraue in our hartes the loue of thy truth, that we may hold fast all innocency of lyfe, and finallye to bee deliuered from all wycked persecutours. Through, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXVII. Here may we see in trouble though he falleth: The iust is free in trouble though he falleth: In God he stayeth and so geueth thankes in all. On hym he wayeth and so geueth thankes in all. 1 Dominus illuminatioTHe Lord of might: is health and light, to me (at nede) whom should I feare? The Lord is strength: to lyfe at length, of myne (I say) who can me deare? 2 Whan men so bad: theyr traynes had layd, Euen then (at eye) they fell downe right: Whan foes dyd presse to eate my flesh, they slid (away) for all theyr spite. 3 Though armed host: besiegd my cost, my hart (from God) shall not relent: Though cruell warre: should ryse me nar, to God (therin) I would be bent.
4 One thing to craue: of God to haue, I dyd (full oft) and aye I will: To kéepe hys place: to sée hys grace, to haunt (euen so) his temple still. 5 Thus shal hys power: hyde me in bower, when troubles should be (fierce and) fell: He would me hyde: there close to byde, as safe on rocke (most sure) to dwell. 6 My hed yet now: he wyll alow, aboue my foes (in state) alwayes: In, will I bryng: glad offeryng, the Lord (so good) to laud and prayse. 7 My voyce O heare: my Lord so deare, I cry (my God) in wofull part: Graunt that I craue: and mercy haue, extend to me thy (louyng) hart. 8 My hart to thée: dyd oft apply, séeke ye my face (I say) ye all: O Lord I will: thy face séeke still, do others (how and) what they shall. 9 Hyde not from mée: thy seruaunt frée, thy (louyng) face, my ayde thou art: Proiect not me: displeasantly, O Lord (my health) do not depart. 10 My parentes when: they bad me renne, from them (to go) my selfe to shift: When Patrons all: my reyse or fall, rought not (a myte) thou dydst me lyft.
11 Teach me thy way: thy law I say, that rightly leadth (in truth) to thée: My foes O Lord: wyth one accorde, should els reioyce (in hate) to frée. 12 Up turne me not: to beare theyr hate, O Lord (to them) that me pursue: False witnes eyes: agaynst me ryse, and lyes (of me) they sprede vntrue. 13 My hart had quayld: and vtter fayld, if fast (to thée) I had not trustd: Let me thy grace: Lord sée in place, in land (of rest) where ioyth the iust. 14 O wayte the Lord: hold fast hys worde: doubt not (at all) be strong, be still: Attend on God: take méeke hys rod, he will (at last) thy hart fulfill. ¶The Collecte. DEfend vs O God from all the assaults of our ene∣mies, that we maye continue in constant confes∣sing of thy name, that while we haue the fruition of thy helpyng presence, at last may haue the same in glory. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXVIII. This mans entent all crafty men to scape: Is vehement all crafty men to scape: Ad te Do∣mine.And hard he is for this he thaenkes doth shape. From God of blisse for this he thankes doth shape. 1 O Lord I cry: my rocke on hye, rest not (thus still) forsake me not: Or els should I: resemble nye, the déede (that be) in pit bewrapt.
2 Heare my request: of humble brest, whan I (so méeke) do sue to thée: Agaynst thy seate: of mercy swéete, my handes (on hye) when lift they bée. 3 And draw my hart: from wycked part, wyth them (O Lord) that worke so euill: Theyr tonge cryth truse: wh hart refuseth, theyr myndes all set to (stroy and) spill. 4 As is theyr déede: so let them spéede, retort their craftes they (vse to) delue, Theyr malice great: the same to get, wyth lyke (by ryght) to quite themselue. 5 Theyr myndes disdayne: Gods actes to frain hys (stately) workes to marke euen so: He shall them stroy: and not employ, theyr lyues (no tyme) in wealth to go. 6 Well worthy prayse: is God alwayes, my mouth (in song) shall hym forth sound: He heard my grone: my prayers mone, he dyd not me (wyth shame) confound. 7 God is my shield: my strength in field, he helpt (me iust) as I beleued: For this good chance: my hart may daunce, and sing in laudes (so wel) releaued. 8 To my small host: God praysd be most, that (tymely) health he soone dyd bryng: The Lord is strength: and fence at length, to his (most true) annoynted kyng.
9 Thy people saue: O Lord I craue, and blesse (wyth ioy) thyne heritage: Féede them as guide: promoote them wyde, to prayse thée (God from) age to age. ¶The Collecte. O Lord most strong forte and refuge to all thy peo∣ple, preserue vs from such as goe downe into the pit of schisme and dissention, and knit vs together in vnitie of mynde, beyng children of one onelye God and of one fayth, so that we may holde fast in harte, that we outwardly professe in mouth, through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXIX. This doth inuite, to note Gods mighty power: All stately might to note Gods mighty power: Hym iust to serue and els can them deuoure. Who can preserue and els can them deuoure. 1 Afferte Domino.YE sonnes of God: sprede ye abrode, the Lordes great power and strength: Bryng ye your lambes: of mighty rambes to God hys laudes at length. 2 The Lord ensue: wyth honor due, extoll his myght and name: And eke expresse: his holines, hym laude in court of fame. 3 His voyce so grand: on sea and land, note how the floudes it stayd: Gods maiesty: you then dyd sée, on them when thunder brayd.
4 Hys voyce rulth sea: how houge it be, hys voyce is sterne and stout: His voyce is thus: most glorious, when it dryueth leuyn out. 5 This voyce so frée: breakth Cedre trée, no force can it repell: It dryueth euen downe: of Lybanon, hys Cedres, though they swell. 6 He made them skip: in rootes to flip, as calues do vse to praunce: So Lybanon: and Syrion, as Unicorne to daunce. 7 The Lord by voyce: the fiery noyce, of flames in partes can send: The cloudes among: he lightneth strong, wyth shoures he fyre can blend. 8 It can distres: all wyldernes, yea Cades desert wyde: The beastes I say: which there do stray, it make themselfe to hyde. 9 This voyce doth bynde: to calue the Hynde, thicke trées it open layth: Therfore men all: in temple shall, hys honour prayse in fayth. 10 Where they shall sing: that God as kyng, hath rule of waters all: On whom he setth: as kyng is fit, and so for euer shall.
11 The Lord all wealth: and stable health shall geue hys people kynde: God them shall blesse: wyth full increase, all peace and rest to fynde. ¶ The Collecte. GRaunt we beseche thee Lord vnto vs, constancye in thy worde, and make vs the temple of thy bles∣sed sprite, so that we may reuerence thy godly voyce, to rebound the same to all powers of this world, that they may be compunct therby, to present themself to thy honour wyth due sacrifice of thankefull hartes, through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XXX. Thankes here be ment for iust deliueraunce: To God so sent for iust deliueraunce: And here ye spie in Gods good gouernaunce. Exaltabo te Domine.All suertie in Gods good gouernaunce. 1 LOrd thée all whole: I will extoll, for thou hast lift me hye: Thou wouldst not make: my foes to crake, agaynst me ioyfully. 2 O Lord of myght: my God of ryght, to thée I cryed in griefe: Thou gauest an eare: to heare me neare, thou sentst me healthes reliefe. 3 Thou broughtst ful wel: my soule from hell, O Lord thou didst wythsaue: Thou me releuest: my strength thou kepest, thou pluckst me quyte from graue.
4 To God sing ye: ye saintes agrée, hys prayses eleuate: And mynde ye still: hys holy will, his graces celebrate. 5 Hys heauy wrath: short time it hath, lyfe standth at hys good grace: At nyght we wéepe: yet after sléepe, at morne we myrth embrace. 6 Whan well I was: in ioyfull case, I sayd as then I thought: That I no day: should fele decay, and neuer moue to nought. 7 For thy good will: so strenghtd my hill, O Lord most stedfastly: But whan thy face: had tournd hys grace, I than fell troublously. 8 In thys my payne: I was full fayne, to cry to thée for might: My God wyth cry: I dyd apply, and prayd both day and nyght. 9 What gayne sayd I: hath lyfe thereby, if death cut short my dayes: Can dust declare: thy power in care? in graue to tell thy prayse? 10 My God therfore: spare me the more, O Lord I thée desire: My simple sprite: despyse not quyte, but helpe I thée requyre.
11 Thou tournst from mée: my wo and grée, to myrth in cherefull voyce: The mournyng wéede: thou changest in déede so fensd I dyd reioyce. 12 Wherfore euen still: all good men will, thy glory sing and prayse: O Lord of loue: my God aboue, I thée wyll laude alwayes. ¶The Collecte. MOst louyng and mighty protector, almighty God suffer not our enemies to triumph ouer vs we be∣seche thee, but so strength vs wyth thy strong hande, that after heauines is turned into gladnesse, we maye geue condigne thanks and laudes in due remēbrance of thy holynes, through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXI. Thus Dauid prayed from Saule so scapte: in letter thankth he so: In te Do∣mine.But Christ is ment: vvith all hys church: for sprite & bodies vv 1 IN thee O Lord I put my trust: let me neuer be shamde: Rid me in thy true righteousnes: which thou for me hast fram 2 Bow downe thine eare make hast to me: deliuerd that I be: Be thou my fort, my rocke so ferme: so stabled iust by thee. 3 Thou art my rocke & castell sure: my fortres large and wide: For thy names sake lord lead me forth: be thou my light and 4 My foote O Lord draw out of net: full priuy set for me: Thou art my strength as I haue said: al hope doth rest in thee. 5 To thy good hands I yelde my sprite: O lord to thy great ruthe▪ Thou hast redemd me certenly: O lord thou God of truthe.
6 I hate their superstition: who holde of vanitie, where iust hath bene my confidence: O Lord alway in thee. 7 I will be glad and eke reioyce: for thyne humanitie: For thou didst note my soules distresse: my state aduerse to see. 8 In cruell hand of deadly foes: thou hast not shut me vp: But set my feete at large in roume: thou temperstd so my cup. 9 Haue mercy Lord vpon my wo: myne eyes therin consume: My soule and eke my body sore: much payne they do resume. 10 My lyfe is wast in heauines: my yeares in mournynges wayle: My strength is falne for myne offence: my bones beginne to quayle 11 A scorne I am among my foen: but most to neyghbourhed: A feare I was to daily frende: seene out of dores they fled. 12 I am so cleane cast out of mynd: as dead man layd in graue: I am become a vessel broke: which no man list to haue. 13 I saw so great conspiracy: of men in counsayle met: My feare encreast whan they dyd rise: my soule to trap in net. 14 But yet my hope hath bene in thee: O Lord I thus dyd say, Thou art my God my trusty God: thou wilt me kepe for aye. 15 My dayes be set in thy good handes: ryd me from all my foes: whose handes be set to persecute: to lade my soule wyth woes. 16 Thy gentle light of countinance: shew me thy seruaunt poore: Saue me O Lord by mercy great: I trust therto the more. 17 And let me not confounded be: O Lord of thee I craue: Confounded be all wicked men: in silence put to graue. 18 Let lyeng lips be stopt to speake: to whist downe lowe be thrust: In cruell spite disdaynfully: they prate agaynst the iust. 19 How is thy grace so plentifull, prepard in store to bee: For righteous men which thee do feare: as Adams broode may see.
20 To hide them safe euen iust by thee: from all prouokyng men: Thine eies in house will kepe them sure: from tonges yt venim 21 O thankes be due to this the Lord: whose pity such I felt: As I with forte were closed in: or I in citye dwelt. 22 Though whan I fled and felt excesse: I sayd thou me despisde: Yet when I cryde thou heardst my voyce: in humble sute deuisde▪ 23 O Loue the Lord ye all his saintes: the Lord the iust preseruth, The doer prowd he thorowly: rewardth as he deseruth. 24 Be strong in hart: most manfully, For he your hartes shall strength: All ye that wayte the Lord so good, O trust ye hym at length. ¶The Collecte. MOst mercifull father which excelst in aboundāce of pitie and compassion, we beseche thy tender and infinite mercy, that while we search for the eter∣nall veritie of thy worde and commaundement, we may escape the detestable presumption and pryde of vayne walkers in this worlde, contrary to the eternal veritie in thy worde, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXII. Here Dauid teachth to vnderstande, what is cleare blessednes: Beati quo∣rum remis∣se.Euen pardon free at Gods good hande, for all our sinnefulnes. 1 O Blest be they: whose trespaces, all whole remitted lye: Whose sinne is hid: in secrecies, from which God turnth his eye.
2 O blessed man to whom in sight, God doth impute no sinne: Who hath no guile: in suttle sprite, as hypocrite within. 3 For that my sinne: I hyd so blynde, and would not it confesse: My bones and strength for sorrow pynde, all day I cryed in stresse. 4 For dayes and nyghtes: thy heauy hand, my soule dyd presse so stout: That all my powers: and moysture changd Selaas dryed by sommer drout. 5 I shewed to thée: my wyckednes, not still my gilt I hid: I sayd: I will my fault expresse, Selathen straight thou it didst ryd. 6 For this to thée: will euery saynt, make sute in tyme of grace: Though waters flow: in déepe constraynt, they shall not hym deface. 7 My refuge thou: art couertly, from trouble me to bryng: Thus fenst by thée: glad sing shall I, Selaas men made frée do sing. 8 I will geue thée: intelligence, right thée to teach the way: That thou mayst walke: wythout offence, on thée myne eye shall stay.
9 But he not lyke the horse and mule, who nought can vnderstand: Whose mouthes wyth bittes except ye rule, they wyll not come to hand. 10 The wycked man: wyth cares is fret, wyth sorrowes fouly vext: But who hys trust: in God hath set, to hym all grace is next. 11 In thys the Lord: reioyce ye still, ye righteous men be glad: All ye that haue: ryght hartes and wyll, ioy ye be not adrad. The Collecte. O Blessed Lord whiche by remittyng sinnes, geuest them who confesse the same thy true iustice, heare thou the prayers of thy congregation: and so dull the dartes of synne in vs, that we escapyng the sorow full wo therof, may bee replenished wyth restfull and spirituall gladnes in the holy ghost, to ioye with thee in the blisse to come, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXII. Here hily aduanst Gods grace do ye see: Who sinne doth remit, All wholy so free. Beati quo∣rum. 1 O Happy be they, Whose sins be releast: This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre.Who hath theyr offence Whole hyd by request. 2 And happy the man Whom God doth aquite: Whose sprite hath no guile To doubt of hys might.
3 For holding my tong, My bones fell away: I gronde in my hart, Sela.All whole by the day. 4 By nyght and by day, Thy hand was to stout: My moysture was dryed Sela.Lyke sommer the drout. 5 My cryme I bewrayed Euen iust in thy sight: I hyd not my gylt, But brought it to light. I cast wyth my selfe, My fault to reueale: And straight thou releast, It euery deale. 6 For this shall we sée, All saintes to desire: In sute for to bée When tyme doth require. Though trouble aryse, as flouds when they grow Yet shall they no tyme, The iust ouerflow. 7 My bower thou art, To kéepe me at ease: Thou fentest me about,Sela With songes of release. 8 To teache thée I will, And guide thée the way: On thée will I looke, So neuer to stray. 9 But be ye not lyke, The horse and the mule: For brutish they be And hard to recule. Wyth bridle and bit Their mouthes do ye strain Lest at you they wynce And turne so agayne. 10 The bad shal haue plages On euery side: Who trust in the Lord, Them grace doth abide. 11 Ye men of the ryght, Be glad to reioyce: Ye true men in hart, Be ioyfull in voyce.
¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXIII. The iust alway in mynde bearth this, Wyth hart to ioye in God of his, To prayse his name that mighty is, For he geueth helpe and heauenly blis: But vayne all other remedies, But payne all worldly policies, Remember this. 1 Exultate iusti in.REioyce in God: the Lord he is, Ye rightwise men and do not mis, The iust be bound to thanke iwis. Repete ye this 2 Prayse ye the Lord: wyth melodies, Wyth harpe and lute wyth simphonies, Syng Psalmes to hym in Psalteries. Forget not this. 3 Syng Carols new wyth iubilie, To God the Lord in maiestie, Hys laudes, hys prayse, sing hartely. Well vse ye this. 4 His worde is true most certeinly, His workes be wrought most faythfully: Holde thys in hart most constantly. Abuse not this. 5 He iudgement loueth: and right entent, The earth therwith is all besprent, Such grace and loue he downe hath sent, Well trust ye this.
6 The heauens were made: by thys the Lord, The hostes of them: by hys true word, Hys breth of mouth: theyr power afordth. Distrust not thys. 7 The seas on heapes: he doth them place, As bottell close: he them embraceth The depes he coutcht in secret space. Denounce ye this. 8 Let all the earth: the Lord if eare, What man this world and mould doth beare, Serue hym in dread: wyth gentle eare. Renounce not thys. 9 He spake the word: and done it was, The earth firme stoode in stable case, What he dyd byd: it came to passe, Reuolue ye thys. 10 All Paynyms wayes God doth reiect, Uayne peoples dryftes by hym be chect: Proude Prynces craftes he doth detect. Dissolue not thys. 11 Gods counsayles aye shall all abyde, Hys thoughtes of hart shall neuer slyde: From tyme to tyme on neyther syde. Respect ye thys. 12 What folke hath God Iehoua Lord, Elect as heyre by hys accord, O blest they be by truthes record. Suspect not thys.
13 The Lord from heauen beholdth vs all, All kynde of men both frée and thrall: He séeth theyr reyse: he séeth theyr fall. Aduise ye thys. 14 From his high seat: he casth hys eyes, All men to vewe theyr tract to spye, Where euer they in earth do lye. Despise not thys. 15 The hartes of all he shope no dout, He knowth theyr thoughts wythin wythout, Theyr workes what they do go about. Repute ye thys. 16 No kyng is saued by route of host, No giaunt strong for all hys bost, Of strength and power though haue they most Dispute not thys. 17 Strong horse is thyng: but weake agayne, That man by hym myght safe remayne, Both horse and man are all but vayne. Approue ye thys. 18 Behold the Lord: holdth eye full iust, On fearefull men whych hym do trust, Wyth grace them guide he safely must. Disproue not thys. 19 Theyr soule from death to ryd them quite, In tyme of dearth to féede them ryght All paynfull stresse he makth full lyght. Betrouth ye thys
20 Our soule hath taryed quietly, For thys our God assuredly, Our guide, our shield most trustely. Forslouth not thys. 21 Our hartes in hym wyll styll reioyce, For hys good name we trust the choyce, And sing we will in ioyfull noyce. Repete ye thys. 22 Extend O Lord thy gentlenesse, As we in thée haue trustinesse, Thou art the Lord of ryghteousnes. Forget not thys. ¶ The Collecte. FEede vs O Lord thy miserable people in that time whan raigneth the famine of thy worde, deliuer our soules from the death of sinne, that we maye bee illed wyth thy mercy: finally, to bee associate to the righteous, in the ioyes of eternitie by thy gratious gift. Through Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XXXIIII. When Dauid fledde, to Achis king, At death he was full neere: And saued yet, this Psalme did sing, Benedicā dominum.With all his frendes in quiere. 1 I Will geue thankes: to God alwayes, Who raignes in power most hie: Within my mouth: shall be hys prayse, declarde continuallie.
2 Of thys good Lord: to bost the fame, My soule shall neuer lynne: The humble sort: shall heare the same, And eke reioyce therein. 3 O laude and prayse: the liuyng Lord, wyth me performe his prayse: And let vs all: wyth frée accorde, extoll hys name alwayes. 4 I sought the Lord: and when I cryde, he bowde hys louyng eare: Yea, he me kéepes, eche tyme and tyde, and dyd me rid from feare. 5 Lo, thus to God: the poore doth call, his cry he doth regarde: And he from paynes and wofull thrall, likewyse doth hym awarde. 6 They had an eye: full bent in hym, and so they lightened were: A shamefast face not one of them, from that tyme forth dyd beare. 7 Gods aungels standes hym round about, whose lyfe him fearth aryght: No harme they take, by wycked route, he them deliuereth quyte. 8 O tast and sée: how gratious, the Lord remayneth iust: That man is blest: all prosperous, that layes on hym hys trust.
9 O feare the Lord: ye sainctes of his, therin your trauayle plant: For they that feare: the Lord of blis, shall nothyng euer want. 10 The Lyons néede: wyth hunger fret, the ryche and proud in hart: But he whose feare: in God is set, of all good thynges haue part. 11 Ye children yong: approche ye neare, geue eare vnto my worde: I wyll you learne, the Lord to feare, in godly hartes accorde. 12 What man he be: that list to liue, and fayne would sée good dayes: Let hym no fraude: in tongue atchieue, in lewde and frowarde wayes. 13 Reiect the euill: and take the good, all wycked wayes eschue: Séeke pleasaunt peace: wyth modest moode, and do the same ensue. 14 Upon the iust: and godly men, the Lorde hys eyes doth splay: And boweth hys eares: as God to them, as oft as they do pray. 15 Gods face is séene, most irefully, to wycked men of hand: To roote full out: theyr memory, from all the earth to stand.
16 To God the Lord: the righteous call, who heares theyr heauy case: And he from cares: and troubles all, deliuereth them by grace. 17 The Lord is nie, to hym by might, that is contrite in hart: And saueth the man: of humble sprite, nor will from hym depart. 18 Great are the cares: of perfect men, and great theyr troubles bée: But yet the Lord: deliuereth them from all aduersitie. 19 He kéepth theyr bones: both safe and sound, Unbroken them to aue: The euil, euil happes: shall all confound, no stay by God to haue. 20 The Lord will kéepe: his seruauntes all, theyr soules he wyll defend: And none shall be in sorrow thrall, who iust to hym doth bend. ¶The Collecte. ALmightye God that arte the strong protector of them that be in aduersitie, and art most mercifull deliuerer from all daungers of the world: We besech thee of thy godly prouidence, to sende thy holy aun∣gell to assist vs on euery side, from tribulation, to bee at last deliuered from the miserable death of sinners. Through Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXIIII. When Dauid fledde to Achis king, For the Lute.At death the doore he was full neere, And saued yet this Psalme dyd sing Wyth all his frendes in godly quiere, This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre.To God hys Lorde, to hym so dere, In voyces clere, with hart and will. Geue thankes I will. 1 Benedicā dominum.GEue thankes I will: geue thankes I will, For aye to God most gratious, He is my forte, my rocke on hill Note the reuolutiōs of sixe di∣uers termi¦nations.My Lord he is most bounteous, My mouth shall prayse hym plenteous, In hart and mynde most feruent still. Geue thankes I will▪ 2 My soule may boast: of this my Lord, He was my helpe so trustelie, Let méeke men heare wyth one accorde: Let wofull men ioye willingly, That God hath done so louingly, From whom all grace doth downe distill. Geue thankes I will. 3 Prayse ye the Lorde wyth hart and voyce, With me ye sée hys gentlenes, Together come, let vs reioyce, To laude hys name in faythfulnes, Lyke ayde to you he wyll expresse, To kéepe from you, all troublous ill. Geue thankes I will.
4 I sought the Lord he sent me ease, He hard my griefe and all my payne, He pluckt me forth of all disease, That deadly gript my hart the vayne, He rid my feare, he turnd agayne, For I hym sought with all my skill. Geue thankes I will. 5 I fledde to hym, and sawe his light, Who eye did cast to his good grace, All lightened were with visage bright, Confounded not were they in face, No payne no spite could them disgrace, God them defendes, none can them spill. Geue thankes I will. 6 God hard my crye as sweete incense, I poore man lo felt this in part, He geueth all blisse, he quith offence, He bade all wo from me depart, Of troublous paine to quench the dart, Right sone he did his worde fulfill. Geue thankes I will. 7 Gods host stode by to strength my fight, For angels power most glorious, About the iust lie strong in myght, To make hym goe victorious, To scape theyr foes so quarilous, Hys power in grace endureth still. Geue thankes I wil.
8 O taste and sée he none forsakth, Gods goodnes smelleth most fragrantly, To whom who wyll themselfe betake, O blest they go ryght happelie, Who trust in hym assuredlie, To them all helpe shall downe distill. Geue thankes I will. 9 O feare the Lord in childelie feare, Ye saintes of hys in holines, Serue hym in truth your hartes him beare For who hym dredth in singlenes, Can féele no want in baronnes, No hurt no harme nor other ill. Geue thankes I will. 10 The Lyons lacke in hunger fret, The ryche I meane and gluttons vayne, To seke theyr pray though they be set, No foode wyth rest can they obtayne, Who séekes the Lord shall misse no gayne, Of all mens néede he hath the skill. Geue thankes I wil. 11 I saylde full sure: the seas at length, Ye children come and heare the case, I wyll you teach Gods feare and strength, By that I scapte so doubtfull place, For God me kept in all my race. From all theyr hate which would me spill. Geue thankes I will.
12 Swéete lyfe is good, it makth men glad, Who loueth it well wyth all hys hart, He shall not néede to be adrad, From dayes eterne who would not start, Kéepe ye hys tong from ouerthwart. And all good wordes let hym fulfill. Geue thankes I wyll. 13 Fast truthfull worde confoundth all blame, Inure thy tong in truth to lose, Truth may be shent yet feare no shame. Forbeare all wordes opprobrious All craft, all curse most odious, For God of myght wyll strength thée still. Geue thankes I will. 14 Flée euill, do good, and haue good rest, Olde Adam kill thou formerlie, So Adam newe wyll follow best, Then séeke thou peace most busilie, But it ensue most earnestly, For peace from God doth full distill. Geue thankes I wyll. 15 God séeth the iust in prouidence, Hys eyes them marke in tendernes, He them relieueth in indigens, Hys eares he bendes in redines, When they do pray in carefulnes, He heares theyr voyce that worke none ill. Geue thankes I wyll.
16 God hateth the proude and them beshenth, With irefull face to daunt theyr brayne Hys vysage grim on them is bent Theyr gay renowne he wyll distayne Whych aye to lyue they would so fayne. Where they reiect all truth and skill. Geue thankes I wyll. 17 The iust opprest to God they cryed, He heard them soone in tyme and place In stresse and néede he them espyed, Wyth all defence he them dyd brace, To make them safe he hyed hys pace For ryghtfull men no spyte can spyll. Geue thankes I wyll. 18 God loueth the méeke: theyr ghostes be swéete To them soft sprites he doth impart Wyth faythfull teares who here doth gréete He wyll them ease of all theyr smarte, To scape their foes, theyr spytefull arte Who would theyr wrecke on them fulfill. Geue thankes I will. 19 The iust felt payne: they yet indurde, In woes though wrapt all dolorous, Great gayne to them is death assured, God them so stayeth most meruelous, They ioye in lyfe most troubelous, The rage therof to quenche and still. Geue thankes I wyll.
20 The iust be strong: they neuer quayle, Theyr bones in strength kept totallie, Theyr constant hartes can neuer fayle, Theyr heyres be numbred seuerallie No bone to breake can possiblie, Such helpe from God doth most distill. Geue thankes I wyll. 21 The euill, dyeth euyll to death full loth, To late he spyeth hys wyckednes He must feare death that hated troth, He must for swéete féele bitternes, He harmde the iust, he sinnd no lesse, As euill he lyued, so dyeth he ill. Geue thankes I wyll. 22 Thanke thou the Lord who kéepes thée still, All helpe from hym doth ay distill, Poore soules he ridde, from bondage ill Of wo and thrall none shall haue skill Whych trust in hym nought shall them spill, O then hys prayse looke ye fulfill. Geue thankes I wyll. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXV. Christ prayth (in this) for recompence his foes to reape (agayne) theyr part: So man for wrong done hym agens, doth yet no spite in (hatefull) hart. Indica Domine. 1 PLead thou O Lord my (ryghtfull) case O iudge (thy selfe) my hurtfull foes: Oppugne thou them in (open) face, which me (all day) impugne to lose.
2 Lay hand (O Lord) vpon the sworde, and eke (take so) the buckler to: Stand vp (to helpe) in thy good worde, to kéepe from me my (wrathfull) fo. 3 Bryng (forth the) speare and stop the way, of them (so fierce) which me would harme: To my poore soule (good Lord) oh say, I am thy health and (stable) arme. 4 Let them be (driuen and) put to shame, that séeke (by craft) my soule to spill: Put them (abacke) to shamefull name, that me wyth griefe would (deadly) fill. 5 Make them (to bée) as dust we sée, before the wynde so (lightly) blowne: (In hast) let Gods swift aungel nie, them (dryue in) chase wyth power knowne. 6 Make way (to them) all slippery, let it to them be (blynd and) darke: Gods aungel (so mought) dryue them by, to féele thy myght and (handy) warke. 7 For they close net (and snare) haue layd, euen causeles me to (kil and) stroy: Yea causles (sure euen) as I sayd my soule in pit (and graue) to cloy. 8 Let (sodayne) wo take hym vnware, hys (crafty) net hymselfe to trap: Let mischiefe fall wyth (payne and) care (ryght soone) into hys onely lap.
9 My soule (I say) I bid thée leape, wyth ioye (all glad) in thys thy Lord: It shall (no doubt) hys health so reape, that ioy he shall (alway) recorde. 10 My bones (so broosde) shall say O Lord, who may (in strength) to thée be lyke? Which sauest the poore from (tyrantes) swords from (irefull) spoylyng hym to kéepe. 11 False witnes soone (at me) dyd ryse, in wyckednes most (hasty) whote: Of me they spurde (of thynges) full nyse, that I knew not (at all) God wot. 12 They dyd (vnkynd) reward me euill, for good to them I (frendly) wrought: To greue my soule (it was) theyr wyll, to bryng my lyfe (and dayes) to nought. 13 But yet (I say) when they were sicke, in sacke cloth then I (wept and) mournd, My soule (wyth fast) I humbled meke, my prayer to me (eftsoones) retournd. 14 I wept (and waylde) as dearest frende, as (any) brother that they had: As childe for mother (doth by) kynde, in blacke (aray) I was all clad. 15 But they (agayne) in my great euill, they floct (on heapes) and dyd reioyce: Most abiectes (cam and) mockt me still, (and I) not ware in spitefull noyce.
16 Wyth such lewd slaues (so vyle) to sée, to them were scorners (ioyntly) knit: Theyr téeth they gnast (and grynd) on mée as (peysant) mockers was be fit. 17 When wylt thou set (O Lord) thy sight, on thys my payne I (dayly) beare? (O Lord) ryd me from all theyr spite, from Lyons whelpes (defend) my deare. 18 My thankes (therfore) I will extend, when folke (in place) be met so most: In companies (as due) to sende, all prayse (to thée) in euery cost. 19 Let not my foes (in ire) at me, reioyce in quarell (falsly) styll: For (gyltles) they hate me to frée, wyth (wynkyng) eyes they mocke theyr fill. 20 For why no peace (in truth) they speake, but all (do rage) agaynst the meke: Good men on earth (they wyshe) to wreke, for thys in craft (and guile) they séeke. 21 Theyr face (and mouth) they haue disfort, at me (they cry) wyth fie and fie: Our eye hath séene (they say) a sport, that we (wyth ryght) may hym defie. 22 O Lord (my God) this hast thou séene, be not at this to (dumme and) still: In thée (thou knowst) my trust hath béene, depart not far (from me) in will.
23 Ryse vp and wake (in hast) I say, to iudge my cause in (open) syght: My Lord and God (thou canst) them fray aduenge (thou soone) my quarell ryght. 24 Oh iudge (my cause) as thou art wont, in (equall) iustice Lord of thyne: O (Lord my) God least in this bront, my foes reioyce (to much) in fyne. 25 Refrayne (in tonge) them thus to say, there there, we sée (for vs) inough: Let them not say (O Lord) I pray, we haue hym (surely) swalowd now. 26 Let them féele shame (and blame) at full, which ioye (and laugh) at my distresse: At me who brag (and boast) that wull, let shame and spyte them (fully) presse. 27 Let them (euen so) in ioy be glad, that wyshe (to sée) my ryght redrest: To God (for aye) let thankes be had, who wylth (so kynd) hys seruants rest. 28 My tonge (then thus) shall lowd rebound, thy prayse (O Lord) and iustice eke: All day I will in (perfect) sound, thy laude tell (iust euen) wéeke by wéeke.
¶ The Collecte. EVerlyuing God, the health, the stay and refuge of our soules, we beseche thee to couer and arme vs wyth the helmet of hope, and wyth the buckler of in∣uincible faythe, so that we may feele thy helpe in all causes of our necessities, at lengthe to be replenished wyth ioy and gladnes to magnifie thy goodnes in the churche and congregation of ryghteous christen mē, and that all our lyfe long, thorough Iesus Christ our Lorde, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXVI. Here wycked mens delite, Is paynted, what it is: But blyndenes deepe in (open) sight, Dixit iniu∣stus.In vertue whole remisse. 1 IN mydst of euill mans hart, Hys sinne hath blynd hym so: Gods feare (all whole) is set a part, From both hys eyes ago. 2 For he himselfe doth glose, In hys bewitched eyes: Tyll God his sinne (so foule) disclose Most worthy hate to ryse. 3 Hys wordes of mouth be nought, And kepes much guile in store: To cease he biddeth hys (hart and) thought, To worke by vertues lore.
4 Shrewd turnes in irefull mood, He most in bed doth muse: He hold on wayes not (truely) good, No euill déede he refuseth. 5 Thy mercy Lord in heauen, Yet ouer all doth spread: Thy faythfull truth is (daily) séene, The cloudes to reache in bread. 6 Thy iustice Lord we sée, As mountaynes ferme to rest: Thy iudgements (hye O) secret bée, Thou shalt saue man and beast. 7 How worthy Lord most iust, Excelth thy grace benigne? As Adams flocke shall (firmely) trust, In fence of thy good wynge. 8 Of thy fat houshold store, As drunken shall they bée: And drinke (at néede) them shalt thou poure, Of pleasures welles most frée. 9 For thou hast well of lyfe, With thée all health aboundth: And Lord in thy bryght lyght so ryfe, Of vs shall lyght be found. 10 O draw thy mercy neare, To them which loue thée then: And let thy grace (O Lord appeare, To rightfull harted men.
11 And let no foote of pryde, Approche me hawtely: Nor wicked hand (in hate) beside, To moue me wretchedly. 12 These workers vayne of euill, In theyr owne turne be cast: Repulse they haue in (croked) will. From footyng be they past. ¶The Collecte. PVrifie our hartes with thy heauenly light O mer∣cifull God, which art originall fountayne of euer∣lasting lyght, that we maye bee fullye replenished wyth the plenteous grace of thy sweete house, so to eschue all wyckednes and crafte, to treade vnder our foote the vauntyng furies wherewith the men of this worlde bee caried by Sathan the Prince of the same, graunt this for thy beloued sonnes sake Christe oure Lorde, to whome wyth thee and the holy ghost, be all honour worlde wythout ende. The Argument. Psalme. XXXVI. Here haue ye paynted beforne your eyes tweyne The restles witte of the fell wycked wyght, How he careth and carkth for his lytheir gayne, This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre.How he flotth aloft in hye power and myght, And setth God and his hallowes all in despyte; Whose cursed steps the iust makth his orison, In lyfe not to tread to hys confusion.
Dixit iniu∣stus.MUsing vpon the variable busines, That thys troubly world haunth by sea & lande My hart geueth me that sinne and wyckednes, Suggestth to the wycked that he may stand▪ Wythout any feare safely of Gods hand, For no feare of hym is in all hys sight, Of Gods law he is bereaued the shyning lyght. 2 Me fel to mynd that he wonted thus to go, To flatter aye hymselfe in his own sight, For sinne the venom did enchaunt hym so, That in it he hase his whole delyte, And thynkth in hart that all is aright, But God will spye out his sinne abominable, Though to the world it hath visour commendable. 3 Busily in mynd I gan to reuolue, His words vnrighteous and craftely layd, All truth and Iustice of God to dissolue But mere deceit in hipocrisye wayghed And would not be controld of that he sayd, To learne of any man he did disdayne, How the very right way he mought attayne. 4 I noted eke so by night what he thought, When Gods men vsen: to recount their trespas▪ But his head in his bed all mischiefe sought Imagening all goodnes to deface, To banyshe all truth and that to disgrace, In no godly way set was his busy brayne, For all wicked wayes he toke for hys gayne.
5 The wicked thus heaping his sinne on hy Where by desert he might be forsake: How meruelous O Lord is than thy mercy, That from this world thy care thou dost not take, Hye vp to heauen and clouds his course doth it make, All men to féede both good and eke the bad, Such faythfulnes euer thy promyse haue had. 6 Thy prouidence O God most meruelous, To all men mortall is inscrutable, More stable and hye then mountaynes hideous More déepe then sea botomles, vnsearcheable Be thy secret iudgements insuperable, For not man only of thy power doth tast, But brute beasts of thée also hath their repast. 7 Man might muse much O God this to expēd But what earthly man could this matter tell, How thou by thy hand doost all things defend, In what bounty thy mercy doth excell, How profound eke thou art in thy counsell, Well Adams childern may well in thée trust, Under thy good wings to be shadowed iust. 8 Who wil thy blessed word trust in faith sure, They shalbe filled with all plenteousnes, For thy store house is full of all pleasure For thou geuest them to tast of thy sprits goodnes, Whose swete welles they shall drynke by thy larges, From whose bellyes shall lyuely water spring, Others to refreshe to thy gloryfyeng.
9 For with the only be these welles of lyfe, Of frayle men spring but podels of myre, From whom sourdeth errour & croked strife, In the only is that we can require, Both lyght truth and lyfe to fill our desire, For in thy lyght truely, lyght must we sée, Or els in all darkenes wrapt shall we dée. 10 Thy gentle goodnes O Lord impart, To such as faythfully thy word do kepe, Who know thée both wyse & merciful in hart, That from day to day they may thy face seke, For they to thée beare aright their hartes meke Thy righteousnes they know & thy iudgements Thy holy worde & eke thy commaundementes. 11 Since than the meke of hart be so at ease, And proude be out of fauour all exilde: Kepe me O Lord from pride their foule disease For they haue both thée and thy worde reuylde Let not my foote be in theyr steps begylde, Kepe away from my soule their violence, That they lay no hand vpon my pacience. 12 Thus depe musing with my selfe in a trance Callyng to mynde the endes of good and bad: Though they tweine here lead a life in distance How the bad for hys myrth shall once be sad, And the good for theyr woe shall once be glad, How the nought shal be cast on the worse hand then déemd I in fine, that truth shal sure stand.
This psalm of an other kynde of Metre Dixit iniu∣stus.¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXVI. Here playne do ye see: how the earthly man, All sinne do commit in his hart that he can, No loue can him moue: of the Lord for to see, No feare can him stay: from hys errour to flee. 1 THe wycked in hart: as I gesse is he bent, All sinfull abuse: in hys lyfe to frequent: Of God hath he not: any feare in hys eyes, So wilfull he goes: in hys awkly deuyse. 2 For blyndly he vseth: for to flatter himselfe, So pride hath hym puft: by his waltering wealth: Untyll that his sinne: so behated of God, Found out by his search: be dewrayed by his rod. 3 The wordes of hys mouth: be vnrightfully wayed, In sleyghty deceyt: be they craftely layed: Quyte ceased he hath: to behaue hym aryght, Good déed for to do: hath he driuen from hys syght. 4 All mischiefe he dreames: to deuise in his bed, From godly desertes: hath he turned hys hed: No way that is good: hath he leaued vnto, No euill can he hats: but in it doth he go. 5 Thy mercy O Lord: to the heauen doth ascend, Styll hym to abide: so to make hym amend: Thy faythfulnes eke: to the cloudes doth amount, Though graceles he be: not hys lyfe to recount. 6 Thy righteousnes standeth: like the mountayns on hye Most stable it is: how so vaynly he lye: Thy Iustice in domes: to the déepes be they lyke, Frayle man with the beast: with thy helth for to séeke▪
7 How wondrous O God: is thy pityfull hart, Thus man to relieue: in hys lyfe ouerthwart: More suerly trust: may the chyldren of men, Thy wynges shall them kéepe: as her birdes doth y• hen 8 Full fed shall they be: by thy plenteous store, Thy grace is so large: to thy prayse euermore: Swéete drinke shall they haue: by thy deinty repast, As floudes do▪ we sée: fro the sprynges to be cast. 9 For truly with thée: is the fountayne of lyfe, All vertue in whom: may we spye to be rife: No doubt in thy light: shall we light euer sée, And blynd shall we be: if we vary fro thée. 10 Continue to them: O thy fatherly grace, Who knowe thy renome: who thy bounty embrace: To them (do we craue): so thy iustice impart, Who serue thée aright: in a purified hart. 11 One bone for my selfe: do I hartely pray, No foote of the proud: that against me he laye: And let not the hand: of the wickedly wight, Confound me by sleight▪ so to vanguyshe my might. 12 Euen there are they fallen: in their crafty deuise, These workers of euyll: be they neuer so nyse, And cast be they downe: by thy powerfull hand, Not able to ryse: neuer able to stand.
The Argument. Psalme. XXXVII. Here taught we be our selfe (in hart) to hang of God, That we deny our selfe (in hart) to hang of God, How good shall well at last (in state) haue their abode And euill shall euill at last (in state) haue their abode Noli emu∣lari. 1 ENsue thou not: men obstinate, Ne fret (in hart) ne stryue wyth them: Enuy thou nat: theyr wycked state, A tyme (but short) to row the streme. 2 For soone as hay: they shall away, as (witherd) grasse cut downe I say: So swiftly fade: as herbe the blade, how gréene (and fresh) so euer it lay. 3 Trust thou the Lord: hold fast hys worde, be doyng still good (righteous) déede: Dwell thou in land: hold still thy hand, in truth (and rest) thy fayth to féede. 4 Thus thy delyte: shall God be ryght, to hym than set thyne (eare and) hart: What mynde can craue: or wyshe to haue, God wyll it iust (ryght soone) impart. 5 Commit thy way: thy state and stay, to Gods (most strong) all louyng grace: Trust hym in fayth: for what he sayth, he bringth it well to (redy) passe.
6 He will expresse: thy ryghteousnes, at length (of tyme) as sunne so bryght: And will endue: thy iudgement true, wyth lyght as noone (doth shyne) in sight. 7 Be still in God: abyde hys rod, let hym (alway) do what he wyll: Fret not I réede: though wycked spéede, who sueth (so fast) all counsayles euill. 8 Recede from ire: no tyme conspire, wyth them (to go) thy heate refrayne: Els shall thy will: be moued still, to counterfet theyr (wycked) brayne. 9 Maligners all: shall haue a fall, They shall be (all déepe) rooted out: Where who abyde: the Lord theyr guide, shall vse (at wyll) the lande no dout. 10 Wythin a whyle: all wycked wyle, shall passe (away) and melt to nought: Hys place wheras: late gréene he was, shall not be found though (Nylo) sought. 11 But yet the méeke: shall as they lyke, enherite sure: the (stable) earth: God wyll theyr stresse: In heauen refreshe, wyth store (and choyce) of peaceful myrth. 12 Th'ungodly séeke: agaynst the méeke, his counsayles mad to (weaue and) warpe: He gnasht hys téeth: yf nought he séeth, in lyfe of them (in shame) to carpe.
13 The Lord shall let: hys wrath and threat, and laugh at hym (full dry) in scorne: For he doth sée: hys day to bée, at hand to wayle (full sore) forlorne. 14 Theyr sword drawne out: bow bent so stout, the wycked (sort all) redy hath: To bryng the poore: to death hys dore, to kill the iust in (hatefull) wrath. 15 Theyr sword so fierce: theyr hartes shal pierce themselfe agayne (so iust) to quyte: Theyr bow so bent: shall be but rent, and voyde shall be theyr (irefull) myght. 16 A little store: got iust before, to ryghteous man is (alway) more: Than is the food: and all the good, of (suttle) man that crafth therfore. 17 The armes and sleyghtes: wyth all the baytes of wycked man shall (shortly) quayle: Yet wyll the Lord: the iust aforde, theyr holde (and trust) shall neuer fayle. 18 God knowth the dayes: and loueth the wayes of godly men (theyr lyues) to ayde: From tycle chaunce: theyr heritaunce, shall last (in tyme) for euer stayde. 19 In perilous dayes: of dreadfull frayes, they shall not stand (in feare) amasde: In tyme of dearth: of barren earth, theyr (store and) plenty shall be blasde.
20 But wycked men: shall peryshe then, gods foes though (they be) hye aloft, Yet lyke the sunne: shall they consume, as (meltyng) fat of lambes so soft. 21 The wycked man: he borow can, but wyll not pay (hys det) agayne: The ryghteous man: to lend he can, and féelth therin no (bitter) payne. 22 Gods blessed men: déepe rooted then, shall raygne (at will) and haue their fyll: Gods cursed men: vp rooted then, shall sterue (for lacke) and want theyr wyll. 23 The Lord is guyde: at good mans syde, hys kynde of lyfe (he so) alowth: Hys steps and gate: hys lyfe hys state, God guideth (full sure) and it auowth. 24 If chaunce he slippe: by humayne tryp, yet (fully) flat he falth not down: Gods hand hym stayth: and vnder layth, to kéepe hym (iust both) safe and sound. 25 I yong haue bene: now olde am sene, the iust (as yet) I neuer knew: Once destitute: or yet hys fruite, to seke theyr bread (in nede) vndue. 26 The iust man wull: be mercifull, still lendth (hys good) he hourdth not than: And yet hys séede: in grace shall spéede, both blest (and praysd) of God and man.
27 Flée thou all euill: wyth hart and wyll, do good that God (of thée) requyrth: Than trust thou sure: long tyme t'endure, to haue (all thyng) what hart desierth. 28 For God loueth ryght: and wyll not quyte, geue vp hys sayntes (for aye) to wayle: Hys deare elect: be euer kept, where wycked séede shall (fowly) quayle. 29 The ryghteous man: most stable than, the earth (at rest) inherite shall: Therin to dwell: most safely well, for euer (sure and) not to fall. 30 The ryghteous mouth: is traynd in south, in wisdom (godly) all inured: Hys tonge wyll talke: all wysdomes walke, in sentence ryght (alway) assured. 31 For why Gods law: is all hys awe, and shet in hart: (it is full fast: Hys lyfe and gate: as stable state, shall neuer slyde (once made) agast. 32 The wycked prye: they toote to spye, the walke (and trade) of ryghteous man: They search and séeke: some cause to pyke, to kill hym (quyte and) if they can. 33 But God hys strength: wyll not at length, leaue them in theyr foule (suttle) handes: To be condemnd▪ by foes so fremde, at sentence (nye so) when he standes.
34 Trust thou the Lord: kéepe fast hys worde, for he wyll thée on hye promoote: To holde the land: where wycked band, at eye (ryght downe) shall fall in foote. 35 For I euen I: haue spyed wyth eye, the wycked (wyght O) far a loft: So strong to sée: as Ceder trée, so grene (and freshe) as bay full oft. 36 Tho went I by: hys seate to spy, but lo (full soone) it was agone: I sought hys place: to sée hys grace, fye (stable) place then had he none. 37 Thys is the summe: soone good become, in cliffe (alway) be innocent: Hold truth full fast: for truth at last, bringth (ioyfull) peace with gods assent. 38 But wretched men: who wicked ren. by heapes shall fall in (shamefull) feare: Their fortune falth: their pleasure palth, their ende (of dayes) is woofull chere. 39 Where helth and welth: from God himselfe, to righteous men so (fastly) growth: He is theyr shield: theyr strength in field, when trouble (chance or) ouerflowth. 40 God them shall fence: and ryd them thence, where (proudly) rule all wycked men: He wyll them saue: for why they haue, theyr trust (and hope) in hym agayne.
The Collecte. O Father which art the assured stay and blisse of all righteous men, for thou neuer forsakest them in hunger, ne yet permitst them to be ouercome in the battayle of tribulation, we beseche thee to defend vs wyth that ryght hande of thyne, which thou vsest re∣dily to reache to them which be in daunger, from pe∣rishyng therein, graunt thys for thy sonnes sake, to whome, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XXXVIII. Meeke Dauid prayde: and ceased nat, In wo dismayde: nye dead in that, Yet so arayde: he faltred nat, In God he stayde: he altered nat, Domine ne in fu∣rore.No further strayde: he varied nat, But thus he sayde: he taried nat. 1 O Lord to sore: correct me not, In angers store: oh checkt me not, For sinne the sore: abiect me not, O Lord abiect me not. 2 Thy irefull dartes: be asperous, They pricke my hart: most dolorous, Thy hand so smart: is burdenous. Reiect me not. 3 There is no helth: in all my flesh, Thy wrath my wealth: doth so represse, My bones themselfe: for sinne want peace. Abuse me not.
4 My sinnes my héede: haue ouerflown, As heauy lead: they be so grown, Theyr fearefull dread: haue down me thrown Refuse me not. 5 My woundes do ren: and sore they stinke, Alasse the dynne: them when I thinke, My folish sinne: I do forethinke. Despise me not. 6 In far great wo: lowe am I brought, My trespace so: my payn hath wrought, Al day I go in mournyng thought. Repryse me not. 7 My loynes are fyld: with sore disease, My fleshe is spyld: and haue none ease: Al parts be styld none haue release. Suppresse me not 8 Full weake I lye: deiect in stresse, I roard on hye: In carefulnes, My hart ye spye: remedylesse. Oppresse me not. 9 O Lord thou spiest: what would I fayne, And thou aduisest: my gronyng payne, Yet me denyest: to helpe agayne. Represse me not 10 My hart doth pant: ah wofull wight, My strength is scant: and all my might, Myne eyes do want: their sence and light. Bewound me not.
11 My louyng frendes: from me they flée, Wyth careles myndes: my griefes they sée, My kinne them wyndes: full far fro me. Confound me not. 12 My foes which sought: my lyfe to spill, Close snares they wrought: to catch me euil, They talkt of nought: to trap me still, Beshame me not. 13 I yet kept me: as deafe I were, As dumme to sée: in tong and eare, Theyr scornes at eye: I dyd them beare. Defame me not. 14 As one I say: wythout an eare, My mouth all day: I dyd not stere: No checkes I lay: to all thys geare. Deface me not. 15 For Lord in thée: I had my trust, My God most frée: thou art so iust, And thou for mée: still aunswer must. Disgrace me not. 16 As thée my guide: I prayd in voyce, That they to wyde: should not reioyce, To sée me slide: to fall in choyce. Abase me not. 17 For sinnefull det: such plages to beare, In dolour great: it made me feare, My hart is fret: to féele them neare. Detrude me not.
18 I wyll confesse: my wyckednes, My sinnes excesse: in heauines, O Lord my stresse: the more redresse. Exclude me not. 19 My foes be strong: they lyue at ease, They hate me wrong: they do not cease, By heapes in throng: on me they prease. Detect me not. 20 Who dyd requyte: my good wyth euill, They dyd me spyte: they would me spill, For that the ryght I did fulfill. Deiect me not. 21 Thou séest my state: forsake me not, To theyr great hate: betake me not, Lord God to late: awake thou not. Forsake me not. 22 My Lord of wealth: oh tary not, From thée thy selfe: oh vary not, That I in health: miscary not, My Lord my God: O tary not. Oh tary not. ¶The Collecte. SEnd out Lord thy sauing health vpon our infirmi∣ties, euē thou that art moste louing Phisition to all our woundes and sores, and graunt that we may be∣wayle to thee all our sorrow and heauines in true re∣pentaunt hartes, and that we may bee able to subdue all the assaultes of sinne. Through Christ.
¶The Argument. Psalme. XXXIX. Whan Dauid sawe the world so bad: Gods men for ruth to scorne, To God in hart complaynt he had▪ his onge in silee borne. 1 I Full decreed my wayes to wayte: least I in tong myght erre, To stop my mouth with mosell strayt: nye me while sinners were. 2 By silence long, euen dom I was: from truth I helde my peace: It fret me sore good thinges to passe: my griefes so dyd not cease. 3 My hart within was set on heate: thus musing fire it tooke: My tong brake out, some thyng to treate: then silence I forsooke. 4 Tell me myne ende O Lord I sayd: what number haue my dayes: That I may know how long dismayd: I here shal lyue in frayes. 5 My dayes lo thou at fyngers hast: a span in brede they bee, My life to thee as nought is cast: lyues man whole vanitie. 6 In shadow darke mans walke is set: in broyle he yleth in vayne: He heapth and heapth and knowth not yet: who reape shall all hys payne 7 Now thē O Lord what loke I for? while men thus earth do wrote My hope no dout thou art in store: thou art my health and bote. 8 To scape thy rod deliuer me: from myne offences quite: And make me not a scorne to be: to men of folishe spite. 9 Lord dom I layd in patience: not once my mouth to ope: For this thou dydst by prouidence: to proue my fayth and hope. 10 Remoue thy scourge from me to flye: by sinne I know deserued, Thy hand so smart hath spent me nye: be I yet (Lord) preserued. 11 For when for sinne thou scourgest man: by plages down sent fro the As cloth by mothe, hys soule doth wan: all men then britle be. 12 Heare Lord my sute, and harke my cry: not deafely heare my teares For Pilgrim strange with thee I lye: as were my fathers yeares. 13 O spare me then, that I my strength: recouer may therfore: Before I go from hence at length: and after seene no more.
¶The Collecte. KEepe thou our way O heauenly father, that we of∣fende not in our tonge, so that we may be kindled wyth the ghostly flames of vertuous meditations, & that we heape vp such treasures in thys mortal lyfe to reape the glory of lyfe immortall in the perfect frui∣tion of thy glorious maiestie, through Christ. The Argument. Psalme. XXXIX. King Dauid prayed as dumme to go, before his cruell fo, To scape from his wo: of sinne to be quyte, And fayth that man is vanitie right This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre.Euen mere vayne vanitie light Vayne vanitie light. 1 I Haue decréed: to wayte my wayes, lest tong should faute by strayes: My mouth will I kepe: with bridle to tye, While that I know my foe to be bye. While he in vanitie lygheth, In vanitie lygheth. 2 I held my tong, A nothyng sayd, In silence domme I layde, So lothe to reply: although to my payne, Great griefe I felt▪ good worde to restrayne, In world such vanitie raignth, Such vanitie raignth. 3 But musing thus: I was in heat, My hart did sore me freat: For fire the payne: prouoked me much, At last I spake: wyth murmuryng grutch, I saw the vanitie such, The vanitie such.
4 Lord let me know: myne ende of dayes, the number how it layes: So truely to touche, the certeintie yet, How long shall nature respite her det, To wayle my vanitie great, My vanitie great. 5 As span thou metst: the dayes of myne, And nought they be to thyne: In breuitie set, all wrapped in feare, Good hap so far: great magre so neare, Man is but vanitie here, But vanitie here. 6 In shadow darke: man toylth wyth payne, and vexth himselfe in vayne: So gather he deare: goods carefully kept, He knowth not yet, by whome to be rept, So déepe in vanitie stept, In vanitie stept. 7 And now O Lord what is my hope, where men thus blyndly grope: Thou truly my scope: art onely to sée, For man we know but shadow to bée, Whole set in vanitie he, In vanitie he. 8 O ryd me Lord that am so thrall, from myne offences all: That neuer I fall: as mocke and a scorne, Of wycked men: wyth téeth to be torne, Who be in vanitie borne. In vanitie borne.
9 And done I went in all my payne, In mouth I dyd not playne: I mynded agayne thy doyng among, Thou wylt the iust to suffer a wrong, Of man in vanitie strong, In vanitie strong. 10 This plage for sinne yet take away, O Lord to thée I pray: For wasted I lay: thy hand is so fell, Thy terrours great: my conscience swell. I féele my vanitie well, My vanitie well. 11 When thy rebukes: mans sinne correcth, Hys strength is soone deiect: Hys beauty so checkt: thou bringst it a sléepe, As mothe in clothe: when slily they créepe, Eche man is vanitie déepe, Is vanitie déepe. 12 Expende my cry: bowe downe thyne eare, O Lord my prayer heare: My teares be thou neare: for straunger I am, And ghest wyth thée: my fathers the same, And they by vanitie lame, By vanitie lame. 13 O spare a tyme: and cease my payne, my strength to wynne agayne: Before to refrayne: eare death doth me spy, Consumde by thée: wyth irefull eye, Lest I in vanitie dye, In vanitie dye.
The Argument. Psalme. XL. At Dauid prayed: so Christ may ye se, Himselfe to geue: full ready to bee, To God wyth thankes: most hartely free, And so they spied: theyr foes for to flee. Expectans expectaui.They mist not to see. 1 BY silent watch: I wayted in sprite, The Lord of heauen: and stayd on his myght, At last he howde: to shewe me hys sight, And heard my cry: that I dyd endight. Hys eare was so ryght. 2 He brought me forth: of horrible pit, In lome and clay: depe myerd in it: On stable rocke: he made me to sit, Hewdes man was: and guyded my féete. In iourney so fit. 3 A song full new: he put in my mouth, To sing to God: hys laud for hys sooth: For he kynde thanke: most gently alowth, Of iust men eke: theyr hartes he auowth. So frendly he bowth. 4 Myne acte shal cause: full many to sée, How God is good: most bountie and frée, In feare to hym: in hart to agrée, In hym to trust: all errour to flée. God lauded to bée. 5 Who trustth in God: is blessed in hart, Though wo hym vexth: how euer it smart: From God hys Lord: yet will not astart, To proude men such: as fables impart. Wyth lyes ouerwhart.
6 My God and Lord: thy wonders be hye, None can thy thoughts: by reason espye: Thou bearst to vs: though I dyd apply, I could not tell: the number at eye. Them halfe to descrye. 7 No sacrifice: do worke the delyght, Meate offerings none: do please thée aryght: But eares vnshit: thou shopst vs by might, Whole offeryngs brent: so sinne for to quyte. Thou longst not the sight. 8 Then sayd I strayt: most duely to thys, Lo here I come: not slowly remisse: In volume booke: there written it is, Of me in chiefe: wythout any mis. Thy name for to blisse. 9 Thy wyll to do: all whole am I bent, My God most hye: wyth gentle assent: To thy swete law: my hart doth relent, Wherby I trust: no tyme to repent. My choyce to lament. 10 Thy iustice great: my selfe shall I strayne, To thy great church: to tell it agayne: No tyme my lippes: from it will I frayne, And that thou knowest: most certainly playne Thy loue to retayne. 11 Thy ryghteousnes: I hid not in hart, Thy truth and health: I glad dyd impart: I kept not close: how louely thou wart, Thy fayth to folke: I spred it in part. So trusty thou art.
12 To me alway: thy mercy reserue, That I may thée: most faythfully serue: Let thy swéete grace: me daly preserue, Thy healthfull truth: that I may deserue. So neuer to swerue. 13 I am beset: wyth troublous woes, My sinnes so fell: do threat me to lose, As heares of head: in number they rose, My hart is faynt: it selfe to repose. So faintly it goes. 14 O Lord assent: to sende me thyne ayde, To ryd my foes that make me afrayde: Make hast to helpe: before I be layde, I dye if helpe: to me be denayde. As wholy decayde. 15 Who séeke in hate: my soule for to kill, Let shame them take: so cursed in will: Confound them all: which séeke me to spill, Let them fall backe: that wishe me so euill. That I may be still. 16 Wo worth them all: which me do defye, And shame for mede, that they myght aspye: Agaynst me who: so daily replye, And in my payne: say fye to the fye. Where health myght they cry. 17 Let these in thée: be ioyfully glad, Which séeke thy name: which be not adrad, To loue thy health: no tyme be they sad, That (God be praysde) by them may be sayd. For mercy so had.
18 Though poore I go: and néedy I bée, The Lord so good: yet careth for mée: Thou art myne ayde: my suertie frée, To tract thy tyme: Lord neuer agrée. From me for to flée. ¶The Collecte. O Lord almighty, which art the inuincible defender of all thy true seruauntes, and so by prophecies were so promised as is recorded in the head and prin¦cipall booke of the law. We beseche thee to graue in our hartes thy holy lawes, wherby we may be able to denounce thy onely righteousnes, through, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XLI. Ye see how Christ makth here hys mone, Agaynst the Iewes to speake: Beatus qui intelligit.So may the iust when he do grone, Gods cause not hys bewreake. 1 THat man is blest: that counth in hart, the poore (afflict) and nedies payne: For he in day: of bitter smart, hym God (hys Lord) wyll ease agayne. 2 God wyll hym kepe: and saue hys lyfe, and blesse (wyth wealth) in earth hys state: And ryd hys soule: from harme and stryfe, of all hys foes: in (deadly) hate. 3 The Lord will ease: whan he on bed, al wrapt (in payne) lyth sicke full oft: And comfort send his paynfull hed, thou tournst (O Lord) his couch full soft.
4 In payne I tournd: and sayd to thée, Haue mercy Lord (right sone) on me: Heale thou my soule: and make it frée, For I (full oft) haue sinned to thée. 5 Mine enmyes thus: sayd wrathfully, their (angry) harts: so sweld in spite: Why doth he lyue: when shall he dye? his name (and fame) to perishe quyte. 6 And if they came: to visite me, they glosde (in craft) as they were vayne: Theyr hartes to guile: do full agrée, and out (from thence) spake lyes agayne. 7 My foes in one: close rounded they, agaynst me whole: they (ioyntly) met: Euen me wyth lyes: they did I say, vnworthely (wyth guile) beset. 8 They sayd he wrought: some euyll deuise, that God him thus (so sore) doth strike: To life no more: God let him rise, that now (in bed) he lyeth so sicke. 9 Yea euen my frendes: familiar, at me (in scorne) they lyft theyr héeles: Euen they that farde: as I dyd fare, yet me (to trap) they markt at meales. 10 To mercy yet: Lord condescende, to me so poore: (in hart) I call: Rayse me agayne: that I may mende, I shall (therfore) rewarde them all.
11 By this I know: thy loue to me, for that (O Lord) myne enmies all: From triumphes yet: full far to be, to sée (at eye) my house to fall. 12 For thou respectes: myne innocence, wherin thou didst: me (strongly) kepe: So shall thy grace: well strength me hence, (I trust) euen nye: thy face so meke. 13 O blessed be: of Israell, thys (mighty) God: and Lorde agayne: So be it aye: of men so well, wyth twise (at ende) Amen, Amen. The Collecte. MOst gentle remitter of sinne almighty God, who louingly shewest the way to escape all daungers to such as be mercifull to theyr brethren in their neecssities, we beseche thee to ease our di∣seases, that where thou doost chastise our carnall offences, yet wyth mercy graunt vs health of soule, through Christ. ¶The ende of the first booke.
Here beginneth the second booke of Psalme▪ The Argument. Psalme. XLII. As Christ (the Lord) for hym and hys, In trust did pray: in (paynfull) stresse: So man euen like: as did his head, Quemad∣modum ceruus.May iust the same: (in worde) expresse. 1 EUen lyke (in chase) the hunted Hynde, the water brookes: (doth glad) desire: Euen thus my soule: that faintie is, to thée (my God) would fayne aspire. 2 My (wery) soule: dyd thyrst to God, To God (the fount) of lyfe and grace: It sayd euen thus: when shall I come, To sée (at eye) Gods liuely face. 3 My teares in stede: of (foode and) meate, Both day and nyght (to me) they were: Whyle that all day: rebukers sayd, Where is thy God: (fro thée) so far. 4 When this (O Lord) came soone to hart, I yet (therin) recomfort felt: And trust to lead: the people forth, to go (full glad) where thou hast dwelt. 5 To ioy in (hart: and) voyce of myrth, Wyth laudes & thankes (most due) alway: Among thy folke: when that they kepe, So hye (in sight) theyr holy day.
5 Why castes thy selfe: than (flatly) downe, My (fainty) soule: I sayd no lesse: Why layest in me: so painfully, In (greuous) wo: and carefulnes? Put thou thy trust: (and hope) in God, Let (earthly) thyng: not thée amase: I wyll hym thanke: for all his helpe, In sight (most sure) of hys good grace. 6 My God my soule: is (dayly) vext, Wyth inward paynes (& pangs) so thrill: I mynde thy workes▪ in Iordan yet, so done (by thée) next Hermon hill. 7 As déepe (profound) to déepe reboundth, at (dreadfull) noyce: of thy great showers Thy streames by course: so ouerflowes, My soule (alasse) the payne deuoures. 8 But God yet will: (commaund) the day, To shyne (most clere) me grace to sée: My night of wo: shall prayse hym than, Who kept yet lyfe: (to byde) in mée. 9 Thou art my strength: (alone) O God I myght therby) than playne in wo: Why hast me thus: forgot so quyte, So sad to go: for (mortall) fo. 10 It pierceth my bones (as sharpe) as sword To heare my foes: in (cruell) spyte: They daily thus: at me vpbreyde, Where is (become) thy God of myght?
11 Why art thou then: (I say) my soule? So vext (wyth griefe) and prostrate so? Why makest in me: so much a do, Where God is frende: in (all thy) wo. 12 O put thy hope (I byd) in God, I trust (therto) in tyme and place: He is my God: whom I wyll thanke, My face shall sée: hys (helpyng) grace. ¶The Collecte. O Lord which art the onelye chearer of mans con∣science and countenance wyth the aspect of thy face which the soules of thy faythfull seruauntes do long to beholde. We beseche thee, that whyle we seke thy fauour by the manifold teares of our compuncte myndes, we may be watred wyth the heauenly show∣ers of thy grace, to place thee within the tabernacle of our hartes. Through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XLIII. For Saule hys wrong among Philistians Prayd Dauid strong among Philistians The poore euen so may thus theyr cry auance. Iudica me Domine.To God in wo. may thus theyr cry auance. 1 O God eterne: as iudge discerne my cause, from folkes vncleane: And ryd me so: from man that go, in vyce, and guyle doth meane.
2 My God of myght: thou art of ryght, Why hast vs dryuen from thée? Whyle thus go I: so mournfully, at mens hostilitie. 3 Send out thy lyght: and truth to sight, to leade and guyde my way: To sée thy place: thy hyll of grace, where thou doost rest all day. 4 That I may go: Gods aulters to, to thée my God euen tyll: To thée my ioye: my God and roye, wyth harpe thée thanke I wyll. 5 My soule so dull: why art so full, of griefe and heauines? Why standst agast: as helpe were past? such thoughtes why doost impresse? Put all thy trust: in God most iust, I wyll hym thankes extende: He shewth me grace: euen nye at face, as God all health he sendth. ¶The Collecte. WE call vpon thee wyth most harty supplication O God which art the eternall fountayne of all light shyne on vs the glorious lyght of thy truth, whyle we here trauayle in thys world, to be illimited wyth the beames of euerlasting lyght of glory in the worlde to come, through, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. XLIII. Poore Dauid prest by tyranny, Of wilfull Saule: who could not blin, This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre. Iudica me Deus.For his blacke garde: to search hym nye, Prayth thus to God his helpe to winne, And wysheth that he his cause would try. He thus beginneth. 1 AH iudge me God: O iudge most true, Discern my cause: by power opprest Unfaintly men: do me pursue By lawes vniust: my right deprest, Which yet thy word: allowth full due, O geue me rest. 1. Reg. 24.Rule me to scape: that wycked man, That sinfull Saule: of shameles face, 2. Thes. 2.Who boasteth himselfe: all that he can, And doth vsurpe: thy godly place, Whose power by sleite: and sinne began. O iudge my case. 2 Know this I do: my God thou art To thée my strength: I whole appeale, Why putst me backe? why standst apart? My state to thée: I iust reueale, Why turnst from mée: thy louyng hart? O mercy deale. Eternall God: why go I thus, Ashamd in face: and vily checkt: My cause but made: opprobrious, Why doth my fo: thus me reiect? To beare me downe: so rigorous? O me respect.
3 Returne thy light: my hart to cheare, Perfourme thy fayth: that thou hast hight: Thy lyght and truth: let it appeare, To teache the blynde: thy worde so bryght, That it may rule: as law most deare, O kepe thy ryght. Make hast O Lord: and bring me nye, Thy holy hill: to sing thy prayse: Thy truth and lyght: of sanctuarie, Will be my guide: in all these frayes, Expell thys crosse, thys misery. O cheare my dayes. 4 That I may go: gods aulters to To offer thankes: in sacrifice: In hart deuout: as due is so, Yea nye in sight: to God to rise My God of ioy: ease thou my wo, O glad myne eyes. That thou alone: hast geuen reliefe, I thée wyll laude: wyth harpe and lute: My God intiere: my helpe in chiefe, Thou shalt my foes: for me confute, So me to ayde: to ease my griefe, O heare my sute. 5 Why then my soule: art thou so sad? Why fretst within: why troublest me? So foule dismayd: in thoughts bestad, Knowst not that God: thy God is he? Call thys to mynde: to make thée glad, O make me frée.
Euen trust to God: in stablenes, No more but trust: for sure he is, I will hym yet: wyth laudes confesse, For he wyll cheare: my face iwis, My God my helth: he is no lesse. O graunt all this. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God the fountayne of lyght euerlasting we sue vnto thee and most earnestly craue of thy bounteousnes, that thou wouldest sende downe thy truth and veritie into our hartes, & replenish vs wyth the clearenes of thy eternall lyght, thorough Iesus, The Argument. Psalme. XLIIII. This Psalme wyth God expostulath, That helpe he long delayes: It prayth for men all desolate, Deus au∣ribus.In olde respect of dayes. 1 O God so good: before these dayes, we hard with open eares: The fathers sage: tolde vs thy wayes, thy workes of olde ferne yeares. 2 How thou expulst: the heathen rout, to plant thy people dere: What people stout: thou dydst wede out, to roote the fathers there. 3 Not they by sword: did winne the land, their owne arme saued them not. But thy bright face: thyne arme and hand, such loue at thée they got.
4 Thou art my kyng: O God my weale, none other sue I to: As once thou holpst good Israell, helpe Iacobs stocke euen so. 5 By thée our foes: down shall we throwe, our hornes shall burte them downe: In thy greate name: full well we know, to make our foes astowne. 6 For trust is none: in strength of bowe, that we can bende and draw: My sworde to weake: my strength to lwe, to helpe not worth a strawe. 7 But onely thou: euen onely thou, sauest vs from all our foes: Thou filst them all: wyth shame inough, at vs that hatefull goes. 8 Of God aboue: we make our boast, all day in thankefull part: To prayse hys name: in euery coast, Selafor euer iust in hart. 9 But what meanth this thou art so far, wherby our shame thou séest: Where thou wert wont to be so ar, our armies now thou fléest. 10 Thou makest vs fast to turne our backes, vpon our enemy: And who vs hate wyth spitefull crackes, they spoyle our goodes at eye,
11 Thou letst vs all: as sparpled shéepe, to be deuoured quyte: As scattred flocke: we mourne and wéepe, among the Paynyms spyte. 12 To heathen dogs vncircumcised, thou selst thy flocke for nought: No gayne to thée: do ryse in déede, though we be solde and bought. 13 Thou makest vs all rebuke to take, of them that neygbours bée: Of vs but scorne: and scoffe they make, about vs whome we sée. 14 Thou makst vs now: as laughyng stockes, a scorne vnto the heathen: They shake their heades: as we were blockes deryded vp to heauen. 15 My shame and eke: confusion, standth full to daunt myne eye: My face all shame: as put vpon, no ende therof I spye. 16 We heare to oft: the flaunderer, how he blasphemth our fayth: We sée our fo: what hate he bearth, how he to vengeaunce layth. 17 Though yet these thinges be come on vs, we do not thée forget: Nor froward lyke: vngratious, thy couenaunt we reiect.
18 Our hart yet standth: not turnd aside, to séeke for other God: Nor yet our steps: begone so wyde, by wayes to walke so brode. 19 No though thou hast: vs smitten sore, where Dragons cruell dwell: Though paynde we be: and tost the more, wyth death the shadowes fell. 20 Among thy plages: if we so euill, should God in name forget: To holde our handes: in straying will, to other Gods beset? 21 Should not our God: inquyre for thys, to searche where we become? Who knowth our harts and doth not misse, the secretes all and some? 22 When thus for thée: all day we bée, as drawne to death and slayne: Appoynted thus: as shéepe we sée, to slaughter driuen a mayne. 23 Then wake O Lord: why sléep so déepe, as though thou louedst not ryght? Aryse, be nye: thy people kéepe, aye leaue vs not to spyte. 24 Why turnst thy face: so irefully, we lowly sinners bée: Why doost forget: our misery, our troubles great to sée.
25 Our soule to dust: is brought downe, euen iust at deathes gate: Our bellies cleaues in paynfull swowne, to ground in fearefull state. 26 Aryse O God: and helpe vs soone, deliuer vs so thrall: For thyne owne sake: we be vndone, for mercy we do call. ¶The Collecte. ARise O God by thy mightye power to helpe vs from all tyranny of persecurion, and where thou didst once for our fathers subdue al Heathen nations so deliuer vs from all our enemies bodely and ghostly through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XLV. A laude ye see: of king and queene, set out-most glorious: But Christ and eke: his spouse is seene, more nye described thus. 1 Eructauit cor meum.MY hart breakth out: swéete prayse to syng, my song to kyng I make: My tonge as swift: to do the thyng, as scribe hys penne can shake. 2 More fayre thou art: more amorous than Adams sonnes I say: Thy spech of lippes: is gracious, for God blest thée for aye.
3 Begyrd thy thigh: Prince valiant, with sword to vanquish stout: To thy owne laude: as mete it stant, thy fame must shew it out. 4 In worship, spéede: and prosper, hye, ryde on to fence the truth: In mekenes clad: and equitye, great acts thy hand ensueth. 5 Thyne arrowes kene: full sharply goes, all folke to thée shall fall: Among the mids: the kings his foes, their harts to vanquishe all. 6 Thy royall throne: O God is fast, which euer shall endure: Thy kingdoms mace: all right is cast, to iudge in truth full sure. 7 Thou louest the right: and hatst the wronge, O God, thy God therfore: With oyle of ioye: anoynts the stronge, beyonde thy match the more. 8 Thy garments smell: of Aloes, of Myrre and cassia: From Iuory hels: out brought they these, to glad thy hart I say. 9 Among thy maydes: so debonayre, kings daughters there were tolde: Thy right hande helde: the Quéene so fayre, in colourd cloth of golde.
10 O daughter heare: and sée full kynde, inclyne thyne eare to mée: Thy people whole: cast out of mynde, thy fathers house to flée. 11 So shall the kyng: thy bewty lyke, hys loue shall ioyne to thée: He is thy God: and Lord to séeke, wyth hart then serue hym frée. 12 So Tyrus land: shal thée enriche, and they that richest standes: Shall bryng thée giftes: thy face to seache, wyth thée to ioyne theyr handes. 13 Thys kynges swéete Quéene: is glorious, all whole wythin to sée: Her garmentes wrought: all curious, wyth gold enbroydred bée. 14 So brought she is: before the kyng, in clothe of néedle wrought: Her Uirgin maydes: her companieng, her frendes shall nye be brought. 15 Wyth ioye and myrth: they shall full nye, be brought to hym I say: In palace there: most innerly, where kyng hymselfe doth lay. 16 Thy fathers romes: such auncientes, thy sonnes shall iust succede: Whom thou mayst make: as Presidentes, all landes in rule to sprede.
17 Thy name to all: in memory, I euer wyll denounce: The people so: shall durably, to thée aye thankes pronounce. The Collecte. O Lorde Christ the euerlastyng worde of thy father by whom he once dyd create, and yet dailye doth create all thinges liuyng, wee beeseche thee to pre∣serue thy churche broughte together of diuers nati∣ons and countries, that we may all in pure hartes so loue thee in the righteousnes of fayth, to attayne to the heuenly habitation with our welbeloued fathers, who lyuest and raignest one God with the father and the holy ghost, worlde, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XLVI. In this Christes spouse elect (full well) Her thankes to God extendth: Deus no∣ster refu∣gium.For that he dyd her foes debell, And that he her defendth. 1 OUr hope is God and strength (at eye) he guidth wyth hys good hand: A present helpe: in trouble nye, hys grace therby doth stand. 2 For this we néede: not care (and feare) though world be cast in stowne: Though hils to sea: were thrown (euen there) though all turne vpside downe. 3 The waters though: they rage (in streme) how euer they do swell: Though mountayns quake: at noyse of them, Selayet iust man hopth full wel▪
4 For why swéete brookes: and floudes (full nye) Gods Citie glad shall stéepe: Hys holy place: and sanctuarye, God strongly it doth kéepe. 5 God dwelth in myds: of her (alone) no man shall her remoue: Ryght early God: shall helpe her sone, hys church I meane aboue. 6 The heathen though: they rage (to fonde) and realmes resist I say: God raysde hys voyce: and so in londe, our foes dyd melt away. 7 The Lord of hostes: so strong (euen he) Wyth vs he standth to fyght: So Iacobs God: our refuge be, Sela.we feare no humayne myght. 8 Lo come and sée: how God (in wrath) great meruayles aye hath wrought: What landes to nought: he scatred hath, how low theyr Idols brought. 9 He put down warrs: and stryfe (in feare) the whole world where they went: He knapth the bow: and breakth the speare, wyth fire he charets brent. 10 Be still and know: I say (all ye) that God I am aryght: To heathen all: knowne will I be, the world shall sée my myght.
11 The Lord of hostes: so strong (from hence) wyth vs he is I say: And Iacobs God: is whole our fence, Sela.our boast in hym doth lay. ¶The Collecte. MOst trustye refuge in all perylles and aduersities which hange ouer vs O blessed Lorde to sancti∣fie the inward tabernacles of our hartes, with the liue¦ly springs of thy blessed sprite, that we may trust sted∣fastly in thee our God in all our battayles to haue the better hand, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XLVII. This Psalme to ioy exhorth: all christen men in sight: Omnes gentes.That Christ by power ascended so: whom glory sued aright. 1 TOgether clap ye handes: ye Gentils all be glad: Reioyce to God in melody: with thanks for mercy had 2 The Lord is hie in power: and ought be feard I say, He is the king of all the earth: to hym all thinges obey. 3 He shall so vnder vs: the people soone subdue: All Gentils cast at feete of vs: at vs their Lordes to sue. 4 He dyd chose out all vs: an heritage so fayre: Euen Iacobs hie magnificence: whō he did loue as heyre. 5 God is ascended vp: in ioyfull noyse on hye: with trumpets noyse: as once his arke, euē thus vp hie did sye. 6 O prayses sing to him: O prayses see ye sing: Sing prayses still vnto our god: and laud him iust as king 7 For that our God is king: of all the world so rounde: Sing ye his prayse than prudently: wt vnderstāding sound
8 For God by strength doth raigne: vpon the heathen all God sitteth vpon his holy seate: all thyng doth heare hys call. 9 The peoples heds be met: with Abrahams god & seede Of god they be to shield the earth: but god doth thē exceede ¶The Collecte. ETernall God which art the kyng of all worldes & realmes, whose kyngdome is aduaunced vpon all people and kynredes, we beseche thee to subdue vn∣der our subiection all heathen vyce and sinne, that whyle we sing to thee our God in wordes of wisdome and vnderstanding, by thy ayde we may haue the bet∣ter hande of them, through Christ our Lorde, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XLVIII. Gods Citie here a type of Christ hys spouse, Is praysed clere a type of Christ hys spouse, Magnus Dominus.It teachth agayne of prayse to pay theyr vowes. All Christen men of prayse to pay theyr vowes. 1 GReat is the Lord: wyth hye accorde, so praysed ought to bée: In citie great: where God is set, hys holy hill to sée. 2 For Syon hyll: is fayer still, of all the world the blisse: This hyll so wyde: holdth North on syde, Gods citie hye it is. 3 Our God euen thus: most glorious, is knowne in palace great: As refuge sure: all men to cure, that place is hys so neat.
4 For lo the kynges: theyr gatherynges, in earth made her to spoyle: Though thus they met: wyth fury whet, yet her they could not foyle. 5 Her walles and holdes, they dyd behold, and merueld all agast: Theyr hartes were danke: theyr brags were blanke, eftsones they downe were cast. 6 Such feares and panges, theyr harts so wrang in tyme of theyr assaute: As women knowes: theyr bearyng throwes, wyth feares lyke were they fraught. 7 So dyd they quayle: as Tharsls sayle, felt wreckt by wyndes of East: For Paynyms all: be worthy fall, Gods heritage to wrest. 8 As we dyd heare: so saw we neare, Gods citye hye and strong: Thys God of oures: the God of powers, Sela.wyll strength her aye from wrong. 9 As we conceyud: so we receyud, O Lord thy mercy great: For we dyd wayte: thy helpe most great, in myds of temple set. 10 As (EL) thy name: is strong in fame, So is thy prayse well sene: The world full out, and so no dout, thy workes full ryghteous bene.
11 Let Syon mount: her ioy recount, let Iudas townes be glad: For thys thy dome: to pull a downe, these Paynyms frantike mad. 12 Walke ye about: the wals so stout, of Syons gostly house: And tell her towers: her fortes and bowers, her prayse that ye may rouse. 13 And marke ye well: how strong she dwelth, in bulwarkes how she lie. That ye may tell: it euery deale, to your posteritie. 14 This God euen hée: our God we sée, for aye and euer strong: He shall vs guyde: tyll death so wyde, of hym shall be our song. ¶The Collecte. O Most terrible God most worthy to bee magnified in al thy workes, which art so glorious a prince in the heauenly Hierusalem: enlarge vs in spirituall vn∣derstandyng, so that after we haue receyued thy mer∣cy in the mydst of the temple of our hartes, we maye duely extoll thy name, through Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. XLIX. The Iewes be here, theyr honour not to see, Reproued full nere, theyr honour not to see, It doth inuite of worlde the pryde to flee. Audite om¦nes.The Christen knight, of worlde the pryde to flee. 1 O Heare ye out: ye gentiles stout, thys thyng that I wyll tell: But ponder it: wyth eares vnshit, thys world all ye that dwell. 2 Ye Adams broode: ye noble blood, heare ye my spell and lore: Both hye and low: all whole in row, the ryche and eke the poore. 3 My mouth shall splay: all wisdomes way. that will man kepe and saue: My hart doth muse: most godly truthes, all vnderstandyng graue. 4 I wyll incline: these eares of myne, to parable full méete: Déepe wordes in harpe: my mouth wil carpe, the sence though shall be swéete. 5 Why should I feare: euill dayes to beare, to set on mucke my hart? That euen my héele: of lyfe so euill, at last myght bryng me smart?
6 For some there bée: whose hartes agrée, in goodes to put theyr trust: And boast themselues: as carkyng elues, of ryches store vniust. 7 No brother can: redeme a man, from death though fayne he would: Or God to go: to offer to, agréement who so should? 8 The pryce to great: herein is set, from death a soule to bye, That must he leaue: to gods owne leaue, for aye in hym to lye. 9 That is to say: that he should aye, byde here in morall state: That he no graue▪ should euer haue, but lyue in pleasant rae. 10 For he may spy: that wyse men dye, and peryshe all the fort: As well the wyse: as mad and nyse, to others leaue theyr port. 11 And can they thynke: that neuer sinke, theyr houses shall and fames: That they here still: shall dwell theyr fill, and landes to beare theyr names? 12 It will not be: that euer he, shall last in glory gay: But forth must go: as beastes they do, in britle state and way.
13 Lo this theyr way: is folishe stray, they blunder blyndly thus: And yet theyr broode: prayse this for good, Sela.as fooles obliuious. 14 They shall lye déepe: in hell lyke shéepe, and death shall gnaw theyr mawe: But clere in lyght: of mornyng bryght, the iust shall be their awe. 15 Theyr beauty gay: shall wast away, in graue with stinche on swéete: Theyr housee clene: shal not be sene, for them so after méete. 16 But as for me: my God euen be, my soule he iust will saue: From hell the power: in blessed hower, Sela.my sprite to hym to haue. 17 But feare thou nat: ne deare thou that, though one be welthy made, Though now hys house, shyne glorious, in honours portly trade. 18 For nought he shall: of riches all, hence cary whan he dyth: Nor yet hys pryde: hys pompe so wyde, in graue wyth hym shall lye. 19 Whyle here he dwelt: hys soule he delt, all ease wyth pleasures wealth: Such men will thée: prayse wyse to bée, if thou so helpst thy selfe.
20 That thou also: wyth them myghtst go, theyr fathers steps to sue: Where they no lyght: shall sée in syght, for theyr excesse vndue. 21 Man lyuyng thus: all gorgious, who vnderstandyng wanth: Is lyke to beast: wyth them to rest, whose fame is short and scant, ¶The Collecte. REplenish our mouthes O Lord with thy heauenly wisdom, that we may remēber the mystery of thy blessed incarnation, wherby thou redemest vs frō the power of hell, graunt that we may be found meete to be presented to thy blessed face, through &c. The Argument. Psalme. L. Here is reproued: the sacrifice, Deus deo∣rum Do∣minus.of Iewes for foolishe trust: And taught here is: wyth sad aduise, that thankes be yet more iust. 1 THe God of Gods: the lord of myght, one God in persons thrée: He bidth and calth: the earth in sight from East to West to sée. 2 Thys God appeard: from Zyon hill, as God of beauty most: From whence he would: should spring his wil and law to euery coast. 3 Our God is come: in tyme of grace, he wyll no silence kéepe: Wyth wastyng fire: before hys face, about hym tempest déepe.
4 The heauen aboue: the earth below, he doth vpon them call: Hys people all: to iudge and know, to helpe them that be thrall. 5 Collect ye now: my sayntes sayth he, in one, before my sight: Who stand in leage: and pact wyth me, by sacrifices ryte. 6 The heauens shall sprede: hys iustice cleare, that all the world may spy: That God himselfe: wyll iudge appeare, Selathe good from bad to try. 7 My people heare: for thus I say, thy selfe to wytnesse iust: O Israell: thy God alway, thy God I am to trust. 8 For sacrifice: or burnt incence, I wyll not thée reproue: To blame therin: thy negligence, to send them me aboue. 9 From out thy house: I wyll not craue, Bull, Bullocke, Oxe, or calfe: Of thy folde els: he goates to haue, to ioy of theyr behalfe. 10 The beastes that grase: the wood so wyde, they be all myne at wyll: On thousand hyls: the beastes that stryde, I made them thée to fill.
11 On moataynes foules: that vse theyr flyght, I know them all and some: Wylde beastes of field: be nye my sight, as made for my renoume. 12 If hungers stresse: though myght I fele, I would not tell it thée: The world all whole: euen euery dele, is myne and all ye sée. 13 And thinkst thou thus: so grosse in wit, that I buls flesh would eate? Or bloud of Goates: to drynke of it, as bloud to spill were swéete? 14 Na this it is: that I allow, to God aye offer thankes: And pay to God: of lyfe thy vow, and séeke none other crankes. 15 In all thy wo: call thou on mée, when troubles thée do thrust: I wil (no fayle) deliuer thée, thus shalt thou prayse me iust. 16 But God thus chect: vngodly man, what meanst to preach my lawes? My pact in mouth: why takest thou than, where lyfe hath wycked sawes. 17 To be correct: by discipline, thou hatest to heare the worde: So thou doost cast: at backe of thyne, my law of swéete recorde. 18 When thee thou spiest: wyth him thou goest, to part the spoyle in hast: Who wedlocke breake: with them thou boast, thy lot wyth them is cast.
19 To cursed speche: thy tonge thou dightst, to clout all crafty guile: The iust thou wringst: the bad thou quytest, by lawes pretense and style. 20 Thou sitst as iudge: thy brothers name, by sleit to ouer runne: Thou quarell pikst: in crafty frame, agaynst thy mothers sonne. 21 Whyle thus thou doost: I sayeng nought, thou iudgest me nought lyke thée: But yet I shall: what thou hast wrought, detect before thyne eye. 22 O ponder this: I do you pray, all you that God forget: Lest I in hast: plucke you away, in wo to sée you set. 23 Who offer me: the sacrifice, of thankes he honorth mée: And thys the way: wherby I vyse, Gods helth to let hym sée. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God, God of all Gods, we humbly pray thee to take and accepte our sacrifice of thankes geuyng in good parte. So that after we be discharged of the burden of sinne, we maye declare wythout hy∣pocrisie that we walke in the way that leadeth to salua¦tion, Through Christ. FINIS. ¶ The ende of the first Quinquagene.
¶ The Seconde Quinquagene of Dauids Psalter, tran∣slated into Englishe Metre.
The Argument. Psalme. LI. A prayer pure and forme full good, for penitentes so meeke: Thus Dauids hart: enbrued wyth bloud, Miserere mei deushys God for grace dyd seeke. 1 HAue mercy God: on me I craue, for thy great gentlenes: Thy mercies store on me vouchsaue, put out my sinfulnes. 2 But washe me depe: from all my sinne, for déepely falne I am: O clense me clere: wythout, wythin, from synne that beastly came. 3 For I confesse: my wyckednes, my state I fele most vyle: In sight I beare: my giltines, it doth myne eye reuyle. 4 To thée alone: I trespaced, I ind before thyne eyes: That iust in word: thou mightst be tryed, thou iudge so pure to ryse. 5 Behold in sinne: I shapen was, in natyue filth infect: My mother me: conceyud alas, in sinne of Adams sect.
6 But lo thou hast: the truth well loued, in hart alway to raigne: Thys wisdome hid: to few approued, thou shewest to me most playne. 7 Thou shalt me purge wyth Isope grene, so clensd, men me shall know: Thou shalt me washe: to be full clene, more whyte than is the snow. 8 Thou shalt make me: much ioye to heare, and rest for all my payne: My shaken bones shall them besteare, and ioye then once agayne. 9 From my misdedes: turne thou thy face, I cannot say to oft: From out thy bookes: my gilt O rase, to féele thy mercy soft. 10 A puer hart: make thou in me, O God both good and true: A rightful sprite: wythin to be, my soule agayne renue. 11 From open sight of thy swete face, O Lord reiect me not: Withdraw not thou: thy sprite of grace, from me so desolate. 12 Thy ioyfull health: restore wyth all, to me thus tst wyth wo: Wyth sprite most frée: and principall, strength me agayne to go.
13 Then wyll I teache: thy wayes for ryght, to all the wycked sort: That they to the: conuerted quyte, for comfort may resort. 14 Ryd me from all: bloudgiltines, thou God my God of health: My tonge shal sing: thy ryghteousnes, and iust condemne my selfe. 15 O Lord my lips: set open wyde, in thankes to make them frée: So shall my mouth: on euery side, geue laudes most due to thée. 16 For thou regardst: no sacrifice, I would els geue it thée: Nor yet requirst: by law precise, our offrings brent that bée. 17 The sacrifice: to God elect, is iust a troubled sprite: Good God thou wylt no tyme reiect a broken hart contrite. 18 O shew thy grace: and fauour yet, to Syon Dauids throne: Ierusalem▪ that citie great, build thou her wals of stone. 19 Then ryghteous hostes: thou shalt allow, whole offrings burnt in sight: Wyth sacrifice: of calfe and cow, they shall thyne aulters dyght.
¶The Collecte. POure vpon vs O god most holy, thy manifold mer¦cies and compassions, by whiche thou cleansest vs from the filthy corruption of sinne, and therwyth makest our hartes cleane in thy sight: we besech thee still to renue in our inward partes the gift of thy holy and principall sprite, by power wherof, we may glori∣fie thy name in this present worlde, at last to come to thy heauenly Ierusalem, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LII. This Psalme inueith: and is full wroth, agaynst oppressours myght: To Christ so Iudas fygure goth, Quid glo¦riaris.to Dauid Doegs spyte. 1 WHy boast thy selfe: thou tyraunt thus? in malice vauntyng aye? Knowst not that God is gracious? to good men day by daye? 2 Thy tong contriueth: all crokednes, of hartes aboundance great: Wyth guiles it cutteth in craftines, as rasour sharply whet. 3 Thou malice louest: aboue all good, to hurt more then to helpe: To hatch more lyes: then truth to broode, Selalyke Adams byrd and whelpe. 4 Thou hast but loued: to speake all nought, that may perdition bring: O thou false tong: thou hast but sought, deceite by flatteryng.
5 Therfore shall God: quite thée subuert, thy house to take from thée: And roote thée out: all ouerwhart, Sela.no lyuing land to sée. 6 In seyng thys: the ryghteous man, shall feare and worshyp God: And shall say thus to scorne hym than, in Gods so heauy rd. 7 Lo thys the man: that had no lust, in God hys strength to set: But he in heapes: of gold dyd trust, by sinne hys strength he met. 8 But I am lyke: in God hys house, a fruitfull Olyue grene: In Gods good grace: most piteous, my trust shall aye be sene. 9 I will laude thée▪ for euer iust, thy word doth neuer mis: Thy name so good: shall be my trust, wyth good men good it is. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God which in thy power and fearefull wrath beatst downe all the vanitie of the worlde and spite of mās pride, graunt vs so to florish as fruit∣full Olyue trees in the house and congregatiō of thy people, that by trust of thy name, we may bee deliue∣red from the curse and malediction of thy wrath, through, &c.
This psalm aforesaid in an other Metre. Quid glo¦riaris.¶The Argument. Psalme. LII. Thus clawbackes heare theyr shame Whom God shall once consume: They Princes hartes enflame, Wyth causeles ire to fume. 1 WHy bragst in malice hye? O thou in mischiefe stout: Gods goodnes yet is nye, All day to me no doubt. 2 Thy tong to muse all euyll, It doth it selfe inure: As rasour sharpe to spill, All guile it doth procure. 3 Thou malice louedst to wrye, Aboue all goodnes walke: And more thou louest to lye, Sela.Then righteousnes to talke. 4 Yea loued thou hast no lesse, To speake one worde for all: All wordes of noughtines, Thou tong in fraude most thrall. 5 But God once thée shall wast, Shall stroy and scrape by hand: Thy tent from thée at last, To roote thée out of land. Sela 6 And ryghteous men shall sée, And feare therby shall take: But yet at hym full frée, Good laughter shall they make.
7 O lo the man hymselfe, That made not God hys ayde: That trustd in ryches wealth Whose myght in mischiefe layde. 8 But I as Olyue gréene, In Gods swéete house shall lay, My trust hath euer bene, In Gods good grace for ay. 9 I thée shall laude euen still, For thys thou dydst say I: Thy name to wayte I wyll, For good thy sayntes it spy. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LIII. Our natyue sinne this Psalme detecth, that sinners all be we: Dixit in∣sipiens.And that from grace who be reiect, confounded must they be. 1 THe foole haue sayd: in hart euen so, no God at all to bée: Wherfore corrupt foule sinne they do to do good, none wyll sée. 2 God looked down: from heauen so hye, on Adams children all: Some prudent man: if he could spye, that God would séeke or call. 3 But they be all astrayd and gone, abhominable made: That would do good: not one, not one, corrupt in all theyr trade.
4 Know they no thyng: in hart so stoure, these wycked workers all? My flocke as bread which do deuoure, nor yet on God they call. 5 They were afrayd: where feare dyd lacke, to shame God put them ryght: Men pleasers bones: God all to brake, for he abhorde them quite. 6 Oh that by God to Israell, from Syon health were had: Hys people thrall: no more to dwell, to make all Iury glad. ¶The Collecte. LOoke downe from heauen most mercifull Lorde, and stay thou the rage of our infidelitie to be de∣liuered from all vayne terrours, and to please thee a∣lone in perfecte integritie of hart, through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. LIIII. The iust here prayth hys God at neede, By hym hys ayde to winne: Hys fayth so good must nedely speede, Hys eye seeth proofe therin. 1 Deus in nomine.O Saue me God: auouch me now, for thy names sake I pray: In thy great myght: my ryght alow, auenge me Lord I say.
2 O God so good: my prayer heare, thy grace I do appeale: My wordes of mouth: accept wyth eare, which hart doth now reueale. 3 For straungers lo: at me they rise, and tyrauntes seke my soule: They haue no God: before theyr eyes, Selathey me both pill and powle. 4 Behold for God: my helper is, and stay of all my lyfe: With other mo, he chiefe I wis, who stayth my soule from stryfe. 5 Euen he shall all: my foes despite, into theyr laps retort: Lord dryue them downe: thy truth so hyght, for thou art whole my fort. 6 I will wyth hart most glad and frée, geue sacrifice to thée: I shall thy name (Lord) magnifie, so good it is to mée. 7 For thou hast ryd: me quyte in déede, from all my griefe and wo: As I did wishe: my foes to spéede, I saw they ouerthrow. ¶The Collecte. SAue thy church O Lord by the protection of thy name, which is only the trusty defence therof, that she may set at nought all enmitie against her, alway to magnifie thee by voluntary confession of thy truth, through, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. LV. As Dauid mournd to shame reiect, by them who semed his frendes: The same did Christ, as his elect, Exaudi.in lyke may haue lyke myndes. 1 GEue eare O God: to my request, in anguishe all be set: Hyde not thy selfe: to myne vnrest, from me thyne eares to shet. 2 Geue hede to me: thy grace impart, to my depe cry and call: I mourne therin: and grone in hart, now here, now there I fall. 3 For that my foes: so cry and rore, and me wyth spyte approche: They mischiefe meane: and euermore, in wroth they e reproche. 4 My hart doth faynt: sore vext it is, in great disquietnes: Yea feares of death: be not remisse, to do my hart distres. 5 Both feare and dread: thus tossing me, my tremblyng neuer blin: Darke horrors depe: full prest they be, all whole to wrap me in. 6 Wherfore I sayd: O that I had, to flye winges lyke a doue: Then would I flye: to rest full glad, and me from hence remoue.
7 No dout far of: I would me flitche, From hence to wildernes: More there to dwell: than here wyth such, Sela.in such vnrestfulnes. 8 I would make hast: to scape away, as fast as wynde could blow: To flée thys storme: and tempest aye, I would me safe bestow. 9 Destroy them Lord: theyr tonges deuyde, theyr counsayles scatter wyde: Theyr citie wryth: to wrong a syde, to stryfe and churlishe pryde. 10 Both day and nyght: theyr citie walles, are thus enuyroned: In mids therof: all mischiefe falles, and sorrow there excéedth. 11 All noughtines: and vyce doth raygne, 1. Reg. 23in Ceyla citie so: Deceyt and guile: wyth all that trayne, theyr stréetes full thorough go. 12 No open foe: workth me thys spyte, for hym then would I beare: No enmy known: thus raysth hys myght, whom I myght flée and feare. 13 But thou my mate: most deare to hart, as was my lyfe in state: Whom I estéemd as guide in part, as homely fellow grate.
14 Wyth whom so knit: we often tooke, both meate and counsayle swéete: We neyther others once forsooke, in Gods house aye to méete. 15 Let death them trap: full sodenly, euen quicke to fall to hell: For vice wyth them: doth lodge and ligh, theyr hartes wyth falshode mell. 16 But as for me: to God I cryed, and hence hym pray I wyll: The Lord saued me: full oft I tryed, I trust he shall do still. 17 At euen and morne I made my sute, at noone day instantly: No tyme my cry: dyd hereute, thus made importunely. 18 For he redéemd: my soule to peace, from war agaynst me set: For many were wyth me to ease, though they in numbers met. 19 Yea God himselfe: whych aye hath bene, shall heare me them to scourge: No tyme to change: they wyll be sene, wyth feare to God assurge. 20 He rearde hys handes: agaynst hys frendes, which ment hym peace and rest: He brake hys league: that men so byndes, together fast in brest.
21 Hys mouth more soft: then butter melt, though warre was stiffe in hart: More smooth then oyle: hys wordes were felt, yet were sharpe dartes and smart. 22 O cast thy care: on God so deare, what burthen thée oppresse: He will thée féede: he cannot beare, the iust to fall in stresse. 23 And thou O God: shalt stroy the fetche, of crafty bloudy men: Theyr dayes to halfe: shall neuer retche, to thée I yeld me then. ¶The Collecte. O Lorde Iesu Christe thoughe thou wart before all worldes, yet in tyme thou tookest vppon thee the nature of man, wherin thou sufferest voluntary death for man in hymselfe vtterly lost, and therto were be∣trayd by one of thyne owne familie, pretendyng yet amitie to thee, we beseche thee to here vs, and graunt that we may so glorifie thy name, that we bee defen∣ded frō all craft and flattery of the world, who liuest. The Argument. Psalme. LVI. This prayth to God as innocent▪ Agaynst his foes so mad: As Christ though pure: the Iewes dyd shent. Miserere mei deusYet he reioyceth full glad. 1 HAue mercy God: on me I pray, for man will treade me downe: His fierce assaut: from day to day, would make my hart to sowne.
2 To swalowe me: my foes entend, as daily bent they lygh: Full many one: do war extend, on me, O thou most high. 3 But euer when: such feares inuade, my hart, to make me flée: I trust yet well, therout to wade, my fayth so cleauth to thée. 4 Prayse God I wyll: and trust hys worde, what hys good hand doth send: I feare not fleshe: hys spyte and sworde, to God my trust shall bend. 5 For daily me: they do depraue, both what I do and say: In hart and tonge: at me they raue, and me to harme they lay. 6 They flocke on me: and priuely, conspyrde they haue in stealth: They wayte my wayes: my steps to stye, to stroy my soule and wealth. 7 They put theyr hope: by guilefulnes, and craft, to scape away: Yet once O God: thou wylt them stres, in ire, for all theyr stray. 8 Thou séest my flightes▪ and often feares, thou markst them all full out: Wythin thy bottell put my teares, the booke them noteth no dout?
9 As oft as I: do call on thée, my foes then take theyr slight: Therby my hart: doth full agrée, that God for me doth fight. 10 Of thys my God: for promyse iust, I wyll hym laude and prayse: God wyll I prayse: and all my trust, in hym I set alwayes. 11 On God I haue: me whole bestowde, a tyme though I be thrall: What flesh can do: though all beshrowd, I feare no whit at all. 12 Now fit for me: my vowes to pay, to God they be so hyght: And hym due laudes: to sing by day, and thankes in open sight. 13 For thou my soule: hast ryd from death, from fall thou kéepst my féete: To walke in lyght: whyle lyfe hath breath, before my God so swéete. The Collecte. O Lord of all power and myght, which defendst thy seruauntes from all inuisible hostilitie, and neuer sufferest them to be ouercome that trust in thy mer∣cy, wype from our eyes we praye thee teares shed for our sinnes, that after we haue subdued our carnall af∣fectiōs, we may rest in the land of the liuing, through Iesus Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LVII. The iuct for his deliuery, geueth thankes that God hym sped: So Christ reioyste when he dyd stye, Miserere mei deusto heauen when death was ded. 1 GOd pity me. O pitie me, on thée my soule is cast: Thy wynges I trust: wyll shadow be, till all thys spyte be past. 2 Thy trusty helpe: I wyll implore, of God my Lord most hye: He wyll my cause: perfourme the more, that now in hand doth ligh. 3 He shall from heauen: send down hys power to saue from me their spite: And those that would: my soule deuower, wyth shame shall full be dight. 4 Twixt Lyons fierce: doth stand my lyfe, wyth fiery men I dwell: Whose téeth be speares: and dartes in stryfe, theyr tonges sharpe swordes and fell. 5 Aduaunce thy selfe: O God appeare, from heauens more hye thou they: Thy glory great: set vp so cleare, on all the earth to stay. 6 To catche my féete: a net they splayd, my soule they haue deprest: Sela.Into that pyt: for me they layd, themselues therin be threst.
7 My hart is fixt: my hart is fixt, O God in thée full stayd: And sing I will: my griefes betwixt, in psalmes wyth musike playd. 8 Awake my tonge: my ioy awake, awake both harpe and lute: Come forth, at morne: I me betake, to sing wyth shaume and flute. 9 Thy laudes wyth thankes: out wyll I sound when people méete aryght: To sing O Lord: to thée so bound, I wyll in Paynyms syght. 10 Thy mercy great: to heauens doth retch, what thyng can it denay? To heauenly cloudes: thy truth doth stretch, to mans most stable stay. 11 Set vp thy selfe: O God aboue, the heauens as is most méete: Aboue the earth: thy glory moue, the stoole of both thy féete. ¶ The Collecte. REmoue O Lord all iniquity and enmitie from thy familie, which mekely set theyr whole trust in the shadow of thy winges, so that by enioyeng thy mercy sent from heauen, we may bee perpetually deliuered from all malicious snares and trappes of our enemies Through Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LVIII. Saules counsaylours: so far fro ryght, This Psalme doth here dewray: Whose craftes wyth like: shall God requite. Si vere vtique.To sing once well away. 1 IF iust your myndes: be truly set, ye counsaylours to ryght? Iudge equally: in weyght and met, ye sonnes of men in syght. 2 Yea ye in hart: do nothyng lesse, in earth to wrong ye bende: Your handes do worke: all wyckednes, though ye the ryght pretende. 3 These wycked walke: in froward wyse, from euen theyr mothers mylke: Once borne they stray? and talke but lyes, theyr wordes yet soft as silke. 4 Theyr poyson lyke: the poyson is, of venome cockafryce: Euen Adder lyke: all deafe I wis, who stopth her eares to ryse. 5 Who hateth to heare: the charmers voyce, charme he so neuer wyse: Of ryght and wrong: they make no choyce, all warnyng they despyse. 6 Wythin theyr mouthes: theyr téeth O God, crushe thou, they be to sharpe: The Lyons mouthes: theyr iawes so brode, breke Lord, proud wordes they carpe.
7 To nought they passe: as water swyft, wythin it selfe doth slyde: And when to shoote: theyr shaftes they list, let them go broken wyde. 8 As snayle that wasth: let them so wast, thus créepyng crookedly: As womans byrth: to tymely cast, let them no sunne espy. 9 As tender ympes: of wycked thorne, before theyr pryckes be hard: Men roote them vp: so all be torne, by wrath they shall be marde. 10 Then shall reioyce: the iust and good, to sée Gods vengeaunce come: To bathe hys handes: in sinners bloud, and thanke for hys good dome. 11 Then man shall say: wythouten mis, the iust hath iust reward: No doubt a God: in earth there is, to iudge in ryght regard. ¶The Collecte. MOst righteous Lord, graunt we besech thee that the people may folow all the righteousnes of thy law, and gladly in loue to embrace the same, neuer to turne their hearyng from the truth thereof, or to bee deluded wyth the mortiferous perswasions of the ser∣pent, to be agayne wounded by hym, from whom we be redeemed thorough the death of thy welbeloued sonne, to whom with thee and the holy ghost be. &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LIX. Agaynst the proud: is made request Eripe me de inimi∣cis.Who dealth wyth guile and fraude: Whom God shall driue: to want theyr rest, with famine ouer yawde. 1 FRom all my foes: deliuer me, O God my God thou art: Shield me from them: in suertie, that vp at me be start. 2 From workers bad: O saue my lyfe, wyth them no tyme to mell: From bloudy men: whole set to strife, make me most far to dwell. 3 For lo they wayt: my soule to catch, these freakes be met in spyte: Though iust offence: they cannot latch, at me O Lord of ryght. 4 Yet causeles they: styll flocke at mée, to hurt they them prepare: Aryse therfore: O Lord and sée, helpe me now plungd in care. 5 Stand vp thou God: and Lorde of hostes, thou Lord of Iacobs lyne: All Paynyms (Lord) vew thou theyr bostes, Selaspare not theyr wilfull cryme. 6 They go at euen: both to and fro, they grin as dogs to bite: The streates they trot: in citie so, as pickethankes them delyte.
7 Behold they speake: wythin theyr mouth, but swordes wythin theyr lyps: They thinke belyke: none heare the sothe, from them that falshode slips. 8 But thou O Lord: shalt them deryde, to scorne theyr mad attempt: These heathen dogs: that barke so wyde, from thée who can exempt? 9 My strength I will kepe fast by thée, O God I will not shrynke: Of thée I know: all strength to bée, as rocke on thée I thynke. 10 For God of grace: wil me preuent, wyth mercy plentuously: And how my foes: shall once be shent, God shal make me to spy. 11 Yet slea them not: all sodenly, lest them my flocke forget: But scatter them: a stray to fly, deiect them Lord so great. 12 Theyr sinne of mouth: theyr word of tong, theyr pryde shall them betray: For periury: they speake and wrong, they prate but lyes all day. 13 Consume them Lord: in hasty wrath, consume them lest and most: To know that guide: true Iacob hath, euen God in euery cost.
14 These men at euen: will them retyre, they grenne as dogs to byte: The citie they: walke all on fyre. as pickethankes them delyte. 15 For meate they range: both here and there, still hungry let them bée: And satisfied: be they no where, no rest or sléepe to sée. 16 But I shall sing: thy strength and power, at morne to prayse thy grace: For thou hast bene: my fort and tower, In all my wofull race. 17 O thou my strength: all whole alone, to sing to thée I shall: Thou refuge wart: in all my moue my God most liberall. ¶The Collecte. LOrd almighty whose power and mercy we do laud and prayse most worthely, both euen and morne, we beseche thee that thou wouldest so preserue oure powers from all darkenes of the nyght, that we maye be beautified wyth the clearenes of the pure workes of thy law, through Christ; &c.
The Argument. Psalme. LX. Whyle Saule dyd raigne: all Iury mournde, by Paynyms sore opprest: In fayth to God: here Dauid tournd, Deus re∣pulisti.and conquerd them to rest. 1 O God thou hast repeald vs long, and scattred vs abrode: Thy heauy wrath: fell vs among, O turne and stay thy rod. 2 Euen thou that hast: sore shakt our land, well nye to shiuer rent: Heale thou the brekes: by thy good hand, it realeth to rie ent. 3 Most dreadfull sightes: and dolorous, thou madest thy people spy: Such wyne thou gauest: for drynke to vs, which greued vs inwardly. 4 Yet hast thou geuen▪ thyne arke as igne, to such as feare thy name: To blanke theyr foes: that would repyne, Sela.thy truth protesth the same. 5 Thy louers all: great daungers fled, and rid from harmes full safe: By thy right hand: let me be led, and my requestes vouch saue. 6 God spake the worde: in sanctuary, which makth me glad to byde: I Sychem will: part myne to lye, and Succoth vale deuyde.
7 Myne Gilead: Manasses myne, both twayne be myne intiere: My strength of head: is Ephraim, and Iuda legister. 8 So Moab stout: shall bow hys head, to serue as washepot aye: On Edom land: my shoo shall tread, ioy thou Philistea. 9 Than who shall lead: me strayt to flye, into the citie strong: Who me will bring: to Iduye, to conquere them among. 10 Art thou not he: O God I say, which thus hast cast vs out? Whych dydst refuse: to lead the way, to guide our armies stout? 11 O than be thou: our helpe at nede, to ease our troubles yet: For humayn helpe: is vayne to spéede, mans arme to weake is set. 12 No doubt by God: we shall achyue, great acts we trust euen thus: For he alone: our foes shall dryue, to treade them downe for vs.
The Collecte. ALmighty & most merciful God, the onely recoue∣rer & ruler of mankynd, which doost so deiect thy faithfull seruauntes that therby thou meanest to pro¦mote them, & so doost humble thē that therby thou entendst to bryng thē to thy heuenly kyngdom, kepe we beseche thee the deuout hartes of thy seruauntes, that whyle they submitte themselues in true penitent hartes to thy mercy, they may be healed frō all come∣brance of conscience to enioy eternall lyfe, thorough the gift of thy sonne. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXI This prayth in payne and stresse: as far exylde and fled, Exaudi Domine.and thanks it giueth: for succor sent, it figurth chrict our hed 1 MY cryeng heare O God, That voyce doth sing in song: Geue eare to me: thus cast abrode, as fled for feare of wrong. 2 From furthest coastes of earth, To thée shall come my cry: Whyle hart féelth griefe: to rocke me lead, That hygher is than I. 3 For thou hast bene my trust, In whome I hopt alone: Of refuge strong: and tower so sure, To fence from me my fone. 4 In thyne owne tente by thée, For aye I trust to dwell: Sela.Wythin thy wynges: most couertly, To lye I trust full well.
5 For thou my God hast heard, My vowes and prayers sad: And them thou gauest: an heritage, Thy name who duly dad. 6 The kyng hys dayes wyth dayes, Thou shalt encrease in length: Hys yeares to be: perpetuall, Euen thus thou shalt hym strength. 7 For euer he shall dwell, Before hys God in sight: O than prepare: hym grace and truth, Which may defend hys might. 8 In Psalmes to prayse thy name, I will whyle world doth last: And pay my vowes most thankfully, From day to day as fast. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God which art most mercifull comfor∣ter of all maner trouble and anguishe of hart, we beseche thee defend thy familie from the face of the enemy, to be in suertie by thee in the tower of strēgth that we may at last dwell in thy heauenly tabernacles, through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXII. This Psalme exhorth: to God to stand, Nonne deo sub∣iecta.Agaynst all mens pursuites: It shewth to faith: Gods mighty hand, Mans brags it vayne reputes. 1 SHall not  my soule: in silence looke, to God as subiect still? From whom my helth: and helpe I tooke, when woes my hart dyd fill?
2 No dout he is my rocke and health, my fort of strength and ayde: I trust the lesse▪ by foes in stealth, to fall as one dismayde. 3 How long wyll ye: wyth wycked guiles, thus me poore man inuade? Ye all shall quayle: as wall that reales, as rotten hedge doth ade. 4 To driue hym low: they mete for this, whom God would haue excell: They loue but lyes: theyr tonges can blisse, Selatheyr hartes yet curse to fe. 5 But yet my soule: to God be still, in silence pacient: And tary him: in quiet wyll, from whom shall health be sent. 6 No doubt I say: he is my strength, my health, my fortresse hye: I feare no oyle: to shrynke at length, where God doth fortifie. 7 Wyth God is layd: my health full sure, and he my glory iust: My rocke of strength: that wyll endure, in God is whole my trust. 8 Trust aye in hym: ye people whole, to hym poure out your hartes: Our hope is God: O hym extoll, he health alway impartes.
9 But Adams broode: is vayne to sée, mens children lyers bée: They wayghed in schooles: ascend more hye, more lyght then vanitie. 10 Then hope ye not: (lst vayne ye be) in wrong and robbery: If ryches flow: aboundantly, no hart to them apply. 11 God once dyd speake: and once agayne, and twyse I haue it harde: That power is Gods: in stable raigne, which we should all regarde. 12 And that O Lord: in thée aryght, is mercy mixt also: For thou shalt quite: to euery wyght, in déede as he shall do. ¶The Collecte. MAke oure sowles subiectes to thy godlye gouer∣nance most louing father, whiche art our onely paciēce that we may renownce the transytory goods of this present worlde with all the vanityes therof, so to folow thee to the eternall lyfe in heauen, through Christ our Lorde. &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXIII. Deus de∣us meus ad te.Poore Christen man: opprest by might, May pray this psalme: with Christ hys head, Who lawdes to God: did pay aright, In desert set: where lyfe he led. 1 O God to thée: my God so strong, From mornyng watch: I cry in stresse My soule and flesh: for thée they long, In desert land, dry, waterlesse.
2 Thus thée I trust: to sée in place, Where resth thy grace: in holynes: That I myght sée: thy mighty face, Thy glory hye: and noblenes. 3 For better is: thy goodnes yet, Than is thys lyfe: the blessednes: Wherfore my lips: shall still beset, To sing thy prayse: and worthines. 4 Thus all my lyfe: (Lord) thée shall blisse, And render thankes: obeysantly, To lyft my handes: I wyll not misse, Thy holy name: to glorifye. 5 Lo thus my soule: full frankt shall bée, As fed wyth fat: and marow swéete: When that my mouth: in landes so frée, Shall ioyous breake: to Carols méete. 6 Euen thus of thée: I myndefull was, When that in bed: I tooke my rest: As watches all: the nyght dyd passe, Of thée I musde: in gratefull brest. 7 Because thou wart: my helpe at néede, as helpe thou couldst: and so thou hast: Therfore I wyll: reioyce in déede, Wythin thy winges: thus safely plast. 8 For when my soule: was set to thée, As fast to ioyne: in feares assaut: Thy mighty hand: then leande to mée, And stayd me vp: wythout defat.
9 Now these which séek: my soule to spyll, To bryng me downe: to sée my graue: In vayne I trust: they worke in wyll, Theyr wynding shéete: they first shall haue. 10 Wyth edged sworde: they shall be threst, As they deuisde: to me full flye: They shall be prayes: to sauage beast, In Foxes lyues: lyke Foxe to dye. 11 The kyng in God: yet shall reioyce, For hys defence▪ in suertie: Who swerth to hym: shall ioy the choyce, For glauering lips: all stopt shall bée. ¶The Collecte. O God the author and fountayne of the light euer∣lasting, graūt we besech thee vnto vs, which early do watche before light vnto thee, that our lips maye sownd out thy prayse, and that our lyues maye sancty¦fye thee, so that our whole meditaion and conuersa∣tion may glorify thee both euen and mone through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXIIII. Here Dauid blamth: hys foes attempt, and telth how dye they shall: So Christ reprouth: the Iewes contempt, and prophecieth theyr fall. Exaudi Domine. 1 O Heare my Lord▪ my voyce and cry, in tellyng thus my woes: And kepe my life: in suertie, from feare of all my foes.
2 And hyde me Lord: from all the trayne, of cursed men in close: From all theyr rowte: conspired agayne, in wycked lyfe so lose. 3 Which wheth theyr tonges: as sword so sharpe and poyson dartes they shoote: Euen bitter wordes: in tonge they carpe, to bring me vnder foote. 4 To shoote at hym: in stelth they lye, who lyfe intiere doth beare: On hym vnwares: theyr dartes they wry, and haue therin no feare. 5 They strength themselfes in wycked pryde, theyr crafty fetch to ply: They do conferre: theyr snares to hyde, they say who them can spy? 6 They searche all spite: and do it round, that is by search comprisd: What hartes most depe: or wit profound, can fynde, is hye deuisde. 7 But God shall shoote: at them agayne, hys arrowes sodenly: Wyth sundry woundes: he them shall payne, all vnewares to spye. 8 He then shall make: theyr proper tonge, theyr owne confusion: That who them sée: how they be wrunge, shall shake as wo begone.
9 All men shall sée: thys worke ryght well, and much commend this acte: As wrought by God: they shall it tell, and wisely note the facte. 10 The ryghteous man: shall ioy in God, in hym to put his trust: Yea all true hartes: shall ioy abrode, that God kept me so iust, ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God, sauegarde of all them whiche put their trust in thee, preserue thy Church from the conuenticles of all her malignant aduersaryes, which so busely assault her with their crafty engynes, that she maye still retayne thy presence in the true vnder∣standyng of the worde, through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXV. For foyson thankes to God: the letter doth aforde, the sprite for that the church encreasth: by dews of his swete worde. Te decet. 1 AL laudes be due to thée: O God in Zyon hil: with harty vowes: of thāks to thée, all Saē shal we fil 2 Which hearst requests so light: in faith made fast to thée all men for this: to thée ful glad, shal come in eche degrée. 3 Ungodly dedes preuaild: on me so lowd they cryde: but thou our sins: wilt purify: as oft we haue if tryed. 4 O blest is he in all: whom thou doost chose and take: in thy courtes he: shall dwel full fed: where he al ioy shall make.
5 O God most drad in ryght, heare vs thou art our health: To them that dwell: by sea or land, thou art theyr onely wealth. 6 Which mountains didst prepare: by theyr own strēgth to rest, So gyrt he is: with fortitude, of all the worthyest. 7 Which swagth the ragyng seas: wyth all theyr roring dinne So all vprores: of multitudes: to stowage he doth winne. 8 And they that furthest dwel: in earth thy signes shall dread: Theyr goinges forth: at nyght & morne: thy laudes shall duely spread. 9 Thou vewst the earth for good: thou makest it rich in store, Gods fluds be ful: men food thou geuest: thou framdst the earth therfore 10 Her forowes thou doost moyst: thou breakst the clods in two: Thou makest thē soft: wyth rainy drops: her fruites thou blest euen so. 11 Thou crownst the earth full whole: wyth thy riche gentlenes thy cloudes as waynes: do cary showers, they drop fat plenteous∣nes. 12 Theyr fatnes eke distilth: on desert pastures wyde: The little hils: depe wet by them: shal ioy on euery side. 13 The playnes wyth flocks bespred: the vales wt wheat ful clad, Thus shal reioyce: and mercy sing: for fruitefulnes so glad. ¶The Collecte. O God and king euerlasting, graunt that we may so be watred wyth the plenteous dewes of grace, to escape the droutes of deadly siune, and to grow in spi¦rituall increase of sprite, to be able to sing hymmes & laudes alwayes to thy honor and glory. Through, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LXVI. An hymne of thankes to God: for helpe in tyranny: Iubilate.With sacrifice: the Iewes it song in feastes most solempnely. 1 REioyce to God wyth ioy: how wyde the land ye dwell: Expresse your ioyes: to shew how hie: his Godhed doth 2 And loke wyth song ye prayse: hys name most glorious: And thynke it is: your glory most: hys fame most hye to rowse. 3 Say thus before the Lord: how workst thou dreadfully? Thy power shall make: thy foes to stoupe: therin though fal they 4 The earth all whole full low: shall worshyp thée as God: SelaAnd sing in psalmes: they shal to thée: to sound thy name abrode 5 O come and note Gods workes: how wonderfull they are, So wrougt to man of Adams lyne: they passe mans wyt to 6 He turnd the sea to land: whose worke alone it is: that through the sea: dry shod they went: our fathers ioyd of 7 He rulth the world by myght: hys eyes the Paynyms Sela.And who rebels: as voyd of fayth: no grace shall them ensue. 8 O blisse our God wyth thanks: ye people more and lesse: And sée ye cause: all speche & voyce: that they his laudes express 9 For he hath set our soule: in lyfe most safe and sound: He suffreth not our féete to slyde: to slyp vpon the ground. 10 For thou O God most hye: hast proued vs narowly: Thou hast vs tryed: as siluer is: by furnace fined therby. 11 Thou broughts vs nye to traps: of foes besiegd strayt: Our loynes & backs: bare painful lodes: of griefs in heuy way
12 Thou hast set man on vs: on thus our heds to ryde: We past by fire: and water to: yet roume thou gauest vs wyde. 13 Thy house I wyll go in: wyth offringes brent therfore: My vowes to pay: I wyll not misse: to the behight before: 14 Which vowes dyd cause my lyps: themselfe to open wyde: All which my mouth: dyd promise iust: when trouble me did stryde. 15 Brent offryngs wyll I geue: to thée of lambes most fat: Sela.Wyth smoke of rambes: wyth ore and goat: I wyll ful glad do that, 16 All ye that God do feare: O come and harken now: I wyll you tell: how louingly: my soule he dyd auow. 17 I dyd but cry wyth mouth: my hart fel strayght his ease: My tonge therfore dyd him extoll: wyth prayse it did not cease. 18 If I yet thus in hart: ought wyckedly had ment: The Lord my sute would not haue heard: in suttle false entent. 19 Where now the Lord heard me▪ by proofe it is discust: My voyce and vowe: in prayer made: he dyd consider iust. 20 O bless be God which did: no tyme my sute relect. No tyme his grace forsooke my nede: he neuer me neglect. ¶The Collecte. POure into our hartes O Lord▪ & desire to glorifie thy ex∣cellent name and maiestie, that while wee endeuour our selues to decline the vayne amitie of this worlde, we may be refreshed by thy grace, to beare quietly all thy probations & trials which thou sendst to purge vs wyth, still to sing in hart thy perpetuall laudes. Through Christ. &c.
The Argument. Psalme. LXVII. Thys song in all: propheticall, Doth cleare expresse: Christes raigne in flesh Whose beames so bright: dyd shyne in sight, That all to come: must prayse his dome. Must prayse his dome. 1 Deus mi sereatur.GOd graunt wyth grace: he vs embrace, In gentle part: blisse he our hart: With louyng face: shyne he in place, His mercies all: on vs to fall. On vs to fall. 2 That we thy way: may know all day, Whyle we do sayle: thys world so frayle: Thy healthes reward: is nye declarde, As playne at eye: all Gentils spye. all Gentils spy. 3 Let thée alwayes: the people prayse, O God of blisse: as due it is: The people whose mought thée extoll, From whome all thyng: they sée to spryng. they sée to spryng. 4 All folke reioyce: lyft vp your voyce, For thou in sight: shalt iudge them ryght: Thou shalt direct: the Gentiles sect: In earth that bée: to turne to thée. to turne to thée.
5 Let thée alwayes: the people prayse, O God of blis: as due it is: The people whole: mought thée extoll, From whom all thyng: they sée to spryng. they sée to spryng. 6 The earth shall bud: hys fruites so good, Then thankes most due: from it shall sue: And God euen he: our God most frée. Shall blesse vs aye: from day to day. from day to day. 7 So God our guide: shall blesse vs wyde, Wyth all increase: no tyme to cease: All folke therby: on earth which ligh, Hys name shall feare, and loue hym beare. and loue hym beare. ¶The Collecte. SHine thine amiable countinance vpon vs O Lorde & graunt vs thy heauenly benediction that while we acknowledge thy worthines in reuerent feare, we may be made worthy to receyue the fruite of righte∣ousnes in presence of thy maiestie, through Christ, &c ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXVIII. The Hebrues sang this Psalme in warre, against their foes to fight: Exurgat Deus.So Christen man: at Christ his foes: may pray the same in sprite. 1 LEt God aryse: in maiestie: and scattred be hys foes: Yea flée they all: hys sight in face: to him which hateful goes 2 As smoke is driuen: & comth to nought: repulse theyr tyranny: At face of fyre: as wax doth melt: Gods face the bad mought flée
3 But let the iust: be glad in thys: and ioy in God hys sight: For Gods great power: & stable truth: in myrth let them delite 4 O sing to God: sound out hys name: sée hym ye magnify: He rydeth on heauens: hys name is God: in him reioyce ye hi 5 He father is: to fatherles: of widowes iudge he is: Euen God hymselfe: which euer dwelth: in holy place of hys. 6 Thys God he makth the desolate: in housholdes great to grow: He loseth the thrall: quyte out of bandes: and bringth the wycked low, 7 O God when thou: wentst forth as guide: before the people out SelaWhen thou dydst walke in wyldernes: which thyng thou dydst no doubt. 8 The erth then shooke: at face of god: the heuens did drop & swel Mount Synay: Gods face dyd feare: Gods face of Israell. 9 Thou pourdst O God: thy fruitful shoures: on thine enheritāce When faynt they were: wyth ease agayne: theyr strength yu didst aduaunce. 10 Thy church and flocke: to dwel therin: thou shalt it thus refresh: So thou prepardst: for all thy poore: O God in gentlenes. 11 Such good effect: god gaue hys word: to them yt shewd his might They dyd ut preach: his armies strong: how they exceld in sight 12 How kyngs wyth hostes: most fiercely set: yet fled discomfited: And householdes whole: that kept at home: the spoyle they dyd deuyde. 13 Though ye haue lyne among the pots: as black as coale in sight ye shalbe whyte: as doue with winges: milke white and fethers bright
14 Whē God great kings: threw out of land: though earst hys flock was blacke then gan they loke: as white as snow: as lyeth on salmons backe 15 Gods hyll is fat: as Basan hyl a mount that stately standth: Wyth cliffes on hye: lyke Basan monnt: it riseth it is so grand. 16 Why leape ye so: to spyte thys mount: ye toppy hillockes gay? This is gods mount: where God hath dwelt: he there shal dwel for aye. 17 Gods charets be: ten thousands twyse: of angels millions: Wyth them is God: wyth hys good grace: as God loued Syna ones. 18 Thou stiedst on hie: yu thraldom caughtst: receiuing gifts in men Yea faythles eke: thou tookst to grace: that God myght dwell in them. 19 O blest be God: who day by day: doth heape hys gyftes on vs: Sela.Thys God is God: of all our health: in power most glorious. 20 He is our God: euen God I say: all health and wealth to shape: Yea death is ruld: by God the lord: whose dint by him we scape qwel: 21 This God shal wound: his enmies heds: he shal their worthies Their heary scalpes: to pare full nie: that still in sinne wil dwel. 22 God sayd I will: restore as once: from Basan myne I dyd: I will returne: all myne as once: from seas most depe I ryd. 23 That dipt thy féete: in all their bloud: may reade appeare aeye: That dogs myght licke: their enmies bloud: so read to be therby 24 Who lyst did sée: O puissaunt God: thy great procedings hie: The goings iust: of thée my God: my king in sanctuary.
25 Whē thanks were song: first fingers went. thē minstrels mouth theyr féete: In myds were set: the damsel maides: who playd with timbrels swéete. 26 When they in one: were ioyntly met: thus god they praysed wel: From hart the ground they blest the Lord: who sprang of Israel 27 Small Beniamin: there ruler went: so Iudas tribe theyr stone: So went the Pieres: of Zebulon: and Neptaly came on. 28 Thus god hath bid all strēgth & power. for thée ful nye to be: With strength O God: cōfirme this worke: that y• hast wrought so frée. 29 Frō thy swéete house: Ierusalem: make this thy strength procede Then kings shal bryng: theyr offerings: to thée to praise thy dede once tamde: 30 The launce mens routes: once scatred wyde: the peoples calue When they shal stoupe: and presentes bring: and warring fol once shamde. 31 Then shal the Pieres: of Egipt land: for this come meke in sig Then Ethiops: ful soone shal yeld: to God their hands and might 32 O all ye realmes: of all the earth: sing ye to God of blis. Sela.Sing psalmes and hymnes: to testify: how worthy prayse he is. 33 To him that rydeth: on heauen of heuens: as he hath done of Lo he his voyce: hath vttred forth: a voyce most strong and bold, 34 Ascribe to God all strength and myght: to Israel so showed: On whom hs power: no lesse is wrought: then is on heauen bstowe 35 O God thou art: full terrible: from out thy sanctuary: This Iacobs God: hys people aydth: O blest be God therby.
¶The Collecte. O Lord and gouernour, whiche refreshest thy electe flocke, with spirituall nourishment of all dilecta∣tion, graunte vnto all thy congregation so to vnder∣stand thy victorious deth, that we may alway confesse thy worthy victory against sinne, death and hell, and to honour thy maiesty now syttyng on the right hand of thy father, to whome with thee and the holy ghost be all honor and glory for euer, Amen. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXIX. A sute of man in trouble bounde, that hath his hart opprest: Saluumme fac deus.To Christ and his: it nye doth sounde, as Paule somewhere exprest. 1 SAue me O Lord: in heauines, by woes depressed downe: The ragyng waues: of all distres, be falne my soule to drowne. 2 In myre so déepe: I sticke full fast, all bottomeles to sée: In waters déepe: downe am I cast, the flouds haue whelmed mée. 3 In crying still: I wery go, my throate is horse and dry: Myne eyes be dimme: and fainty so, whyle God I wyshe to spy 4 My foes excéede: my heares of head, at me they causeles looke: My foes preuayle: that wyshe me dead, I payd I neuer tooke.
5 Thou know O God: my folishnes, if ought amisse I dyd: My crymes of lyfe: my simplenes, from thée be neuer hyd. 6 Who wayte on thée: féele they no hostes, of shame for my desert: O God the Lord: of Iacobs hostes, let them féele neuer smart. 7 Forsooth for thée: susteyned I, both shame and vyle reproofe: My face is hyd: for infamy, so felt for thy behoofe. 8 I was repute: as stranger fremd, to all my brethren bad: As aliant: so me condemnd, my mothers children had. 9 For why, the zeale: of thy swéete house, hath me vp eaten quite: On me fell dedes: opprobrious, of them that thée did spyte. 10 I wept and fast: my soule to chast, my body low to bryng: Thus when I dyd: they did it cast, to my disabelyng. 11 When sackecloth course: I put me on, to mourne my griefe the more: Theyr laughyng stocke: and iestyng stone, they made me then therfore.
12 The Iudges eke: which sate in gate, on me they babled euill: So dyd on me: wyne bibbers prate, yea songes they made theyr fill. 13 Yet I O Lord: prayd whole to thée, in tyme acceptably: For thy great ruthe: and veritie, wyth helpe heare thou my cry. 14 O plucke me out: of myre and sand, before I sinke to stéepe: Let me escape: my haters hand, to ryse from waters déepe. 15 Let me no tyme: by floudes and sea, all ouerflowne to bée: Nor let the déepe: vp swalow me, ne pit shit mouth on mée. 16 This graunt to mée: O God this day, thy grace is liberall: Turne thy respect: to me I pray: regard thy mercies all. 17 Hyde not thy face: and cherefull sight, from me thy seruant poore: For greuous woes: on me be lyght, make hast and heare therfore. 18 Draw nye my soule: to chalenge it, redeme and saue it well: For these my foes: so haut they sit, saue me from them so sell.
19 Thou knowst what spite: what shame I beare what vyle rebukes I féele: Myne enemies all: that me do deare, be known to thée full well. 20 The shame hath pearst: and rent my hart, I féele all hartes disease: I lookt if man would ease my smart, but none was me to ease. 21 In stede of meat: for my repast, they gaue me bitter gall: In my great thyrst: they esill cast, to quenche my thirst wythall. 22 Theyr table be: to them a snare, theyr swéete meates tournd to sowre: And that for ioy: they dyd prepare, let theare but sorrow lowre. 23 Theyr eyes be darke: to sée no lyght, and wyt be far fro them: And make theyr loynes: to réele vpright, be they lyke drunken men. 24 Poure out thy wrath: these frekes to strike, who walke so stubburnely, And let thyne ire: and wrath a lyke, take hold of them full nye. 25 Theyr dwellyngs fyne: be they supprest, that they theyr country lose: In all theyr tents: let no man rest, theyr stocke no man to chose,
26 For whom thou smitest: they scourge in sport, as though thou wouldst them so: Of thyne afflict: and wounded sort, they talke wyth pleasure to. 27 O let them fall: from sinne to sinne, as thou dydst plague the blynde, And suffer not: that they go in, thy iustice it to fynde. 28 Be they cast out: of booke of lyfe, who thus impugne Gods grace: No where in booke: memoratiue, wyth iust men haue they place. 29 As now for me: for that I mourne, in paynes and dolours lye: Thy health to me: O God returne, to rayse vp me on hye. 30 Gods name I wyll: wyth prayse aduaunce, in song full déepe in hart: I will in hymnes: hys laudes enhaunce, hys grace to shew in part. 31 And thys shall please: God far aboue, (who is a sprite most pure) Then Oxe or calfe: wyth horne and houe, to offer hym (be sure) 32 The humble soules: shall thys beholde, reioyce they shall by lyue: And ye that séeke: the Lord, be bold, reioyce, your soule shall lyue.
33 For God no doubt: the nedy heareth, they may reioyce more hye: His prisoners: in eye he bearth, he cannot them defye. 34 Let heauen and earth: and all betwene, hys worthy laud set out: The sea and all: that cxéepth therin, prayse hym all round about. 35 For God shall saue: swéete Zyon hill, hys place of godly rest: And Iudas townes: build vp he will, to dwell in them possest. 36 Hys seruauntes true posteritie, shall it enherite iust: And they that loue: hys maiestie, of dwellyng theare may trust. ¶The Collecte. O Lorde of all pitie and compassion, incline thyne eare vnto vs to vnderstande the certentie of thy truth and saluation, and that we may bee so purged from the filthines of all synne, to haue a name in thy blessed booke of election, there to be registred amōg thy dere electes, through, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LXX. The iust man here: calth God to ayde, To be protect: from hasty brayde, Of all hys foes (to hate) so ryfe: By hys good hand: to be well stayde, Deus in adiuto∣rium.No tyme that he: be ouerlayde, By weakenes frayle (of all) his lyfe. 1 O God to me: thyne helpe intende, In hast thy selfe: to mercy bende, and me (O Lord) deliuer quite: Lyke grace I craue: that thou extend, Thy helpe from heauen: so downe to send, to ayde me strong: by (godly) might. 2 In hast be they: confounded all, Wyth shamefull name: men myght them call, Which seke (in hate) my soule to spill: Be they put backe: and dryuen to wall, All vyle reproofe: myght them befall, who that to me: wyshe (any) euill. 3 Euen strayt fled backe: let all them bée, For theyr reward: foule shame to sée: these suttle (men but) glosers all: Whose tong to fawne: can whole agrée, To say there there: lo thus to mée, by guile (and craft) to make me fall. 4 But let all those: that séeke thy myght, With gladnes full: and ioy he dyght, in thée theyr Lord (and God) all daye: And let them all: that haue delite, In thy swéete health: say still aryght, the Lord (so good) be praysed aye.
5 As now for me: though poore I ligh, Afflicted sore: in misery, O Lord to me make (hasty) spéede: Thou art myne ayde: most trustely, My God of all: deliuery, to long (fro me) do not recéede. ¶The Collecte. O God eternall and inuincible protector of thy sub¦iectes, we besech thee make hast to helpe and suc∣cour thy poore houshold, who standeth in sute at thy maiestie, that we may escape all shame and rebuke of sinne and aduersitie so defended by thine ayde, through Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXI. The iust geueth thankes: to God aboue, Who kept his youth in stay: So craueth he still: for further loue, In age no tyme to stray. 1 In te domi¦ne speraui.MY trust O Lord: in thy good name, I haue (in hart) alway reposde: Let neuer me: be put to shame, from hope (I haue) to be deposde, 2 In thyne owne grace: and righteousnes, all quyte (from harme) deliuer me: Inclyne thyne eare: to my great stresse, to saue (my lyfe) and make me frée.
3 Both rocke and wall: be thou to me, to which (most sure) I may resort: Thy will it is: that kept I be, my holde thou art and (stable) sort. 4 And make me scape: the tyrannye, my God (and Lord) of wycked foe: To scape the hand: of man to spye, both false (in hart) and cruell to. 5 Thou art my hope: and patience, O Lord for whom I (dayly) long: From euen my youth: my confidence, thou hast (no dout) bene euer strong. 6 For sith my birth: by thée alone, full sure (by thée) were kept my wayes: Thou pluckst  out: my mothers wombe, my mouth (therfore) shall sprede thy prayse. 7 A monster great: men me report, so many iudge (that be) vniust: But yet thou art: my stable sort, in whom is all my (hope and) trust. 8 O let my mouth: wyth prayses flow, that thée I may land (alway) thus: That I may sing: to hye and low, thyne honour (great most) glorious. 9 In tyme of age: reiect me not, that out (from thée) I be not cast: And leaue me not: all desolate, in (néedefull) tyme when strength doth wast
10 For now my foes: together iet, in counsayle whole (they do) conspire: To rayle at me: they be all set, to trap my soule in (hateful) ire. 11 They say hym God: hath whole reiect, sue on (therfore) and take hym now: And full ye may: on hym he wrect, for none (in earth) wyll hym auow. 12 O God from me: depart not far, O God my God (to thée) I cry: From me thy helpe: do not debarre, make hast (to come) my foes be nye. 13 And let them all: confounded bée, to sinke (and drowne) who seke my soule, Let shame them take: and vilanie, who wishe my lyfe (my soule) to foyle. 14 As now for me: most quietly, I will abyde thy (louing) hand: Yea day by day: more earnestly, my mouth (and tonge) shall prayse thy sond. 15 My mouth shall tell: thy righteousnes, thy sauing health (to me) all day: But ende of this: great gentlenes, I can not thinke or (wholy) say. 16 In this my hope: I will go on, in God my Lord (so great) of power: I will expresse: of thée alone, thy truth (so ferme) both day and hower.
17 For thou O God▪ hast taught me well, from (all my) youth vnto this day: Thy meruels I: therfore will tell, thy wonders (great and) how they lay. 18 But me in age: when heares be white, depresse me not (O Lord) adowne: I will first tell: thy power and myght, this age (that is) and them to come. 19 For sure O God: thy truth is sene, to heauen (aboue) lyft vp so hye: Things great by thée: so wrought hath bene, who can (in power) be lyke to thée. 20 How great and sore: aduersitie, thou madest me oft (in lyfe) to spy: Yet didst thou turne: to quicken mée, from déepe (of stresse) to rayse me hye. 21 Beside thou didst: encrease my raigne, with honor (much so) more and more: When turnd thou wart: and pleasd agayne. of ioy (so glad) thou gauest me store. 22 I will thée prayse: in psaltry swéete, my God (and Lord) thy truth to tell: To thée my harpe: shall stand as méete, O Lord (so good) of Israell. 23 My lips and mouth: both fayne and glad, shall be (alway) to sing to thée: So shall my soule: for mercy had, Which thou (by grace) hast made so frée.
24 My tonge shall talke: thy righteousnes, from day to day (and that) euen till▪ Because wyth shame: thou dydst represse, my foes (so fierce) that wisht me euill. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty god which raignes eternally in that hie throne of maiestie, and yet doost not disdayne to looke vpon vs poore miserable wormes crepyng here on earth, and also doost not suffer vs to bee confoun∣ded with shame for euermore, we beseehe thee to ful∣fill our lyps wyth thy worthy prayse, and exercise our hartes in continuall meditation of all thy goodnes declared to vs, Through Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXII. In letter prayd: king Dauid playne, His sonne to spede: in all hys raigne: In sprite more true: yet mnt it is, Of Christes God sonne: and king of blis. 1 Deus iu∣dicium.BEstow O God: thy iudgements true Upon the kyng: annoynted due: Thy iustice eke: geue thou therto, To this kings sonne: in it to go. 2 Then shall he iudge: the people ryght, The good to saue: the bad to smyte: He shall the poore: afflict defend, The meke to quyte: the proud to bend. 3 The mountaines great: swete peace shal bring Unto thy folke: in gouernyng: The smaller hils: shall righteousnes, So sprede a lyke: in faythfulnes.
4 The simple sort: in misery, To holde their right: he shall applye: The poore mans childe: he shall protect, And briber stroy: that him so wrect. 5 They shall feare thée: in reuerence, As long as sunne hath influence: Or while the moone: her face doth showe, From age to age: from hye to lowe. 6 He shall come down: as rayn from seas, On grasse new shorne: or woll the flease: As showers swéete: on earth do lyte, To cheare all thing: in fruitfull sight. 7 In his good dayes: all rightwise men, Shall floryshe then and rise agayne: Swéete peace shalbe: on euery side, As long as Moone▪ her sphere doth ryde. 8 From sea to sea: his rule shalbe, From Palestyne: to déepe red sea: From Euphrates: to holy land, From cost to cost: how wyde it standth. 9 The Ethiopes: in wildernes, Full méeke to hym: shall bowe their knées: His foes shall séeme: to licke the dust, All prostrate ligh: to hym they must. 10 Of Tharsys kings: and other Iles, shall gifts present: him otherwhiles: Of arabye: and saba kings, shall humbly bryng: their offeryngs.
11 To make short tale: what kings there be, In earth must geue: hym homage frée: Yea nations all: shall them submyt, To hold of hym: and kysse his féete. 12 For he the poore: shall soone releife, The crying wretch: to ryd from griefe: The nedy man: all comfortles, Without all helpe: he will release. 13 I saye agayne: he will be good, To nedy man: and poore of bloud: Though here he be: both torne and brent, Their soules to saue: he will consent. 14 Their soules from fraude: in vsurye, He will them ryd: that tyranny: Theyr names to him shall shine full cleare, Their bloud, his sight: shall count full deare. 15 And liue he shall: to hym shalbe, So geuen the golde: of Arabye: He shall for poore: make sute alway, The poore for it: shall prayse hym ye. 16 One hand full sowen: of wheate on hyll, For growth and length: then shake it will. In Lybanon: eke trées so hye, As gréene as grasse: all townes shall lygh. 17 Hys name shall still: and aye endure, Before the sonne: it was full sure: Hys grace shall blesse: all people iust, All heathen him▪ shall prayse and trust.
18 This God our Lord: he blest full well, Euen iust the God: of Israell: He wondrous thinges: doth worke alone, All mysteries: by hym be done. 19 Hys name be blest: in vnitie, For euer one: in trinitie: This name shall fill: the earth agayne, Say we therto, Amen, Amen. ¶The Collecte. WE acknowledge O God almighty thy holy name to be worthely magnified, wherunto we now re∣sort with humble supplication, besechyng thee to sup¦presse all hostilitie of our oppressours, who enuye thy prosperous and blissefull raygne of thy sonne our Sauiour Christe, geue vs thy people such peace wherby we may ensue all righteousnes & godli∣nes, through the mediation of our said Lord & saui∣our, who wyth thee, &c. ¶The ende of the second booke.
Here beginneth the thirde Booke of Psalmes. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXIII. This musing Psalme: by Dauid made: to Aaph put to sing, Doth shew the endes of good and bad: what vice what vertue bringth. 1 O Good is God: to Israell, Quam bo∣nus Israel Deus.To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the swéete, And good men féele the smart. 2 But yet my féete: wel nye were gone: to dout of godly wayes, My steps of lyfe: almost were slipt: to renne in lyke astrayes. 3 For why I fret▪ all whoe in zeale: to note how sinners were: In peace wyth blisse: all whole beset: the good men all in feare. 4 For they of death: féele no distresse: nor much it doth them fret, Theyr strength is fresh: in euery part: well fed and fat they iet. Yet good is God to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 5 Misfortune none: befalth these men: no labour pressth them hard: They haue no scourge: as other men: all welth is theyr reward. 6 Of this ariseth: their hawty pride: wherin they vaunt so stout: All clad they bée: wyth wyckednes: and wrong euen round about.
7 With falnes foule: theyr eyes be sweld: their gullets féele no hurst Their paunches ful: their helth so quart: theyr hartes excede in lust Yet good is God to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 8 And others they: corrupt with talke: they speake all that is nought They do blaspheme: euen God aboue: such rage dewraith their thought. 9 For vp to heauen▪ they cast their mouth: Gods prouidēce to scorne Their tong in earth: must beare the rule: by them ye poore is lorne. 10 This makth all folke: to fall to them: to sue their wealth vnto: Their water cups: to drinke in part: to ease theyr want and wo. Yet good is God: to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 11 The people mad: tush say they all: do God such matters know? Hath God aboue: respect or care: of thinges so done below? 12 For lo say they: these wycked men: they prosper well in all: The world is theirs: as ioly men: all goodes to them befall. 13 And some of them: sayd thus agayne: my hart I clensd in vayne: To purge my lyfe: from suttle art: I count it folish payne. Yet good is God to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart.
14 Thus vext I went: afflict in hart: all day by wycked sect: In early morne: sore scourged I was: to haue this cae detect. 15 I had almost: sayd euen as they: lo then I had bene wood: For so should I: haue euill reproued: thy flocke of children good. 16 I sought and sought: to search it out: O Lord what this might be: But thou O God: so secret wart: it was to hard for me. Yet good is God: to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 17 I doubted still: tyll God I sought: in hys most saintly place: To note hys wont: in all their endes: at last of all theyr race. 18 I spied thou setst: theyr slipper state: in brittle goodes vnclere: Thou cast thē down: on hed to nought: yea when most hie they were 19 O how they quayld: most sodenly: cast down and perisht quyte? For their misdéedes: & wyckednes: to nought brought down in sight. Then good is God to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 20 As dreames so vayne: do vanyshe quite: from man yt wakth frō slepe Theyr image Lord: so shalt thou stroy: thy citie not to kepe. 21 Myne inward ghost: sore vext it was: before this case I knew: It pearst my raynes: and rootes of hart: to note their workes vntrue
22 So fond I was: and ignorant: in secret workes of thée: To brute beast lyke: all voyde of wit: so dull thy trade to sée. For good thou art: to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 23 But yet O lord: though thus I thought: I was held vp by thée: My right hand yet: thou heldst so vp: that far I dyd not flée. 24 As me thou taughtst: so hence thou wylt: teach me thy secret wil, And after that: with glory bright: my soule with ioy to fill. 25 For whome haue I: in heauen but thée: to loue or trust aright: Or who in earth: can health impart: but thou my harts delight. All good thou art to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart. 26 Though flesh & hart: here fayled me: thou didst not me forsake: Thou art O God: my strength of hart: my part thou art to take. 27 For lo who far: from thée do stray: they perishe shall no doubt: A whoryng who: eke renne fro thée: thou driuest them al to nought 28 But good for me: by God to hold: in thée O God to trust: To tell thyne actes: how good thou art: in Syon gate full iust. O good is God to Israell, To them of perfect hart: Though wycked men: haue here the sweete, And good men feele the smart.
¶The Collecte. GEue vs assistence of thy grace almighty father, & so guide our feete in meditation of thy righteous iudgementes, that we slyde at no tyme or be offended by vndiscrete zele, or enuy at the prosperitie of thine aduersaries, eyther to misconceyue thy euerlastyng prouidence, or yet to bee the slacker in the godlye wayes of thy holye testimonies, so that we may alway ioyfully beare thy crosse sent vnto vs, hauing thee for our lot and comfort therin, and so hauyng our hartes pure in thee, we maye prayse thy rightuousnes in the eternall gates of thy heauenly Hierusalem and euer∣lastyng habitation, Through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXIIII. A sore complaint (here may) ye read, Agaynst Gods foes so vayne: Which Christ his worde: and eke his flocke, Pursue wyth myght and mayne, 1 WHy art so far: O God (our God) Vt quld Deus repulisti.For euer wylt thou flée? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy shéepe, Of pasture (as we bee) 2 O God (our Lord) thinke thou vpon: thy congregation dere, Of olde so strong: possest by thée: whom thou redemst so clere. And thynke vpon the (chosen) lot: of thyne inheritaunce: Of Syon mount: wherin thou dwelt: wyth thy good ordinaunce. 3 Lift vp in hast: thy féete (and handes) confound thy foe in face: How hath he stroyd: thy sanctuary: the seat of thy good grace?
Why art so far O God (our God) For euer wilt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee.) 4 Thy foes dyd rore (full hye) in pryde: in tyme of feastfull day: As conquest signes: in temple there: theyr banners did they splay. 5 Where he that once did (cut and) hew: a beame or sparre of wood: To beautifie: thy temple worke: was thought deuout and good. 6 But now they boast (and brag) herein: to pull all down to nought: To breake with mall: & eke wyth are: the gates of caruers wrought And yet art far: O God (our God): For euer wilt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee.) 7 Yea fyre (and flame) now haue they set: vpon thy holy place: They haue defylde: & cast to ground: ye house where dwelt thy grace 8 They sayd (in wrath) to stroy them quite: let vs in one consent: Gods houses thus: in all the land: they haue all wholy brent. We (now can) sée no wonted signes: there is no Prophet more: Not one wyth vs: of wisdom sage: to ease our bondage sore. And yet art far: O God (our God) For euer wylt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: against thy shepe, Of pasture (as we be.) 10 How long O God: shall thus (in spite) the aduersary brayd. Thy house, thy feastes: thy fold deface: hys brags at thée be layd?
How long I say: shall he (so mad) thy holy name blaspheme, For euer thus: hym shall we sée: thy power so lyght to deme? 11 Why than (O Lord) hold still thy handes: & winkst at this his spite? Thy hand draw out: of bosom soone: to stroy thy foes by myght. Why art so far: O God (our God) For euer wylt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy shepe, Of pasture (as we be.) 12 Yet God my kyng (and Lord) he is: of olde in yeares now gone: He health bestowd: on all the earth: himselfe doth it alone. 13 Thou didst deuyde the sea (as once) by myght of thy great hand: The Dragons heds: thou brakest in two: so drownd by sea & land. 14 Thou crushedst the head of Whales (I say) Leniathan so great: For thy dere flocke: thou madest hym meat: which was in desert set. Then why art far from vs (O God) For euer wilt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee.) 15 Of stony rockes so (flinty) hard: thou broughtst out fluds & springs And so thou driedst: great waters vp: for all theyr gatheryngs. 16 The nyght & day: be thine (at will) thou spreadst both light & sunne The sunne by day: to shyne so cleare: by nyght to shyne the Moone. 17 The costes of all: the earth (so wyde) thou dydst them place ful due Thou summer madest: and wynter both: eche other right to sue.
And yet art far: from vs (O God) For euer wylt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee.) 18 Remember this (in mynd) O Lord: thyne emnies how they vaunt, How folishly: the people haue: reuylde thy name a taunt. 19 Geue not thy turtels (sely) soule: to beast of cruell port: Forget not aye: the company: of thyne afflicted sort. 20 Behold thy pact: ones made (to vs) for darkenes pestilent: Is spred the earth: where théeues do dwell: both false and violent. And yet art far from vs (O God) For euer wilt thou flee? Why fumeth thy wrath: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee. 21 O suffer not the poore (that is) contryte to féele a shame: But let the poore: and nedy soule: for helpe aye prayse thy name. 22 Ryse God (awake) and iudge thy cause: thy foe thou séest extreme: Beare still in mynde: hys vyle attempt: for daily he blasphemth. 23 Forget not thou the (ragyng voyce) the brags of all thy foes: Theyr boasting pryde: do mount alway: at thée theyr hatred goes. O than be nye: O God (our God) For euer do not flee? And fume no more: agaynst thy sheepe, Of pasture (as we bee.)
¶The Collecte. O Lorde the almightye maker of heauen and earth, with al the furnishing therof, which of thine inesti¦mable loue didst redeme the world agayn by the price of thy precius blud, be myndful of thy poore desolate flocke, ouermuch laden in misery and wo, to beholde how thy glorye is troden vnder foote by the wycked powers of this worlde, heare our lamentable teares, and comfort vs wyth ioy agayne after our afflictions, to prayse thy mighty hand all dayes of our lyfe: who liuest and raignest, one God wyth the father, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXVI. A prophecy: of Christ ye spye, who threath the wycked state: Confite∣bimur ti∣bi Deus.Not so to wry: their tiranny, to wreke poore men in hate. 1 WE do confesse: and thankes expresse, to thée O God wyth prayse: Thy name is nye: as testifie, thy wondrous workes alwayes. 2 When tyme most fit: shall serue to it, I then will iudge the ryght: In day so set: when men be met, all hartes to sprede in sight. 3 Proud earthly man: shall melt euen than, who dwelleth on earth shall quaile: I set the ground: of earth so round, Sela.I can it shake no fayle.
4 I did vpbrayd: such fooles and sayd, deale not so madly sirs: To wycked rout: I spake full out, blow not your horne to fierce. 5 Lift not to hie: your horne sayd I, your power all wrong ensuth: Wyth stubburn neckes: speake you no checks but bend your hartes to truth. 6 For hye renowne: commeth not adowne, from East, or West, or South: How wyde ye bée: ye cannot flée, this Gods true worde of mouth. 7 For God iwis: right domes man is, no thought can scape his eyes: Hym throweth he downe: hym doth he crown as he can best deuise. 8 In Gods ryght hand: a cup theyr standth, of wyne full red to sée: But mixt wyth lies: and dregs it lighes, which he poorth diuersly. The good at brynke: the cleare doth drynke, God brinche them gently so: The bad doth sup: the dregs full vp, the botomes troublous wo. 9 Still will I talke: such wonted walke, of Iacobs God and Lord: His doomes to sing: hym worshippyng, I will wyth hartes accord.
10 And God sayth thus: downe will I crushe, all hornes of wycked men: Euen so will I: exalt on hye, all ryghteous power agayne. ¶The Collecte. O Most louing sheparde, which for the redemption of thy flocke didst drinke the bytter cup of thy paynfull passion, we pray thee so attempre the cup of aduersitie in such measure to vs, that we may glad∣ly in hart beare our crosse, therto strengthned by thy holy sprite, and that we neuer walke in the proude wayes of this world to drynke their heauy cup in the world to come, who lyuest and reygnest with the fa∣ther and the holy ghost. &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXVI. Against oppressours tyrannous, who put Gods flocke to wrong: This Psalme would they: should well discusse▪ Nota in Iudea deusGods power and hand so strong. 1 IN Iury God: is known full well, the ryghteous doth confesse: His name is great: in Israell, the wycked sayth no lesse. 2 His tabernacle: Salem is, a place of peace most swéete: And Syon hill: a seat of his, where raignth hys grace full méete.
3 This God euen there: for all theyr sake, his loue so them behelde: Bowe, arrowes, sword: and shield he brake, Sela.all battayle set in field. 4 Thou Syon mount: doost more excell, in honor fame and myght: Then robbers hils: where that they dwell, how fierce they range in sight. 5 These Gyantes proud: of stomacke fell, euen they be spoylde agayne: They slept theyr sléepe: though full they swell, theyr handes shall nought retayne. 6 O Iacobs God: at thy reproofe, these tyrantes fell to ground: Theyr charets splayd: and strayed aloofe, both horse and man I drownd. 7 Euen thou alone: thou fearefull art, in wrath agaynst the proud: Who can resist: thyne irefull dart, O Lord who euer could? 8 From heuen thou madest: thy iudgement soūd that earth thy power myght heare: So earthly man: was soone on ground, he shooke and quayld for feare. 9 When God arose: to iudge in ryght, hys sayntes opprest wyth smart: Then dyd hys strength: appeare in sight, Selato saue the meke in hart.
10 Mans fiercenes past: shall full set out, thy prayse (O Lord) no lesse: Their traynes & guiles: which stil they clout, from hence thou shalt represse. 11 Then vow your vowes: and pay them well, to your Lord God full glad: I byd you all: which nye hym dwell, bryng giftes to God so drad. 12 Stout Princes sprites: so furious, he can both quenche and quell: On them his hand: is wonderous, how fierce in earth they swell. ¶The Collecte. MOst drad and soueraygne Lord graunt we be∣sech thee to our meditations such effect, for the confession of thy holy name, that we be so illightned by thy eternall hyls, to haue vnderstandyng of thy glo¦rious resurrection, that we be not disapointed of thy glory at thy fearefull iudgement, Through Christ. &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXVII. Strong fayth in voyce: with diligence, for helpe he cryeth a lowd: He stickth to Gods: good prouidence, Voce mea ad Domi∣num.and seeth himselfe alowd. 1 TO God to cry: in voyce I will, to God I say in voyce: He shall to me: geue eare full still, to make my hart reioyce.
2 In troublous dayes: the Lord I sought, my woundes still ranne by night: My handes and strength ful low were brought my soule fled comfort quyte. 3 I will of God: yet mindfull be, to wayle I wyll not cease: SelaWhan I my soule: fore vext shall sée, my voyce shall not decrease. 4 Thou holdst myne eyes: full waking still, that rest I none can take: So faynt and weake: I haue no wil, once speche by mouth to make. 5 I did therfore: than strayt recownt, the dayes of olde ferne yeares: I did reuolue: the fathers wont, in their distresse and feares. 6 My songs from mynde: shall not depart, to others which I sing: By night I muse: and talke in hart, my sprite searcht euery thinge. 7 And thus I playne: wyll God my Lord, absent himselfe for aye? Shal I be thus: so sore abhorde, will he his grace denay? 8 Hys pytye great: will it a waye: for euer not to tourne: And will his worde: now ende (I saye) to make vs still to mourne?
9 Hath God forgot: to pytye thus? can he himselfe forget? And will he shut: so hard from vs, Sela.his loues and mercyes great. 10 At last I sayd: this wauering, declareth my frayltye fonde: But I entend: in mynd to bryng, the chaunge of his good hande. 11 My Lords great actes: I will recount, my fayth to hym to bynde: His wondrous workes: how hye they mount, In tymes of olde to fynde. 12 In all thy workes: so wrought by thée, my study whole shall stand: My talke shalbe: most frankly frée, to spreade thy dedes of hand. 13 Thy way O God: I sée is set, in holynes all bryght: What God is like: in glory great, as this our God of might? 14 Thou God art he: which openly, workst wonders hye as God: To people farre: and sonderly, thy power thou spredst abroade. 15 Thou hast redéemd: with might in déede, thy people tenderly: Olde Iacobs stocke: and Iosephes séede, escapt by thée they be.
16 The waters déepe: saw thée O God, the waters déepe saw thée: They were afrayd: to féele thy rod, the depthes dyd quake to sée. 17 Thy cloudes raynd down: so waters fell, the heauens for sound dyd ryng: The stones of hayle: were arrowes fell, by them thy foes to wryng. 18 Thy thunders noyse: dyd rumble stout, in ayre the sphere aboue: Thy lightnyngs shoone: all round about, the earth dyd quake and moue. 19 Thy way in sea: is large and wyde, thy pathes in waters great: Thy footesteps yet: cannot be spied, how there thy féete be set. 20 Thou ledst thy people pastor like, as shéepe in all theyr way: By Moses hand: thou didst them kéepe, whom Aaron helpt to stay. ¶The Collecte. O God the wonderfull workesman of deedes incō∣prehensible, most specially in the element of wa∣ter, sometyme by staying the rage of them to the de∣fence of thine elect, to the cōsuming of thine enemies sometyme in turnyng to the nature of wyne, to the cō¦fort of thy seruauntes, we besech thee so to accept the voyces of our cryes, that we may feele thy mercy con∣tinually poured vpon vs, to preserue and to comforte vs, Through &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXVIII. This hye profound: oration, A monitorie is: To God to turne: to trust vpon, Attendite populi meus.by workes so great of his. 1 MY people kinde: heare this my law, true lore it full auowth: Inclyne your eare: in gentle awe, to harke my wordes of mouth. 2 My lipes sage sawes: shall now vnfolde, which parables might séeme: And prouerbes straunge: of yeares of olde, how we should God estéeme. 3 Which thinges we haue: both hard and tride, to be most certen true: Which fathers olde: to vs a lyed, vs tolde that should ensue. 4 Not we therfore: will hyde the same, from their posterytye: To them to tell: Gods lauds and fame, his wonders straunge to sée. 5 He made a pact: with Iacob iust, and law set Israell: Wherin he chargd: our fathers trust, these things their seede to tell. 6 That so myght all their linage know, in ages still to come: To ryse and sprede: to hye and low, Gods actes to hys renome.
6 That so myght all: theyr linage know, in ages still to come: To ryse and sprede: to hye and low, Gods actes to his renome. 7 That they therby: myght truly set, in God affiaunce strong: That they should not: hys workes forget, but kepe his hestes full long. 8 Lest they should proue: theyr fathers lyke, a faythles stubburne kynde: A people loth: the ryght to seke, which fell from God in mynde. 9 All lyke the tribe: of Ephraym, in armes wyth dartes and bowes: Yet turnd theyr backes: at fightyng tyme, and had foule ouerthrowes. 10 They kept not (lo) true tutch wyth God, hys pact they oueryed: From hys swéete hestes: they strayd abrode, to walke hys law they fled. 11 And soone forgate: what done had he, to them as beastes vnkynd: His wondrous workes: that they had séene, were cleane cast out of mynd. 12 Great meruels wrought: his mighty hand, in theyr forefathers sight: At Zoan field: in Egipt land, to shew hys power and might.
13 He cut the seas▪ apart to stand, as walles erect on hye: He led them through: to go to land, while they like heapes did lygh. 14 He led them forth: in Iorneys right, by clowde as guyde by day: By night whole out: in firy lyght, his angels kept their way. 15 He claue the rockes: in wildernes, how hard so euer growne: Where out he slackt: theyr thirstines, as flouds from depthes had flowne. 16 He made the stone: to gushe in streams, from them did water strike: Though flyntes by kynd: kepe fiery leames, God made them drinke to kepe. 17 For all this yet: agaynst his will, they sinned more and more: They hym prouokt: in desert still, for all his gentle store. 18 They tempted God: to proue hys power, theyr hartes went much astray: They would haue meat: at present hower, theyr lustes they would assay. 19 Agaynst theyr God▪ most euery where, they spake lyke rebels thus: Can God prouide: a table here, in wyldernes for vs?
20 He strake the rocke: the waters spred, as streames they flowed in déede: But can (say they): God geue vs bread, or flesh hys flocke to féede? 21 When God this heard: he was full wroth, his fyre in Iacob brent: Hys heauy plage: in anger goeth, euen downe on Israell sent. 22 Because no hope: in God they layde, that he could féede theyr want: Nor yet put trust: in hym for ayde, God made theyr hartes to pant. 23 He dyd commaund: the cloudes aboue, which flote the ayre about: He bade the heauens: theyr gates remoue, to poure theyr giftes full out. 24 Then rayned downe: that Manna swéete, therof that they should tast: He sent them down: about theyr féete, from heauen thys vyand cast. 25 O wondrous act: that man dyd eate, such foode of aungels strong: He pourd them down: theyr fill of meate, their pitched tentes among. 26 He made the East: wynd blow hys blast, amid the heauen in length: He forst the southwynde blow as fast, by hys great power and strength.
27 So than he raynd: as thicke as dust, of flesh aboundant store: And fetherd foules: to fill theyr lust, as thicke as sand on shore. 28 Amid theyr tentes: it fell as motes, not far to séeke therfore: Euen round about: theyr dwellyng cotes, it dyd them serue the more. 29 They thus dyd eate: and fed they were, full vp vnto the chin: He graunted them: theyr lust so far, what they could wishe therin. 30 Theyr lust was not: abased so, for still in lust they quothed: And whyle they chowd: both to and fro, in mouth this meat they lothed. 31 Lo wrath from God: was kyndled sheu, he slew theyr worthies great: He feld to ground: theyr chosen men, in Israell beset. 32 For all this yet: they sinned still, theyr wonted guise they playde: To trust to hym: they had no will, though wonders he displayde. 33 Therfore he spoyld: theyr lyuyng dayes, in vanitie to lygh: Theyr yeares he spent: in feares and frayes, to vere both hart and eye.
34 As long as God: them strake and slue, they sought hym then full gent: They séemed tho: theyr sinnes to rue, to God at morne they went. 35 Then could they well: remember this, that God was all their strength: That God full good: redemer is, theyr comfort most at length. 36 But yet they dyd: but glose in speache, theyr hartes agréed not so: They lyed in tonge: thus hym to seache, dissemblers dyd they go. 37 Theyr myndes to hym: were nothing sound, but hollow hartes they had: They stoode not still: wyth hym so bound, in league and couenaunt glad. 38 Yet he so good: theyr sinnes forget, and would not them despise: Full oft: hys wrath: he dyd retrete, that whole it should not ryse. 39 For he dyd count: they were but flesh, as frayle as britle glasse: And that they were: like wynde to gesse, that passth wythout repasse. 40 Ryght many tymes: in wildernes, they hym prouoked sore: How much grieued they: his gentlenes, in desert more and more.
41 They dyd reuolte: oft God to tempt, that saint of Israell: They proued hys power: in mad contempt, as he in boundes should dwell. 42 They minded not: hys able hand, what once for them it wrought: Nor yet that day: when they were bond, how he redemption brought. 43 How he had done: miraculously, in Egipt fully out: In Zoan field: his wonders hye, they dyd forget no dout. 44 When he did turne theyr waters swéete, to bloud how they increast: And made theyr springes: all full on méete, for drinke for man or beast. 45 He lyce sent eke: all kynd of flies, which them deuoured quyte: Among them frogs: dyd scraule and ryse, to vexe them day and nyght. 46 He gaue theyr fruites: of whole encrease, to caterpillers spoyle: The grashopper: dyd neuer cease, to wast theyr labours toyle. 47 He dyd vnbarke: of vyne the trées, wyth stones in clods congeald: And eke theyr trées: of mulberies, wyth frostes so sene but selde.
48 He smote their beastes: of cart and plough, wyth hayle in his great ire: Their other flockes: he smoote full rough, wyth coales of burnyng fire. 49 He cast on them: his fury whote, wrath, woo, with anguyshe styng: With such fel plages: them sore he smote which Angels euyll do bring. 50 He made playn waye: for his sore wrath to go, and stroyd them quyte: No sowle he sparde: from sodaine death, their beasts the plage dyd smyte. 51 He stroyd theyr fruites: begotten fyrst In Egypt furious: Their prymer fruts: of all their lust where Chams séede dwelt in house. 52 But yet he led: his people frée, lyke shepe he kept them aye: As shepe in flocke: most tenderly in desert led their waye. 53 He brought them out: in suertye all feares that they might flée: He ouerwhelmd: their foes at eye, In waues of fomyng sea. 54 He brought them iust: within the cost of his good Sanctuary: To this swete hyl: of vertue most which hys right hand dyd bye.
56 He Payyms draue: all out of place, and Iacobs stocke put in: Theyr heritage: he set the space, and met theyr lot by lyne. 57 But yet the Lord: they tempted hie, and hym prouoked still: They turned quite: his law awry, the signes of hys good wyll. 58 They turnd theyr backes: yea did conspire, as once theyr fathers went: To theyr old wontes: they dyd retyre, as sturdy bow in bent. 59 To reare hill aulters was theyr trade, wherby they moued hym sore: Of Idols grauen: theyr Gods they made, by which they greued him more. 60 God heard thys case: full wroth was he, wyth indignation great: At Israell: excedingly, hys sore displeasure fret. 61 That he did shoone: hys sacrary, which once in Sylo stoode: Hys tent I say: pitchd stedfastly, among olde Adams bloud. 61 So he eftsones: to thraldom sent, hys arke that was theyr strength: Which was theyr olde: fayre ornament, their foes possest at length.
62 His folke he gaue: vnto the sword, wyth warres entangled so: Hys heritage: full sore he deard, in much displeasant wo. 63 The fire eate vp: theyr lusty men both yong in armes and sydes: Theyr virgins yong: not honord then, wyth wedlocke songes as brides. 64 Theyr priestes by sword: were vily slayne▪ religion set at nought: No wydowes left: which should complayne, before all slayne by thought. 65 The Lord as one: layd long in slepe, at length from slepe awoke: Wyth wyne refresht: in hart full depe, as gyaunt strength he toke. 66 Hys foes rearwardes: euen down he felde, theyr hynder partes he strake: That most in shame: they euer dweld, so he theyr armies brake. 67 All Iosephs trybe: he dyd refuse hys arke to them to bryng: So Ephraym: he would not vse, he ment an other thyng. 68 But Iudas trybe: he toke hym till, wherin he bode in place: And olde beloued: swéete Zyon hyll, he chase in louely grace.
69 And there he built: hys sanctuary, as princely palace hye: He founded it: as earth to lygh in state perpetually. 70 And Dauid meke: he dyd elect, hys seruaunt whom he loued: To state so hye: from state abiect, from shepe cotes hym remoued. 71 He toke them vp: in followyng, hys ewes full big wyth yong: To guide hys folke: in pasturyng, hys heyres of Iacob sprong. 72 And he them fed: in faythfull hart, as Christ annoynted kyng: He gouernd them: in prudent part, hys raygne all blisse dyd spring. ¶The Collecte. ALmightye God which art most bountifull feast maker, we beseche thee release our soules with that heauenly Manna thy spirituall grace, that we dy∣rected by the hand of thy prouidence, may continu∣ally dwell in the holy mount of thy chosen congrega∣tion, once redemed by thyne almighty hand, at the last to come to thy holy tabernacle, to ioy with thee eternally, by the gift of thy sonne Iesus Christ to whō with thee and the holy ghost be all honor and glo∣ry. Amen.
The Argument. Psalme. LXXIX. ¶The church lamenth: the tyranny, of all her foes so fell: Deus vene runt gen∣tes.Her sinnes she waylth: most mourningly▪ yet trust of helpe full well. 1 O God now come: be Paynyms wylde, thyne heritance to wast: Thy holy house: they haue defylde, Hierusalem is raced. 2 Thy seruaunts corps: this heathen sect, hath cast to byrdes for meate: Thy sayntes weake flesh: they haue reiect, to beastes of earth to eate. 3 Theyr bloud they haue: lyke water shed, about Hierusalem: And none there was: to mourne the dead, or yet to bury them. 4 We are become: an open shame, to all our neyghbours next: But mockyng stockes: in laughyng game, on all sides we be vext. 5 O Lord how long: shall last thyne ire? for euer shall it bée? Thy gelousie: to burne as fyre, for euer shall we sée? 6 Poure out thy wrath: vpon thy foes, for Paynyms know not thée: Upon those realmes: which be to lose, thy name and power to sée.
7 Deuourd they haue: true Iacobs place, hys séede and house lygheth wast: The sanctuary: of thy good grace, the walles they haue defaced. 8 Our former sinnes: remember not, make spéede, shew mercy soone: Thou séest our griefe: our wofull state, how all we be vndone. 9 Helpe vs O God: our sauiour, for prayse of thy good name: Our sinnes our ill: behauiour, forgeue, forget the same. 10 Least heathen rayle: and say in spite, where now is come theyr God? Thy seruaunts bloud: so shed in sight, reuenge, and shew thy rod. 11 O heare the sighes: and sorowes déepe, of captiue men in bonds: Men iudgd to death: sée that thou kepe, shewe forth thy strength of hands. 12 The blasphemy: at thée so cast, by these our neighbours partes: Requyte it them: O Lord at last, seuen solde on all theyr hartes. 13 So we thy shepe: and people true, to thankes we shall agrée: Thy prayse our tonges: shall still ensue, to our posteritie.
¶The Collecte. PReuent vs O Lord with thy great mercy before the zeale of thy wrath be kindled to vengeance, graunt that we may be edified by the exāples of such as haue shed their bloud for cōfessing thy name, and that we commended to thee by theyr petitions may at thy mercy receyue remission of our synnes, Through, &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXX. This Psalme doth aske: deliuerance, from hard captiuitie: In peace and truth: good Christians, Quiregis Israell.should pray Christes church to bee. 1 THou shepeheard king: of Israell, that Ioseph ledst as shepe: On Cherubin: that sittest so well, heare now, appeare, and kepe. 2 For Ephraym: and Beniamin, and eke Manasses sake: Stirre vp thy power: and strength of thyne, and vs to mercy take. 3 Restore vs God: to loue agayne, and shyne on vs thy face: If thou Lord wylt: vs visite playne, we shall be safe by grace. 4 Thou Lord and God: of hostes I say, how long shall fret thyne ire? Agaynst thy folke: which daily pray, to thée in méeke desyre.
5 Thou féedst them full: wyth bread of teares, they mourne for wo at meat: Thou geuest them drinke: in weping feares, in heaped measure great. 6 A cause of stryfe: thou makest vs be, to all our neyghbours next: They rayle on vs: and scornd be we, our foes vs sore haue vext. 7 Turne vs to thée: thou God of hostes, and shyne thy face on vs: Kepe vs in peace: represse theyr bostes, and whole we shalbe thus. 8 Thou didst translate: from Egipt darke, a vyne euen so thou wouldst: To plant it there: it was thy warke, whence Paynyms were expulst. 9 Thou madest it rome: first clensd by hand, from Cananites the wéedes: And roote it toke: it spred the land, these were thy godly déedes. 10 The hyls were closde: wyth shade of it, the hyll of Syon house: The boughes therof: dyd sprede so fit, lyke Ceders glorious. 11 She did extend: her braunches wyde, to touch the feas extremes: In length it went: a long the syde, of Euphrates the streames.
12 Why hast thou beat: his closure downe, to lay as open soyle? That they which walke: from towne to towne her grapes myght fréely spoyle. 13 The tushy bore: of woode full fierce, doth route it vp to stoure: A sauage beast: whose meat is gyrse, doth wholy it deuoure. 14 Turne thée we praye: thou God of hosts, looke down from heauen in spéede: Beholde this vine: in all our costes, and visite it at néede. 15 The vyneyard place: behold also, which thy right hand did set: For thy sonnes sake: defend therto, the braunch thou madst so great. 16 With fyer brent: it is cut downe, thy wrath was cause in sight: But they shal quayle: (when thou doost frown) which wrought this dedly spite. 17 Extend thy hand: vpon the man, of thy right mighty hand: Upon the sonne: of man that can, thy foes by strength withstand. 18 And so shall we: no more recéede, from thée so wyde to fall: Yf thou reuiuest: vs than in déede, thy name extoll we shall.
19 O Lord our God: turne vs agayne, from erryng far from thée: Shew vs thy light: of face so fayne, all whole then shall we bée. ¶The Collecte. VIsite thy vyne O Lorde which thy mightye hande hath deliuered from Egiptiacall bondage, that it may be reuiued continually by the brighte visage of thy presence, & that it may ioy prosperously to bryng forth good workes to the land of thy name, Through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXXI. A song of ioy to God: of maiestie aboue, Who geueth all thing aboundantly: to thē that him do loue. 1 NOw sing ye ioyfully: To God our strength & rocke: Exultate.Yea sing ye swete: in iubilies: to God of Iacobs stock 2 Streyne vp your psaltery: and wrest your tymbrels hye, Wyth mery harpe: and virginals: set out your melodye. 3 Blow out wyth trumpet lowde: in new mooues feast I say: In tyme so méete: accordingly: our solempne feastfull day. 4 By statute thus enact: it is for Israell: From Iacobs God: it is a law: hys worthy actes to tell. 5 God made in Iosephes séede: (for wytnes) thys decrée: Of Egipt land: whē out he went: where language straunge hard he. 6 I did his shulder ease: from burthens great and thicke: His hands escapte: the dayly toyle: of making potts and bricke,
7 Thou cryedst on me in stresse: I thée deliuered ryfe: Sela.In thunder close: I answerd thée: first tried at fluds of strife 8 O then my people heare: I wyll the iust assure: O Israell: if heare thou wylt: my worde which shall endure. 9 Strange God thou shalt not haue: no other God to serue: If thys thou doost: and frowardly: fro me thou doost not swerue. 10 I am the Lord thy God: who thée from Egypt led: Then set thy mouth: full open wyde: I wyll it fyll full fed. 11 But yet my people thus: would neuer heare my voyce, No Israell: would none of me: nor lyst in me reioyce. 12 I let them go therfore: theyr own hartes lustes to sue: Theyr crooked wayes: to walke at will: whych they did after rue. 13 O that my people meke: had heard my document: And Israell: had walkt my wayes: wyth gentle hartes assent. 14 How soone would I at ones: their foes haue wrested downe: And turnd my hand: agaynst them all: at them who firse did frown 15 Gods haters should haue knéeld: at héeles of them to lay: Though lyingly: they had it ment: theyr dayes had lastd for aye. 16 Yea then he would haue fed: wyth floure of finest wheate: And out of rocke: them had I fild: wyth hony pleasant meat. ¶The Collecte. OPen thou O Lord the mouthes of vs thy suppliants to rebounde out the prayse of thy glorious maiesty, and that we renouncing all Aegiptiacall works of darke ignorance may reioyce in the aduan∣cyng of thy blessed name through. &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXXII. This Psalme is thret: and lesson good, to iudges stately romes: Deus stetit in Syna∣goga.Amid the Iewes: as Christ he stoode, and blamde their wrongfull domes. 1 GOd standth in mids: of Princes hye, when they to counsayle fall: And iudge he is: theyr dedes to try, he iudgeth theyr iudgements all. 2 He once shall say: how long wyll ye, geue sentence wrongfully: How long wyll ye: acceptours be, Sela.of persons wickedly. 3 Defend the poore: and fatherles, speake law to theyr behoue: Of men afflict: in heauines, in ryght theyr cause approue. 4 The nedies sute: ryd ye hys cause, deliuer hym wyth spede: And plucke the poore: from all the clawes, of wycked bribers drede. 5 They nothyng know: nor vnderstand, they walke in darkenes depe: The bases réele: of all the land, for ryght, men mourne and wepe. 6 I sayd no lesse: but Gods ye bée, so hye I you estéemd: Of God most hye: as children frée, I you in office déemde.
7 But ye shall dye: as wretched men, to children most vnlike: To tyrauntes lyke: as one of them, ye all shall fall in dyke. 8 Ryse thou O God: iudge thou the land, where wronge hath such excesse: To heritage: thy mighty hand, shall clayme all heathennes. ¶The Collecte. GRaunt vs O Lorde thy grace, to decline frō wrong¦ful domes in iudgement, as thou commaundest it vnto vs, that we may relieue the nedefull sutes of thy poore afflict seruauntes, whereby we may be associa∣ted to the electe number of thy children, Thorough Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalme. Lxxxiij. The Hebrues here: do inuocate, Their God for helpe: against mens spite: Deus quis similis.The church this psalme: doth renouate, In her distresse: to scape all quite. 1 O God our God: within thy selfe, Hold not thy tonge: thys muet still: Nor silence kepe: but kepe our helth, Stay not O God: but punishe euill. 2 For lo thou séest: what murmuryng, Thyne enmies make: most arrogant: How hye aloft: theyr heds they bryng, Who thée do hate: how proud they vaunt.
3 They haue in guyle: their counsayles take, in Ire agaynst: thy people poore: Conspirde they be: close drifts they make, and all thy sayntes: they will deuoure. 4 They sayd come on: let vs them roote, euen quyte from out: all nations: Of Israell: the name to wroote, no man to be: to name them once. 5 For they haue layd: their heades in one, together knit: in hart and mynde: Confederat: they be echone, agaynst thy selfe: like beastes vnkinde. 6 The tents where kepe: the Edomits, the Ismalits: with might and mayne: With them be ioynd: the Moabits, the Agareus: they fume agayne. 7 So Geball folke: and Ammon to, beset in leage: with Amaleke: The Palestyns: with them do go, and they that dwell: in Tyrus eke. 8 To them be knyt: thassirians, a people fierce: and strong in armes: Lothes childer hye: they would aduaunce, Selawhose strēgth they be: to worke their harms. 9 But do to them: as Madian, did féele thy hand: and angry looke: As eke thou didst: to Siseran, to Iabyn eke: at Kyson broke.
10 They whole on heapes: at Endor quaylde, no graue receyued: their bodyes deade: Gods hand them all: so countervaylde, as dunge on earth: their carcase spred. 11 Make them withall: their princes gaye, to Oreb like: and Zeb also: As Zebée: and Salmana: make all their péeres like them to go. 12 Who sayd in pride: let vs possesse, Gods temple hye: to vs to ryse: Let vs deface: that holynes, with all the rites: and sacrifice. 13 Make them my God: to be in sight, all like the whele: down hill that slidh: And let them be: as stuble light, tost hye wyth wynde: that neuer bidth. 14 And lyke as fyre: that brenth the woode, the rage wherof: no trée can flée: As flames the hyls: where forage stode, do wast for heate: and parched be. 15 Euen so O God: all them pursue, with thy great sormes: and tempests stoure In thy sore wrath: make them to rue, all foule dismayde: in hart to loure. 16 With vyle reprofe: their faces fyll, with very shame: confound them all: That they might search: thy name and wyll, O Lord to thée: that they might fall.
17 Be they abasht: and vexed still, Yea more and more: both day and nyght: And let theyr fames: all shame bespill, Destroy theyr flesh: but saue theyr sprite. 18 That they may know: that thou alone, Whose name deuine: Iehoua is: Art rocke most hye: against our foen, Aboue the earth: that sittest in blisse. ¶The Collecte. O Shake and discusse from vs most louyng Lorde, all superfluitie of error, that we may so defie all hea∣then vyce, to feare and worship thee onely, who in hi∣est maiestie raignest on all the earth, Through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXXXIIII. As Dauid longd: Gods house to walke: where ciuill warres hym drew: So should we loue: Christes church in sprite: hys heauenly face to vew. 1 O God of hostes: how louely be: thy tabernacles all? Quam dilecta.where god y• raignst in grace & truth: for help at nede to call. 2 My soule doth bres in loue it melth: it longth Gods courtes to sée: My hart and flesh: doth pant and cry: wyth God of lyfe to bée. 3 Yea there her nost: the sparow buildth: the swalow there may bred Thine altars nye: Lord God & kyng: where wandring wars I led. 4 O wel is thē: their harts be blest: who may thy house frequ Sela.They may sing out▪ thy laudes always to ioy in mind contēt 5 O happy men: whose helpe thou art: whose harts thy paths do seke Whose soules inspirde: do ioy to walke: thy wayes in credēce meke
6 They passyng here: thys vale of teares: yet wels of ioy they finde: Theyr pooles at ful: wt heauenly showers: shal flow for rest of minde 7 Frō strength to strength from faith to faith▪ to god they shal go still, Till they by flockes: eche one appeare: wyth God in Syon hill. 8 O Lord of hostes: & god of strength heare y• my harts request Sela.With open eare: O harken God: on whom doth Iacob rest. 9 Behold O God: protectour good: our state in all assayes: Behold thy Christes: annoynted face: for grace thy people prayes. 10 In thy good courtes: one day passh more: then thousand daies els where I rather wish: gods dore to kepe▪ then proud mens halles to teare. 11 For God the Lord: is light and shield: he glory giueth and grace: No good thyng he: shall hold from them: who godly lyfe embrace. 12 O Lord of hostes O puissant God: I must conclude for ryght: That man is blest: and blest agayne: who trustth in thy great might The Collecte. ALmighty God whiche art the eternall founder of all the heauenlye mansions aboue, graue in our harts such eleuations of gostly meditation to behold thy passyng goodnesse thou bearest to man∣kynde, that we may bee found worthye to ascend vp to thy celestial place in heauen, Through Christ.
The Argument. Psalme. LXXXV. Man here makth sute: for sinne who felt, Deserued captiuitie: Benedixisti domine.And shewth what helth: Christs kingdom delt, To mans felicitie. 1 AGaynst thy land: become thou art, O Lord most gracious: thou hast returnd: frō Iacobs hart, his thraldom burdenous. 2 Thou hast forgeuen: thy peoples sinne, that was so hugely growne: Yea all theyr sinnes: thou couerdst in, Selawherby thy grace was knowne. 3 Thou hast restraynd: thine heate all quyte, from indignation: Thou hast withdrawn: thy face and sight, from wraths destruction. 4 Whole turne vs than: O God our wealth, to grace that we conuert: Remoue thine ire: impart thy health, forgeue our foule desert. 5 Eternall God: agaynst vs thus, for euer wilt thou threate? Shalt thou thyne ire: stretch out to vs, from age to age so great? 6 Uphold thy worde: to vs returne, and quicken vs agayne: So shall thy flocke: no longer mourne, but ioy in thée full fayne.
7 Shew vs thy grace: O Lord of power, that it we may perceyue: And geue to vs: thy sauiour, that health we myght receyue. 8 Plaine wyll I heare: what God shall speake, for peace he shall denounce: To all hys folke: and louers eke, that they their vyce renounce. 9 All they no doubt: who will hym feare, is hys saluation nye: Hys glory than: shall iust appeare, in all our land at eye. 10 Ryght frendlines: and veritie, they shall ech others méete: So ryghteousnes: and peace from hye, shall kisse eche other swéete. 11 Known truth from earth: shal then out spring wyth all good fruites aryght: For ryghteousnes: all florishyng, from heauen shall cast her sight. 12 Euen thus the Lord: shall manifest, hys bounteous goodnes neare: That full our land: wyth grace possest, all godly frutes shall beare. 13 Ryght iustice eke: shall be hys guide, that strait may good man walke: His wayes and gate: her steps shall stryde, no tyme the ryght to balke.
¶The Collecte. PArdon O mercifull Lord the sinnefulnes of all thy people, and shew to vs thy mercy and light, which may lead vs into the way of peace, by followyng the guidance and direction of thy righteousnes, through Iesus Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXXVI. Here Dauid prayth: this Psalme I say, That Saule hym fraith: with great distresse, But Christ more true: yea Christ doth pray▪ Who once did sue: as man in flesh, To scape all spite: but most for vs, He this endight: and sayth euen thus. Inclina Domine.and sayth euen thus. 1 BOw downe thyne eare: O Lord heare me, These cea∣sures haue perfect sence red, seuerally or ioyntly.For thée I feare: as God most hye, Whose fauour kynd: my hart would sée, I fayne would finde: thy grace at eye, For poore I lye: all wrapt in thrall, My wante I spye: to thée I call. To thée I call. 2 My soule preserue: for thyne it is, Aye thée to serue: vnfainedly, So wholy bought: it may not misse, Kéepe then in thought: my Lord sayd I, Thy seruant poore: to thée I call, To thée the more: wythstand my fall. Wythstand my fall.
3 Extend thy grace: saue me O Lord, And shew thy face: all louingly, In mercy so: thy grace aforde, I stand therto: assuredly, Wherto I hyed: to seke for ease, And dayly cryed: I wyll not cease. I wyll not cease. 4 O Lord make glad: thy seruantes hart, My state full sad: and soule is fret, To thée I go: from thée to start, From all my wo: I wyll not yet, I mourne to thée▪ in soules disease, Though hie thou bée: I trust to please. I trust to please. 5 For kynde thou art: O Lord of grace, Of gentle hart: and mercifull, To all a lyke: in euery place, Who wyll thée seke: most bountefull, In stable fayth: thou art to spie, In thée who stayth: who mournth in thée, Who mournth in thée. 6 Agayne I say: my Lord geue care, To thée I praye: in thys my mone, Thou knowst my paine: which now I beare, My foes restraine: I wéepe alone, Expende my crie: full bitterlie, Thou séest I ligh: all heauilie. All heauilie.
7 When troubles rise: in dreadfull dayes, In sundrie wise: on thée I call, I drawe thée neare: in all my frayes, For thou wilt heare: when I am thrall, Then helpe me send: from heauen so bright, As trustie frend: my hart to light. My hart to light. 8 None like to thée: O God most hie, Of Gods that be: all day so sought, For wit, for might: for maiestie, Thy workes be right: thy dedes be wrought, Who wyll contend: wyth thée in sight, As them to mend: O most of myght, O most of myght. 9 All people iust: whom thou hast fourmd, Now come they must: to worship thée, O Lord full low: wyth mynd refourmd, And them bestow: in hart most frée, Thy grace to prayse: thy name to sprede, So good alwayes: theyr doynges lead. Theyr doynges lead. 10 For God art thou: thou wonders doost, As once so now: thou shewest thy myght, Thou madest all thyng: on earth and dust, The heauens do sing: thy power in sight, No God but thée: shall Paynyms néede, As eye may sée: by Gospels réede. By Gospels réede.
11 Teach me thy way: O Lord agayne, That sue I may: thy truth so frée, All walke to it: make me to strayne, My hart O knit: in thée to lygh, Wyth reuerence: to loue thy name, In confidence: to feare the same. To feare the same. 12 I thée wyll thanke: O Lord my God, Wyth hart most franke: to sing thy prayse, Thy louyng grace: so wyde and brode, I wyll embrace: fall out my dayes, Thyne excellence: I wyll proclayme, Wyth diligence: to shew thy name, To shew thy name. 13 Thyne actes to me: I must confesse, Full great they be: myne eyes doth sée, Thou rydst full quyte: my depe distresse, By thy great myght: thou madest me frée, My soule of late: nye gone and lost, From hell the state: all nethermost. All nethermost. 14 O God so great: the proud aryse, At me they fret: in numbers ryfe, The worst of all: in cruell wyse, They wyshe my fall: they seke my lyfe, They feare not thée: they much do boast, Thy face they flée: in euery coast. In euery coast.
15 But thou O Lord: yet God most méeke, As truth recordth: of louyng brest, Art pitifull: thée poore to séeke, To wrath but dull: to mercy prest, In grace and truth: looke thou on vs, To mone in ruth: all gratious. All gratious. 16 O turne to me: and turne anone, My rocke to be: thy grace I craue, Thy seruant strength: for which I grone, That I at length: my soule to saue, Wyth thée may wonne: in thy cleare house, Thy handmais sonne: all glorious. All glorious. 17 O shew to me: for good, some signe, Some amitie: shew thou in sight, Agaynst my foes: though foes repyne, Thou healtst my woes: to shame theyr spite, That they may sée: and so agrée, I stayde by thée: in comfort frée. In comfort frée. ¶The Collecte. O Lord of all comfort and compassion, we beseche thee to cheare the countenaunce of the congre∣gation of thyne elect familie, from all terrours of hell and other hostilitie, so that we may bee protected by the louyng visage of thy grace, in beholdyng our mi∣serable trauayle that we haue in thys worlde, & that by thee we may haue the dominion of our carnall af∣fection, to tread them vnder foote, Through Christ.
The Argument. Psalme. LXXXVII. This pleasant song: describeth the state, Of Christs dere spouse: where Christ was borne Hierusalem: most fortunate, Fundamen¦ta eius in.To nurse both Iewe: and gentile lorne. 1 GOd hily loueth: Hierusalem, Whose bases strong: be depely set, In holy mounes: sure layd in them, Moria, Syon, Olyuet. 2 The Lord I say: loueth Syon gates, Her portes and fortes: her wals and towers: Aboue the rest: for all theyr states, Of Iacobs tentes: and princely bowers. 3 Thou citie hye: of God no doubt, Where he doth raigne: in maiestie: Hye thynges be sayd: to set thée out, Sela.To blase thy power: and dignitie. 4 I Raabs realme: and Babylons, Wyll beare in mynd: such shall know me Lo Tyrus lo: Philistians, Lo Moores most far: there borne is he. 5 Of Syon thus: it shall be sayd, That he and he: was borne in her: But he that is: far hyest layd, Is he that her: confirmth most clere. 6 The Lord for truth: shall it record, The people when: he registreth: That he so hye: that louely Lord, Sela.Was borne euen there: and there he lyegth.
7 All singers there: and trumpetters, Their songes & hymnes: shall swete rebound: Fresh liuely springes: wyth all their cheres, Shall prayse thys Lord: for grace most bound. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God the only foundation of our fayth which doost build the gates and strength of thine eternall maiestye to be seene in the hartes of thine e∣lect, as it were vpon thy holy hiles fenced and beset round about by thy righteousnes, graunt vs we be∣sech thee to glory in thy true faith, and to declare the benefite of thy sonnes redemption wrought for our soules by his incarnation to whom wyth thee and the holy ghost, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. LXXXVIII. Here is a mone: most piteous, of man afflicte in stresse: It payntes Christes death: most dolorous, Domine Deus.hys sepulture in flesh. 1 MY louyng Lord: and God of grace, on whom my health dependth: Both day and night: before thy face, my crye I haue extend. 2 O let therfore: my prayer soone come now before thy sight: Inclyne thyne eare: and heare my bone, with teares which I endight.
3 My soule is full: of miseries, in woes full gorgd I rore: My lyfe in sight: to all mens eyes, is euen at death hys dore. 4 As one of them: I am estéemd, that tumble must in pit: A sely man: I am but déemd, so voyde of strength I sit. 5 As frée (from toyle) among the dead, as wounded slepe in graue: Who far from mynd: be sonke as lead, whom slayne thy handes now haue. 6 In pit most déepe: thou hast me throwne, in deathes and hels dispayre, In places darke: down low bestown, where comith no lyght nor ayre. 7 Thy fury Lord: lyeth hard on me, oh striffe on euery side: And vext thou hast: both hart and eye, Sela.wyth all thy stormes full tryde. 8 Thou hast driuen far: my frendes from me, acquaynted most to sée: Abhord of them: thou madest me be, thus bound I cannot flée. 9 My sight doth fayle: for heauines, to thée Lord yet I cry: No day from thée: Lord would I cease, to lift my handes full hye.
10 Thy meruels great: wylt thou deuise, to worke to buried men? Or els shall sprites: to lyfe aryse, Sela.thy laudes to ound agayne? 11 Or shall my graue: thy pitie tell, when once thou hast me layne? Or shall thy truth: be proued so well, when I destroyd am layne? 12 Thy wondrous workes: which wrought thy hand, Shall darkenes them expresse? Or shall thy iustice shyne in land, of mere forgetfulnes? 13 To thée O Lord: my prayer went, to whom els should I go? Yea still my sute: shall thée preuent, at morne while laffth my wo. 14 Why than O Lord: abhorst my soule, all helpe from me to wynde? Why hidest thy face: from me so whole, that I no grace can fynde? 15 Afflict I am: at poynt to dye, from youth thus haue I bene: In hart astound: thy dreades fele I, so fearefull they be sene. 16 Thy sower wrathes: so multiplied, hane ouerwhelmed me: Thy terrours eke: which sore abyde, haue stroyd me whole to sée.
17 They daily did: passe ouer me, as water surges hye: They compasd me: in cerenty, euen round about full nye. 18 Both frend and kinne: from me full far▪ thou hast put whole away: My frendes that were: familiar, in darke fro me they stray. ¶The Collecte. O Lord the redemer of all which art meruelous in the procuryng of our health and saluation, which by thy descension into hell were made as one among the dead, heare the timely prayers of thy family pray∣ing to be deliuered from our peruerse enemye labou∣ring to bring vs into bondage, graunt this O Lord: who lyuest and raygnest with the father. &c. The Argument. Psalme. LXXXIX. The letter here: describeth to eare, the state of Dauids raygne: Misericor∣dias do∣mine.The sprite to hart: doth this impart, that Christ shall ay remayne. 1 GOds mercies all: wyth song I shall, for euer sing and play: Wyth mouth euen still: expresse I will hys truth from day to day. 2 For thus I sayd: hys mercy stayde, for euer shall remayne: Thou shalt confirme: thy truth most firme, in heauen and it maintayne.
3 With Abraham: in league I am, who was my chief el: To Dauid lo: I sware euen so, for hym and all his sect. 4 I will thy sede: prepare in dede, for euer world to ende: I will aduaunce: thy gouernaunce, Sela.for aye thy raigne extende. 5 The heauens O Lord: shall iust recorde, thy meruayles great in dede: Euen so thy saintes: wythout restraintes, thy truth in church shall sprede. 6 For who compare: so boldly dare, with God in heauen so cleare? Whom can we seke: the Lord so like, among Gods children deare. 7 This God of blisse: most puissant is, amids his saintes echone: Most louely feare: to hym they beare, which stand about his throne. 8 O Lord and God: of hostes so brode, who (Lord) so strong as thou? Euen round about: thy truth falth out, to them which thée allow. 9 Thou canst represse: the seas excesse, by power imperiall: When they do swell: in surges fell, thou makest them downe to fall.
10 Thou Egipt braidst: and it so raydst, as wounded carcasse proude. Thou scatredst wyde: thine enemies pride, such strength thyne arme auowde. 11 The heauens be thyne: wyth all their shyne, the earth is thine ful sure: The world so round: thou dydst it found, with all the furniture. 12 As North and South▪ stood thorow thy mouth thy worde them both dyd frame: So Tabor West: and Hermon East, both hils shall ioy thy name. 13 An arme endude: with fortitude, thou hast omnipotent: O let thyne hand: then strongly stand, thy ryght hand hie be bent. 14 As ryghteousnes: so iudgement is, thy throne and royall seat: With mercy truth: most ioyntly sueth, before thy face so swete. 15 O then most blest: such folke doth rest, that ioyeth and féelth the same: In thy pure light: they walke shall right, O Lord to prayse thy name. 16 Thy name so bright: shall them delite, all day to ioy therin: And they alwayes: themselfe shall rayse, by thy iust word to winne.
17 For thou thy selfe: doost worke their welth, the ioy of all theyr strength: By thy good grace: thou shalt in place, lyft vp our hornes at length. 18 On God is set: our helpe so great, our shield he is to tell; And be our kyng: all health to bryng, that saint of Israell. 19 Thou spakest thus once: in visions, to thy swete saintes full nye: My helpe I layd: to strong mens ayde, I chase and hauntst him hye. 20 I Dauid found: my seruant sound, I sacred hym wyth oyle: Hym kyng made I: ryght holily, and Lord of all the soyle. 21 Wyth hym my hand: shall strongly stand, my power shall hym defend: My valiant arme: shall whole hym arme, for strength I will him send. 22 No force so yne: can vndermyne, hys strength to make him thrall: No crafty wyle: shall him beguile, by wycked man to fall. 23 I down will bray: his foes aray, which shall hys face resist: His haters lyke: I will them strike, and stroy them shall my fist.
24 My faythfulnes: and gentlenes, wyth hym shall long abyde: In my good name: shall spring his fame, hys horne and strength full wyde. 25 Unto the sea: his raigne shall be, and he the Lord of it: His right hand shall: rule ryuers all, on fluds as chiefe to sit. 26 He me full grate: shall inuocate, most frankly thus to say: My father thou: my God t'auow, my helth, my rocke, my stay. 27 Yea more then this: I wyll him blisse, my first begotten sonne: More hie to stand: then kings in land, that yet to earth be gone. 28 I will him kepe: my fauour meke, for euer hym to loue: My couenaunt fast: to hym so past, shall neuer voyde remoue. 29 His séede euen so: shall stable go, so depe I will it plant: His regall powers: shall days and howers, as heauen stand valiant. 30 But if his sede: from me recede, and shall my law forsake: Or yet shall balke: in all theyr walke my iudgemente them to slake.
31 And shall perchance: myne ordinance, prophane and cast it backe: Or my precept: as light reiect, to kepe it shall be slacke. 32 I wyll no doubt: then visite stout, to scourge theyr wyckednes: I wyll them smite: wyth plagues in sight, to beate their sinnefulnes. 33 Yet wyll not I: my clemency, wythdraw from them to go: And lowd to lye: so wyll not I, my fayth to ieopard so. 34 I list not vayne: my pact prophane, though they defile theyr south: I wyll me take: to that I spake, to kepe my word of mouth. 35 Once sware I dyd: and testified, my holines to pledge: From Dauids part: I would not start, as this may he alledge. 36 That is, his sede: should euer sprede, and neuer should decay: Hys throne begunne: should shyne as sunne, in my swete light to lay. 37 As moone in sight: it should be bryght, though oft it féelth the clips: These witnes sure: in heauen endure, Sela.to try my fayth of lips.
38 But lo as now: what done hast thou, thou hast abhord thy Christ: And hym forsakt: and abiect makt, at hym displeasd thou lighst. 39 Of couenant made: thou breakst the trade, wyth this thy seruant knit: His regall crowne: thou rentst it down, euen flat on earth to sit. 40 His walles as wast: thou battred hast, and none thou leauest to stand: Thou breakst hys fortes: & stroyst his portes, thyne ire séemth now so grand. 41 All they to spy: which iorney by, tread downe hys raygne in spyte: The neyghbour next: hys state hath vext, as laughyng stocke in sight. 42 Who foes therto: in hatred go, theyr handes thou lyftes on hye: The enemy coye: thou makst him ioy, at it, hys iestes to wry. 43 Thou hast whole stynt: hys weapons dynt, hys edge of sword but blunt: It had no power: as conquerour, to wynne as it was wont. 44 Thus hys renowne: thou pulst a downe, wyth darkenes all obscurde: Hys scepter flat: on ground is plat, dispayre he séeth assurde.
45 Thou hast in déede: thus shortened, hys yong and flouryng dayes: Thou hast hym clad: wyth shame bestad, Selaashamed thus he layes. 46 How long by day: wylt thou for aye, O Lord thus hyde thy face? And shall thyne ire: thus burne as fire, wylt thou thys raigne disgrace? 47 O call to mynde: in hart yet kynde, what brittle date I beare: Or hast thou wrought: mankynd for nought, to stroy hym thus in feare. 48 What man is hée: in lyfe so frée, that death shall neuer sée? Can he escape: hys mortall shape, Sela.from graue whole ryd to bée? 49 Where may we holde: thy mercies olde, O Lord, where do they lygh? As thou dydst sweare: in Dauids eare, in truth most earnestly. 50 Then call to mynde: spite done vnkynde, O Lord to thyne electes: What tauntes in brest▪ I hold at rest, of diuers peoples sectes. 51 Wherwyth thy foes: haue wrought vs woes, O Lord despitefully: They threat vs hye: opprobriously, no steps of Christ to spy.
52 We may conclude: though we be rude, the Lord will turne agayne: The Lord therfore: for euermore, be blest, Amen, Amen. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God most true in thy promises, and ter∣rible yet in thy iudgementes, graunt we beseche thee that we may walke faythfullye before thy holye face, to feele the comfort of thy louyng presence, and where we bee scourged at any tyme for straying from thee, that yet agayne we may receyue thy mercy to glorify thy name, Through Iesus Christ, &c. ¶The ende of the third booke.
Here beginneth the fourth Booke of Psalmes. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XC. The wofull lyfe: of man for sinne: here Moses paynted clere: Gods grace aduaunst: mans state deiect: Christes aduent craued here. 1 O Lord thou hast: our refuge bene: as sanctuary most frée: In tyme now past:Domine ne refugium. frō age to age: to whō safe might we flée made: 2 Before the hils: had ful their shape: ere earth & world was Frō world to world: true God yu art: thy power shal neuer fade. 3 Thou doost retract: mans life to dust: thou so dissoluest his trayne: And saist eftsoones: ye Adams séede: returne to lyfe agayne. 4 A thousand yeres: in thy good sight: as yesterday that was: though long they seme: yet swift thy slide: as nightly watch doth pas. 5 Thou makest thē flow: as fluds in course: as dremes they vanish lyte As early grasse in sodentye: doth change hys hue and plight. 6 Which flourth at mone: & groethful grene: & gatherth strēgth ful gay But rept it is: at nyght full dym: and witherth dry away. 7 A like we wast: and fall away: when thou art wroth for sinne: And whyle thys sence: of wrath doth last: arayd we be therin. 8 Thou hast detect: before thy face▪ our sinnes ful open layd: Our hydden crymes: our secrecies thy face hath bright dewrayd. 9 For all our dayes: do slyde away: in thy displeasant wrath: We spend our yeres▪ as tale is told: that brittle pleasure hath.
10 Our yeres in dais: be seuenty selde: though strēgth wan eighty mo: That pride at last: were paine and griefe: it passe and hence we go. 11 Thy wrathfull power who can comprise? no man by reasonyng: for more yt mā: doth feare thy power▪ thy wrath him more doth wring 12 That we our days: may nūber right: O teach this wit to vs: Theyr date so frayle: shal make our harts: apply to wisdome thus. 13 Be thou retournd: O Lord we pray: how long wylt thou depart: Thy seruantes rue: most pityfull: intreatable in hart. 14 Refresh vs Lord: and fill vs full: with thy swete early loue: To ioy a while: to sing the laudes: whyle we our breth can moue. 15 And cheare our hartes: wyth dayes as good: as thou hast vs afflict: And as our yeres: haue smarted long: with heauy scourges strickt. 16 Thy seruantes teach: thy worke deuine▪ theyr state thy grace to sée: That thy renowne: may so appeare: to theyr posteritie. 17 The cherefull grace: of God our Lord: remayne on vs as now: Our workes of handes: confirme in vs: our handes O prosper thou ¶The Collecte. ALmighty and euerlastyng God which art our de∣fensible refuge in thys oure briefe space of lyfe whych we perceyue to be miserable, we beseche thee not to presse vs wyth the burden of thy heuy indigna¦tion, but so nurture vs wyth thy fatherly rod, that we may desyre these eternall dayes of reste: where thou wyth thy sonne and holy spryte reygnest eternal God to whome, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. XCI. The faythfull man: doth here confesse: that Gods defence is strong: Against all griefe: that hym can presse: to scape all wo and wrong. 1 WHo vnder fence: and couert dwelth, Qui habitat in adiutorio.of God that is most hye: He shall be sure: in shadow well, By God of heauen to ligh. No dout of thys: ought man to haue: who proofe therof will make: For God is strong: vs all to saue: if fayth to hart we take. 2 The iust by fayth: may thus be bolde, to say to God so iust: Thou art my hope: my strength and holde, my God in whom I trust. I haue no hope: in worldly thyng: that may be sene or felt, Though things I vse: as nede doth bring: which god for vse hath delt 3 To make the scape: he will not misse, all crafty hunters snares: From pestilence: that noysome is, as far from other cares. When diuel or mā: hys soule wil spyte: then God wyl helpe hym free Hys body frayle: shal yet be quyte: from plages how fierce they bee. 4 For vnder wynge: he thée shall hyde, hys fethers thée to broode: Hys fayth and truth: shall fence thy side, as shield and buckler good.
As once in th'arke: theyr wynges so wyde: the Cherubins dyd splay: As vseth the henne: her byrdes to stryde: to kepe the kyte away. 5 Thou shalt not néede: to be adrad, for feares of all the nyght: No dart so sharpe: shall make thée sad, that flyeth by day in syght. No horrors fell: shall so preuayle: to make thy hart agat: Misfortune none: shall thee assayle: God wyll eye thee so fast. 6 Thou shalt escape: all pestilence, which walkth in darke to noye: Of sicknes sore: to haue defence, that hye at none doth stroye. No venome bayte: shal thee infect: by diuell or man be layd: For God to thee: shall it detect: by whom it shall be stayd. 7 Though thousandes fast: to murre in renne by thee that dwellers bée: On thy right hand: though thousandes ten, do fall: thou shalt be frée. Thou nedest not feare: what fortune fall: to all the world beside: Thou shalt not stand: so casuall: for God shall be thy guyde. 8 Yea both thyne eyes: shall make thée sée, how proud men shall decay: How faythles impes: shall scourged bée, for theyr desert I say. God shall his foes: tread vnder foote: who him & his did hate: Theyr lies and brags: them shal not boote: with all their cruel state
9 For thou my God: myne onely trust, my hope thou art t'endure: Thou hast my soule: thus made full iust, thy helpe to haue ryght sure. Because thou hast: affiance had: in God who dwelth so hye: He shall kepe thee: from chances bad: and be thy sanctuary. 10 There shall no euill: so chance to thée, but all shall worke thy wealth: No plage shall nye: thy dwellyng bée, to stroy therof the health. Thou safe shalt dwell: protected well: by God, if hym thou fearst: From wrathfull men: that be so fell: if fayth to God thou bearst. 11 For he shall geue: hys angels charge, on thée to cast theyr sight: To sée thy wayes: full set at large, to walke therin aryght. Hys angels be thy seruantes prest: thy welth and helth to kepe: To worke thy rest: to prompt thy brest: thy God in hart to seke. 12 They shall in handes: beare thée alone, to stay thy hold aloft: Lest thou shouldst hurt: thy foote at stone, els mought thou fall full oft. If God thou fearst: & kepe hys wayes: hys sprite wyll thee preserue Thou nedest no dout: to walke in strayes: if god thou vowst to serue
13 The Lyons fierce: and adder flye, on both them shalt thou go: Thou shalt tread down: the Lyons frye, and eke the dragon to. All venome beastes: shall renne fro thee: they shall serue thee at will The diuell so stoute: thy fayth shall flee: though he thy soule would spill. 14 Because hys hope: on me he set, I will hym rid from shame: I wyll hym lyft: to make hym great, because he knew my name. I will sayth God: my helpe hym send: in all hys troublous dayes: No better cause: make me to bend: then that on me he stayes. 15 When he shall call: and sue to me, to hym I shall apply: I will wyth hym: in trouble be, and ryd hym gloriously. His trust and fayth: shall not decay: hys loue shall haue reward. Though here he wepe: from day to day: yet I hys teares regard. 16 Wyth length of dayes: where lyfe shall last I wyll hym satisfy: I wyll hym shew: for louyng taf, my sauyng helth so hye. Though here opprest: as vyle outcast: the iust for ryght doth wayle: The greater ioy; sayth God at last: shall chance to hys aduayle.
Who vnder fence: and couert dwelth, of God that is mos hye: He shall be sure: in shadow well, by God of heauen to ligh. ¶The Collecte. EXtende O mercifull father through the inuocati∣on of thy holy name thy louing tuition vpō vs thy poore seruants that where we be to weake by our own strength to ouercome the crafry and combrous as∣sawts of our enemyes, that yet by thy fatherly prote∣ction we may bee defended agaynst al their hostylitie, and so in pacience passe ouer this mortal conuersati∣on to ioy with thee in the length of dayes in thy bles∣sed presence Through. &c. The Argument▪ Psalme. XCII. Of sabboth day (the solemne) feast▪ doth vs excyte by rest: Gods mighty workes: that we declare: loue hym for all the best. 1 A Ioyfull thyng (to man) it is: the Lord to celebrate▪ Bonum est confiteri.To thy good name: O God so hye: due laudes to modulate. 2 To preach (and shew) thy gentlenes: in early mornyng lyght, Thy truth of worde: to testifie: all whole by length of nyght. 3 Upon (the psalme:) the decachord: vpon the pleasant lute: On sounding good: swéete instruments: wt shaumes, wt harpe, wt flute 4 For thou hast ioyed: my fearefull hart: O Lord thy workes to sée And I with prayse: will iust reioyce: these handy workes of thée.
5 How glorious: O (blessed) Lord: be these the factes of thyne? Thy thoughts be depe: thy counsayles hye: inscrutable deuyne. 6 The brutish man: (that is) vntaught: is nought of this beséene: The foole as is: the carnall man? perceyueth not what it meanth. 7 When euill men flour: as (doth the) grasse: & wicked workers bud Then shall they all: come downe at once: for euer drownd in mud. 8 But thou art hye: (full hye) aloft: as Lord and president: For euer standst: vnmoueable: and wyse in regiment. 9 For lo thy foes: O Lord (so strong:) thy foes shall perishe all: And such as worke: all wickedly: shall haue a shamefull fall. 10 My horne (and power) shall yet be raysd: as Unicornes is séene: Euen now I seme: as swetely dewd: with oyle of Oliue gréene. 11 Myne eyes (full out) theyr lust shall haue: of all my waityng spyes: Myne eares the same: of crafty men: who vp at me dyd ryse. 12 The true (elect) and ryghteous man: shall florishe lyke the palme: As Ceder trée: in Lybanus: hymselfe shall sprede wyth balme. 13 Depe planted they (in rootes) alway: in gods swete house to byde: Shall florish lyke: in both the courtes: of this our God and guyde. 14 In age (most sure) they shall encrease: theyr fruite aboundantly: Well likyng they: and fat shalbe: to beare most fruitfully. 15 That is (to say) they out shall preach: this lordes true faythfulnes: Who is my strength: & mighty rocke: who hateth vnryghteousnes
¶The Collecte. ALmighty God which art the contynuall ioye and perpetuall felicytye of all thy saynts whom thou doost inwardly water with the dew of thy heauenly grace, wherby thou makst them to floryshe like the Palme tree in the celestial courts of thy church: we be∣sech thee that thou would so discusse from vs the bur∣denous weight of sinne that we maye enioye their fe∣lowship: Through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XCIII. This praith in faith: when stormes aryse: in trust of helpe full sure: But here in raigne: is Christ bewrayde: and how his church shall dure. 1 Dominus regnauit decorem.THe Lord is kyng: in hys aray: the Lord is clad wyth strength, He girt hymselfe: the world is sure: it cannot réele at length. 2 Thy throne is strong: prepared sure: from tyme all out of mynde Thou art that art: all durably: which neuer ende shalt fynde. 3 The flouds haue lift: aloft O Lord: the fluds haue lift their voyce: The stremes rge: wyth griefly waues. thy foes to hie reioyce. 4 But far aboue: all rage of fluds: or dreadfull stormes of sea: Doth God surmount: more excellent: hys enmies all to slea. 5 Thy worde is sure: thy testament: is tryed in all assayes: All holines: doth decke thy house: O Lord for yeares and dayes.
¶The Collecte. MOst maruelous God which art begirt round a∣bout withall godly maiestye and power, as thy handy workes in the creation and situation of heauen and earth do manifestly declare, heare vs we beseeche thee thy humble suters, and inspire into our hartes fast fayth to beleue thy worde, perfect our soules to confesse it in tonge: and cōfirme vs to shew the holy∣nes therof in our life to the glory of thy name. Through Iesus Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XCIIII. The poore opprest: doth helpe implore, agaynst proud iudges myght: Deus vltio num do∣minus.As Christ and hie: long heretofore, be paternes good in sight. 1 O God and Lord: reuenger ryght, of sinne reuenger God: Now shew thy selfe: declare thy might, make hast to shake thy rod. 2 Be thou set vp: in maiesty, thou iudge of all the land: Requite the proud: accordingly, and let them féele thy hand. 3 How long O Lord: these wycked men, how long tryumphe shall they? Thy people thus: to ouer renue, wythout both stop and stay.
4 They blatter out: euen what they list, sore wordes they be and proude: All wycked ympes: wyll not desist, to vaunt and boast aloude. 5 Thy people Lord: full sore they flyte, thyne heritage they vexe: Their poore estates: wyth wronges they smyte and threates therto annexe. 6 The widow lo: the straunger eke, they murther craftely: The fatherlesse: they quell alyke, though deare to thée they ligh. 7 Theyr mouthes thus speake: as hartes deuise, tush God séeth nought of this: Nor Iacobs God: shall thys aduise, in thys he is remysse. 8 Ye doltes of all: most brute to sée, betyme yet vnderstand: When prudent wise: when will ye bée? ye fooles I say so fond. 9 Can he be deafe: which made the eare, how harken should not hée? Who made the eye: can ye hym bleare? that he should nothyng sée? 10 Or he that checkes: the heathen els, shall he not you reproue? And he that man: all wisdom tels, shall he not you remoue?
11 The Lord doth know: the thoughtes of man, to be both fond and vayne: Your open wronges: how can they than, escape deserued payne? 12 Then happy is: that man and blest, whom thou doost chastise here: And whom by loue: in law thou teach est, O blessed Lord most deare. 13 To make hym sit: wyth patience, in dreadfull dayes at rest: Whyle that to men: of violence, theyr pit be digd and drest. 14 For God no dout: wyll not reiect, hys people them to fayle: Nor yet forsake: hys lot elect, to make them long to wayle. 15 Untill that ryght: be turnd agayne, to dome, as iust it ought: And follow it: shall they full fayne, whose harte hath iustice sought. 16 O who wyll vp: for me to stand, agaynst malignant spies? Or wyll wyth me: conioyne hys hand, at wycked men to ryse? 17 If soone the Lord: had sent none ayde, to me in myne vnrest: It had not faylde: my soule dismayde, had dwelt in graue opprest.
18 But when I sayd: my foote doth réele, to note the worldes disdayne: Then helpe O Lord: thou didst me deale, thy grace dyd me sustayne. 19 As carefull thoughtes: in store dyd ryse, when thus my hart dyd boyle: Thy comfort so: dyd me repryse, my soule to scape the foyle. 20 Shall wycked seates: of tyranny, cleaue fast to thée as thence: That thou should fayne: to scourge therby, the poore by lawes pretence? 21 They cloyne in one: in companies, agaynst the iust mans lyfe: The giltles soule: of wycked vyce, they whole condemne in stryfe. 22 The Lord yet was: to me in stresse, a refuge strong of fence: My God was rocke: as inaccesse, my trust and confidence. 23 He shall them quite: their crafty guiles, as they dyd others cloy: God shall them slea: for all theyr wyles, our Lord shall them destroy. ¶The Collecte. NVrture vs O Lord with the sincere doctrine of thy blessed worde, be thou to vs a refuge in time of tribulation, so guide vs by true knowledge and vn∣derstanding of thy word that we neuer fall from thee Through Iesus Christ. &c.
¶The Argument Psalme. XCV. This cherefull Psalme: doth inuite vs in voyce: This cherefull Psalme: inuiteth our voyce: Due laudes to God: in our hymnes to rebounde: Due laudes to God: in hymnes to sounde: With lowly hartes: in hys grace to reioyce: With lowly hartes: that we reioyce: His worde to heare: as we duely be bound: His worde to heare: as we be bound. 1 Venite.O Come in one: let vs sing to the Lord: O Come in one: to prayse the Lord: And hym recounte: for the stay of our wealth, And hym recounte: our stay and wealth: All harty ioyes: let vs duely recorde: All harty ioyes: let vs recorde: To this strōg rocke: to the Lord of our health, To this strōg rocke: our Lord of health. 2 His face with prayse let vs ryse to preuent, His face with prayse let vs preuent, Hys factes in sight: to the world to denounce, Hys factes in sight: let vs denounce: Ioyne we I say: in our ioyfull assent, Ioyne we I say: in glad assent, Our psalms & hymns let vs early pronounce, Our psalms & hymns let vs pronounce.
3 For why this Lord: is a God of a might, For why this Lord: is God of might, For helpe at néede: Upon whom we may call: For helpe at néede: whom we may call. A puissant kyng: in hys radiant lyght: A puissant kyng: in hys brght lyght, He passth all Gods: by his rule ouer all: He passth all Gods: by rulyng all. 4 All coastes of earth: in hys power do ligh: All coastes of earth: by hym do ligh: His celles and groundes: be they neuer so depe: His celles and groundes: though they be depe: As fast by hym: be the mountaynes on hye: As fast by hym: stand mountaynes hye, And stoupe to hym: be they neuer so stéepe: And stoupe to hym: though they be stéepe. 5 The sea is hys: as the worke of hys handes, The sea is hys: his worke of handes, Her ryse and fall: with her mutable rode, Her ryse and fall: with all her rode, The land from her: by authoritie standes: The land from her: by power standes, Whom God so stayed: for hys stable abode: Whom God so stayed: for hys abode.
6 O then come we: let vs humbly adore, O then come we: let vs adore, And prostrate ligh: be we downe on our knées, And prostrate ligh: on both our knées: He made vs all: both the riche and the poore, He made vs all: both riche and poore: Both kyng and slaue in theyr priuate degrées: Both kyng and slaue in theyr degrées. 7 For God he is: as our Lord and our stay: For God he is: our Lord and stay, Hys people we: in hys pasture to rest: Hys people we: in pasture neare: His flocke of hand: for he lead vs in way: His flocke of hand: who leadth our way: His voyce to day: if ye heare at the lest, His voyce to day: if well ye heare. 8 Beware say I: that ye harde not your hartes, Beware say I: ye hard no hartes, Agaynst hys grace: when he byd you repent, Agaynst hys grace: to you so ment, As desert saw: in a strife ouer whart: As desert saw: once strife or ewhart, Lyke tempting day: of an eluishe entent, Lyke tempting day: of mad entent.
9 In which pastyme: as your fathers aforne, In which pastyme: your fathers olde, Dyd tempt my strength: to assay what I could: Dyd tempt my strength: to proue my myght, They proued but me: in a mocke and a scorne: They proued but me: in scorne to bold, Where yet my workes: might they sée if they would, Where yet my workes: they saw in syght. 10 Full forty yeres, dyd I chyde with this age: Full forty yeres, I blamde this age, Great griefes by them: did I suffer in mynde: Great griefes by them: I felt by thys: I sayd euen thus: whē▪ I spied how they raged, I sayd euen thus: to spy theyr rage, They erre in hart: in my wayes be they blynde: They erre in hart: my wayes they misse. 11 To whom I sware: in myne angry reproche, To whom I sware: all wrathfully, By theyr foule strayes: was I forst therunto: By theyr foule strayes: thus forst therto, If they so euill: to my rest shall approche: If they so euill: my rest should sée, Then blame haue I: if it euer be so: Then blame haue I: if it be so.
¶The Collecte. LOrd of all saluation, beholde we beseche thee the sheepe of thy pasture redeemed by thy precious bloud, graunt that in prudence we accepte thy voyce to be ruled therby, at last to ioy wyth thee in thy rest perpetuall, through, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XCVI. This Gentiles calleth: to (christian) fayth▪ In Christ to ioy their head: In whome all power: and glory layth, To iudge both quicke and dead. 1 Cantate.O Syng (I bid) to God the Lord, A song of new deuise: Let all the earth: his prayse recorde, for grace most new shall ryse. 2 (Unto) thys Lord: so new sing aye, And prayse hys maiestie: Be tellyng forth: from day to day, His great benignitie. 3 To Gentiles him (looke ye) declare, Hys glory tell them all: And shew all folke: wyth all your care, Hys workes most martiall. 4 For why (no dout) this Lord is hye, Aboue all prayse so famde: To be most drad: ryght worthely, Aboue all Gods so namde.
5 For all (euen all:) the hethen gods, Be vayne, be things of nought: This Lord in heauen: hath his abode, and heauens by him were wrought. 6 All glory (prayse all) worship, fame, Be his as ornament: All prayse and power: be his to name, In heauenly firmament. 7 Ye stocks (of men) and familyes, Of peoples, bring this Lord: Bryng ye this Lord: as comly is, All laud for power of worde. 8 Yea glory geue (all ye) full true, To his swéete name most hye: Heaue vp your giftes: present hym due, His courtes thus drawe ye nye. 9 Before this Lord (his face) bow downe, Before his holy grace: Ye dwellers all: in fielde and towne, O dread his mighty face. 10 Tel ye (I say) the Gentiles all This Lord his raigne hath pight: The world is fast: not lyke to fall, And he shall iudge in right. 11 Let heauens (so hye) be glad so pure, Let all the earth reioyce: Let all the sea: in furniture, enhaunce theyr cherefull voyce.
12 The (fruitfull) fieldes: and all therin, Ought now reioyce full lite: Than shall all trées: In woode be séene, to gether ioye in sight. 13 Before this Lord: who (shortly) comth, For come to rule is he: To iudge the worlde bright brightfull dome, His flocke by verytye. The Collecte. O God almightye creatour of heauen and earthe, whose prayse the whole ornament of them both doth daily magnifie, we beseche thee that as we con∣fesse the victory of the crosse, so we may renounce all heathen errour, to beholde the glory of thy seconde commyng, wyth full ioy of our consciences, through Iesus, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XCVII. This Psalme in sprite: doth gratulate, Cbristes kingdome cleare: immaculate: Wherby such lyght: hath God detect, That truth was raisde: and lyes deiect. Dominus regnauit. 1 THe lyuing Lord: doth raigne as king The erth therfore: full glad may sing The iles may ioy: so many sene, That he is come to make thē clene. 2 Thicke cloudes and darke: be him about, On wycked men: to thunder stout: Both iustice right: and equitie, Of his high throne: the bases bée.
3 The fyre him goeth: before in sight, Wyth blasing leames: of fearefull lyght: By which full wyde: he doth enflame, Hys foes to burne: which scorne his name. 4 His lighteninges shyne: the world full out, On euery side: whote sparkes to spout: The earth at sight: for feare doth quake, No puissance can: resistence make. 5 The mountaynes hye: as ware did melte, At God his face: thus present feit: I say at face: of Lord so hye, The earth dyd feale his maiestye. 6 The heauens declare: his rightwisnes, When he by them: strikth wickednes: All peoples thus: his glory sawe, How drad he is: whom all should awe. 7 A shamde be all: which Idols serue, Who chose vayne gods: from God to swerne Ye angels all: which seruauntes be, Come worship hym: bowe downe your knée. 8 So Sion ioyed: in hearing this, And Iury ioyd: in townes of hys: O Lord for these: thy domes entent, That such should haue: sharpe punishment. 9 For thou O Lord, doost all excell, That here by low: in earth do dwell: Exalted far: in name thou art, Aboue all Gods: so new vpstart.
10 O ye that loue: thys Lord so hye, Hate ye all vyce: of mawmetrye: He kéepth theyr soules: who serue hym pure, From wycked hand: to ryd them sure. 11 Now lyght is sprong: to ryghteous man, That day from darke▪ discerne he can: And ioy is falne: to rightfull hart, From whence no power: can hym depart. 12 Then ioy ye iust: in thys your Lord, Thys lyght, hys grace: alway record: Hys holines: well thynke and thanke, Hys name confesse: therin be franke. ¶The Collecte. O Lord the preseruer of all thy faythfull sayntes on whom as on thyne electe portion thou doost per∣petually raigne, inspire we besech thee into our harts the bright beames of the scriptures of thy prophets and apostles, that what soeuer as yet remayne in our hartes as sauoring the olde carnall blyndnes of our originall darknes, may be illitened by the heauenly lyght of thy holy sprite, to whom, &c. The Argument. Psalme. XCVIII. Here thankes be done: that God (in worde) most true, Sent Christ his sonne: mans losse (agayne) to cure: All thinges that bee: must laud hym (euer) due, Cantate.Such peace to see: restord (in earth) so sure. 1 SYng ye all new: to God (a song) on hye, For he most true: hath meruels (newly) wrought Hys able hand: hath (wonne hym) victory, Hys arme so grand: this helth (to man) hath brought
2 The Lord of loue: thys health hath (open) layd: So man to moue: to serue (in hart) aryght: Hys righteousnes: he hath full (plainly) splayd, For theyr redresse: to Gentiles (eyes and) syght. 3 He cald to mynde: hys (gentle) mercies frée, To Iacob kynde: hys truth (and fayth) to kepe▪ The earth all whole: thys helth dyd (fully) sée, O hym extoll: thys God (our Lord) so meke. 4 Thou earth sing out: all whole (I say) full glad, In voyce most stout: with (gentle) musikes sound: To God thy Lord: (reioyce) for mercy had, Thy songes record: thou art most (duely) bound. 5 Yea sing in harpe: to God (and Lord) so hye, Sing round & sharpe: wyth all thy (tunes and) stringes Wyth harpe bid I: with (note of) Psalmodie: Your voyce apply: to ioy these (heauenly) thinges. 6 With trūpets blow: wyth shaulme so (swetely) sing, Both hye and low: extende your (harty) strength: Make iubilies: before this (heauenly) king, For Lord he is: to serue (I say) at length. 7 Let eke the seas: rose out in (merie) chere, Thys Lord to please: wyth all her (fishe in) store: The world so round: and (all the) dwellers there, your voyce rebound: to prayse (this Lord) the more. 8 The floudes a like: Let (them now) clap their hands This Lord to seke: (wyth man) in ioyfull hart: The mountayns hie: (so houge) aboue the landes, Let them be by to daunce (wyth man) in part.
9 To God do this: let it (in sight) be plyed, For come he is: (as lord) to iudge the land: Hys iustice sword: the worlde shall (iudge and) guide, Hys equall word: to all shall (euenly) stande. ¶The Collecte. POure into our harts O Lord thy healthfull grace, which thou hast reuelde to all Gentiles so spred by the rightwisnes of thy gospel, we hūbly besech thee that as thou once camest to be iudged and con∣demned for vs most misera le sinners so at thy next returne thou would graunt vs mercy to escape thy fearefull iudgement, for whom thou tokst vpon thee to be condemned for the raunsome of our sinne: to whom with the father. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. XCIX. Swete Christ his raigne: this Psalme compristh, As Rabins all: can say no lesse: Dominus regnauit i∣rascantur.God graunt that they: with vs would ryse, To sing these thankes: to hym in fleshe. 1 THe Lord to raigne: is bent therin, All folke ought than: his presence dread: He sitteth betwixe: the Cherubin, Let all the earth: then quake I reade. 2 This Lord is great: in Zion séene, Where power he sheweth: & ruleth with loue And hye he is: on all the Heathen, If they a like: their hartes would moue.
3 O let them all: thy name confesse, The bad to beate: the good to blisse: For greate it is: in fearefulnes, The power therof: most sacred is, 4 All Princely power: loueth equitye, And equitye: thou broughtst in sight: In Iacobs stocke: thou didst applye, To iudgement true: and iustice right. 5 Our Lord this God: O magnifye, Both Iewes and Gréekes: your wayes relēt, To his fotestole: his sacrarye, Bow downe your knées: most reuerent. 6 As Moses méeke: so Aaron graue, Were chiefe his priestes: so Samuell: Among them were: his power to craue, They cryed to God: he hard them well. 7 To them in cloud: spred pillour like, He spake as all: the people sawe: They did his hests: and statutes kepe, Which he them gaue: in pact for law. 8 O Lord our God: thou hardst them iust, And spardst them Lord: for thine owne sake, Yea when with plagues: thou didst thē thrust, For foule attempts: which they did make. 9 Extoll this God: our Lord so frée, Fall downe before: his holy hill: For God our Lord: in maiestye, Most sacred is: and iust in will.
¶The Collecte. THou art both Lord and king we most humbly cō∣fesse it right deare sauiour although the Iewishe phariseyes saye the contrary, thou only gouernst the hartes and conscience of men: and by thy only grace doost iustifye the same, we beseche thee so to rayse vp the piller of thy heauenly light to shyne to our soules that we may be alway defended from all errour and aduersitie to offer vnto thee the sacrifice of prayer in thankes geuing, who liuest & raignest one god with the father. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. C. All men of breath: but temporall, Which Pilgrimes walke: this earthly Ball: To ioy be bid: here seuerall, Iubilat Deo.To God in dayes: most festiuall. 1 O Ioy all men: terrestriall, Reioyce in God: celestiall, I byd not Iewes: especiall, But Iewes and Gréekes: in generall. 2 Serue ye thys Lord: heroicall, Wyth ioy of hart: effectuall: Seke ye hys sight: potentiall, Wyth hymnes of myrth: most musicall. 3 Know ye thys Lord: imperiall: As God vs made: originall: Not we our selues: he vs doth call, Hys folke as flocke: kept pastorall.
4 Hys gates and courtes: tread vsuall, Wyth laudes and hymnes: poeticall: Geue thankes to hym: continuall, And blesse his name: most liberall. 5 For why this Lord: so principall, Is swéete, hys grace: perpetuall: Hys truth of word: stand euer shall, With hundreth thankes: thus ende we all. ¶The Collecte. O Lord and father of all honor & glory, shew vs thy mercy, and graunt thy grace that we may spiritu∣ally reioyce in the laude of thy name, and so in spryte to serue thee, that we maye feele in our hartes the delectable comfortes of thy true promi∣ses made to vs the poore flocke of thy pa∣sture, so to ioyne to thee our louyng pastor, to come at the last to thy heauenly folde, where thou raignest with the father and holy ghost one God, &c. ¶The ende of the second Quinquagene.
¶ The third and last Quinquagene of Dauids Psalter, tran∣slated into Englishe Metre.
The Argument. Psalme. CI. When Dauid long: was kept from raigne, This Psalme he sang: to ease his payne▪ How kinges should rule: here see you playne▪ As he would fayne, ̄ ̄ 1 BOth mercy méeke: & iudgement right, Miseri∣cordiam & iudi∣cium.In Metres song: I wyll endight: To thée I will: Lord sing in sight, With hartes delyte. 2 I wyll my lyfe: beare strayt in way, If thou from me: goest not astray, In all my house: cleane hart shall lay, Without denay▪ 3 To wycked déede: none eye shall stand, And hate I wyll: all rebels band: To ioyne wyth me: I wyll wythstand, wyth hart and hand. 4 A froward hart: and wilfull , From my whole sight: shall flée full out, To me shall clout: no wycked rout, Wythout all dot. 5 Hys neyghbour who▪ styth priuily▪ Hym will Astry  vtterly▪ I will not  proud , Wyth pleasure hye.
6 True men in earth: I wyll me get, Most nye to eye: wyth me to se: Who walketh more strayt: shall serue me bet Wythout all let. 7 From far my house: they shal be sent, Who guiles can forge: or lyes inuent, None eye on them: shall firme be bent, Wyth myne assent. 8 Yea soone by day: I will deface, Proud men in earth: of wycked trace, To dryue all shrewes from Gods good place, Wythout all grace. ¶The Collecte. ALmightye God which art God of power incom∣prehensible, which shewest to thy seruants ioynt∣ly both mercy and iudgement: Graunte we beseche thee, so that we may faithfully loue thee, truly to fol∣low thee in all godlines, through Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CII. Here man in eare: most pituously, Wishth Syon built: defast in shame, He moeth hys long captiuitie, Christes heauenly church: wishe we the same. \ \ 1 O Lord to thée: I cry and call. Domine exaudj.My prayer heare: O louinglye: Thou art my Lord: most liberall, Receyue my sute: admyt my cry.
2 While thus I mourne: hide not thy face, From my distresse: so wrathfully: Enclyne thyne eares: and heare my case, But soone in hast: O aunswer make. 3 My dayes lyke smoke: slyde fast apace, Consume they do: no rest they take: As fier brandes: my bones are brent, Theyr liuely powers: my sprites forsake. 4 My wounded hart: lyeth impotent, As witherd hay: cut downe by sithe, To eate my bread: from me it went, On me so sore: this trouble lyeth. 5 For gronyng lowde: in thys distresse, My wofull hart: oh panth and sith, That scant to skin: cleaneth any flesh. My bones be sene: thus wast I lay. 6 Lyke Pellicane: in wildernesse, I am, which sing: but wele away, As Owle that fléeth: all birdes in sight, In desert darke: which loueth to stray. 7 Full watch I kepe: both day and night, Myne eyes no slepe: can take for mone, To Sparow like: that leaueth her flight▪ In houses eues: which lowerth alone. 8 All day my foes: do me reuyle, Wyth tauntes they sport: when I do grone, These boasters mad: at me so vyle, Agaynst my soule all sworne they bée.
9 My bread that I: eate all this whyle Was ashes lyke: in taste to sée, My drinke with teares: with weping menkct. So many griefes: afflicted mée. 10 My soule with cares: was full besprenct, To note thy wrath: and heauy frowne, Thou liftst me vp: as I were strenghd, But sone most weake: thou threwst me down 11 My dayes draw low▪ as shadow falth, When darke comth: in field and towne, I wyther like: as blosome pah, My colour wanneth my moysture dryeth. 12 But thou yet Lord: as thée befalth, Art permanent: no man denieth, Thy memory: shall aye remayne, Where fast to dut: my nature hyeth. 13 I know thou wylt: once ryse agayne, To pitie (Lord) swete Syon mount, To shew hys grace: the tyme constraynth, The tyme is come: by iust account, 14 Thy seruants lo: desire in hart, To sée her stones: to building mount, They pitie her: to spie her smart, To marke her thus: in dust oppres 15 The Gentils straunge: wyl ioyne their part To feare Gods name: of all the best, Ye kings of power: in earth all whole Shall prayse thy name for worthiest.
16 When this the Lord: shall hye extoll, In buildinges fresh: this Zyon place, And her in booke of fame enroll, When glory bryght: shall her embrace. 17 And when they sée: how he is bent, To poore mans sute: in tender grace And will not be: ought discontent, To scorne theyr cryes: both all and some. 18 This thyng thus done▪ as monument, Shall written be: for folke to come, That countries whole: which shall arise, May laud thys Lord: wyth hye renome. 19 For God from hye: hath cast his eyes, Where holy is: his sacrary, Thys Lord from heauen: in gentle wise, Hath lookt to earth: to heare the cry. 20 To heare I say: the wofull playntes, Of men fast bound: in misery, To losen them: from theyr constrayntes, Which were at deathes dore very neare. 21 That they might shew▪ to all hys saintes, In Zyon place: Gods name so deare, To tell all out: Ierusalem, His worthy laudes: in open quere. 22 When people whole: shall mete in realme, Of all estates: which this shall know, To serue this God: so good to them, All reignes to hym: shall them bestow.
23 Though God as yet: my strength hath beate From captine state: to iourney slow Though he my dayes: hath short extreat, I Zyon trust: yet built to spy. 24 I wyll hym thus: wyth wordes intreat, Ah God my God: to wastefully, Cut not my dayes: by halfe away, Where thy yeares last▪ eternally. 25 Thou laydst the earth: in stable stay At first full strong: by power deuine, The heauens euen so: none will denay, Be wrought by thée: wyth all their shyne. 26 They all shall quayle: thou yet shalt holde, As garmentes worne: waxe thinne and fine, Thou shalt them change: as vestures olde They shall be changd: thus temporall. 27 But thou art still: as we behold, And art that art: perpetuall, Thy yeares in length: shal stand in déede, For féele defect: they neuer shall. 28 We trust the more: thy seruants séede, Olde Abrahams stocke: shal not decay, Their issue Lord: by thée shal spede, Before thy face: to dwell for aye. The Collecte. O Lord most mercifull protectour of all them that be in trouble, who in thy self art god euerlasting, shew thy mercy vpon vs so frayle and transitory as we be, that we may reioyce in thy sauyng helth, through Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. CIII. The righteous man: whom God doth feede, Enioyneh his soule: due laudes to sing, For his great loue: who knowth his nede, From griefe and payne: his hart to bring, Who steyth his state: all voyde of dread, His dayes in peace: with ioy to lead. Thus playth his string. ̄ ̄ 1 ARise my soule: blisse thou the Lord, Benedic a∣nima mea.Addresse thy selfe: his name to spread, My senses all: wyth iust accord, Within without: do it in dede, Hys holy name; due prayse record, Thus byd ye be: in his true word. So oft reade. 2 Reuolue the same: in gratefull mynde, My soule I say: to thée agayne, His benefites to tell full kynde To thée it is: most certaine gayne, To God who will: him faster bynde, Of his good grace: the more shall fynde I tell thée playne. 3 Of all thy sinnes: the giltines, He pardon giueth: full louingly, In all thy sores: of heuines, Thou mayst in hym: haue remedy, If thou to hym: makst thine accesse In stable hart: with faithfulnes, Thine ease to spy.
4 His sauing helth: comth prestly on, To ryd thy life: from peryls all, To make thée scape: confusion, He geueth good eare: whan thou doost call, With mercy kinde: euen he alone, With round defence: he crowneth thy mone, No tyme to fall. 5 With all good thinges: in plesantnes, He féedeth thy mouth: he filleth thy will, As Egle vseth: her new to dresse, In age for strength: to cast her bill, So he thy yeares: reuiueth afreshe: Such youth in age: can God expresse. O prayse hym still. 6 The Lord can trye: all wicked wayes, All wrong to right: whan he séeth best And though he sendth: some bitter dayes, He can them swéete: with ioyfull rest, True iudge he is: the iust to rayse, Whan force he beares: his truth to prayse, Than stay thy brest. 7 To Moses once: God did declare, His wayes his will: and all his trade, His prouidence: and daily care, To kepe his flocke: with gentle ayde, To Israell: what will he bare, Theyr practise shewth: how they dyd fare, So safe to wade.
8 They proued the Lord: most pitifull, Whole bent to grace: in tyme of néede, They felt hys helpe: most mercifull, To anger flow: but prest to méede, He pardon shewd: most plentifull, To hartes contrite: and sorrowfull. For they must spéede. 9 As do sterne Lordes: in cruelnes, Alway he is: not chidyng sore: He kéepth not ire: the poore to presse He mercy hath: in louyng store, And when he fumeth: for giltines, Yet mercy staith: hys gentlenes, Prayse hym the more. 10 A proofe hereof: in vs all spy, He serueth not vs: as we deserue As our foule sinnes: for vengeance cry, But féedth our want: our néede to serue, Though hym we greue: as wretches thrall, He guideth our life: and stayth our fall. Not far to swerue. 11 How hye the heauens: this earth surmount So far doth grace: our gylt excell, Hys mercies great: most hily mount, Upon those men: in feare who dwel, Which low in hartes: theyr fautes recount, To worship hym: as feare is wont. O loue hym well.
12 How far the East: is wyde from Weast, Whose coastes and termes: shal neuer méete, So farre our sinnes: be set at rest, By hys good gift: and pardon swéete Though vs he beateth: as he knowth best No wrath it is: but loue of breast. No irefull heat. 13 For lyke hys chylde: the father vseth, To nurture hym: by chastisement, Hym farre to draw: from vayne abuse, And yet but loue: and pity ment, So God to man: doth mercy vse, Who hym to feare: doth not refuse. And will repent. 14 For he doth know: our nature frayle, Wherof and whence: we all be made, But dust and clay: who soone may fayle, Wyth weyght of earth: all heauy lade Hys grace séeth this: to our aduayle, Els should we all: both wepe and wayle. Full euill apayde. 15 Who markth of man: hys yeres in trade Shall spy hys lyfe: but misery, Euen like to herbe: though grene in blade, That witherth soone: to hay so dry, For lyke as flowers: in field do fade, So wasteth man: anone decayd. In vanitie.
16 This freshly flower: if wyndes so sterne Do hym once shake: he falth away, That where he grew: no man can learne For brittle flesh: hath brittle stay, Hys terme but short: to tyme eterne, By death once past: none hym discernth From dust and clay. 17 Though nought made here: can euer last, Gods mercy yet: holdth stable hand On hym that feare: to hym hath cast, From age to age: in euery land, Hys righteousnes: is set full fast, To man bestowd: it will not wast But aye shall stand. 18 These men I meane: of louely feare, Be such as kepe: hys godly wyll Which fast in mynd: hys worde do beare In hart and tong: to kepe it still, And alway geueth: full ready eare To God theyr Lord: to them so deare To learne hys skill. 19 Thys Lord in heauen: hath set hys place From whence he séeth: all mortall wayes Who rightly goth: who halth in pace: As lyfe he ruleth: so death he stayes, All rule doth stand: in hys good grace, The good to kepe: the bad to chace. To short hys dayes.
20 O prayse thys Lord: ye sprites of hys, Ye angels pure: of strength so great, Ye worke hys wyll: ye neuer misse, Hys power ye know: hys royall seat, Ye know what Lord: what God he is, Ye heare hys voyce: ye sée hys blisse. Hys laudes intreat. 21 O prayse the Lord: all ye hys hostes, Ye armies cleare: of heauenly starres, Ye sprites so swift: ye firy ghostes, In peace ye serue: ye rule hys warres To do hys wyll: ye renne as postes, In heauen and earth: in all theyr coastes. As ministers. 22 O all ye workes: what names ye haue, In all the world: recount his grace: To make you all: he dyd withsaue, Aduaunce thys Lord: in tyme and place, O thou my soule: of thée I craue, Extoll this Lord: he wyll thée saue. From wofull case. ALmightye God creator and defender of all thy creatures, specially of them which do put theyr trust in thee, defend vs thy poore suppliauntes from all aduersitie that is set agaynst vs, thou seest howe weake we be of our selfe, assist vs therefore O Lorde with thy godly protection to glorifye thy holy name in earth as thy holy sprites doo in heauen, thorough Christ, &c.
The Argument. Psalme. CIIII. This Psalme setth out: for prouidence, Almighty Gods: magnificence: His wisdome, power: his goodnes eke, Of night, of day: of yere, of weeke, His excellence: all thyng doth kepe. ̄ ̄ 1 O Prayse my soule: the Lord of name, Benedic a∣ima mea.O Lord my God: of worthy fame: Thou doost excell in dignitie, Wyth honour clothd and maiestie. O hym proclame, Prayse his degrée. 2 For he is clad: most cleare wyth light, As he were deckt: wyth vesture bryght: He spreadth the heauens: as vayle most fyne, Where lyeth hys grace: and power deuyne. O séeke hys sight, To hym incline. 3 The vpper heauens: be so arayde, Wyth waters lyke: as beames be layde: The cloudes he makth: hys charet swift, On wynde the wynges: hys walke he listh, O hym estéeme, Expend hys gyft. 5 And he doth make: hys aungels sprites In wyndes and blastes: to worke theyr mightes: The flamyng fier: is minister, Whose worde to do: they waite full nere. O loue his lightes Trust hym intiere. 6 He setteth the earth: on bases sound The seas they be: O wondrous ground: The world to ende: it shall not reale, It can no change: ne ruine féele. O hym rebound Hys myght reueale. 7 Wyth waters depe: this earth was shet, As it wyth coate: all darke beset For once the seas: as mountaynes stoode, Most hye aboue: as raging floud. O prayse hym yet: Repute hym good.
7 Though thus theyr waues: the waters spred At thy rebuke: they swiftly fled: At thy rough voyce: in thunder hard, They fast gaue vp: their hold and warde. O hym a drede: His strength regard. 8 The hils then hye: in sight dyd mount The fieldes fell low: as now they wont: As them thou stowdst▪ in most due place, They stand euen so: they moue no space. O hym recount: Extoll hys grace. 9 To all thynges made: thou gauest hys roume Theyr proper place: not out to come: Thou doost the seas: in boundes repose, Not backe to turne: the earth to close. O hym renome: His hand disclose. 10 He springes sendth out: to floudes to grow And they in sea: discharge we know: Betwene the hyls: they kepe their flote, To fresh the earth: with new gréene coate. O hym betrow Hys larges note. 11 All beastes of field: there drynke theyr fill: They séeke them néedes: though fed on hill: The asses wilde: they slake their thirst Most dry which be: so made at first. O marke hys wyll: His care betrift. 12 The fetherd foules: séeke harborow As nye their drinke: they sit on bough: Where byrdes do chirme: the trées among, To God theyr Lord: in cherefull song. O hym auow: And praise hym long. 13 He wetith the hyls: and makth them soft, From heauenly cels: by dewes aloft: By frutefull cloudes: which wrought his hand The showers fall down: to moyst the land. O laud him oft: Him vnderstand.
14 He makth for beast: the grasse to spring, And herbage els: for man to bryng: To serue hys néede his bread to get, In earth such vse: in beast he set. O serue this king: His actes intreat. 15 Whence wyne is geuen: mans hart to cheare, And oyle his face: so bryght to cleare: And bread fro thence: he doth addres, Mans hart to strength: in stablenes. O count him deare: Hys laudes expresse. 16 The Lordes own trées: by man vntyld, Wyth Sap by showers: be fully fild: As Ceders hye: of Libanus, Which he hath plant: right plentuous. O praise him milde: His care discusse. 17 In these hye trées: the birdes do nest, God geueth them wit: to séeke theyr rest: The Storkes there build: and houses haue, In trées of fyrre: themselfe to saue. O loue him best: His loue ingraue. 18 The mountayns hye: a refuge bée, For buckes and beastes: of Uenerie: And so the rockes: all inaccesse, To Conies bée: theyr sikernesse. O praisd be hée: Hys workes confesse. 9 The moone he made: for ceasons due, The nyght to cleare: wyth chaunges new: The sunne so hye: a creature, Hys down fall knowth: and kéepth it sure. O good ensue: Hym worship pure 0 And after day: thou bringst in darke, So nyght comth on: and blyndnes starke: The Sauage beasts: yet gayne therby, So créepe they forth: to féede full slye. O note hys warke: Hys reed espy.
21 The Lyons whelpes: most fierce they rore, In rangyng long: of pray the store: They séeke by darke: their sustenance, Prepard by Gods: good ordinance. O hym adore: Hys worke enhance 22 When sunne returnth: and shewth hys rise, Expellyng darke: hys light surpristh: These beastes by heapes: then soone remoue They kepe theyr dens for lyght aboue. O thys aduise: Hys prudence loue. 23 Thus man goth forth: hys worke to do, More bold that they: be thus ago: To tillage true: he maketh hys gate, And spendth hys day: till it be late. O stand hym to: Recount thy state. 24 O mighty Lord: my fort and holde, How be thy workes: tride manifold: Thou madest them all: in wisdome hye, Of thy great goods: full therth do lygh. O hym behold: Hym magnify. 25 The sea so houge: the Ocean, So large in armes: and space for man: Theare liuing things: saunce number créepe Great beasts and small therin do kéepe. O search it than: This meruel seke 26 The ships by sayles: the bilowes passe Where men transport▪ theyr wardly trase: There playth his vages: Leuiathan, Whom thou dydst forme: to sport theran. O marke this case▪ Reuolue it man. 27 All creatures: of thée expect, Their foode most apt: for euery feet: That thou shouldst geue: theyr nourishment, In tyme of néede: most competent. O hym respect: To hym assent.
28 When deale thou doost: they gather strayt, In hungers stresse: themselues to bayt: If thou splayst hand: wyth blessyng méete, With good, full good: they be replete. O hym awayte: Esteme hym swéete. 29 When face thou hidest: and nought doost send, O then they wayle: to death they bend: If breath thou stopst: decay they must, They must returne: into theyr dust. O then amend: Regard hym iust. 30 When thou returnst: thy sprite agayne, New thynges by thée: new breath optayne: Then yerely thus: thou deckst a fresh, The face of earth: wyth new increase. O holde him fayne: Hys loue possesse. 31 Gods maiestie: be it for aye, In glory blest: in all hys way: The Lord shall hye: reioyce in thought, In all hys workes: so godly wrought. O soule thus pray: As thou art taught. 32 This God when he: mans sinnes to fynde, But lookth on earth: it quakth and twynd: When he the hyls: wyth hand but touch, They smoke for feare: and low they couche. O soule hym mynde: Thy Lord auouch. 33 For I will sing: to thys my Lord, Whyle I am here: and hym record: In Psaltries swéete: I wyll my song, To my Lord God: in lyfe prolong. O soule accord: Performe it strong. 34 My talke of hym: most pleasant is, No day I will: be found remisse, To ioy in God: I will not cease, He is my health, my rest, myne ease. O soule him blisse: Hym séeke to please
Where sinfull men: from earth shall fayle, All wycked freakes: God let them quayle: But thou my soule: thy Lord aduaunce, Prayse all the Lord: hys heritaunce. For thyne aduayle: Syng still all hayle. ¶The Collecte. MOst excellent almighty God, which doost wyth thy blessing hand, most richly refreshe all liuyng thynges wyth theyr foode and sustinaunce, graunte that our soules may so be refresht in the contemplati∣on of thy godly maiesty, alway to behold thy glory in heauen, in the meditation of thy wonderfull workes here in earth, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CV. Gods actes here lauded be: by stories order tolde: His pact alledge: no thanke to man: but God most due extolde. ̄ ̄ O Prayse in voyce the Lord, Syng out wyth iust accord: Exalt hys name: search out hys fame, Confitemi ni dominoHys worthy dedes record. 1 O prayse in voyce the Lord: vpon hys name to call Denounce and tell the people cleare: his doynges liberall. 2 Syng out, wyth iust accorde: and play in instrumentes: Tell all hys factes most meruelous: sprede out hys ornamentes. 3 Exalt hys name wyth ioy: most hye, and most deuyne: And let theyr hart that seke the Lord: to mirth all glad inclyne.
4 Search out hys fame and power: the Lordes right famous arke: Séeke here hys face still euermore: draw nye to note hys warke. 5 Hys worthy déedes recorde: which he hath wrought as God, His strange foreshewes: hys godly domes: so past his mouth abrode O prayse in voyce the Lord, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: search out hys fame, Hys worthy dedes recorde. 6 Ye séede of Abraham: hys seruaunt thys respect: I you appeale, praise ye the Lord: ye Iacobs stocke elect. 7 He is the Lord our God: yea none I say but hée: His iudgementes be in all the world: but most wyth vs to sée. 8 For he hys couenant myndth: for euer it to do: In thousand worldes, still fast to stand, hys word commaunded so. 9 Hys pact to Abraham: fast made, with fayth endude: Hys othe also to Isaac: agayne the same renude. 10 And he this league as law: to Iacob sure decréed: To Israell as testament: for euer well to spéede. 1 Thus saying, geue I will: to the land Canaan: For plot of your inheritaunce: as met with lyne by man. 2 But thus when few they were: to them in lyke respect: And there in land as straungers set: as Pilgrimes whole reiect. 3 And strayed from land to land: of nations wandringly: From countries wyde to other realmes: of people diuersly.
14 He sufred yet no man: to do them any wrong: For all theyr sake: yea kinges be chect: and plaged them among. 15 He say, touch not my Christes: that sacred flocke to mée: My Prophetes true: afflict not ye: which preach my maiestie. O prayse in voyce the Lord, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: search out hys fame, Hys worthy dedes recorde. 16 When he sent dearth on earth: to stop theyr foodes reliefe: And stroyed of bread: the sustenance: which stayd their strength most chiefe 17 A man before he sent: to them as herbeger, Lo Ioseph sold to seruitude: to serue in Egipt theare. 18 Whose féete they wrung in stockes: by Putiphars complaynt: In iron cast wyth chaynes I bound: hys lyfe felt hard constraynt. 19 Untill the tyme was come: that iust hys cause was séene: Whom God approued: and throughly tryed: by Oracle deuine. 20 The kyng then sent and hym: dyd lose by men of hys: The Prince that there: the people ruld: did him frō bondes dismisse 21 He made hym Lord in chiefe: of all hys court about: And ruler sole: of all hys goods: in hys Empyre full out. 22 That he might bynde and lose: his Dukes and lordes at wyll: And wit to teache: hys sages all: by hys approued skill.
O prayse in voyce the Lord, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: searche out hys fame, Hys worthy dedes recorde. 23 So Israell in went: to Egypt glad and sad: This Iacob olde: a straunger liued: in land of Cham the bad. 24 And there God multiplied: hys people notably, And made hym far: more strong and big: then were hys foes at eye. 25 The Moores then changd theyr hartes: as God dyd them detect: That they dyd hate: his people sore: wt guiles hys seruantes checkt. 26 Then God sent Moses out: hys seruant good and true: Yea Aaron eke: whom he dyd chose: his hart on them dyd rue. 27 Which there to them dyd splay: his workes and wordes by signes Hys meruels rare: in land of Cham: such power thē God resignes. 28 And he depe darkenes sent: all thinges then darke was so: The signes themselfe: ne Moses yet: rebeld Gods wyll to do. 29 He turnd theyr waters all: to bloud, not them they dranke: He slue theyr fish: theyr nourishment: for all theyr waters stanke. 30 The Lord euen so brought frogs: in numbers wonderfull: Which crept vpon: the beds of kynges: theyr priuy chambers full. 31 He spake the worde then came: on heapes all kynde of flies: So lyse of dust: as myngyns small: in all theyr costes dyd ryse.
32 For all theyr raynes and dewes: he gaue them hayle to change, And flames of fyer: so mixt wyth thē: in all their landes most strange. 33 Wherwyth he smote their vines: their fig trées flat to ground: He brake euen down: their fruitful trées: in all their quarters round 34 And when hys worde came forth: of grashoppers on heape: In numbers theare: nigh infinite: dyd Caterpillers leape. 35 Which dyd all whole deuoure: theyr grasse about the land: Yea frute and all: that grew in soyle: thus heauy lay hys hand. 36 Theyr fruites first borne he slue: in all theyr realme in length: Their pryme offpring: most principal▪ of all their natures strength. O prayse in voyce the Lorde, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: searche out hys fame, Hys worthy deedes recorde, 37 He then dyd lead them out: wyth gold and siluer stuft: And none there was: in all theyr tribes: that fell or febly puft. 38 So Egypt ioyd full glad: when they went out of realme: For they the Iewes: drad fearefully: theyr feare so fell on them. 39 He spred on them a cloud: to couer them by day: Wyth piller bryght: to cleare the nyght: he dyd dyrect their way. 40 At theyr request and sute: he brought them quayles for meate: He filled them: with bread of heauen: swéete aungels foode to eate. 41 He claue and opte the rock: whence water flowed full prest: They ran lyke streames: in wildernes: to comfort man and beast.
42 For why he bare in mynde: hys holy promise thus: Hys loue also: to Abraham: hys seruaunt vertuous. 43 And full wyth ioy and myrth: he led hys people forth: Hys deare electes: wyth iubilies: so taken well in worth. O prayse in voyce the Lorde, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: searche out hys fame, Hys worthy deedes recorde. 44 And last he gaue them whole: the gentils landes by met: They all possest: for heritage: for which the people swet. 45 To thend that they should kepe: hys statutes true and ryght: That they should aye: obserue his lawes: prayse ye this lord of might O prayse in voyce the Lorde, Syng out wyth iust accorde: Exalt hys name: searche out hys fame, Hys worthy deedes recorde. ¶The Collecte. WEe sue vnto thee most louyng Lorde, besechyng thee by the power of thy name, that where our fathers were conducted therby, to the ministra∣tion of thy heauenlye aungels foode, that thou would so vouchsaue to feede and comfort vs wyth thy misticall nou∣rishment of thy body & bloud to whome with the father and holy ghost be.
The Argument. Psalme. CVI. The Iewes (which dwelt) in Babilon: thus sang their thankes in harte: They do confesse: gods onely grace: they blame their owne desarte. \ \ THe Lorde (so good) with thankes confesse: Who can hys power expresse: Well true men bee: then Lord teache mee, Confitemi ni dominoThy seruauntes state to see. 1 The Lord (so good) with thanks confesse: sing prayse & laud him hie All good he is: for why hys grace: for euer standth full nie. 2 Who (fully) can his power expresse: wyth tong he Lord so great: Or cause be harde: hys prayses all: who can hys grace extreat. 3 Wel true men be (in hart) most blest: who iudgemēt true performe Which worke alway: that righteous is: in iust and lawfull forme. 4 Thē lord (I craue) teach me ful kind: haue mind to work my welth As friendly thou thy people mindst: to me resort wyth helth. 5 Thy seruauntes state (O Lord) to sée: shew me their blisse at eye▪ That I reioyce wyth thy good folke: and thanke thée ioyfully. The Lord (so good) wyth thankes confesse, Who can hys power expresse: Well, true men be: then Lorde teach mee, Thy seruauntes state to see. 6 We all (to thée) haue sinned sore: as oft our fathers dyd: We haue gone wrong: and done amisse: most wickedly in déede.
7 Thy (noble) faytes in Egipt done: our fathers noted seald: Of thy great loues no mynd they had: at red sea they rebeld. 8 Yet he (full kynd) dyd them preserue: for loue of his great name, To make hys power: so notable: the world to feare the same. 9 The sea so red: he dyd rebuke: then soone vp dryed it was: And through great déepes he led them dry: as desert men do passe. 10 And he (by strength) defended them: from aduersaries power: He ryd them sure: from enemies hand: they could not them deuour 11 The waters (depe so) whelmed such: as them dyd vexe and greue: That none remaynd: not one of them: he them dyd quite remeue. 12 Hys (stable) word: they then beleued: to spy theyr foes distresse: And then they sung: an hymne of thankes: to prayse hys worthines The Lord (so good) with thankes confesse, Who can hys power expresse? Well, true men be: then Lorde teach mee, Thy seruauntes state to see. 13 In (their great) heat though hast they made: his works they soone forgot: No tyme they would: his counsailes byde: no, tary would they not. 14 They (fondly) longd in wycked lust: for meat in wyldernes▪ They tempted God: in desert hye: wyth shamefull sturdines. 5 And there (euen there) he gaue them full: their asking redily: But yet theyr bane: they tooke therin: theyr lyues destroyd therby. 6 And Moses (guide) yet they prouokt: wt wrath in their own tentes Yea Aaron eke: Gods holy priest: wyth foolish brablementes.
17 Wherfore (in hast) the earth dyd ryue: & swalowd Dathon quyte: It couerd whole: the route and band: of Abyram in sight. 18 The fyre (frō heauen:) fell whote and fierce: amids their company The flame dyd burne: those wycked men: wyth all theyr familie. 19 Eftsoones (as God) a calfe they made: at Horeb mount most fond: They worshipped: this moltē worke: which made theyr proper hand whole 20 And thus they turnd Gods (onely) glore: who was their worship To shap of calfe: but eatyng hay: which they did hye extoll. 21 They God forgot (and left) full soone: who them to grace dyd take: Who wrought as god: in Egipt land▪ strange dedes for al their sake 22 Great thyngs (to sée) O wonderfull: in land of Cham I say: And thynges of power: most terrible: at red sea there in way. 23 To stroy them he (then full) decréed: if Moses his elect, Had not in sight: vp start to treate: his wrath to stay vnwreckt. 24 And they despisde: and (lightly) scornd: that land delicious: No fayth they gaue: vnto hys word: but went contrarious. 25 They did (in hart) eke grutch and moyne: in all theyr tents vnkynd They heard no tyme: gods holy word: it was to them but wynd. 26 By liftyng vp: his (irefull) hand: God sware vnto them all: That he would them: in wildernes: destroy wyth shamefull fall. 27 And that he would: cast (shortly) out: their séede where gentils byde And sparple them: as runnegates: in countries farly wyde.
28 Yea yokt they were: and knit (in hart) to Baal Peor fast: They glad dyd eat: the sacrifice: to dead men which was cast. 29 Thus they (all out) dyd him prouoke: to wrath by filthy vyce: So hie, that néedes: Gods heauy plage: on them did sharply ryse. 30 Then Phinées: stoode vp (in zeale) as iudge he vengeaunce tooke: And strait the plage: did stay & cease: gods wrath so them forsooke. 31 Which (godly) zeale: reputed was: to hym for righteousnes: From age to age: Gods prest to be: wyth all hys séede no lesse. 32 They also (greued and) angred God: at waters namde of stryfe: That Moses meke: gate harme for them: for God abridgd hys lyfe. 33 For they prouokt: hys gentle sprite: wordes doubtfull out to lashe: Wherby he spake: without aduise: with lips to swift and rashe. The Lorde (so good) wyth thankes confesse, Who can hys power expresse? Well, true men be: then Lorde teach mee, Thy seruauntes state to see. 34 They did not eke (in warre) destroy: the Heathen peoples sect: As God them bad: most earnestly: that they should them reiect. 35 But myxt (and ioynd) they were full nye: among the gentils sort: And learnd their workes: outragious: wherof they made but sport. 6 Wherby (full soone) they honoured: and serued theyr idols gay: Which were a snare: so sought by them: to brede their own decay. 7 So far (as blynd) they doted than: vnnaturall, and mad: That they to diuels: did sacrifice: their sonnes & daughters glad.
38 Much giltles bloud: they (spild &) shed of their own childers brood To Idols slayne: of Canaan: the land foule staynd wyth bloud. 39 Thus foule (to foule) wt their self workes: they were defild & staind A whoryng far: their fancies straid: no fayth to God remaind. 40 Thē (iustly) gods: most dreadful wrath: his own good people brent That he abhord: his heritage: where stoode hys regiment. 41 So that he gaue: them (wholy) vp: to Gentils cruell handes: That they them ruld: which hated them before in other landes. 42 And then (full soone) theyr enemies: full sore dyd them oppresse: As subiectes vyle: subdude they were: to all their cruelnes. 43 He oft (in loue) deliuerd them: but they more oft rebeld: With theyr inuentes: and so for sinne: they were but iustly feld. 44 He yet (at length) hys eyes dyd cast: when they in trouble grond: And when he heard: how painfully: in wo they daily mond. 45 He them agayne: to mind did call: his pact to them betrought: He dyd repent: and pitied them: hys heaped grace so wrought. 46 Yea more (then this) he made euen such: to shew them pitie all: Which earst full hard: thē captiue held: as slaues most bond & shrall The Lord (so good) wyth thankes confesse, Who can hys power expresse? Well, true men bee: then Lord teache mee, Thy seruauntes state to see. 47 O saue vs Lord: our (louyng) God: from Gentils vs collect: Thy holy name: that we may found: thy laudes wyth ioy erect.
The (gentle) Lord of Israel: and God wyth prayse be raysde: From world to world: let all men say: Amen the Lord be praysde. The Lord (so good) wyth thankes confesse, Who can hys power expresse? Well, true men be: then Lorde teache mee, Thy seruauntes state to see. The Collecte. BE myndefull of vs O mercifull Lorde, for the deare loue that thou bearest to thy people, and discharge vs from all seruitude and bondage of sinne, and saue vs by thy healthfull hande, and gather vs to ge∣ther in one vnitie of sprite, to glorifie thee onelye our Lorde and sauiour, to whome wyth the father and the holy ghost, &c. ¶ The ende of the fourth booke.
Here beginneth the fifth Booke of Psalmes. Psalme. CVII. ¶The Argument. This hath fiue partes distinct: where diuers men be bid: The Lord to prayse: to preach hys power: who them from perils rid. ¶The Quiere. The rearefreyt of the Psalme. GOd graunt that we would: prayse euer agayne, The Lord for hys grace: so to sing in our quiere The wonders he doth: for the children of men, Confitemi ni dominoWhose mercy so nere: to all doth appeare. To all doth appeare. ¶The Meane. / / 1 O Prayse the Lord all ye, Due thankes to hym extende: For good he is: whose gentlenes, Shall last till world doth ende. 2 Let them say thus in thankes: who were by God made frée: Whom he redéemd: from cruell hand: of troublous enmitie. 3 And whom he gatherd nye: from countries strange and wyde: From East and West: from North and South: in citie safe to byde. 4 Who wandred out of way: in desertes wildernes: And found no way: to dwelling towne: to stay in restfulnes. 5 Who hunger felt and thirst: nye pynde by famishment: Whose hartes within: dyd melt away: for néedefull nourishment.
¶The Rectors. 6 ☞Who thus afflict: when they did cry, To God in meeke complaintes: He them dyd saue: most louingly, From all theyr hard constrayntes. 7 For he led them: the way full kynde, Both ryght and prosperous: Wherby they dyd: a citie fynde, To dwell commodious. ¶The Quiere. 8 ☞God graunt that they would: prayse hartely then: The Lord for hys grace: so to sing in theyr quiere: The wonders he doth: for the children of men, Whose mercy so neare: to them dyd appeare, 9 For that he refresht: theyr bodely neede, Where thirsty they strayd: as wyth anguishe opprest: Theyr soule dyd he ease: of theyr hunger in speede, To set them in rest: wyth foode of the best. ¶The Meane. 10 And they that sate in darke: in deadly shadowes blacke: Afflict in bondes: and iron chaynes: and felt all comfortes lacke. 11 They thus deserud for why: gods wordes they did detest, The counsayles eke: they did despise: of all the worthiest. 2 He then brought downe their hartes: wyth griefes most tedious: They fell full faynt: none helpyng them: so far rebellious.
¶ The Rectors. 13 ☞Who thus afflict: when they dyd cry, To God in meeke complayntes: He them dyd saue: most louingly, From all theyr hard constrayntes. 14 For he them brought: from sorrowes long, From darke and deadly shade: He brake their bondes: and fetters strong, To freedome they to wade. ¶The Quiere. 15 ☞God graunt that they would: prayse hartely then, The Lord for hys grace: so to sing in theyr quiere: The wonders he doth: for the children of men, Whose mercy so neare: to them dyd appeare. 16 For that he releast: their burdenouse holde, The gates that in brasse: were inuincible fast, As also the barres: that in yron were folde, By hym were they brast: set ope at the last. ¶The Meane. 17 And fooles that lewdly did: by surfet foule transgres, And were for al theyr sinnes afflict: by sicknes fell excesse. 18 Who meat in tast abhord: though swéete and wholesome dyght, And then came nigh: to death hys gates: to stop theyr breth and sight ¶The Rectors. 19 ☞Who thus afflict: whan they do crye, To God in meke complayntes: He them did saue: most louinglye, From all their hard constrayntes.
20 For he then sent: his worde anone, He them restord by myght: Wherby they scapte: destruction, From perill saued quite. ¶The Quiere. 21 ☞God graunt that they would: prayse hartely then, The Lorde for hys grace: so to sing in their quiere: The wonders he doth: for the childer of men, Whose mercy so neare: to them did appeare. 22 That offer they may: the sacrifice pure, Iust thankes of their lippes: out of hart so to rayse: Hys workes to renome: so the world to allure. His walkes and his wayes: most gladly to prayse. ¶The Meane. 23 And they that enter do: the sea wyth shyp and sayle, To worke theyr feates: in waters depe▪ for lyfelodes great auayle. 24 They sée Gods dreadfull workes: in tempestes them they note, His meruels eke: of thynges so houge: in depe also in flote. 25 God speakth and strait ryse vp: the wyndes of blustring stormes Which vp do hoyse: the bellowes rage: in gastly grisly formes. 26 Theare ships rise vp to heauen: agayne to deepe they fall: Thus tosse in waues. the mariners: great feares their hartes apall. 27 They to and fro be tost: they réele as man full dronke: Theyr arte thē faylth theyr wits be gone: they fare as men but sonke
¶The Rectors. 28 ☞Who thus afflict: when they do cry, To God in meke complayntes: He them doth saue: most louingly, From all their harde constrayntes. 29 For he the stormes: doth calme in sea, the waues he stilleth their dinne: 30 Then glad are they: that still they be, Safe hauen he driueth them in. ¶The Quiere. 31 ☞God graunt that they would: prayse hartely then, The Lord for hys grace: so to syng in their quiere: The wonders he doth: for the childern of men, Whose mercy so neare: to them dyd appeare. 32 Hys fame to aduaunce: as duely they ought, Downe set as they be: with the people in place: To prayse hym aright: for indempnitie wrought, Where elders in space: their courtes do embrace. ¶The Meane. 33 So let men note Gods myght: in dread of hym to stand: Which turnth moist soyle: to wildernes: & dryeth vp springs to land 34 A fruitefull earth he makth: as salt and barren ground: The dwellers sinnes: be cause therof: where in their liues be found 35 So he the desert makth: to flow wyth water springes: And soyle most dry: from barennes: by runnyng brookes he bringes.
36 And there he setth to dwell: all hungry nedefull men: To build themselfe: a city strong: as Forte therto to renne. 37 And there the fieldes they sowe: and vineyardes large they plant Swéete frutes to beare: of yeres increase: to féede their néede & want 38 All them he blessth wyth store: they then increase most hye: And suffreth not theyr cattell once: to droupe or yet to dye. 39 But when they fall to sinne: he them decayth agayne: By cruell powers: he bringth them low: with cares opprest & payne ¶The Rectors. 40 ☞When thus afflict: they feele decay, By Princes great abuse: Though out of way: a tyme they stray, At last he them reduce. 41 For he the poore: returnd by smart, Doth rayse from misery: His householdes yet: he makth in part, As flockes of sheepe to ligh. ¶The Quiere. ☞God graunt that they would: prayse hartely then, The Lorde for hys grace: so to sing in their quiere: The wonders he doth: for the chylder of men, Whose mercy so neare: to them did appeare. 42 That tymely they may: this ponder aryght, As righteous man: in his duety so glad: Is prest to reioyce: wyth a godly delyte, Where mouth of the bad: shall dumly be sad.
The conclusion. Mans hart that is wise: these things wil aduise, Pure thankes to procure▪ to hys God for his cure, And thus hys deuise: may he iustly comprise, Ryght oft is hys vre: by loue to allure, Kynde mercy so sure: in hym doth endure, Extoll hym I say: both by night and by day, Ren neuer astray: from his mercifull way. ¶The Collecte. WE do acknowledge O Lord thy manifolde mer∣cies, which thou doost daily bestow vppon our miserable necessities, beseching thee as thou sittest in heauen on the ryght hand of thy father in throne of equall glory with him, that we may worthely cōceiue and vnderstand this great mystery of thy inestimable mercies, duely to laude the same, to the glorye of thy name, who with the father and the holy gost, art wor∣thy all prayse, Amen. ¶Certayne verses of the sayd Psalme otherwise translated. 6 When thus they cryed to God: thus set in woes excesse: Ryght soone he dyd: deliuer them: from all theyr hard distresse. 7 For he led them the way: both ryght and prosperous: Wherby they did: a citie fynde: to dwell commodious. 8 O that men would then prayse: the Lordes benignitie: To tell what actes: ful strange he doth: to mans posteritie. 9 For that he doth refresh: the soule in thyrst so dry: And filleth the soule: that hungry is: wyth goodnes largely.
13 When thus they cryed to God thus set in woes excesse: Ryght soone he dyd: deliuer them: from all theyr hard distresse. 14 For he then brought them forth: from darke and dedly shade: He brake theyr bondes: and fetters strong: to fréedom sure to wade. 15 O that men would then prayse: the Lordes benignitie: To tell what actes: ful strange he doth: to mans posteritie. 16 For he the gates of brasse: hath all to shiuers broke: And burst the barres: a sunder quite: in yron forgd by stroke. 19 When thus they cryed to God: thus set in woes excesse: Ryght soone he dyd deliuer them: from all theyr hard distresse. 20 For he then sent hys worde: he them restord by might: Wherby they scapte: destruction: from peryll saued quite. 21 O that men would then prayse: the Lordes benignitie: To tell what actes: ful strange he doth: to mans posteritie. 22 That they would offer hym: of thankes the sacrifice: And full tell out: hys workes so great: in glad and thankfull wyfe. 28 When thus they cryed to God: thus set in woes excesse: Ryght soone he dyd: deliuer them from all theyr hard distresse. 29 For he dryueth down the stormes: and makth them soone to cease So that the waues: be still agayne: wherby they winne release. 30 Then are they glad at hart: because at rest they bée: He bringth them thus: to that theyr hauen: which they so glad wold sée.
31 O that men would then prayse the Lordes benignitie: To tell what actes ful strange he doth: to mans posteritie. 32 That they would hym exalt: when people most be met: And prayse hym due: where Elders bée: together ioyntly set. 40 Though he doth beare a whyle: that tyrantes them oppresse, And suffer them: to go astray: in wandryng wyldernesse. 41 Yet he doth helpe the poore: from hys great misery: Hys householdes yet: he makth in part: as flockes of shepe to lye. 42 The righteous man wyll this: expend and eke reioyce: Where that the mouth: of wickednes: shall whole be stopt in voyce 43 Who that is wyse I say: will ponder all these thynges: They shall so know: what mercies frée: the Lord in sorow bringes. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CVIII. When Dauid kept: Odollan caue, Where Saule he scapte: for all hys raue: Thus thankes in song: he dyd extende, Paratum cor.To God who did: hys lyfe defende. / / 1 MY hart to God: is ready found, Thy worthy laudes: deuout to sound: For sing I will: and Psalmes recorde, With glory due: in tong and worde. 2 Lyft vp thy selfe: thou Psaltrye swéete, Thou harpe euen so: with tunes most méete, For I my selfe: will early ryse, Newe songes to sing: I wyll deuise.
3 I thée wyll prayse: O Lord in songe. In peoples sight: euen them among: Yea Psalmes to thée: I wyll arrect. Among all folke: of euery sect. 4 For farre aboue: the heauen we sée, Standth firmly thy: benignytie: Thy fayth and truth: as proufe doth teache, Most nye the cloudes: doth wholy reach. 5 Be thou exalt: O God on hye, Aboue the heauens: in maiestye: Aboue all earth: thy glory set, That men may know: thy power so great. 6 That thy beloued: from wretchednes, Whole rydde may be: in stablenesse: Let thy right hand: than vs preserue, O aunswere me: my turne to serue. 7 God spake his word: in holynes, Wherein I ioy: and shall no lesse: All Sychem iust: in partes I set, And Sucoth vale: I also met. 8 All myne no doubt: is Gilead, And so is myne: Manasses had: And Ephraim: my reigne the strength, And Iuda is: my guyde at length. 9 Land Moab is: my water pot, And Idumye: my conquerd lot: Wheron my sho: extend I wyll, On Philistyne: ioy shall I still.
10 Who hath me brought: to be so nye▪ That cytye great▪ so walled hye: Who led me forth: so iust to come, To Idmye: to wynne renome? 11 Was it not thou: I say O God? Which vs forsokst: cast wyde abroade: Which didst not walke: as God with vs, With our mayne hostes: victorious? 12 O geue vs helpe: and that at hand, Of all our griefe: of troubles band: For weake the helpe that man can do, Most vayne to trust: it is euen so. 13 In God we shall: all strong endure, By hym to do: duentures sure: And he our foes: shall sone debell, To treade them down: though hie they swell. ¶The Collecte. PRepare our harts O Lord ready vnto thee, to con∣fesse the power of thy name, and wheras we know how thou early as conquerour didst ryse, to raygne in kingdome euerlasting, so we may in life alway ryse from our earthly conuersation: to be pertaker of thy heauenly resurrection to whom with the father and the holy ghost art one God: worlde without ende. Amen.
The Argument. Psalme. CIX. Here Dauid vext: by tyrannye, hath Doegs spite bewrayed: Whose successour: we Iudas spye, who falsly Christ betrayed. / / 1 Deus lau∣emO God my ioy: and all my prayse: in whome I glory most: Hold not thy peace: thy vertue rayse: destroy my haters bost. 2 For wycked mouthes: and mouthes of gile: at me be open set, Wyth lying lippes: they me reuile: wyth tonges most false they ief. 3 Wyth hateful wordes: they compasse me: such gall in hart they haue They fight at my: sinceritie: they causeles me depraue. 4 For loue I had: to them in hart: they séeke my hurt and bloud, Yet dyd I pray: to ease my smart: wherin I wysht them good. 5 For good they euil: agayne requite: to malice so they bend, And so for loue: I shewd in sight: whote hate they do repend. 6 Some wycked man: O constitute▪ on hym to breake hys band, Let Satan stand: and execute: hys power agaynst hys hand. 7 When iudged he be: for any déede: let hym as gilty come, Hys prayers whole: ill mought they spéede: to sinne turnd all in some 8 And let his dayes: abriged be: in yeares but fewe to go, His office eke: withall his fee: Some other take hym fro. 9 Let all his séede: and issue sprong: full sone be fatherles, And let his wife: be widow young: and curst with barennesse.
10 As wandrels make: his childrens stray: to beg & séeke their bread, Depryued so: their houses gay: abroade to desert led. 11 Yea let his goodes: the vsurer: all wholy catch in net, And let also: the forriner: by spoyle his labours set. 12 Let no man be: in any place: to pitye hys distresse, And no man helpe: with any grace: his children fatherles. 13 To wast be led: his progenye: to ioy in no degrée, Their name be blot: from memory: no second age to sée. 14 His fathers crymes: be they reuiued: in mynde before the Lord, His mothers sinne: to her deryued: and styll of God abhord. 15 Yea let them hange: in open sight: before the Lord for aye, Dryue he their fame: all whole & quyte: from all the earth away. 16 Because no loue: he had in brest: to any nedy wight, But did pursue: poore man opprest: to kill the hart contryfe. 17 He curse ensued: he ioyed therin: it came hym home the more, He blesse eschued: none would he wynne: it shal hym flee therfore▪ 18 To cursednes: he whole was set: as clad for all the nonce, As water yet: his bowels wet: as oyle it pearst his bones. 19 Let it therfore▪ as cloke to be: hymselfe to wrape therin, With gyrdell gyrt: so like be he: alway euen next the skyn. 20 This mede from God: to them befall: which me resist in hate, To them euen all: in generall: agaynst my soule that prate. 21 But do thou Lord: my Lord with me: as it becommeth thy name For swéete is thy: benignitye: O ryd me far fro shame.
22 For sore afflict: and poore I wepe: I am all destitute, My hart within: is wounded déepe: in death nye constitute, 23 As shadow fast: I passe away: as day doth low declyne, As grashopper: remouing aye: from place I am so dryuen. 24 My knées do reale: all fatigate: in fasting long from meate, My flesh is dryed: for lacke of fat: or oyle to make it sweate. 25 A foule rebuke: to them I séemde: on me they strangly gase. As laughing stocke: they me estéemd: & shoke their heads apace, 26 O helpe me Lord: my God withsaue: to thée alone I clyue, Preserue me sure: thy grace I craue: and shortly me reuyue. 27 And let them knowe: in this thy ayde: that this is whole thy hand, That thou thy selfe: my state hast layd: so strong by thée to stand. 28 And let them curse: so thou do blesse: O Lord of all most drad, Yea let them rise: but foule to misse: to make thy seruaunt glad. 9 Let all my foes: with shame be broke: as clad therwith echone, Let them be wrapt: as with  cloke: in their confusion. 0 And I with mouth: will celebrate: the Lord with thankes on hye, Whom people most: be congregate: I wyll his lades applye. 1 For that he stode: in poore mans nede: at his right hand so strong, To saue his soule: frō iudges drede: who might him stroy by wrōg.
¶The Collecte. O Most pitifull Lorde and intreatable God, whiche didst vouchsaue to be cast vnder the malediction of the law, so bearyng the wrath of thy father, to the ende that thou would discharge vs from all curse and malediction, we beseche thee so to deale with vs mer∣cifully that we may escape from the tyranny of synne that doth haunte vs, and also to bee defended by the power of thy name from all cursed detractions of e∣uill men, so that we may fully ioy to be in thy fauour, in the enmitie of the world, to whom wyth thy father and holy sprite, be all honour and glory for euer. Amen. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CX. Though Dauids raigne: be somewhat ment, Yet Christ is chiefe: here prophecied, Who was both kyng: in regiment, And priest in death: then after stied, To heanen to sit: as priest and king, His frendes to saue: his foes to wring. Wyth death the sting. ̄ ̄ 1 THe Lord most hye: the father thus, Dixit do∣minus do∣mino.Dyd say to Christ: my Lord his sonne Set thou in power: most glorious, On my ryght hand: aboue the sunne, Untill I make: thy foes euen all, Thy low footestoole: to thée to fall. As subiectes thrall.
2 The Lord shall send: from Zion place, Of thy great power: imperiall, The royall rod: and princely mace, Whence grace shall spring: originall, Yea God shall say: thou God vp ryse, To raigne amids: thyne enemies. In princely wyse. 3 The people glad▪ in hartes delight, Shall offer giftes: in worship frée, As conquest day: of thy great might, In shinyng shew of sanctitie, For why the dew: of thy swete birth, As morne new sprong: dropth ioyfull mirth, So séene on earth. 4 The Lord did sweare: and fast decréed, He will hys worde: no tyme repent: Which sayd thou art: a priest in déed, A kingly priest: aye permanent, Of order namde: Melchisedeck, Whom peace and right▪ doth ioyntly decke, As Gods elect. 5 The Lord as shield: kepth right thy hand, To make thy raigne: inuincible, He shall subdue: by sea and land All power aduerse: most forcible, He shall great kyngs: and Cesars wound, In day of wrath: all them confound. By fearefull sound.
12 He iudgement true: shall exercise, As iudge among: the Gentile sect, All places he: shall full surprise, Wyth bodies dead: on earth proiect Abrode he shall: in sunder smyte, The heds of realmes: that him wyll spyte, Or scorne hys myght. 13 Though here exilde: he strayth as bond, And shall in way: but water drynke, Of homely brooke: as comth to hand, Pursued to death: and wysht to sinke. Yet he for thys: humilitie, Shall lift hys head: in dignitie. Eternally. ¶The Collecte. O Lord the eternall sonne of the father, which wart begotten before the world was made, and art the first of all creatures we lowly beseche thee that where by the session of the ryghte hande of thy father thou subduest thy enemies, so make vs to subdue all the do¦minion of sinne rising against vs to be made meete to serue thee in all godlines, who liuest and raignest one God, wyth the father and the holy ghost, Amen. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXI. This laudatory is: and thankth Gods gentlenes, Who made all thyng: and vs redeemd: from sinne and wretchednes. / / 1 Conite∣bor tibi.WIth all my hart I will: the Lord commend on hye, Met secretly: with faythfull men: in church eke openly.
2 Full greate be all the factes: of this hye Lord in name, Most exquisite: and may be found: of them that loue the same. 3 His déede is worthy prayse: most worshipfull I say, It Glory is: and comlynes: his iustice lasts for aye. 5 Of all his wondrous workes: remembraunce hath he made, The Lord is good: and mercifull: to Israell in trade. 5 For meat and spoyle he gaue: to them that feard hym due, So myndfull he: will euer be: his pact and league to sue. 6 His actes great power shewd: to all his peoples sight, In geuing them: the heritage: of Gentils landes for right. 7 His workes of hands be séene: all truth and equytye, And his precepts: all faythfull be: in iust confrmytye. 8 Upholde they stand most firme: and euer wyll remayne, For made they are: by verytye: and equytye agayne. 9 He sent hys people guydes: which them to fréedome lad, His pact he bad: should euer stand: whose holy name be drad. 10 The feare of God is sayd: of wisdome first the way, Who kéepe hys hests: haue wisdome cleare: whose prayse shal ner decay. ¶The Collecte. GOd whose glory all thy saints most gladly delight to confesse, graunt vs to haue the feare of thy ho∣ly name, wherin consist the beginning of all wisdome that wee beyng enstructed in thy will and pleasure, may be fedde wyth the heauenly nourishment of thy worde, through Christ, &c.
This doth recite, of hym that feareth the Lorde: The prayses right, of hym that feareth the Lorde: Whose constancy, in God by faythes accorde. Lyeth perfectly, in God by faythes accorde. ̄ ̄ 1 THat man is blest: and liueth at rest: that fearth the Lord most pure, Beatus vir.Who hath delyte: most exquisite: to worke hys byddinges sure. 2 No doubt hys séede: shall firmly spéede: in all felycitye, These regents hye: theyr progenye: most blessed shall they be, 3 He riches store: in house the more: wyth plenty shall possesse, Hys righteousnes: in stablenes: shall last and still increase. 4 And light shall spred: from darknes drede: to godly mens reliefe, The Lord benigne: aye pitiyng: and iust to ease their griefe. 5 This blisfull man: he pitye can: and lend with diligence, His word and déede: by wisdoms réede: he rightly shall dispence. 6 For moued he: can neuer be: Gods arme shall hym defend, The iust shall sure: in fame endure: till all the world doth ende. 7 At tydyngs euyll: no tyme he wyll: stand dreadfully hymselfe, Hys hart for why: stands stedfastly: he trustth the Lord of health, 8 His hart so great: is stable set: to feare nothyng aduerse, Untyll hys eyes: their lust espies: on all hys foes peruerse. 9 He spredth hys store: he geueth the poore: hys iustice yet abidth, His power shalbe: exalted frée: with glory large and wyde. 10 The euyll shall sée: and fret shall he: shall gnash his teth and lowe▪ The wicked lust: of men vniust: shall wast and turne full sower.
¶The Collecte. GRaunt we beseech thee O God which art the light euerlasting and guyde of our hartes, that we may loue and feare thee aboue all thinges, to delight on∣ly in thy praise, and so to deale to the necessitie of ou neighbour in thys prcsent lyfe, that in the next we heare not that sharpe word of reprobatiō for vnmer∣cifulnes. through Christ. &c. The Argument. Psalme. CXIII. This praisth Gods grace on hie: therto it doth inuite, His dignitie and prouidence: it doth in part endight. \ \ 1 YE seruauntes (all: ye) children méeke, Laudate ueri.prayse ye the Lorde of all: Prayse ye hys name: extoll ye due, hys power potentiall. 2 Gods (worthy) name: be blest frō hence: tyl all ye world haue ende To dread and loue: his power aboue: God graunt we all contende. 3 Frō time ye Sunne (doth shine) in rise: til downward fallth ye same From East to West: O blessed be: the Lords swéete holy name. 4 For why (no fayle) the Lord doth rule: on Gentils all that be, Yea heauens he passth: in glory bright: thys Lord of maiestie. 5 For who is lyke (this God) the Lord: in glory fame or power? Who hath set vp: himselfe aboue: as chiefe and gouernour. 6 And yet he bowth: himselfe (full low) of hys great gentlenes, All thynges that be: in heauen and earth: to sée in carefulnes.
7 And he it is (at will) alone: that liftth the poore from dust, The nedy man: he doth promote: in dong that low was thrust. 8 To make hym (hye: and) equall sit: wyth Princes rule to beare: Yea that wyth Péeres: of age most graue: of his own people deare 9 And he (alone) the baren makth: in fruitfull house to dwell, As mother glad: to ioye in babes: O prayse the Lord then well. ¶The Collecte. WE geue all prayse most due to thy blessed name almighty god, beseching thee, so to preserue vs in the lappe of thy welbeloued spouse thy church that we maye encrease and be stablished in the perpetuall knot of charitie and vnitie: Thorough Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXIIII. Here ioy is made: that Iacobs seede, Did Aegipt scape: in luckie speede: That led they were: by Gods great might, To Canaan land: to them behight. ̄ ̄ 1 WHen Israell: from Egipt went, In exitu.Where God them held: in chastisment: When ryd from thrall: was Iacobs house, Of people fierce: and barbarouse. 2 Then Iury land: was consecrate, True God to serue: full dedicate: Than Israell: was hys Empire, Hys subiect made: to rule intyre.
3 Which thing whan that: the sea did spye, She fled to sée: Gods power so nye: And Iordan floud: reuersed was, As geuyng place: hys arke to passe. 4 The mountaynesleapt: as Rammes full light, Aboue the waues: th'appeard in sight: The Hillockes eke: did skip full glad, As Lambes in grasse: all fat bestad. 5 What meanst thou sea: to flée so fast? Thou Iordan why: aback wart cast? Was this the cause: Gods truthfull grace? Or fathers fayth: that ye gaue place? 6 You Mountaynes hye: why leape ye thus? As Rammes with fruite: most plenteous: Ye litle hylles: why skypt ye so? (Thys sight to sée) as yong shéepe do? 7 At Gods bright face: the earth thus shooke, At Iacobs Gods: most present loke, Be whole adrad: than earth to sée, Thys puissant Lord: so nye to bée. 8 Whose power dyd turne: the stone to gushe, Great water brokes: most merueylous: The flint so hard: whence fier springth, Euen water flouds: he made it bring. ¶The Collecte. GRaunt vs O Lord euer to escape the seruitude of all errour and Egipticall sinne and wyckednesse, that we may always beare our lyues sanctified to thee to reioyce in thy protection, Through Christ, &c.
¶The Argument. Thus Gentiles Gods: be scornd vnpure▪ Where God of heauen: is God most sure: On hym to trust: to lawd hym aye, Who blessth our lyfe: and keepth our way. ̄ ̄ 1 NO prayse geue vs: O Lord to vs, Non nobis Domine.Geue it thy name: most glorious: For thy swéete loue: for thy good truth, Defend vs Lord: and shew thy ruth. 2 Why els no doubt: the Heahen sect, Would say where is: their God so tect? If God they haue: as we in sight, Let hym come forth: and shew his might. 3 But sure our God: is God in heauen, Not made or séene: to carnall eyne: He doth at will: what lyke hym best, He made all thinges: by hym they rest. 4 Their Idols all: the best, they bée, But siluer cast: and gold to sée: The handy worke: of mortall men, They be thus made: full brittle then. 5 Wyde mouthes they haue: but speake no whit Of speache but domme: to them most fit: And eyes they haue: yet haue no sight, All voyde of lyfe: all voyde of light. 6 So eares they haue: but heare nothyng, How loud men cry: in halowing: And nose they haue: but haue no tast, Their brent incense: on them is wast.
8 Yea handes they haue: but handle nat, Two féete they haue: but haue no gate: They make no voyce: from out theyr throtes, Where yet small flies: haue open notes. 7 As those be all: so such be they, Which make them first: of gold or clay: And so be they: which worship them, Or them do trust: in any realme. 9 But thou that séest: O Israell, Trust thou the Lord: bid them farewell: The Lord is whole: thyne ayde and shield, Protectour sure: in towne and field. 10 Ye Aarons house: trust ye this Lord, None other serue: to hym accord: The Lord is whole: your ayde and shield, Protectour sure: in towne and field. 11 All ye that feare: the Lord so hye, Trust ye this Lord: to hym applye: The Lord is whole: your ayde and shylde, Protectour sure: in town and filde. 12 The Lord hath mynd: and careth for vs, He wyll vs blesse: most prosperous: And Iacobs house: so will he blesse, Blesse Aarons house: he wyll not mysse. 13 Who feare the Lord: he blesse them all, Both rich and poore: both great and small: To do them good: is hys entent, Who worship him: most reuerent.
14 The Lord wyll adde: to your encrease, To heape hys gyftes: he wyll not cease: Uppon your selfe: in ioyfull cheare, And after on: your children deare. 15 Ye are the Lordes: most blessed lot, Yf feare in you: be not forgot, The Lordes ye be: hys heritage, Who made of heauen: and earth the stage. 16 The heauens so houge: the heauens I saye, Be all the Lords: in whom they staye: The earth he gaue: to men a place, To dwell therin: to serue his grace. 17 The dead that be: prayse not the Lord, No sence in them: no voyce or word: Ne they whose corps: be layd to rest, By them no laudes: can be exprest. 18 But we alyue: wyth voyce and hart, Wyll prayse thys Lord: tyll we depart: From thys tyme forth: and so for aye, Than sing we styll: Alleluya. ¶The Collecte. BE thou our protectour & helpe O mercifull Lord for we put our whol affiance in thee only, be mind¦full that thou formedst vs oute of the moulde of the earth graunt vs therfore thy strēgth to acknowledge thee our maker duly to laud thee and celebrate thy name through Christ. &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. CXVI. When Dauid scapt: aduersitie, to God wyth thankes he goes, So man full past: all miserie, may so hys hart disclose. / / 1 I Loued haue: the Lord and shall, Dilexi quo niam.wyth all my hart for why: He soone hath heard: my prayers all, wyth voyce when I dyd cry. 2 Full nye I say: his eare he bent, to me most redily: Wherfore my dayes: that me be lent, hym will I call most hye. 3 The snares of death: dyd close me in, yea panges of hell me found: Fell anguish smart: and woes betwene, I felt about me round. 4 Eftsoones I cryed: in Gods good name: for helpe and sayd euen thus: O Lord I pray: thy grace I clame, my soule from payne discusse. 5 Of clemency: the Lord is full, and iust he is in worde: And this our God: is mercifull, which doth all grace aforde. 6 The Lord preseruth: the simple ones, as abiectes counted here: For lo my selfe: was wo begone, and health he brought me nere.
7 Wherfore I sayd: O turne agayne, my soule into thy rest: Since that the Lord▪ hath easd thy payne, for thyne aduantage best. 8 For thou O Lord: hast ryd my feares, my soule from death besyde: And eke myne eyes: from wepyng teares, my féete from falling wyde. 9 To walke in life: I purpose then, before the Lord vpright: Whyle here I lyue: with liuing men, on earth to please his sight. Credidi propter quod. 10 I held my fayth therout I spake, to God in hope full strong: Although with woes: my hart did quake, and sorowes seamed long. 11 In all my flightes: so forst to flée, I sayd thus halfe amasd: All men on earth: but liers bée, myne eyes were so adasd. 12 To quyte my Lord: what shall I geue, hys benefites at length: His grace so great: by whom I lyue, surmounth my simple strength. 13 I will take vp: and heaue on hye, the cuppe of thankfulnes: And Gods good name: besech wyll I, who compast all my wealth,
14 To God my Lord: I now will paye, my vowes that I behight: With thankfull hart: from day to daye, In all hys peoples sight. 15 The Lord no doubt: full deare reputes, the death of all his saynts: He taketh to hart: their wrong pursuts: and heareth their wofull playnts. 16 For truth, lo I▪ thy seruaunt lord, thy seruaunt this may speake: Thy hand maydes sonne: can this record, for thou my bandes didst breake. 17 To thee therfore: I offer shall, of thanckes the sacrifice: The lordes good name: theron to call, I will in gratefull wise. 18 To God my Lord: I wyll repaye, my vowes that I behight: With thankfull hart: from daye to daye, in all hys peoples sight. In all the courtes: euen iust in them, of Gods hye house so bright: In mydst of thée: Hierusalem, O prayse this Lord aright. ¶The Collecte. GOd the clenser of manes soule frō the filthynes of sinne which in redines doost cōfort his sprite that call vpon thee faythfully, we besech thee to plucke vs from the daunger of death and hell and to place vs in the region of the lyuing, where death and sinne be a∣bolished. Through Christ. Psalme. CXVII.
¶The Argument. \ Laudate Dominum. This Hymne doth endight, Gods glorious might, — His truth and grace most free, That Gentils a farre, Were made to be narre, With Iewes one flocke to bee. \ 1 PRayse duly ye lord: in myndful accord: ye hethen ones all vayne, Ye Gentils I bid: recount how ye sid: & prayse this Lord a∣gayne. And honour ye right: this Lord in his light: ye nations all in town All people I say: where euer ye lay: extoll this Lordes renowne 2 For méerly hys grace: and mercifull face: confirmd lyeth on vs all▪ Hys loue doth excell: all sinne to debell: his grace is generall. This lord in his truth: most stable ensuth: his word & promise iust The faith of his way: will neuer decay: O praise this lord of trust ¶The Collecte. ALmighty and most merciful Lord, which wouldest be praysed by the mouthes of all nations, thorow out all the world, whose grace we the Gentils cald vs to the perticipation of thy sonne Iesus Christ, we be∣seche thee so to confirme this grace in vs, that we ne∣uer declyne there fro, but continually laud thy mer∣cy, through the same Iesus Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXVIII. This Psalme is sung▪ of prayse and laudes: that Dauids rule begonne: In sprite it shewth: and ioyeth the raigne: of Christ Gods onely sonne. ̄ ̄ 1 Confitemi ni dominoO Thanke and laud: the heauenly lord: for he is gracious, Because his loue: and mercy frée: for euer standth to vs.
2 Let Israell: nowe glad confesse: wyth song melodious, Because his loue: and mercy frée: for euer standeth to vs. 3 Let Aarons house: and stocke confesse: in thankes most plenteous, Because his loue: and mercy frée: for euer standeth to vs. 4 Yea let them all: that feare the Lord: this grace in hart discusse, Because his loue: and mercy frée: for euer standeth to vs. 5 In trouble layd: to straytes be thrust: I cald the Lord from thence He hard at large: and set me wyde: this Lord of excellence. 6 The Lord as thus: with me to stand: on my nye side to be, I can not feare: for what can man: preuayle in spite at me. 7 The Lord takth part: with them to ioyne: that me do helpe & ayds Myne eyes shall sée: their full desire: my foes reuengd and frayd. 8 O good it is: the Lord to trust: on hym all hope to cast, More sure it is: then man to trust: on hym to leane to fast. 9 Yea good it is: the Lord to trust: to hym all whole to stand, More safe it is: then Prince to trust: with all hys gard and band. 10 Though nations all: do compasse me: and hedge me round about, By name (I trust (of this the Lord: I shall cut downe theyr route. 11 Let them besege: and compasse me▪ on euery side at wyll, The Lordes good name: I hope therby: theyr pride to quel & kill. 12 Though they lyke bées: swarme me about: to sting, to hurt, to noye They soone shall fade: as fyer in thornes: in God I shall them stroy. 13 By pushing oft: they thrust at me: to make me full agast, But yet the Lord: my piller strong: was whole my stayful fast.
14 The Lord of power▪ my strength he is: of laudes my tenors style, For he was made: my health and fence: to scape all mortall guyle, 15 The voyce of ioye▪ and healthful mirth: rebound in iust mens tents For why ful great: the Lords right hand: hath wrought experimēts. 16 The Lords ryght hand: exalted is: hys power is clearly knowen, The lords right hand: great feates hath done: mans strength is not his owne 17 Not dead I am: but liue as yet: and trust to spend my dayes, To tell Gods workes: his mighty actes: by whom my liuing stayes. 18 The Lord although: he me correct: in chastisment most fyt, Yet downe to death: he draue me not: he would not so permyt. 19 Ope me the gates: of righteousnes: that iust men vse to haunt, To enter now▪ Gods temple so: the Lord with prayse to vaunt. 20 This gate is wyde: the Lord his gate: where due his grace is spred All ightwise men: do passe therin: who faythfull life haue led. 21 I wyll wyth thankes: set out thy prayse: for thou hast answerd m Though thou didst strike: yet ease thou sētst: for helth I had by thée▪ 22 The stone it selfe: which was reiect: by all the buylders choyce, Was made the heade: and corner stone: to all good mens reioyce. 23 From god the Lord: this act issued: his worke it was alone, A thing it is: most meruelous: in all our eyes so done. 24 This is the day: the ioyfull day: which that the Lord hath made, Let vs therin: reioyce and sing: a day that shall not fade, 25 Ah Lord helpe now: and saue I praye: assist vs presently, O Lord on hye: geue helpe I praye: good lucke send spéedely,
26 O blest be he: that comth as thus: in God the Lords good name, To you as we: gods house that kepe: haue wisht good lucke & fame. 27 God is the Lord: and lightned vs: all health who luckly sendes, Sprede bowes therfore: and bynde your hosts: with cords at alters endes 28 Thou art my God: whom thanke I will: whom I shall celebrate, Thou art my God: to whom my laudes: I will whole dedicate. 29 O thanke and laude: the heauenly Lord: for he is gracious, Because his loue: and mercy frée: for euer standeth to vs. ¶The Collecte. MOst mercifull God which art the vndoubted cō∣forter in all our aduersities, and makst the hou∣ses of the iust to be filled with ioye & gladnes, extoll thy churche and congregations by the power of thy ryght hande, to bee the eternall gate, tho∣rough which all righteousnes may procede so established vpō the hed corner stone Iesus Christ in this lyfe, that at the resurrection she may be presen∣ted glorious in thy fighte, thorough the same Ie∣sus Christ, &c.
A Preface to the Psalme. 119. MAde is this Psalme: by Alphabete: in Octonaries folde, All letters two: and twentie set: as Hebrues them haue tolde. The verses all: an hundred bee: threescore and iust sixtene, Thus framde and knit: for memorie: and elegance some wene. Here letters all: so sortely bound: do shew in mysterie: Eternall health: may sure be found: in scripture totallie. Uerse yokt by eight: Christes rising day: doth figure them in some, Sweete Saboth rest: not here I say: I meane of world to come. Peruse this psalme: so wide and brode: eche verse saue one is freight As still in termes: of law of God: most ofte by voyces eyght. Right statutes, olde precepts, decrees: cōmaundemēts, word, & law. Known iudgemēts, domes, & witnesses: al rightous wais thei draw Enuie no man: Gods worde to painte: in arte by such deuise, Reade Hebrue tonge: the tong so sainte: and causeles be not nise. Upfolde be here: Gods truthes discust: right sure vs all to teache, So lies of man: all low be thrust: full false in glosing speache.
¶The Argument. Psalme. CXIX. This Psalme dewrayth: good mens desire, Gods law to know so milde: Which Dauid prayth: whom men in ire, Did curse, from home exilde. Aleph. 1. ̄ ̄ 1 Deati im∣culati.A Rightvp man: of perfect wayes▪ is blest and blest agayne, As blest be they which walke their dayes: in gods true law so playne. 2 And yet I speake: so blest they be: who kepe his witnesses, All whole in hart: which will agrée: to search Gods promises. 3 Admit they do: no sinfulnes: who walke his pathes alwayes, At wil who worke: but wickednes: they tread not these his wayes. 4 Aduisedly: thou gauest in charge: thy hests that we should kepe, Approued so: by thée at large▪ for vs most due to leke. 5 Ah then O lord▪ where ye wilt so: would God my wayes were steyd Affected right: in hart to go: thy statutes iustly leyd. 6 Ashamed then: I shall not shrinke: in hart or visage cold, Abacke to stand: what tyme I thinke: thy lawes and them behold. 7 Ascribe will I: to thée my thanke: in hart most right and clene: Assoone as I: shall learne so franke: thy iudgements iust besene. 8 Agayne I vow: withall my hart: to kepe thy true decrées: A far then Lord: do not depart: from me thy grace to léefe.
Beth. 2. In quo corigit. 1 By what or how: can yong man clense▪ or yet reforme his way, Best, word of thyne: if he the sence: will warely kepe I saye. 2 Betymes where I thy word haue sought: with all my harts entent Be guyde, lest I: might erre in thought: from thy commaundemēt▪ 3 By lowe I hyd: thy word in hart: thy willes inspird to kepe, Blasphemingly: lest might I start: from thée in sinne to déepe. 4 Both blest and praysed: thou doost remayne: O lord of secrecye, Bestryde my hart: and teach my brayne: thy statutes inwardly. 5 Bold haue I bene: and euer shall: by thée with tong to tell, Before all men: thy iudgements all: which once thou spakst so well▪ 6 Blith whole my hart: did ioye to trace▪ thy testimonyes wayes, Beholding them: more glad in face: than riches gaynfull prayse, 7 Bestowe I will: my tyme and talke: in thy precepts to muse, Beside to note: thy wondrous walke: no tyme I will refuse. 8 Besport me still. I purpose me: in thy decrées whole set, Beleue I haue: thy wordes decrée: no tyme I shall forget.
Ghimel. 3. Retribue. 1 Confirme O lord: thy seruantes will: with thy good grace so meke Consist that I: in lyfe may still: so iust thy wordes to kepe. 2 Cleare thou mine eies: both darke & thral: reforme my sprite afresh Consider then: thy law I shall: what meruels they expresse. 3 Cast here on earth: as Pilgrimes be: I am poore traueler, Conceale not Lord: thy law from me: depart not thou to fer. 4 Consume do I: afflict in sprite: for loue to know thy worde, Comprise I would: alwayes aright: thy iudgements hye O Lorde. 5 Correct thou doost: the proud therfore: which thy precepts despise, Curst be they all: from thy good lore: who wander wyll to nyse. 6 Contempt and shame: frō me remoue: which proud men cast on me Content for that: in lyfe I loue: thy lawes to testifie. 7 Chiefe Princes lo: in counsell sate: and me they hie controld: Chaunge yet my choyce: so would I not: I vsed thy statutes bold. 8 Cause why, to me: thy witnesses: are whole my hartes delites, Close counsellers: they be no lesse: agaynst these cursed wyghtes,
Daleth. 4. Adhesit. 1 Deare Lord to dust: my soule is knit: nye dead I ligh for griefe: Draw nye my life: and quicken it: with thy swéete wordes reliefe▪ 2 Detect I haue: my wayes to thée: thou aunswerdst me agayne: Declare thy will: that I may sée: in hart thy statutes playne. 3 Due sence geue me: to vnderstand: the wayes of thy preceptes, Demure I will: then take in hand: to talke thy wondrous steppes. 4 Distemperd cares: dyd melt my hart: to note the worldes despite, Deale then some ease: in gentle part: as thy true worde hath hight 5 Deliuer me. from lying wayes: from suttle glosing sect: Delite my hart: in all thy layes: vouchsaue this good effect. 6 Do this for why: right path of lyfe: I haue now chosen due, Deteyne I will: myne eyes so rife: to vew thy iudgements true. 7 Directly Lord: where hold I haue: thy testimonyes fast, Defame me not: of thée I craue: to fall by shame agast. 8 Deliuerly: runne shall I light: thy lawes the perfect gate: Dilated large▪ when thou in sprite: shalt make it ioy in state.
He. 5. Legem pone. 1 Eternall God: teach me the way: of thy most iust decrées: Euen then I shall: kepe them all day: in all their full degrées. 2 Employ my wits: to perfectnes: so hold thy law I may, Effect therof: I shall expresse: wyth all my hartes assay. 3 Eke lead me strayt: to sée the path: of thy preceptes most right, Elect for why: my hart themhath: wherin I most delite. 4 Egge thou my hart: to magnifie: thy testimonies all, Escape that I: may vtterly: foule auarice thée gall. 5 Erect myne eyes: not down to cliue: by lustes to things most vayne Encleare my sight: and me reuiue: thy wayes to loue the trayne. 6 Establish Lord: thy worde all sure: thy seruaunt lo I am, Els could not I: thy feare procure: to reuerence thy name. 7 Eftsoones remoue: the brute vnswete: of shame that I do feare, Espy I do: thy doomes discrete: all mixt with mercy deare. 8 Enforst I haue: lo all my minde: thy statutes iust to sue: Encourage me: soone them to finde: I craue thy iustice true.
Vau. 6. Et veniat. 1 First Lord I craue: thy grace deuyne: thy mercyes swéete to féele. Fence thou my soule: with health of thyne: as thy true word doth deale. 2 Fynd thus I maye: to answere right: and dul blasphemers slent Fast that my hope: is wholly plight: to thyne aduertisments. 3 Farre driue not lord: thy word most sure frō out my mouth to stray Full still for why: I will endure: to wayte thy iudgements way. 4 Ferme will I kepe: thy laye and lore: sith thou wilt teach the way, Fayth still to beare: I wyll the more: from age to age for aye. 5 Fayre walke and large: thus shall I hold: in conscience vpright, Forth on where I: do séeke so bolde: thy cleare precepts in light. 6 Frée shall my tong: thy witnes tell: before both Lord and king, Foule shame shall not: my hart debell: to shrinke for manacyng 7 Fro thence I shall: my comfort fynd: thy lawes shall me delyte, Fresh loue I beare: to them in mynde: no tyme to slyde to lighte. 8 Fold vp my hands: I will full hye: to thy commaundements, For them I loue: and muse shall I: thy stable testaments.
Zain. 7. Memor esto. 1 God call to mynde: thy promise graue: to me thy seruaunt frayle, Good hope therin: thou madest me haue: to my poore soules auayle. 2 Greate comfort this: gaue me in thought. in payne whē I did lye, Glad hart for why: thy word me wrought: as whole reuiued therby 3 Grym stately men: though one by one: most hye do me deryde, Gone yet a backe: I haue not done: from thy true lawe aside. 4 Graue thoughts had I: & cast in mind: thy iudgemēts lord frō first, Gat so I did: my comfort kynd: to stake my wofull thirst. 5 Greued sore I am most horribly: at wicked mens ententes: Glyde fast they do: so shamefully: from all thy lawes contentes. 6 Grate songes in verse: I do deuise: of thy swéete statutes lore: Gest when I am: in wandryng wyse: abrode afflicted sore. 7 Grauen depe in mynd: thy name by night: O Lord ful oft I had: Glue fast to hart: that so I myght: thy law that I had rad. 8 Grace thus dyd grow: to me so gréene: for that thy law I kepe: Graunt then O Lord: I may be séene: thy wyll alway to seke.
Heth. 8. Portio me. 1 Hole portion Lord: thou art of myne: to thée alone I clyue: Hold will I iust: thy law deuine: though men for lies do striue. 2 How déepe in hart: thou séest all day: I haue thy face be sought: Haue mercy then, on me I pray: such trust thy worde hath taught. 3 Here how I liue: what wayes I lead: I haue discust full nere: Home so to turne: thy lawes to pleade: my féete I did retire. 4 Hast made I fast: my fault espied: no tyme then troyted I: Hart, hand, and tong. I straite applied: to kepe thy lawes more nye. 5 Hat wicked men: on heapes they met: to robbe from me my trust: Hard yet in hart: thy law I kept: though sore at me they thrust. 6 Hye midnight iust: my tyde is set: to rise thy name to blesse: Harke so I shall: and spie the bet: thy iudgements righteousnesse. 7 Hoste me I will: with them to dwell: which thée do duely feare: Hyd who do kepe: thy hestes full well: in hart to mynd them cleare. 8 Hyll, dale, and vale: the earth is full: thy mercies Lord to tell: Helpe thou therfore: my wits so dull: teach me thy statutes spell.
Teth. 9. Bonitatem fecisti. 1 I Lord confesse: thou dealst full kynd: with me thy seruaunt frayle: In thy good worde: such grace I fynde: thy promise neuer fayle. 2 Inspire right tast: of discipline: and me sound knowledge teach: Iust haue I hold: the lawes of thyne: most firmly them to seach. 3 Inuegeled foule: awry I went: before I was correct: Imprint I now: thy testament: in hart thus gently checkt. 4 Intirely good: and liberall: thou art who can deny: Illumine then: my senses all▪ thy statutes well to spy. 5 Ill men and proud: theyr traps haue set: to spot my truth with lyes, Inure my hart: I purpose yet: all whole thy lawes to vise. 6 Inlarded is: their hart with pride: they swell in fat and grease: Inuy I not: their ioyes so wide: thy lawes can me refresh. 7 It wrought me wealth: so good it was: that troubles me did strayne. Indued was so: my soule with grace: to learne thy statutes playne. 8 Ioy more I do: the law of thyne: which thy swéete lips pronounce: Infinitely: then siluer fine: or gold a thousand ounce.
Iod. 10 Manus tuae. 1 King, Lord, & God: thou art to me: thou madst & formdst my shape, Kerne depe my hart: wt knowledge frée. thy word in mind to wrap. 2 Kynd louyng men: that worship thée: wyll ioy at me right soone, Keyd fast thy word: was so to me: in hope that I haue done. 3 Know well I do: in thys thy rod: thy iudgements all be iust, Know worthy is: thy truth O God▪ which humbled me to dust. 4 Kysse thou my soule: by louing grace: some comfort swéete to féele, Knyt iust thy word: though I be base: thy man yet euery deale. 5 Knéele lowe I will: to aske full sad: thy mercyes all in sight, Kéepe than my life: I shall full glad: for I thy lawe delyte. 6 Kil down ye proud: confound their lies: they me wold vayn peruert Koole thou their heate: and I will ryse: to preach thy lawes apart. 7 Kenne they thy lawes: as turnde to me: who duely thée do feare, Known right who haue: thy dignitie: thy word with me do beare. 8 Knocke, aske, and séeke: I will, and wéepe: in hart thy word to spie, Knead els in mire: of error déepe: I should most shamefully.
Caph. 11. Defecit. 1 Longd hath my soule: and languished: while I thy helth expect: Lord yet thy word: me comforted: for hope dyd me erect. 2 Lo both myne eyes: did faynt and wast: thy promise still to wayte, Lowd thus I spake: when wilt thou cast. thy helpe to ease my strayt. 3 Lyke though I was: to bottle dryed: in smoke so was my skyn, Leaue would I not: thy statutes tryed: I kept yet mynd therin. 4 Leafe Lord my dayes: how lōg to go: thy seruaūt fayn would know Long wilt thou slake: erre thou my foe: wilt iudge who thrust me lowe. 5 Lyme pittes full slye: these lurdens proud: did digge in crafty sort, Lyes lowd they made: not well auowed: by thy true lawes report. 6 Life, truth and way: thy lawes contayne: though words they prate vntrue Lend me thy helpe: where men so vayne: do falsly me pursue. 7 Large sautes they made: to make me sinke: well nye they had me spent: Loth yet I was: in hart to shrinke: from thy commaundement. 8 Let then thy grace: and gentlenesse: refresh and me reuiue: Loue so I shall: and wil expresse: thy wordes of mouth belyue.
Lamed. 12.In eternum domine. 1 Meke Lord thy word: most stable lieth as heuen: is permanent: Most strong it is: as testefieth: the starry fyrmament. 2 Man trust may thée: thy fayth so standth: in truth from age to age: Marke wel we do: the earth & lond: how fyrme thou madst the stage. 3 Made fast they bide by thy decree: vntil this present day: Meete seruice all. do yeld to thee: In all theyr course and sway. 4 My chief delyte: and ornament: onlesse thy law had ben: More deepe in wo: I had ben shent: whole quenched quite & cleane. 5 Mind stil I will: thy lawes precept: and neuer it forget: Me still in life: it dayly kept: by thee this grace I get. 6 Maineteyn my life: for thine so wrought: I am most congruent, Midst whole in hart: for why I sought: thy true commaundement. 7 Mad men in harte: vngodly men: awayted me to kill: Muse yet I did: full oft agayne: thy testimonyes wyll. 8 Moch noted I: things finest tried: drue fast to brittle ende: Meere infinite: thy law I spied: whose bredth no time could spende.
Mem. 13.Quam dilexi. 1 Nye loue in hart: thy law I beare: such hope therby I winne: No day doth passe: but that I steare: my mind to muse therein. 2 Now hast thou made: my wit excell: my foes by thy precepts: No time there is: but that I mel: with them in my concepts. 3 Note this I do: I am more wise: then all my teachers be: No dout for this: that I aduise: thy testimonies free. 4 Not aged men: haue knowlege like: I them exceede to far: No question: for that I kepe: thy lawes familier. 5 Nedes must I stey: and so I do: my feete from path of vice: No witherward: aside to go: but keepe thy words deuise. 6 Nought do I shrinke: one ynch awry: from thy decrees amisse: No prayse to me: doth rise therby: for thou hast taught me this. 7 New fragant tast: by thy sweete word: O how my pallat felt: No hony combe: set on my bourd: such swetenes euer delt. 8 Notorious: my wisdome grew: by thy commaundements: No wicked wayes: then will I sue: I hate all crafty flents.
Nun. 14. Lucerna. 1 O Lord thy word: a lanterne is: full cleare to guide my féete: Ondoubted light: that will not misse: to rule my pathes most méete. 2 Oth once I spake: and promise made: in hart I full decréed: Obserue that I: should whole in trade: thy iust and righteous réede. 3 Opprest I am: O Lord to hye: in soule, in sprite, in flesh: Of this sore crosse: reuiue thou me: thy worde pretendth no lesse. 4 Oh let my mouthes: frée sacrifice: please thée O Lord at will: Ope thou my wits in ghostly wyse: teach me thy iudgementes skill. 5 Onsure my lyfe: all day I sée: my soule lyeth in aye hand: Obliuious yet: thy law to flée: I will not so be bond. 6 Onrightfull men: and obstinate: for me a snare haue layd, Offend thy law: yet will I not: to renne from it astraid. 7 Obtaynd I haue: thy witnesses: in iust fée simple state: Oblected so: my fansy is: with them most delicate. 8 One thing in hart: inclynde I to: to worke thy statutes lore: Once this to misse: I will not so: to ende for euermore.
Samech. 15. Iniquos. 1 Presumpteous men which guiles deuise: I hate as hypocrites: Pure law of thine: most hie I prise: for that all truth behightes. 2 Protectour thou: thou art my bower: thou art my trusty shield: Persist I will in thy good power: I trust thy word so mylde. 3 Part ye from me: malignaunt men: your by pathes wrong I hafe: Performe I shall: more iust and playne: my Gods precepts in gate. 4 Plucke vp my hart: O me sustayne: by thy swéete worde to lyue: Pinche not my hope: with shames disdayn: to make my hart to rine 5 Preserue me still: in sure defence: so safe I shall remayne: Promoote thy wordes: intelligence: I shall alway full fayne. 6 Presse downe thou wilt: all thē to nought: which erre frō thy decrées Playne lies they forge: in crafty thought: they frame but fallacies. 7 Proud men lyke drosse: thou wilt remoue: which iet in earth so stout Precellently: therfore I loue: thy witnesses full out. 8 Perplext wt feares: my flesh doth shake: when I thy power do marke Profound afrayes: my soule haue take: thy iudgements be so darke
Ain. 16.Feci iudicium. 1 Quite out my life. I delt with that: which lawfull was and right: To Quarelers: vp geue me not: my soule with wrong to spite. 2 Queynt thou my hart: delightfully: in things of perfect name: ☞In Quire ellys will: the proud therby: Some cause my life to shame. 3 Quicke sight I lost: Mine eyes wer wast: for wayting long thy helth I Quothd and sight: and longed fast: thy rightwise worde of wealth. 4 Quit me O Lord: thy seruaunt poore: from sinne and mercy reatch: So Quicken me: in all thy lore: and me thy statutes teach. 5 Quire, out the truth: that right I may: O vnderstanding graunt: In Quiet mind: to thee I pray: as seruaunt suppliant. 6 Qualms ouerwhelmd: my wofull hart: for men haue stroyd thy law: O Quel them Lord: as iudge thou art: the time doth aske thine aw. 7 Quench not my sprit: with these thy foen: for I thy lawes do loue: No Querry geuyth: such gold or stone: which I would prise aboue. 8 Quake might my hart: if all thy lawes: I held not all the best No Question: I loue thy sawes: all false wayes I detest
Pe. 17.Mirabilia. 1 Right wonderfull: set hy aloft: thy testimonies are: Reuolue therfore: then will I oft: my soule shall kepe them nar. 2 Resort who doth thy law the doore: winth light as shewth the profe, Ripe wisdome riseth: therby in store: to simple mens behoue 3 Rayse vp my mouth: I did apert: for wind my breth I drew: Refresht for that: I wisht my hart: with thy sweete statutes vew. 4 Respect me Lord: not me refuse: my strength were els but lame Rue than on me: as thou dost vse: on them that loue thy name. 5 Rule thou my steps: thy word to tread: forme them to lyue therby: Reigne can no pride. in all my head: to vanity to fly. 6 Redeme me Lord: from iniury: of men in quarels vayne: Retayne I may: more constantly: thy constitutions plaine. 7 Reueale to me: thy seruant true: thy louely face so bright: Renue my sprite: my soule endue: teach me thy statutes right. 8 Ran down my cheekes: did water streames: for yt thy law they balke Rough cheare I made: to note all realms: against thy law to walke.
Zadic. 18. Iustus es Domine. 1 Séene right thou art: full good and iust: O Lord in veritie: So righteous be: thy domes discust: all iudged in equitie. 2 Strayt hast thou chargd: that mē should haunt: thy testimonies réede Still fayth to speake: still truth to graunt: most vehement at néede. 3 Sower zeale fret me: in gelousie: for ire nye spent I was: Set whole for that: my foes I spy: from all thy wordes to passe. 4 Skord cleane full out: thy word is séene: fine tride frō drosse vnpure: Sticke fast to it: thy seruaunt meanth: in hart to loue it sure. 5 Smal though I séeme: and vile at eye: to vaunting insolentes, Slide yet shall not: my memory: from thy commaundements. 6 Sound righteousnes: thy iustice is: and that which still will last, Sure truth thy law: is so iwiffe: I trust therto full fast. 7 Smart woes & sharpe: when they did presse: & I by spite abused: Swéete comfort yet: did me refresh: thy hestes when I perused. 8 Stand euer shall: thy witnesses: in ryghteousnes to stay, Send wisdome then: well teach me this: that euer lyue I may.
Coph. 19.Clamaui. 1 Thy grace to winne: cried loud I haue from hart effectuall: Then aunswere me: O Lord with saue: thy statutes kepe I shall. 2 To thee I suyd: O saue me thou: I sued to none beside: That iust I may: in life avow: thy testimonies tried. 3 The dawning day▪ preuentingly: I cried most earnest than: Trust fast I did: thy words for why: my hope therby I wan. 4 Tyme watch of night: mine eyes preuent: so rath I then awoke: Thus that I might: some thing commēt: of thy true word on booke 5 Tourn Lord thine eare: my voyce to heare: thy mercies aske euē so: Touch thou my hart: reuiue me cleare: as thou doost vse to do. 6 They tread full nye: that would on me: their malyce execute: Twind far they be: thy law to fle: O Lord be my refute. 7 Tread thou as nye: O Lord with ayde: for God thou art at hand: True be thy lawes: all iustly layd: their wayes be mad and fond. 8 Taught am I sure: earst long ago: of all thy witnesses: Through thee were set: most groundly so: that they wil neuer misse
Res. 20.Vide humilitatem. 1 Uyse thou my wo: and rid my smart: thou seest exild I am: When yet thy law: from inward hart: forgotten neuer cam. 2 Uphold my cause: and me release: so free redeamd to ryse: Wast not my life: but me refresh: in thy words warantise. 3 Ungodly men: from health ren far: and health ren far fro them: Wyde fle they foul: for why they erre: thy words they search not thē 4 Use still thy grace: O Lord of might: thy mercies great be seene: With life, and ioy, refresh my sprite: as earst thy wont hath bene. 5 Uaine men there be: right many one▪ which me pursue and presse: Ware yet I am: to swerue to sone: from thy sweete witnesses. 6 Uyle men I spied: transgresse thy law: for grief therof I quoke: Which was because: at eie I saw: thy lawes how they forsooke. 7 Uew thou my hart: O Lord & see: how thy precepts I loued: Wherefore by grace: reuiue thou me: not whole frō thee remoued. 8 Uouch this I may: thy word in chiefe: in some is truth most pure: Wast can no time: thy lawes relief: thy domes aye Iust will dure.
Sin. 21.Principes. 1 Xtremly Lord: I am pursued: of princes vndeserued. Xactly yet: thy woord I vewd: I them with feare preserued. 2 Xteme I do▪ thy word so glad: and ioy therof as mich: Xceding Ioy: as he hath had: that spoyles hath found most rich. 3 Xcesse of lyes: I haue abhorde: I haue them aye defied: Xtend I haue: my loues accord: to all thy lawes so tried. 4 Xprest I haue: thy lawdes most deare: seuen times a day no lesse: Xpending iust: thy domes so cleare: full wrought in southfastnes. 5 Xcellent peace: in conscience: haue they which loue thy lawe Xchew they can: all light offence: no harme to them can draw. 6 Xpect I do: thy helpe and health: O Lord to thee I pleade: Xcited so: I haue my selfe: thy iust preceptes to treade. 7 Xquisitly: In soule I kept: thy testimonies hye: Xpert by vse: I them accept: in loue exceedingly, 8 Xalt I haue: thy statutes right: and eke thy witnesses: Xempt from thee: to scape thy sight: I can no secrecies.
Tau. 22.Appropinquet. 1 Yeld Lord assent: with eares vnshit: to heare these lawds I sing: Yt mought please the: to graunt me wit: as thy word vse to bringe. 2 Yet once I pray: myne sute euen so: admit before thy face: Yll mens despites: O take me fro: thy word so worketh in grace. 3 Ymnes, Psalms, & songs: my lips shal sound: such cōmēdatiōs braue Yf thou wilt teach: my hart the ground: thy lawes in hart to graue. 4 Yea sure my tong: shall still expresse: thy word deseruingly: Yokt so with truth: and rightwisenesse: thy whole precepts I spy. 5 Yere after yere: me then vpshore: with thy good helping hand: Yong did I chose: (thou knowst) thy lore: to thy decrees to stand. 6 Yearnd hath my hart: and wished long: thy health to féele so meete: Yies, head, and hand: haue loued as strong: thy law to me so sweete. 7 Yeld still I will: O life prolonge: my soule shall prayse thee then: Yane shall I wide: for ayde among: for thou dost ayde all men. 8 Youth made me erre: as sheepe but lost: seeke vp thy seruant Lord: Yes seeke him Lord: bestow the cost: thy law me not abhord.
¶The Collecte. ALmighty God the onely paterne & meede of all felicity, which by thy wholsom directiō informst thy faythfull seruauntes to walke vpright in thy law, to search thy pactes and promises, to obserue thy pre¦ceptes and commaundementes, graunt vnto vs, so to vnderstand thy iustifications and wyth whole hart to searche thy wylles and pleasures, and to preache out thy great actes done to our behoofe, that when wee were as loste sheepe wandryng in our wayes of igno∣raunce, we myght be brought home to thy shepefold to be placed on thy ryght hand wyth thy shepe in thy kyngdome, through Christ our Lord, &c. ¶Obseruations. These fiftene Psalmes: next followyng, Be songs deamd: of steps or stayers, For that the quiere: on them dyd sing, The peoples vowes: to blisse by prayers, For lucky spéede: in theyr affayres, As néede and tyme▪ as case dyd bryng. In wedlocke, warre: or house begonne, For peace, for ayde: for fréedome wonne, ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXX. When Dauid felt: all spite of man, All helpe of God: he then optaynd: By whome alone: reliefe he wan, From hard disease: that hym constraynd. Well trust we than, When we be paynd.
1. Canticum graduum. ̄ ̄ 1 TO God when I: was vext wyth smart, d do∣inum .By wrongfull meanes: of man opprest: I cryed in voyce: I cryed in hart, He aunswerd me: at my request. In gentle part, He gaue me rest. 2 For thus I sayd: and still will say, O Lord my soule: deliuer frée: From lying lips: saue me I pray, From crafty tonges: that double bée. But set all day, To vanitie. 3 What shalt thou winne: what gayne or gift? Thou crafty tong: with all thy spyte: Or what may that: increase thy thirst, False tong to vse: in such delyte? What is thy drift? What winst in sight 4 Euen this thou wynst: sharpe dartes and fell, Of Gods strong hand: in dreadfull feare: Whose strength shall send: thy spite to hell, As whote as coales: of Iuniper. And marke it well, In mynd it beare. 5 O wo is me: that myne abode, Is still prolongd in hard exile: Thus forst to dwell: as cast abrode, In Ceder tentes: both blacke and vyle. O helpe me God, Me reconcile. 6 Ah long to long: my soule abydth, Wyth such as hate: good loue and peace: With people rough: of hawty pryde, Which fierce in hart: on me do preace. O cast them wyde, Their magre cease.
Whan peace I seeke: they cry to warre, Whan fayre I speake they threat the more: Whan them I sue: they driue me farre: Thus gall for loue: I gaine in store. O God be narre, Help me therfore. ¶The Collecte. O God the onely pacifier of all manner of angwishe and trouble, deliuer we pray thee the souls of thy true seruants from slaunderous and lyeng lippes, to be neuer ouercome by the malicious assauts of the e∣uill, but to stand by the assistence of thy grace wholye in thy protection to the lawd of thy name, throughe Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXXI. As Dauid here: so other king, Nie toward warre: ought thus beginne: The people than: hym following, Should wishe hym spede: Gods ayde to winn Thus comth he in. 2 Canticum graduum. ̄ ̄ 1 TO heauenly hils: I lift mine eyes, Leuaui¦oculos.In faythfull hart: euen there direct. Frō whence can els: my help arise? Gods foes to quel: this cursed sect. O cursed sect. Let all my help: come whole from God Who made this heauen: and earth to see: Though other stray: most far abroade, His will his arme: my trust shalbe. My folke speake yee.
3 We trust and pray: that God of hosts Will not permit: thy foote to slyde: But make thee beate: the Paynyms bostes, He sleepeth not he: that kepeth thy side. His ayde is tried. 4 For lo he will: not slomber once Much more, deepe sleepe: he will repell But keepe he will: his little ones, He warden is: of Israell. We trust him well. 5 The Lord himselfe: wilbe thy shield. The Lord shalbe: thy shadowes bower: At thy right hand: most nye in field He will thee keepe: both day and hower. By godly power. 6 The sunne by day: shall thee not burne, But shine therof shall cleare thy way, The moone by night: shall serue thy turne: Her frory hornes: shall thee not fray. But be thy stay. 7 The Lord our God: will thee preserue, From all euill haps▪ from all mischaunce: The Lord wil saufe: thy soule conserue He will thy fayth: and fame auaunce. In Gouernaunce 8 The Lord will keepe: and keepe mought he, Thy comming in: thy going out: By puissant power▪ (thus pray all we) From this tyme forth: the world about. We haue no dout.
¶The Collecte. DEfend thy people O God, which art so vigilant a watchman ouer thy flocke, graunt that we be con¦ducted safely by thee both by day and nyght, from all assaultes of our enemies, through. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXXII. Here Salem is: well ioyed and wisht, That earthly mount: is figure past: For vs to wish: Christes church so blist, That we in heauen: may mete at last. From earth dismist. 3. Canticū Graduum. / / 1 MOst glad I was (saith good man so) Letatus sm in.When men deuout: said thus to me, Come we in one: in will we go, the lordes hie house: of maiestie & pray him to. 2 Our féet shall stand: in certentie, Within thy gates: Hierusalem, Within thy courtes: where we shall sée, Gods true electes: to ioyne with them, In perfectnes. 3 Hierusalem: thou shinyng beame, Thou builded art: in peacefulnes, As citie els: in any realme, Where men may méete for holines. In tymes select. 4 For thither haue: the tribes accesse, Euen Gods owne tribes: by him elect, I meane Gods flocke: of Israell, To laude hys name: by lawes respect. His prayse to tell.
4 For there the seates: be duly dect, To iudge the truth: by priesthoodes spell, Set there we sée: of Dauids house, His iudgement seat: there iust to dwell. Most glorious. 5 O wishe and pray: all ioyfull peace, Hierusalem: to haue euen thus: Who loue thée well: or wishe thyne ease, All ioy haue they: most prosperous, Well God to please. 6 O peace befall: thy walles so wyde, No forren power: to worke disease: God graunt thy towers: may strong abide, In all successe: most happely, By God the guide. 7 My brethernes sake: my neighbours nye, Make me thus speake: vp on thy side: To wishe thée peace: so earnestly, Thy welth to stand: from day to day, O Mount most hye. 8 Yea thus I séeke: thy wealth I say, For Gods house sake: our Lord of loue, Whose regall power: therin doth lay O thus do we: our hartes to moue, In sprite to pray. ¶The Collecte. VOuchesaue O Lord to graunt to all such as delight to walk in the courtes of thy house the congregations of thyne e∣lect people, continuall abundant peace that while in the same we confesse thy grace exhibited therto, we may enioy thy feli∣citie in the heauenly habitation, through Christ, &c.
The Argument. Psalm, CXXIII. On Whome the worlde: doth looke awrye, This psalme is fit: for there behoue: Proude worldlye men, true man defye, All like themselfe they only loue. As proofe doth trye. 4. Canticum graduum. \ \ 1 TO thée I lifte: mine eies on hye, Ad te Do∣mine.To thée that dwelst: in heauen aboue Thoughe here wt shame mē me deny, Yet me I trust: thou wilt approue. O Lord be nye. 2 As man and mayd: for helpe doth eye, Theyr Lords & Ladies handes to proue: So we our eyes: bende certainly, To God our Lord: his grace to moue. O trustelye. 3 Haue mercy Lorde: to vs applye, Haue mercy yet: shewe vs thy loue: For skornde we be: full bitterly, They vs with spite: from them remoue. O cruelly. 4 With mockes and taunts: reuilde we lye, Our soule is ful: of their reproue: The wealthy (Lord) the proude we spye, Be they that vs: with spite disproue. O Lord be by.
¶The Collect. O God whose habitation is in heauen we list vp our eyes vnto the beseeching thy mercy to repres the opprobrious despites of the proud & fauorably graūt to vs to fele thy wonted mercies, through Christ our Lorde. ¶The Argument. Psalm. CXXIIII. The Iues so left: in Iury still, VVhan they exild: were others set: VVith thanks theyr songs: they did fulfil, As they by times: together met. So we the same, May counterfete. 5. Canticum graduum. / / 1 BUt God himselfe: by redy grace, Nisi quiaHad stand with vs: in carefulnes: Against mens spite: & Irefull face, May Israel: in tong expresse. As we the same, Must nedes cōfes. 2 I say againe: to note the case, Except the Lorde: himselfe in preace: Had ben with vs: in open place, Whē mē rose vp: our harts to presse. Like Israell, We must confesse. 3 They had deuourd: by time and space Our soules euē quicke: In cruelnesse Whā they so faine: would vs disgrace And fumed at vs: In wrathfulnesse. Lyke Israell, We must confesse. 4 The storms, & slouds: of woes so base Had drownd vs quite: by theyr exces The roring streames: so swift in pace Had drencht our soules remedilesse. Like Israell: We must confesse.
5 Proud swelling flouds: so ran in race To whelme our soules: in heuynes: Our rest of life: they would deface. And thought therin: great godlinesse. Like Israell, We must confesse 6 With hart most kind: let vs embrace, This louing Lord▪ wt thanks to blesse who duld theyr teeth: our flesh to race Their pray so sought: in gredinesse. Like Israell We must confesse. 7 Our soules as birds which foulers trace Be scapt their snares: of wickednesse Which they with craft: did interlace, The snare is broke: we haue release. Like Israell We must confesse. 8 Gods mighty name: we ought to blase, Our help at néede: who made no lesse But heauen and earth: and all it hase As Israel: maye still expresse. So iust the same we wil confesse. ¶The collect. SHut vp the cruel mouthes of the euyl, O Lord, who labour to deuour vs by the rauenouse teeth of de∣traction that where we doute our owne strength: we may be saufe by thee through Christ. The Argument. Psalm. CXXV. This Psalme commendth: against our foen, Almighty Gods protection: Yf we in faith: to him can clyue, No power aduerse: can vs contryue. In vaine they striue.
6. Canticum graduum. ̄ ̄ 1 WHo stickth to God: in stable truste, Qui confi∣dunt.As Sion monnt: they stand full iuste, which moueth no whit: nor yet cā reel, But standth for aye: as stiffe as stele. Than trust him wele. 2 Hierusalem: with hils is set, Enuyroned: with bulwarkes great: Right so the Lord: standth round about, His people nye for euer stout. Without all dout. 3 For wicked power: with all his tayle, On iust mens lot: shall not preuayle: Lest rightwise men: should put their hands To wickednesse: for feare of bonds. So my God stands. 4 Do well O Lord: in loues respect, To godly men: though here reiect: And right vp men: of parfyte hart, O them embrace: in gentle part. As God thou arte. 5 But who to wrong: will backe declyne, Of croked drifts: who draw the line: Where wicked waile: god them shall leade, But Israell shall ioy in meede. Without al dreade. ¶The Collect. REpulse O Lord the malignant assaultes of the euill from the lot and elect flock of thy true seruants, that where they put theyr whole trust in thy protection, they may be strong against the troublous stormes of all temptations: thorough. &c.
¶The Argument. Psalme. CXXVI. This Psalme in sight: doth prophecy, What myrth is made: most worthely: When God doth worke: deliuery, From soules or bodies: misery. To liberty. Canticū Graduum. \ \ 1 WHat tyme the Lord: shall backe repry In conuer∣tendo.Hard Sions thrall: to death so nye, Appeare shall we: then dreamingly, Such ioy vnlookt: for then to spy, So sodenly. 2 Our mouth shall laugh: then plentuously, Our tonges shall flow: with songs full hye, Then Gentils shall. say openly, For them the Lord: wrought royally, We sée at eye. 3 The Lord no dout: shall magnify, For vs his power: most notably, Thus may we ioy: then restfully, Our thraldome past: all totally. So blessedly. 4 O Lord returne: then spedely, Our captiue state: our drudgery: As riuers cheare: the south so dry, So shall thine acte: vs gratefy. Most louingly.
6 Who soweth in teares: all mourningly, Hys corne bought deare: in penury: Shall reape agayne: yet ioyfully. To sée increase: his néede supply. So fruitefully. 7 Who goeth from home: all heauily, With his séede leape: his land to try: He home returnes: wyth hocky cry, With sheaues full lade abundantly, Reioycingly. ¶The Collecte. COmfort thy people most pitifull Lorde, and deli∣uer vs from all maner captiuitie, sinne, errour, & infidelitie, that where as we sowe here in teares wyth heuines, by thy goodnes we may reape in ioy & glad∣nes through Christ. The Argument. Psalm. CXXVII. This Psalme describeth: Gods prouidence, Whence man must spye: his suerety: In house & towne: his whole defence, Or els shall he: his ruine see. In vanitye. 8. Canticum graduum ̄ ̄ 1 EXcept the Lord: the house by buylde Nisi do∣minus.They toyle in vayne: who buylde most fayne: Except the Lord: becityes shielde, The watchman playne: loose all theyr gayne They win but paine
2 But labour lot: that soone ye ryse, That late ye créepe: you safe to kepe: That bread ye eate: in carefull wise, Where God geueth slepe both sound & déepe To his good shéepe 3 Lo childern be: an heritage, From God so sent: beneuolent: The frute of wombe: to comfort age, From God is lent: by his assent. Munificent. 4 As arrowes strong: in Gyauntes handes, Make strength appeare: to scape all feare, So childern yong: to Gods men standes, As staffe and speare: in age most deare, To them full neare. O well is him: whose quiuer is, With such full dight: his house well pight, At iudgement gate: they shall not mis, To plead their right at foes despite, They shame to quite. ¶The Collecte. ETernall God the repayrer, vpholder and builder of all mansions both spirituall & corporall, without whose continuall ouersight all thinges shoulde fall to vtter ruine, preserue vs we pray thee and accomplishe our desires, thoughtes and workes, that we go about to the glory of thy name. Though Christ. &c.
The Argument. Psalm. CXXVIII. This Psalme intreat: the wedlocke state, Yt maketh Gods feare: most fortunate: Where both be met: well God to serue, Who can them deare: to make them swerue. Synce God will: here Them both preserue. 9 Canticum graduum. ̄ ̄ 1 O Blest is he: who feareth the Lord, Beati omnes.and walkth his waies: in harts accord Who can agree: by fayth full sure, To spend his daies: to him most pure To seeke no strayes: But will endure. 2 For thou shalt eate: thy labours true, Of thine owne hand: in ceason due: For thus thy meete: and trauels free, Well shalt thou stand: blest shalt thou be. In sea and lond, most luckely. 3 Thy wife most deare: as frutefull vine, Shall spread thy house: the fides to byne: Thy childerne cleare: shall lorish out, Like Olyue bowes: thy bourde aboute. Thus God alowes, Thy state no dout. 4 O geue good eare: expend it than For happy so: shalbe that man: Who iust in feare▪ to God doth bend: His life to woe: can not descend. God clyueth him to, And him defendeth.
5 The Lord blesse thee: from Sion hye, With grace supreame: she blest mought lye: That thou mayst see: while life is prest, Hierusalem: in goods possest. This come to them, In feare who rest. 6 And God geue grace: that thou maist spye Thy childrens seede: and progeny: God shew his face: to Israell, In peace to speede: In ioy to dwell. That al good deede, May there excell. The Collect. GRaunt to al such as feare thy name O Lord, perpe∣tual prosperity in the state of their lyues: referring al their actes & dedes to the glorification of the same through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalm. CXXIX. As Syon vext: to God she can, In prayers meeke: her refuge make:— So Christe, his churche, and christen man▪ In God theyr Lord: may comfort take.— In harte yet glad, For Christs his sake. 10. Canticum graduum. / / 1 GReat grief they haue: against me wrought Sepe ex∣pugna.Yea oft and oft: from day to day: From vp my youth: they quarels soughte, Speake Israel: now truly may. So Christ his spouse: May ioyntly say.
2 Yea oft I say: full manye times, Great traines at me in spite they lay: From vp my youth: for all theyr crimes: They coulde not yet: my state betraye. So christen man: in like may praye. 3 The plowers plowde: vpon my backe, Theyr errours mad: yet thought full gay: My truth, so strong: they could not flacke, Their forrowes long: had short decay. So Christ his spouse may ioyntly say. 4 The Lord so iust: their cords hath cut, Their wicked yokes: to ren a stray. In prison bound: they kept vs shut, But God them all: hath driuen to bay. So Christen man: in life may praye. 5 Let them be shamde: confounded still. And backeward tornd: in theyr aray All they which hate: sweete Sion Hill, Or that woulde els: her quiet fraye. So Christ his churche may ioyntly say. 6 Let them how grene: they séeme to stand, Be like in sighte: the witherd haye: On houses tops: pluckt vp by hand, That fadeth to nought: without delay. So Christen man: in like maye praye.
7 Whereof in dayne: the mowers gripe When they to such: theyr hands do splay Nor gleaners can: fynd sheaues so rype, That they to fyll: theyr bosomes maye. So Christ his churche: may ioyntly saye. 8 That none to them: good lucke do wysh. Which walke in gate: by fide the way: On Gods hye name: theyr works to blesse: But wisht them all: far well awaye. God graunt that ofte: this all we praye. The Collect. DEfend thy church O Lord from al assalts of her ad¦uersaryes that they al beyng discomfited, the true childe of the same maye ioy in thy eritye, throughe Christe. The Argument. psalm. CXXX. In banishment: when Iues were pent, And felt gods yre▪ the greuousnes: Thus thral their sinnes: they did lament They freedom wisht: from cruelnesse. In banishment. 11 Canticum Graduum. \ \ 1 IN deepe excesse: In heuynes, O Lord to thée: my crying went De pro∣fundis.From depth of hart: I did expresse, My great constraynts: most violēt. In deepe excesse.
2 O Lord affent  O here aent, My wofull voyce: in redines, O let thyne eares: to harke be bent, My prayers cry: in lowlines. O Lord assent. 3 If thou wouldst presse: mans unefulnes, O Lord to send: due punishment, Who could O Lord: the waightines, Sustayne to byde: thy chastisement. If thou wouldst presse. 4 Be Lord content: lo we repent, For thou shewest grace: to humblenes Thus feard to be: most reuerent, Then kepe no sinnes: in irefulnes, Be Lord content 5 I hope release: I trust no lesse, The Lord I byde: still permanent: My soule expecth: hys frendlines, I wayte his wordes: accomplishment, I hope release. 6 My soule so ment: more confident, To wayte my Lordes: great gentlenes, Then watchemen wishe: the night full spent, And wayt the morne: theyr watche to cease. My soule so ment.
7 In faithfulnes: in chearefulnes, Let Iacob wayt: the Lord so gent, Because with God: is uefulnes, He oft redéemth: his mercyment, In faithfulnes. 8 He will relent: incontinent, And full aquite: the wretchtdnes, Of Israell: his prisonment, And pardon all: theyr wickednes, He wyll relent. ¶The Collecte. LEt thyne eares inclyne to our prayers O Lorde of all pitye and compassion, for wyth thee is copious redemption, whereby thou doost not surely obserue our iniquities, daily bestowe on vs thy mercies, tho∣rough Christ, &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXXXI. When Dauids foes: inueterate, Hym slaundred sore: as obstinate: That he Sules reigne: would vendicat, He prayed to God: immaculate. To cleare his state. ̄ ̄ 1 MY hart proud things (lord) counted not Domine non est.Myne eyes aloft: haunt mounted not: In boasting actes: I walked not, Things past my reach: I stalked not. Lord deare me not.
2 If I my hart: refrayned not, If I my soule: restrayned not: If I as childe: beweynd me not, If I from pride: absteynd me not. Then heare me not. 3 O Israell: most fortunate, Wayte thou the Lord: still moderate: Be méeke, flée pryde: inordinate, From this tyme forth: interminate. And feare thou not. ¶The Collect. SVffer vs not to be ouercome with the haut pryde of the world O Lord to woorke euery disturbaunce of godlines graffe mekenes in vs & so to follow thy son our sauiour in the same, through Christ our Lord. The Argument. Psalm. CXXXII. This Psalm doth pray: for good successe, Of all thy realmes: & priesthodes state: So Dauids oathe: his vow hys stresse, What god him hight: it doth debate. Ye Christ expresse. 13 Canticum graduum. / / 1 REmember Lord: meke Dauid king, And al his hard: affliction, Memen∣to domi∣ne.For his good sake: by pityenge, Amoue from vs: confusion. Haue hym in mynd.
2 How he in good: deuotion, To thée hys Lord: hymselfe dyd bynde, By othe and vow. to God most hye, To thée I say: strong Iacobs frende. Thus constantly. 3 Be it my shame: if I go in, My Cabborne house: in rest to lygh: If I my shéetes: thrust me betwene, And clyme my couche: in fethers soft, Blame might I winne. 4 Or els if I: myne eyes aloft, Should geue them sléepe: myne eies the lids, To suffer them: to slumber oft, Though fast they craue: to fill their néedes, Then fall myne house. 5 Untill I fynde: without all dreades, The Lord a place: commodious: A sacrary▪ and temple swéete, To Iacobs God: victorious. To hym most méete. 6 Of this place lo: I Salomon, In Ephrata hard there in stréete, And found we haue: this holy throne, 2. Par. 21.In Ornans field: wyth woodes beset. O come ye on. 7 To his fayre tentes: go we to fet, To temple built: hys arke of grace: And bowe we low: with honour great, To his footestoole: hye set in place. And thus say we.
9 Aryse O Lord: and kepe by place, Of quiet rest: no more to flée: O thou thy selfe: soone thither moue, Thyne arke of strength: conioynd with thée, O Lord of loue. 10 And let thy priestes: be deckt alway, Wyth right and health: as them behouth: Let all thy saintes: reioyce I say, So blest by thée: to prayse the due. Both nyght and day. 11 For Dauids sake: thy seruant true, To whome thy grace: did louely spring Shame not my face so chosen new, Thyne owne (O Lord) annoynted king, My hart to freat. 12 The Lord in fayth: sware promising, To Dauid backe. he wyll not treat: Of thyne owne wombes: engendred frute, I will to one: bestow thy seat. All lyke in sute. 13 If that in truth: thy childerne wyll, My pact and statutes: execute: Which I will teach: then shall euen still Thy children sit: thy throne for aye. Wyth my good will. 13 For why the Lord: without denay, Hath Zyou mount: elect in choyce: He much desird: that it should lay, As seate wherof: he would reioyce, And thus he sayd.
14 Here shall my rest: from troubly noyse, Remayne full sure: for euer stayd, Here will I dwell: for her I wisht, In my desire: full well apayd. Of her I wist. 15 Her vitayles all with full increase, Shall blesse alway: my blissefull fiste, Her poore to féede: wyth bread at ease, I will them all: full satisfy, If me they please. 16 I will their priestes: adourne on hye, With helth; wyth truth: wyth lyfe, wt light: And they his saintes: shall sanctify, That they may ioy: in hartes delight, With holines. 17 There Dauids horne: and regall might, I will it make: to florish fresh. And there I will: a lyght prouide, To myne owne Christ: by frutes successe, Of Dauids syde. 18 And all hys foes: wyth vtter shame, I will them clothe: and them deryde As yet for hym, hys crowne, and name, Shall florish out: both large and brode, In blessed fame. So graunt it God. ¶The Collect. REmember O Lord thyne eternall pact and promise made to mankynd in Christ thy sonne, endue our hartes worthely to aunswer the same on our behalfe, by the same Christ our Lord, &c.
The Argument. Psalm. CXXXIII. A short extrete: of loue the strength, So large in length: in tast so sweete: O charity: thou art I wisse, Of Man the blisse: in ech degree: O charity: wyth vnity. 14. Canticum graduum ̄ ̄ 1 O Come and see: how things most meete Ecce quā bonum.It is, and sweete: where men agree: Whan brethren bound: together dwell In peace so well: In loue be founde, O vnity: keepe charitye. 2 It is as sweete: as Balme the best, On head well drest, which downe did fleete, By berd and throte▪ the berd I say, Of Aaron gay: his skirt of cote. O charity: seeke vnitye. 3 It is as sweete: as dewe that wont, Fat Hermon mount: to make so weete As dew no dout: that heauenlye stils, On Sion hils: euen round about. O vnity: beare charity. 4 For there euen there: the Lord hath chargd, Where peace enlargde: most rule doth here: All blisfull lyfe: for aye to be, Where men agree: and voyd all strife. O charity stirre vnity.
¶The Collecte. Poure O Lord vpon thy church thy gift of brother¦ly charity, and christiā vnity that we may be sprin∣kled with the dew of thy pirituall oyntmente and so that we maye euer reioyce in the grace of thy bene∣diction, through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalm. CXXXIIII. The Leuites set: in nights to sing, To God so great: their Lord and king, On steps in sight: some one by choyce, Dyd thus excyte, all mens reioyce, So met to bring: Both sprite, and voyce. 15. Canticū Graduum. / / 1 LO ye all here: Ecce nunc be∣nedicite.Ye seruants déere: And ye that stand: Of God so grand: Now prayse the Lord: By Gods accord, By night in house: And glorious. Draw neere: recorde His hand, with vs. 2 Your handes lift hye: Gods sacrary: The Lord proclaime: Enhaunce the same: In holynes, Due laude expresse: Blisse ye his deede, In fayth and dread. Apply no lesse, His fame to spread. 3 The Lord of grace: Blisse he this place: Who heauen did make: For all our sake: From Sion Hyll, Your hart and will, And earth I say, Both nighte and day. Embrace, him still, Awake, and pray. The ende of the songes of the Stayers.
¶The Collecte. WE thy seruantes all O Lorde, who of duetye doe blesse thee alway with our thankes we hartlye pray thee to vouchsafe to lighten vs darkened as we be with the night of this world whereby we may ob∣tayne most large blessinge from that while we lifte vp our hands in good workes of our vocation, through Christ our Lord. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXXXV. This Psalme endited seemth, for ministers in quiere, Gods workes it telth, vayne Gods it scornth, it singth Gods laudes full cleare. / / 1 O Worship thanke and praise: the name of God the Lord, Laudate nomen domini.Ye seruauntes all: of thys your God: laud ye with one accord. 2 Ye ministers which stand in God the Lordes good house: And kepe the courtes: of this our God: O prayse hym glorious. 3 Laude ye the Lord for why: the Lord is gracious, Syng out his name: for swéete it is: to man delicious. 4 The Lord no doubt hath chose: vnto hymselfe in care. Olde Iacobs stocke: all Israell: for hys peculyar. 5 I knowe the Lord is great: and hye I him estéeme And that our God: passth other Gods: which mē for gods do déeme. 6 And what it lyketh them: the Lord doth it in déede, In heauen and earth: in sea full out: in déepes where fishes bréede. 7 He vapours lifth from earth: and they to clouds do renne, He lightnings turnth: to raine in store: he winds drawth out of dēne
8 To quite their cruelnes he smote in Egypt land: Theyr fruites first got: not one to scape: from man to beast in band. 9 In midst of thee: the Lord: his signes and wonders sent: Thou Egipt land, which Pharao, and all his seruants shente. 10 He many countryes smote, and dyuerse nations slew: He vanguished: most mighty kings: and made them all to rew. 11 Of Ammorites theyr kyng hight Seon hie in throne: So Og, that hog: of Basan king: and Canaans realmes echeone. 12 And gaue theyr lands and holds: for heritage of right: For heritage: to Israell: his people whole and quite. 13 O Lord thy name endureth: for euer world to ende: From age to age: thy memory: in fame shal stil extend. 14 For now the Lord hath iudged: his peoples cause most playne: He them auengd: and pleasd he was with all his flocke agayne. 15 The Gentyls, Images: be siluer molt and gold: But handy worke: of wretched men: how euer they be fold 16 Mouthes haue they made in them? but speake nothing at al, So eyes they haue: and nought they see, blind Gods and casuall. 17 And eares they haue in shape, and yet they heare no sound: Where beast most domme: hath life and sprite, no breth in them is found. 18 As they be all to see, theyr makers be the leke: Domme deafe, and dead, brute stockes and blocks: so all which thē do seeke. 19 Ye house of Israell, do well, prayse ye the Lord, Yea Aarons house, preach ye his praise: the lords great actes record
20 Ye Leuis house and seede, blesse ye the Lord all whole Ye all that feare and worship true, this Lord most hye extoll. 21 O praysed be the Lord, of Sion nighte and day, His place is set Hierusalem: O prayse the Lord I say. ¶The Collecte. O God of all comfort and swetenes, whome all the world for thy incomporable gentlenes more wor¦thely prayse we besech thee to kepe vs from all vayne errour of the Paynyms vanities, to worshippe thee in sprite & verity: through Christ. The Argument, Psalme. CXXXVI. The Rectors. This Caroll sweete: exhorth vs clere, Gods goodnes great: to prayse in quiere. The Quiere. That men wyth laudes: should them inure, For thankes breede thankes: and grace procure The Meane. So redy bendth: hys loue so pure, Which will in ioy: our hartes assure. \ \ The Rectors. Confite∣mini.COnfesse and praise: the Lord most kynde: For God he is: as man doth fynde. The Quiere. For euer standth: hys mercy sure: Hys grace to vs: wyll styll indure. The Meane. So redy bendth: hys loue so pure: Which will in ioy: our hartes assure.
Rectors. 2 Confesse and prayse: the God of Gods, Who made vs first: of earthly clods. The Quiere. For euer standth: hys mercy sure, Hys grace to vs: wyll still endure. The Meane. So redie bendth: hys loue so pure: Which wyll in ioy: our hartes assure. Rectors. 3 Confesse and prayse: the Lord of Lordes: Who made all thyng: by strength of wordes. The Quiere. For euer standth: hys mercy sure, Hys grace to vs: will still endure. The Meane. So redy bendth: his loue so pure, Who will in ioy: our hartes assure. Rectors. 4 Who wrought alone: actes maruelous, 5 Who formd the heauens: by wisdome thus, 6 Who stretcht the earth: on fluds from vs. The Quiere. Who dyd all this: in hys good cure: For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs: doth still endure: Which will in ioy our hartes assure. Rectors. 7 Who made great lightes: in firmament, 8 The sunne for day: in regiment, 9 The moone and starres: on night to glent. The Quiere. Who dyd all thys: in hys good cure: For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs: doth still endure: Which will in ioy: our hartes assure.
Rectors. 10 Who Egipt smote: with their first borne, 11 And brought fro thence: the Iewes forlorne. 12 By mighty strength: both night and morne. The Quiere. Who dyd all this: in hys good cure: For euer standth his mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs: doth still endure, Which will in ioyes: our hartes assure. Rectors. 13 Who sea so red: dyd whole deuide, 14 And Iacob made: through it to slide, 15 But Pharo drownd: his host beside. The Quiere. Who dyd all this: in hys good cure, For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs: doth still indure, Who will in ioyes: our hartes assure. Rectors. 16 Who led his flocke: by wildernes, 17 Who slew great kinges: of Heathennes, 18 The strongest kings: he put to stresse. The Quiere. Who dyd all this: in hys good cure, For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs: doth still endure: Who will in ioyes: our hartes assure.
Rectors. 19 As Seons brags: and Ogs despites, 20 Of Basan kinges: and Amorites, 21.22. Whose landes he made: true Iacobs rightes The Quiere. Who dyd all thys: in hys gyod cure: For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. Hys grace to vs: doth still endure, Who wyll in ioyes: our hartes assure. Rectors. 23 Who mynded vs: in trouble set, 24 And vs redeemd: from them vs fret, 25 Who heapeth all flesh: with heaped met. The Quiere. Who dyd all thys: in hys good cure, For euer standth: hys mercy sure. The Meane. His grace to vs doth still endure: Who will in ioy our hartes assure. Rectors. 26 Then prayse and thanke: the God of heauen, With hart, with tonge, with lyfe most cleane The Quiere. For euer standth, hys mercy sure Hys grace to vs, wyll styll endure. The Meane. So redy bendth: hys loue so pure: Which wyll in ioy: our hartes assure. Rectors. O thinke and thanke: the Lord of Lordes, His thoughtes, his actes, hys louely wordes. The Quiere. For euer standth his mercy sure, To thankefull hart, it wyll endure. The Meane. So redy bendth: hys loue so pure, Which will in ioy: our hartes assure.
The Collect. BE myndfull O Lord of our misery, whych art Lord of all mercye, and graunte that as thou leadest the fathers into the lande of promyse, so to restore vs to the heauenly land of all felicitie, through Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalm. Cxxxvij. When Babilon: the Iewes supprest, they tell how they did playne, From whence well rid, they her detest, to wishe her spoylde agayne. ̄ ̄ 1 AT water sides: of Babilon, Super flu¦mina.euen there we sate and wept▪ While Syon mount▪ we thought vpō remembring Gods precept. 2 We hong among. the Salow trées, our Harpes and Organs all: No ioy we had: with wéeping eyes, to matters musicall. 3 They craued of vs: who thrald vs wrong, Some dyties melody: In scorne they sayd: sing vs some song, Of Syon merely. 4 How can we syng: sayd we agayne, The Lordes swéete songes deuyne: In land so strange▪ who vs constrayne, we must all mirth resigne.
5 If I should thee: cast out of mynde: O good Ierusalem, I would my hand: went out of kinde: to play to pleasure them. 6 Yea let my tonge: to palate sticke: if that I minde thee not. If Syons prayse: I should not seeke:▪ as chiefe to ioy in that. 7 The Edomits O Lord, requite, for Salms heauy day, Who cryed wast her: spoyle her in sight: euen flat on ground to lay 8 O Babilon: thou doughter light: which waylst thy spoyling déepe: Well mought he spéede: that thee did quite: as thou madst vs to weepe. 9 And well fare him: that toke thee ones, which vs downe fiercely threwest: Who slong thy babes: agaynst the stones, as ours in rage thou flewest. ¶The Collect. ALmighty God the strong deliuerer of al them that be bound in captiuity graunte vs so to rebounde thy praise in agreable consent of spiritual songs, that where out lyues & harts hath hetherto bene in a dis∣cord from thy holy wils: and as outlawes haue wan∣dred astraye, nowe restore vs againe by thy mightye power, in one vnitye to glorifye thy name throughe Christe.
The Argument. Psalm. CXXXVIII. Whan Dauid skapt: much wo on kynde Thus thanks to God he dyd extende So taughte by proofe he vowed in mynde, That he of God would styll depende. As he entendth. / / 1 Confite∣bor tibi.I Wyll O Lord: geue thankes to thée, My hart therto: doth wholy bende: Before the powrs: as Gods they bée, So sing I will: my voyce to spend. Els God forfend. 2 I knéele to thy: right regal cell, To prayse thy name for truth and loue: Thy word and name: thou madst excell, Aboue all thinges: the déede doth proue. As men expende. 3 For this I sawe: what day I cryed, Thou answerdst me: most louingly: To my poore soule: thou lentst I spyed, More grace, so strength: to multiply. Thus didst thou lende. 4 All kings of earth: prayse thée they must, O Lord most true: as right allowth When they shall here: performed iust, Thy word to me: which spake thy mouth. They will contende.
5 Loe they shall sing: with harts most free, Of all the Lords: most rightful wayes: That great is God: in maiesty, So they his name: shall euer prayse and thanks repend. 6 And that the Lord: though placed hye, Who glory hath: as God aboue: Yet he the meke: respecth full nye, And knowth the proud: from far aloofe. him low to bend. 7 What though I walke: in midst of woe Yet wilt thou me: reuiue and ease: And stey by power: myne Irefull foe, Thy right hand strong: shall me release. Thy helpe to send. 8 The Lord shall this: performe for me, That is begon: to bringe to ende. Thy grace benigne: Lord aye shalbe, Thy handy woorke: thou wilt not blende. But still defend. ¶The collect. MVltiplye thy strength in vs O Lorde and enlarge the powers of our soules, 'that while we worship thee dayly in thy holy temple, at the last we may glo∣ry with thy elect angels in heauen, through Christe. ¶The Argument. Psalm. Cxxxix. When Dauid mysreported was: that he would Saul subuert He thus appeald to God hymself, who knew hys giltles hart.
̄ 1 O God thou hast: ful searcht me out, Domine probasti.Thou knowst my harte and reines: Accused I am: to compasse in, Both king and realme wyth traynes. 2 My sitting downe: my rising vp: my Actes thou knowest echone Thou vnderstandst: my thoughts a far: before I thinke them on. 3 My walks thou knowst: my rests & steys: my bed thou goest abcute Yea al my wayes: thou hast contriued: all sercht by the no doute. 4 No secret word: in all my tonge: so whispered closly in But thou O Lord: it knowst at whole: although it make no dinne. 5 For why thou me: thy selfe didst frame: behynd, before in forme: Thou laydst thyne hand▪ to this my clay: thy hands did me perform 6 This knowledge is: to meruelous: for me to reach I knoow, To hye and hard: for me to fetch▪ by hye or yet by lowe. 7 And whether can: I thinke to goe: fro this thy sprite and thought, From thee in face. how can I flye: or whether shall I flought. 8 If I do clime: to heauen aboue: euen there thou artfull néere: If so by low: I make my bed: In hell, thou art lo there. 9 If now I take: the morning wings: who spredth her beames so swift That strayt I cowd: to fordest Sea: remoue my house to shift. 10 Yet there thy hand: shall lede me forth: as pastor guideth his sheepe thy strong right hand: would me vphold by prouidence most deepe 11 If eke I say: or thinke at least: that darke shall hide my heade: Than shall the night: as shining day: be round about me spreade.
12 For sure the darke so dark: cannot: endarke thy louely sight: The night as day: do shine to thee: so darkenes is as light. 13 For iust my reynes: with theyr affects: are thine how hid they be, In wrapst thou me my mothers wombe: with vestures sonderly. 14 I geue thee thanks: for that I am: in shape formd straungely, Thy works so hye: be wrought in me, which playnd my soule doth spye. 15 My substance first: both bones & Ioynts: were nothing hid fro the In earth ful depe when I was wrought: and wouen was curiously 16 My masse vnshapt: thyne eyes did see: was writ in thine owne boke By dayes increase: my parts were formd: whē none on them could looke 17 How dere to me: O God appere: thy thoughts, these counsels gret How manifold: be but the summe: In count if they were set. 18 If I would tell: the summe of them: they should excéede the sand: Than this reuolued: I watch to thée, by thée I trust to stand. 19 If thou uow wouldst: thy self O God: confound that wicked man: bloud thursty men: whome I defye: would leaue me wholy than. 20 For these they be: that sigh at thee: and speake vngraciously: They vse thy name: in vayne to light: thy foes be puft to hye. 21 Do I not hate: all them O Lorde: who thée with hate disdayne? And fret not I: and fume at them: which rise at thee by trayne? 22 Yes Lord from hart: I hate them all: with perfect hate and yne Thy foes I take: myne enemies: as they were onely myne. 23 Than search me God: and boult my hart: to thée this cause I yelde Well try and know: in thoughte and driftes: what hauntes in life I held
24 And see in me: if any wayes: be founde rebellious, Then lead me forth: the worldly way: of death obliuiouse. ¶The Collecte. O God the wonderfull creature of all thinges earth∣ly the eternall protectour of the same, who knowst all our secret partes more perfectly than we our selfe can discerne, graunt we beseech thee that we may be∣haue our self in perpetuall feare vnder this thy parfit beholding of all our doyng, and clense the thoughts of our hartes that they maye be acceptable to thee, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalm. CXL. This prayth for good: (and iuste) deliuerance: Frō wayting spies: & guyleful (fawning) frēds Yt sheweth euēso: what ones (at lēgth) shal chance To good and bad: in both theyr (finall) ends. / / 1 ripe me omine.O Lord most good: (in haste) deliuer me, From man that is: so euell and (wholly) nought O keepe me saufe: In (stedfaste) suerty, From wrongful man: of (cursed) wicked thought. 2 To euill theyr hartes: do whole (alwaye) agree, From whence they haue: all (suttle) mischief wrought, To hate and bate: them selfes they (fullye) bende, But strife all day: by them is (vainely) sought. 3 Theyr tongs so sharpe: (on me) they haue extende, As serpent slye: (as snake) moste pestilente: Like Adders sting: theyr (venome) poyson sende, SelaSuch poyson they: in (fawning) lippes frequente.
4 My sely soule: O Lorde: (my God) defende, From wicked power: most (fierce and) violent: From wrongfull men: O me (good Lorde) preserue, To trip my foote: by them is (lewdly) ment. 5 These hawty men: (to death) to make me sterne, Hath hid theyr snares: with (suttle) cordes in brayde: And spred their nets: me thus they (wayte to) serue, With wiy trappes: my wayes (and steps) they layde. 6 Yet sure from God: I would not (farly) swerue, To whom in fayth: euen thus I (boldly) sayd: Thou art my God: O heare my (wo full) mone, From hart the roote: by tong (in word) displayd. 7 My Lord and God: my trust (most iust) alone, My strength and health: my (closely) couerture: Thou shieldst my hed: to scape my (deadly) fone, In day of warre: to stand (on foote) full sure. 8 Permit not Lord: whyle thus (for wo) I grone, His will to haue: this (wicked) man vnpure: SelaTo hys attempt: (O Lord) geue no successe, Lest proud they swell: and harme (the more) procure. 9 O let theyr lippes: in (crafty) wickednes: Betrap themselfe: in all their (daily) paynes: O let their hed: féele first (their due) distres, That compasse me: wyth suttle (wily) traynes. 10 Let burnyng coales: for their (so mad) excesse, Fall downe on them: to dull their (hasty) brayries Let fire and pit. be (wholy) theyr rewarde, No tyme to ryse: to (any) better gaynes.
11 Of bablyng tong: who hath no (bit or) warde, O let them Lord: here neuer (proue to) thriue: Him euill shall hunt: till he (to nought) be marde, No wealth to hym: (at all) shall downe deriue. 12 Full sure I am: God will (most kynde) regard, The poore mans case: with ayde (and ease) beliue: Of helpelesse man: to try his (truth and) right, In iudgement strong: for hym (alway) to striue 13 Thus righteous men: (so met) in open sight, Shall prayse thy name: (O Lord) that is so high, Then strayt vp men: in heauenly (ioyous) light, Shall sée thy face: (to lyue) eternally. ¶The Collecte. DEfend vs thy poore destitute seruauntes O Lorde from the crafty traines of the malignant enemies of all godlines: resist their pryde asswage their malice confound theyr deuises, that we beyng vnder thy pro¦tection, may laud thy mercy for the same. Thorough Christ, &c. The Argument. Psalme. CXLI, Here Dauid prayth: for stedfastnes, among the wycked sect: To scape theyr traps: and wyckednes, That they may low be chect. \ \ 1 O Lord I haue: lowde cryed to thée, Domi∣ne cla∣maui.to me therfore make spede: Unto my voyce: thine eare agrée, whyle that I cry in drede.
2 O let my sute: in syght so ryse, as doth incense to thée: My rayse of handes: as sacrifice, of myght, Lord let it bée. 3 Lord set a watch: before my mouth, kepe thou my mouth and lips: To speake nothyng: but truth and south: to scape all snares and trips. 4 Let not my hart: declyne to euill, with wycked workes inurde: With wycked men: to worke in will, by their delites allurde. 5 Yea let the iust: as frendly led, me smite and blame I say: No wycked balme: to stroke my hed: agaynst them still I pray. 6 O hedlong be: their iudges thrust, as down from rockes bethrowne: They would haue harde: my wordes at first, if swete they had be browne. 7 Our scattred bones: they breake in moode, so nye the graue they lay: As man which cleanth: and shiuerth woode, or one that clods doth bray. 8 For that myne eyes: O Lord to thée, O Lord be firmly cast: And thée I trust: then vtterly, spill not my soule in wast.
9 O kepe me saufe: fro crafty snare: which they to me do driue: From wicked trappes: that men prepare: which wickednes contriue. 10 But rather let: these wicked fall▪ all whoel into theyr nets: Betrapt themself: so be they all: while I may scape theyr threats▪ ¶The Collecte. SEt a watch O Lord, vnto our mouthes least that we apply our speech to vanity, to consent wyth the wic∣ked of the world: correcte thou vs with thy mercifull rod of chastisement, by vertue wherof we may be kept in aw to decline from all vyce through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalm. CXLI What Dauid thought: and how he prayd, whan feare draue bym to caue: He here reporth on God he stayed, who did him strongly saue. \ \ 1 VNto the Lord: with voyce I crye, Vocemea ad Domi¦num.So nye in parell set: Unto the Lord: my prayer hyed, both hart and voyce were met. 2 I pourd my sute: my sore complaynt, before his face in sight: My troublouse state: I did depaynt, before himself in light.
4 What tyme my sprite: was inly pent, my life thou knewest the path: Yet layd they snares: vext though I went, in all my walkes in wrath. 5 On hand both right: and left I vewed, none saw I that me knew No scape was free: none so endued, that once my soule woulde rue. 6 O Lord than thee: I cryed vpon, and thus I sayd eue then▪ Thou art my hope; and portion, in land of lyuing men. 7 Respect my crye: for worne I goe, in cares full deepe I wayle: Saue me fro them: which vext me so on me they sore preuayle. 8 O bring my soule: from prison bound Thy name to celebrate: So iust men wil: me glad surround, whan thou shalt quite my state. ¶The Collect. WYth humble voyce we sue vnto thy deuine maie∣sty, O Lord, that we may haue our hope so stren∣gthed by thee, to inherite the like state of thine electe in the land of the liuing through Christ. The Argument. Psalm. CXLIII. Whose hart wyth hate the world resolueth, To state all base deicet: If he in fayth this psalme reuolueth, God sone wyll him erect.
\ \ 1 NOw heare my sute: O Lord in stresse: Domine exaudi.to my request agree: For all thy truthes: and rightwisenes: sone aunswere thou to me. 2 (But enter not: to iudge extreme: thy seruant hye by lawe: For who himselfe. can cleane esteme: yet him I neuer saw.) 3 For loe the foole: my soule hath chasd: to earth my life hath wrest: My state in darke: he hath abasde: as men of old deceast: 4 My pinched sprite: in me doth fayle: opprest in heuines: My hart sore vext-doth morne and wayle: astoynd in pensiuenes. 5 Old yeares from fyrst: I haue recount: our fathers how thou ledst: Thine actes I marke: how hye they mount: I muse the woorkes thou didst. 6 My hands to thee: I held full hye: that thou wouldst me vouchsaue: My thristy soule: as pasture drye: thy graces dewe doth craue. 7 Then heare me Lord: but sone heare thou: my sprite doth feble ligh: Hyde not thy face: from me as now: least strayt my graue I spy.
8 Thy voyce at morne: cause me to heare, for thée I trust alone: Shew me thy wayes: my steps to steare, my soule to thée is gone. 9 O rid me Lord: from all theyr spite, that would me causeles trayne: For I to thée: referre my right, in hid defence full fayne. 10 Teach me to worke: thy will to please, thou art my God I say: And let thy sprite: so neuer cease, to leade me straite the way. 11 For thy swéete name: Lord quicken me, from them that me pursue: And make my soule: from perill frée, my hart with ioy endue. 12 Thy grace I trust: my foes will quell, and make their strength but lame: Who vexth my soule: thou wilt debell, for I thy seruant am. ¶The Collecte. ALmighty God which hast brought to lyghte the ioyfull mornynge of thy sonnes resurrection, which filled the earth with ioye and gladnes, we re∣quire of thy goodnes, that as thou didst cheare the hartes of thyne apostles by that comfortable resur∣rection, so comfort thy holy spouse the church which daily holdth vp her hands crauyng thy mercy, to ioy in the holy ghost, through the same Christ our sauior
¶The Argument. Psalme. CXLIIII. That God in warre: wyth Dauyd stoode: here thankes he dyd apply And prayth to scape: all heathen spyte: hys reygne to prosper hye. / / 1 Benedi∣ctus Do∣minus.THe Lord be blest: most worthy prayse: who is my God & might, Who teachth my hands▪ hys warres to rule: my fyngers eke to fighte. 2 My louely grace▪ my hold, my fort▪ my raunsommer is he: protector sure▪ in whome I trust: who boweth my flocke to me. 3 O Lord benigne: what thing is man: that thus thou him respectst? the sonne of man: so weake so vayne: that thus thou him erectst? 4 For man is made: like vanity: a thing of nought most frayle: his dayes passe fast: as shadow fleeth: as water bobles fayle. 5 O Lord bow downe: the heauens & come: be nye & helpe our payne O touch these mounts: these heathen Dukes: that they may smoke agayne 6 Thy lightnings spout: and scater them: like men amasde and strau Thyne arrowes sharpe: shoote out at them: disturbe their brags so haut 7 But send thy hand: from hye aboue: and me deliuer free: from waters déepe: from childer straunge: theyr power make me t flee 8 Whose mouth doth speake: all vanity: and bost all conquests wyde whose right hand will: but them deceyue: so sweld in lies and pride 9 O God I will: thus saued by grace: sing newly songs to thee: In psaltry sweete of strings full ten: my psalmes shall tuned be. 10 For thou geust health: and victory: to kings by stable woorde: me (Dauid) lo thou hast discharged: to scape theyr cruel sword
11 O saue me Lord: deliuer me: from forreine childers spite, Whose mouth full vayne: doth boast and prate: whose right hand: false is dighte. 12 But graunt that al: our childer grow: as playnts frō youth vpright our doughters yonge: so polished: as pallace pillers bright. 13 That full may flow: our garners wide: with kinds of vitaile swete that all our sheepe: bring thousands forth: yea millions in streete. 14 And that well fed: our Oxen goe: to labour stronge to see: that battries none, no leadings thrall: in streetes no waylings be. 15 Oh happy is: that people sure: who hath these thinges at will. Yea blessed is: that people best: whose God the Lord is still. ¶The Collect. TEach vs, O Lord, to vse so all our spirituall armors agaynst our ghostly aduersaryes that we may resist all euill, that we be not made bond vnder the vanitye of thys world so to be excluded from thy gouernāce in grace: through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXLV. Thys Dauyd framde: by Alphabete, Where God he thākth (in hart) most hie Whose power & might: whose grace so great▪ In prouidence (most cleare) we spy. ̄ ̄ 1 ARise I will: my God and king, Exalta∣o.to rouse my grace (wt tōg) most hie and blesse thy name: to me bening I will (and shall) eternally.
2 Both day and night: I will declame, thy (worthy) laudes most thankfully: By praysing due: thy holy name, for aye (and aye) without delayes. 3 Clere is this Lord: most hye of fame, his state surmounth: all (mortal) prayse: Can no man search: how he excell, in greatnes hym (by weight) to paise. 4 Describe to age: shall age full well, thy (handy) workes: with reuerence, Declare they must: where that they dwel, thy (godly) mightes: magnificence. 5 Enhaunce I shall: thy glory bright, thy fame (and name) thine excellence: Enditing still: thine actes of might, so wonderfull (that be) to sée. 6 For that that man: may speake & wright, thy (princely) dedes. that dreadfull bée: From hence euen so: I will resound, thy (godheds) grand abilitie. 7 Good men shall preach: how grace abound in thée (O Lord) with gentlenes: Glad songes to sing: they will in sound, of thy great (truth and) bounteousnes. 8 How good the Lord: how gracious, he is to all in (paynefull) stresse: How slow to wrath: not furious, his mercy ruleth (and stayth) his ire.
9 In loue he is: most piteous, to all that him (therof) require: Imprinted be: his mercies sure, on all his workes (all whole) intiere. 10 Know this will euery creature, with thankes (most due) O Lord to thée Kynd harted men: will them inure, (in hart) to blesse thy maiestie. 11 Loude will they speake: thy regall seat, most glorious (at eye) to sée: Lord, so shall men: be glad to treate, thy power (deuine) so tried by déede. 12 Men thus will still: thy strength repeate, to Adams stocke: and (liuing) séede: Most wide they will: with kinde assent, thy kingdomes (laud: and) glory sprede. 13 No dout the reigne: is permanent, a reigne (of blisse) to stand for aye: Nedes must thy power: and regiment, endure (in length) from day to day. 14 O sure in worde: the Lord is tryed, most faithfull true (and iust) alway: On all his workes: his will is spyed, most holy (God all) them to saue. 15 Poore wauering men: the Lord bestrideth their stay (and hold) by him to haue: Playne faln or wrongd: he reiseth againe, if they their reyse (in faith can craue.
Quicke eyes all thing: doth fastly straine, on thée (O Lord) so good at néede: Quite all their foode: they aske so fayne in tyme (most fit) thou geuest in déede. 17 Right wide thou splaist: thy blessing hand, all liuing things (wyth store) to féede: Refresht by thée: so full to stand, with plenty (fed in) foode delight. 18 Still iust appearth: this Lord so grand, in all his wayes (to man aright: So wholy he: doth aye appeare, in all his workes of (his great) might. 19 The Lord to all: approcheth nere, to him (for helpe) which make request, To all I say: soone them to heare, which call (on him) with faithfull brest. 20 With ready spéede: he filleth their mynd, who feare hym (iust both) most and lest: Unto their cry: he bendth so kynd, and saueth them (whole) as him (it) likth 21 Exceding sure: before behynde, the Lord hys louers (frendly) kéepth: Exile he doth: vngodly men, to scatter them (most wide) he séekth. 22 Yelde shall my lipps: by duetye then, this Lords deserued: (laud and) prayse Yea let all flesh: geue thankes agayn, to his good name (most due) alwayes.
The Collect. ETernall gouernour of all ages and tymes, O Lord almighty, which doost minister foode to all liuing creatures in due season, geue vs grace alway to thāke thee for the same, and to reioyce most cōstantly with all thyne elect for thyne almighty power exprest by thy right hand in the prouision therof. Through Christ. &c. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXLVI. To trust to man: this Psalme forfendth, Whose arme is flesh: and worde but wynde, Where God full ayde: to man extendth, By whome twise lyfe: he iust dyd fynde, Which Dauid knew: the text dewrayes, Wherfore his soule: sang still his prayse. Alleluya. \ \ 1 O Thou my soule: prayse thou the Lord, Lauda a∣nima mea.The Lord of loue: and God of light Extend thy powers: with one accorde, Recount his name: in inward spryte▪ Expresse thy voyce: without delayes, O thou my soule: singe still his prayse. 2 My hart is set: to lawde this Lord: Thys Lord so good▪ is God of grace: His laudes my life: shall whole recorde, Yea ure as long: I bide in place. My God to thanke: I wil alwayes, O thou my soule: sing still his prayse. 3 O put no trust: in princes power, The God of might: is Lord to trust: Yea trust no man: his frute is sower, No helpe in hym▪ no credence iust, Gods loue is sure: at all assayes, O thou my soule: singe still▪ his prayse.
4 Mans breath ones past, he turneth to dust, This Lord so strong: he euer lastth: All earthly power: decay it must, Mans counsayles all: deathes day doth waste, Gods helpe is ferme: without decayes O thou my soule: sing stil his praise. 5 Blest is the man: whose helpe is God, The God of hosts: to Iacobs seede: Full fast with them: he styl abode, Who God will trust: aswell shall speede, In hym beset: al stable stayes O thou my soule: Sing still his prayse. 6 This God made heauen: and earth betwene, The Lord so grand: so infinite: He made the seas: with all therein, His truth in word: he kepeth full right▪ His déede from tong: makes neuer sayes O thou my soule: sing styll his prayse. 7 The Lord reuength: oppressed man, Thys God of right▪ as is deserued, All wrongs and spites, requite he can, He dealth out bread: to hungersterued: Thrall men in bonds: he vseth to rayse O thou my soule: singe still his prayse. 8 The Lord giueth sight to blynded eyes, This God so bright to see agayne: He lifteth the lame: from ground to rise, The iust doth hee: in loue retayne: To fill his lyfe: with ioyefull dayes, O thou my soule, singe still his prayse.
9 In care the Lord: all straungers kepth, Of them sure God: he is at neede: And Orphans loueth: and widowes seeketh, Nye hart he takth: theyr cryes of dreade: Euill minded men: to dust he brayes, Syng still my soule: syng out hys prayse. 10 Prayse God as king: who raygneth for aye: As God of thyne: O Sion hye: Resort to him: Go not astray, Knyt fast thyne hart▪ shrinke not awrye. Expell he will: all feares and frayes. Rouse hym my soule: Sing stil his prayse. ¶The Collect. EVerliuing God, on whome the elect haue put their whole confidence, and feede theyr ioyfull soules in hope of thy grace: graunt vs to be illumined in sprite, euermore to loue thee and to celebrate thy name in pure conscience, through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXLVII. Thys psalme exciteth the Iewes: to prayse the Lord most chief So good to them: who priuatly: did worke them all reliefe. \ \ 1 Laudate Dominū.PRayse ye the Lord alway: for good it is to sing, To this our God: for sweete he is: whom laudes we ought to brin 2 God buildeth Hierusalem: he doth her sure protect: The poore exiles: of Israell: he shall agayne collect. 3 He heald the brusde in hart: who wayle in sprite contrite, Theyr plages and sores: he bindeth them vp. he cureth thē al ful light
4 No dout God them beholdeth: who starres by number tels: By proper name: he calth them all: he knowth theyr rests and cels. 5 The Lord of ours is greate: and great he is in power: His knowledge is: all infynite: his name as strong as tower. 6 The Lord vpholdeth thafflict: So gentle is his will: He throweth to ground: all wicked men: So mightye is his skill. 7 O sing to God our Lord: prayse ye his raygne abroade: Confesse his power: hys will his skyll: In harpe sing ye to God: 8 Who clothe the heauen with cloudes: and raygne to earth prepares He bringes forth gras: on hills to growe: to serue mans dayly cares. 9 Who geueth to beast theyr foode: to all both great and small: The rauene her birds: he féedth in care: whan they forsaken call. 10 In barbed horse of strength: his pleasure standth not in: In legs of men in force of armes: it pleaseth not him to wynne. 11 They please who feare the Lord: by such he fyght with strength: who trust all whole his gentlenesse: these only please at length: Lauda Hierusalem. O Thou Ierusalem prayse hye the Lord of thyne: Thou Sion mount: auaunce thy God: in hart therto encline 13 For he makth fast the barres: of all thy gates full prest: He blissth euen so: thy childer al: in midst of thée to rest. 14 And he doth stablish peace: In all thy borders sure: He féedth the full: deliciously: with wheate the flower most pure.
15 Who sendth his word on earth: and swiftly doth it renne: Both rayne and wynd: his biddings heare: to serue the nede of me 16 And snow he geueth like woll: the earth so warme to be: The hory frosts: the mislyng dewes: as ashes scattreth he. 17 He casth abroade his yse: like morsels so congelde: and his great cold: who can abyde: that he so hard hath seald. 18 He sendth his worde & will: he melt them all agayne: He blowth the winde: then they anone: to waters flow most playne 19 Yea he reuealeth his word: to Iacobs seede and stocke: His statutes true: his iust decrees: to Israel his flocke. 20 He delt no time as thus: with other landes I say: He shewed not them: his domes so playne: O prayse the Lord alwaye ¶The Collecte. STrength & fortify the gate of thy church O Lorde, and make her to be enlarged in peace and vnity, re∣ueale thy word to her vnderstanding that she may be wholy directed by that to please the in truth: through Christ. ¶The Argument. Psalme. CXLVIII. To prayse here all be byd: what heauen or earth contayne: The Lord so hye: and sapyent: nothyng he made in vayne. / / 1 Laudate Domino in Coelis.PRayse ye the Lord: from heauens: ye heauenly mynds I call, Prayse him on hye: as hye he is: ye powers celestiall, 2 Prayse hym ye Angels all: his legats ye that be: ye hosts so cald: his armies great: prayse hym in maiesty.
Prayse him ye sunne and mooke: in course so maruelous, Ye starres so bright: ye Planets all: prayse hym most glorious. Ye heauens by heauens-distinct: prayse him with all your shyne, ye water streames: aboue the ayre: so stayde by power deuyne. They all might prayse and laud: the Lordes good name of myght, For he the worde: but spake at once: they straight were made in plight. He constituted hath: that they should euer dure, He set a law: which shall not cease: by ordinance most sure. Ye earthly thinges on earth: prayse ye the Lord with them, Ye dragons grim: ye depes and gulfes: shew ye his power supreme Fire, lightning, thunder, hayle, both snow and vapours drye, ye hurling wyndes: tempestuous: which worke his word full nye. Great mountains hils and clifs: low hillockes all and some, ye fruitefull trées: ye Ceders all: prayse ye the Lordes renome. Ye beastes and cattell all: both sauage wylde and tame, ye serpents flye: ye fetherd soules: prayse ye his godly name. So kinges of earth most due: with all their people met, So princes hie: and iudges all: on earth as Gods be set. So yonger men and maydes: in age syncere and pure, As older men: with childer yong: with all their busy cure. The Lordes name let them prayse: for it alone is hye: His glory passth: both heauen & earth: as thyngs here made do cry. He hath his flock aduanced: so him his saintes shall prayse, Euen Iacobs séede: who drawth him nie: praise ye the lord always.
The Collecte. O Lord the woorthye prayse and ioy of all thy crea∣tures, graunt vs thy grace that we worthely mag∣nify thy name, through Christ. The Argument. Psalme. CXLIX. Thys Psalme the Iewes doth moue, Theyr God to laude wyth loue: It sheweth that grace on them shall lyght, So glad their foes to quyte. / / 1 O Syng vnto the Lord, Cantate Domino.A song of new accord: And let his prayse: declared bée, In good mens company. 2 Let Israell be glad, in God hys maker drad: Let Syons youth: and childer ioy, In their most princely roy. 3 Let them prayse out in quiere, Hys name to them so dere: In Tabret loud: in harpe so soft, Sing they to hym ful oft. 4 For why the Lord reioyce, And loueth hys flocke in choyce: The meke forlorne: he will adourne, wyth health to serue theyr turne. 5 So godly men made frée, in ioy and prayse shal bée: They shall reioyce: vpon their beds, That God did rayse their heds.
6 Their throtes shall prayses sound, to God by duety bound: Two edged swordes: in both theyr handes, to smite all forren landes. 7 To be auenged right, of all the Paynyms spite: To be a rod: to chastise smart, straunge peoples froward hart. 8 To bynde their kinges wyth chaynes, to quite their wrongfull meanes Theyr nobles eke: to kepe in warde, wyth iron fetters hard. 9 To bryng on them in spéede, theyr iudgement iust decréed: Which shall his saintes: to honour rayse, prayse ye the Lord alwayes. Alleluya. ¶The Collecte. O God which art a God of all goodnes & vertue, whiche doost vse to exalte them whiche humble themselues, and to deiecte those who aduaunce themselues, graunte vs on earthe to ioye in all puritie of lyfe as thy saintes in heauen ioy in thy glorious presēce to the prayse of thy name, through Christ.
¶The Argument. Psalme. CL. Thys psalme is last: and byddeth vs prayse, That first and last: doth vs behooue: Whan thyngs be past: and spent our dayes, Yet laudes shall last: wyth thankefull loue. Alleluya In heauen aboue. / / 1 O Prayse ye God: of excellence, Laudate dominū in sanctisIn his respect: of holynes: And prayse ye hys: magnifycence, In fyrmament: of stablenes. Wyth lowlines. 2 O prayse ye hym: as Sauiour, For his sweete actes: heroycall: And prayse ye hym: as gouernour For his great power: potentiall. most principal 3 O prayse ye hym: for maiesty, In trompets sound: effectuouse: Omnipo tentia.And prayse yee hys: Authority, In lute and harpe: melodiouse. most studious 4 O prayse ye hym: all sapyent, In Tymbrell sweete: wyth daunce in quiere SapientiaAnd prayse ye hym: so prouident In fydle strung: in recordere: wyth harty chere. 5 O prayse ye hym: all bountifull, In Cymbals sound: out lowd in state: Bonitas.And prayse ye him: so pytyfull: In Cymbals sound: more mittigate. ☞Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum. Full moderate
6 Let all with breath: or lyfe endued, Or what with sound: is fortefied: Prayse out the Lord: in state renewed, For grace and power applied. To none denyed. Alleluya. I chaunter cry: to all you here: Prayse ye the Lord: with harty cheare. ¶The Collecte. MOst laudable and mercifull God, beyng the swete Tenor of all our harmony, which doost here exer¦cise our hartes otherwhiles wyth songes of teares and lamentations, and otherwhiles of ioy and glad∣nes. Graunte we beseche thee that after wee haue songe vp our temporall songes in praysing of thy name, wee may at last bee associated to that hea∣uenly quire aboue, to be∣hold thy glorious ma¦iestye wyth thy saintes, tho∣rough &c. FINIS.
¶Gloria Patri for diuers Metres. To God on hye, in vnitie agayne: In Trinitie, in vnitie agayne: Reigne, power, and prayse, to hym be geuen, Amen. As due alwayes, to hym be geuen, Amen. To God on hye be prayse, The father first of myght To Christ his sonne: and their good sprite▪ For euer due of ryght. His name be blest: in vnitie, For euer one: in Trinitie: From this tyme forth: as it hath bene, Say we therto, Amen, Amen. To God on hye: in Trinitie, In vnitie: yet one agayne: Reigne, power & praise: most due to see, Be alway geuen: of mortall men. So mought it be Say we Amen. To God the father first of myght, To Christ his sonne: both God and Lord: To God of them: the holy sprite, Though three yet one: in iust accorde, Reigne, power, and prayse: as due by right, Ascribe we all: in open sight. With all our might.
Te Deum. O God we prayse: the Lord most hye, Which liust and reignst: eternally: Wth hart & voyce: in one accorde, We knowledge thee: to be the Lorde. And all the earth: doth worship thee, As Lord and God: our king to be: All things were made: by word of thyne, Thou father art of power deuine. All aungels lowde: to thee doth crye: They laude thy name: continually: The heauens and all: the powers therin, Thy prayse to spred: do neuer lynne. To thee do cry: the mighty sprites, The Cherubins: all dayes and nights: And Ceraphin: doth neuer cesse: Thy louely laudes: full out t'expresse. And thus they crye: in sweete accord, O holy, holy, holy Lord: Thou art of hosts: the guyde and boote, Thou Lord thou God: of Sabbaoth. Thy maiesty: and power of hoste, Do spred the heuens: in glory most: The earth is fylde: with thy great fame, With thy great power: and gloriouse name. Thapostles gard: so gloriouse, Extoll thy name: most precious: Which haue by déedes of worthinesse, Set forth thy prayse: and noblenes.
The Godly band: of prophets wyse, To prayse thée God: they whole deuise: Which haue declard: thy holy will, From age to age: for euer still. The Martyrs meeke: of army stronge, Which spent theyr bloud: for thee so longe: Do glorifye: thy blessed name, And prayse thee Lord: thou most of fame. The holy church: through world so wyde, Do knowledge thee: the Lord and guyde: They do confesse: thy power and might. And knowledge thee: eche day and night. The father God: eternally: Of power so great: and maiestye: That rulst and dwelst: in heauen aboue, As father, God: which doost vs loue. The church euen so: most faythfully, Confesse in truth: and vnitye: That Tower of strength: that holy one, Thy honorable: only sonne. The holy church: confesseth eke, The holy sprite: in fayth alyke: O blessed God: our harts enspyre, Thou holy Ghost. thou comforter. Thou art O Christ: of glory kyng, And beame most bright: so glisteringe: Thy hart so kinde: is knowne to all, Thou diedst for man: to rid his thrall.
Of Father God▪ in mighty throne, Thou art O Christ aye lasting sonne: Begot before▪ the worlds were made, Or els of earth: foundation layde. When thou didst take: that worke on thee, Mankind to bring: to liberty: The Uirgines wombe: thou didst accept, Nor it abhordst: nor it reiect. When thou hadst sayne: of death the darte, Of Sathans power: and hell the smarte: The heauenly gates: thou opendst free, To all that did beleue on thee. On Gods right hand: thou sittest full nye▪ In equall power: and maiestye: With father God: in iust accord, In heauen thou sitst: O Christ our Lord. We do beleue: when th'end shalbe, That thou shalt come in maiestye: Where thou shalt sit: as iudge to déeme, Both quicke and dead: as thee beseme. Helpe thou therfore: thy seruants true, With thee do pray: with harts moste due: Which thou redemdst: of hart so good, With sheding out: thy precious bloud. Wyth thy good saynts: make them to be, So numbred whole: in company, That they may ioy: in glory iust: From earth, from sinne▪ most clene discust.
By thy good grace: thy people saue, O Lord theyr helpe: in thee they haue: They put themselfs: to thy good charge. O blesse thou God: thyne heritage. Direct thou them: in thy right way, And gouerne them▪ to thée we pray: And lift them vp: for euer still, Exalt them hye: by thy good will. We thee O Lord: do magnify, Still day by day▪ continually, As so O God: most due it is, We should not be: therto remisse. Thy worship asketh: the same of vs, It is so good: so bounteouse: Thy name to prayse: we do entend, For euer world: withouten end. This day preserue: our harts within, And kepe O God, our soules from sinne: Uouchsafe O Lord: to kepe vs pure, In thy good lawes▪ our liues assure. Haue mercy Lord: on vs, we call, Haue mercy still vpon vs all, Without the whych: we cannot stand, We clayme the strength: of thy good hand. Let mercy light: on vs O Lord, We trust in thee: with one accord: We do thus craue most earnestly, As we do put: our trust in thee.
In thée O Lord: I haue my trust, In thée my hope: and helpe so iust: Beholde O God: I stand to thée, Then let me not: confounded bée. ¶The song of the three Children. Quire. * Prayse ye the king of kinges, Blesse ye the Lorde of fame: For euer prayse: and magnifie, His blessed holy name. Rectors. O Angels hie of God, The Lord your ornament: Ye heauens so clere: & waters eke, Aboue the firmament. Quire. * Prayse ye the kyng of kynges, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnifie, Hys blessed holy name. Rectors. O all ye powers of God, Ye sunne and moone also: Ye starres of heauens: ye showres & dewes, The Lordes rough wyndes that blow. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kynges, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse▪ and magnifie, Hys blessed holy name.
Rectors. O fyre and partching heate, Ye winters, Sommers all: Ye dewes and frostes: ye frostes and cold, Ye snowes and Yse that fal. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kynges, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnifie, Hys blessed holy name. Rectors. O nights and dayes so bright, Ye lights, and darkenes dimme. Ye lightnings cloudes, and earth so round, Extoll and laude ye him. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kynges, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnifie, His blessed holy name. Rectors. O hils and mountaynes great Grene thyngs on earth that growe: Ye wels and springs, ye Seas and flouds, And Whales in deepes by low. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kynges, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnifie, Hys blessed holy name.
Rectors. O all ye fethred foules, Ye beasts and herds abroade: O ye the sonnes of mortall men, O Israell prayse the Lord. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kings, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnify, his blessed holy name. Rectors. O priests of God aboue, And seruants true of hys: Ye sprites and soules of righteous men Extoll the Lord of blisse. Quiere. * Prayse ye the kyng of kings, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnify, His blessed holy name. Rectors. O men of hart so meeke, And holy soules in mynde. O Anani, and Azari, And Miaell so kynde. Quiere. * Prayse ye the king of kings, Blesse ye the Lord of fame: For euer prayse: and magnify, His blessed holy name:
Benedictus. O Blest be God: of Israell, The Lorde & guide: we know full well He visited: hys people all, He them by grace: redéemd from thrall. And raisde he hath: saluation, Most mighty now: for vs eche one: Of Dauids stocke: so vertuous, His seruauntes line: and noble house. As he dyd speake: in tymes of olde, By holy Prophetes: mouthes so tolde: Which were his will: to vtter than, And haue bene since: the world began. That we should be: in fréedome quite, And saued be: from enmies spite: To scape the handes: and cruell state, Of all the men: that vs do hate. The mercy plight: to fathers sage, To them performe: from age to age, And eke recount: hys noble acte, To call to minde: hys sacred pacte. His othe to kepe: so sworne and plight, To Abraham: our fathers right: Which he in tyme: so bounteous, Would iust performe: and geue to vs. That we so rid: from enmies handes, From cruell yoke: of combrous bandes: Myght serue hym styll: in ioyfull cheare, Without all griefe: all care and feare.
In holines and righteousnes, So hym to serue: in stablenes: Before hym thus: all voyde of strife, To passe all dayes: of this our life. And thou good child: shalt haue the name, Of Prophet great: most chiefe in fame: For thou shalt go: before Gods face, To shew before: hys wayes of grace. To geue vnto: his people sone, To knowledge healthes▪ saluation: This health to shew: the grace of his, For all theyr faultes: and sinnes remisse. Through mercy great: and tender loue, Of God the Lord: that raignes aboue: Wherby the day: that spring from hie, Us visited: so ioyfully. Them lyght to geue: that placed bée, In darkenes great: and miserie: And eke in shade: of death no lesse, And guide our féete: in wys of peace. ¶Magnificat. MY soule the Lord: doth magnifie, Who shewth his power: so mightely, Thus hath he done▪ by his gret might, Of onely grace: that he hath plight. Also my sprite: both day and hower, Reioyceth in God: my sauiour: Not me my selfe: but thée O Lord, I do extoll: in hartes accord.
For he hath thus: regarded mée, His handmayd true: of low degrée: Whose poore estate: and simple house, He doth accept: so bounteous. And now behold: the kyndreds all, Shall me henceforth: right blessed call: So thou hast sayd: by thy good worde, As aungels voyce: doth well recorde. For he that is: most mighty tride, Hath me set vp: and magnified: By his good grace: he doth the same, For holy is: his worthy name. And mercy great: that he doth beare, Is shewd to all: that do hym feare: On kinredes all: by him alone, He helpes vs now: and hearth our mone. Wyth hys good arme: he strength hath shewd, And scattred cleane: the proud and lewd: In their conceiptes▪ and fansies vayne, This is our God: that still doth raigne. The mighty downe: from seat he threw, And humble hartes: exalted due: Thus God hath done: by power so hie, The worldly riche: full low do lie. The hungry soule: he filde in all, Wyth eche good thyng: so liberall: The riche in wealth: wyth all their ray, With empty handes: he sent away.
Remembring still: hys grace that fell, Hys seruaunt holye: good Israell: Which promisd was: our fathers gray And Abraham: hys séede for aye. Nunc dimittis. LOrd now thou lettest: thy seruant go, To peacefull rest thou good art so: Thy loue to me: thou doost aforde Accordth thereto: thy holy word. For these my eyes: saw happely, Health long desird: so ernestly: Thy sauing health: thou geuest alone, My eyes haue seene: saluation. Which thou hast thus: preparde aright, Before thy flock: and peoples sight: Theyr eyes do sée thy loues entent, And goodnes great: which thou hast sent. To be a light: to Gentels all, To lighten them: that lye in thrall: That thy good flock: in ioy may dwell, To glory great of Israell. Grace before meate. MOst louing Lord: to thee we cry, All vs to blesse: our borde be nye: Thy giftes to vse: in this repast, No spoyle to make: hereof in waste, And that our want: while we do yll, Our hart and tong: expresse none euell. Grace after meate. PReserue vs Lord: which all hast wrought, As thou of loue: vs all hast bought: Refresh our soules: with godly feare, For these good giftes: kind hart to beare? Our tyme to spend: ech day by day, At our liues ende: reioyce we may.
Quicunque vult. WHo saued will be: before all thinges, He must true fayth: fast hold in all: which safe & sound: who kepth it not Without all doubt: he perish shall. This is the fayth: calde Catholike, Euen through the world: full out so famde: To serue one god: in Trinitie: In Trinitie: but one so namde. Confounding not: theyr persons three, Their substance sundred cannot be: The father, sonne: and holy goste, Be diuers yet: in persons three. The godhed yet: of them all one, Of father, sonne, and holy Sprite: Theyr glory lyke: their maiesty, All one eternall, is aright. The father such: the sonne is such, The holy gost: is such a lyke: The father hie: the sonne euen so, The holy gost: vncreat eke. The father god: the sonne the sprite, Incomprehensible they be all▪ Eternall god: eternall sonne, The holy goste eterne we call. Yet they not three: eternals be, But one they stande: eternally: Not three distinct: in power or tyme, But one all whole: in vnitie.
The father houge: of power he is, The sonne, the holy ghost euen so, Not thrée almighties so be sayde, But one almighty knowne no mo. The father God: the sonne is God, The holy ghost: euen so is God Not yet three Gods: but one is God, In all the world: so long and broade, The Father Lord: the Son is Lord, The holly Ghost: is truely Lorde, Not yet thrée Lords: but one is Lord We say and singe: in true accord. As we ech person: God and Lord, Be bid by Christian truth to name: Forbidden so: we be by fayth, thrée gods or els: thrée lords to frame. The Father made of none nor born, Of none begotten well we know: The sonne of God: alone not made: Nor created, begotten thoughe. The sprite is iust: of God and so Of Christ not got: proceding yet: One Father so: one son, one sprite, Not thrise in name: these persons set. In Trinity▪ not one beforne, Nor yet behynde: more great or lesse: These persons thrée: all equall be, Eterne a like: we must confesse.
So that in all: this vnity: In trinity: I say agayne: The trinity: in vnity, We must adore: as one full playne. Who saued will be: most rightly iuge The Trinity: forsooth euen thus: And helth eke aske to think ye Christe, Incarnate was: made flesh for vs. For this is fayth: both right & sounde That we beleue and iust confesse: That Iesus Christ: the sonne of God Is God and man: our Lorde no lesse. Of God his substaunce, God begot, Before the worlde: was made in sight And man he is. of Maryes flesh, His mother him: in world so dight. He perfect God: and perfect man: Of soule with reason most indued: Of humayne flesh: subsistyng is, By whome our nature was renued. Christ equall is: in Deity, To God so great: his father iust: Yet greater he: and Christ the lesse, For birth in manhoode so discust. Who though he be: both God & man, One Christ he is: in déede not two: To lesh his godhed did not chaunge, But taking flesh: on godhed so.
Of substance whole: he is vnmixte, By person yet: he is but one, As soule wyth wit: and flesh one man One Christ is so: both God and man Who suffred death: for all our health, And downe he went in sprite to Hel: He did yet ryse: from death agayne, The thyrd day iust as scripture telth. To Heuen he ied: and there he sitth On gods right hand: which mighty is from whence he shall: return to iudge The quick and deade: all right I wis And when he comth: all men shal ryse In bodies dead: reuiued agayne: And geue they shall: accompt full due of al their thoughts: & works so plain. And they that haue done good I saye, Shall enter sure to life eterne: And they that haue done euill, to fyre To darknes cast: that is externe. This is the fayth: most Catholike, Which any man, if it mistake: And faythfully doth not beleue, No wight him saued: once can make.
Veni creator. COme holy Ghost: eternall God, Which doost from God procéede. The father fyrst: and eke the sonne, One God as we do reade. Oh visite thou: our minds and harts, Thy heauenly grace inspire: That we in truth: and godlinesse, May set our whole desire. Thou art O sprite: the comforter, In woe and hard distresse: The heauenly gift: of God so highe, Which tongue cannot expresse. Thou fountayne art: and liuely spring, Of ioy celestiall: The fyre so bright, the loue so cleare, and vnction spirituall. For thou in gifts: art manifold, Whereby Christs church doth stand: And wrightst thy loue: in faythfull hartes, The power of God hys hand. And like as thou: hast promise made, Thou geuest the speach of grace: That through thy helpe: the prayse of God, May sound in euery place. O holy Ghost: to moue our wits, Sende downe thyne heauenly light: Inflame our harts: our God to serue, With loue both day and night.
Our weaknes strength: confyrme vs Lord, Both féeble faynt and frayle: That nether flesh, the world, ne deuill, In vs do once preuayle. Put backe from vs: our enemies, And graunt that wée obtayne: Swéete peace of hart: with God and man, From grudge and proude disdayne. And graunt O Lord, O leader sure, That we by thée as guide: May safe eschue: the snares of sinne, From thée no tyme to slyde. And plenty Lord: of thy good grace, Graunt vs we humble pray: Be thou our ioy: and comforter, To scape that dreadfull day. Of stryfe and foule: dissention, O Lord dissolue the bands: And knit the knot: of peace and loue, Through out all Christen lands. Graunt vs O Lord: through thée to know The Father most of might: That we of his: beloued sonne, May sure obtayne the sight. And that with perfect stable fayth, We mought acknowledge thée: The sprite of them▪ of both I say, One God and persons thrée.
Be laude to God: the father hye, And God his sonne prayse ye: Be prayse to God: the holy sprite, One God in Trinity. Pray we that Christ: the sauiour, Uouchsafe his sprite to send: To all which true: professe his name, Till all the world doth ende. THe 150. beyng the last Psalme, is a serious and ear¦nest inuitation to the prayses of God: and so most agreably placed, as last to knit vp the ende of all that is treated in the fiue seueral bookes of Psalmes so de∣uided by the Hebrues. In whiche fiue bookes bee in∣sparsed abroad matter of Prophecy of Christ and hys church, of History, of Doctrine, of Instruction, of Inuita∣tion, of Exhortation, of Reformation, of Insultation, of Con¦solation, of Gloriation, of Inuocation, of Obsecration, of Me∣ditation, of Patience, and such lyke. So that all breath, voyce, and sound of worde, sunge, sayd, or thoughte, should tende wholy in the ende, to prayse the Lorde, whych is the first, the mydst, and finall worke, and sa∣crifice, wherunto all should be referred. Furthermore because in rhe thyrd, fourth, and fifth verses, onelye musicall instrumentes be recyted, lest they should be but bare instrumentes wythout distinction, or signi∣fication of sound, in them be added for supplement, the three appropriates ascribed to God in Trinitie, as Power and Authoritie, whereby all thynges were created and wrought Wysdome and Prouidence, wherby all thynges be iustly gouerned and ruled. Goodnes and Bountie, wherby all thinges be preser∣ued, from whence procede all graces and giftes both bodely and ghostly.
Thus this Psalme whych is the last beyng confor∣mable to that whych is the first, which is also tracted by certayne Triades describyng the felicitye of man doth resemble, the same not onely by Triades of verse but also by thys Triade included in mystery, thoughe not expressely: So determinyng the chiefe and laste woorke, that thys blessed man so described in all the course of hys lyfe should meditate, which acte in the next lyfe he shall most perfectly do and performe. Therfore the Chaunter is not vntymely broughte in for fresher remembraunce to proclayme once a∣gayne hys ioyfull Alleluya, to ende therin to the glo∣rye of God in Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghoct, to whome be all honour, glory, and praise euerlastingly, Amen. ¶For the Coniunction of Psalmes and tunes. FIrst ye ought to conioyne a sad tune or song, with a sad Psalme, And a ioyfull tune and songe wyth a ioyfull Psalme, And an indifferent tune and song, with a Psalm which goeth indifferently. Psalmes of ioy be such as be constitute in the third and fift place of Athanasius table, which be Psalmes consola∣tory, and of thankesgeuyng with theyr Coniugates. Sad Psalmes be such as be set in the fourth common place, as Deprecatory, and Interpellatory, Indifferent be suche as be in the first and second place, as Propheticall, or such as do teach and exhort, and such also as be mixte containyng diuers of the sayd fiue places: For a difference of tunes & fonges in this triple nature and diuersitie be vsed, the thre charectes of the thre common accentes,\ as the sharp accent to ioyfull songes and tunes,\ The graue accent to sad, The circumflect accent to indifferent.̄ Not yet by this meanyng to prescribe a rule to preiudice any mans peculiar spirit or eare, for as there be diuersities of tastes in mens palaces: So bee there in mens spirites, and so also in theyr eares. For what Psalme or songe, one mans spirite shall iudge graue and sad, some other shall thinke it pleasaunt. And what one mans eare shall thinke pleasaunt, another shall
iudge it sower and seuere. And therefore in this diuersitie. I leaue it to euery mans spirite as God shall moue hym: and to euery mans eare, as nature shall frame hym. I set thys onely in example, for that it so agreed to my vnder∣standyng inwardly, and to myne eare outwardlye. But such copulations would there be in Psalmes and songes who can attayne to that grace, Omne tulit punctum. &c. which Dauid expressed and obserued, who was a Christi∣an deuine in sprite, a perfecte Poete in hys Merre, and an expert musiciō in ordering of his instruments, and setting of his tunes agreably. ¶Fiue bookes of Psalmes according to the Hebrues. The .1. from the .1. psalme vnto the 41. And they haue in the end, eyther Fiat, Fiat. or els Amen, Alleluya. The .2. from .42. vnto .72. And they haue in the end, eyther Fiat, Fiat. or els Amen, Alleluya. The .3. from .73. vnto .89. And they haue in the end, eyther Fiat, Fiat. or els Amen, Alleluya. The .4. from .90. vnto .106. And they haue in the end, eyther Fiat, Fiat. or els Amen, Alleluya. The .5. from .107. vnto .150. And they haue in the end, eyther Fiat, Fiat. or els Amen, Alleluya.
The nature of the eyght tunes. ̄ 1 The first is méeke: deuout to sée, \ 2 The second sad: in maiesty. \ 3 The third doth rage: and roughly brayth. / 4 The fourth doth fawne: and flattry playth, / 5 The fyfth delight: and laugheth the more, \ 6 The sixt bewayleth: it wéepeth full sore, \ 7 The seuenth tredeth stoute: in froward race, ̄ 8 The eyghte goeth milde: in modest pace. ☞The Tenor of these partes be for the people when they will syng alone, the other parts, put for greater queers, or to suche as will syng or play them priuatelye.
̄ The Meane. MAn blest no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked mēs affayres: And standth no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres But hath his will: in Gods law still: this law to loue aright: And will him vse: on it to muse: to kepe it day and night. The Contra tenor. MAn blest no dout: who walkth not out: in wycked mens affayres: And standth no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres: But hath his will: in Gods law still: this law to loue aright: And will him vse: on it to muse: to kepe it day and night.
Psalme. 1. The first Tune. Tenor. MAn blest no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked mens affayres, And standth no day: in sinners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres. But hath hys will: in Gods law still: this law to loue aryght: And will him vse: on it to muse: to keepe it day and night. Base. MAn blest no dout: who walkth not out: in wicked mens affayres, And standth no day: in synners way: nor sitth in scorners chayres, But hath hys wyll: in Gods law styll: thys law to loue aryght: And will him vse: on it to muse: to keepe it day and night.
\ Psalme. 68. The second Tune. Meane. LEt God aryse: in maiestie: and scatred be his foes: Yea flee they all, hys sight in face: to hym which hatefull goes, As smoke is driuen: and comth to nought: repulse theyr tyranny: At face of fire: as waxe doth melt: gods face the bad mought fly. Contra tenor. LEt God aryse: in maiestie: and scattred be hys foes: Yea flee they all: his sight in face: to him which hatefull goes: As smoke is driuen: and comth to nought: repulse theyr tyranny: At face of fire: as waxe doth melt: gods face the bad mought fly.
Psalme. 68. The second Tune. Tenor. LEt God aryse: in maiestie: and scattred be hys foes: Yea flee they all: hys syght in face: to hym which hatefull goes: As smoke is driuen: and comth to nought: repulse theyr tyranny: At face of fyre: as waxe doth melt: gods face the bad mought fly. Base. LEt God aryse: in maiestie: and scattred be his foes, Yea flee they all: his sight in face, to hym which hatefull goes, As smoke is driuen: and comth to nought: repulse their tyranny, At face of fire: as waxe doth melt: gods face the bad mought fly.
\ Psalme. 2. The third Tune. Meane. WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentils spyght: in fury ragyng stout. why takth in hand: the people fond: vayne thinges to bryng about, The kyngs arise: the lordes deuise: in counsayles met therto: Agaynst the Lord: wyth false accord: agaynst hys Christ they go. Contra tenor. WHy fumeth in syght: the Gentils spyght: in fury raging stout, why takth in hand: the people fond: vayne thinges to bryng about, The kyngs aryse: the Lordes deuyse: in counsayles met therto, Agaynst the Lord: wyth false accord: agaynst hys Christ they go.
The third Tune. Tenor. WHy fumeth in syght: the Gentils spyght: in fury ragyng stout, why takth in hand: the people fond: vayne thinges to bryng about: The kynges aryse: the Lordes deuyse: in counsayles met therto, Agaynst the Lord: wyth false accord: agaynst hys Christ they go. Base. WHy fumeth in sight: the Gentils spight: in fury raging stout, why takth in hand: the people fond: vayne thyngs to bryng about, The kyngs aryse: the Lordes deuyse: in counsayles met therto, Agaynst the Lord: wyth false accord: agaynst hys Christ they go.
\ Psalm. 95. The fourth Tune. Meane. O Come in one, to prayse the lord, & him recount: our stay & health, All harty ioyes, let vs record: to this strong rocke: our Lord of health. His face with prayse, let vs preuent: his factes in sight, let vs denounce, Ioyne we I say: in glad assent: our psalmes & hymnes, let vs pronounce. Contra tenor. O Come in one, to prayse the lord, & him recount, our stay and health, All harty ioyes, let vs record, to this strong rocke, our Lord of health: Hys face wyth prayse: let vs preuent, hys factes in sight, let vs denounce, Ioyne we I say: in glad assent: our psalmes & hymnes, let vs pronounce.
The fourth Tune. Tenor. O Come in one, to praise the lord, & him recount, our stay & helth, All harty ioyes, let vs record, to this strong rocke, our Lord of health, His face wyth prayse, let vs preuent, his factes in sight, let vs denounce, Ioyne we I say, in glad assent, our psalmes and hymnes, let vs pronounce Base. O Come in one, to praise the lord, and him recount, our stay and health All harty ioyes, let vs record, to this strong rocke, our Lord of health, Hys face wyth prayse, let vs preuent, his factes in sight, let vs denounce, Ioyne we I say, in glad assent, our psalmes & hymnes, let vs pronounce.
/ Psalme. 42. The fift Tune. Meane. EUen lyke the hunted hynd: the water brokes desire: Euen thus my soule: that faintie is: To thee would fayne aspire, My soule did thirst to God: to God of lyfe and grace: It sayd euen thus: when shall I come, to see Gods liuely face. Contra tenor. EUen lyke the hunted hynd: the water brokes desire, Euen thus my soule: that faintie is: to thee would fayne aspire: My soule did thirst to God: to God of lyfe and grace: It sayd euen thus: when shall I come: to see Gods liuely face.
The fift Tune. Tenor. EUen lyke the hunted hynde: the water brookes desire: Euen thus my soule: that faintie is, to thee would fayne aspire, My soule did thirst to God: to God of lyfe and grace, It sayd euen thus, when shall I come, to see gods liuely face. Base. EUen lyke the hunted hynde: the water brookes desire, Euen thus my soule: that faintie is: to thee would fayne aspire, My soule did thirst to God: to God of lyfe and grace, It sayd euen thus, when shall I come, to see gods liuely face.
\ Psalme. 5. The sixt Tune. Meane. EXpend O Lord: my plaint of worde: in griefe that I do make, My musing mynd: recount most kynd: geue eare for thyne owne sake, O harke my grone, my cryeng mone, my king, my God thou art, Let me not stray, from thee away: to thee I pray in hart. Contra tenor. EXpend O Lord: my plaint of worde: in griefe that I do make, My musing mynd: recount most kynd: geue eare for thine owne sake, O harke my grone: my crying mone: my kyng, my God thou art, Let me not stray: from thee away: to thee I pray in hart.
The sixt Tune. Tenor. EXpend O Lord: my plaint of worde: in griefe that I do make, My musing mynd: recount most kynde, geue eare for thine owne sake, O harke my grone: my crying mone, my kyng, my God thou art, Let me not stray: from thee away: to thee I pray in hart. Base. EXpend O Lord: my plaint of worde: in griefe that I do make, My musing mynd: recount most kynde: geue eare for thine owne sake, O harke my grone: my crying mone: my kyng, my God thou art, Let me not stray: from thee away: to thee I pray in hart.
/ Psalme. 52. The seuenth Tune. Meane WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout, Gods goodnes yet is nye, all day to me no doubt, Thy tongue to muse all euill, it doth it selfe in vre: As rasor sharpe to spill, all guile it doth procure. Contra tenor WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout, Gods goodnes yet is nye, all day to me no doubt: Thy tonge to muse all euill, it doth it selfe in vre: As rasor sharpe to spill, all guile it doth procure.
Psalme. 52. The seuenth Tune. Tenor. WHy bragst in malice hie. O thou in mischief stout, Gods goodnes yet is nye, all day to me no doubte: Thy tonge to muse all euill, it doth it selfe in vre: As rasor sharpe to spill, all guile it doth procure. Base. WHy bragst in malice hie, O thou in mischief stout, Gods goodnes yet is nye: to me all day no dout, Thy tonge to muse all euill: it doth it selfe in vre: As rasor sharpe to spill, all guile it doth appeare.
̄ Psalme. 67. The eight Tune. Meane GOd graunt wt grace, he vs imbrace: in gentle part: blesse he our hart, With louing face: shyne he in place: his mercies all: on vs to fall: That we thy way: may know al day: while we do saile: this world so fraile Thy healthes reward: is nye declard: as playne as eye: all Gentils spy. Contra tenor. GOd graunt wt grace: he vs imbrace: in gentle part: blesse he our hart, With louing face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on vs to fall. That we thy way: may know al day: while we do saile: this world so fraile Thy healthes reward: is nye declard: as playne as eye: all Gentils spy.
Psalme. 67. The eight Tune. Tenor. GOd graunt wt grace: he vs imbrace, in gentle part, blesse he our hart, with louing face: shine he in place: his mercies all: on vs to fall, That we thy way: may know al day: while we do saile, this world so fraile Thy healthes reward: is nye declard: as playne as eye, all Gentils spy. Base. GOd graunt wt grace: he vs imbrace, in gentle part: blesse he our hart, with louing face: shyne he in place: his mercies all: on vs to fall: That we thy way: may know al day: while we do saile: this world so fraile Thy healthes reward: is nye declard: as plaine as eye: all Gentils spy.
Meane. COme holy ghost eternall God, which doost frō God procede, the father first, and eke the Sonne, one God as we do rede. Contra tenor. COme holy ghost eternall God, which doost from God procede, the father first, and eke the Sonne, one God as we do rede. Tenor. COme holy ghost eternall God, which doost from God procede, the father first, and eke the Sonne, one God as we do rede. Base. COme holy ghost eternall God, which doost from God procede, the father first, and eke the Sonne, one God as we do rede.
The Table, / 65 AL laudes be due to thée / 85 Against thy laude / 92 A ioyfull thyng it is ̄ 103 Aryse my soule. ̄ 119 A right vp man. ̄ 137 At waters sides. ̄ 145 Arise I will. / 43 Ah iudge me God, B. / 40 By silent watch. ̄ 72 Bestow O God. / 86 Bow downe thyne eare. ̄ 101 Both mercy méeke. / 124 But God himselfe. C. \ 136 Confesse and prayse. \   Come holy ghost. D. \ 9 Due thankes with song. E. \ 5 Expend O Lord. ̄ 37 Ensue thou not. ̄ 127 Except the Lord. / 42 Euen like in chase. F. / 59 From all my foes. G \ 20 God graunt he heare. / 34 Geue thankes I will. / 48 Great is the Lord. ̄ 55 Geue eare O God. \ 57 God pity me. ̄ 67 God graunt with grace. / 82 God standth in midst. ̄ 87 God highly loue. ̄ 89 Gods mercies all. / 129 Great griefe I haue. H. \ 12 Helpe Lord so hie. \ 13 How long wilt thou. \ 17 Heare thou the right.   36 Here playne do ye sée. * \ 51 Haue mercy God. / 56 Haue mercy God. \ 57 Haue mercy God. I. ̄ 11 In Lord so great, / 18 I will loue thée. ̄ 31 In thée O Lord. / 34 I will geue thanckes. \ 36 In midst of euil mās hart. \ 39 I full decréed. / 58 If iust your mynd. / 76 In Iury God is known. / 116 I loued haue the Lord. \ 130 In déepe excesse. / 138 I will O Lord. L. ̄ 26 Lord iudge my déede. \ 30 Lord thée all whole. \ 68 Let God arise in maiestie. \ 134 Lo ye all here. ̄   Lord now thou lettest. M. ̄ 1 Man blest. ̄ 22 My God, my God. ̄ 45 My hart breakth out. / 61 My crying heare O God. / 71 My trust O Lord. ̄ 78 My people kynde.
\ 88 My louyng Lord. / 108 My hart O God. / 122 Most glad I was. ̄ 131 My hart proud thinges,     My soule the Lord. N. ̄ 81 Now sing ye ioyfully. ̄ 115 No prayse geue vs. \ 143 Now heare my sute. O. \ 3 O Lord how ill. \ 4 O God so hie. \ 6 O carpe not sowre. \ 7 O Lord in thée. / 8 O Lord our guide. \ 26 O God of trust. ̄ 25 O Lord to thée. \ 28 O Lord I cry. ̄ 32 O blest be they. ̄ 32 O happy they be. \ 38 O Lord to sore. / 43 O God eterne. \ 44 O God so good. / 46 Our hope is God. ̄ 49 O heare ye out. \ 54 O saue me God. / 60 O God thou hatest. / 63 O God to thée. ̄ 64 O heare me Lord, ̄ 70 O God to me. ̄ 73 O good is God to Israell. \ 79 O God fallen in. \ 83 O God our God. / 84 O God of hostes. \ 90 O Lord thou hast, / 94 O God and Lord. / 95 O come in one. ̄ 96 O sing to God. \ 100 O ioye all men. \ 102 O Lord to thée. ̄ 104 O prayse my soule. ̄ 105 O prayse the Lord. / 107 O prayse the Lord. / 109 O God my ioy. ̄ 118 O thanke and laud. ̄ 128 O blest is hée. ̄ 133 O come and sée. / 135 O worship thanke & praise ̄ 139 O God thou hast. / 140 O Lord most good. \ 141 O Lord I haue. \ 146 O thou my soule. / 149 O sing vnto the Lord. / 150 O prayse ye God. /   O God we prayse. ̄   O blest be God. P. / 35 Pleade thou O Lord. \ 117 Prayse duely the Lord. \ 147 Prayse ye the Lord. \ 148 Prayse ye the Lord. R. ̄ 33 Reioyce in God. ̄ 66 Reioyce to God with ioy. / 132 Remember Lord. S. / 62 Shall not my soule. \ 69 Saue me O Lord. ̄ 98 Syng ye all new.
T. \ 14 The foole hath sayd. ̄ 19 The heauens do tell, ̄ 21 The kyng wyth voyce. / 23 The Lord so good. ̄ 24 The earth it is. \ 27 The Lord of myght. ̄ 41 That man is blest. ̄ 47 Together clap ye handes. ̄ 50 The God of Gods. \ 53 The foole hath sayd. / 77 To God to cry. / 80 Thou shepeheard kyng. ̄ 93 The Lord is kyng. ̄ 97 The liuyng Lord. \ 99 The Lord to raigne. \ 106 The Lord with thankes. ̄ 110 The Lord most hie. ̄ 112 That man is blest. ̄ 120 To God when I. ̄ 121 To heauenly hils. \ 123 To thée I lift. / 144 The Lord be blest. V. \ 142 Unto the Lord. W. \ 2 Why fume in sight. \ 10 Why standth so far. ̄ 15 Who Lord shall byde. \ 52 Why boast thy selfe. \ 52 Why bragst in. ̄ 74 Why art so far. \ 75 We do confesse. / 91 Who vnder fence. / 111 With all my hart I will. ̄ 114 When Israell frō Egipt. ̄ 125 Who stickth to God. \ 126 What tyme the Lord. ̄   Who saued will be. Y. ̄ 29 Ye sonnes of God. / 113 Ye seruants childrē meke.
Index. The numbers be as the Hebrewes account them.Vsus & vis Psalmorum in Athana∣so. ̄ 120 AD dominum cum tri. ̄ 25 Ad te domine leuaui \ 28 Ad te domine clamaui. \ 123 Ad te leuani. ̄ 29 Afferte domino. ̄ 78 Attendite popule. ̄ 49 Audite hec omnes. ̄ 1 Beatus vir. ̄ 32 Beati quorum. ̄ 41 Beatus qui intelligit. ̄ 112 Beatus vir qui. ̄ 119 Beati immaculati. ̄ 128 Beati omnes qui. / 34 Benedicam dominum. / 85 Benedixisti. ̄ 103 Benedic anima. 1 ̄ 104 Benedic anima. 2 / 144 Benedictus dominus. / 92 Bonum est confiteri. ̄ 96 Cantate domino. 1 ̄ 98 Cantate domino. 2 / 49 Cantate domino. 3 ̄ 19 Coeli enarrant. \ 9 Confitebor. 1 / 138 Confitebor. 2 / 111 Confitebor. 3 \ 75 Confitebimur. ̄ 105 Confitemini domino. 1 / 106 Confitemini domino. 2 / 107 Confitemini domino. 3 ̄ 118 Confitemini domino. 4 \ 136 Confitemini domino. 5 \ 16 Conserua me.   116 Credidi propter. \ 4 Cum inuocarem. \ 130 De profundis. ̄ 22 Deus deus meus. \ 44 Deus auribus. / 46 Deus noster. ̄ 50 Deus deorum. \ 54 Deus in nomine. / 60 Deus repulisti. / 63 Deus deus meus. / 67 Deus misereatur. ̄ 70 Deus in adiutorium. ̄ 72 Deus iuditium. ̄ 79 Deus venerunt. \ 82 Deus stetit. / 83 Deus quis similis. \ 94 Deus vltionum. / 109 Deus laudem. / 116 Dilexi quoniam. / 18 Diligam te. / 110 Dixit dominus domino. ̄ 14 Dixit insipiens. 1 \ 53 Dixit insipiens. 2 \ 39 Dixi custodiam.
\ 36 Dixit iniustus. \ 3 Domine quid. \ 6 Domine ne in furore. 1 \ 38 Domine ne in furore. 2 \ 7 Domine deus meus. / 8 Domine deus noster. ̄ 15 Domine quis habitabit. ̄ 21 Domine in virtute. \ 88 Domine deus salutis. \ 90 Domine refugium. \ 102 Domine exaudi. ̄ 131 Domine non est exalt. ̄ 139 Domine probasti. \ 141 Domine clamaui. \ 143 Domine exaudi. / 23 Dominus regit me. ̄ 24 Domini est terra. \ 27 Dominus illuminatio. ̄ 93 Dominus regnauit. ̄ 97 Dominus regnauit exul. \ 99 Dominus regnauit iras. \ 134 Ecce nunc benedicite. ̄ 133 Ecce quam bonum. / 59 Eripe me de ini. / 190 Eripe me domine. ̄ 45 Eructauit cor. ̄ 145 Exaltabo te Deus. \ 30 Exaltabo te domine. ̄ 55 Exaudi Deus orationes. / 61 Exaudi Deus depreca. ̄ 64 Exaudi Deus orationes. \ 17 Exaudi deus iustitiam. \ 10 Exaudiat te Dominus. / 40 Expectans expec. ̄ 81 Exultate deo. ̄ 33 Exultate iusti. \ 68 Exurgat Deus. ̄ 87 Fundamenta. / 86 Inclina domine. \ 126 In conuertendo. ̄ 11 In domino confido. ̄ 114 In exitu Israell. ̄ 31 In te domine speraui. / 71 In te domine spe. ne. ̄ 66 Iubilate deo. \ 100 Iubilate domino. / 35 Iudica domine. / 43 Iudica me deus. ̄ 26 Iudica me domine. \ 146 Lauda anima. \ 147 Lauda Hierusalem. \ 113 Laudate pueri. \ 117 Laudate dominum. ̄ 121 Leuaui oculos. / 122 Letatus sum. / 135 Laudate nomen. / 147 Laudate dominum. / 148 Laudate dominū de coel. / 150 Laudate dominus in san. / 48 Magnus dominus. \ 51 Miserere mei. / 56 Miserere mei de. \ 57 Miserere mei deus mise.
̄ 89 Misericordias. ̄ 101 Mīam & iudicium. / 132 Memento domine. ̄ 37 Noli emulari. / 62 Nonne deo. / 76 Notus in Iudea. ̄ 115 Non nobis domine. / 124 Nisi quia dominus. ̄ 127 Nisi dominus. ̄ 47 Omnes gentes. / 108 Paratum cor. \ 2 Quare fremuerunt. / 42 Quemadmodum. \ 52 Quid gloriaris. ̄ 73 Quam bonus Israell. / 80 Qui regis Israel. / 84 Quam dilecta. / 91 Qui habitat. ̄ 125 Qui confidunt. \ 12 Saluum me fac domine. \ 69 Saluum me fac deus. / 58 Si vere vti{que}. / 129 Sepe expugna. ̄ 137 Super flumina. / 65 Te decet deus. \ 5 Verba mea. \ 10 Vt quid domine. \ 13 Vsquequo domine. ̄ 74 Vt quid deus. / 77 Voce mea ad dominum. / 95 Venite exultemus. \ 142 Voce mea ad dominum.
¶Faultes escaped. Letter. Line. Faultes. Reade. D. 4. fa. 2. 16 gratitudum. gratitudinum. 20 introllatori. interpellatori. 21 vim aduersa. aduersariorum. 25 deperta. de parta. 29 conlationem. consolationem. E. 1. fa. 3. 3 dentrum. deutrum. G. 2. fa. 2. 21 ecclesiastices. ecclesiastes. Page.       9 1 v. vij. &c. 15 bore. poore. 17 7 citie. cies. 18 20 adde. ☞ Sela. 20 3 all rouse. he ro. 20 9 all. aye. 32 6 scorndst. scourdst. 44 15 the sutes. thy sutes. 61 22 so. so. 65 7 wyth. which. 99 30 wyth. so. 102 20 ilo. nily. 102 26 weane. weaue. 106 14 clyffe. lyfe. 107 25 and in my. and when I. 117 28 which. who. 122 7 let earth. no earthly thing let. 162 11 thy trusty. the trusty. 172 29 not not. not. 177 63. 64. 178 25 is tryed. it tried. 180 14 wrougt. wrought. Ibidem 25 besiegd. besieged. 188 2 thou know. thou knowest. 198 22 the iustice. thy iustice. 204 3 scourged. scourgd. 208 4 hold still. holdst still. 219   the sixte verse to much. 228 29 them vp. hym vp. 240 19 whole turne. here turne. 86 12 fall one. full out. Ibidem 13 eyes doth. eyes do. Ibidem 15 O Lord yet God. O God yet Lord. 249 26 but if but when 254 19 witherth dry. witherd drieth. 255 13 and as. and eke. 263 15 and hie. and his. 273 8 bright. by rightful do 282 3 he moueth. he moneth. 285 15 when. where. 287 16 so often. so oft to rede. 294 19 them nedes. their nedes.   2 their eth. theare. 296 22 their ships. theare. 298 2 put the nūber 35. 300 4 he say. he sayd. 309 22 when. who. 323 8 strongly. strangely. Ibidem. 17 as wt iust cloke as iust wt cloke Ibidem 19 whom. when. 327 13 confirmitie. conformitie. 331 20 than. then. 347 8 then. them. 352 8 know worthy known worthy 354 7 bid. byde. 356 11 in aye. aye in. 364 18 me not. not me. 377 21 they shame. their shame. 384 8 then. thou. Ibidem 19 all thy. all the. 388 12 to dwell. so well. 401 16 thou nou. thou now. Ibidem 18 that sigh. that sight. 404 21 . 407   correct yt num bers of y• verse. Ibidem euer euen. 408 6 indge. iudge. 409 20 will. wilt. 401 25 my grace. thy grace. 416 12 strayes. stayes. Ibidem 18 stayes. srayes. 423 strange. strunge. 414 5 applied. to all applied.
Imprinted at Lon∣don by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Al∣dersgate beneath S. Martins. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. per Decennium.
