3060 99844698 9533
Frauncis Billerbeg from Constantinople, written to Dauid Chyrtaens of Germanie, S. P. D. WHen at this time I liued at Constantinople, and delibera∣ted with my selfe, of the argu∣ment of an Epistle to bee sent to you  that I should shewe vnto your matter not vnpleasant, if I should sig∣nifie vnto you, somewhat of the Gouernours, which are vn¦der the Turkes Empire: And of such thinges which are doone in Persia: and of other things which I sawe heere, or haue receyued of men of singuler credit worthy of me∣mory. I thought it superfluous, to write vnto you of the Ec∣clesiasticall state amongst these people, when as I doo vn∣derstand by your Oration. yt you haue better intelligence then I, which a Nobleman Communicated with mee: For vnto me it was most acceptable, both for other causes and also forasmuch, as I perswaded euery thing to bee true, which therin is conteyned. It pleaseth mee to begin with the Emperour himselfe, whose name is Amurathes the third, the second sonne of Amurathes Selimus, who is about thyrty yeeres olde. He began his Empire with the murther of fiue young brethren, whome
he strangled. He is off a lowe stature, a great head, grosse A  on  Tur  and leysie, and in a manner neuer moouing them.  awes and chéekes pulst vp and swolne. A long nose tched downe to his mouth. A thinne red beard: pale ted for the most part. The rest of his body leysie and feeble. He hath the faling sicknesse. It is certaine that his spirites are fble and fearefull, for he dareth not goe The great Turke hath the faling sicknesse. on hunting, wi the which he is now and then delighted but very seldome: nor to passe ouer Bosphorus to his Parkes, vnlesse the Sea be very calme. It is reported that he quaketh euery inche of him, whē hée heareth the sounde of Armour and Gunnes, wherevp∣on The Turke feareful and a cowarde. it falleth out, that contrary to the custome of his el∣ders, he committeth his warres to his Deputies. They say, that he is ruled by the commaundement of his mo∣ther and his wife: these béeing corrupted with gyftes and rewardes, procure the Emperors fauour to many. It is said, that hée is contented with one wife, which thing, they rather impute to his imbecillitie, then to hys temperancie. He hath a sonne whose name is Mehemet, Mehemet. the onely inheritour of so many kingdomes: notwith∣standing that he is scarse fourtéene yeeres olde, neuerthe∣lesse it is said that he hath children: which thing I would not haue credited, vnlesse it were most manifest, that hée was begotten when that his father was scarce fourtéene yeeres of age. Amurathes abstaineth from wine, notwithstanding, the Souldiers which serued his Father Selimus, were so The great Turke drin¦king no wine. vsed to wine, that many of them cannot be compelled to abstayne from wine, contrarie to the commaundement of the Lawe maker. This is that Amurathes, and such one he is, that is now worshipped and feared of the most part of the Monarches of the world, who most presumptu¦ously gloryeth in his letters, that he is the onely gouernor of the world. Sians called Bassa, a man excelling bothe in Sians.
courage of minde and comlines of body, is Amurathes Vicegerent, and elected his chéefe Councellor, and named of the Turks, Vezi Asem. He may be called Protoe∣zirms or chéefe Counsellor. Soliman, when hee was young, gaue him his name Sans, which signifyeth fayre  and comely. He is now about 40. yéeres of age, by na∣tion an Hungarian, he neuer fought battell, nor went a warfare, although he was ermed in Gréeke,  There are besides this man Sans, fowre others  . Basle which are of his priie Counsell, of the which, twaine are now heere resident: Misach which signifi  Messias, and Mehemēces, these are bothe by nation ∣ans, neyther of them bthe (for I did inquire) famous in Cheualry or warfare. The other two, new are in the warres against the Pesians, Sinan and Osman, of the  which the one is of Epirus by nation, who is said to bée of a séemely stature, a leaue body, a blacke fae, an Eagles nose or bill, of an angry stomacke, and not to be pacifyed. He subuerted Gulett, and tooke the kingdome of To∣nis from the Spanyardes, and commaunded Peter Porta∣carrerius the President or Captaine of Gulett to be beate to death with Cudgells, neere to the Ile Coregra, to the infamie and dishonour of the Spanish nation. Before this time, he warred in Arabia prosperously. Hee hath not now so prosperous a wind against the Persians. The other called Osman Basla, and he is of Bosnia: He  is now Resident at the broken places called Casp por with an Army: There is greate emulation betweene these twaine for the obtayning of Glory. After Vezri Basse, Beglerbegus of Grecia is had in Beglerbe∣gus of Greece. great honour, he is called Mehemetes, by nation an ∣rian, This man next after the Emperour and hys Vice∣sultanus, hath the chéefest place, and there vppon hath this proude name, (which signifieth the Lorde of Lordes.) The rest of Beglerbegi liue in prouinces appointed to them.
This as the chéefe of them, followeth the Emperours Court, that if there be any thing néedefull to bée doone, he executeth it. He is expart in warfare. His Court is more frequented then the other mens of warre. Next vn∣to him, the Admirall of the Sea is of great authoritye: whose name is Ochalus, by nation a Calabrian, he is Ochialus called of the Turke Captaine Bassa, retayning the Itali∣call word: these Lieutenauntes of the Sea, are called by the Italians, Captaines. This mans condition is as it was before, both homely, base, and serule. This man in a battaile fought at Naupact, or at the Gulfe of Corinth, led the left wing of the Turks Nauie, and then the Algeries were the prosul∣thaine. At the beginning of the battail against Mal∣ta, he repressed the men of warre, which bouldly set vp∣on him, in so much that the Maltamans were put to flight Notwithstanding recouering their strength, they sette vpon him afresh: who, when he sawe his Armie to giue backe and flye, he saued his life by conueying himselfe away with 40. Gallies, when as Andreos Auria a Gen∣ua, Euery Gal∣lie had sixe Ores. pursued after him very slowly: Neuertheles in a short space he repaired his Nauie, and in y• next yéere he repel∣led the violence of our Souldiers, and stayed their enter∣prise at Ploponesus: and the third yeere after that conflict, he and Sinan Bassa tooke Gulett. Two yéeres before this time he assayled with his Na∣uie to Colchis and there subdued the inhabitants about the Riuer Phasis, there he builded a strong Castell in the foresayd Ryuer. In all other points he wrought rather by subtilty, then magnanimity. When he was about 33. Agalami∣zaoram. yeere of age, he was made Lieutenant of the Ianizaro∣rans. Hee was more comely then any of the rest, and of greater humanitie and entertaynment, of a merry and pleasaunt countenaunce, but altogether ignoraunt in marshall affayres, because he was newly aduaunsed of a
meere Courtier, vnto that Lieutenantship. As it is reported, he is about to marie the Emperours daughter, with whom he is in singuler fauour. This mans name is Abraham: to whom the whole au∣thority of the Turks Empire is in a māner committed, all christian mens children and such as are at vnder age, are taken frō their parents, except Ochialie, who was brought into the power of the Turke: hee was condemned to the Gallies: notwithstanding he denied the Christiā faith, and became a Reuolt, and was infected with the superstitions of Mahumet, and by that meanes he was aduansed to such honoures. The warres betweene the Turkish Emperor and the Persians. NOw let vs speake of the bat∣tell against the Persians and of such other matters as I haue heere noted. In the beginning of the Battel, that I may pro∣foundely rippe vp the matter, Mustapha was sent against the Persians, one of the Teziis Basses, a man verye expart in marshall affayres. Hee first inuaded the Georgians of Ibe∣ria, who worshipped Christ after the manner of ye Greekes Georgians. because that they seemed to fauour the Persians and he op∣pressed them in such sorte at vnwares, that they tooke frō them the best part of theyr Prouince and Country, with a Cittie, the name whereof is Tflis, and moreouer layde a yeerely tribute vpon them. Media. Hiell . . Mehe∣metes. From thence hee inuaded Media, at the same time that Hismaell king of the Persians dyed. His brother Me∣hemetes
Hodebendi béeing a louer of peace and tran∣quillity, and who knewe the strength of the Othmans, was desirous to make an ende of that strife, rather by rea¦son and discretion then by warre: and therefore sent his Ambassadors to Mustapha, to conclude a peace, and to take truce: vntill that Ambassadours should bee sent to Amu∣rathes to to conclude a peace. But Mustapha, a man of an vnquiet spirite, and whom fortune fauoured, vtterly re∣iected the mention of any peace. Wherfore the Persi∣ans prepared themselues to warre, to reuenge the newe and olde iniuryes, committed by Othomannus: They mette together at a Cittie called Zerua, by the which Othoman∣nus. Media, cal∣led Zerua. name Media is nowe called, they fought a cruel battel, many men killed on bothe parties. Notwithstanding they departed, not knowing who had the victory, sauing that the Brother of ye king of Tartaria, which nowe raig∣neth at the Méer or Lake, called Mois. This Brother of y• king of Tartares, brought with him 30. thousand hors∣men to ayde the Turkes, according to the couenant made Maeotis is in the hye Tartaria, bordering vpon Persia betwéene them. From thence forth they fought ventu∣rously, and doubtfully who shoulde nquer, vntill that licence was graunted to the persians, to send Ambassa∣dours for peace. And that Mustapha was called home a∣gaine, and an other placed in his stead. The Persians Am¦bassadours, when they came hesher to the Emperours Court to treate of peace, and that they could not agrée, then the Turkes demaunded to haue all Media, but the Persians stoode stoutly therein, and in their owne defence did what they were able to doo, and so returned safe home. Which thing was doone the last yeere about the Moneth of August. Now that they could conclude no peace, they returned to their Armour, and prepared themselues to warre, The Persians euery where spoyled the Countrey, and layd the inan Bassa fieldes wast, they burnt Granges, Villages, and Townes they intercepted all manner of victualls, in so much that
the Turks were in great distresse, Sinan Bassa, who suc∣céeded Mustapha, being their generall. The Turkes were so plagued with hunger and pesti∣lence, and specially by the plague, that they were com∣pelled to leaue of their procéedinges, and deuide theyr Armie. At this present Sinan Bassa, gathereth his Armie againe, and is before this Cittie, which is called Ezerū: Ezerum This Cittie standeth vpon Euphrates. Heere he receiued ayde about the beginning of April. At the same season, Armour, Artillery, and money, were brought by Pontus Euoxinus, to the Citty Trapezum, that they might be Trapezus. It deuideth Europe frō Asia. sent vnto the Armie. The other Armie of the Turkes are resident at the Broken wayes, called Caspiae portae, Osman Bassa being their Leiuetenante, the which vnles he bee defended by the benefit of the place: and had receiued ayde from the Tarters, he shoulde haue beene in great distresse. The places betweene the Armies are so wasted and spoyled, that neither of them for want of victuall can helpe the other. It is reported that the Persians, would gladly haue peace: for hether to the spoyle hath béene in their prouinces or Countries, for they in especiall laid waste theyr owne Countrey and Territories: that thereby they might repell their enemies. It appeareth also, that it repented the Turks of the beginning of that war. To omitte other thinges Beglerbegus came at that time from the Cittie Ezerū where hee was Liuetenant, Beglerbeg and had lost his head, because he was prouoker and pro∣mouter, of that infortunate warre, vnlesse that he had giuen to the wife and mother of the Emperour, two thousand Duckets to speak for him: whose pardon they obteyned of this condition that he shoulde bring into the Emperours Treasury euery yéere 2000. Duckets, héere vpon it is manifest, that both Turks and Persians, were desirous of peace: neuerthelesse neither of them woulde seeme to giue place to the other.
Sinan Bassa is looked for heere euery day, whom they say shall haue commission from the Emperor to conclude peace with the Persians: Some say that hee was called backe againe, as he was in his iourney towards Constan¦tinople, because that the Persians with whom hee had made truce, had broken theyr promise: and because that they made a great slaughter of the Tukes, besides the Sea called Mare hyrcanum: who thought nothing lesse then that the Persians would haue transgressed the truce which they made with Sinan Bassa: ut I dare not as∣firme these of a trueth, because it is as yet vncertaine. The cause why these two people, of one iuing, and of one superstition doo fight so cruelly, one with the other, is this, (for so they report.) The Turks accuse the Per∣sians, that they haue neglected to send Ambassadors and rewardes to Amuratha, the lawfull successor of Soliman nus and Selimus: according to that couenaunt and com∣position which was made before time, betwéene Soliman nus the Emperour of the Turkes, and Thamus the king of the Persians. Amurathes interpreted, that intermis∣sion of sending rewards and Ambassadors, as a contremp tious signe of enmity, when it was neuer neglected in the time of Thamus: and for this cause hee aded his enemies countrey: neither would the Persian requyre peace, and therefore it came to hand strypes. It is certainly beléeued, that if Mustapha whom I said before, was called from the Armie, had remained still in Mustapha the Armie, the Turks should not haue come into that di∣stresse, in the which they are nowe at this day, because he was most expart in marshal affayres, and had the best knowledge of those Countryes. He was therefore called home to Constantinople, because hee was accused that hee did not admitt the Ambassadors of the Persians, sent to intreate for peace: and that hee sold all the offices in his Campe for money. Mustapha for his good seruice was
vncourteously rewarded: wherfore he fearing the threat∣nings and displeasures of the Emperour, dranke pysn Mustapha. and so dispatched himselfe, béeing iust foure score yeeres of age. This is that Mustapha, who tooke Cipres from the Ʋenitians in our daies and killed Bragatinus, the Go∣uernour of Famagusta, pulled the skinne off his bodye, which thing he did contrary to his promise. He also, what time as, Beglerbegus was in Egypt, pacified the commo∣tions and tumults, which were in Syria. Hée subdued the Arabians which had rebelled. Hee ouercame in Battail Baiazetes, the sonne of Solyman∣nus, who though his Father was liuing, made an insur∣rection against his Brother Selymus, and thus he perse∣cuted him, by the commaundement of the Emperour, on such sort, that the wretched caytife, lost bothe his life and the kingdome. And thus much we haue heard of Musta∣pha. Now I will declare bréefely what I haue hearde of other matters woorthy of remembrance. The 12. of the Callendes of Iune, when the Admirall of the Sea departed hence: whose name was Ochiali▪ he went into Africa, that he might stay and represse the seditions which were in the kingdome of Tunes. The Moores, after they had receiued their king, who was the lawfull inheritour, by the meanes of the inhabitants of Malta: and who had béene hetherto detayned in Niapo∣lis, and in my time he reiected the superstition of Mahu∣met, and imbrased the religion of Christ. The Moores (I say) for the most part, rebelled against the Turkes. Af∣ter that hee had pacified the sturres and vproares of the kingdome of Tunes, it was in his commission that he shold inuade the kingdome of Fees, the which thing if he bring to passe, as he is purposed, it seemeth that the Christian kingdomes shalbe inuironed on euery side, with the Tur∣kish Armies. This is a matter more detestable, that the Princes of the christian common wealth, are the causes
of so much misery: whiles some of them be in such seen∣ritie, and so carelesse, that they lye as it were buryed in pleasures and idlenes: othersome are occupyed in Ciuill wars, vnto their vtter destruction and confusion, neither doo they consider what the common enemie is aboute, or what should be doone or prepared against him. Of the peace concluded betweene King Phillip and the Turke. ABout the Callends of May Iohn Marilian of Mellan, af∣ter Truce be∣tweene the Spanyardes and the Turkes. he had obtayned héere of the Emperour, truce for three yeeres, departed hence to Ve∣nis, and from thence to goe in∣to Spayne. He was héere three yéeres intreating for peace, and nowe at the length obtayned it, but on such sorte, that neither Christian nor Turke, thinketh it to continue: for both of them applyed them∣selues to the time, rather then that eyther of them desi∣red any freendshippe of the other. For the Turkes are occupyed in the warres against the Persians: and the Spanyardes in Ciuill warres. Moreouer, the conditions of the truce are such, that whethersoeuer of them liketh, may breake of without impeachment. It is to be lamented, that this most mighty king, is King Phillip of force to resist the violence of the Turke, and will not
which thing he will not doo, because he may more safely inuade his owne people: and so suffer the great Turke to rage at his pleasure, and notwithstanding, intreated for peace, and obteyned an vncertaine truce, doubtfull and not to be trusted. Bothe the publike and priuate state of Christians, be∣ginneth so to fainte, and to decline, and as it were to were so sore sicke, that it is a manifest signe and argu∣ment, of some notable and suddaine mutation & chaunge. Many Christians, euery day séeing the prosperous suc∣cesse of the Turkes, and hauing their felicity and procee∣ding in admiration: and contrariwyse, perseuing the miseryes of the Christians, beginne to reuolts: and re∣ceiue the irreligious impietie of Mahumet, denying Mahumet Christes Religion. Among whom there were of late, three Italian Fryers or Munckes, of the which, two of them beeing apprehen∣ded, Christians denying their faith by the fraude and malicious deuises of the Spany∣ardes, and Italians, dyed myserably. The thyrd, for as much as he was an expert, famous, and eloquent Prea∣cher, he gaue himselfe ouer to the blasphemies of Mahu∣met, and became a Turke. I omitte these thinges, be∣cause I knowe that they are gréeuous vnto you, and la∣mentable, vnto whom I wish bothe eternall and tem∣porall felicity. Let thys be in steade of a conclusion.
Certaine other newes of the warres betweene the Turkes & the Persians, dated the 9. of Iuly follow∣ing, after the former Letters. SInan Basse, (of whome wee made mention before) retur∣ned Sinan Basse out of the Campe, which was against the persians, to Constantinople, the 6. day of August, as he was returning, there mette him at Choalcedon A Cittie in Asia against Constan∣tinople. foure Gallies, with principall Captaines, called Baslaes. The next day after his returne, he declared the conclu∣sion of peace, betwéene the Turkes and the Persians, and truce for one yéere, with the singuler contentment of the Emperour. The same Sinan Basse, brought with him to Constantinople, tenne of the chéefe of the Georgians, as pledges, least that they should inline at any time to the Persians, and alwaies heereafter be subiectes to ye Turks. The Ambassadour of the former king of Fees, was rea∣dy euerie day to depart, and very well content, that the Turke was about to call home againe Ochialus, who was sent to ayde the newe king: after that he vnderstood the newe King of Fees, to haue yéelded vp to the King of Spaine, the Hauen called Larcaca, ouer against the Cittie Arzilla, the which Hauen is now kept, and defended with a garrison of 600. Souldiers. There were Letters sent to Venis from Constantinople, the 19. of August, and deliuered the 15 of September, that there was truce taken betweene the Persians and the Turkes. There were Letters written from Constantinople, the
13. of Nouember, that there was a most noble and nota∣ble Ambassage of the king of Persia, in the way to Con∣stantinople, and almoste there: which signifieth vnto the Turke, that if he would restore the Cittie Zerua, and all Media, according to the composition made with Sinan Bassa, that then they woulde returne, otherwise they woulde proceede. They looked daily for the returne of Ochialus from Fees The 9. day of Marche is appointed for the circumcision of the Turkes sonne. It is concluded at Constantinople, with the Ambassa∣dours of the king of Transyluania, that he should adde to the olde tribute or pension, foure thousande Ducketes more. Of the Tarters, bordering vppon the Emperour of Muscouia. THe Region where the Cra∣mes dwell, enuironeth on the Southside, the kingdome of Mosche. The King of these Muscouia. Tarters, is the vassaile of the Tarters tri∣butaries to the Turke Turkish Emperour, and paieth Tribute to him. Hee when he prepareth him∣selfe to warre, cannot make of fighting Souldiers méete for those affaires aboue 40000. in hys Armie. There lyeth a wildernes very large of the Circassians, betwéene the lymmettes and borders, of this king of Tar∣taria, and of the Empire of Muscouia, Sauage, and vntylled, voyde of men, without buildings or woodes, there appeareth nothing in it, saue onely the earth, grasse,
and the beauty of the Heauens. Tanaiis it deuideth Asia, from Europe, & runneth through this wylde wildernes. Tarters Casanenses From these superior Tarters  Creaes, vntill the borders of Moscouia, an hu forty and tenne Ger∣maine myles, where you mle ouer Tanaiis, and Occam, and many other le Ryuers. On the Eastside, border the Tarters, Casanenses, called Astracan, whom the Emperour of Moscho, partly by violence, partly by fame meanes, haue subdued, and made them subiect to . Duke of Muscouia false of his promise. Russians and Tarters subdued. They did inhabiteyr Country or Prouince quiet∣lye certaine yeeres nioying the Preuilegies of the great Duke, who is yet a liue: vntill that the greate Duke, broake his promise, as hee was wont to doo, and conueying them other where, by little and little sette Deputies ouer them. Notwithstanding in the former tyrannie, the Russians, with the Tarters, were rooted vppe, in so much, that in 50. or 60. Myles, there are nei∣ther men, nor any buildings or houses. Beyond Casan, which standeth on the otherside of Vnol∣got, about 500. Myles from Moscha dwell the Tarters, called Nagii, of whom Tamerlen had his beginning as the Turkes reporte. Tamerlen a Scythian, inuaded Asia, and killed 200000 Turkes, in the yéere of Christ 1345. These were once most mighty, but were destroyed with the like tyranny that the Ruscians were. The cause of theyr vtter destructiō, rose with this occasi∣on. For as much as they had no certaine Rulers: whom they ought to haue obeyed, they haue no standing mansi∣ons or houses, neither any vse of mony, of Corne, or Salt. They haue Sheepe and Heards, Camells and Horsses. The Nobilitie and Gentlemen of that Country, vse theyr Mothers naturall tongue, they are called in Russia Boyaren, with vs Noblemen. They wauer abroade hether & thether, with their Cat∣tel,
without any certaine mansiō places, neither can they remaine aboue thrée dayes in a place, for lacke of pasture. Theyr habitation and magnificencie, consisteth in their Chariots, which haue dyuers Celles, or diuers places or Chambers: one for theyr Wiues, another for theyr Husbandes, and the third for theyr houshold stuffe, and to certaine lowsie skinnes or ragges. In the arse of they Cartes, hang two great Lether Bottels, wherein they put Camels milke, Mares milke Cowes Milke, and Ewes Mylk, hand-ouer-head altoge∣ther, this they swallow vp greedily vntil they be drunk. They kil very seldome any Camells, Horsses, Oren or Sheepe, vnlesse that they bee diseased, they boyle and seeithe the fleshe of such Cattell, as be sicke, or as dye without kylling: and they deuoure it without eyther Breade or salte. The Nobelest men of them, eate vppe the pottage: as for their Seruaunts, they gather the Vrine of Camelles and Horsses, and of other Cattell, which they account as very daintie. If they lacke this, they must be contented with Fennish and Moorish water. Whosoeuer is the Mursi. strongest and mightiest among ye Mursians, hée killeth the weaker scotfrée without any punishment, & taketh away al that he hath, and for this acte he is highly commended. They haue neither maiestrates, lawes nor iudgments. In the yéere of Christ 1563. ther was a Mursian, with one eye, whose name was Ismaell, a notable Nigromancer. They are meruailously delighted with that arte, the cunninger that a man is in that Arte, the more is his estimation. The sayd Mursa brought to passe with in∣chauntments, that he killed all the reste of the Mursians, with tempestes and Thunderboltes, whom he could not otherwise ouercome. When he had killed certaine thousands by this meanes, he supposed, that the rest which was left aliue, durst not
rebell: which thing befell to him prosperously. Neuer∣thelesse, after his death, by the same meanes that he en∣treated others, by the selfe same his children were de∣stroyed. These be those Tarters, which being driuen by penury, These Tar∣ters serue the Empe∣rour of Muscouia. and want of ictualles, doo serue the great Duke of Mos∣couia, with fifteene thousand men, and no more inuaded of late Lauonia. Notwithstanding, they béeing offended with the Em∣perour of Moscho, haue coupled themselues with the Creames, called also Tarters, who in the expedition or The Cittie Moscho burnt 1571 setting foorth, and voyage of the Tarters, in the yéere of our Lorde 1571. ayded the Creames: at what time, the Cittie of Moscho was set on fire and burnt.
¶ The true discription of the mag∣nificall Tryumphes and Pastimes, re∣presented at Constantinople, at the solemnizing of the Circumcision of the Soldan Mauhmet, the sonne of Amurath, the thyrd of that name, in the yeere of our Lorde God 1582. in the Monethes of of Maie and Iune. T. H. IN the yeere of our Lord and Sauiour. 1582. the Soldan Amurathe, Emperor of Turkie, séeing his affayres to be in euyll order, percey∣uing also the contrarietie of affections in his Subiectes, dyd now determine with him∣selfe to winne the good will, and to be better beloued, and more estéemed of his then before, and also to be more redoubted, and had in grea∣ter estimation amongst Straungers, and foreine Nati∣ons and Countries then euer, thought it necessarie and very requisite, to make a great solemnitie in the Circum∣cising of Soldan Mahumet his Sonne: and for the better performing of his purposed determination, dyd summon together the greatest part of all Christian Princes, to the ende that this Feast might be solemnized, as it were be∣fore the eyes of the whole world: And in déede, the Am∣bassadours of many Christian Princes, and Mahumets, were sent vnto Constantinople, that is to saye, the Ambas∣sadour
of the Emperor of Fraunce, of Polognie, of Venice, of Persia, of Fees, and of Tartaria, of Transiluania, and of Moldauia, with many other Princes. Now because this pompeous Triumphe (the newes whereof hath runne through diuers places) ought to be solempnized, and showne before so many people, of so many and sundrie Nations, with what apparell, with what expences, and how magnifically doo you thinke was it begunne and en∣ded. Now to declare vnto you, the place wherein sundrie sortes of Playes and Pastimes were showne, it was meruailous great and large, wherein was erected great Theaters and Scaffolds of woodde, distinguished and se∣perated into diuers parts, as if they were Chambers ap∣pointed for euerie Ambassador, places as well to banquet in, as also for euerie Ambassador, places as well to banquet in, as also for to beholde the Plaies and Pastimes. Amu∣rathe, was in the most fayre and ritchest place of all the rest, from whence he might through lattisses, or grates, sée euerie one, without being séene of any one. Behinde him was his Mother, his Wife, and his Sister: and on the one side of him was Sinan Bassa, his Lieuetenant generall, then the rest of his Earles and noble men, on the other side was the Ambassadors of the aforesayde Kings and Princes. In the middest of all these Theaters there was a fayre Tyltyard, all open and discouerd, eigh∣téene hundred paces long, and twelue hundred paces broade, verie finelie paued: and in the same there was two most excellent and auncient Pyramidesses, the one of marble fowre square, verie cunninglie made, and the foote of it to vpholde this Pyramides, there was fowre great and mighty Pillers, fowre square, and round at the toppe, the inscription whereof dooth shewe, that the Em∣peror Theodosia, dyd cause the same to be erected in that place: the other was of stone cunningly erected, with∣out any kinde of simonde or morter, and this was made
by the Emperor Constantine, and néere vnto these Pyra∣mides, there were certaine péeces of woodde, set vp verie high, so that they did appeare much more higher then the Pyramides, these péeces of wood had betwixt them, rea∣ching from the one to the other, engines made of core, composed in manner of a Tabernacle, to the which was tyed an infinite number of Lampes, verie splendisaunt, moste dexteriouslie handled, which cast a great lyght throughout all the place. There was also a wheele, much lyke vnto Myll whéele, the which turned conti∣nuallie of it selfe. There were also fiue Images, in fourme and fashion lyke vnto great pyllers, verie high made, all of waxe, and paynted with diuers collours, verie splendisaunt, and shyning brightlie, because of the golde wherewithall they were garnished: to be short, all thinges were verie methodically and sumptuously set foorth. Nowe the daye of Circumcizion approching, which was the eightéene of Maie, in the yéere aforesayde, Amu∣rathe and his Sonne, accompanied with Dukes and Earles, and many other Officers, together with many thousands of people martched foorth, with great tryumph out of his Castle, dyrectlie vnto the place appointed, for these Playes and pastimes: and as they discended from horseback, there was showne vnto them in the base Court of the Castle, thrée hundred straunge Beastes, made all of Sugar, verie diuerselie disposed and ingeniously in∣uented. That doone, the Sonne of Amurathe follo∣wed with great and more brauer troope of men then be∣fore, went towardes his Mother: for it is the custome of the Turkes, in the Cyrcumcizing of the Sonne of theyr Soldan or Seigniour, that this Sonne before his Cyrcumcizion, must goe and giue the Dirnear adieu, and last farewell vnto his Mother, whome he séeth no more: after that, he being now arriued at his Mothers Pallace,
leauing all his trayne apart, he went vnto her reuerent∣ly dooing his duetie, remayned with her alone the space of two howres: after long conference, he humbly tooke his leaue and departed from her, dyrectly vnto the place of pastimes, the manner whereof, I wyll declare vnto you, as héereafter followeth. THe cheefest place of the base Court of Amurathe, was finely paued, and garnished round about with Tapi∣stie, and Tyssue, and sparckled with Golde and Syluer: In the middle thereof, went the fiue Pillers and Ima∣ges aboue mentioned, layde, and loaden within the Cha∣riots. Now as Amurathe passed round about this base Court, with an Army of men, beholde the Chariottes, began of themselues to runne round about, both backe∣ward and foreward, in such sort, that for the tyme, of the great crie, and shoote of all the people with ioye, of clap∣ping of handes, with leaping, dauncing, and with Ta∣bours, and Trumpettes sounding, it raysed such a num∣ber, that all the whole Cittie dyd sounde thereof: euerie man now might well knowe, what heapes, and compa∣nies of all sortes of Nations, there were then in Constan∣tinople: but amongst so great a multytude, there were found fiftéene Turkishe souldiors, whereof some of them bare Speares & Iauelins, other some Kniues, which they had made fast vnder their sides, and in their hands: other∣some had Helmets or Headpéeces, so harde set vpon theyr heades, that the blood ranne downe vpon theyr foreheads, and they all bléeding, with such sores, woundes, and hurtes, to shew that they were ready prest, to spend, and shedde theyr blood, euen to the last droppe, for the mainte∣naunce of theyr Princes life. His Sonne being now so recomforted (as it were) in his heart, with the great reioysing and loyaltie shewed him of all the people, he caused to be cast out, whole great handfulles of money, and he himselfe cast it out, in great
aboundaunce: and afterward, with all haste and spéede, he came to finde out his Father: but as for his Mother, she caused the verie same day a Feast to be made ready, at the commaundement of her Husband, vnto the which there were bydden all the women, and the daughters of the Lordes, Seigniors, and Gentlemen of the Court: it were, and would be too tedious to set downe, and describe the preparation, and great royaltie which was priuilie made at that Feast, where there was not one man a∣mong them all: yea, and one may presume, that it was verie sumptuous and costlie, when daye by daye they car∣ried a thousand dishes of daintie meates, and as many fine sugred Marchpanes into the Hal, where all these wo∣men were. Furthermore, Amurathe himselfe, sent them a gyfte, and present of fiue hundred Pillors of Sugar, ve∣rie artificially wrought: and this solemne banquet lasted, and continued seuen whole dayes together: and at the ende thereof, the Mother, the Wife, and the Syster of Amurathe, together with all the women of theyr compa∣ny, went to sée the sportes and playes. I wyll now in order shew you the Feast of Amurathe, the place, the guests, and the time, how long it lasted: but you must vnderstand, this was not made in one onely place, nor that the guests dyd banquet together in compa∣ny one with another, as Christian people vse, & accusteme to doo: for, as for Amurathe himselfe, he dined alone in his braue banquetting house, as in a Cage, accompanied onely with his Eunuches, and such as were instruments, and ministers to his ordinary pleasures: the company of women had theyr banquet apart from him, as is afore∣sayde: The Lordes and Seigniors of the Cittie, were se∣perated in theyr braue banquetting house, and the Kings, and Princes, Ambassadors in them. Moreouer, Amu∣rathe mynding to blowe abroade his lyberalitie, did feast all theyr Officers within the Tentes, and Tabernacles
dressed, and made ready in the Iousting parke, and after this manner he vsed, and entreated them. viz. The fyrst day the chchéefe Gentlemen were inuited, and bidden: the next day following, were bidden theyr Officers: then af∣ter them the trauailers, or the aduenturers in the warre: and the Lords of the Court alwayes kept company with the Gentlemen: If you now aske me, what, and how ma∣ny sortes of meates there were then serued at this Feast: there was no other thing at all, but Hennes, and Mutton, with some porredge, & boyled broath, and such lyke things set vpon the table: but there you should not sée, Venison, Wildfowle, nor any kinde of Fishe, whatsoeuer, nor no dainty nor licquorishe meate, all simply, and homely dres∣sed, if a man should compare them with ours héere, and yet neuerthelesse, all the guestes were well content with their fare, but they were euyl serued with their drinke, for they were serued with no other, but water & sugar: They be such people, as openly before any body, they abstaine al∣together from drinking of wine: but among themselues priuily, all the wine in the world will not satisfie, nor suf∣fice them, such gluttons, & licquorish people they are: and thus doo they feast themselues twise euery day. And to∣ward the euening, they bring foorth before the people (so desyrous to sée the Triumphes, and magnificensies, which passe day by day, to behold) into the same Park aforesayd, & being set downe together there vpon rushes, they bring foorth (I say) gréene chéese, bread, broath, and mutton, in a thousand platters, and dishes euery day: and as soone as the meate is brought, the Tabers, & Trumpets sound out, at the first sound wherof, the people comes rūning to this kytchin, fighting and scambling for theyr supper, and for theyr meate, as earnestly as if it were to run to make an assault: so that one snatcheth on one side, and another on the other side, and that as one hath caught & gotten, ano∣ther is ready to plucke and teare againe from him: and to
be short, you should sée them run so on heapes after  victuals, as if they were dogs halfe starued to death: yea, and a man might well call this a feast for dogs, for there was nothing at all brought them to drinke. The meates being taken away, Amurathe cast downe from his Scaf∣folds, of golde & syluer by handfuls, with Goblets of gold and siluer, very cunningly wrought and made with pée∣ces of golde, and diuers sorts of money: behold now what a solemne feast this was. Now followeth it, to speake of the playes, sports, and pa∣stimes, the which I wil declare vnto you in thrée articles, how they were represented, & shewed at thrée sūdry times. The one sort thereof were called forenoone sports: another were called afternoone sports: and then the last of all mid∣night sportes. The inhabitants, and Artificers of Constan∣tinople, those forenoone sportes with all theyr royall and braue attyre. The souldiors and men of warre, the labou∣rers, the minstrels, the leapers, and dauncers, the inglers, and such lyke, did employ, and busie themselues about the afternoone sports. The midnight sports were passed away with burning of Fortresses, Holdes, Horsses, Elephantes, and other creatures made by arte. But let vs now consi∣der the forenoone sportes, the beginning whereof, were meruailous and pleasaunt: for presently after the dinner which they had giuen to Amurathe, and to all his guests, soone after the Sun was vp, behold a great troupe & com∣pany, of more then a thousand of the chéefe and principall Merchants of Constantinople, walking in braue apparell, with Ensignes & Tabors: the Turks martched first along, & then the Christians: the Iewes were more sumptuously apparelled then all the rest, made theyr back warde: And before all this goodly company, went all the honourable, graue Syres, cloathed according to the dignity, and woor∣thinesse of theyr ages, bearing with them, ritch pre∣sentes, and gyftes of golde, and syluer: then followed
them, men of lustie age, carrying also in theyr handes, other such lyke presents, and they marched on all armed. After them came all the young youthes decked, and trim∣med vp in wenches apparell, with gownes, iewelles, and bracelets, and all other precious ornaments, and tyrings, the quiuer vpon theyr shoulder, the bowe in the left hand, and a crooked Foarde in the right: These were followed of a company of pretie fayre lyttle chyldren, bearing of small réedes, or Canes lyke vnto Dartes, and braunches of Palme trées, of Nosegayes, or Pōmanders, of Saffron in golden cloaues, all in high Hattes of the Turkes fashi∣on, cloathed in cloath of golde, with garmentes of embro∣derie: and long large gownes, as ritch, and fayre as pos∣sible might be. After all those, there came thyrtie men, drawing vpon a Chariot of eight whéeles, a shop of eight cubites long, and six broade, beset all within, with starres of golde full of Tapistry, and precious costly cloathes: all this company hauing made thrée towres by the afore sayd Parke, at the length arested, and stayd in good order, euen in the middest thereof, ouer against Amurathe: and then you would haue sayd, that the ritches, not only of Constan∣tinople, but also of all the whole world, had béene brought into that Parke, for there should you haue séene such pre∣cious stones, such pearle, such golde, such purple, and such thinges of value, that one would pryse, and prayse them farre aboue both gold and pearle. Now as all this great company of Merchauntes were there resting themselues: one old man began, & so all the rest folowed with one cōmon voice, to crie as loud as they could: God graunt the Emperor lyfe, with all prosperitie & felicitie. And after this salutation, some of the old aged sort, dyd guide and conduct the Chariot, wherein the shop was, and brought theyr gifts and presents, vnto the house of Amurathe, which on his owne behalfe, had also besto∣wed giftes, & presents vpon them: but because I saw but
a lyttle, it maye be thought that the one gaue not againe, so much vnto a great many, as the great many dyd: and now it is come into my remembraunce, what the Poet sayth: That such is the myserie of this life, that those as haue but little, must yet beare and carie that themselues, vnto the huge high heape of ritches. Euen so, Amurathe making a shewe to be lyberall towards the people, payed with a fewe small trifling gyftes, the great ritches, which were offered him at this solemne Feast: Marke nowe I pray you, how one thing followes after another: for he then hauing both taken and giuen, the Merchaunts retur∣ned with them, as if they had béene parted, and gone a∣way quite. The next daye after, Sinan Bassa gaue the pastime of two blockhouses, in the one wherof was a bande of Chri∣stians, and in the other a bande of Turkes: these Castles or blockhouses, were couered all ouer with thicke paper, and strengthened about with towers: he tooke with him thrée score horsemen, which put themselues in two bands, and fought for those Castles, but the victorie styll went on the Turkes side: It was a leane, and childishe astime, in the presence of so notable a Seignior, to sée thée Lieuete∣naunt generall of all Turkie, make sportes and pastimes of chyldren, with his principall and chéefe Captaines: all the beholders thereof stoode a watching, to sée some great royaltie come from that Bassa, but they were deceyued of theyr expectation héerein. Well, let vs leaue off, and pretermitte this a thing so much to be laughed at, and let vs consider of other thinges and sightes, then, and there séene: and first of those of the Admirall, who brought into the Parke, or Tiltyarde, a Fortresse made of boordes, and planted within an Iland of paper, encompassed with sixe Galleies and Foystes, the which was called Cypresse. He beginneth straight waye to beate downe this For∣tresse with the Cannon shotte, which were within the
Galleies: then he caused to giue it an assault, and so car∣ried it away: this loe, was the true showe and represen∣tation of the taking of Cypres: and in this assault you should haue heard the Turkes bellowe and crie, so highe, and hideouslie, that euerie one was astonied, and at his wittes ende. Then after that, all the handy craftes men, and Artifi∣cers of Constantinople, being prepared for the nance, and stryuing who among them all should offer and giue vnto the Turke, the best and ritchest present and gifte, came to make a showe in the Parke, without kéeping any order at all, but all in one daye, and as it best lyked euerie one of them. The fyrst bande and company, was the Mahume∣meticall Priestes, bearing Bookes in theyr handes, but chéefelie and aboue all, the Lawe of Mahomette, written in fayre great Letters: theyr Musti, (which is in Tur∣kie, as the Pope is in all Europe,) was set in a high Chayre, and carried vppon a Camell: at euerie steppe, he turned, and looked ouer the leaues of his Booke, fayning as though he had searched, and sought for some great secrete matter: then hauing giuen his blessing vnto Amurathe, he was ledde into the Princelie house, to offer vppe his presentes? which doone, he returned a∣gaine with his Priestes and Preachers. You should haue then séene (which I cannot tell you but with great gréefe, and wéeping eyes) that great Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, followed of his Cleargie, hauing the Pa∣triarchall Robe (which is in manner of a Ceape) tray∣ning vppon the grounde, and all of blacke, the which hee offered vnto the enimie of the Christians, with a great summe of Golde, within a vessell of Syluer: and then of all his, and of his sorte, he was saluted with a loude voice: To saye the trueth, it was a syght most lamentable, at the beholding whereof, a man might
well alledge the auncient crie, and complaine of Hellas, Alas: At the which extremitie, the discorde thereof, hath raunged ouer, and destroyed a number of meste myserable Cittizens: he which hytherto, and héeretofore hath looked to haue all at commaunde, and himselfe to be subiect, nor vnderling vnto none, beholde, into what pouertie, beastlie thraldome, and myserie he is now fallen and come. After him, dyd martche along the Patriarche of Ar∣menia, dooing euen as the other dyd. Then came the Artificers, bringing theyr Shoppes vppon Chari∣ottes, and working of theyr Occupations, euen in the presence of Amurathe, the which he marked as dilly∣gentlie, as if he meant to haue learned some thing of them. I doo héere set thée downe (gentle Reader) the particu∣lers, although it hath béene a thing verie greeuous vn∣to mine eyes to beholde and sée, and to my hande to write, being meruaylous wearie, with those so long pastimes: yet if thou hast tyme and leysure, to reade, and peruse the same, they will be vnto thée, but as playes, sportes, and recreations. Fyrst of all, then came the Goldsmythes, carrying diuerse peeces of workemanshippe of Golde, and of Syluer gylded, verie ritchlie, and artificially wrought, as Cuppes, Goblettes, Platters, Kniues, Penkniues, and such lyke other thing: they were in number about an hundreth, bothe olde, myddle age, young men, and chyldren, all most sumptuouslie apparrelled. After them was drawne vpon a Chariotte with sixe whéeles, theyr shoppe, glystering, and shyning round about on all sides, by reason of the vesselles of Golde and Siluer that were therein. After them you should haue séen a great number of Ora∣pers,
Taylers, Smithes, Masons, Carpenters, then of meat dressers, which dressed and made ready, diuers sorts of meats, and gaue them away fréelie to all thè people, which accomponied them: the Butchers martched also in order with theyr shambles, and butcherie well furnished with fleshe, and with trypes: then came the Cookes with their kitchen, and cookerie: and after them the Fishmon∣gers, with diuers good made ready dishes of fishe: then the Victuallers, bearing diuers kindes of meates, and of wines made of water, and of cherries in great vesselles, whereof they gaue to as many as would drinke: after them came the Bakers, the Potters, and the Ioyners, which presented and offered vnto Amurathe, a gylded table, and besette with diuers sortes of verie braue, and fine stones: then the Grocers, and Appoticaries, bea∣ring with them saffron, incense, synomond, India spyces, and other such like spyces: then the Glassemakers, which made theyr vesselles of glasse, in the sight, and presence of all men: then the Embroyderers, going in gownes, and cloakes of cloath of golde: then Dyers of all sortes of cloathes of all sortes, and collours: the Veluet men, the Taffyta men, the Parchment lace makers, the Cutlers, the Kniuemakers, the Sadlers, the Spurriers, the Ful∣lers, the Tanners, the Curriers, the Chaundlers, all these hauing theyr place according to theyr degrées, and euerie thing in perticular. Yet must I not héere forgette the noblest sorte of all Artificers, which are the Labourers, who with the plough, and twelue great Dren, laboured the earth in that Parke, to the great benefite, and good of all those, which were assystaunt, and by at this pastime. Neither must I with silence pretermit, and passe ouer, the Fishermen with theyr nettes, and all otheyr fishing tooles and instrumentes, being in a lyttle small Cocke∣boate, from which they fished, the little small fishes: After
all these came the Barbars, which dressed and cut off the beardes and heaires, one of another: the  Fea∣ther makers, the Fealt makers after the she fashi∣on, Hatte makers, Bonnet, or shadowe makers, Candle∣stick makers, Weauers, Brasiers, P and Foun∣ders without number: After those cae  Merchaunts of cloath of Silke, of Fustians, of Bussins, of Wos∣stedes, and halfe wstds, and of Br &c. Followed of Couerlette makers, and Lapi men: after them came a great company of Garden, with all sortes of fruites, flowers, and hearbes, carrying about them for a showe, the Images of him, whome the olde auncient Pa∣ganes, called the God of the Gardens, decked, and trim∣med vp with leaues, Nosegayes, & Garlandes of flowers: they had behinde them, the Sheepheardes, Oxe kéepers, Horse kéepers, Mule kéepers, Carters, Whéelebarrowe men, and Carriers with theyr Horsses, Mules, and Asses, which were decked vp to make a laughing sport of to the world. And because that they presented, and brought no∣thing with them, but woodde, water, and stones, they were straight wayes driuen out of the Parke, and so they went theyr way with shame, and reproch. By this tale, you should haue marked the auarice, and couetousnesse of Amurathe, which commaunded that they should very ho∣nourablie entertaine, and make much of them, as brought him any fayre and ritch gift: yet contrarily, he neyther would sée nor heare: but he draue them farre from him, which brought him giftes according to theyr abillitie and power, and not to his lyking. I must now set downe for the afterward, and last com∣pany, the Singers, Players of Instruments, Schollers, Monkes, Iuglers, Tumblers, and Plaiers: people which among the Turkes, are as like them in fashions of liuing, in apparell, & in styring from place to place, as one drop of milke is like vnto another, neither better nor worsser:
the heart of the singers & Musicians, had great good agrée∣ment and concorde, with the armie of seditious souldiors: there you might haue séen Arabians, Mores, Persians, Gre∣cians, and Spaniardes, sounding of theyr Cornets, Trum∣pets, Tabors, Cyterons, and other Instrumentes within the Parke, or Tiltyard, where they made such a confused noyse and sound, without tune, change of note, or kéeping of tune and space, that all the whole Toune sounded and rong with the route of theyr voices, and soundes. Last of all, marched on the Scholers, which of a truth you would not haue iudged to haue béen such: but rather you would haue taken them for, Pilgrimes, and begging Friers: for a man could not haue presumed any otherwise of them, séeing them wrapped in such couerings, with white hattes tyed about the myddle with stringes: bare footed, with fowle dyrtie handes, and a most filthy and yrksome countenaunce to beholde: they presented vnto Amurathe certaine bookes, and painted papers of theyr owne inuen∣tion. The Monkes followed after them, with a company of poore Pilgrimes, which goe in pilgrimage to Mecque, as they call it, which is the Sepulchre of Mahomet, they are counted verie holie men in Turkie: cloathed lyke Scholers, which doo nothing but labour and trotte vp and downe with theyr bodies, making themselues leane, as in the ende, they loose all theyr witte and vnderstanding: and because they rested, nor stayed not in any one place, at any time, but alwayes were skipping, and dauncing about: a man might verie well compare them vnto Curetes, and Corybantes, the auncient Priests of Cybele, the graund mother of the two Paganes: vnto them it was among all other, that Amurathe caused many small presentes to be made. They were presentlie followed of Players, more in number then flies, or gnattes, one sort masking wise, other some hauing Myters, lyke Popes, and crowned: balde, and halfe shauen, theyr vi∣sages
of all most straunge: with Goates beardes, theyr mouthes wide open, as if they would haue swallowed vp as many as looked vppon them: some of them hauing theyr garmentes all to broken, and as it were fleade ouer theyr eares: other some halfe naked, and halfe co∣uered, and other some altogether naked, and shamelesse without measure. Now these proper youthes, and naughtie packes, be∣ing once come into the Parke, they beganne to crie out, to snort, and to laye on loade vppon the pales, and vppon the kettelles, pottes, and pannes, platters, and basons, stryking vppon lyttle belles, chyldrens rattles, and cym∣balles, with a moste straunge and confused noyse, en∣termixte with daunces, and theyr most horrible and dis∣solute behauiours, for they made mockes and mowes, and gyrned at as many as laughed at theyr follies, and they neuer ceased to turne and tumble vppon both hand and foote. There was amongste them one Spaniarde, who being seperated a lyttle a sunder from the rest, be∣ganne to leape and daunce, both his compasse and mea∣sure, with such a ryght remoouing of his féete, and as orderlie wauing, and shaking of his handes, and with so braue a turning rounde of all his whole bodie, to∣gether, so fyne, and artificiallie, that hee dyd moste properlie showe, and set foorth in a manner, all the braue iestures, and moouinges of the body (prescribed, and foretolde of by Plato:) bothe backewarde and fore∣wardes, to the ryght hande, and to the lefte: high, lowe, and rounde: whereof; and whereby, all the beholders conceyued a woonderfull great delyght, and pleasure. Moreouer, these aforenamed players had among them∣selues, as it were a chéefe Captaine, which was an olde man, the most villaine, and arrantest knaue of all the whole company: and he forsoothe was set vpon an Asse,
the which thrée young merchaunt men vppon croutches, and gyrded about with a lynnen cloath, and halfe naked, went before, holding him vp vppon staues. This sight aboue all the rest, terrified me verie sore, and then for the tyme, my spéeche was quite taken from me, and my tongue was, as if it had béene fast tyed to the roofe of my mouth. Nowe some of that company made pastime all daye long; with Apes, Catles, and Dogges, with young Goates, and lyttle Mules, with Hartes, and small byrds: vppon which theyr sportes and pastimes, Amurathe him selfe, being giuen altogether to vanities, was more atten∣tiue, then vnto any other, yea, then all the rest: for there was nothing with them, but gamboldes, friskes, and daunces, morisques, singing, cryinges out, and such lyke vaine exercises: some of them in this theyr sporting and playing, were bytten of Serpents, and venemous beasts, and presentlie then againe they were healed, and made whole of the same byting: and then loe, they made ma∣ny most shamefull countenaunces and faces, most vn∣woorthy to be set downe in writing. Hytherto, I haue spoken altogether of the forenoone tes: let vs therefore now consider of the afternoone, which were no lesse sauced, spiced, and peppered, with pompe and pride, then the other, although there was not in them in all pointes, so great store of ritches, and mag∣nificencie, as in the first. Was it thinke you a leane, or thinne sport, to sée so many Souldiors fighting, as in bat∣tayle raye: and so many Footemen assayling; and forbid∣ding the Turke as it were from his Castles, and Holdes, with wrastling men a number, and dauncers, martching altogether, and with a number of others, making proofe of all theyr prowesse, and manhood? There was not one man to be founde, which tooke not great pleasure and de∣lyght, to shewe all his valiancie, as well for him selfe, as for all those as behelde and looked on.
But I will first beginne with the Combat of the wrast∣lers, an exercise very much sette by among the Auncients, and such a one, as did verye much delight as many as be∣helde the same: For the Herauld had no sooner ended his proclamation, and crye, but straight wayes came foorth in to the same place, xv. couple of wrastlers, all naked and oyled after the olde fashion, to catch holde the one by the other, euery one by his companion: one amongst the rest, pricked and praunced on, and sette out himselfe in the middest of the place, showing his broade shoulders, sha∣king his armes, and as Dares did, whereof Virgil maketh mention, challenge and prouoking the reste to wrastle: and suddainly a young man came in before him, which was to sight, no lesse stronge, nor stoute then the other, and he beganne luste lie to cast vppe his legges, and his fistes into the ayre, then hauing made a prayer with a lowde vayce, and marching a little vp and downe, to make him∣selfe somewhat nimble and plyant, hee layes me fast holde vpon him, as had so defyed him, by and by they came vnto handy gripes, and to graple themselues together, laying eache other vpon the grounde, flatt vpon their noses, then rysing vppe againe, they fell to it lustily, sometime thrus∣ting and pushing, and sometime clypping, and colling eache other very straightlie: sometime shifting of places, and lifting one another vp aloft into the ayre. The one of them went about to catch the other fast by the legge, wherby he should leese his offered blowes and breath and all together, but he there with vnfolded and vntwined his legges, and sette vpon the other as earnestlie, for to make him loose all that laboure: nowe they hauing béene at their prises for the space of three es, they were bothe so weary, so soultry whot, and so out of breath, and yet so fleshed one against an other, with choller, and shame to sée all the whole Courte standing, and watching all ye while vpon them, giuing iudgment on them, so that in the ende,
they were well faine to giue ouer and rest themselues, and then Amurath commaunded them to depart. Then came the other also in their order, but they wrestled not so stoutly, nor yet so long as the first did. And this is al that the wrastlers did. Behold now came a company of 50. men, all on Hors∣backe, well armed, and furnished throughout, both for theyr handes, and for all the rest of their bodies, for all sortes of Combats, theyr crooked swordes by theyr sides, their bucklers about their neckes, their howes in theyr left handes, and staues in their right handes, like vnto the halfe Pikes of Arabia, for the pastime and sporte which they would make. But because these bee extraordinarie sights, I haue thought good to write and discribe them somewhat more at length. First of all, there were layde in the aboue named Parke, eyght heapes of Grauell, of equall height, and distaunce, foure on the one side, and foure on the other. In the midst was a narrowe straight way, but well couered ouer with fine thinne sandy Gra∣uell, of purpose: that if any of them in running shoulde fall downe, their fal should not hurt, nor endaunger them, by meanes of the softnes of the Grauell: vpon these hylls of Grauell, were fastened staues and postes, hauing foure on the one side white, all round at the point, and the other foure also white, made cirkle wise and as a fireshouell, all made of Leather and Paper very properly. They were the poynts, and endes, where hée might sitte and sée all the sporte and play of the Horsmen which began to march on that way steppe by steppe: fyrst by great, then in raigne, and as in battail raye: vpon that they put them∣selues out of ranke altogether, and beganne theyr race with slacke brydle one after an other, and so neere, and iust vnto one another, that theyr horsses were one at ano∣thers heeles: and in running, they tooke theyr arrowes
out of theyr Duiuers, and couched them in such good or∣der that they touched the verie rundels, so swiftly and so quickly as the eye was able readily to sée the marke at the seconde course, because they had not drawen, nor shott be∣fore but onely at the rundels, they now setled themselues against both the two, aswell the rundels, as the others made cyrklewise (as I tolde you) and with so wonderfull a quicknes, and readinesse therein, and helping themselus sometime with the left hand, and sometime with the right without any turning or bowing of their bodies: and for the third charge, course or onsette in couching, they one while couered their right shoulder, and an otherwhile the left, with their bucklers, and that with quicknes incredi∣ble. Moreouer, in running at all the brydle, they drew out theyr swoordes, and cutte the rundels, percing quite through the other fashioned cirkles, and all this was doone in one onely course or race: then turning the bridle all short, they addressed themselues against the endes and poyntes thereof, and with their drawen swordes, they a∣bated and beat downe the same: and by that meanes they got againe their bowes, and made one shoote or draught vp into the ayre: Furthermore, they wrought and did great maruailes with theyr halfe Pikes, in diuers kindes of Combatts, and in the ende when with theyr swordes they had cutte in peeces, they plucked vppe the staues and poastes which were made fast within the Grauell hylles, and cast them vppe into the ayre, and in running, they caught and helde them fast in their hands, then lyfting them vppon their horse saddles, they beganne to vse and handle them as before they did theyr swordes, and long bowes. But before I leaue off and giue ouer these particulers, I will speake of one thing, most worthy of all to be mar∣ked and
such a thing in déede, as a man may take it vnpossible, but I my selfe sawe it. Out of these aforesaid number of 50. went two younge men, verie faire and braue among all the rest: the one of them stoode on his feete, in the saddle vpon the Horsback, and tooke his companion vppon his armes, standing vp∣right vpon his feese, and béeing in this order, and manner, they put foorth the Horse, (and gaue him the Carriere:) and they held them very fast, and hee that was the vpper∣most of them, sht out all his arrowes against a rest, and proppe of woode, which he had in his right hand, that cari∣ed him. Moreouer these two young men hauing ranged vp and downe, and yed themselues fast to our Horsses by the bridles, the one of them leaped vp, and sets me one of his feete vpon one of the saddles, and the other foote vpon the other saddle, where he held himselfe as fast as if he had béene glued too, bearing still his companion vppon hys arme, standing vpright▪ and holding in his hand the fore∣named proppe of wood, against the which, the other béeing now already mounted so hie, did most finely shoote and hitt the same, and yet notwithstanding the Horsses did runne a very swift pace. There were others also among them, which hauing sixe naked swordes, and the poyntes thereof fast tyed vpward to theyr Horse saddles, put theyr heades also vpon, and toward the saddels, and theyr feete vpwarde, and so made the Horsses to runne a galloppe, as fast as if a man should say, thus and thus it shalbe. On the otherside there were among them, which sette them two at once in one saddle, and as the Horse ranne with all his power and might, they skipped vppe and downe from the Horse, and then to the Horse againe, very nimbly and lust∣lie, one after an other, and neuer made no stoppe nor stay at all: others there were, which turned themselues bothe backwarde and forwarde in the saddell, the Horse still running, and coursing vp and downe verie roughlie, and
oysterously, making I say such friskes and gamboles in the swift running course, as were in deede most wonder∣full. This béeing doone, they all ranne togeather on a heape, and béeing gotten vp againe on feete, vppon the Horse saddels, they shot out theyr arrowes very stronglie and with great violence: and béeing in the ende dispersed and set so a sunder, they ranne one against an other, with their halfe Pykes and Iauelins, and did show diuers such notable feates, as the olde auncient speare men were wont and accustomed to doo in courses and feates of Che∣ualrie: furthermore, they taught very many fine feates and most notable, vnto theyr men of warre: as howe to prepare and make ready the battaill: to assaile: to presse: to enclose the enemie, and hemme him in one euery side, to strike him both on the right side and on the left, to deck and trimme vp their owne companies, and to giue the on∣sette: to take in and to rebate: to pricke on, holde fast, and turne theyr horses, to pursue and follow after, to leaue off againe as they lust: to take: to spoyle: to breake in, and thrust vpon the enemie ouercome: to encourage the hearts of the Souldiers when he hath the worst, to gather all his companies together: finally he taught all the par∣ticular pointes of warre, wherofboth Souldiers and Cap∣taines ought not be ignoraunt. And a man may righte well speake of these foresaid 50. Horsmen, as the Poet Virgil writ of the Combatt of Iulius and others, in the fift booke of his Eneiedos, Ʋiz olli discurrere pares atque agmi∣natermi deducti soluere choris. &c. which is as much to say, as FOrthwith like very valiant men, They take theyr course, and part, And by three and three in warlikewise From the troupes they all doo part
Spreading abroade as reason is: Their flagge and ensigne fayre, And then againe vnto their places, in order they repayre. VVhere, with offensiue weapons they, Doo strike the other parts, So vehemently, and with courage bolde, As kills theyr sillie heartes: Then meetes thone, and with the other, VVith violence verie greate, Sometimes forward, and sometimes backwarde, As they doo thinke it meete. And in theyr running courses then: Some sights you might beholde: As represents some Combats fine. And battells braue and bolde. And afterward they ginne to flee, They turne theyr backes amaine: They march like men, but will not fight, The peace is made againe. WEll now that we haue spoken sufficiently of y• sight of the Horsmen, let vs also beginne to say somwhat of the Combattes, and skirmishes, and of the taking of the Fortresses, and Holdes by the foote men: where the Rea¦der shall see howe the Turks tooke them by assayling and invading of them. There were two Fortresses made of Boardes, gylded and painted with djuers colours, well garnished with Walles, little Towres, Rampires, and Bulwarkes,
whereof the one was called the Turkes Fortresse, and the other the Almaignes, or Dutchmens, and there were 30. Souldiers clothed with the Armes and attire of the Al∣maignes in the one: and 30. of the Turkish side in the o∣ther, which was garnished and decked vppe with many Engines and fine deuises of warre. And for to beginne, the Almaignes which would first bee seene, and haue as it were the vpper hand of all: sent two of theyr spyes vnto the Turkes Campe, wherevnto when they were approa∣ched and come, they behelde and saw, to theyr payne and gréefe, what they were minded and determined for to doo. For there was one of the two taken, and the other saued himselfe by swiftnes of foote, and he tolde vnto the Al∣maignes howe all thinges had passed. Nowe when they vnderstoode of the Turkes euill meaning towardes them, they went thence away, to conuay and hyde themselues very vnorderly, about the Turkes holde, who beeing as it were amazed thereat, and troubled with theyr noise ma∣king, went all of them out thereof, giuing a charge, set∣ting the Almaignes in a rowte or company, and leading them fighting, euen vnto theyr Trenches, crying out with a lowde voyce, saying, that this shamefull flight of the Almaignes, had brought vnto them a woorthy victo∣rie: and as for the Almaignes, thys rowte and companye nowe swelling in stomacke against them, they began to consult and determine of what was to be doone, iudging with themselues, that it beooued them to assay, and prooue all other wayes and meanes, before they came to warre, but yet in conclusion, they were resolued to giue the Turke a Battell: and so both the one and the other béeing well furnished, went away in company. The Almaignes caryed Pikes, Eucklers, and swrds, but the Turkes couered themselues all ouer with theyr Bucklers, marching all a greate, and fayning that they were afrayde, and that they would not fight at all,
which did so encourage the Almaignes, that they thought verily to weary and tyre the Turkes, who béeing nowe well awakened, and stirred vppe with this mockerye, gaue them a signe and token, laying handes vpon theyr weapons, and crying with a lowde voyce Alla, Alla, (which is as much to say, as God:) they made their pée∣ces play: then they came vnto the battell, which was so sharpe, that what of one side, and what of the other, theyr number was not much vnlike: then was there againe a newe Combat, and skirmish to recouer the bodyes, but that was ceased and stinted by and by: The Almaignes nowe retyred into theyr owne quarters, whether also the Turkes approched, so that the skirmish began afresh whereas the one part sought against the other verye sharply, and a long time: in the ende, the Turkes con∣strained the Almaignes to saue themselues within their Castels, whereas they did besiege them, fighting moste furiously, and laying on lustie loade against the place, with all the power of theyr peeces. The Almaignes yet resisted them very brauely, and withstoode a great many of theyr assaultes, but at the last they were ouercome by the Turkes, who beganne to beate downe theyr Gates, to spoyle, and to kill as many as they founde hidden in a∣ny place, to thrust downe the other from the toppe of the Castel to the bottome, to arest them that fledde, and to bring them Captyues, with theyr handes fast bounde be∣hinde at their backes: this doone, they sete vp an En∣signe, or flagge vpon the toppe of all the Castell, and in signe and token of victory, they caused a great triumphe to be made, with Tabours and Trompets, besides this there were brought into the foresayde Tyltyarde, xiii. other fortes, and holdes, which were not farre distant from the two Fortresses, and they yeelded themselues vppe vnto the victorions. And besides all this as happe∣ned and chaunced at the Combattes, and in the taking
(as aforesayde) three men which stoode and behelde this warre, were slaine and kylled with Cannon shote: such are the sportes, and pastimes of Tyrauntes, which neuer make an ende and giue ouer, without shedding of blood: Let vs now saye somewhat of the Speare men: I wyll tell you at one bare worde, that of fiftie couple of run∣ners, there were not two found, which dyd meete, and en∣counter eche other tenne tymes: neyther yet any other∣wise, but in fréendlie passing one by an other: by reason whereof, all the whole world cried out amaine vppon those gentle Iousters, which were constrayned to retyre: but the two last runners, being ashamed thereof, at theyr last Course, dyd so boysterouslie, and so fiercelie encounter eche other, that theyr horsses were both kylled with the brunt then giuen betwéene them, and the two runners them selues verie gréeuouslie hurt therewith. Then came before them one of the Wrastlers, a verie mightie, and a meruailous strong man, woorthy to be compared vnto that Milon so much extolled, and celebra∣ted at Crotone: for proofe of his prowesse, he lyfted vp an high, a long péece of woodde, which twelue men could not styre, nor remooue from the ground, but with great paine, and with much adoo: then he tooke the same vpon his shoulders, without holding the same with his hands: and afterward, being layde downe flat vpon the ground, and his shoulders, and thighes being fast tyed and bound, he tooke vp and bare vppon his breast or stomacke, a great thicke stone, which tenne men had rowled awaye, and yet he made but a mocke and laughing stocke of that his loade. And yet beholde, a thing more meruailous then all these: fowre men dyd cleaue long péeces of wood vp∣pon his bellie. Moreouer, with his téeth and his handes, he dyd bruse, and breake in péeces, a horsenayle of yron, and with such force, that the one halfe stucke fast in his téeth, and of the rest he made two péeces, in eche hand one:
and with thrée blowes with his fyst, vpon the Coulter of a Plough, he brake it quite in sunder: and with his bar tongue he lycked the same Coulter put into the fyre all redde hotte: the same man also, with his téeth alone, dyd saddle, bridle, and harnesse a horse, and dyd diuerse and many other most meruailous thinges: by reason where∣of he gotte to himselfe great gaines, and was very much praised, and cōmended of all men, because of his strength, and force altogether so extraordinarie and straunge. But before I make an ende of the discourse of the afternoone sportes, I haue considered with my selfe, that it shall not be any thing at all hurtfull to the Reader, if I speake a worde or two, of the dauncers ouer the lyne: many of them there, shewed foorth braue proofes of theyr skylles: but there was one among all the rest, which gained and gotte the garland from them all: and I knowe no man that was not wholie rauished, to sée them runne so sud∣dainlie, with so good a grace, without stinting, and with so valiaunt a boldnesse. A certayne Poet reporteth in one of his Commedies and Stories, that the simple and common people were in a muse, at the beholding of one named. Quidam, which walked vp and downe vppon a Corde or Lyne: But if so be that this Poet had séene that as I speake off, he would without doubt, haue béene driuen out of counte∣naunce: for this fellowe went vp vpon the Lines, which were fast tyed to the rafters, and beames of the house, as high as a man might well discerne, and with such swift∣nesse and nimblenesse, that a man would haue sayd, that they had béene Ladders or Stayres, and then he came downe againe verie boldlie, both backewardes, and arse∣wardes (as they saye) and also foreward, not hauing any other staye, or proppe, but a lyttle small staffe, or sticke, wherof he made him a counterpeise: one whyle he daun∣ced vpon the Cordes with both féee, and another whyle
with one alone: sometime with the lefte, and sometime with the right: now starke naked, and straight waies his hose on: now clasping his legges about the cordes, with his head hanging downeward, and so turned himselfe round about, and then loosed his legges, caught holde a∣gaine with his hands, and skipt vp vpon it: he slidde also meruailous right and boldly, from the top of all,  the ve∣rie bottome of all, and that as I esteeme the cheefest, and principallest sport and pastime of all is: at night forsooth, he tyed fast to eche of his féete, sie naked drawne swords, and continued his sport, with such playing, and passing a∣way of the tyme, and with such clapping of handes on all partes, so that if by chaunce any one of the lookers on, ought him any mallice or grudge, or would haue wrought him any mischeefe in his sleepe, he himselfe by his agilli∣tie and nimblenesse, would presently haue awaked out of his sleepe: by meanes whereof, by the common voice and crie, of both great and small, at that solemne assemblie, he was called and named, the cheefe and principall maister of that craft or occupation. You haue now already seene (good gentle Reader) the royalty and great woorthinesse of the sports and pastimes, of both before and after dinner, verie grosely giuen & set downe before you: but in few wordes, & of a verie trueth. Let vs nowe then conclude, (if it please you) and let us describe vnto you, the sightes which they made, and were to be seene in the night: and although that they were not much vnlyke vnto the day sportes, yet I will in bréefe declare them vnto you. Presentlie and immedi∣atlie after Sunne set, they lighted theyr Lampes, which were hanged vp in the Tabernacle, and in the wheele made of Cordes: (whereof I haue spoken heeretofore) the which Lampes, turned verie round by art & cunning, and burned verie cleare, and lyght all the whole night. More∣ouer, there were euery night, lighted in the sayd Parke, to
the number of thyrtie Lynks, or Torches, from the which, all the whole Theatre, receiued a most famous and cleare lyght, and brightnesse. Now these thinges being in this order disposed, they shotte off squibbes full of pouder, which made a meruailous noyse and sounde: and as they fell vpon the ground, they spette out six or seuen sparkles, lyke vnto Starres, and verie pleasaunt to beholde. Then after all this, they brought in euerie day, day by day into this Cloister▪ sixe, eight, and at the most, ten For∣tresses, Towers, or Shippes, made of boords, couered pro∣perlie with Paper, or with fine linnen cloath, gylded, and verie ritch, and sumptuous made, with diuerse paintings and collours, and then they gaue fyre vnto them: they were made strong, both within and without, and of all sides, with short péeces, lyke vnto Mortiers, which are a kinde of Artillerie of yron, short, and hauing many ringes or cyrcles, onely vsed in Shippes for nayle shotte, being well appointed, with squibbes, and with pouder for the Cannons, without any lacke or want therof. And as soone as they put too fyre, there presentlie followes a noyse lyke lyghtning and straunge thunder. These squibbes dyd flée about in the likenesse of Serpenes, and were powred out round about the Theatre: and to make an ende of this brute or noyse, they had in theyr company, the sounds of Trumpettes and Tabors. These so fearefull noyses were nothing at all pleasaunt, but rather shewed, and be∣tokened the assault, and taking of Constantinople. Fur∣thermore, you should haue séene the shapes, and figures of men, cloathed after the Persian, Italian, and Allemaigne fashion: also the shapes and figures of Elephantes, Ca∣melles, Dogges, Horsses▪ Asses, Wildesowle, and other lyke creatures, all full of Cannon shote and powder, vn∣to the which they put fyre, and then they were all brought to nothing. These sportes lasted and continued, vntyll two of the
clocke, and sometime (at the commaundement of Amu∣rathe) vntyll thrée of the clocke after midnight. The Turke me thinkes heerein, went about to followe and iitate, the proude King Solmonee: which striued to worke against the lyghtening, and thundering of the Gods, as the Poets make report. But as they eigned, that Iupiter knew well how to correct and chasten, the intollerable pride of Salmone: so in mine opinion, this man héere, being more arrogaunt, and much worse and wickedder then Salmonee, now stryketh vppon the true lyghtening of the true God, and being cast downe into hell with his supporters, and maintainers, receyueth the chastisementes, there prepared and made ready for him, and due vnto him of so long time. Moreouer, because that the acte of Circumcizion was doone by night: beholde, and marke well wherefore I haue deferred vntyll now, to speake of the Ceremonies, which then were obserued, the which I wyll touch bréefe∣lie and in fewe wordes: The seuenth day of Iune, A∣murathe, caused Proclamation to be made, that they should bring into the Parke aforesayde, all those as were to be Cyrcumcized: with promise by him made, to giue vnto euerie one, a gowne, a shyrt, and a hundred peeces of money, which were woorth about ten pence a peece: and at this crie or Proclamation, there was gathered to∣gether such a multitude, of young chyldren, seruauntes, lacques, and slaues, which came most part, rather for the desyre of gayning the giftes, then vppon any deuotion at all: so that they lacked and needed aboue thirtie Surge∣ons to dresse them, and yet they were occupied about them all that daye, and most parte of the night: And in the same night, after the sportes and pastimes were all ended, and about two of the clocke in the morning, Ma∣humet, the sonne of Amurathe, the young Prince of six∣teene yeeres olde, was Circumcized, not openlie, but in
his fathers Waredrope, and in the presence of his sayd fa∣ther, and of the  Officers and Seignio, by Mahu∣met Bass; the  Counseller of that State. You haue heere (frendly Reader) the discourse of the foolish Ceremonies of that myserable Nation, which is in daunger to eare and suffer the eternall names of  but before I make an ende, I will adde and speake one word more, touching and concerning that as happened, and chaunced at the end of the sports, and which troubled vs all, that were at the Feast. First of all, were the wed∣dings of the Daughter of Amurathe made, who was ma∣ried to the Admyrall of Turkie: these weddinges were royallie feasted for the spars of fiue dayes. Then by chaunce it fell out so, that Sulthane, the wife of Amurathe dyd not goe her full tyme all out: and the tumult grewe betweene the Ianissaries, and the Archers of his Garde, the which dyd rise in tumult, the one against the other, in his presence, and within the Parke, with such furie and erce anger, that without any respect of theyr General or of the great Bassa, or of Amurathe himselfe, they came to handy blowes, in such sort, that two Ianissaries, and foure Archers were left dead, and stretched abreade euen in the same place. Amurathe now being sore afraide, and ama∣sed thereat, and verie much doubting the Ianissaries, which are meruailous vnhappy and wicked people, cau∣sed his Castell to be made fast, and throughlie furnished round about. You se now him, which was in hope, to haue swallowed vppe (as it were) all the whole world, stand trembling and quaking for feare, euen in the mid∣dest of his owne garde, Vnder the collour of I wot not what bruite or noyse, and had much ad to warrant or saue himselfe vnder the shylter, or suretie of any walles. And now to make an end, the wedding being all finished the one and twenty day of Iune, the day before the which he retyred, and went in the morning into his Castel with
his Sonne, being conducted and guided by the Bassas, and with three hundred other Gentlemen▪ This is it, as I had to saye, touching the sportes and sightes at Constanti∣nople, wherein I haue béene as bréefe, and vsed as much dilligence, as possiblie I could: and if it dooth not lyke you (good Reader) yet thinke not euyll of me, although I am not ashamed to write it: but rather blame you him, which durst attempt to doo all▪ these things, and take well in woorth, my endeuor héerein. Vale. FINIS. T. H. I doo send vnto you the Confessi∣on of Gennadius, the Patriarche of Constantinople, exhibited to Mahumet, the 11. Empe∣rour of that name, immediatly after that Constanti∣nople was taken, who required the same of him: and this I receyued of Theodosius Zygomalius, the cheefe Notarie of this present Patriarche Ieremy. Thus fare you well in all felicitie, at Constantinople, the 9. of Iulie. WE beleeue that God is the creatour of all thinges, whatsoeuer they be, and that they were of nothing: and that he is neither a body, nor hath a body: but liueth intel∣lectuallie: and he is a God, ve∣rie good and perfect of mind, or substaunce, and most wise: not
made, or compounded: he is without beginning, and hath no ende: he is in the World, and aboue the world: he is not in one place, and he is in euerie place. These are the properties of God, by the which he is seperated from his creatures and such other lyke. He is , and good, and true, & whatsoeuer things his works haue in a part, excellent, he hath them all alone, & by a more excellent manner: And his creatures haue these same perfections, because he giueth them to his creatures, and because he is good, in lyke manner his creatures are good: because he is wise, they are wise: because he is true, they are true: and whatsoeuer are such like: sauing onelie, that God hath them in a principall place, the crea∣tures by perticipation. We beléeue, that in GOD there are thrée properties: which are as the beginninges, and fountaines, of all the other his properties: and God lyueth by these thrée pro∣perties, euer inglie in himselfe: and before that the world was builded by him, and by them he builded the world: and by them he gouerneth it. And these thrée properties, we call them thrée persons: and because these thrée properties, doo not deuide the onelie and most simple substaunce of God, therfore be is God, and with these pro∣perties he is one God, and there are not three Gods. We doo beléeue, that the worde and spirite, doo spring but of the nature of God, as from the fyre, lyght and heat: and as the fyre, although there be nothing, that can be lyghtned, and be made warme by it: notwithstanding, the same fyre hath alwayes lyght and heate, and sendeth out lyght, and heate. So, before the world was builded, the worde was, and so was the spirite, naturall powers of God, because God is a minde, or substaunce, as it was sayde before: and these thrée, the minde or substaunce, the worde and spirite, is one God, as the soule of man is the minde: and a worde intellectuall, and an intellectuall
will, and notwithstanding these thrée in déede are one soule. Moreouer, wée call the worde, the wisdome of God, and the power: and his Sonne, because he is the sonne of his naturall substaunce, and as we call the sonne of the nature of man, the sonne of man: and as the cogita∣tion of this minde is: so is it in these diuine things. Fur∣thermore, we name the will of God, the spyrite of God, and loue: Wée call the minde the Father, because he is not begotten, and without a cause, the cause of the sonne and of the spirite. Because therefore God doth not vnder stand onely his creatures, but more he knoweth and vn∣derstandeth himselfe, and for this cause he hath the worde and wisdome, by the which he vnderstandeth himselfe pro∣perlie. Likewise, neither he willeth and God loueth on∣lie his owne workes, but he willeth and loueth himselfe much more: therefore the word and spirite goe foorth or proceede out of him euerlastinglie: and these twaine with God are one God. Wée beleeue that God hath builded the world by the word of his wisedome, and of his power, and by the spirit of his good will, he foreséeth and gouerneth, and mooueth euery nature to good, according to the order of euery na∣ture: and for this cause we beléeue that when God will conuert men by his onely mercy, from the deceit of deuils and worshipping of Idoles: because in a little place of the Iewes, in the which he was worshipped and beleeued to be one God according to the Lawe of Moses, the rest of the whole worlde worshipped the creatures wickedly, and many Gods, because that they are none, in the place of one and him true, and euery man liued according to their sensuall apitites, and not according to God: then God re∣stored man by his worde, and by his holie spirite, and ther∣fore the worde of God put vppon him the nature of man, that as man, he might be conuersaunt with men, and as the word of God and wisedome should teache men to be∣léeue
in one true God, and to leade their life accor∣ding to that Lawe, which he hath giuen, and againe, as a man, that he might giue a reason of his life, and example of his doctrine: Hee fyrst kept the Lawe, which he gaue vnto men: as the word of God and power, he might re∣store, the moste comelie goodnes which he woulde. For it coulde not bée, that by the power of one man, the whole worlde should bee conuerted to God: and thus the omni∣potent and inuisible God, hath sowen the trueth by hys worde in Ierusalem: By his spirite hee illuminated and confirmed his Apostles, that they should sowe the trueth throughout the whole worlde, and that they shoulde con∣temne death through the loue of God, who had sent them, and by the loue of the saluation of the world, according to the ensample of Iesus, who dyed willingly, according to that which was of man, that the world might be saued. Thus we beleeue one God in Trinitie, the Father, sonne, and holy spirite, as our Lord Iesus hath taught vs, and we beleeue that he is true, because he is the trueth it selfe: and his Disciples hath taught vs more at large: thus we doo vnderstande of the power of his wisedome. Wée beléeue that the word of God, and man, whom the that word of God put on, and the life of Christ in his flesh was the life of man most holie, but the wisedome of the power and workes of him, was the power of God. Wée beleeue, that as the soule and bodie is one man, so the word of God of one part, and of ye other part. The soule and the body, are two distinct natures perfectly in one mā, so is the humanitie and deitye in Christ, two distinct na∣tures, knitte together according to Hypostases and per∣sonally, neither is the word of God chaunged into flesh or into the soule of Christ, neither is the flesh of Christ, or his soule conuerted into the word of God, but the word of God was and is in Christ the word of God, by a meruai∣lous disputation, humanity, humanitie: and that the hu∣manitie
haue not taken the deitie of the worde of Christe, but the deitie of the worde of God hath taken mans na∣ture, which consisteth in that, for as much as it was ta∣ken. Whatsoeuer thing is in God, and of God naturally, is God, because there is nothing accidentall in God: and therefore we name and beleeue the intellectuall worde of God, to be God: and because this worde of GOD was in Christe, for that cause wee confesse Christe to bee God and man: man, because he consisteth of soule and body: God, because of the word of God, which is in him. we beleeue, that the word of God is in Christ, and in the world, and in heauen, and in God, and in the Father, wherefore the word of God is infinite, as God is infinite, begetting him, that is as much to say: thinking, and hath an infinite power. But in God after one manner, and in Christ after an other manner, and in the world, after an∣other manner. We beléeue, that when God dooth communicate his goodnes and his grace to any creature, neuerthelesse, it go∣eth not from him, but thereby he is more magnified, be∣cause that the highnesse of God, is made manifest by the vertue of his Creatures. The more excellent that the Creatour is, by greater communicating of his goodnesse: so much the more the goodnesse of God, and his loue towardes men, and hys power is declared. Wherefore the goodnes of God, and his loue towardes men, is more magnified in this point, that God himselfe hath come into Iesus Christ, with his omnipotentcie, then that which he sent into his Prophets one of his graces or two, and in some one Prophet a lesser grace, and into some other a greater. We beleeue that Christ was crucified and dyed, of hys owne proper will, for many and great profittes, to the de∣claration
whereof, we should occupy many wordes: and he hath suffered all these thinges, according to that which was of man in him. As for the word of God, it is neither crucifyed, neyther dyeth, neither ryseth againe: But he rayseth vp the deade as hee raiseth vp his owne fleshe which he bare. We be∣leeue, that Christ, after his resurrection was assumpted vp into the heauens, and shall come againe with glorye, to iudge the quicke and the dead. Wée beleeue that mens soules are immortall, and that the bodyes of holy men, shall ryse incorrupt, cleere, actiue, neither shall they haue any neede of meate, nor drinke, nor apparrell, nor any other corporall pleasures: and that Soules im∣mortall. the soules and the bodies, of them that haue beleeued, and haue ledde theyr life vertuously, shall goe into Para∣dise: but the impenitent, wicked, and Infideles, into pu∣nishment: and that the Paradise of the Saintes, and the fruicion thereof, is in heauen: the punishment of the wic∣ked in the earth: and that the fruition of the Saints is no thing els, then that such soules shalbe persit in knowledge, and shall beholde the misteries of God, which they knowe not nowe, but by faith onelie. Wherefore it was necessarie that the word of God, and God to be incarnate: many other thinges are necessarie, when necessity requireth, we are ready to render a rea∣son thereof: after these reasons, the seuen certifie vs of our Faith. Moreouer, the Prophets of the Iewes, haue shewed before, whom we receyue, of this Iesus, what soeuer hee hath doone, or whatsoeuer haue béene doone, and whatso∣euer his disciples haue doone by his power: The like the Oracles of the Greekes haue foreshewed by the gift of God, and the like did the Astronomers of the Persians and of the Grecians, with the preaching of Iesus. For all these of the which we haue made mention, doo
agrée and are consonant to the scripture in all thinges, be∣cause that they which haue written them, haue had alone Doctor, or teacher, euen the grace of God: vnlesse it were so in something they would haue disagréed, and haue béene dissonant. Because they haue receiued such a fayth and relygion, although newe and miraculous, men with great diligence in eu, and with manifolde daungers, as well pri, dent and wise: and by this meanes the ma∣licious deceite of deuils was ouerthrowne. This faith and religion conteineth nothing impossible, neither any thing that is dissonant with it selfe, neither any corporall thing, but all spirituall: and it is the way which leadeth mens soules vnto the loue of God, and of euerlasting life. So many as haue receiued this faith, and haue lyued bertuously, according to the Lawe of Christ, haue obtay∣ned great gifts of God, and haue doone many miracles, which thin es could neuer haue come to passe, if this faith had beene false and vntrue. The Kinges which made war against this faith, with great slaughter and punishment throughout the worlde, many hundred yeeres, notwith∣standing that they had many Gods, profited nothing, but the faith had the victory, and continueth vnto this day: when the Lord shall come, he shall finde it: and vnlesse that this faith had beene by the will of God, then had it beene easily ouerthrowne. To the same Iesus our Lorde, the true God, be glory. Amen. Thus we affirme breefly as con∣cerning our Faith. These were translated into the Arabrik tongue, by Achomad Kadde, a Barrn, whose father was Mah Tzelepe the Scribe. FINIS.
