4946 99843637 8383
THE SVVAGGERING DAMSELL. A COMEDY. Written by R. C. Non satis insidiis est admiranda Virago. LONDON. Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crooke; and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Greene Dragon, in Pauls Church-yard. 1640.
To his vvorthy Friend, Mr. Robert Chamberlaine on His Swaggering Damsell. WHat pretty humor was thy Muse in when, She put on Breeches, and the dresse of men; Casting aside her Robe, embroyder'd thicke, With Lawrell sprigges, and Flowers of Rhetoricke; Or what conceit had Mercurie, when he, Made use of Venus Looking-glasse to see How his shape femall did become him, sure She tainted him being her selfe impure; No, she is chaste, and in her geniall bed, Hermes himselfe would loose his Maidenhead: Cupid has stuft her pillow with loose haires, Pluckt from his silken curles, and oft repaires Vnto her Slumbers with a balmy kisse, Charming her braine to teeme with love like His. Her sheets are sweetly ayr'd, and spun so fine, Ladyes may have worse lodging, light thy Pine Then glorious Hymen, at our Damsells eyes, That she may shine in her solemnities, And dazell her detractors, thou choice Friend, Shall give me leave with justice to commend; Thy paines to the Pierides, thy hand, Shalt dresse their bankes and bowers, untill the Land Grow fertill as thy Fancy, for thy parts, Have made a conquest of a thousand hearts. H. Harris
To his deserving Friend, Mr. Robert Cham∣berlaine upon his Swaggering Damsell. FRiend, when my Ʋessell from the narrow stage, Lanch'd to this wider Ocean, where the rage Of madding Censure met her, Thou didst play The part of a skill'd Pilot calm'st the way: Nor envy with her strongest winds durst stirre, Knowing (Skill'd Navigator) thou guid'st her; I dare not boast, like Art, yet hope to prove Commended, since I strive to quit thy love In the acknowledgement, and offer these To thy Faire Damsell's welfare, may she please Those that have judging soules; and to the rest That hate Dramaticke Lawes, as is your test Vnto their faith, that's hatefull, for they be Counted in shew, not prove their puritie: This glory for to suffer their dull rage, And be cry'd up the glory of the Stage. T. Rawlins. To his Deserving friend Mr. Robert Chamber∣laine upon his Swaggering Damsell. YOur Swagg'ring Damsell you most aptly Fit, To the sweete Harmony of Art, and Wit, Your Pen hath taught all women to begin, A new; yet civill way to Swagger in; Our natures you have chang'd, and men adore, The selfe-same thing which they did hate before; A woman Cavellier, nor is your Muse, In forfeiting her modesty profuse; No debaucht Scenes, nor such base mirth as we Place in the Scenes, of obscene Ribaldry, Pollutes they Pen, thy happy influence, Virgins may read with a safe innocence: And shall applaud thee as one borne to be, The sole restorer of their liberty. E. B·
The Actors. SIr Timothy Testy; an old angry decayed Knight. Sir Plenteous Crambagge, an old Vsurer. Valentine Crambagge, Sonne to Sir Plenteous, and Lover of Sabina. Fairefaith, Kinsman to Valentine, and Lover of Mirabell. Sportlove, Friend to Ʋalentine. Sabina. Daughters to Sir Timothy. Mirabell. Daughters to Sir Timothy. Betty, VVaiting Maide to Sabina. Kate, VVaiting Maide to Mirabell. Muchcraft, An Atturney. Budget, His man. Hilts, A blunt fellow, Servant to sir Timothy. Trash, Clowne, and Servant to Valentine. Welt, His Wife, A Shoomaker, at whose house Valentine lay in the time of his disguise. Roger and Rowland, Servants to sir Plenteous. Musitians. Officers. Boy.
The Prologue. FAire stars attend this presence, Gentlemen, Our Author bids me bid ye welcome, then Our house bids welcome, I my selfe agen, Well, then at once thrice welcome Gentlemen. But first, to you whose education brings Learning along wee't for to judge of things; I speake, but what needs that, your natures such, That with nice Criticisme it scornes to touch. Ladies for you, I reade it in each front; You will, nay more, you must looke faire upon't, How ere, we hope, that all your smiles will be, Propitious to our labours, not that wee, Forestall your judgements, or doe begge applause, Thats not our meaning, we have no such cause; Yet doe beleeve, you will your Candors bring, Cause 'tis the Primrose of the Authors Spring.
THE SVVAGGERING DAMSELL. A COMEDIE. Actus 1. Scena 1. Enter Hiles, Roger, and Rowland; Roger with a Napkin on his sleeve, and a silver bowle in's hand. Rog. COme Hilts, one cup more. Hilts, Not a drop, I know they have din'd by this time, and if I shu'd be out oth' way, when my master comes, he would raile, that the noyse of an Oyster wench wu'd not be halfe so divelish. Row. Come, come, one lustie dish now ith' bottome oth' cellar's worth all the rest — Hilts. A way with your number 4. it makes rattle-bagges and windmills in my guts, I cannot endure it. Rog. Come, come, I warrant ye, it will not, prethee come. Hilt. Not? Why I'me blowne wee't already like a Lan∣cashire Bag-pipe upon a May day; and besides, tis so weake, that a man cannot keepe it alive while he throwes it in's guts, when thou comst' to our house Ile give thee a cup of Beere will make thy nose cry twang Roger.
Row. Why, but ye doe not keepe such a house for all your jesting, doe ye? Hilts. Such a house, shat come in a morning, and finde the cellar a foote deepe in March beere; here a blacke Jacke, and there a slagon standing in't like steeples in a drown'd city — Ther's house-keeping Roger. Rog. I marry sir, there's a house well kept indeede. Hilts▪ Nay sir, by this meanes we make my Master a better house keeper than ere his father or grandfather was before him; for where they were us'd to ride every day a Hawking and hunting, my Master keepes the house sometimes for two or three yeares together, and what's the cause? nothing but our mirth, our randans, our tarra tantaras — oh the onely way in the world to make a gentleman a house-keeper. Rog. Well, come, I must needs have our round about to thy Masters daughters; for dost heare Hilts, me thought there was a little nodding and winking betwixt my young Master, Mr. Ʋalentine Crambag, and Mistresse Sabina, didst not per∣ceive it Rowland? Row. Yes marry did I, and tother gentleman there his Kinsman me thought now and then cast a sheepes eye towards Mistresse Mirabell; goe to, an old Ape has an old Eye, Roger. Hilts. Why but Roger you are not such a Sillibraine, I hope to thinke that your young Master loves Mistrisse Sabina — Rog. Nay, I me past thinking, for I doe partly know it. Hilts. How? Rog. Why, tis neither impossible nor unlikely? Hilts. I doe not beleeve your young Master's such a stout fellow Roger. Rog. Why pray? Hilts. I meane, as to venture himselfe upon such a wilde thing, I tell you sirs, your young Master, I confesse is a pretty dappart young gentleman, but in respect of her he is but a Child, a shrimpe, a Butterflie, a Chitterling, a Bable; in love with her quoth a? Shee's not one that cares for complements, or will be wonne with cringes, or your tres-humble serviteur Madame; no no Roger; she is a Blade, a Sparke, a Teare-coate; and he that carries her away, must mumble her, jumble her,
rumble her, and tumble her, swagger, roare, and teare like a mad man; your young Master quoth a? — pish, To them Ʋalentine and Fairefaith. Rog. Husht, here come the gentlemen. Ʋal. Why stand you here? make sir Timothy Testies man welcome — go. Hilts. It was a brave speech of your worships sir. Val. O Cosen, Exit with Rog. and Row. The wombe of Aetnas but a rocke of ice, Compar'd unto those flames that rage within My bosome; I must enjoy, or else give end unto This mortall life by some untimely meanes. Fair. Good starres forbid it sir; Come, come, Lull not your owne destruction, nor unman Your selfe in doting on the outward frame Of an imperfect soule, Follow discretions finger that will guide Your understanding and your minde to one, Whose person's vertues Temple; Cosen thinke on't, Her qualities and yours will ne're agree; Your civill nature ne're will correspond With her wanton humours. Ʋal. It cannot be, There's nothing save a Deity can inhabit So glorious a mansion, Not love her, say yee? not have her; I hope my starres will never looke so blacke, How ever yet my comforts this, If I cannot have her I can perish. Fair. That case is desperate, when a man must needs Sinke in a gulfe, or split upon the rocke; Know sir, I beare as good a mind To her faire sister Mirabell; but yet I checke these passions fearing that shee is Too like her sister, yet my flames doe rise
So high, that she takes notice on't; come Learne to forget her, for you must expect Nothing from her but scorne. Val. That such a creature has so foule a soule, 'Twill never pierce My understanding judgement, or beleefe; Her birth and education needs must purge Such grossenesse. Fai. Sir be happie, hugge your owne fancy, May things prove well, I shall be glad to see't; Farre bee't from me to envie any good Betydes a friend and kinsman. To them Sabina Mirabell. Peace, they'r both come. Ʋal. Welcome faire one, Welcome I fay, toth' armes of him that flies, All joyes but those that in thy bosome lies. Sab. My bosome? what dee you finde there pray sir; you have a minde perhappes to my Jewell, if you will not hurt it, ye shall have it a while to play with, tis a pretty bright thing sir. Val. Not so bright as your white bosome, Lady. Sab. As how pray ye? what see you there? Val. O no, the gods wu'd frowne if any mortall breath, Shu'd once prophane that milkie way, There's not a little in that lovely place, But does create a wonder: When Cupid's thirstie, and desires a sip, Of Nectar, than he runnes unto thy lip, And for your haire, the brightnesse of it does Perswade my soule the very graces spun The golden twist. Sab. Pray yee speake on sir, when ye have emptied your pockets youle be quiet. Ʋal. Emptied my pockets? Sab. Sir, these are but pocket complements, run 'em over once, and then perhaps I shall talke with yee; remember where ye left, I wu'd be loath to put ye out sir, my haire was golden twist, ye said, come, what of all this?
Val. This has enflam'd my thoughts, Ensnar'd my soule, and made me vow A desperate destruction to my selfe, Except from you I have one gracious smile May stile me servant; And for your fathers minde, I know it jumpes with our desires. Sab. My fathers minde? dee thinke his frosty beard, Can temper my affections, No, no, His precepts are too wither'd for my youth; Know sir, That I disdaine those low-borne wormes That will be circumscrib'd by dotage In loves affaires: I scorne to be directed, I am my selfe sir, and my onely soule Is my owne will and humour: But pray whence come these words? Ʋal. From my deepe passions. Sab. Whence those passions. Val. From your faire eyes, they Were the happie guiders of my soule, Vnto this bower of wonder; They fir'd my heart Which burnes, and will doe in remorslesse flames, Vntill from them I doe receive a glance, May sweeten these my torments. Sab. Not so loud I pray you, speake softly sir. They whisper. Fair. Speake Mirabell, May I thinke a proud thought. Mir. O by no meanes sir, they are great sinnes. Fair. This of mine's a vertue. Mir. What may it be sir? Fair. Nothing Lady, but a presumptuous study to be yours. Mir. Sir, you may speake what you please, but first Let it arrive my apprehension what Or how you meane, according to my skill, I will returne my answer.
Fai. Onely to be One of the number that doe still attend Your pleasures becke, and so be stil'd your servant. Mir. Sir, My thoughts nor fortunes ever were so high, To keepe a servant of that consequence, And tis my hope they never will, or shall be. Fai. Breake not a sacred oath, for I have sworne My selfe your servant: then for pitties sake, Doe not infringe my vow. Mir. Well, Tendring your vow, Suppose I shud admit Your selfe into my service, wod ye strive, T' expresse the faith and diligence belongs Vnto a servant. Fair. My pleasure and delight shud fixe, On nothing more than to expresse, My faith and loyalty. Mir. Well, I admit you into my service, But by the way you may perhaps observe Some passages betwixt a friend and me, As letters, tokens passages, or so; Which if ye doe, take heede ye word it not, But still possesse your selfe with secresie. Fair. Betwixt a friend and you? — umph. Mir. Ne're scratch your head about it, for y' are now My servant. Fair. I am, I've sworne it, and I will be so, But yet ye did not heare me sweare my selfe, A servant to your friend — Ile none of that. Mir. Your reason? Fai. Tis love that makes me here present my selfe, And with my selfe to tender up my soule, Engag'd by vowes and oathes to waite upon No creature but your selfe: Love is the spurre that prickes me on to this, And love you know can brooke no rivalls. Mir. Doe you love and serve your selfe?
Fai. You and my selfe I doe. Mir. Your self's the friend I meane, and this discourse Has beene a true prospective glasse, whereby To peepe into your minde, which now I finde Full fraught with sweetnesse, when I did desire, Ye wod keepe private what ye did observe, 'Twas nothing else But to be secret to your selfe and me; Sir, in a word, I doe embrace your love. Fair. Be not too prodigall of thy goodnesse sweet, Consider what a scarciti's of it now Ith' world. Mir. Let this suffice sir, — I am yours. Sab. Pray let me intreate ye to love your selfe a little better than to spend all this breath to no purpose. Ʋal. Why then Ile take my leave, but first, let this snow white hand but daine to blesse the unhallowed lippes of your admiring Slave, that I may hence with gladnesse, and have cause to boast of something. Sab. With all my heart sir; but I pray how long were you Doctor of the chaire in the schoole of complements? Val. O they can never come from a dejected spirit. Kisses her hand. Sab. Well, now I hope you are satisfied. Val. I wish my heart could truely speake it. Sab. Come, come, you are too importunate. Val. O let not anger bend so smooth a brow, Not for the earths hid minerall wod I give The least occasion of a frowne to thee, For if I shud, I should perpetually abhorring my selfe Though not a word, Yet let me have one glance before I goe, For nothing faire one speakes a lovers minde, So well as the eye, Sab. They talke of women, but you are able to teach all the women in the world to talke much to little purpose, for ought I see; come I must tutor ye a little, I see that. Val. Were I so happy to be your Pupill, I were a wonder
to my selfe. Fai. If it were so I thinke you wod not be much troubled to make him untrusse forsooth. Val. For pitties sake jest not at pitties object: Little knowest thou the miseries of him, That has his amorous flames return'd with scorne: Well, since tis thus, I will my selfe translate From this mortality, and embrace my Fate. To them Sir Timothy Testy, Sir Plenteous Crambagge. Sir T. No further, no further, pray returne. Sir P. Good sir give me leave to bring you a little further. Sir T. Pray yee, returne, ye doe but trouble your selfe and me to no purpose, well, Sir Plenteous Crambagge I thanke ye. Sir P. Farwell good sir Timothy Testy. Sir T. Come girles, come— where's Hilts? — ha. Where is he? Enter Hilts. Where are you sir, when ye shud waite upon me? —ha, Where I say? Hilts. I was but ith' cellar, forsooth. Sir. T. Ith' cellar forsooth? what businesse have you ith' cellar for sooth? who shud waite upon me the whilst? where∣fore doe I give you three pound a yeare, and a trencher-cloake? — ha? — well— Sir P. Farewell sir Plenteous, Sir P. Farewell good sir Timothy Testy. Exit sir Tim. cum suis. How does my cosin Fairefaith? how shall we squander away this afternoone, can you tell? Fair. As you please sir. Sir P. Come, I have a mighty minde to be merry, what so ere the matter is. Fai. I'me very glad of it sir. Sir P. But I have alwayes observed that when I am so ex∣treamely dispos'd to mirth, one vexation or other falls pre∣sently in the very nicke. Fair. It falls so sometimes sir. Sir. P. Well come, what de'e say gallants?
My thoughts me thinkes are on a jocond pin, I am strain'd up to a mightie pleasant key, me thinkes. Fai. What say you cosin Valentine? Ʋal. What ye please. Sir P. Nay, I' me indifferent, my masters walke the fields. Goe by Water, see a Play, or what ye will, tis All one to me, come what say you sonne, — speake? Which of these three, come, come, you are too sad▪ Say, what shall wee doe? Val. What yee will sir, I confesse I doe sometimes Walke the fields, thinking to purge vexatious thoughts, but wheresoever I turne mine eye, something or other ministers occasion of fresh tortures: when I go by water, then the waves that tumble one in the others necke, present to my fancy the multiplicity of distraction crowding in at the doore of my thoughts, and for seeing a Play, I confesse it a brave thing, both to feast the wit, and recreate the minde: but, I thinke I shall ere be long see my selfe act my owne Trage∣die. Sir P. I told you cosin, this Sunny flash wud have a storme; Whats the matter sonne? — ha? — Why thus dejected? — Speake—cosin, what is the businesse? What ayles my sonne? Fa. No great hurt sir. Sir P. Speake man, heres none but friends, unbrest your selfe, Whats the matter I say? Ʋal. Nothing, nothing sir, onely a melancholy fit. Sir P. Nothing? thats strange—Cosin, how comes my sonne thus discontented? what wud he have? Fa. Sir, to stretch your patience no further than it will reach, tis a gentlewoman that hee wud have, a good lustie hansome gentlewoman. Sir P. A gentlewoman? how dee meane a gentlewoman? What wud he doe with her cosin? Fa. I cannot tell sir, he has a use for her it seemes, hee is in love with her, you may imagine now what hee wud doe with her.
Sir P. How? in love with a gentlewoman? You are a forward boy indeede — I hope 'Tis with one that hath a good portion, if not youth by Gold and silver, you and I shall not be friends — umph: In love quoth a? It is a thing cosen, I never yet knew What it was, and yet I'me three score and upwards. Fa. Not sir, Were ye not in love with your Lady before ye married her? Sir P. Tis true, I had a great deale of money with her. Fa. More than your sonne's like to have with this gentle∣woman I heare. Sir P. Say ye so? how comes this about sonne? — ha? Ist possible? Ʋal. Sir, Tis not this transitory pelfe, Nor all the trumperie the world cries up That I respect; no, I esteeme a soule Sweetned with education; Let dung admirers idolize their bagges; Tis not for man, In whom there dwells an immortality: I have made a choice, Not for such by respects, this creature is The pride and darling both of love and fame: Sir, know that I Scorneto dishonor my good starres so farre, As to besmeare my soule with trash, Or to prophane Loves sacred rites for wealth. Sir P. Come, come, tell not me of education, and I cannot tell what, I must have money, I cannot purchase land With education not I, neither with all your Philosophy, I tell you, I must have Mony, and I will have mony — but prethee cosin what is this Gentlewoman — ha? Fa. A brave lusty bouncing Lasse, I can ell ye— what dee thinke of Mistresse Sabina Testy, daughter to Sir Timothy Testy. Sir P. What of her?
Fa. She is the goddesse of your sonnes idolatry. Sir P. Shee? Passion of my heart, sonne, coud'st thou finde no body else to dote on but she? did I carke, and care, and watch, and toile and moyle, and sweate for this — ha? have I endur'd a thousand millions of curses for exacting of forfeitted bonds, and morgag'd lands for this? Sir Timothy Testy's daughter, quoth a? a wild slut, her father a decai'd gentleman, and one that with riot and excesse has cut so many collops out of his estate, that sometimes he is glad to keepe his chamber, and gentily begin a course of physicke two or three yeares together, Sir Timothy Testy's daughter quoth a? Val. O my heart, me thinkes it teares in a thousand shivers, Mistresse — father — friends, and all averse to my desires, be not so cruell Fates. Sir P. Well, to be short, if sir Timothy can, or will, give a considerable portion, tis a match, if not, Pardona moy, good son, I will not have a brood of beggers in my house — not I. Fa. Stay a little sir, the greatest matter you doe not either know, or consider, were your consent the thing, that I thinke wod not be much stood upon; but here comes the breake necke of the businesse; the gentlewoman scornes him. Sir P. How? scorne the Crambags? Sir, Be it knowne to all men by these presents, that there's ne're a gentleman of 'em all but are now and then glad to be beholden to the Crambagges; she scorne him? come cosin, Ile goe talke with her father about it, but first Ile know her portion. Exeunt sir Plen. and Faire. Ʋal. Tis in vaine, she cannot love, not? why can she not love? am I so vile a thing? no, I am not, whats the reason then? tis her immortall minde that wings her thoughts above my reach, there, there 'tis; what shall I doe then? turne co∣ward and suffer it; nay, what can I doe — what? I can die — O ye fields of blisse, If ye containe a flowrie grove of rest, Prepar'd for those that must needs dye for love, Embrace my vowes, and entertaine that soule
That flies for shelter to your sacred shades, Offers to draw. Come forth thou purge of melancholy, Rip up this lumpe of sadnesse, cut those chaines, Wherewith my soule is linckt to miserie; —Stay,—come downe proud thoughts, Consider well what ye attempt to doe: Am I a sacrifice for such a wight? — O no, Ile then resolve to live, Although it be but to torment my selfe, And thinke that torment pleasure, cause tis shee, For whom alone I suffer miserie. Actus Secundus. Enter sir Timothy Testy, sir Plenteous Crambagge. Sir T. PIsh, pray sir doe not urge me, I'me a little busie. Sir P. Tis but a word sir, and the matter ends. Sir T. Words, or matter, I cannot heare it now I tell ye. Sir P. Tis a concernement requires your serious intention, as much as mine sir. Sir T. Sir, I doe not use to step out of my humour, neither for my owne sake, nor no mans else. Sir P. Tis for your owne profit and good, pray heare it sir. Sir T. Well, lets here it then, lets heare it, but dee heare, be breefe. Sir P. Thus it is. Sir T. Nay, come come, make an end, make an end. Sir P. I have not begun yet sir. Sir T. Preethee make an end I say. Sir P. Well, then you shall heare the end: my sonne Va∣lantine has a minde to make a conjunction copulative with your daughter Sabina. Sir T. Speake in a plainer part of speech man, what dee meane? Sir P. He has a minde to lye with her sir. Sir T. Ile see him hang'd first, except he marry her first. Sir P. So he does entend sir, but you would not heare the beginning, which made me beginne at the end.
Sir T. Well, come to th'point, what saies my daughter too't? Sir P. Rich Parents ne're question that sir, they first wisely agree upon Portions, seale Writings, then marry the young couple, and afterwards, give 'em time to consider of that, if we may have your consent, I make no question of hers. Sir T. Well, ye have it, ye have it. Sir P. I thanke yee sir, I shall make my sonne a glad man when I come home sir. Sir T. Send 'em joy, come, is this all ye have to say? Sir P. Tis all sir. Sir T. Well, fare yee well. Sir P. Stay sir, I had like to have forgot the maine businesse. Sir T. Puh, yet againe, speake, speake come, what ist? Sir P. I wud desire to know sir what blessings you meane to bestow upon your daughter? Sir T. Pish, dee thinke Ile be backward in these things? She shall have a thousand. Sir P. Tis a faire portion sir. Sir T. Have ye done now? Sir P. I have done, I have done, heavens protect ye sir— Sir T. A due, a due. Sir P. —Good sir, but one word more, and then I have done. Sir T. What againe, what ailes the man tro? Sir P. Onely this sir, I hope you'le pay the money upon the wedding day sir, will not ye? Sir T. Money? — what money? Sir P. The marriage money sir. Sir T. What marriage money? Sir P. The thousand pound. Sir T. The thousand pound? what dee meane sir? Sir P. Did you not say but now you wod give a thousand pound with her? Sir T. I told you I wod give her a thousand blessings; passion of my heart, a thousand pound quoth a? sir I scorne it; ye have abus'd me to thinke so, let those scraping curmud∣gions, that for the most part beget riples and idiots like them∣selves, I say, let those doo't J tell ye; on the wedding day, as I said, Ile give her a thousand blessings with all my heart. Sir P. And ne're a penny of mony? Sir. Not a penny.
Sir P. What? Not with your owne childe? Sir T. Not a Denier, not one Denier: Sir P. Why then give me leave to tell yee, your resolution is unworthy, nay, tis scurvy. Sir T. How scurvy? and in my owne house too? Sir P. Ay scurvy, and I must tell yee, argues no better than a beggerly disposition. Sir T. Beggerly disposition? O basenesse it selfe. Sir P. Base, I n'ere stood yet sir with my cap in my hand to a Scrivener for the procuring of ten pounds upon my owne bond. Sir T. How? I stand with my cap in my hand ye rascall? when? when? how? to whom? I stand with my cap in my hand? — I defie thee. Enter Hilts. I stand with my cap in my hand? Hilts. How now? what dee affront my master in's owne house sir, pray avoide. Sir T. Out of my house ye dunghill, ye dirt, yee spawne of ten ith hundred. Hilts. Come, come sir, lets see your backe, or your wor∣ships pate feele the weight of my cudgell. Sir T. Out ye villaine. Sir P. Very well sir. Exit sir Plenteous. Sir T. A slave abuse me thus, and in my owne house too. Hil. Come sir, doe not trouble your selfe, he's gone now Sir T. A Sirra, an old Pancridge. Hilts. Nay I see you are bell mettle sir if you'r angred once. Sir T. Angry? twas well thou cam'st in, for in my con∣science I had kill'd the rogue else. Enter Sabina, Mirable. Whorson dogbolt affront me thus. Sab. Whats the matter Hilts, who has vext my father thus Sir T. Old Crambag forsooth, has beene here and so abus'd me as I was never abus'd since I peept into the world, and whats the reason forsooth, because his son and heire's in love with you forsooth, and entends to make you his bride forsooth, therefore must I give thim a thousand pound forsooth, but Ile see him hang'd for a signe ats owne doore first; the truth is
daughter, his sonne is a pretty gentleman, but heres the thing, his sonne, as I perceive is mad in love, and for ought I see, rather than faile, he will give me a thousand pound for my consent, were not I an Asse then Hilts, to give a man a thou∣sand pound to marry my daughter; when the same man ra∣ther than goe without her will give it me? were not I a Buz∣zard then I say? Hilts. A man wod thinke so sir. Sir T. Why shod I doe it —ha? give me but a why, and I'me satisfied? Hilts. In troth sir I cannot give you any great reason, un∣lesse your purse were sicke of a Plurifie which I cud ne're finde yet. Sir. T. Well, for the businesse of marriage, use your owne minde daughter, I cannot tell, perhaps the old curre may leave him an estate — Well, once trouble not me, and doe your pleasure, but if you talke of money, I shall be angry, come along Hilts. Exit sir T. Hilts. This young gentleman, a nimble sparke I see, that I did not thinke the young co wod have beene leaping so quickly —therefore doe you hamper him as soone as yee can, dee heare. Within. Come away Hilts. Hilts. I'me comming and please your worship. Exit Hil. Sab. Advise me in this dangerous maze to steere a safe course. Mir. Yee are in a faire way to doe your selfe a great deale of good, keepe your selfe in't sister, the gentlemans a great heire, sweetly behav'd, bravely discourst▪ and besides, a pro∣per hansome compleate gentleman, what can you desire more sister? Sab. Sister, I love the gentleman, at first, I confesse, I did a little sleight him, but my second thoughts fram'd a recanta∣tion which my intentions have directed to salute him spe∣dily. Mir. A way with it sister, give it not a minuts more enter∣tainement for a world, send it immediatly. Sab. Come, Ile dispatch it instantly.
Mir. Be certaine ye doe sister. Exeunt Sab. Mir. Enter Valentine, Fairefaith, Sportlove, Trash. Val. —umph, And was I borne to the sport of Fate, Cud not the destinies as well have said Be happy — inexorable starres, Had ye but doom'd me to have trod the pathes Of dreadfull banishment never to returne, T'had beene a heaven in respect of this — But tis in vaine, Vpon the statutes of the starres to plaine; I must even rush upon some desperate death, And theres an end. Fa. Heaveans forbid sir. Ʋal. Theres no remedy, her loves impossible. Sport. Impossible? why dee thinke the world containes a creature cannot be won. Ʋal. Yes indeed? Sport. You might as well have told mee, that hee that has a Puritanicall wife cannot be a cuckold sir; take this from me, there's not the bravest gallant that e're went naked to the middle, but a hansome man, good cloathes, language, and money will bring her under the see, I warrant yee. Fa. Sir, me thinkes it were not a misse if you did cast your eye upon some other, the world is wide and populous, and now and then to looke a squint, wud be a good way to as∣swage the violence of your passion. Val. O no, she—she is the blasing starre where on I gaze, and the little world of beautie which I admire. Tr. O brave Master — there was a speech; O Master Sportlove, this learning's a dainty matter — dee heare sir, shall I goe and tell her what ye say? — Sport. You cannot come againe time enough, let it a∣lone. Tr. I warrant ye sir. Exit Trash. Fa. Come, Try her againe sir, ye cannot tell, droppes of raine may pierce an Adamant.
Spo. That's with often falling upon't sir, if he cud but learne that, she wud love him presently. Fa. Push, away with these fruitlesse passions, be your selfe once againe. Spo. That cannot be sir, you must consider he is in love. Fa. Why, cannot a man be in love, and yet be him∣selfe too? Spo. He may be, but 'tis raro aut nunquam, jealousie in a wo∣man, love in a man, and tooth ach in a dogge, are three of the most dangerous things I can tell ye, that are incident to mor∣talls. Enter Trash. Tr. Nay, I'me come againe gentlemen. Spo. What already, and done your errand too? Tr. O rarely, sir, I had it as perfect — Ʋal. Sirra, what did yee tell her? you are so officious. Fr. I told her sir, that your worship said, she was the staring blaze whereon you gaz'd, and the world of little beau∣ty which you admir'd. Ʋal. Out ye rogue, yee small knowing rascall, thou hast undone me; did I tell ye so? dost thou goe and turne my words backwards, ye villaine. Falls upon him. Tr. Gentlemen, if I cud runne away from him, I wud not be beholden to yee, for shame, doe not stand still and see a man kill'd. Fa. It was but a mistake sir, pray pardon him. Tr. Twas nothing sir, but onely the wrong end came out first, the gentlewoman understood it well enough. Spo. Come, pray ye sir have patience. Val. I must kill the rogue, for he will never have wit. Tr. Forbid that sir, if men shud be kill'd for want of wit, I had beene a Masterlesse coxcombe long agoe sir, but tis no matter, you may use me at your pleasure. Sp. Come, come, all's well, all's well. Tr. I thats true indeede, when I'me beaten once, then all's well still. Fa. But Mr. Sportlove, nothing but this gentlewoman troubles me, that she shud be so faire, so young, so hansome, and yet cannot love — me thinkes 'tis strange.
Spo. It may be she feedes upon preserv'd snow, which if she doe, she'le seldome have a warme thought, I can tell yee, Fa. Nay, her diet's good Ile assure yee, for she will con∣stantly have a breakefast of Oringoes, a dinner of Potatoes, a Sacke posset to supper, and so goes to bed. Tr. If she feede thus, tis impossible for the poore gentle∣woman to hold out long. Enter Betty with a Letter. Val. Fellow servant, how fares our Mistresse? Tr. Ye were told but just now, were not yee? Bett. This Letter was commanded first to kisse your hand, and then enforme yee. Ʋal. To the gentle hand of her dearest Valentine addresse these. The Letter. Ʋal. Sir, I hope by this time your good nature has granted a pardon for my seeming rashnesse, which proceeded not from a minde fraught with disdaine, but grounded on a reso∣lution to be your servant, th'old man's not yet in bed, but halfe an houres forbearance lockes him up in slumber; about which time my ambition is to see you at my chamber, where my servant shall attend to give you accesse to, Your respective handmaide, Sabina Testy. Tr. Now sir you wud runne into the fire, and drowne your selfe, wud ye? what dee thinke of me now sir, did I not doe my errant bravely sir, did not I? Ʋal. Thou hast done ingeniously, and I will study corre∣spondent gratitude. Tr. Nay, pray sir, I had as leefe you did beate me agen, as give me hard words forsooth, I cannot endure 'em. Val. O how precious are those minuts wherein are wrapt unexpected joyes, sweete peece of paper; faire was that starre under whose influence thou wert made— O this halfe houres forbearance, pardon sweet heart, passion had almost made me forget a due respect. Kisses her. Tr. Pray sir doe not charge your memory with these things, leave 'em to me sir. Ʋal. To you sir, wherefore?
Tr. Because shee is the Sugar-plumme—of my af∣fections sir. Val. Cry yee mercy, farewell pretty Ducke; tell your Mistresse I will flie like time, till I have blest these eyes with the sight of her. Exit Betty. Fai. Cosin, y'are now in a progresse towards the gentle∣woman, take a little of my advice along with ye — ha∣ving now the advantage of a faire opportunitie, try her every way, you know my meaning, and then as you finde her dis∣pos'd, you may better dispose of your affections. Spo. Sir, were it in my case, I tell ye in plaine termes, I wud promise her a thousand things, and it may be for a nights lodging, I wud vow'em and sweare 'em too; but when J had once satisfied my purposes, I wud shew her a faire paire of heeles, and there's an end. Tr. Spoke like a gentleman, Ile assure yee sir. Val. Tis easie sporting where no paine is felt, Come, come, lets goe. Fai. We attend your pleasure sir, for I perceive you long to be where your minde is. Tr. A lacke aday, you must consider sir every thing wud live. Val. Sweet, I come. Exit Val. Fai. Spo. Didst ever see a passion so transport a man, heaven blesse his wits. Tr. Twas a good prayer sir, but he must have 'em first. Exeunt Spo. Trash. Enter Sabina, Betty. Sab. What said he Betty when he read the Letter. Bett, Hee was so ravisht with joy, that J thinke he knew not what hee said forsooth, and for the letter, he did so cull it, and lull it, and clip it, and hugge it, and busse it—O me Mi∣stresse, this love— Sab. Tis a pretty pleasant vexation; but did he say hee wud come? Bett. He told me he wud come with all speede, and that hee shud thinke every minute a hundred yeares till hee saw yee, with many other pretty words which I cannot re∣peate
for sooth. Sab. I shall be extreame melancholy till I see him; but are you sure he did say he wud come? Bett. Very certaine, forsooth. Sab. How long dee thinke it will be first? Bett. Your owne appointment was halfe an houre, but for ought I saw, he was resolv'd not to forbeare so long forsooth. Sab. Prethee Betty helpe me to cosen the time a little with some pretty love Song. Bett. That will but make yee the more melancholy for∣sooth. Sab. Though it doe, yet me thinkes I love it dearely. Bett. Me thought yee said ye were afraid of being melan∣choly but now forsooth? Sab. I did so, and so I am, and yet I love it. Bett. I had heard 'em say forsooth, that melancholy people are like Spaniells. Sab. Why prethee? Bets. They say a Spaniell, the more a man beates him the more he fawnes upon him; so melancholy people, me thinkes, the more the humor torments 'em the more they love it. Sab. Tis very true, come reach me my Lute— prethee sing Betty. A Song. BE not so cruell fairest Boy, But unstring thy golden bow, In love we must expect no joy, Nothing there but sorrow's flow; If thy flaming arrow did But touch, yet it still appeares, We must for ever after bid Farewell joye, and welcome teares; Tell us, then tell us where doth grow, The herbe that cures the wounded eye, Else we must cry alas and woe, There's no such herbe that growes, and dye. Sab. Twas well sung. Bett. No indeede forsooth my voyce is quite gone, Cham∣bermaides have occasion you know forsooth now and then to
sit up in the nights when they have businesse to doe, and that spoiles a maids voyce quickly forsooth —they knocke. Sab. They're come I vow, runne to the doore. She runnes to doore and lets them in. Enter Ʋalentine, Fairefaith, Sportlove, Trash the three Gentlemen salute Sabina. Tr. My little Tewxbury mustard, how does thou doe? Bett. Mustard? why mustard, pray ye? Tr. Because I never come neere thee, but thou makes my very eyes water. Fai. Sir, tis fit wee now withdraw; the darkenesse of the night preswaded our attendance, now common civilitie re∣quires our absence—pleasures attend your proceedings sir. Spo. Sweet night embrace ye sir. Ʋal. Thankes noble sir, peace conduct ye. Exeunt Fair. Sport. Betty. Tr. Well now your worships pleas'd I hope —but stay, Where's Betty? Sab. She's gone out with the gentlemen. Tr. Gone out with the gentlemen quoth a? and I stand here. Exit Trash. Val. Your courteous invitation makes some recompence for the late scorne with which you did slight my honest zeale. Sab. I doe acknowledge sir The error of my rashnesse, and begge pardon, I have inform'd my judgement better since; And you appeare to my opinion More acceptable farre than when you first Presented your desires with your selfe, That now shall want no fitting entertainement To satisfie the first neglect. Ʋal. I cannot deny, but that it made Of some sad thoughts within me, but I A little rectified, consideration Hath almost cur'd my passions, and my fire Of love is some what abated. Sab. The few houres
Are added to my age, since you last saw me, Have made no wrinkles yet upon that beauty, To which you then did give large attributes, And to be cold so soone, argues 'twas onely Your flattery and courtship. Val. Not so Lady, I ne're dissembled any false intents, My words were the true characters of my thoughts, Onely your scorne, —there tis. Sab. Sir I amalter'd much From that bad humor, and my heart hath tane A flame into it from the observation Of your compleate deservings, and is ready To answer your desires. Val. You engage me To a due gratitude, but I have setled New resolutions. Sab. Sir, ye are now revengefull, And punish scorne with scorne; a gentle nature Wud not deny a reconciliation Vpon such tearmes; but you suspect my freenesse. I blush to thinke on't, and am sorry sir, The offer of my selfe is no more valued, Than thus to be refus'd, streight my servant Shall be your guide, and so I wish sweete peace To your faire thoughts. She offers to goe, he brings her backe. Val. They are the fairer, Lady, In that they have called backe your fairest selfe To be their object. Sab. Call not backe your humour To flatter me. Val. By my best hopes I doe not; A Saints devotion  earnester, Or more free fro ny pocrisie than my love: I owne not a desire but what is yours; And if agen you chide my forward zeale, My danger will be more in the relapse, Than in the first disease which you have cur'd;
In steed of healing Balmes, apply no Corrasives To my sicke heart, but gently entertaine My second motions, for next to Eternitie You are my happinesse. Sab. You did intimate That you had fixt upon some other beauty, From whose pure excellence, a brighter flame Is shot, than my dull eyes can sparkle forth; If it be so I shall not envy it. Val. Your error Was a just motive I confesse, but when I said I had setl'd new resolutions, I did but dissemble, which pray pardon first, And then receive me to your faire opinion, By all the sacred powers, religious mortalls Invoke to make an oath of power to force Beleefe, you onely must be she, Or none; in whose blest union I shall joy, And satisfie my kinreds expectation Of issue. Sab. Urge no more, My Faith takes all for truth, and in exchange Of your deare selfe, delivers up my selfe as freely. Val. This blest minute doth deserve A note in times large register. Sab. To morrow Let it have publike motion 'fore our friends; And when you please the consummation Of our full joyes shall follow: Deare, farewell, I must to bed. Val. I will goe with ye sweet — Sab. Forbid ye chast directors of my soule, Desire shud be so forward ere the Ceremonies Confirme it lawfull. Val. Why shud we be nice, And stand upon the outside of our actions More than the substance, though we shud anticipate
Those pleasures, since our vowes are past we neede not Have scruple, they'le beget a second doubt, And make the earnestnesse of love suspected. Sab. O fie upon't sir, doe not cloud your vertue With such a staine, y'are lovely to me yet, And shall be whilst y'are faithfull — Ile to bed And wish you rest. Val. Good night. Sab. Are ye a man? And wud not take A better leave of me? Exit Sabina looking backe. Val. How looking backe, and leaving ope the doore, Ile leave you such an earnest, if I can Prevaile, that you shall sweare I am a man. Exit after her. Actus Tertius. Enter Fairefaith, Sportlove, and Trash. Fai. MY cosin Valentine not yet return'd, say ye? Spo. Not yet indeed sir. Fai. What dee thinke shud be the reason? Spo. Tis not reveal'd to me sir; but I thinke hee prevail'd with his Mistresse for a nights lodging, and that may be the cause of his long stay. Tr. He has staid something long indeede, but —I be∣leeve he will come home very shortly forsooth. Fai. I confesse I long to be acquainted with the issue of his enterprise. Enter Valentine, Betty, Trash runnes to him. Tr. Oh my sweete Master's come agen. Val. I am so. Tr. And you are even as welcome sir, as ever poore Ma∣ster was to a servant. Val. —Pray sweete heart returne, let not me trouble ye. Bett. No trouble sir, — if you have any other commands
T' impose, I shall joy t'observe'em. Val. Not I sweete heart, onely fare ye well. Exit Betty. Tr. O my sweete hony-suckle, art thou gone already. Val. Good starres, gentlemen. Fai. Faire morning to my sweete cosin, we hope health betides your Mistresse, and doe now expect to be gladded with the newes of a faire progresse to the end of your desires. Val. The end of my desires is even the desire of my end, for I have no joy on earth. Fai. What agen in these perplexities, whence come these clouds of discontent now? — ye tooke no joy before be∣cause ye had no hope t'enjoy her, in whom ye had plac'd all your hopes and joyes, the cause of that distempers remov'd, what may occasion this — heavens know. Spo. Ye cannot tell sir, perhaps the letter was dissembl'd, and she in some idle humor might send for him to abuse him. Val. O cosin Fairefaith, this gentlewoman — Fai. What? cannot she love yet? Val. Yes — love? O yes. Fai. Whence rise these distractions then? Val. Even from her love. Fai. How? can neither frownes nor smiles give ye satis∣faction, tis some what strange, two meere contraries shud pro∣duce the very same effect. Val. She has with love undone her selfe and me. Spo. There's some mysterie in't without question. Fai. I pray sir untie these knotty expressions, for I cannot. Val. To be too prodigall of that, which once lost, the whole world cannot recover — weakenesse intolerable Admit Iurg'd her, I'de thought the treasures not of earth or sea Cud have perswaded such a brave borne minde, Vnto the pleasures of forbidden sheets. Fai. O sir, is the winde in that corner now? Spo. What dee thinke of my opinion now sir. Val. O cosin Fairefaith, had I beene a woman — Tr. You wud have beene an arrant whore in my consci∣ence. Aside.
Val. I say, if I had beene a woman cosin, Armies of Virgine resolutions shud Have still environd me: O misery! Had she beene cautious in preserving that, That rien of immortality her honor; Earth had not carried such a Paragon; But now Her outward frame sets but the blacker dye Vpon her mindes deformity; I'me now resolv'd To hate those very thoughts that pitch upon So pure a peece of impurity. Tr. Puh, what needes all this stirre Master, suppose yee have found her to want a graine or two, doe but consider of it, 'tis nothing amongst friends; alacke a day sir, the Gold∣smith himselfe may be cosen'd with a light peece, ant shall please your worship. Fai. But will not ye visit her againe? Val. Never — never. Spo. Nor send to her? Val. No, neither my selfe, nor any one depends on me shall ere come there againe. Tr. O poore Betty, I shall ne're see thee againe, I perceive that. Ʋal. Come cosin, I must be gone. Fai. Sir, I shall intreate to be excus'd, I have engag'd my selfe to meete a friend, Which will expect me here immediatly. Farewell cosin. Exeunt Val. Sport. Trash. Trash turne, agen Tr. Dee heare sir? Fai. Come, what say you? Tr. I have a strange thing come just now into my head sir, and that's this sir; there's Newgate for Theeves, Bridewell for Whores, and Bedlam for Madfolkes, yet among all these I doe wonder there's ne're a place for fooles. Fai. 'Twere a charitable foundation had a man meanes to doo't with, your Master has an estate, and might doe well to
thinke of such a thing. Tr. Ye say right sir indeede; charitie shud begin at home, that's the truth on't—but let me tell yee sir, this gentle∣woman does a little trouble my scull for all that. Fai. What a capcase were I in, if her sister shud be of the same stampe, what wud the world say, what wud men thinke? Tr. What? — they wud thinke ye were borne when the signe was either in Aries, Taurus, or Capricorne, that's all they wud thinke for ought I know, and so fare yee well. Exit Trash. Fair. Children and fooles tell truth, well If't be my fate, there's no remedy, Nor friend to flie unto in such a case But honest patience. Enter Mirabell. Stay, here she comes, Ile see, If in her carriage I can reade my fortune — What my Mirabell—unexpected happinesse. Mir. How dee sir? Fai. Better then I was. Mir. Why? were ye sicke sir? Fai. Suppose I had beene, or am, your presence wud beget a health immediatly, J confesse I was not even now so well as now I am, because I wanted thee which now I have sweetest. Mir. I shud be loth to be found wanting, when your occa∣sions call upon my service sir. Fai. Sweetly spoken faire Mirabell, But heare me, Admit I had a strange occasion now To try thy bosome, wudst thou be content To runne a hazard that might manifest Thy love and loyalty? Mir There's not a danger in the world can be So dreadfull to my thoughts, but I wud runne T'embrace it for the pleasure of my love; But pray sir, what meane these doubts? Fai. Nothing faire one, onely a conceit.
Mir. May it concerne me sir. Fai. Yes —'tis but a thing incident to all your Sexe. Mir. Please you t' unlocke your minde sir, Ile study what I can to purge your thoughts. Fai. Tis onely this —I feare you are too coy, That's all my feare, too coy Mirabell, too coy, Mir. Coinesse! O heavens! tis the only object of my scorne s;ir, I doe not thinke there's such a thing ith' world, Or that kinde nature Was e're the mother of so vile a monster; Were I perswaded that my veines contain'd, But the least dramme of such a peevish humor, Though't kept my heart alive Ide rince it out; In a word I disdaine it. Fai. My hopes say you doe. Mir. Sir, if you please, Put your invention to the racke, Till it finde out some strange device to try Whether I'me coy or no; Breath but a syllable, and it straight commands The mind or person to serve Your pleasures. Fai. There's not a tittle of a word in this, But has its quire of harmony; But why doe I deferre so great a blisse? Come, let love embraces crowne our sweete desires. Mir. What dee meane sir? Fai. Onely a gentle taste of loves delicious sweets. Mir. What, before we marry? Fair. Yes. Mir. Your reason. Fai. O it puts life into a patient expectation — come. Mir. Pray forbeare sir. Fai. How? forbeare? What's become of this present minuts protestations. Mir. I never dream'd that you Had ever sullied your well tutor'd soule With such a vile intention.
Fai. Come, come, where twining hearts unite What neede these scruples? Mir. Sir, Staine not your brest with such ignoble thoughts, Tis true — I scorne proud coinesse, but I doe abhorre To thinke of this. Fai. O that those eyes Shud be the portalls to a heart of flint, I cannot endure it; Come, come, I must needs satisfie my flames. Therefore no more excuse. Mir. Sir, ye have uttr'd words Doe breath an aire wud kill a Basiliske; Call yee this love? 'Tis rather treason 'gainst Loves Majestie▪ Will you pretend t'expresse a love to me, And yet speake ruine to my reputation; Banish these thoughts, or else for ever be A detestation to my bosome. Fai. Dwell in thy goodnesse, gentle love; 'Twas not to please a wanton appetite, Or spot thy shrine of Virgine puritie That I have spoke; No it was onely but to trie the strength Of thy resolves in goodnesse, what before I did but love, I now admire; But— If like thy sister thou hadst swarv'd a jot, From that integritie wherewith I see Thy minde is fortified, I shud have cut Thee off from my acquaintance. Mir. How's this? if like my sister, say ye? What has she done, pray ye? Fai. No great hurt forsooth. Mir. If ye love me tell me sir. Fai. Now ye conjure me, I will. My cosin Ʋalentine Crambagge that was so in love with her, it seemes he prevail'd with her a little too much, to give it ye
in plaine termes he has lyen with her, glutted himselfe with the sweet spoiles of her virginity, and now for ought I heare by the vertue of Hocus Pocus, my gentlemans gone. Mir. Accursed fate, Sabina thus dishonor'd, And by thy kinsman? I feare too much of that detested blood Flowes in thy veines, henceforth Ile not converse Either wirh thee or any other man That is of kindred to him, pray ye be gon, Your presence turnes my very stomacke up, Take't as ye please, I must for e're discard ye. Fair. Displeas'd with me for his faults? Mir. Tis all one, speake not —reply not—your sentence Is this —fare ye well. Fai. I obey it — Exit Fairefaith. Mir. It has beene still observ'd since time begun That sweetest natures still are soonest wonne, This is the fate that usually attends Best dispositions: Poore women! into how many fooles paridices are wee daily brought by these wicked men! Enter Sir Timothy. Ah poore sister. Sir T. How now, what ayles your sister now? Mir. Nothing forsooth. Sir T. What does the wedding hold or no? —ha? Mir. Shees wedded already sir. Sir T. How? and I not know on't? what a forward sawcy girle's this? But is she married indeede? Mir. Yes, to misery, shame, and infamy. Sir T. What's the matter girle? — ha? — speake — what's the matter? Mir. Hee that pretended so much love to her, I meane young Crambragge. Sir T. Ay —what of him? —ha? what's the businesse I say? Mir. O Sister, sister! Sir T. Daughter, I charge ye tell me what the matter is,
what of young Crambagge? Mir. He — that villaine has by smooth words wrought upon her gentle nature, to her perpetuall dishonor; to tell ye the plaine truth sir, he has lyen with her, publish'd it abroad to her disgrace, and is now fled. Sir T. —umph — lyen with her? — and fled? Is there no thunder left above the skye? Is Iove growne deafe? or has he sworne to lie A sleepe, and thus forget the earth? Enter Trash. What's your businesse sirra? Tr. Sir, my Master sent me to your worship, to tell your worship, that your worship needs not trouble your selfe a∣bout your daughters portion, for his mindes alter'd, and hee bid tell your worship that he wud intreate your worship to have patience. Sir T. Sirra, your Master's a rascall, and you are another. Tr. O by no meanes, and please your worship. Sir. T. O Mirabell, me thought I had a good opinion of him, he had so civiliz'd her, and me thought had brought her to be the best natur'd girle: Mercilesse fate, My passive fortitude wherewith I once Out-fac'd misfortune now is fled and gone, My daughter thus digrac'd? What's the reason I knew't no sooner? Mir. It comes too soone whensoever sir; The messenger has heeles of lead that brings Good newes, but ill newes flye with Eagles wings. Sir T. Stand fast ye weake supporters of my age Henceforth my hand be pillow to my head, O my perplexed soule! Cud I but leape now from some rockie top, Into the plunging swallow of the sea, 'Twud be some ease, Fetch her Mirabell, fetch her, Exit Mirabell. Alas I little dream'd of this. Tr. Your worship might have dream'd on't, for to my knowledge your worship was a sleepe in your bed when the
businesse was done. Sir T. O that I had the rogue by the eares. Tr. I but he does not desire to give eare to yee. Enter Mirabell, with Sabina very pensive Sir T. Out ye strumpet, ye whore, does thou play the whore and looke me in the face? hast thou playd the baggage? hast thou playd the whore? — Ha? Out of my sight ye queane, get ye out. Exit Sabina. O Mirabell is there no stones, nor water, fire nor sword to be revenged with — Ha? Enter Hilts. Come Sir, you keepe a fine order here, I appoint you to over see my house, and you let gentlemen come in and lye revelling here all the night, you are a trusty Trojan you. Hilts. Tis more then I know Sir, tis the first time I heard on't, if I had seene the sawcy rascalls I wud have sent 'em fur∣ther with a vengeance. Sir T. Abominable — thus to disgrace her selfe and me, where is she, did not I bid ye fetch her? Mir. She has beene here Sir, and you sent her out againe. Sir T. Has shee? I know not, these distractions do so con∣found me, that I forget the last minute: O daughter Mirabell what shud I doe? Tr. Me thinkes your worship shud keepe alwayes a rope about your house against such a desperate case as this is. Sir T. Hilts take that rogue, and dee heare, deliver him from me to the keeper of Bridewell — take him away I say. Hilts. Come Sir come, are ye come hither to jeere? Tr. No Sir, I did not jeere Sir. Sir T. Take him away I say. Hilts. Come along come. Tr. Master Hilts, your master does but jest man. Sir T. Sir your master has abusd my house, and Ile make him smart fort. Tr. Tis like enough and please your worship, but shall I be punisht for the wickednesse of my Masters Codpeece, and please your worship, no no. Sir T. Carry him away I say.
Tr. Your worship's a merry Gentleman, you love to make sport I see that. Sir T. Hilts, I bid you once more carry him away, what dee thinke to laugh me out of my resolutions? Hilts, Come your wayes sirra. Tr. Hilts is in sober sadnesse and please your worship. Sir T. So am I too sirra, carry him I say — Hilts. Was thou mad to talke thus to a Iustice of Peace, a Iustice of Corum horum rotulorum? 'tis as much as thy life's worth. Sir T. A prating sawcy rascall; carry him away. Tr. I beseech your worship forgive me, good your wor∣ship. Sir T. Carry him away I say. Tr. Good your worship forgive me, I beseech your wor∣ship. Sir T. Well, let him goe for this time, get ye gone sirra. Tr. Yes and shall please your worship — gone quoth a? Ile see your worship hang'd before Ile come neere ye againe. Exit Trash. Sir T. O Hilts, this wicked fellow has undone us. Hilts. Who dee meane sir? Mr. Crambagge? Sir T. The same. Hilts. What has he done sir? Sir T. What? my cheeks wud burne to speake it, uncon∣trouleable fates — is there no pitty in your votes. Hilts. Well, if I once meete with him — Sir T. What then? Hilts. I'de make him an example to all the young lads in England, I wud fustinado the carkasse of him till the limbs of the rogue flew one from another, and then I wud beate 'em together againe. Sir T. No, no, if we shud hurt him Hilts, the Law wud be of his side. Hilts. Hurt him, no forsooth, I wud onely bestow a little timber upon the shoulders of him. Sir T. Pish, pish, come, goe your wayes to my cosin Muchcraft the Atturney, tell him I'me comming to him for
his advice; in the meane time doe you put the Case to him for comming into the house at an unseasonable time of the night, goe your wayes, Ile be with ye presently. Exeunt Sir Tim. and Mir. at one doore, Hilts at another. Enter Ʋalentine and Fairefaith. Fai. Your father's comming after us here. Val. Where is he? Enter Sir Plent. Sir P. O sonne—I have beene so abus'd—nay, and a hundred to one but I had beene soundly basted too, and all this to please thee. Fair. As how pray sir? Sir P. I went to treat with sir Timothy about the marriage, and because I stood upon a portion, old Testy was pleas'd to call me a thousand rascalls; and in the heate of the businesse (O my armes!) comes me in that same great horse-bon'd Hilts, and so shakes me; well sonne, Ile even walke in, if a∣ny body come to pay money tell 'em I'me within, if they come for money, tell 'em I'me not well, for this fellow has so bruis'd my armes that I'me not able to tell it; dee heare what I say, to ye sonne? Exit Ʋalentine saying nothing as displeas'd. Nay lowre and pout till Doomsday, tis all one, I will have money before I give my consent, come, come, tell mee no more tales—love quoth a? If I had married for love cosin, I had beene a rogue, a foole, a begger; no, no sonne, I must have money, and I will have mony. Fai. Sir, the last night your sonne went to see his Mistresse, and prevail'd so farre with her, that to tell you the naked truth, they lay together all night; he perceiving her so easily wonne to wantonnesse, and fearing hereafter she might be a little too liberall of her entertainement, has cast her quite off now feares your displeasure for his too much forwardnesse, and that's the cause of his sadnesse. Sir P. How? lay with her—'tis not possible. Fai. Not for a gentleman to lie with a hansome wench, why, 'tis one of the possiblest things that can be sir. Sio P. I'ame sorry to heare it cosin, but I'me glad hee has put her off, a company of rascalls, they are serv'd well enough,
I warrant ye, the poore boy hearing how her father had abus'd me, cud not finde in's heart to love her a jot longer; yet for all that cosin, I like not's humor in this, that he cannot talke with a woman but he must be jobbing presently, I doe not like that I must tell ye — well 'tis done and past now. Fai. I but I'me afraid you'le heare on't again, sir Timothy intends to clap him up till he has made satisfaction, but pray sir voyce it not that I told ye. Sir P. Will he so? tell him, Ile see him hang'd by the necke in the high way to Paddington first; he clap him up? he shall not have so much as a haire of his head except it were to choak himselfe with, and yet my sonne shall goe up and downe, aye, and job him upon the nose too and hee shall not know him; and if you please tell him, that I'me resolv'd before I have done with him, so bitterly to vexe him, that he shall be glad to come with a rope in's hand, and make a humble petition to the Hingman, that he may have lycence to hang himselfe to save his cloathes — come along. Exeunt. Enter Mirabell, Kate. Mir. Not vexe? Why? Doe you thinke there is a woman lives. That has a sister abus'd as mine And not yet be vext? To them Fairefaith. To bring a maid into this misery, And all under loves pretence: This is your kinsman sir, your owne flesh and blood sir. Fai. The more sorry am I forsooth; But if you'le please to entertaine my vowes, Of reall love and service once againe Into your better thoughts, Ile use a meanes That shall preserve her honour from the dust, If not abhorre me. Mir. Let your heart and tongue but correspond And you enslave my soule. Fai. I have already hammer'd in my scull, A vindication that shall make her name Shine to posteritie.
Mir. The boundlesse Ocean of your goodnesse drownes The slendernite of what I can returne. Enter Sabina. Here she comes, if ye can doe her a favour, Both she and I will be glad to snatch all Opportunities to expresse our thankefull minds sir. Fai. Ladies, thus it is, hee has disguis'd himselfe, goes in womans apparell, if ye please Ile bring ye to him, where, if there be occasion, you shall command my best assistance. Kate. Pray ye sir where is the place? Fair. It is at A Shoomakers house in the Strand, but that's all one, follow me. Exeunt Omnes. Much. Budget. Enter Muchcraft, Budget. Bud. Sir. Much. Have ye drawne William Woodcocks plea to Tri∣stram Widgroms declaration — ha? Bud. No sir, the cause is remov'd, Woodcocke fearing to be overthrowne at Common Law, comes with a pittifull long bill, makes a case of conscience on't, and so is flowne away. Much. Is he so? if I had knowne that Budget, I wud have Pluckt his feathers a little first, but 'tis no matter, let him goe. Enter Hilts legging and scraping. What's your errand fellow? Hilts. Fellow? Sir I'me none of your fellowes, not I. Much. I beleeve ye are not, whats your businesse before me? Hilts. Sir I doe not come to doe my businesse before you. Much. What meane these frivolous answers? Whose man are ye sir? Hilts. My masters sir. Much. Very good — what mad man are you pray? Hilts. Mad sir, no more than your selfe—mad sir? —umph. Much. Nay let him alone Budget, wee shall have a brave action of battery here by and by. Hilts. Sir, I belong to the right worshipfull Sir Timothy Testy; my master sent me for your Vice, the Case is this; a Gentleman comes into my masters house at an unreasonable time of the night contrary to my Masters knowne will and command, whether is this a trespasse or no? Much. No, no, prethee doe not trouble me, I'me a little
busie. Enter sir Tim. Sir T. Cosin Muchcraft, how dee sir? Much. Sir Timothy Testy, you are kindely welcome sir, how dee sir? Sir T. Never worse cosin, — even almost dead with griefe, most abominably abus'd. Much. Wherein, pray ye sir? Gives him a fee. Sir Tim. That I will tell more at large hereafter sir, not one∣ly a peece, but my whole love attends ye sir — the case is this; a Gentleman comes into my house, at an uncivill and un∣seasonable time of the night, contrary to my knowne will and command; a Trespasse or no? Much. A trespasse: a transcedent crime sir; a most foule matter, Ile assure ye; your man did not put the Case to mee in this manner. Sir T. Not? ye whoreson blockhead, are yee not able to speake to a man? wherefore doe I keepe ye? —ha? Hilts. I cud not, I had not instructions in my pocket. Much. 'Tis well enough sir, both Law and Equitie supports your cause; come, wee'le walke out and talke of it. Sir T. Your tongue drops honey cosin, and you have re∣vived my staggering spirits: And now though time and age, Cover my head with honorable haires, Yet — Since raies of Sunny thoughts peepe out agen, Ile strive to quell these passions — come Sad sighes, and teares are Oratours of griefe, But 'tis an active braine that brings releese. Exeunt omnes. Actus Quartus. Enter Fairefaith, Sabina in mans apparell, Sportlove, Trash, and Hilts. Fair. Come, pray sir doe not thinke on't. Sab. How shall I stand by and see.
A gentlewoman of my kindred wrong'd? Be patient? And my kinred thus abus'd? my proper flesh And blood disgrac'd, our reputation turn'd Quite topsie turvie, nay, and all this done By a lascivious villaine? No, no, Nothing but's blood shall pacifie my sword; Had but the slave as many thousand lives As there doe graines of sand surround the sea, There wud be scope to vent my fury on; But now 'tis circumscrib'd within the verge Of one poore rascalls life, whose blood will scarce Give satisfaction to my thirsty steele: Come sir, I doe perceive you know his haunts, which if ye doe, I doe conjure ye here to bring him forth; And if you will, or dare to second him, Ile stand ye both. Fai. Sir, on my life I vow, The place of his abodes unknowne to me; They say he's fled and gone: Tis true, I had Some conversation with him, but I was A stranger to his thoughts and actions; And where this time hee does bestow himselfe Tis not knowne to me. Sport. Sirra, what say you? where's your Master? Tr. Ah, I wud I cud tell ye, he has left me in a pittifull case here, if old sir Plenteous doe not take pitty upon me, I must even go and drive Wheele-barrowes in Lincolnes-Inne-fields, for ought I know. Fai. Alas poore fellow, I'me sorry for that, what canst doe? Tr. I have a qualitie sir, but the world now adayes does not respect men of parts. Fai. What ist? Tr. A Bagge-piper, an't shall please your worship,
Fai. A Bagpiper? Tr. Yes indeede sir, as simple as I stand here, I have plaid before as good Beares as be in the Kingdome of England. Fair. Where dost live now? Enter Ʋalentine in womens apparrell. Tr. Sir, in the meane time J waite upon the Lady that lies in the house here. Ʋal. Trash. Tr. Madam. Ʋal. Come ye hither. Sab. Vnhappy eyes ye have undone my heart. Tr. I come forsooth. Sab. Stay faire one, stay, Val. Speake ye to me sir? Sab. I doe, But first, I doe intreate you will be pleas'd To smile upon my rashnesse, then must I Perforce enforme ye, that just now I felt A blow upon my heart, which I conceive Was darted from your eyes. Val. Your conceit was in an error sir. Sab. O no, I see betwixt those brests Is Adons garden, and Elisiums love, Kisses her, And from these lippes proceedes an ayre transcends Sabean spices, or the Phoenix nest; Lady, Be pleased to let this Jewell pride it selfe Betweene those snowie hills, and you engage My soule unto your selfe. Gives her a Iewell. Val. My gratitude entertaines your loving directions sir, A word sir, Valen▪ and Sport▪ goe aside. What gentleman is this? me thinkes he much resembles Sabina Testy, know ye him not? Sport. Not I, I met him here by chance, it matters not who 'tis, take you his gifts —and be sure to yeeld what hee would have yee doe, and wee shall want neither gold nor jewels, I see that: and dee heare, you will by this meanes put such a tricke upon your sweete-hearts Champion as never was,—and in the issue it will be found to be but a jest, there's and end.
Sab. Pray accept of this. Tra. I were to blame if I shud not sir; Wheelebarrowes, quoth a? Ile see 'em all hang'd first, a hansome gentlewomans service is as good as fee taile, I see that. Sab. Me thinkes Lady, you much resemble a gentleman I know, one Mr. Valentine Crambagge, one that I wud be every glad to see. Val. I know the gentleman sir, he is, I take it, a friend to one Mistresse Sabina Testy. Sab. A friend, Had she beene dead when first she saw his face, She had beene happy. Val. Pray you why sir? Sab. Has done her that dishonor, That time can never raze out of memory; And in regard she is my neerest cosin, The sad remembrance of it teares my heart Into a thousand shivers; But now your presence like the morning Sunne Drives off these melancholy mists wherein My soule did sometimes wander. Val. Sir, I am yours. Sab. O the sweetnesse of those words! Tr. Nay, there's a pound of Sugar almost in every word she speakes sir. Sab. Lets mixe our selves. But first, let Hymen with a wedding knot Knit up our soules. Ʋal. O no sir. Sab. Nay you are now my captive. Val. I hope I shall easily procure my redemption. Sab. Thy very hearts thy ransome, nothing shall, But onely that redeeme thee. Val. I doubt not sir, but your owne goodnesse will plead my excuse; For know, I did Set up a resolution long agoe, Never to marry. Sport. Pish.
Sab. How, not marry? Fair. Remember what I told you cosin; Sir, I know shee will be perswaded, but that gentlewomen, yee know, thinke it a kinde of disparagement to be too soone wone, that's all sir. Sab. Pray expresse your intentions Lady. Ʋal. I have already sir. Sab. And is that your resolution? Ʋal. Indeede it is sir. Sab. Why then Ile tell yee mine: I'me now in quest of this detested slave That wrong'd my cosin, and doe hope ere long To vindicate her quarrell, therefore know, If thou'lt not marry me immediatly, Those lookes that doe so much resemble his, Shall whet my sword against thee, nay, convert My love to fury, and shall sacrifice Thy blood, to expiat my kindreds wrong; Therefore I must, nay more, I will enjoy; Despight of fate I will; My quike desires doe chide my patience, And thou must yeeld or die, than quickly speake; I cannot stand to waite upon discourse: But by the way consider, that ye are now To give a sentence either of life or death, Vpon your selfe, take heede; if ye say aye, You live my darling, but if no, you die. Val. Sir, I consent to marry, and am content to be dispos'd of as you shall please. Sab. Your breath is musicke now, come lets along. Tr. Why, but sir, you will not carry away my Mistresse I hope in this manner, will ye? and I have but newly got her neither — slid, these are tricks indeede? Sab. Sirra, there's for you hold you, your peace, it is my humor. Gives him money. Tr. Blesse your worship sir, and keepe ye in this humor still say I. Exeunt omnes. Enter sir Plenteous, Muchcraft, Budget. Much. Well sir, I heare ye, but yee have not spoke toth
purpose yet. Sir P▪ Accept this from me sir, Ile proove sir, that my sonne was invited and sent for, and that her maide and she both us'd all meanes possible to allure him thither. Gives him a fee. Much. Ay, now you have spoke home sir, this is some∣thing now, I feele your cause a little better▪ and thus much for your comfort, never trouble your selfe Enter sir Timothy standing privately to heare the passa∣ges, chasing and stamping. about it, Ile take such a course that his cause shall ne're proceed Ile warrant yee, alas sir Timothy's cause is not worth the legge of a Fly, and yet he does so torment my house, that I can neither eate, drinke, nor sleepe; yee know Budget how often I have desir'd him to forbeare my house▪ and yet all will not doe. Bud. I wish hee were hang'd, he makes me tell a hundred lies in a weeke in telling him ye are not within, of purpose to be rid of him. Sir. T. Here's a rogue. Much. Alasse for's businesse, were my case, if any body wud but give me a sawcer of Mustard sor't, he shud have it. Sir T. Sawcy rascall. Much. Suppose he brings his action, what can he doe in▪t? — not this, tis true, he wud have retain'd me to have ta∣ken out a Writ against ye, but when I perceived that it was nothing but a malicious humor, I bid him goe and be hang'd with this brabbles▪ I wud not be troubled with 'em. Sir▪ T. Very good, but you were willing enough to be troubled with my money, I have heard you all this while, and this your sucking knave too. Much. Sir Timothy, come, come, Ime glad you are come, Ime glad you are here with all my heart, come, I must have you made friends by all meanes. Sir T. Friends? Ile see him stand bare to the taile of a Cart first, I friends with him? —hang him rascall. Sir. P, Sir, I make no doubt but I shall make you know, and your daughter too before I have done with her, that shee has abus'd my sonne, I cannot tell, I will not say she has be∣witch'd him, but if I prove it, Ile make ye all stinke with a
vengeance. Sir T. Why, ye worme-eaten slave, does my daughter looke like a Witch? Sir P. Budget, pray ye put downe worme-eaten slave, and the day of the moneth too, bee heare? Sir T. Didst not come thy selfe (you whorson gull▪) Sir P. Write ye whoreson gull. Budg. Yes sir. Sir T. Didst not come, thy selfe, I say to know what por∣tion I wud give her? Now I find it was but a meere pretence, ye cheating rogue you. Sir P. Write ye cheating rogue you. Budg. Yes forsooth. Sir T. If my man Hilts were here I wud beate thy very nose into thy face, and afterwards beat it out agen. Sir P. What wud ye doe sir? Much. Nay pray gentlemen forbeare while ye are in my house. Sir P. I can forbeare him no longer. Much. Come sit Timothy, pray goe along with me. Budg. Sir Plenteous, pray ye goe along with me sir. Sir T. Prethee let me beate the rogue first. Much. Nay come sir, come, come. Exit Muchcraft with Sir Thomas, Budget with sir Plen. Enter Sabina, Valentine, Fairefaith, Sportlove, Trash, Rowland. Sab. Why so? This is the crowne of all our joyes on earth, When love and marriage trippe it hand in hand, Jt makes the minde to vault And caper o're the clouds of discontent; Me thinkes my soule has wings and I cud fly, From hence t' Elizium, come cheere up my sweete, What art thou sad, and see thy husband laugh? Come now we are married, we must have but one Passion betwixt us — Gentlemen what? Frownes at a Wedding? Fair. How? frownes? Shud a man seeme to droope or hang the wings
At such a time, he were farre fitter for T'accompany wild Tygers in a wood, Then to converse with men, the gods themselves Sing Epithalamies, when mortals wed, If Gods are subject to these passions, then They needes must over-sway the hearts of men; Sir, joyes attend ye, may you ever be As full of joyes, as we are now to see Your happy Nuptialls: Pish, be not so sad cosin. Sport. Come leave this dull discourse, and let us fill, Our active soules up to the brimme with joy; Come, Sings. FArewell this company, If you love sadnesse, For melancholy is, Nothing but madnesse; Hang up proud costly cloathes, Pedlers and pack toyes; Let us make the hogs-heads weepe, Claret and sacke boyes. Are there no Fidlers in this world? Ro. Sir, I wud they wud come once, my very heeles are up ith' aire already me thinkes in this humour, I cud wish the whole world were a Morrice dance for foure & forty houres outright. Tra. O thou egregious puppy, if the whole world were a Morris dance for foure and fortie houres outright, what shud, nay, what does thou thinke wud the good people of New England doe all that while. Row. I doe thinke they wud pray for a timely cessation of the noise of the superstitious bells hanging about their knees. Tr. A most damnable witch in my conscience. Sab. Come sweet-heart, rush up your spirits, put on a re∣solution to be jocund; thinke but on what must passe betwixt us two this very night; How I must revill in thy armes, and then How thou must tumble in my bosome; And that I know will be enough to purge
Sad contemplations. Val. Sir, pray you excuse me; Troublesome thinges doe whisper in my eare, Which for the present J cannot expell. Fai. Pish. Sab. Doe not heede or nusle the least sad thought At such a time, tell 'em some other time You'le sit and heare their grievances. Sport. Ay, ay, doe so, what? upon your joviall day be sad? but where be these Fidlers? Musi. We are come sir. Sport. Pray ye play then. Come, a song, a song. A Song. IOy, health, and pleasure, waite upon This louely paire, May all your dayes like to this one Be void of care, And may those twinkling starres of night Attend your bed, That so the bridegroome may get right Your maydenhead. And let Arabian odours then Perfume thy sheets; Strewing thy chamber once agen With daintie sweets, Then let these pretty thoughts that move A flame in Cupids fires, Bring ye to bed where you may prove The things that love desires. Sab. Come, these Nuptiall rites being done, It now remaines we speed it to the bed, Where we will arme in arme discourse and act Loves pretty handy dandyes — Gentlemen —speake— Has not my starres beene kinde, To grace my Fortunes with so faire a blisse. Fai. Sir, ye enjoy a happinesse beyond Expression or compare. Tr. Nay sir, Ile promise ye this, that as long as she is your wife, no man breathing shall ere bring Acteons punishment
upon your head —I will not say what the woman may doe, and that's a rare blessing Rowland betwixt you and me, I can tell yee. Sab. Me thinkes I see My selfe now dandl'd on the knee of Fate. Sport. Sir, you doe now embrace A richer veine than ere the Sunne beheld, And I presume none save your onely selfe, Whose presence is a treasure of enchantments, Could have prevail'd so farre with her, whose eye Ne're yet cast glance of love upon a man, Therefore doe I pronounce You th' onely minion both of Fame and Fate. Row. Nay, you are a happy man, that's certaine sir, if all men had such wives, we shud have a strange world, for then we shud be troubled neither with children nor cuckholds. Sab. Well gentlemen golden slumbers attend ye, Come faire one, come, we have too long defer'd The love embraces of the marriage bed, O how it rapps my soule to thinke that I This very houre with my faire love must lie, Rak't up in cinders, love may burne, but when It 'gin's to flame, it fires both gods and men; Come. Ʋal. Pray ye sir forbeare a little. Sab. I will sweet-heart. Ʋal. Cosin Fairefaith, a word, you have brought me here upon a businesse will utterly disgrace me; what will this gen∣tleman thinke of me dee thinke, when he findes that I have gull'd him thus. Fair. Come, come, put your feates to sleepe, Sab. Nay, come sweete-heart, why these delayes? Row. Pray yee sir deale gently with her, she's yong and fearefull to lie with a man, and that's the businesse sir, that makes her so loth t'unpin. Tr. Alas poore soule, in my conscience you had rather lie with a woman, than with these rude men behalfe, wud not ye forsooth?
Sab. Come, give me your hand. Val. Good sir. Sab. Why? what's the matter? Val. Nothing sir. Sab. Nothing? I know tis something; are not y well? Val. Yes forsooth. Sab. What's the reason yee will not goe to bed then? pray ye come without more adoe. Fair. Fie upon't cosin, a woman wud scorne these things. Tra. Nay, yee are ith' right sir, I doe beleeve she wud defie it. Sab. Come, what's the businesse with ye? will ye not goe to bed —ha? Val. Sir, Ile consider of it presently. Sab. How, consider of it? Am I a man? a married man? or what? Am I a husband? must a husband then Entreate his wife? Is Nature growne so old she has forgot To teach her children what belongs unto Their different places? Although before I was content to bend My spirits to your foote, yet know, that now The will of Fate has destin'd me to be Next under it the sole, commander of Your minde and person, therefore now I must, Nay, I will be obey'd. Tra. Pray ye doe not fright her too much, she's a very ten∣der hearted thing forsooth — pray ye speake her faire. Sab. Hold you your prating sirra, she shall observe my will now. Tra. You'le never doe good sir with foule meanes. Row. By your favour my friend, I know this out of my owne knowledge, that a froward sharpe husband will pre∣sently make a woman doe what she list. Sab. Stoppe your mouthes. Tra. Sir, for my part I will not stop my mouth, I under∣derstand
what I say sir, I'me a married man my selfe sir, and 'tis well knowne to be true, that I cud never yet get any thing of my wife by harsh words. Sab. Once more I bid you hold your babling. Tra. Sir, she shall not goe to bed till shee has a minde to goe to bed, nor I will not hold my babling neither sir. Val. Hold your peace Trash. Tra. Yes forsooth. Sab. You'le close your mouth by and by I hope. Tra. Yes marry will J sir, but not at your bidding sir: what now—what dee thinke I'me a foole in a Play? Sab. Will you hold your tongue or no? Tra. Yes forsooth and please your worship. Sabina takes hold of him, and offers to strike him. Sab. This insolence I cannot beare, And for your part you are my wife, and one In whom obedience ought to be exprest, And I your top. Trash. Ay, you want but a little whipping. Sab. What say you sirra? Tr. I say, a woman that has a good husband, and all things else, and will not goe to bed, wants nothing but whipping. Sab. Well, 'tis thus, If milde intreaties, nor a gentle fawne; Nor protestations, nor a husbands love Can mollifie thy Stubbornesse, nor bring Thy sturdy disposition to my hand; Ile for a time quite turne out of my thoughts A husbands pitties, and where smiles did faile, A lustie bastinado shall perswade — What shall I be bafled thus Out of my pleasures with a womans blush; Ist fit that I stand pleading where my starres Bid me command? I scorne it, therefore speake This very present minute, nay before You fetch more breath, speake either ay, or no, Or I must strike, there's no remedy. Row. We shall have the Peace broken, here presently, I see that.
Tr. Peace, quoth a? nay and my head be not broken I care not. Sport. Come, she is content to goe sir. Sab. Give the word. Val. Sir, I will goe to bed. Sab. Come your wayes then. Exit Sabina leading Ʋalentine; Trash falls into a laughter. Tr. Dee heare gentlemen, dee heare? What if this gentleman shud get my Master with childe now? Sport. Nay, what if your Master shud get that gentleman with childe. Tra. I cannot tell what hee may doe for men, but I ne're knew him doe such a courtesie for a woman yet. Row. Mr. Fairefaith, pray tell me one thing, why did you being my Masters kinsman, and an old souldier stand so pati∣ently, and see him so affronted. Tra. J that's true indeede Rowland, he being an old beaten souldier too. Fair. A beaten souldier? Tr. An old souldier I meane sir. Fair. I confesse I had no disposition to medle in't, because J know they'le agree themselves, I know the bowels of the businesse, which you doe not, come, goe along, and by the way Ile tell ye the plot. And then wee'le bring this newes To blesse the eares of old sir Timothy, Come— Strength I confesse may make a Gyant yeeld, But give me policie to winne the field. Exeunt omnes. Actus Quintus. Enter Mirabell, Hilts before, and Kate behinde. Mir. O My poore sister! Kate. There's no question but we shall finde her, how long has she beene wanting forsooth? Mir. A great while Kate, a little faster, what shall I tread upon your heeles?—not so fast neither. Hilts. What the devill ayles ye? too soft, and then too fast, here's more adoe with you, than with all the Pageants in
my Lord Majors show; he that waites on you, had neede to have his steppes prick'd out with a paire of Compasses, for ought I see. Mir. What a surly groome are you, may not one speake to you? Hilts. Speake? yes forsooth you may speake, but I doe not love to walke before a Gentlewoman like one of these gin∣gerly youthes that goe before their Mistresses, as if the streets were pav'd with egges, not I. Kate. Why, how now sir sawce boxe, what is't all fellowes with ye, ye filthy, stinking, sawcy, dirty, scabbed, paltry, lousie, mangie rogue ye. Hilts. Heyda, Mistresse Iuniper, what's the matter with you tro? you were not us'd to be so snappish, I'me sure on't, I have both gone and rid before you, and you ne're found fault with it. Kate. O ye lying rascall, did ye ever ride before me in your life? Hilts. Yes marry have I forsooth. Kate. 'Tis as false a tale Mistresse as ever was told; 'tis true, e rid before me one night a little short journey; 'twas no∣thing, I cud even a gone as farre a soote upon the matter. Hilts. Who doubts that forsooth? Kate. Why will you lie then ye rascall? Hilts. Why, whats the businesse? what the mischiefe ayles ye? sure ye have not made water today I thinke. Mir. Come Hilts come, you shud beare with her. Hilts. Beare forsooth, shee shud beare, shee's us'd too' it, more than I am forsooth. Kate. What shud I beare pray? suffer such an Asse as you to ride upon my backe, shud I not? Hilts. Why not? aswell as alwayes upon your belly for∣sooth? Mir. Come, come, pray ye goe along, we have something else to thinke on than stand here. Kate. Very well sir, I shall thinke upon your words. Hilts. This way forsooth? Mir. Yes, yes, goe on. Enter Sir Timothy with officers meeting them. Sir T. How now daughter, whether are you going? Mir. To see if I can finde my sister sir.
Sir T. Come, come, doe not trouble your selfe to no pur∣pose, I have order'd it already, Ile have these men goe that have authority to make the doores and gates flie open where they come and goe, and dee heare Officers, looke too' it, and be sure to search very narrowly the places that I told ye of, and especially the house where young Crambagge is suspected to lie, and if yee finde either one or both of 'em, bring 'em away, dee heare? Offi. We shall sir. Exeunt Officer. Sir T. Daughter, I rather thinke (to put her selfe out of th-way of this approaching disparagement) shee has runne her selfe upon some desperate course. Mir. But dee thinke these men will finde her sir? Sir T. I cannot tell, wee shall know presently. Kate. Doe not weepe Mistresse, I hope shee's well, and will be here agen shortly. Sir T. Come, come, lets have no weeping. Hilts. Doe not you greeve, and for them 'tis not a pinne matter, let them alone, weeping is as wholesome for a woman sir as making of water. Mir. Had she but bid farewell 'Twud not have troubled me so much; But thus to goe away— Hilts. Ne're feare, shee's well enough Ile warrant ye. Sir T. Oh Hilts, Her high borne spirit cannot brooke disgrace, And I doe feare these mischiefes will provoke Some violent hand upon her selfe; yet me thinks one thing Whispers my understanding in the eare, And tells me she is safe; There's not a jewell, ring, or bracelet left That ere she wore, but is convey'd away. Hilts. Nay then sir feare nothing, for if shee had so much wit to carry away her rings and jewells, she has wit enough to keepe her selfe from killing or drowning, I warrant ye. Sir T. O heavens! With what a swinge is youth,
Hurri'd along the world and subject still, Vnto the rule of an unbridl'd will: Oh! Pitty those Parents then, who oftentimes Are brought unto their graves by children crimes; In, in, and comfort your selfe; Ile see these Officers dispatcht away, Exeunt Hilts, Mirabell, Kate at one doore, Sir Timothy at the other. Enter Valentine unbutton'd as out of bed. Val. Rowland, Rowland▪ Rowland; I say. Enter Rowland as newly awaked. Row. What's the matter here? Wast you that call'd sir? Val. It was I. Ro. What wud ye have sir, are not ye well? Val. I wud I were. Ro. I'me sorry you are not well sir? Ʋal. Call Trash, call Trash. Ro. Trash, Trash. Tr. What's the matter? Within. Ro. Come presently, you master's not well; Hes comming sir, what wud ye please to have sir? Ʋal. Nothing, nothing at all. Enter trash yawning and rubbing his eyes. Tr. Rowland, where art foole? Ro. Here, here man, whether dost goe? Tr. What's the matter Rowland—ha? Ro. Your Master's not well here. Tr. Not well? O alas! Ile runne and fetch some hot wa∣ter presently. Val. Stay, whether dee goe? come your wayes hither, what will you fetch man, I'me not sicke. Tr. Not? you're but a yawling rascall Rowland for waking of me, I was in the daintiest sleepe, and the sweetest dreame; me thought my Master was in bed with the bravest wench— Ʋal. 'Twas too true. Tr. How? was it too true? introth, I thanke yee for no∣thing, you ne're dream'd so for me I'me sure on't. Val. O Rowland, I'me undone, I'me undone. Ambo. What's the matter sir?
Row. Ile warrant yee the gentleman that went to bed with him, finding himselfe cosen'd has kill'd himselfe, or one mis∣chiefe or other, I thought no good wud come on't. Val. No, no, 'twas a woman all the while, 'twas a woman. Tr. 'Twas a woman good man simple, what? dost thou thinke that I dreame out of Aesops Fables? Row. 'Twud vexe a man to marry in jest, and then to have it prove plaine earnest, Ile assure yee that. Ʋal. O Trash, I'me undone. Tr. Why undone sir, why dee say so, and please your wor∣ship. Ʋal. Ime married man, I'me married with a vengeance, Tr. Why so am I too sir; but how shud we helpe it, can ye tell that sir. Val. O Rowland, what shall I doe? where shall I goe? where shall I runne? Row. Run quoth a? nay, if you'r married once, Ile trust ye for running. Ʋal. I am married, and I know not to whom, did I but know that. Trash. That's no great matter, 'tis but going to the Church Booke, and you may know that presently. Val. Accursed Fate, what marriages might I have had? to what a pitch might I have mounted up my fortunes? which now I see are nothing but confusion: Who knowes what strumpet this may be, Some queane for ought I know, that thinkes to raise Her selfe out of my ruines: Now my perplexed thought begin to burne With flames of guilt: Now comes my trembling soule unto the barre Of my owne knowledge: O Sabina, Sabina! The gods now tumble vengeance on my head For wrongs to thee; Had I beene well advis'd, O then I might Have layne by thy faire side, where every touch: Had beene as tender as a bed of downe.
And every smile a heaven; But 'tis too late, To call backe what is past, it was my fate, And there's an end; Now am I round entrench'd with miseries; One side a marriage nips me in the bud; On th'other side, a rankrous enemie, Old Testy, who still gazes on the print Of our mistaken step, therefore 'tis now No time to pause, packe up my cloathes this night, I doe intend to save my selfe by flight: Trash, about it presently. Tr. Yes and please your worship. Val. But dee heare, let not my Landlady, nor her husband have so much as a glimpse of it, for I have no money for 'em. Tr. Nay sir, if you intend to travell, be sure ye take all your money along with ye, especially if you meane to be merry, for you shall finde that money is the most daintie companion sir; but Rowland, dee heare? scatter no words. Val. By no meanes. Row. Not a word sir; Exeunt Valentine and Trash, manet Rowland. Travell quoth a? here's a peece of worke indeede: Enter Welt and his Wife. O Mr. Welt, how dee sir, how does my Landlady —ha? Welt. Very well, how dee you Rowland? Row. Troth, pretty well, Servingman like, carelesse of much, proud of a little, drunke for want of wit, and some∣times sober for want of money. Welt. I thought ye had beene sicke, because I have not seene yee this long time. Row. Sicke quoth a? my pockets are a little cowardly now and then indeede, that's all my sicknesse. Welt. What? wud ye have 'em quarrelsome? Row. Quarrelsome? no, but I wud have 'em to have a little more mettall in 'em for all that. Welt. Wher's your Master pray? Row. Nay I know not, I have not seene him this sixe houres.
Welt. There is a little money due to me from him, I wish he wud take the payment of it into consideration, I have ex∣extraordinary occasion to use the money, if he please to let me have but some of it, it will doe mee a courtesie, he shall finde me reasonable. Wife How idlely you talke husband? Is that a way to live in the world, doe you thinke it is for my ease to have gentle∣men come, and lie in my house, and goe away and pay nothing — ha? Welt. Pay? yes good sweetheart, why shud he not pay; there's no body speakes against that, sweetheart. Wife. Why doe you talke so foolishly then of being reaso∣nable, and I cannot tell what, I doe not like such words I tell ye truely; —reasonable quoth a? Eate my meate, drinke my drinke, burne my wood, foule my roomes, weare my sheets, make use of my servants, and yet I must be reasonable; if ye can talke no wiselier before folkes, pray ye hold your peace and let your wife speake — besides, yee know he owes me both for bootes, shooes, and pantables, and I shall give him that too shall not I? no indeede forsooth, I wud have your Master to know that I do not buy my lether so cheape, Ile as∣sure ye — be reasonable quoth a? besides, I have pro∣mis'd to pay Mr. Sugerbox the Chandler, nutmegges and sugar for his mornings draughts, and Mr. Dash the Vintener for wine in's chamber, and shall I pay them before your Ma∣ster has paid me —introth I doe not meane it. Row. 'Tis fit a gentleman shud pay you before, that's the truth of it. Wife. Ye say right Rowland, I see you have more conside∣ration with yee than my husband has — be reasonable quoth a? —marry whoope. Row. Why dee keepe all this stirre, my Master's not run∣ning away woman — here's a quarter indeede, if hee will be ruled by me, he shall not give you one farthing, because you keepe such a coile. Wife. How keepe such a coile ye jacke sawee? how now? such a coile? dee thinke ye are talking to your companions sirra? such a coile? and in my owne house too sirra? and you
must stand by forsooth like Iohn a Noakes, and see every Ser∣vingman runne upon me in this manner; remember this when ye come to bed; and for your Masters not paying of me, ye Sawcebox, I'me at the better end of the staffe with him, for I have lockt up all his clothes; nay if you'r so Sawcy, Ile fit him, Ile warrant ye. Row. Ye will? Wife. Yes indeede will I? Enter Trash. Tr. Rowland, Rowland, Rowland, theeves, theeves, theeves, theeves, Rowland, theeves. Ro. How now? how now? Tr. All my Masters clothes are stolne quite a way Rowland, all stolne every jot, breeches, doublet, boots, spurres, cloaks, gownes, hats, bands, cuffes, ruffes, caps, shooes, shirts, all gone, all stolne, every jot. Ro. Here's the theefe. Tr. Where? where? Ro. Here I say. Tr. Who, my Landlady, did you steale my Masters clothes — ha? wherefore pray ye? Wife. Steale 'em? no sir J scorne it; I tooke 'em indeede, and Ile justifie it; and more than so sir, I have lockt 'em up, and Ile justifie that too. Tr. How? lockt up my Masters clothes, wherefore I pray ye? Wife. Wherefore? doe not yee know your Master owes me money? doe not you know I have often askt it, and can∣not get it? doe not ye know that it is a pretty summe? doe not you know that it is for meate, drinke, lodging, fire, and candle-light, washing, wringing, and starching; besides, boots, shooes, pantables, and galosheas: if, I had the Booke I cud shew ye. Tr. Nay, you're perfect enough without booke for ought I see. Enter Boy. Boy. Trash, Your Master's come home, and you must come to him presently. Exit Boy. Exeunt Trash, Welt and his wife.
Ro. Here's a creature Ile sweare upon a booke, this woman has no bones in her tongue, if any man love trumpets, there's a noise for him, sure I doe not thinke but this Shoomaker's a witch, he wud never a contracted himselfe to the devill else. Enter Valentine. Val. What, are ye here? and I have nothing put up yet? Ro. Sir, your clothes are all put up, and safe under locke and key. Val. Nay then 'tis no matter; who put 'em up? Ro. That did my Landlady sir, shee has lockt 'em up, and sweares she'le keepe 'em safe till she can perswade ye to part with some pocket mettle sir. Val. Enough, enough, I will not be beholden to her, Ile satisfie her. Enter sir Timothy with Officers. Sir T. O sir, have I found ye out in the end, Come Officers lay hold on him — but stay lets talke with ye a little first. Ro. Sure my master was borne when the signe was in Can∣cer, for whatsoever he does intend, goes alwayes quite back∣wards, well some body shall know on't presently, that shall fetch him off againe for all this sir. Sir T. Sirra, hold your peace, and Be gone about your businesse fellow, Exit Rowland. Dost know what thou hast done? or have my wrongs Arriv'd at thy understanding yet? — ha? Val. Sir I am conscious to my selfe of all The wrongs and injuries that I have done ye. Sir T. Why hast thou put this blemish on my child, Which like a Canker threatens to deface My Story, and for ever raze my name Out of the booke of honour, nay, a spot, Which time nor date, nor all the brinish waves Can e're wash out — speake thou detested wretch; Hadst not a sparke of vertue left within Thy bosome to preserve thy honour— speake, I say. Val. In trembling reverence to your precepts here, I creepe upon my knees before the barre
Of Your just frownes, I dare not pleade excuse, No, no, my crimes are writ upon my front In die of blushing guilt, which nothing but Your reconciling smiles can ere wash out, —They, I say, they must be That expiating sacrifice for me. Sir T. Smiles on thee? Hast thou the face to say thy faults can be Capable of mercy? go to, marke what I say, Vnlesse thou canst contrive a way to cure The wounded reputation of my Girle, Expect not one commiserating thought, But all the tortours of severitie That e're can be inflicted — Come, come, rise up, it is in vaine to kneele, My eares are stopt to mercy, nothing now But onely that can ope them. Val. Sir, I am content to engage all my possibilities to ac∣complish your desires. Sir T. There may be some hope in this. Ʋal. Sir, Devise how I may But give this satisfaction you require, And my soule shall study its performance. Sir T. I cannot tell, Thou hast so plung'd her in a sincke of shame, —That't will, for ought I know, Nonplus the world to finde a remedie. Val. Her case is not so desperate, I hope, I'me ready here to hugge The most ingenious torments on these termes, That she and you'le be pleas'd; Wert to encounter a whole host of fiends, Never to sleepe but in a Dragons den; Or from the bowells of the burning hill To fetch a cole, eate fire, or drinke a cup Of Mercurie precipitat, Ile do't, And thinke it an Elisium, if it may Redeeme your loves, and state me once agen
In your esteeme. Sir T. 'Tis well, I doe commend your forward minde; But this will never doo't; There's nothing but a marriage will admit A thought of remedy. Ʋal. Nothing but marriage? Sir T. Not any thing ith' world but Marriage▪ Val. Not? Sir T. No indeede. Val. Mercilesse Planets, will ye still goe on, To heape these hills of mischiefe on my necke▪ Or can misfortune reach a higher pitch In him whose miserie is intollerable, And remedie impossible, O no; Sir, in a word, Your daughter's quite undone, and so am I. Sir, T. How stands the businesse? Speake the worst, if truth, and let me die. Val. Sir, 'tis in vaine to counterfeit, Or build up castles where they cannot stand; Doe with me what ye please, the truth is this, I am already married. Sir T. How? already married? Villaine, keepe in that breath; The repetition of these words wud teare A heart of brasse—already married? Didst thou ensnare my childe for this? Hast thou betrayed her white innocence for this? Blasted the blossome of her virgin spring, And married now another? Canst hope or dreame, that e're thy perjur'd soule Shall see th' Elisian groves? Hold heart from breaking, now or never hold, Married to another? Shall I be bandy'd thus for ever twixt Rackets of shame and misery, Cud fate finde ne're a football but my selfe To tosse and spurne—umph?
Hell and the furies doe conspire I thinke, To cull out me from all the rest oth' world To vent their mischiefes on, who is't ye have married? speake. Ʋal. It is unknowne to me sir. Sir T. I aske ye who 'tis you have married? Val. Sir, Vpon my life I know not who she is. Sir T. Has thy leudnesse brought thee to distraction; mar∣ried, and yee know not to whom? come take him away, 'tis in vaine to talke—but stay a little. Ile see what creature 'tis. Val. 'Tis very true sir. Sir T. What wilt thou make me mad? Where is she, in the house? Val. Yes. Sir T. Officer, goe fetch her hither, Exit Officer. Ile make her tell me who she is, If she can: Married already quoth a? and ye know not to whom neither, here's a marriage with a vengeance. Enter Fairefaith and Sportlove, who were present at the marri∣age leading betwixt them Sabina veil'd, they present her to her Father, Hilts attending them. Fai. We heard ye sent for my cosin Valentines wife sir. Sir T. I did so. Fai. We have brought her to you sir, here she is sir. Sir T. Very well, in good time: what are you gentlewo∣man? whence are ye? ha? — speake; nay, if you will not give me an account, I must punish ye; Sabina unpins her maske, and falls upon her knees to her Father. — let not my eyes surfeit — what my Sabina? My lovely Girle? Thrice welcome to my bosome? My Sabina? my daughter, and the wife Of this my deared friend, unexpected felicitie, Enter Sir Plenteous with Trash and Rowland. Sir Plenteous? welcome thrice noble sir Plenteous; But stay
Gentlemen, pray ye present her to her husband first, Fairefaith and Sportlove present her to Valentine. Sweet sir Plenteous, how dee sir? Sab. Dee know me sir, nay gaze on sir. Hilts. He knowes her present I see that. Tra. Know her? he has beene familiarly with her—be∣fore man, and that thee didst not know. Sab. Gaze on still sir, I'me not Sabinaes ghost, but her poore selfe; Here stands the creature that was wrong'd by thee, The very selfesame that you married sir: What dost thou thinke? Dost thou not tremble, lest I shud begin, To number up my wrongs? I that was lull'd ith' bosome of my friends, And as 'twere dandl'd on a Fathers knee; Forfeited all this favour, and was made A stranger to his eye for love to thee; Yet thou Like the prodigious Monster of the world Ingratitude, didst labour to forget, Not my love onely, but those sacred vowes Have past betwixt us; but to be short, Thus —thus I revenge my selfe. Kisses him. Val. O my Sabina! It is too sweete and loving a revenge Vpon so vile a miscreant. Sab. Come Let the remembrance of these matters dye, And be confin'd to dust, let 'em be trod Into the very center of the earth, Never to rise againe; and let our loves For ever twine like twins; What's past I have forgot and pardon'd. Val. Seale it, or else I die; Kisses him agen. Live, O live! A rare example to all future times Of constancie in love.
Sir P. Daughter, my heart bids thee welcome, This night my house shall give thee entertainement, Whereof thy selfe shall be sole governesse, And when the icie hand of death shall drive My soule out of this clod, It shall be his and thine. Sir T. But gentlemen, me thinkes I long to heare The storie of this marriage, how it come to passe; For did I know't, I shud adore the starre, Vnder whose influenee she wae brought t'arive Midst stormes of woe upon this shore of blisse. Sport. Sir, I doe thinke 'twill be A seasonable discourse for supper; Suspend but your desires till then And you shall be satisfied. Sir T. With all my heart, with all my heart, but sonne, I have one petition to preferre to you. Ʋal. You may stile it a command sir. Sir T. You must needs bestow upon me your servant Trash. Tr. Heyda? now I'me a beg'd foole, I see that. Val. Sirra, attend my father. Tr. Your worships humble servant sir. Sir T. In all this businesse I have observed in thee Discretion —judgement — wit—and police; Therefore I doe appoint thee Steward of my house, And put into thy charge the overseeing Of all my businesses. Tr. Nay sir, for an oversight in any businesse let me alone. Sir T. And what is more. Dispose my house and servants as you please. Tr. Hilts, come hither —Sirra, doe you waite upon me. Hilts. Yes forsooth. Tr. I did ever thinke thou wudst come to some good, for thou hast beene alwayes an honest Trojan; Dee heare, if you had carried me to Bridewell, when ye were bid —where had your proferments beenethen Hilts. Sir T. Mr. Fairefaith, for you,
I doe perceive your ingenuitie, Has beene a meanes to make my comfort swell; And for returne, J doe bestow on thee My daughter Mirabell. Fai. Sir, your returnes are farre beyond the claime Of my deserts; and though J am not fit To bandy favours with so brave a Knight, Yet I will stretch my studes to expresse A detestation of ingatitude: and now Sabina, I doe salute thee by the word of Sister, Kisses her▪ —but why so dumpish on a sudden —ha? I know the cause already, 'tis for feare Your censures on her faults be too severe; She has given satisfaction where 'twas due, Her Father's pleas'd, and so we hope are you: To you she is referr'd, who now are set, Ready to give your sentences; but yet Be pleas'd to speake your doome with gentle breath, Cause you're the Judges of her Life and Death. FINIS.
