5444 99843790 8546
A prooued practise for all young Chirurgians, concerning burnings with Gunpowder, and woundes made with Gunshot, Sword, Halbard, Pyke, Launce, or such other. Wherein, is deliuered with all faith∣fulnesse, not onely the true receipts of such Medicines as shall make them bolde, but also sundry familiar examples, such, as may leade them as it were by the hand, to the doyng of the lyke. Heereto is adioyned a Treatise of the French or Spanish Pockes, Written by Iohn Almenar, a Spanish Physition. Also, a commodious collection of Aphorismes both English and Latin, taken out of an old written coppy. Published for the benefyte of his Countrey, by Wylliam Clowes, Mayster in Chirurgery. ❧❧❧ Seene, and allowed, according to the order appoynted. ¶ Printed by Thomas Orwyn, for Thomas Cadman. 1588.
To all true professors of Chirurgery in generall wheresoeuer, Wylliam Clowes, wisheth all happinesse, with much increase of knowledge, and after this life, the most ioyfull and blessed life euerlasting. Amen. I Haue followed the ex∣amples of many excellent learned men, which in times past did vsu∣ally dedicate theyr paynefull la∣bours and trauels, according to the worthines thereof, some to Kings, some to Queenes, Princes, Nobles, and other great personages, partly as testimonies of their owne vowed affection and duty toward such worthyes, and partly, as petitioners for protection to their labours vnder their happy patronage: who were therefore as fortresses of defence to support them a∣gainst such, as then (and the like whereof we want not at this day) lay snarling, and scornefully prying into other mens doings, to blemish and deface the same as much as in their power consisted. In which respect, it was most truely sayd of a learned man, that he may be called a very good Cooke, that is able to make one sawce to serue euery mans taste. Or that man may be called a most perfect and rare man, whose works being published to the viewe of all men, can please euery mans humor, especially in these dayes, wherin, are so many daynty cares, and so many queasy stomacks, with no want of rayling toongs, which Horatius Morus, in his Epistle to Ierome Comfort, Do∣ctor of Physicke, declareth, saying: Is there any thing so
sounde, or so passing well handled, which can escape the vene∣mous tongues of such as would sting Homer himselfe, if he were liuing at this day? Wherfore my louing brethren and freends, (I meane none but you that are the true professors of Chirurgery) vnto you do I most willing∣ly offer these my simple labours and trauels, as heere∣tofore I haue done, hoping also you will as willingly receiue it into your good Patronage, and to defend it with your friendly supportation, and that is all I craue: and that you will accept of it, as did King Artaxerxes the cup of cold water at the hands of poore silly Sinae∣tes. Then, as for the intemperate eares of the malitious sort, who make no difference between good and bad, or truth from falsehood: yet I trust, they shall do me no more discredit nor hurt, then had Prometheus of Thessalia, who receiued by the Sword of his mortall enemy, a great wound in his brest, for a full purpose and determination of his death thereby, but contrary to expectation, the same did cure Prometheus of a fe∣stered sore, which before did greeuously trouble him, so the hand that meant to hurt, did heale, and the wic∣ked determination of an ill digested minde, yet con∣trary to his expectation, had a good and happy ende, no more hurt (I hope) nor no lesse good, shall my e∣nemies toongs, neither hands procure vnto me. And now my friends and Brethren, to whome I so willingly dedicate these my labours, vnderstand you, that my present purpose, through Gods assistance, is to deliuer, for the benefit of all young practizers of Chi∣rurgery, certayne obseruations and notes of some spe∣ciall cures, by my selfe accomplished, with diuers needfull and necessary remedyes, prooued most pro∣fitable,
not onely for burning with Gunpowder, but also for woundes made with Gunshot, Sword, Dag∣gar, Harbard, Pike, or Launce, all which, I haue ga∣thered out of diuers learned Authors, and by my selfe augmented with an addition also of a most excellent learned Worke, written by Iohn Almaner, a Spanish Physition, that doth intreate of the French Disease. Which Treatise, was deliuered me by a good freend and a well willer, vnto all the young practizers of Chi∣rurgery, for whose sakes he Translated the same out of Latine into English, and required me to publish it foorthwith: the which, (courteous Reader,) I haue most faythfully set downe, and adioyned it vnto these mine obseruations, with certayne Aphorismes both in English and Latine, very profitable for all young Stu∣dents which are desirous of learning and knowledge. In which discourses, if I haue slipped or ouershot my selfe in my penning, I craue pardon, for I knowe, I shall make a rude perfour∣mance of a good meaning, the which I commit in the end to thy consi∣deration, and my selfe to thy courtesy. Vale, in Christo, Wylliam Clowes.
Good men are not forbidden to hope for Honor for theyr vertue, sith both are the blessings of GOD. blazon or coat of arms But some whose mindes, a World will not suffice, As Caesars raigne, and others doe despise: And such I say oft speake vs faire in face, Yet worke the spite mens credits to disgrace. Which done, full fine, as foes they will you skorne With open wrongs, which are not to be borne. But I conclude, let such say more or lesse, Nothing shall stand, but what Gods hand doth blesse.
The Epistle to the Reader. SInce I finished my last Booke, inti∣tuled, De morbo gallico, the which I presen∣ted vnto all the true professors of Chirurgerie, in Anno 1585. It was giuen me to vnder∣stand, that a new Impression of my Booke was presently to passe: then I wayed with my selfe, it would be very hard for me to accomplish all things that mine intent did leade me vnto, for the correcting and enlarging of the same Booke in so short a time, (wherein I knowe are diuers faults escaped) but I promised heereafter, if God did permit me life and health, I would to my power supply all wants. So I willed the Printer to proceede, according to my former collection, for that I did sup∣pose the matter sufficient, and the wants tollerable, if it were rightly censured by men of learning and skill in the Arte. But as for the scornefull scanners, their commendations I disdayne, for I knowe they are frosen in the dregs of their owne corrupt iudgements, and therefore whilest they should speake well of me, I might be thought like vnto them: but if it shall please any good man, that is (I say) learned in the Arte, who doth espye the wants and imperfections of my Booke, that he will vouchsafe to publish an other worke of his owne collection or translation in∣treating of the same matter, then truely I will my selfe not onely yeeld him his due commendations, but also be thankefull to God that it hath pleased him to make my simple Booke the cause of the publishing of any learned worke. Which will be no doubt a benefite vnto our Countrey and common wealth, notwithstan∣ding the gaynesaying of some, who continually spit foorth poyson out of their noysome and vnsauorie mouthes, against diuers godly learned, and wel disposed persons, who haue with long and te∣dious labours published diuers Bookes of Physick and Chirurge∣ry in English. For say these malitious men in derision and scorne∣full manner, Behold, these be our late London english Writers. In deede it is sayd, that Demosthenes himselfe, being a greatInfallible signes of their vild dispositi∣ons. learned man, could not auoyde the snares of those that enuyed his diligence in the writing of his Bookes, which is so much the
lesse greefe vnto me. But I answere these our backbiters, I meane, such as are gilty in this case, by desiring, that it will please them  at their leisures, with a good conscience to walke vprightly heer∣in, and to examine most of the Works of our late London English Writers, and then I trust they shall finde no wincking at abuses, nor holding of candles before the eyes of them that are starke blinde, they haue so zealous a care vnto sinceritie, and also that our young plants may be well and sufficiently watered with lear∣ning, and knowledge in the Arte. And this they haue truely, and faithfully published in English, according vnto that mea∣sure of knowledge, which God of his great goodnesse hath besto∣wed vpon them. Thus you may playnely perceiue the goodnesse of the tree by the fruite, but what is that, which enuy hath not de∣famed, or malice hath not defiled? for enuy and malice is a most mischeuous trap or snare, wherein many heedlesse men do fall. Now followeth another sort of domesticall enemies, and these (I thinke) are leapt out of Carons Boate, and haue wilfully  drowned themselues in the whirlepoole of slanderous reports. And these paragons will needs treade bypaths, to seeke strange noueltyes. Yet if they were better aduised, it would not be imper∣tinent vnto their credits, but they do account it odious to be re∣proued, or to suffer themselues and their abuses to be spoken of: and do most idiotlike behaue themselues against Hypocrates and Galen, and all Galenists, whose worthy Workes being ex∣tant to the view of all men, haue purchased to their Authors a∣mongst the good, eternall prayses and credit for euer. Neuer∣thelesse, you may easily perceiue what spirits they carrie, that thus wound the dead with speeches of defame, and yet themselues in respect, ignorant in the Arte. And some of them are scarce able to write and reade true English, but doe brag withoutToo foule or impudent a fault in chal∣lengers or auillers measure (vpon a very sudden) of their excellent cunning, which happely they had stolne out of the beggerly budgets, of some counterfeite stale Peracelsian Quack saluer, or Mounti∣bancke, and yet moreouer do challenge, to be the true Disciples of Peracelsus, but God knowes, they are not worthy to serue vnder his regiment for pyonors: for they missinterprete Para∣celsus whome truely they vnderstand not, and condemne Hi∣pocrates
and Galen whome they neuer read. I would no man should thinke I go heere abouts to speake against the thing that is good, neyther do I seeme to mayntayne the thing that is euill, neyther will I reward any good man with euill reports for bene∣fits and knowledge receyued, for truth is truth from whome so euer it come, be it from Hipocrates, Galen, Paracellus, or any other learned men. And therefore I say vnto such aforesayd, let not the Paynter goe beyond his pensill, nor the Shoomaker beyond his Shoo, for so his pride may haue a fall, and all his honor lye in the dust. And now good Reader, seeing mine intent is not to hold my toong at abuses, I will heere a little farther decipher the rest of these exclaiming aduersaries, which haue most impudent strum∣pets faces, that will I thinke blush at nothing: and heere I will  farther speake of an old cauelling companyon, and a maister of lyes, one, whome hecretofore I haue deciphered in my Booke De morbo gallico, he hath with reprochfull speeches returned agayne to his old humor, and spurned against Incarnatiues. But all those young Students, which are desirous to be satisfyed heer∣in, amongst many other worthy Authors, reade Vigo, cap. 21. fol. 175. which Booke, Maister Baker hath partly corrected, as himselfe hath there declared, or else reade the old english Booke translated by M. Traheron, fol. 111. cap. 21. so he that is but meanely read in the Arte, may by his good indeuour and dili∣gence, easily finde and knowe the true nature and properties of Incarnatiues of diuers sorts, and therefore Incarnatiues which haue beene diuised by many graue and learned men, from suc∣cession of ages, are not to be reiected at the becks of euery such like lame schoolemaister, or ridiculous ringleader, which will needes reach out his hand, and with his Momus pen leade others to seeke a Diamont with a Lincke, which could shew it selfe in the darke: but I maruell that his disciples or followers are not ashamed of so base a champion, or else one of them ashamed of another. It is sayd, that this wisard of late dreamed he was transformed like one of Acteons whelps, and that he had coursed a Collyers Cart, onely to seeke for one that had stolne away the King of the Frogs, which Iupiter sent downe in a great light∣ning
and thunder, which dreame, seemed to be farre more dan∣gerous vnto him, then the strange Starre which Doleto sawe in Calabria: neuerthelesse, his naked name, and fayned forge∣rie of this base borne birde, I meane not further to touch: let no such bosters be your warrant what soeuer they say, for he is cal∣led an ill Fisher, that cryeth stincking Fishe. Moreouer, a new adopted Chick of this old Cocke, and the  very key of his counsell, is dropt out of dores vpon a sudden, andThis fellow is so wise in his owne conceit, that he re∣nounceth to follow the method and wayes of eu∣ring, after Hi∣pocrates and Galen, because they were Heathen men. I aunswere with the say∣ings of the godly, wise, and learned, that he which  a Christian, will liue as a Christian, and yet may take Physick and Surgery of a ew, if he haue skill. hath plunged himselfe in the bottomlesse sea, or filthy dregs of his aforesayd Grandsires caluish iudgements and opinions: and in the verie pride and glorie of his skill, he setting himselfe as it were in the chair of ignorāce, (a fit Pulpet for such a Prophet:) did there with terrible stearne lookes, and squared speeches af∣firme, that indeed it was superstuous to vse Incarnatiues, which inuading mind and attempt did become him as well as a ring of golde in a sowes snoute, whose will wants wit through prodi∣galitie to accomplish his childish intent and purpose. But now forsooth, this was vrged and brought in by the similes of dogs toongs, and Momemyasse, a very deepe wit to vnderstande mysteries, and whose capacitie heerein, he sayth himselfe, farre passeth our reach, for his mysticall knowledge, lyeth secretly hid vnder the shadowe of Apollos gorgeous cloake, and bew∣tifyed in print with Esculapius golden bearde, wherein, there is neyther grosenesse, nor impurities, as there is in our Incarna∣tiues, &c. But the exalted essences foolosophically extracted by him, out of the egge of an Elephant, the marye of a whet∣stone, and the braynes of a Woodcocke, soirculate to digest in his baren head, and this is his misterium magnum, where∣with if he anoynt theyr eyes, then ye shall (say they) beholde certayne Spirits that inhabit or dwell in the ayre, called Nenu∣sareni, and Aerdadi: a high matter in a lowe house, which sore troubleth the wits of these wandering Pilgrimes, which contrarie to the direct line of equitie wrong ballans the mea∣ning of good Authors, and so thinke thereby, to patch and cloute vp theyr owne silly credits, by pulling downe and defa∣cing of others, and thus would they roote vp that which they neuer planted. Therefore I may rightly compare this image of
enuy, and such lyke, vnto the malitious man, which desired of Iupiter he might lose one of his eyes, so that another whome he hated, might lose both his, &c. but I will now blot paper, or spend time no longer to aunswere any such, for it is no con∣quest to beate an Asse to death. Also, I meane to vnfolde the strange euents that succee∣ded  after the taking of a certayne pernitious pill, which pill, as it is sayd, was sprinckled abroade by an odde birde of the same neast afore rehearsed. This Pill of his, was shadowed vn∣der the vale or title of Turbith mineralis, and it is no such thing. Moreouer, it was sayd to be a Paracelsion Pill, but I am not of that opinion, for I suppose, no good or godly Paracelsion would haue giuen it to a dog. The composition of the same vile Pill Mayster Reade hath discouered in his Booke of Ar∣ceus lately Translated, and by him published, as a caueat for all good people to beware of that Pill. And in my simple iudge∣ment,Such abuse is neuer wincked at, but when idiots ruleth the rost, there the iust may be oppressed, and many a good cause troden vnder soote. no good man ought to countenance, allowe, excuse, smo∣ther, or conceale so perillous a medicine, sith it hath left be∣hinde it so foule and filthy broade scarres, that touched the liues of foure persons, fyrst, Iohn Butler, Mayster of a Shippe, a Barbar surgeons seruant of London, a Ropemakers boy in Rowsey, and one Master Washborne a Marchant, that dyed also in Rowsey. This cruell Pill was ministred vnto these foure persons by two simple fellowes, who were Surgeons of two Ships, which sayde, they were deluded by this crow brightfast companion, which did write it downe its their booke of secrets, with his owne hand, for a pretious iewell, and there recor∣ded it to be good for all diseases. a bad pollicie, and verie ill de∣uised, but how needfull it is for all good men to beware of this Pill, let euery man iudge which hath care of his owne health, yet I do not malice the person of the man, but his filthy Pill,There is no friendship to be had with such honest men. although to see to, he is more fitter to be made a turnebroche, or a Scullien of a Kitchen, then to be admitted to be eyther Physition or Surgeon, but it is sayde of a learned man, if such kinde of knaues might be well punished for example sake, by the handes of the Magistrate for such offences, so should the
young Students in the Arte be lesse deceyued. I do not heere re∣hearse a tale of a tub, which requireth no longer remembrance, than the view, or looking on; but a matter of such moment, which ought to be eternized in thy minde, and although I knowe he dangereth his owne welfare, that reproueth euill mens faults,Not. 1. and shall lye open to slaunder and reproch, yet I suppose it better to be maligned of such, then to conceale so great a mischiefe, that might otherwise ensue by the farther spreading of so vile a me∣dicin, and therefore I must crane pardon, for I do meane heere∣after in this whole discourse, not to shun any such rotten rootes as they come or chaunce to lye in my way. Heere I am I say farther prest and vrged to vnmaske another  of the same neast of young Snakes, or rather old suttle Serpents, who I trust in God, partly by me, and also heereafter, by the helpe of others more learned, they shall be all ferited (which way soeuer they goe) from their wicked buries, mosses, and starting holes: and farther, I would haue followed their abuses at this time, and also the abuses of others vnspoken of, but that I haue beene preuented by some speciall causes, troubles, and lets, but if heereafter they do not amend, I will discouer them to their shame, and their names. And therefore curteous and friendly Reader, note my sayings which I will openly publish, and iudge with discretion. It is not long since that a subtile deluder verie craftely, hauing vpon set purpose his brokers or espials abroade, vsing sundry secret drifts to allure many, as did the Syrens by their sweet Sonets and melody seduce Mariners to make them their pray, so did his brokers or espials deceiue many, in proclay∣ming and sounding out his same abroade from house to house, as those vse to do which crye Mistresse, haue you any worke for the Tincker, at the length, they heard of one that was tormented with a quartaine, then in all post haste this bad man was brought vnto the sick patient by their craftie meanes, and so forth, without any tariance, he did compound for fifteene pound, to rid him within three fits of his Agew, and to make him as whole as a sish of all diseases: So alittle afore his fit was at hand, he called vnto the Wife of the patient to bring him an apple of the biggest size, and then with a pinne writte in the rinde of the
apple Abracadabra, and such like, and perswaded him to take it presently in the beginning of his sit, for there was (sayth he) a secret in these words. To be short, the patient being hungry of his health, followed his counsell, and deuoured all and euery peece of the apple. So soone as it was receyued, nature left the disease to digest the apple, which was too hard to do, for at length, he fill to vomiting, then the core kept such a sturre in his throate, that where to fore his Feuer was ill, now much worse, a malo ad peius, out of the fryingpan, into the fire: presently there were Physitions sent for vnto the sick patient, or else his fifteene pound had beene gone, with a more pretious Iewell, but this lewde fel∣low is better knowne at Newgate then I will heere declare. Such counterfeite Charmers, with Figures and Caracters, Ta∣galtius doth condemne, as absurd and erronious, which wicked practises he sayth becommeth no honest artist to vse, or to exer∣cise. It is also sayd, that in Archadia, a Woman began to cure with wicked Charmes, without the applying of any medicines, which beeing knowne in Athens, she was condemned by the Senate to be stoned to death: a iust reward for such vngodly practises. I reade likewise of another lewde Woman, which was accused of Witchcraft, the cause was, for that she did commonly take vpon her to cure Men, Women, Children, and Beasts, by a cer∣tayne Charme, the which, they say, she would do, onely for a penny in money, and a loafe of bread. This thing was misliked of many good men in the Countrey where she did dwell, and for that cause, she was vpon suspition of Sorcery and Witchcraft, brought to the Assises, and there Arrayned for it. The simplicity of the old Woman was somewhat considered of by the whole bench, then the Iudges and the Iustices graunted her this fa∣uour, that if she would truely declare vnto them What manner of Charme it was she vsed, she should be deliuered: and beeyng in great feare, and doubt of her life, forthwith in the presence of them all, declared it to be as followeth. First (sayd she) after I had receyued the penny in money, and  the loafe of bread, then my Charme was this.
The Charme. 1. My Lofe in my lappe, 2. My Penny in my pursse, 3. Thou art neuer the better, 4. Nor I am neuer the wurse. Immediatly after, the Iudges with the rest perceiued it to be meere deceit, & cousenage: then they did straightly charge her, vpon payne of great punishment, to leaue off her delusions, and cosening of the people, & so she was discharged, as it is there said. I could speake of many other abusers of Physick and Surge∣rie, but what redresse would be had, I knowe not, and yet I do not meane to speake of the old Woman at Newington, beyond Saint Georges feelds, vnto whome, the people do resort, as vnto an Oracle: neyther will I speake of the Woman on the Bancke side, who is as cunning, as the Horsse at the Crosse keyes, nor yet of the cunning Woman in Seacole Lane, who hath more skill in her Colebasket, then iudgement in Vrine, or knowledge in Phisick or Surgery. But I could discouer many others, which practise Physick and Chirurgery, with the bit in their mouthes, and the raynes in their necks, which do not only thereby deceiue the simple people, but oftentimes the wisest men, and these are as hurtfull, as mothes in cloaths, or cancker rust in Iron. There are many other abusers about this City of London lurcking in corners, and sometimes they do raunge and wander  astray from towne to towne, from countrey to countrey both farre and neere, by sea and land, and these I suppose to be the very spawne and frye of that Rogish route, which practised Chi∣rurgery at Muttrell, in the time of that famous Prince King Henry the eyght, which fraternitie, and brotherhood of abu∣sers of the Arte, good Maister Gale hath discouered in his Booke of the office of a Chirurgion, who sayth, that they were all banished the Campe, and if they had not auoyded with speede, they had been all hanged as theeues and murtherers. And what shall be sayd to some, which not long since haue beene commanded to prepare themselues, and with all speede to  serue her Maiesty in the Warres, then presently with many so∣lemne circumstances, did desire to be excused, protesting, that they had no knowledge in Surgery, but onely, for the drawing,
and stopping of a tooth, letting of bloud, or for the cure of the french Rocks, and thus they did playnely throw all their skill in Surgery flat to the ground, which a little before shined most brightly in the eyes of many. But this I say is well knowne, let the seruice be once furnished with sufficient Surgeons, which often∣times is very hard to do, then they begin to shake their chaines,The greatest barkers are not the best biters. and keepe a stirre, that they can cure that which all the best Chirurgions in London or elsewhere do forsake, but what man∣ner of curing they vse, I may not speake that I knowe. I could re∣hearse diuers of this stye, but they would say my Booke were se∣ditious: but this may suffice for a caueat. Therefore these to say the troth, may fitly be compared vnto a certaine boasting brag∣ger dwelling beyond the Seas, which did attempt to the great ad∣miration of the standers by, to deck on with a ciment for theTruth can ne∣uer so well ap∣peare, as when it is compared with deceite and falsehood. nonce, a mans eare that was cleane cut off from his head, yet his glory was but short, for within two dayes, the arerotted, and fell off againe, and he became a poynting stock to the whole Towne and Countrey. I would no man should heere misconstrue me, or to thinke I vrge any thing in this my whole discourse, a∣gainst any good or honest artist, for my meaning is not against any such, who haue beene, and are, in the Arte, right diligent and studious for the good of our countrey & common wealth, but against such, as Vesalius, Tagaltius, Vigo, Arceus, Maister Gale, Maister Hall, Maister Bannester, and such as these good men, do disalow, who haue in all their whole discourses and writings, neuer sought for vaine glory, promotion, or reward, but only by their vertues, and laudable studies, to make knowne the vndiscret, and vaineglorious brags, friuolous vantings, peeuish practises, and wicked dealings, of a sort of abusers of the arte and good artists. And I suppose no honest man else, which is a true artist, but doth, and will also detest and hate all such caterpillers, which suck the sap and eate the bread out of the mouthes of ma∣ny a good Surgeon, who haue been very much decaied by reason of such ill persons, to the great impouerishment, not only of them∣selues, but likewise of their poore Wiues and children. Which men are well known, if ability were answerable to their willing∣nes and skill, to doo her Maiesty very good seruice in the Arte,
wherein they haue beene trayned, and spent themselues a long time in trauell and studie for the attayning of the same. Now time calleth me to an end of this Epistle to the Reader, and of a part of the generall discourses of abuses and abusers of the Arte, and all good artists, and I will conclude with the last and the very worst of all sorts, and they are those, that withThe more ignorant they are, the more bolder they are, and yet hate to be eproued. open mouth stand vpon their tiptoe, saying with many puissant and forcible reasons, Away with all these bookes, and bookemen, for they haue made our Arte too common. I perceiue, it was not without great cause, that Plinie complayned, and sayd, Lyke as there is no light without a shadow, no more is vertue without enuy, but by Gods good grace, I will returne their speeches vpon their owne heads. Chilo the learned Philosopher sayd, That in Bookes you shall finde written the veritie and truth of things secret and vnknowne, the which time can neuer consume, nor fortune destroy, happy is that man which escapeth such Ciclops dens, without danger of the fluxe of their foule mouth, but I say vnto them whatsoe∣uer they be, that onely their naked experience which they soThe foolish perswasion of naked expe∣rience, hath deceyued a great many. brag of, without learning in the Arte, may sitly be compared to a tree without fruite. The first beginners of their sect of bussard∣ly Empricks, I reade was Philinus Cous. Acro. Agrigenti∣nus, and Alexandreus, with others. And farther it is sayd, that their experience is nothing worth, that is not grounded vpon reason, the mother of all Artes and Sciences, and reason and knowledge is gotten and made ripe by reading and weighing the well obserued practises, and meditated rules of the generati∣ons of learned men, and diligent artists in time, gone before vs, heereunto (I say) ioyning our owne practise, we get vs the mre prompt and excellent vnderstanding, how to put things in pro∣fitable execution▪ and thus both reason and experience matched togethers, maketh a perfect artist, and he that denieth this, hath neither wit, arte, good experience, nor honestie▪ and so I con∣clude, that the reading of good Authors, is the schoole of wise men, for learning, and knowledge, is the most rare gift of God, which maketh men become famous vpon earth: for example, as approoued Historyes do report, Plato, and Socrates, were well
knowne to be two famous Philosophers, though they were the sonnes of two poore Citizens of Athens, for their well occupied minds in learning and knowledge aduanced them to great ho∣nor, as it may appeare by their great renowme, large volumes, and infinite labours, remayning still vnto posterities, and there∣fore it is as possible for an Owle to encounter with an Eagle, or a Wren with a Faucon, as for such boysterous blockheads, with their wodden practises, grounded onely vpon experience, the schoolemistresse to fooles, who with vnequall comparisons, do challenge men of reason and knowledge in the Arte, with their beaderowles of infamy, folaryes, fables, and old wiues tales, long bred and nousled vp in the storehouse of abuses, but it is a most true saying, and it is in these dayes come to passe, that euery peeuish Pan will compare with learned Apollo, but with spite and hatred in their harts, euery Momus will assayle Minerua, with rayling priuely behinde mens backs, and euery Zoylus will barke at Cicero, with open iniurie in their deedes. But Ye may not feare such enemyes To Arte, and Authors good, Who though they fawne in flattery, Yet thurst they for your bloud. For these haue watcht full priuely, Such is their vile desire, Care yee not for their courtesey, Ne force yee of their yre. This warning for a caueat, To mee it shall suffice, Except to those that will not see. A word may serue the wise. But our good God, which hath euer defended vs from the raue∣ningBeware of hypocrisie, shadowed vnder the cloke of frend∣ship and a∣mitie. iawes of such dangerous foes, or smiling serpents, which with stealing steps, do sowe the seeds of sedition, with the hands of Briarious, will returne all the euils which they do worke
vpon their owne heads. Thus (good Reader,) I will through Gods assistance, proceede to the accomplishing of this small Treatise, notwithstanding their great threatnings to kill with Dagger, Sword, or Battle axe, but I little esteeme of such, sith these my labours seemed in the opinions of men, both godly, wise, and learned, not to be vnprofitable, or vnworthy to come a∣broade, for the benefit of all yong Students in the Art, whose Readings and practises, I wish most willingly that God may prosper. Amen. Willyam Clowes.
COurteous Reader, I suppose it almost vnpossible at the first impression of any Booke, but some faultes will passe, be it neuer so carefully looked vnto, yet none heere I hope so egregious, but that I know euery honest mind will frendly weigh the cause, & consi∣der the troubles that is had in such works. But as for the malitious quarrell pickers, whose poysoned natures is to turne nothing to good, these, I say, will not onely mislike and repine, but with their scorning lookes rather watch to finde faultes, than with honest minds to amend those, which vnwillingly haue beene committed: therefore I haue gathered this small Errate: and if in the course of your readings, it will please you with your pennes first to couer & correct the faults escaped, as it is heere declared, & also very easy to find, both the chapter, leafe, and line, then I shall thinke my self most happy, & so wish you such profit by these my labors, as your own harts doo desire, & as the matter is able to affoord, as knoweth God, who direct you in all these your studyes and labours. Amen. Faultes escaped. PAge. 1. Line. 9. for proclayming, reade proclayme. Pag. 3. line. 4. reade foliorum maluarum, lin. 22. albumina cuorum. pag. 4. lin. 30. lei papaueris. lin. 31. vnguenti. pag. 5 lin. 15 in the margent reade Querce∣tanus. pag 6 lin. 26 foliorum maluarum. lin. 32. 32. vnguenti. pag. 7. lin. 2. seminis ps▪ lin 10. 11 olei. li. 15. albuminum. pag 8. lin. 5. cin∣nabrij. lin. 7. Diachalciteos. pag. 10. lin. 18. radicum Bugloss. pag. 11. lin 4. aqua fumiterrae lin 7. fumoterrae pag. 12. lin 6. cum gummi. lin. 9. Resin pini. lin. 10. Gummi. lin. 13 colophoniae. pag 15. lin. 16. chamo∣millae, and in the margent, reade Cataplasma anodinum pag. 16. lin. 6. & oculis populneis. lin. 26. Aquae hordei. lin. 28. sarcocollae. pag. 17. in the margent reade Angeli Bolognini Restrictiuum. pag. 18. lin. 19. diamoron. pag. 22. lin. 13. seminis sinapis. pag 39. lin. 5. cum gummi. lin. 14. ophio∣glossi. lin. 17. nummulariae lin. 18. lilij conallum pag. 42. lin. 28. cauterie. pag. 43 lin 15 peritoneum. pag. 45. lin. 16. cannabis. pag. 47. lin. 1. agrimo∣niae. li. 3. Androsaemi. li. 4. Aschyri li. 21. pilosellae. li. 23. Quinqueneruiae. pag. 49. lin 30. vnguenti. pag. 50 lin 4. albumen vnius oui. lin. 14 cum gummi. pag. 51 li. 5. reade distillentur ac separato oleo adiungantur, &c. lin. 12. ga∣langae. li 15. nucis moscatae li. 16. cubebarum. li. 18. ligni. pag 54. li. 14. Empl. Resolutiuum. pag. 55. lin. 27. aceti pag 56. li. 6. reade, vitellos ouorum tres. li. 29. & 30. vnguenti. pag. 60. li. 28. epispastices. pag. 62. li. 14. 25. camforae. pag. 7. in the 1. and 2. line, are left out the doses of mellis communis, which should be lib. 2. and of vitriol. alb. which should be 4. ounces. pag. 88. lin. 20. reade▪ & de Ianua.
depiction of surgery on a wounded man
To his very good freend, Mayster Clowes Chirurgion, all health, &c. IN writing of Bookes for the benefit of the studious, as I consider of sundry commen∣dable courses taken by the Authors in that be∣halfe, so yet is there none (in my iudgement) more apte, either to amplify the Authors name, or else to increase the Readers knowledge, then that which is done by way of familiar examples and obseruations: for such are properly beawtifyed with these three amiable ornaments, Varietie, Perspicuitie, and Certainty whereof in seuerall, the fyrst delighteth, the second informeth, and the third assureth, but ioyntly, all concurre, to the readie ripening, and speedie preparing of the Artist to answere the expectation of his calling. When  therefore, the principall of your labour (Maister Clowes) hath in this Booke beene, to deliuer faithfully your experiments in the curation of woundes, with such playne instances of the medicines vsed in particular cases, and historicall obseruations of their seuerall successes, ioyned with the noting of occurrences, and preuention of accidents, as may in deede (according to your speach) leade the young artist by the hand to do the like, I do not onely for mine owne part, finde my selfe bound to encou∣rage and commend you, but dare also assure you, in behalfe of the bette sort, of all thankefulnesse: Hippocrates hauing led that trace in his Epid∣micis, hath therein no small estimation with the learned Physitions Ama∣tus, Valleriola, Coiter, Arcu, Dod, and Skenchius, haue agayne renewed that course, and receyued reuerent accompt for their labours. The learned Crto in his old age, seemeth to haue repented of nothing in that kinde so much, as that he had not reserued and written the obseruati∣ons of his practise, by which he supposed his name might more haue been commended to posterity, then by any other of his writings. I am not igno∣rant also, that to write obseruations of a mans practise, is a way, by which the Reader may be as much and perhaps more dangerously abused, then by any other, namely, if the Author should be vnfaithfull, or conceited in his owne priuate opinions, which by this meanes he would seeke to esta∣blish and obtrude vnto the credulous reader, but as the later of these can not be obiected against you, if the whole behauiour of your life may be taken for a testimonie, so neyther may the former be suspected by any that haue care to guide their iudgements by the rule of charitie. Adde heereunto, that beside the protestation you haue made in the word of a
Christian, concerning the veritie of these things, and your sincere and vp∣right meaning in the penning thereof, I am able, and will be ready in sun∣dry poynts, and namely, in your medicines and prescriptes, to testify that you haue concealed nothing from the Reader. As for the et, with those also that I speake of, if their likelihood and probabilitie may be sent a∣mong the learned and artistes of iudgement to gather their voyces, I doubt not but your side shall be full. But you say, your encouragement is greatly hindered, when you consider and call to minde, in what euill part things are nowadayes taken, that were not euill meant, and that such as would seeme wise men are become so foolish, that they can not heare the euill partes of base abusers disgraced, but by and by they must deeme themselues in like ort thereby defaced. I see the vlcer you appoynt me vn∣to, I derne it to be Cacoethes, and the malignitie thereof to be greater then any man can cure: but withall I deny, that it should be any wor∣thy cause of your discouragement, nay rather I hold, that you are afresh to take courage agaynst it, for dyuers reasons, fyrst, for that the burthen shall not lye onely vppon your backe, but that others are charged in lyke sort with you, who will not shrinke the shoulder from you in the bearing thereof, and many handes (you knowe) make quicke and easy worke. My second reason is, because the Deuill entendeth thus by their meanes to vpholde hys kingdome of ignorance and wickednesse still among vs, agaynst which, if we be enemyes of hys kingdome, we must needes make warre with all our might. Thirdly, because this is an infallible truth, which you may write vppon, that no man will misiudge, or ma∣ligne your inuectiues agaynst the wicked and theyr practises, or take themselues defaced by theyr disgrace, but such as haue guylty consci∣ences, and are priuie to themselues, eyther of the same or lyke enormi∣ties, or atleast, that they do mayntayne or wincke at the same in others, when as rather by theyr places they should punish them: this latter sort (I hope) will be more wise, then to be found guylty of vpholding ini∣quitie, and if there haue been ouersightes committed heeretofore (as the best aduised will not denye) I trust they will become more warie for the lyke heereafter, but the former orte are rightly touched in the olde and common prouerb of a galde horsse backe. When a great many kicke at our dressing of two or three mes sors, it is a signe that they are all in∣fected with the lyke, and do therefore feare, least we would lay handes on them also, and then what reproche can that be to vs, when as our writings agaynst a fewe notoriously naught, shall discouer vnto the world a greater number that are in secret: as naught, they can not say we haue accused them, when as in deed their owne consciences haue fyrst condemned them, wherein, if they had stood sounde towarde their owne∣hearts, nothing could haue touched them, so that we see these sayings well conymed, A good conscience is as a brasen wall. And agayne, An euill conscience is as a thousand witnesses against a man. Of these things, if I would stand long, I could say much, that should worthely redound
o the shame and confusion of all such, but remembring the length of an Epistle, I will shut vp the rest in this briefe. One verie aptly compared the conscience of a man, to the minor, or assumption of such Syllo∣gismes as do conclude particularly vpon a generall charge or accusation propounded for example. The Lawe sayth, He that killeth or maymeth, must be killed or maymed, the guilty conscience then assumeth thus: But I haue killed or maymed, and so this conclusion commeth vpon hym, therefore I ought to be killed or maymed agayne, all writers in Chirurgerie do giue this proposition, All vnskilfull men do wickedly abuse this Arte, and ought to be punished, then the guilty conscience euery where maketh this assumption: But I am an vnskilfull man, now followeth the con∣clusion on the neck of it, Therefore I do abuse the Arte, and ought to be punished. So when any Writer describeth the properties of wicked practi∣sers, he perhaps doth not say, this man is one, or such a man is such, but the consciences of those men, to whome such propertyes pertayne, do tell them so much in theyr bosomes. Who then (I pray you) is theyr accuser but themselues? Yea, but (will some say) in your inuectiues a∣gaynst abusers, you describe the men so by theyr propertyes, as euery one may knowe who you meane. I aunswere, fyrst, I haue knowne some, who thynke themselues no small men, that haue greatly stayned theyr wisedomes in misiudging such descriptions, therefore I wish men to be well aduised in theyr Interpretations. Secondly, if it be so, as they saye, that a man by hys propertyes may bee poynted out as with ones finger, my counsell is, that euery man must labour to change away hys euill qualityes for good, that so, when they shall be spoken of, they may commend hym, and not disprayse hym. And verely me thynke, it is full of reason, that they, who are so angry for hearing of theyr quali∣tyes, should be much more ashamed to vse them. Feare not therefore (Mayster Clowes) in the loue of mans health, to shewe your selfe euen a vehement enemy, to all that hate, or hurt the same: Mans health (I saye) craueth it at your handes to decypher such counterfaytes in all theyr colours, that they may (at least) be auoyded of the people, though they be not also punished of the Magistrate, which notwithstanding were most of all to be wished. I see you euery where carefully except the sonnes of arte, and all honest and diligent men in our calling, of purpose because you would not haue your inuectiues applyed to any that deserue them not. If then there shall be any one that wyll needes take the things that are spoken to himselfe, and so beyng angry at his owne shadow, will also play Will Sommers part, in striking him that standeth next him: if any (I saye) shall thus deale with you, imagin therein what good successe you haue had, that in laying for one Foxe, you haue caught a couple, one, whome before you knew by speciall pro∣pertyes: and another, who hath now reuealed himselfe by the guiltinesse of his conscience, double gayne (you know) bringeth double reioycing. In such sort verily, should I thinke the matter meetest to be taken, as namely,
if I should declare of one that I knowe did giue a Gentleman common praecipitate (as it seemeth) but mixt with a little vnguent out of his salua∣torie, for a pill to purge him with: and another that to remoue a defiled bone, applyed a faire Mallet and a Chissell to the matter for more speede: and by the declaring of these, I should also rub the galled backs of others, whome I knewe not before to be sick of that disease, were there not as good cause for me to be glad of the successe of my discouery, as for all o∣ther men to take it to their aduantage for the shunning of such impo∣stors? the best men, I doubt not, will giue their voyces to this: the worst sort, I am sure, you meane not to make your iudges. You haue heard my iudgement of your labours, and my opinion of your aduersaries, the latter, your owne experience and working shall dayly confirme, the other, the Chirurgians practise, and orderly imitation, shall abundantly ratifye. And as I do entreate you for the publishing of this present fruite, so do I no lesse exhort you, to the keeping of other obseruations heere∣after to the like vse. In both suites I perswade my selfe, (for the good will you beare vnto me) that I shall preuayle. Your assured freend, and wellwiller, Iohn Banester.
In prayse and commendation of the Author and this VVorke, I. G. Master of Arte, and Student in Physick and Chirurgerie. AMong many other good things of late published in the Art of Surgery, I cannot but prayse, and greatly commende this breefe and short treatise, set foorth by Maister Wil∣liam Clowes, proceeding from good iudgement gotten by his industrie and much experience by his owne practise. I thinke verily that as no man of sounde iudge∣ment can mislike the matter, so no man that is in credit for his honestie, will discommend the intent of the man, but rather attribute vnto him the title he deserueth (a wellwiller to his Countrey.) In the censures of the wise, a more necessary Worke could not come foorth in this Art, considering the time. Surely the want of that know∣ledge in many sory Surgeons which in this booke is manifested vnto vs, hath cost many a poore Souldyer full deere, and hath made that stick by many Mariners, which they shall neuer be able to clawe off whiles they liue. For when they haue been any way maymed or in∣dangered with losse of life or limme, then commes the bare singlesoled Surgeon, as he rightly tearmeth them, and what to do by arte knowes not, yet something he must attempt, treading in his old cowpath, as though he were healing a broken head, or plastering of a kibed heele, hauing one or two boxes of greene Salues, with a plaster of Diachilon, and a greene grasse Melilot, with their motheaten Mussilage, and these are good for sooth for all sores, and so committeth the health of the patient to the mayne chance, a miserable thing, that warlike men should first fall into the hands of men, and after∣ward to be as it were massacred by such ignorant beasts.
But that they may leaue their brutish ignorance, and theyr sauage cruelty, let them reade ouer if so be they can, this directiue agayne and agayne, and if they be not tootoo sottish, they shall fynde theyr iudgement amen∣ded, theyr wittes sharpened, theyr practise corrected, and theyr fingers directed, poynt by poynt, from the beginning of the cure, till the finishing thereof. Thou shalt fynde also heereunto annexed (good Rea∣der) a learned Worke for the cure of the french disease, written by a Spanish Physition. Also, certayne singular Aphorismes, collected out of most excellent Authors, a Worke worth the labour, and worth thanks to, for that a man may walke safely in this narrow compasse, who before might be indangered of losing himselfe or his sense, in the wilde forest of Aphorismes. And surely, we can not if we did as we should but greatly thanke God, for that as in most other, so in this arte, the neces∣sary knowledge, and sufficient practise is brought of late into shorter volumes then euer it was, so that though we may say,  vita breuis, yet can we not of late yeeres so rightly say  ars longa, for now ha∣uing the pathes so wel trode by our owne countreymen, they better knowe our nature then Strangers did, we may walke safer with small studie, then they could with tedious trauaile in tyme past. Heeretofore men might well saye,  experimentum periculosum, be∣cause peraduenture it cost many a man a limme, and ma∣ny men might be spoyled▪ before experience were rati∣fyed. Now that which before was incultum nemus, being made parua siluula, a man may take a sure staffe to leane vnto, whereas before he might trust to a rotten sticke, and so be deceyued. Now because this notable worke is wrought at home, vp starteth Aesops mangy curre, and all Acteons Dogs in a great cry; ready to pull downe the authors heereof, but their maister must be their maister, barke and brawle they neuer so lowde. Why they be so fell, I knowe not, vnlesse it be that the bleareeyed man
can not abyde the candle, nor he that hath been brought vp in a darke den, abyde the lyght of the Sunne: but to say the truth, Hinc illae lachrimae: ego excludor, ille recipitur. by this meanes they are knowne to be ignorant asses, and therefore by wise men worthely shut out of dores, which if Aesops asse had been, he had not so dangerously taken acquayntance of his mayster. Yet there is ano∣ther flye bytes theyr galled backe, as bad as this, for that euery day more then other, the dawes stollen fea∣thers are plucked from him, and he knowne to be but a dawe, what with the old, pulling the black haires from theyr crowne, and the yong, pulling the gray from theyr forheads, they must needes appeare to be but bald bus∣sards. and thys is the cause they crye out, fye vpon Bookes, for, Litera scripta manet, as they are knaues in grayne, so they are fooles in Print: but to speake much, were but a folly, for words with them are but wynde, it is Morbus inueteratus, an old vlcer of the stomacke, which if you touch, it fluxeth at the mouth, spewing out theyr poyson agaynst all learning and learned men, who would cure them of theyr foule euill. I haue oftentimes mer∣uayled how they that are artistes in deede, can suffer such brasenfaced beastes to liue among them, who if they be long tollerated, will cause Surgery to be of that credit, that a man had rather fall into the chaps of a mad Dog, then into the hands of a Surgeon. for as their words tend to the defaming of the most skilfull, so their works to the disgracing of the Arte. wheresoeuer they goe, they leaue such a stincke behynde them, that all men that hath had to deale with them, cry fye vpon them. To prooue this to be true without a sillogisme, looke vppon the af∣tercures that are among you. It is some mens worke to rectifie other mens errours. Heere I might speake to the worshipful company of Surgeons in London, amōg whom I know many haue good knowlege, and also great reason ioyned alwayes with their practise, Cicero contra Catali∣nam spake to Senators, Hoc quis ferre possit, inertes homines
doctissimis viris insidiari, st ultissimos prudentissimis, ebriosos so∣brijs, dormientes vigilantibus, and therefore if either arte or artistes be respected in this case, Non est lenitati locus: seue∣ritatem res ipsa postulat, such matters are not to be iested withall, the Stocks were a fit place for such persons to publish theyr skyll. Hos igitur a vestris aris & aulis, a tectis vrbis, a moenibus, a vita fortunis{que}, ciuium arcebitis, & tanquam hostes patriae, latrones Angliae, rectâ pergant in exilium. Who could tollerate eyther Molem inuidiae, procacitatem linguae, or, Spolium populi, but euery man hath spoken so much, and so little preuayled, that I am out of hart to speake any more. But yet I must needes teare off one ragge more from their torne coate, before we part. These cater∣pillers, or peoplepollers, being thus paynted out in their seuerall colours, with theyr proper badge to knowe them by, well perceyuing, that among so many torches, theyr pictures must needs be perceyued, seeke to couer themselues vnder other mens hoodes, get other to com∣pose, and they to subscribe, and then the worke is theirs, and so they become of blinde bussards, that can scarce write and reade, great learned men. If Tully were aliue, he would crye out, O honorem contumeliosum, such men in deed do rather aucupari gloriam, though ignominiosam, then publicae vtilitati inseruire. I vnderstand that Aesops Asse is alyue agayne, and would couer himselfe with a Lyons skinne, but if he do appeare, we shall perceyue his long eares well ynough, then were he best to keepe him selfe within his owne territory, least he become by word much famous through greater folly. But suppose he can escape cleanly a while, yet will Academicus lye whispring hos ego, &c. tulit alter honorem, I could saye something which I leaue, expecting alteration of disposition, that would be like a water of great force, to trye whether there were any figges in theyr bellyes or no, but because the one may be wiser then the other, I keepe silence, ho∣ping that Philoponos shall haue good words for his good will, and I would pray them all, that old Philadelphus
for his friendly dealing might be free from their furie, but no salue I thinke can cure that sore, for this will euer be true, Inuidia virtutis comes, Enuy followes vertue at the hard heeles, not to treade in her steps, but to trip vp her heeles if she could. But to conclude, I thinke all haue some kynde of conscience or other, and there is magna vis conscientiae, & magna, sayth Tully, in vtramque partem, vt nihil timeant qui nihil commiserint, & poenam semper ante oculos versariputent qui peccarint, A cleere conscience will acquite continually where good meaning is, but a canckred hart will alwayes accuse where froward dealing is, and so farewell good Reader, and iudge as thou seest cause, and apply that which is spoken in good will, to thine owne profite. Vale. From Cambridge, Iune the 24. Anno. 1588.
T. P. To his louing freend Mayster Clowes. IN tempests safe by Pylots skill we sayle, In flattering snares true friendship vs vpholds: From loathsome greese good comfort doth vs bayle, These three in one, Clowes Booke to vs vnfolds. He stirres the helme, and friendly comfort lends, When surges rage, when snares, when griefe off ends. When outward sores as boystrous waues do swell, When venime hid, as flattring tongues do sting, When both as greese each hart with torments quell, When naught but death doth seeme releefe to bring, Then Clowes thy Pylot can from Sea to shore, From payne to ioy, from sicke to sound restore. Once Aesculapius Theseus sonne did cure, Machaon once did Philoctetes saue, Their prayse for this vnsteyned doth endure, Such iust reward good skill and knowledge haue: Whome fame, vnsought for, followeth at the last. Which sought for, by vnskilfull, flyes as fast. Clowes as Apollos sonne, by Art is sayd, Not one, but sundry Hippolites to saue, And Banester Machaon seemes, whose ayde, As many Phyloctetes dayly craue. How then, shall these not liue in trumpe of same? Since thousands cured shall extoll their name? Amongst which sort, my selfe although the last, Yet not the least part of their cure did find. Whose arme past cure, an Atrophy did wast, And sinewes shronke contracted out of kind, Which past all skill, vnskilfull Surgeons thought, To health by skill these skilfull Surgeons brought.
But as the sweetest cloath the moathes do eate, And freshest Rose the cancker seekes to spill. And as the statelyest towres the winde doth beate, And fretting lightning strikes the loftiest hill, So enuy seekes the deadly foe of fame, By slanderous toongs to hinder their good name. The Dogs their vomit loues, the Goates their crags, The Swine delight to tumble in the mire, Our common prouerbe telles that scuruie nags, Are fittest for to please a scabbed squire. No maruell then though folly such embrace, Which seeke by lyes these skilfull mens disgrace. Yet they shall shyne as gold that rusteth not, When these as drosse with shame consumd shall lye, Repining much that no report may blot, The rightfull prayse which of these twayne shall flye. So Momus shall with these compared fleet, As doth the Beetle vnder Roses sweet. Feare not therefore these slanderous toongs reports, Which strike the best, but bad vntoucht do saue. Of your good names they batter not the forts, But hating skilfull, shew what skill they haue. Continue fast, strange cures procure your fame, Do good, and none but bad will touch your name. T. P.
Now as followeth, is set downe those cures, which by Gods helpe haue bene fini∣shed and brought to perfite health. The cure of two Gentlemen greeuously burned with Gunpouder. Chap. I. ALthough it bee the maner of Fugitiues and Landlepers, which runne and gad from Countrey to Countrey, and from towne to towne, proclaiming their cures at the Market Crosse, as did not long since one raunging runnagate, who cal∣led himselfe Iohannes Petrus, aliàs Scleeues, which would needes take vpon him to cut of a great Wenne that long time had growne on a mans side: and with∣out any tarience, with his flattring speeches and sweet words brought a sleepe the poore patient to agree to haue his wenne taken away: the which in a short time he did attempt. And to shewe the worthines of his handy worke, presently did cut off the top or vpper part of the Wenne, which done, immediatly after, to grace the rest of his worke, he tyed it round about the roote with a strong ligature, to cause it beare out, & to shew the more vgglie vnto the beholders: Then he trayned his patient into the Market place, with all his sore side open and bare, for the market folkes to beholde. But God knowes, within fewe daies his poore patient, by his beastly vsage, dyed: for which lewd abuse, a Gentleman of Darby, called Maister Buckley, an Atorney of the law, vpon an honest zeale and for conscience sake banished this abuser out of the Countrey as an outlawe for euer. I will not follow these men, or rather monsters, nei∣ther
will I protract time, or vse many circumstances, but now I come vnto my purposed matter. It happened in annoNote. 1577. two Gentlemen were drying of Gunpouder in a brasse panne, who, as it did appeare, had no consideration vnto the ouer heating of the panne, but without knowledge of the dan∣ger or care of themselues, did continually stirre the pouder with their hands, vnhappely it chaunced, the pouder vpon a sudden became on fire, wherewith they were most greeuously burned, both hands and face, and also their bodies, and their clothes were set on fire, which caused them to make a most la∣mentable crying: which being heard of diuers in the same house, and perceiuing their chamber to bee in a great smoake and smell of Gunpouder, presently they entred in, and with al hast that possible might be, did carie them into another roume, and there they did cut, rent, and teare of all their clothes from their bodies: otherwise, without these helpes, there is no que∣stion but they had bene both burned to death. There dwelled neere vnto them a Gentlewoman, who did bring them into great ease with a whay, the which she made of veriuce and milke. Neuerthelesse, she being fearefull to meddle any far∣ther,A signe of a good con∣science. for that she neuer had experience in such great burnings with Gunpouder, and her stomacke could not away with the sight nor sauour of them, and then presently I was sent for: And after diligent view had, I did first anoynt the parts that were blistered, specially on their handes and face, three times a day, for the spae of fower daies, with this remedie following, &c. Gale. Rec. Salis com. ℥. ss. Succi Cepae. ℥. iiij. Misce. But where the skinne was burned off, and the parts made ravv and paynfull, there I vsed this vnguent, the which I haue infinite times approued in many cures that haue bene burned with Gunpouder, which medicine was neuer chaun∣ged till the parts were perfectly whole, without any farther helpes but only this.
Clowe. Vnguent Ambusi Rec. Axunglae porcinae lib. iiij. Olei lini lib. ij. Olei Ros. lib. j. ss. ana. m. j. Folia maluarum. Violarum. Nympheae. Plantaginis. Prunellae Vmbilici veneris. Androsemon. Sempervini. Infuse these sixe daies, then boyle it with a gentle fire of coales, till the herbes bee parched, then strayne it, and adde thereto Cerae albae. lib. ss. Nitri Albi. ℥. vj. And if you please in the bayling to put in of Shoemakers peece grease lib. i. your vnguent will bre the better: I haue with this vnguent cured many, and it is of my collection. But note this, that vnto their eyes I applyed this rémedie follo∣wing. Rec Aquae Ros. rub. ℥. iiij. Lactis mulieris. ℥. ij. Ouorum albuminis. numero. ij. Saccari candi. q. s. Misce. And I annoynted the eye liddes and the parts neere there∣vnto with this excellent vnguent. Rec. Olei Ros. ℥. viij. Cerusae lotae in aqua Ros. rub. ℥. ij. Cerae albae. ℥. ij. Albuminis onorum. numero. iiij. Camphorae. ʒ. ij. Misce, fiat vnguent. In the end I finished these cures without blemish or signes of any burnings with
Oleum ouorum, & Oleum amigdalarum, &c. I would be loth that any of the fruite of my labours should bee profitable vnto the wicked, or come into their hands, sith they are like Esops curre, neither good to themselues, nor fruitfull to others. Here followe certaine remedies, good for burnings with Gunpouder. Chap. 2. IT is requisite to bee noted and obserued, that in any wise you attempt not to cut any of the blisters of them that bee so burned with the flame of Gunpouder: for that will cause your patient to be in too intollerable payne: but they must be anoynted, as aforesayd, with the same remedie for the space of three or fower daies, or els with any of these here set downe. M sap.Rec. Saponis nigrae. lib. j. Mellis com. lib. ss. Salis com. ℥. j. Misce. Or this. Rec. Succi cepa. ℥. ij. Olei lini vet. or Varnish. ℥. j. Misce. Any of these may be vsed as aforesaid, and then if you please you may safely proceede in this cure with my vnguent, or els with any of these here vnder written. Am. Parre his vnguentum pro igne. Rec. Lithargiri auri. ℥. iiij. Olei Ros. ℥. iij. Olei Depapaueris. ℥. ij. ss. Vnguentum populeon. ℥. iiij. Camphor. ʒ. j. Misce, & fiat vnguentum. Or this.
Medici floren∣tini. Rec. Olei Rosati. ℥. viij. Olei ex ouis. ℥. ij. Nitri albi puluerizati. ℥. ij. Cerae. ℥. j. ss. Corticis med. sambuci. m. j. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. Or this. D. B.Rec. The pith and barke of Elders, ana. ℥. ij. boyle these in three pints of water, till halfe be consumed, then strayne it, and adde to oyle of Nuttes ℥. iiii. boyle these till the water bee consumed, and adde thereto Cerae. q. s. Et fiat vnguentum. Or this. Iosephus Quirsitanus.Rec. Lard molten in the flame ℥. ii. and powre it into the iuyce of Beetes and Rewe, the Creame of Cow milke ℥. i. Mucilage, of the seedes of Cidoniorum, & Dragagant, ana. ℥. ss. Misce & fiat vnguentum. Or this. Jacobus We∣kerus.Rec. Calcis extinctae ℥. iij. Olei. lib. j. Cerae lib. iij. Thou shalt euery day once wash the chaulke, and let the water be taken away with a spunge: do this tenne daies, then wash it with Rosewater and let it drie, and then melt your Waxe and Oyle, and take it from the fire, and put in the calx, made in most fine powder vnto the Oyle and Waxe. &c. The true maner and order of the curing of a Marchant of this citie of London, which was wounded with Gun∣shot. Chap. 3. A Fewe yeeres past, a Marchant of good account in this Citie of London, called Maister Thomas Gore, being at Flushing in Sealand, there making of great suite vnto the Prince of Orenge and the States, for the release of a shippe and goods of his and his
friends, which the Flushingers had taken at sea, in which time of his suite, he did stand at a doore where his lodging was, be∣holding a band of Dutch Souldiers, as they were marching to the walles: And as it is the maner of Souldiers, in townes of warre, to discharge their peeces as they passe by: so one of those Dutch Souldiers, that partly knew him, and the cause of his comming to the towne, as the Gentleman himself con∣fessed. This Souldier at that time had his peece charged with a bullet, and so shot at him, he hauing both his handes clasped together, and the bullet passed through the middle of both his hands, and fractured the bones, and also wounded him through the vpper part of his left arme, and also brake that bone in many peeces, which did rent and teare the mus∣cles, sinewes, veynes, and arteries: after which followed great paynes, pulsation, and inflammation, that continued a long time, notwithstanding he was presently dressed by the Sur∣gions of the towne, but he receiued of them small comfort or hope of his recouerie. Then his friends being Gentlemen and Marchants of London, were by him giuen to vnderstand that he was still from day to day worse and worse. Then they sent for him to London, and presently vpon his arriual I was called vnto the cure: And after conference had with a Doctor of Phisicke for his diet, purging and bleeding, I made readie forthwith this Cataplasma, which appeased the paynes, and ceassed the inflammation. ana. m. ij. Folia maluarum & Violarum.Cataplasma. ana. m. j. Florum Chamomillae Fol. Ros. Boyle all these in newe milke till they bee very soft, then stampe them in a morter, and adde therevnto ana. ℥. j. ss. Vnguentum Ros. Vnguentum populeonis. Vitellos ouorum. numero. ij. Farinae hordei. ℥. ij.
ana. ℥. ss. Radicis althae & Semina Psillij. Sometimes I did put in these mucilages of each ℥. ii. and of oyle of Ros. ℥. i. ss. with the crummes of white bread steeped in newe milke ℥. iii. Thus the parts were freed from all paynes and enflammations: which being done, to shunne the like daungerous accidences, which oftentimes in such wounds is hard to resist: therefore I applied round about the parts this defensiue. Defensiue. Rec. Oleum Ros. ℥. ss. Oleum Myrtini. ʒ. iij. ana. ℥. ss. Sanguin. Draconis Boli armeniaci Farinae Hordei ana. q. s. Albuminis ouorum Aceti Ros. Misce. Mundifica∣tive. Rec. Mel. Ros. ℥. ij. Terebinthinae ℥. iij. ana. ℥. j. ss. Succi Apij & Plantag. Boyle all these together a little, and then adde therevnto, ana. ℥. ss. Farinoe Hord. & Fabarum. Sarcocollae. ʒ. j. ss. Croci. ʒ. ss. Misce. Powder that which is to bee powdered, and mixe all these together, stirring it continually, till it come to perfection. Notwithstanding I had very great helpe by this Mundifica∣tiue, and the powder of Mercurie precipitate, yet I was af∣ter constrayned to vse more stronger remedies: And amongst others, I found most profite in this powder following, which did not onely take away the euill flesh, but also it did remoue
diuers fragments and peeces of bones which were hidden within the spungious flesh, &c.Clowes. Rec. Mercurij praecipitati. ʒ. iij. Aluminis combust. in aceto Ros. ʒ. j. Cinalri. ʒ. ss. Misce. Likewise I commonly vsed Emplastrum Diachalsitheos, and the gum plaster, published in my booke De Morbo Gal∣lico, in the 27. leafe, which plaster was inuented and practi∣sed by a very excellent Surgion a Frenchman borne, who followed the warres a long time vnder the King of Nauarre, and also in the Lowe Countries: By chaunce comming ouer into England, fel acquainted with Master Baker, vnd whom he did giue this gum plaster, as he called it, & since by meanes it is come into many mens hands. Truely the plaster is wor∣thie commendations, &c. But, as I haue aforesayd, after I had taken away all the spungious flesh, and mundified the wounds, and also remoued the loose bones, then I next vsed my Vnguentum Incarnatiuū, wherevnto sometimes I did mixe Aluminis combust. in Aceto Ros. which vnguent did not onely drie vp superfluous moysture, but it did moreouer gently clense without any great mordication or byting: which being performed, then I did shortly after desiccate and drie vp the sayd wounds with Vnguentum Desicatiuum, and Em∣plastrum Diachalsitheos. And thus I performed this work and cured him perfectly within this Citie of London. The cure of one Maister Andrewe Fones, a Marchant of London, who being in a ship at the Sea, was set vpon by the Flushingers, in which fight he was very daunge∣rously wounded with Gunshot. Chap. 4. THis Marchants Shippe was set vpon by certaine Flushingers at sea, and being a long time in fight with them, and very sore oppressed by the number of men and Shippes, yet they did fight it out vn∣till
at the last by chaunce he was that into the vpper part of his breast neere vnto Os forculae, or the channell bone, and so passed through till it came to the lower part of Os scapulae, or the shoulder blade, where it did rest till lie came to London, which was a long time: for immediatly after his hurt, the ship was taken and caried to Flushing, where he was in cure, as he sayd, along time with two of the Prince of Orenges Chirurgians, to his great cost and charges, yet it profited him nothing. Then I was sent for, and after speech had, I made probation and found where the shot was lodged: then I did without tarience, in the presence of diuers skilfull Chirur∣gions of London make incision, and there I did take out the shot. And after that there was great care ad of him by his friends, for that I did signifie vnto them the wound was not without daunger. Then there was ioyned with me Maister Doctor Lopus, one of her Maiesties Phisitions, which after∣ward shewed himselfe to be both carefull and very skilfull, not only for his counsell in dyeting, purging and bleeding, but al∣so for his direction of Arccus Apozema, amongst others it wrought most singularly: the proofe thereof I neuer had vntill that time, but since I haue vsed it, and I haue found it a trea∣sure for the curing of wounds in the breaft, whose composi∣tion I will here set downe, &c. First, after I had taken out the shot, I preserued the wound with this digestiue, the which I vsed vpon tents and pledgets. Digestiue Clowes. Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vita ℥. iiij. Vitellorum ouorum. nu▪ ij. Olei Ros. ℥. ss. Mercurij precipitat, biscalcinati. ʒ. j. Croci. ℈. j. Misce. After the wound was herewith preserued, then I annoyn∣ted it round about with oyle of Roses warme, and Empla∣strum Diachalcitheos dissolued in oyle of Roses, and at eue∣ry dressing I applyed hot steuphs of white wine, and Aqua
vitae. q. s. and I defended the wound from accidents with this defensiue. Defensiue. Rec. ana. ʒ. j. Pul. ros. rub. & Myrtillorum. ana. ʒ. vj. Boliarmeniaci Terae sigillat ana. ℥. j. Succotum Plantaginis & Solani ana. ℥. ij. ss. Olei Ros. omphac. & Myrtillorum. Aceti Ros. ℥. j. Cerae. ℥. ij. In which time and space of the vse of these outwarde re∣medies, I did giue him to drinke of this Apozema often∣times q. s.Arceus Apo∣zema. Rec. ana. p. iiij. Hordei mundat. contusi. Passularum mundatarum contusarum. Radicorum Buglossae contusae. ℥. iij. Gliceryzae contusae. ℥. j. ss. Seminum cumini. ℥. ij. Iuiubarum, numero. xx. Prunorum, numero. xv. Radicum petrocelini contu. m. j. All which being boyled in xiiii. pounde of Rayne water, to the consumption of the third part, after that let it be strongly strayned, wherevnto shall be added▪ Penediarum. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. iij. Sirupi Rosarum & de duabus ra∣dicibus sine aceto. Saccari albi lib. ss. Cinamomi puluerizati. ʒ. j. Fiat Apozema.
And likewise for cleansing and mundifying of the sayd wound, I vsed this next following, and also many times be∣sides with Basilico, mixed with Mercurie precipitate. Petri An∣dreae Mundifica∣tiuum. Rec. Terebinthinoe Venotoe lotoe in aquafumitoriae. ℥. iiij. Vitellorum ouorum, numero. ij. ana. ℥. ij. Mellis Ros. Sir. de fumitoria. Farinae orobi. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. ss. Thuris. Masticis Aloes hepaticae. Radicis Peucedani. ℥▪ j. Misce. Also I iniected inwardly with a iting this excellent losion, which did wonderfull well mundifie and clense the breast.Iniectio. Mundifica∣tiua. Vigon. Rec. ana. ℥▪ ij. Hordei mūdati Lentium. Caudae equinae. m. j. Ros. Rub. m. ss. Boyle them in equall parts of common and Plantiue wa∣ter, cum modico succo mali punici, vnto the consumption of the third part, putting thereto, when it is strayned, Sacchari rub ℥. ij. Sir▪ ex infusione ros. ℥. iij. Croci. ℈. ss. Misce. After the parts were perfectly mundified, then I perfected the cure with these remedies here vnder prescribed. This iniection doth mundi∣fie, incarne, & consolidate.Rec. Aquae hordei lib. ss. Sir. ros. ℥. j. Penidiarum. ℥. ij. Liqueritiae. ʒ. ij. Myr▪ ℥. ss. Misce. with the afore rehearsed infections I vsed this
vnguent, which is very necessary for such wounds made with gunne shot: and I haue approued it in many other cures. Vnguentum de Peto. Clowes. Rec. Succi de Peto. lib. vj. Adipis ouini. lib. ij. ana. lib. ss. Oleorum Ros. lumbricorum & Olei Hipericonis cum gum∣mis nostrae inuentionis. Terebinthinae Venetiae, ℥. xij. in aqua vitae lotae. Resini pini. lib. ss. Gummis Elemnij. ℥. vj. Olibani. ℥. iiij. Masticis. ℥. ij. Collophonij. lib. j. Mellis Ros. lib. ss. Cerae albae. lib. j. Vini albi. lib. j. ss. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. With these remedies and order here rehearsed I did per∣fectly make him whole, and cicatrized vp the wound with vn∣guentum desicatiuum rub. and so hee remayneth vnto this day, within this citie of London. The cure of a certaine Souldier that was wounded with gunne shot in the lowe Countries, he was shot in at the bottome of his bellie on the left side, and the bullet passed through and rested in the right buttocke neere vnto Anum, where it lay secretly hid and could not be found for the space of three yeeres, in which time it became a Fistula of a hard curation. Chap. 5. IN the yeere of our Lord 1573. I was sent for vn∣to my singular good friend Master Richard Yong, one of her Maiesties Justices of Peace of Middle∣sex, who did earnestly request me, that I would for his sake, if it were possible, that the foresayd Souldier, whose name was called Maister Giles, might bee recouered agayne
and brought to his former health, for that he was knowne to be a very valiant man. Which cure in truth seemed to me to be very hard and difficult, for that he had bene for the space of three yeeres with diuers very good Chirurgions, both beyond the Seas, as also in England, and yet his greefe did still re∣uerse and breake out agayne. The reason I perceiued, was, for that the place where the bullet lay could neither by proba∣tion nor coniecture, bee certainly knowne where abouts it did rest, and that was the chiefest cause, I suppose, they fayled in this cure. So at this worshipfull Gentlemans request, I did take him in cure, and after probation made with probes of leade and waxe Candles, and long and small flexible tents that were apt to yeeld to euery crooked turning, yet by no meanes I could come to the knowledge or vnderstanding where the bullet had conueyed and hid it selfe, neither could the patient himselfe giue me any certaine direction thereof: then first of all I enlarged the mouth or orifice of the Fistula, with a tent made of a Spoonge, and for that the callous hol∣lownes did penetrate deepe, and as I haue sayd, being vncer∣taine of the bottome which was in that part where the bullet lay, therefore I ordayned a long and small stiffe tent made of fine lint without any grosse threeds in it, and so with the white of an Egge well beaten I framed my tents in length and bignesse according to the greatnesse and smalnesse of the greefe: which being thus prepared according to arte, then I did annoynt euery tent flightly ouer with vnguentum Rosa∣rum, only to haue the powders cleaue fast & take better hold on the tents, wherby it might be so conueyed in to destroy and remooue the callous hardnesse which was inuironed about the circuits or compasse of the hollownes of the Fistula, and the first powder that I vsed for this purpose was this. Rec. Vitriol crud. ʒ. ij. Mercurij precipitat. ʒ. iij. Cinabrij. ʒ. ss. Boli armeniaci orient. q. s. Misce.
After that I had reasonably well enlarged the Fistula with the powder, I vsed it twise a weeke, and I remoued the es∣cares with vnguentum Rosarum, and layed vpon the same most commonly Emplastrum diachalcitheos dissolued with oyle of Roses and the white of an Egge mixt together, and so applyed it. And although I had herewith partly taken away the callous, yet I found not that profite and commoditie, as heretofore I had done in the curing of diuers other. Then hoping of better successe with this strong powder following, the which I applyed after the same maner and order, as the o∣ther aforesayd. The strong powder. Rec. Vitrioli albi combust. ʒ. j. Alluminis vsti. ʒ. j. ss. Mercurij sublimati. ℈. j. Boli armeniaciorient. q. s. Misce. With this powder I did wholly destroy the callous, so farre as it was possible to conuey in my tents. Then suppo∣sing I had made way sufficient to haue found where the bul∣let rested, but yet doe what I could by searching, either when he stoode vp right, or stooped downwards as he stoode when he was shot, all which profited nothing, till at the last I did consider that such Fistulaes that hath mo ks or turnings then one, could hardly bee cured by teuts: wherefore I follo∣wed the counsell of Tagaltius, who saith, in the cure of Fistu∣laes where medicine by tents cannot bee brought or conuayed into the bottome, as the cause doth require, then to vse iniec∣tions and liquours meete for the purpose, to bée cast in with a string, is, saith he, greatly auaileable, as I very well did proue by this cure: for I prepared this water following, the which I did cast it in with a ing that had a long pipe and a large bar∣rell: The sayd water is called Aqua Fallopij. Aqua Fallopij Rec. ana. lib. j. Aquae plantaginis & Ros. ana. ʒ. ij. Alluminis Roch. Argenti sublimati.
Put all these together in a double glasse, and boyle it in Bal∣neo mariae to the consumption of the fourth part. After I had cast in of this water, presently I stopped the mouth or orifice of the Fistula, and caused him forthwith to lye downe vpon his right buttocke, according as the passage directed me, only to this ende that the water should not returne backe agayne till it had wrought his effect, for within xxiiii. houres after he did greatly complayne of extreeme paynes in his right but∣tocke ere vnto Anum, and there I did perceiue it to be great∣ly tumied and swolne, then I applyed on the out side of his buttorke where he complayned this Cataplasma, which is a singular remedie in such causes. The composition is as fol∣loweth. Anodina. Cataplasma. Clowes. Rec. ana. m. j. ss. Foliorum maluarum violarum. Hiosciami albi. ana. m. j. Florū chamomelae. & Ros. Boyle these in new milke, and then adde thereto Medullae panis. q. s. Farinae hordei. ℥. ij. Sem. lini. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. j. ss. Oleorū ros. & Violarum. Vitellorum ouorum, numero, iii. Croci. ℈. i. Misce. Thus I let him remayne till the next day following in the morning, for then I had a good hope the water had found the passage and place where the bullet had seated it selfe. Then I called other in presence when I made incision vpon the right buttock nere vnto Anum, & there by ye inciston I tooke out the shot. And for that time to mitigate the payne I iniected newe milke and Sugar, with a little oyle of Roses, and vpon pled∣gets I applyed vnguentum Rosarum to remoue the ascher
which was made by the foresayd water, and I staied the blée∣ding which came by the incision with Galens powder: and so he rested reasonable quiet all that day and the next night: then at the second dressing I ordayned this vnguent, the which I vsed till the paynes and inflammation was ceassed, and the said vnguent is made of Axungia & oculorū populei, wher∣with I mixed a smal quantitie of Mercurie precipitate, then after I did mundiste it with this mundificatiue. Vnguentum mundificatiuū Rec. Gum. amoniaci. ℥. ii. Galbani. ℥. i. ss. ana. ℥. i. Aloes Sarcoc. Terebinthinae. ℥. iiii. Resinae pini. ℥. ss. Olei ros. ℥. iii. Olei mastic. ℥. iiii. Mellis ros. ℥. i. ana. ℥. ss. Succorum plantaginis. Apij. Card▪ Bened. Viridis aeris. ʒ. iij. Dissolue your Gummes in white Wine and make an vn∣guent according to arte: After that the parts were well mun∣dified, then I did iniect in twise a day this iniection, which doth both incarne and conglutinate. The iniection of Tagaltius. Rec. Aqua hordei. lib. i. Mel. ros. ℥. iii. Saracol. ʒ. ii. ana. ʒ. i. Olibani. & Myrrhae. Vini Maluatici. ℥. vi. Misce, secundum artem. Thus in a short time I finished this cure with this iniectiō, & my vnguentum de Peto, & the plaster of Diachalcitheos.
The cure of one Master Henry Rodes, one of the wayters of the Custome house, he being vpon the water skir∣mishing with his peece, and by reason that the same had flawes in it, did breake in many peeces, and made a great wound vpon his chinne, & caried away a good part of the manduble and teeth withall: moreouer it did rent his hand in three parts very greatly: all which I cured agayne without mayme or deformitie. Chap. 6. AFter I had stitched the wounds of his hands and face, then I preserued them with oyle of Hiperi∣con warmed, and vpon the same to restrayne the bleeding I applyed this Restrictiue. Angeli Bo∣lognini Re∣strictiui.Rec. Boli armeniaci. ℥. j. ss. ana. ʒ. j. Sanguinis Draconis. Terrae sigillatae. Thuris gummosi. ʒ. ij. Pilorum leporis terrefact. ℈. ss. Ouorum albuminis. q. s. Misce. And the wounds of the hande were defended from iniuri∣ous accidences that commonly follow such wounds, that will admit no cure till they bee remoued by good industrie and di∣ligence, which was performed with this defensiue. &c. Defensiue. Rec. ana. ʒ. j. Rosarum rub. Myrtil. ana. ʒ. vi. Boli armeniaci. Terrae sigillatae. ana. ℥. j. Succi platag. & Solatri. Aceti ros. ℥. ij.
ana. ℥. ij. ss. Olei ros. & Myrtil. Cerae. ℥. ij. Misce. Then with decent bolstring and roulling I preserued his hand for the first dressing, laying it orderly vpon a palmestrie of wood, bewrapped round with fine towe, and bound it easely so that his hand might safely lye on it, without stirring or re∣mouing any way. Then after the wound of his lippe was al∣so stitched, I vsed vnto the wounde of the outward part the oyle of Hypericon warmed, which I applyed to with pled∣gets of fine lint dipped in the same oyle, and vppon that the foresayd Restrictiue. And I often dressed the wound in the in∣side of his mouth with Sirup. ros. & Mel. ros. and also with this Gargarisme here following. Gargarisme. Rec. Aquae hordei. lib. j. Succi granatorum. ℥. ij. Mellis ros. ℥. ij. Diamorion. ℥. j. ana. ℥. iiij. Aquae ros. & Plantaginis. Alluminis Roch. ℥. ss. And thus also with bolstring the wound of his chinne and conuenient roulling of it, he rested till the second day, then at the second dressing I ordeyned steuphs of white wine with Aqua vitae, q. s. and my vnguentum de Peto, which I vsed continually with the oyle of Hypericon warmed, and the pla∣ster called Diachalcitheos, and annoynting the parts about with oyle of Roses: and so this wound of his chinne was in a short time perfectly cured. In like maner I prepared at the first for the curing of his hande also steuphs of white wine with Aqua vitae, q. s. and I ordeyned likewise this digestiue, wherewith I continued vntill▪ the wounds did yeeld perfect
matter, in which time no accidence ensewed that did hinder the ordinarie course of curing. PigestimRec. Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae. ℥. ij. Vitellorum ouorum, nu. ij. Croci. ℈. ss. Olei Ros. ℥. ss. Farinae hord. q. s. Misce. A conuenient digestiue in such wounds is necessarie, be∣cause of the alteratiō of the ayre, & for brusing & renting of the parts so disseuered: how be it, digestiues may not be vsed ouer long, for then it will certainly too much putrifie the parts. Moreouer, I vsed in the time of Application of this digestiue, Oleum lumbricorum, and Oleum hipericonis, of each e∣quall portions, and twise a day I dipped the pledgets of the digestiue in these oyles, and annoynted the part about with warme oyle of Roses, and a plaster of Diachalcitheos dis∣solued with oyle of Roses, and the white of an Egge being al relented together, and so I continued with bolstring and roul∣ling, as aforesayd, till the wound was well digested. Then I did mundifie those wounds of his hande with this Mundifi∣catiue which Maister Rasis the French Kings Surgion did giue vnto me: and it is a singular remedie in such wounds, as I haue many times approued. Francisci. Rasij. Mundifica∣tiuum.Rec. ana. ʒ. iij. Pul. Aloes. Myrrhae. & Gentianae. ana. ʒ. ij. Pul. vtriusque Aristolochiae. & Centaurij minoris. Pulueris ireos florent. ℥. ss.
ana. q. s. Accipiantur omnia cum ir. Ros. siccar. & Absinthij. Addendo Aquam vitae. ℥. j. Et fiat linimentum. After the wound was well mundified, then I prosecuted vnto the ende of the cure with myne Incarnatiue, and some∣times I mixed with it, as aforesayd, aluminis combust, in aceto Rosarum, and after brought it vnto a perfect cicatrize with this vnguentum de minio following. Vnguentum de Minio. Rec. Minij leuissime triti. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. ii. Olei rosati. Olei myrtini. Coquantur lento igne cum cera alba. ℥. ss. Misce, & fiat vnguentū secundū artem. Now here I will draw vnto the end of this cure, the which I performed within this Citie of London. About the same time, one Henry Battey a Cheesemonger, dwelling at Bro∣kenThe cure of one Henry Battey a Cheesemon∣ger of London Wharfe, which by ouercharging of his Dagge yt did breake in many peeces, and the breech or screw of the Dagge did flye vp into the corner of his eye and fractured the bone, and so passed vp into his head, and the wound presently was closed together, that those Chirurgions which were before called vnto the cure, supposed the wound to be very small, and went about to heale it vp▪ but still he did growe weaker and weaker, and in the ende he was speechles, that diuers times the bel toulled for him. Then I was sent for, and forthwith I enlarged the wound by incision, and I tooke out the screwe of the Dagge out of his head, and the peeces of fractured bones, and so in a short time after I cured him within this Citie of London, and yet he liueth vntill this day.
The cure of a certaine Souldiar that was shot through the legge, and fractured the great bone called Ostibiae, or Foscilla maior. This wound fell to Gangraene within two daies, by reason of a wonderfull inflammation that followed, he hauing also a very full & plethorick body. Chap. 7. THis Souldier was of a hot collericke and fu∣rious nature, and his bodie was replenished with euill humours. The parts about the Gangroene was marueilously inflamed, which greatly increased the furie and spredding of the sayd griefe: so that forthwith I scarified the affected part with deepe sections and scarifications. And I opened with a launcet all the small veynes that did appeare about the Gangraene, but where Horsleaches is to be had, it is very profitable to applye them, but in the stead of Horslea∣ches to opening the small veynes with a launcet is auaileable, but not so good as the Leaches, because they sucke and drawe out the adusted bloud▪ which is congeled and compact in the veynes and parts inflamed: then I fomented the corrupt part two times a ay with this Lixiuium, which did excellently cleanse and consume the filthinesse and corruption. Lixiuium Am. Parrei.Rec. Aceti optimi. lib. j. Mellis ros. ℥. iiij. Sir. acetosi. ℥. iij. Salis com. ℥. v. Boyle all these together and then adde thereto Aqua vitae. lib. ss. When the corrupt part was herewith well fomented and bathed, then I applyed vpon it this vnguentum Aegiptia∣cum. Vnguentum AEgiptiacum. Rec. ana. ℥. iij. Floris aeris. Alluminis roch. Mellis com.
Aceti acerrimi. ℥. v. Salis com. ℥. j. Vitrioli Rom. ℥. ss. Sublimat Puluerisati ℥. ij. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. Thus with pledgets of lint I did applye vnto the cor∣rupt part, and vpon the same also this Cataplasma, of which I haue had sufficient tryall. Fallopij cata∣plasma. Rec. Rapum vnum domesticum. Vnam satis crassam radicem Raphani. Let them be scraped and sufficiently cleansed, then take Pulueris seminis synapij. ℥. j. Gariophilorum. ʒ. iij. ana. q. s. Olei seminis lini. Olei nucum iugland. vetustissimi. Let these bee laboured in a morter to the forme of a plaster or Cataplasme, and then vse it, &c. Moreouer, there was ap∣plyed about the mortified parts three or foure times double this Defensiue, which is of a marueilous good operation, for it comforteth the member, and will not suffer it to receiue corruption. Desensiue Vigonis. Rec. ana. ℥. iiij. Olei ros. ex oliuis immaturis. Olei myrtini. ana. ℥. ij. Succi plantaginis. & Solani. Let all these bee boyled till the iuyce bee consumed, then strayne them, and adde thereto
Cerae albae. ℥. j. ss. ana. ʒ. i. ss. Farinae fabarum Farinae lentium. Farinae hordei. Sandalorum omnium. Boli armeniaci. ℥. j. ana. ʒ. i. Pulu. myrtilorum. Granorum & foliorum eius. Misce. By these meanes afore rehearsed, the Gangraene was staied, in which time and space the Liuer veyne was opened, and his bodie was purged with Diacatholicon, and at sun∣drie times wee did giue him to eate of fine Mithiridat a little quantitie at a time, which, as Tagaltius sayth, is merueilous good to defend the filthie and venimous fumes from hurting and offending the Heart, which venimous vapors commonly ascende vp from the corrupt member: And during all which time he was adioyned to a thinne and cooling diet. Then after that the Gangraene was by these meanes fully and wholly stayed, then the aschers were after remoued and taken away by these remedies now next ensuing. Vnguentum Tetrapharma∣con Galeni. Rec. ana. q. s. Picis nigrae Resinae. Cerae. Adipis vaccinae. Fiat vnguentum. Then I did take of this sayd vnguent ℥. iiii. of the oynt∣ment that is made of Axungia and Poplear buds ℥. iii. wher∣vnto I did adde the yolkes of two Egges, all which together was well laboured in a morter, then I did therewith remoue the aschers, which being done, the part affected was after
perfectly mundified with this most excellent vnguent. Mundifica∣tiuum opti∣mum Vigon.Rec. Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. iiij. Mellis rosati colati. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. i. Succi plantaginis. Succi Apij. Let them boyle vnto the consumption of the iuyce, then take them from the fire, adding these here vnder written. viz. Statim, vitellos duorum ouorum. ana. ℥. j. Farinae hordei. Farinae fabarum. Misce. And after the place was thus well mundified and clensed, then i did incarne and heale it vp with vnguentum ceraseos paruum Mesuae, and with my vnguentum incarnatiuum mixed with Allumin. combust. in Aceto ros. &c. Vnguentum Ceraseos par∣uum, Mesuae.Rec. ana. ℥. j. Aristolochiae. Ireos. Sanguinis Draconis. Hamoniaci. Sarcocollae. Lithargirileuigati. ℥. v. Olei. lib. j. Misce. And likewise I vsed this plaster following alwaies vpon the foresayd vnguent, vntill the end of this cure. Emplastrum nigrum. Rec. Olei ros. lib. iiij. Cerae albae. lib. ss. Minij. lib. ij. Camphor. ℥. ss.
Boyle together your Minium and Waxe til they be black, then put in your Waxe, and last your Camphyr. And thus within the space of tenne weekes he was safely cured, and his bone was agayne vnited and knit, his splints and roullers were taken also away, and the plasters that did remaine a∣bout his legge, for the curing of the fractured bone was like∣wise remoued: and thus I finished this cure as effectually as though he had neuer receiued hurt. But if the Gangraene should yet haue increased, as oftentimes I haue seene, not∣withstanding these and such like good remedies, then the last helpe will be miserable, that is, to cut off the corrupt member in the whole and sound parts, &c. The maner and order of the taking or cutting off a mor∣tified & corrupt legge or arme, which commeth often∣times by reason of wounds made with Gunshot, &c. Chap. 8. SIth as I haue sayd, that oftentimes it happe∣neth, by reason of euill accidents which fol∣lowe wounds made with Gunshot, the whole member doth come to Gangraene Sideratio or Sphacelus, so that we are many times con∣strayned forthwith to make a speedie dispatch to cut off the member, which shalbe done as Maister Gale ve∣rie skilfully hath appoynted in the whole and sound parts. And if it so fall out, or happen, that a legge is to be cut off be∣neath the knee, then let it be distant from the ioynt iiii. inches, and iii. inches aboue the knee: and so likewise in the arme as occasion is offered. These things being obserued and noted, then through the assistance of almightie God, you shall lucke∣lie accomplish this work by your good industrie and diligence. But you must bee very circumspect and carefull of all things which concerne the methodicall perfection of this worke, that is, you shall haue a great regard to the state of his bodie, as al∣so for euacuation and dyeting: And after his bodie is prepared
and purged, then the same morning you doe attempt to cut off the member, be it legge or arme, let him haue two houres be∣fore some good comfortable Caudle, or other broth, according vnto the discretion of the learned Phisition, or Chirurgion, only to corroborate and strengthen his stomacke. And in any wise omit not, but that he haue ministred vnto him some good exhortation by the Minister or Preacher: And you shall aduer∣tise the friends of the patient, that the worke you goe about is great, and not without daunger of death: for that many acci∣dents or syntomies doe runne and flocke together vnto such great wounds: which desperat euilles in such causes will ma∣ny times admit no cure. All which being considered, then or∣deyne the night before some good defensiue, and let it be ap∣plyed two or three times about the member. Defensiue Clowe.Rec. Emplastrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ss. ana. ℥. j. Succi semperuiui. Succi plantaginis. Succi Solani. Olei ros. ℥. ij. ss. Olei myrtini. ℥. j. Ouorum albumin. nu. ij. Aceti ros. ℥. j. Misce. And oftentimes I haue vsed this with good successe. An other de∣fensiue. Gale. Rec. Boli armeniaci. ℥. viij. Farinae hordei. ℥. iiij. ana. ℥. ij. Sanguinis Draconis. Terrae sigillatae. Olibani. ℥. j. ss. Aceti. ℥. iiij. Albumin. ouorum. q. s. Misce. All which being well considered, you shall haue in a readi∣nesse
a good strong fourme and a stedie, and set the patient at the very ende of it: then shall there bestride the fourme behinde him a man that is able to hould him fast by both his armes: which done, if the legge be to be taken of beneath the knee, let there bee also an other strong man appoynted to bestride the legge that is to be taken of, and he must hould fast the mem∣ber aboue the place where the incision is to be made, very stedi∣ly without shaking, and he that doth so hould should haue a large hand and a good gripe, whose hand may the better stay the bleeding: but in some bodies it will not bee amisse to ad∣mit bleeding, specially in such bodies as are of hot complex∣ionsIn hot com∣plexions we are many times constrai∣ned the second or third day to open a veyne, only to pre∣uent a feuer, and in bodies of euill consti∣tutiō. It is also very necessary to emptie or loose the bellie by supposito∣ries or Clisters, if cause so re∣quire, &c. and doe abound in bloud. And I haue knowne through the skilfulnesse of the houlder not much aboue ℥. iiii. of bloud lost at a time: but in weake bodies it may not bee suffered to loose much bloud: for bloud is sayd to be the treasure of life, for which cause a good houlder is not to be spared. In like maner there must be an other skilfull man that hath good experience and knowledge to hould the legge belowe, for the member must not be held too high, for staying and choking of the saw, neither must hee hould downe his hande too lowe for feare of fracturing the bones in the time it is a sawing off, and he that doth cut off the member, must bee sure to haue a sharpe sawe, a very good catlin and an incision knife, and then boldly with a stedie and quick hand cut the flesh round about to the bones without staying, being sure that the Periostium or Panicle that couereth the bones bee also incised & cut with the Nerue that runneth betweene the two bones of the legge, which shallAlso he must haue a good quicke eye, a strong arme, and a stout heart. be done with your incision knife: all this being orderly perfor∣med, then set your sawe as neere the sound flesh, as easely you may, not touching it, and with a light hand speedily sawe it off, then hauing prepared also in a readines this restrictiue pouder to stay the fluxe of bloud. The restrictiue powder. Clowes. Rec. Boli armeniaci. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. j. Sanguinis Draconis. Aloes.
Olibani. ℥. j. ss. ana. ℥. ss. Terrae sigillatae. Masticis. Croci martis. ℥. ij. Lapidis hematites. ℥. ss. ana. ℥. j. Calcis ex testis ouorum. Mummiae. Gypsi. ℥. vj. Farinae volatilis. ℥. iiij. Misce. Take of this powder as will serue your turne, and mixe with the sayd powder Pilorum leporis terrefact. & ouorum albumin. ana, quantum sufficet, and let the Hare haires, I say, bee cut as fine as possible may bee, so much as will bring it all to a reasonable thicknesse, and when the powder is thus prepared, before you cut off the member, let there bee in like maner made for the purpose three or foure small boulsters or buttons, fashioned in the top or vpper part like a Doues egge or as a Sugar lofe button, flat in the bottome to the compasse of a French Crowne, and round vpwards as aforesayd, and these you shall make of fine Towe, according to arte wrought vp in water and vineger, wherevpon you shall applie some part of the restrictiue: And when the boulder of the member aboue doth partly release the fast holding of his hand by little and little, by which meanes you may the better perceiue & see the mouthes of the veynes that are incised and cut, and vpon the endes of those large veynes that are incised and cut, you shall place the round endes of these three or foure small but∣tons, and vpon them presently without tariance, place a round thicke bed of Tow made vp in water and vineger, so yt it be fit as neere as you can gesseit, to the compasse of the stumpe or member that is taken of, and thereon spred of the restrictiue,
and vpon that you shall lay an other broder bedde of Towe made vp as aforesayd, so large yt it may compasse the member ouer, & that it may be safely tyed to keepe fast on the rest: and vpon the two beds of Tow spred the Restrictiue reasonable thicke afore you place them to, and you shall tye on the large bedde of Towe being cut first with a payre of Sissers in iiii. parts thereof, one cut right ouer against another an inch long and somewhat more, that the sayd bed may be bound to with the more ease. And you shall tye the large bed to, as I sayd, with a ligature, which they call a chokeband, doubled two or three times, being flat and fully an inch broade, and a yarde long: in the middle of the sayd ligature you shall spred some of the restrictiue, wherby it may take the better hold to the large bedde of Towe: after it hath remayned on a small time, be∣ing thus fast tyed, then you shall place vpon these a double large bedde of soft linnen cloth: and then with a strong rouller of foure inches broade, and three or foure yards long, let it bée artificially roulled, and where as the bloud beginneth to shew through all, in that place you shall specially lay a good com∣pressor or thicke bolster made of Towe wrought vp in water and vineger the thicknesse almost of a mans hand, and thinne towards the edges, and in compasse of a Philips dollar more or lesse, as you suppose the greatnesse of the fluxe to bee, and couch them close to, in as many places as the bloud doth shew it selfe: and thus with thrée or foure roullers and as many soft linnen beddes, some single and some double, with sufficient number of bolsters, some great and some small, you shall arti∣ficially stay the fluxe of bloud: which order and way did yet ne∣uer fayle me, nor any other that haue vsed the same, according vnto the order here prescribed. Some also doe vse to drawe o∣uer the great bed of Towe a wet Oxe bladder, and pulleth it close vp ouer the same, the which they tye fast to with the a∣foresayd ligature or chokeband, and vpon the same a double or single linnen bed: and thus with a fewe broade bolsters and roullers they also very orderly stay the fluxe of bloud: All which being orderly done, then you shall easely as possible
may be, carie the patient to his bed, hauing a pillowe made readie to rest the member on: Thus let him lye with as much quietnesse as may be, kéeping a conuenient diet, then the third or fourth day you shall haue in a readinesse steuphs of white wine, with a decent rouller, &c. Likewise prepare for the se∣cond preseruation of the wound this digestiue, or the like. Digestiue. Rec. Terebinthinae in Auqa vitae lotae. ℥. iiij. Vitellorum ouorum. nu. ij. Olei Ros. ℥. ss. Sir. Ros. ℥. j. Masticis. ʒ. ij. Farinae hordei. q. s. Croci. ℈. j. Misce. And applie vpon the same digestiue this plaster following, or the plaster called Flos vnguentorum. Emplastrum de Peto, or Hyosciami lu∣tei. Clowes.Rec. Resinae. lib. ij. Cerae albae. lib. j. Adipis hircinae. ℥. iiij. Gummi Elemni. lib. ss. Aquae vitae. lib. ss. Succi de Peto. lib. iiij. And if you cannot get Succi de Peto, take in the steade thereof Hyosciami lutei the quantitie aforesayd, boyle all these till the iuyce be consumed, then strayne it, and after make it vp in rouffes. This plaster I haue proued to bee good for wounds made with gunshot: And after the wound is well di∣gested and brought to perfect matter, then you may mundi∣fie the same with this gentle mundificatiue, or the like. Mundificati∣uum. Rec. Mellis Rosati. ℥. iiij. Farinae hordei. ℥. ss.
Terebinthinae. ʒ iij. Resinae. ʒ. ij. ana. ʒ. j. Thuris. Masticis. ana. ʒ. ss. Myrrhae. Sarcocollae. Cerae. ʒ. ij.If you adde to of Cerae one ounce, it is not amisse. ana. ℥. iij. Olei mastic. & Hyperic. Misce. Or this. Vnguentum mundifica∣tiuum. Rec. Mellis. ℥. x. ana. ℥. j. Farinae Siliginis Lupinorum. Hordei. ana. ℥. ss. Myrrhae. Aloes. ana. ℥. iij. Succi apij. Absinthij. Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. ij. Misce, & fiat vnguentū secundū artem. For Incarnatiues you may vse vnguentum aureum, vn∣guentum ceraseos Mesuae, or that which is of my collection specified in my booke De Morbo Gallico, or this Incarnatiue following, which I haue vsed in such causes, and it profiteth this cure greatly, specially in children, and in soft and tender bodies. Rec. ana. ℥. vj. Terebinthinae clarae. Olei rosati. Resinae pini. ℥. iiij. Cerae citrinae. ℥. iij. Gummi Elemni. ℥. ss. Misce, & fiat vnguentum.
And sometimes I mixed herewith Alluminis combust. in aceto rosarum, and being made into very fine powder q. s. it would then also gently clense without payne, &c. And I did vsually deficcat and drie vp the same with this Desiccatiue, and sometimes with vnguentum de minio, &c. Vnguentum desiccatiuum. Rec. ana. ℥. j. Antimonij. Cerussae. ana. ℥. ij. Plumbi vsti Lithargiri. Terebinthinae. Olei rosati. ℥. iiij. Cerae albae. ℥. iij. Misce. Powder that which is to bee powdred, very finely, then dissolue at a gentle fire of coales your Waxe Oyle and Cere∣binthine, and in the cooling put in the powders, &c. But if you haue not this my powder alwaies in a readines, you may thē vse Vigoes order, that is, to cauterise the place with a bright cauterising yron fit for the purpose, made red hot: or els with good Maister Gales powder, which I wil hereafter set downeThe yron is most excellēt, but that it is offensiue to the eye, and bringeth the patient to great sorowe and dread of the burning and smart. in this booke, which powder of his was a worthie inuention, and better pleased the patients then the burning yrons, which were, I say, very offensiue vnto the eye, and yet the powder wrought with extreme payne, and made a very great ascher, & by that meanes the bone afterwards hath bene cut off newe agayne, as I haue seene many times within the Hospitall of S. Bartholmewes, and so did make a very long worke or e∣uer they were cured: but this powder here published neuer causeth payne, but often bringeth with it reasonable white matter. The foresayd powder is of my collection and gathe∣ring, the which I did put first in practise in the Hospitall of Sainct Bartholmewes, as it is well knowne vnto some of the Surgions that then serued there, and yet liue within this Citie of London, who were present with me when I first put
it in practise, after the order before declared, at which time there was taken off in one morning seuen legges and armes, and so by Gods assistaunce, we stayed al their fluxes of bloud, without any payne vnto them, but onely in the compression and close roulling and tendernesse of the wound excepted. Af∣ter it was made known, there were diuers that were destrous to haue it: amongst the rest Maister Crowe, a man of good experience and knowledge in the arte, he was very earnest with me for it: and for diuers speciall occasions, I was the more willing to giue it him, but I would not deliuer it vnto him as then, till he had seene with his owne eyes first the experience and profe of it. Not many daies after the woor∣shipfull Maisters of the sayd Hospitall requested me with the rest of the Surgions to goe to Hygate to take off a maydes legge which they had seene in the visitation of those poore houses: The sayd legge was so greeuously corrupted, that we were driuen vpon necessitie to cut it off aboue the knee, which wee did performe by this order here before prescribed, and he did see, we stayed the fluxe, and lost not much aboue ℥. iiii. of bloud, and so cured her after within a very short time. Then I gaue him the order and making of the sayd powder. Only this I am to giue you to vnderstand, that I haue since my first collection, added other Simples, which profite it greatly: And I haue also giuen it vnto many good Surgions, who were men both sober, wise and learned, as well in London as in the Countrie, that haue bene thankfull for it: But I must needes say agayne, some other there are, whose tongues can vnfoulde secretes, and their capable heads vnderstand great misteries, vnto whō I haue likewise friendly giuen it. These men were not onely vnlearned, but also shamelesse, and such haue rewarded me agayne, euen like vnto the churlish Curre vnto whom reliefe was offered, whose malice is such, that he neuer respecteth the goodnesse of the gift, nor the courtesie of the giuer, but snarleth and snatcheth at him that offereth re∣liefe to helpe to satisfie his hunger: a slender recompence for so great a courtesie. To speake hereof I am taught by expe∣rience,
for hauing bestowed on them, not only this profitable powder, the which now most willingly I present vnto all the young professors of Chirurgerie, &c. and I knowe they haue vsed the same, vnto the profite of their patients and credite of themselues: yet neuerthelesse, some could finde in their hearts behinde my backe to render me no other thankes, than did the churlish Curre, who rewarded euill for good. In steade of thankes I haue bene backbitten: and thus I reape for my la∣bour but chaffe for corne: ill will and priuat grudge, for cour∣tesies and friendship offered. I doe not here compare any good man vnto any such had persons, neither will I compare any such bad persons vnto any good man. But (now gentle and courteous Reader) I doe craue pardon, for that I doe here with the Macedonian call a spade a spade, a backbiter a back∣biter. And so I ende, wishing all good Artistes to take heede and beware, vnto whom they impart their secretes, least they also enter into the gappe of vngratefulnesse, or the vnsauerie dunghill of their despightfull tongues. Now followe very good approued remedies for wounds made with gunshot, which may bee vsed with Flamula, if the bullet haue passed through, or els with tents according to the depth and greatnesse of the wound. Chap. 9. Am. ParrieRec. Mercurij precipitati biscalcinati. ℥. j. Butyri recentis. ℥. iiij. Vnguenti basilicon. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. j. Olei liliaci, & Lini. Camphyr ʒ. ij. dissolued in Aqua vitae. q. s. Misce, & fiat vnguentum. Or this. Rec. Vnguentum Basilicon. ℥. ij. Butyri recentis. ℥. j.
Mercurij praecipitati. ʒ. ij. ss. Misce, & fiat vnguentum. Or this. Digestiue Clowes Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae. ℥. iiij. Vitellor. ouorum. nu. ij. Vnguenti Populeon simplic. ℥. ij. Olei rosarum. ℥. ss. Mercurij precipitati. ʒ. ij. Croci. ℈. j. Misce. This Digestiue being vsed with Oleum catulorum ofA note or ob∣seruation. Maister Ambrose Parries description, hath a certaine league and soctetie or facultie to appease paynes, and to alter and chaunge the contused substance of flesh, made by the bullet, in∣to perfect matter: but if the part affected be possessed with any distemper or inordinate accidents, which often followe such wounds, sometimes by reason the bodie is replenished with thinne and seirrous humours, called of the learned Cachochi∣mia, and other distemperatures, specially in such bodies as a∣bound in choler, flegme, and melancholie, then it is conue∣nient to make euacuation by purging the humour most mole∣sting and abounding, which is to bee done with great discre∣tion. There are other noysome causes which followe these wounds, and do, as it were, excruciat and torment the patient with great inflammations, fluxes of blond, feuers and conuol∣tions, which sodainly inuade the bodie: which if they bee not with spéede cured, it wasteth the strength, and the recouerie of the patient is to be lamented, and death speedily ensueth. So these things being foreknowne, diligently weigh and consi∣dered, may by Gods assistaunce, be preuented, where Reason and Experience are copartners and partakers together. This Oyle is also good for wounds made with gunshot. Landrada. Rec. Oleilini. lib. ij.
Terebinthinae. lib. ij. Viridis aeris pul. ʒ. ij. Misce. Or this which is called Oleum catulorum. This oyle doth appease paynes and also re∣moueth the brused or con∣tused flesh. Am. Parrie.Rec. Olei viol. lib. iiij. Catulos duos. Verminum terrestrium. lib. j. Boyle these ouer a gentle fire of coales till the flesh bee se∣parated from the bones, then strayne it, and adde thereto Terebinthinae Venetae. ℥. iiij. Aquae vitae ℥. j. Some of late haue added vnto this Oyle the leaues of Ni∣cosiana, or Peto, with other herbes, and they say it profiteth greatly: but I haue vsed it without any addition, as Maister Ambrofe Parrie hath himselfe published, and for the worthi∣nesse thereof I can speake by experience: for being sent for by letters from Right Honorable, and also by her Maiesties commaundement to goe into the Low Countries, to attende vpon the Right Honorable Earle of Leicester, Lord Lieute∣uant and Captaine Generall of her Maiesties forces in those Countries, and shortly after my comming thether, I was commaunded by his Excellencie to haue a great regarde vnto the hurt and wounded Souldiers, and there was likewise in that seruice, Maister Goodrouse one of her Maiesties Sur∣gions,It is more tol∣lerable in him that praiseth his owne ver∣tues, than he that bosteth of other mens deedes. who was also employed about the curing of the woun∣ded Souldiers, and without praise of my selfe or flatterie to others here nominated, but onely I speake it to the praise of almightie God, there did not dye, to my remembrance, one man that was then hurt with gunshot, so that he was not first wounded to death, but he was shortly after perfectly cured: for our method and waies of curing, did greatly differ from the bitter practises of a sort of straglers, which did thrust themStealing of same & credit, is the onely marke such shoote at. selues into Captaines bands for principall Chirurgions, and there without either knowledge or skill seduced many with
their rude obseruations, and vndiscret practises, which at ran∣don they had gotten, and partly by tradition from their foolish maisters, of whom also they had learned bedroulles of errors, with a fewe experiments passed from hand to hand: & such, as sayth Guido, followe one another as it were a sort of Geese or Cranes. I say, like maisters, like men: more fitly may they be compared vnto certaine cart Jades or Packhorsses, yt lame∣ly doe carie their loades vnto the Inne doore, but farther they cannot, nor will not goe. And thus the blind leadeth the blind, moyling and toyling as though they should roule the stone of Sisiphus. But it may bee some of them hereafter will repent their rashnesse and bouldnesse: as did the Ape, who as it is sayd, was so proude of his furd Jacket, that he would forsooth needes imitate the Beare, only to spoyle the poore Bees of their hiue and Honie. But to conclude with such catterpillers which enter into other mens haruest, I am perswaded there bée mo killed by such wicked practisers, then there are many times slayne by the sword of the enemie. And this I haue ge∣nerally noted of them, that seldome haue they cured any of their Patients, but they did first passe as it were through a gulfe of miserie, which is too infallible signes of their wilfull ignorance: for no doubt but many of them, as I say, doe prac∣tise their malignant corrosiue, byting or gnawing medicines, to the vtter subuertion and ouerthrow of their patients. For, what feuers, what fluxes of blood, what crampes and conuul∣tions do followe, let such as haue seene their beastly dealings be iudge, specially the poore wounded Souldiers, who abide still the brunt of their sowterly Chirurgerie. But now (to the praise of almightie God be it spoken) who did so blesse our la∣bours, that none of our hurt Patients did at any time com∣playne of payne or greefe, by reason of our remedies, but they did take their naturall and quiet rest. Being but shot through either their thigh, legge or arme, or other fleshie parts of the bodie, so that no ioynts were wounded, or bones greatly frac∣tured withal, but being wounded in the fleshie parts, then our order was thus, to draw a Flamula through the member, be∣ing
made of fine Lawne or some fine linnen cloth, & vpon the same we applyed of my Digestiue, or the like in operation, and sleeped the same in warme Oleum catulorum, and did also conuey into the wound of the aforesayd Oyle being war∣med, and in the Orifices of these wounds placed a short tent armed with the Digestiue, &c. and I layd vpon the same Em∣plastrum de Peto, or Hyosciami lutei, and also round about the member the defensiue made of Emplastrum Diachalci∣theos, with the Succies, as I haue set it downe in the eight Chapter of this booke, and then with conuenient roullings and bolsterings we accomplished this first preseruation. And when the wound was in time perfectly digested, and the con∣tused flesh made vp the bullet remoued, then forthwith the wound was mundified and made cleane with this Mundifi∣catiue, or the like. Mundifica∣tiue. Franciscus Ra∣sius. Rec. Butyri rec. lib. ij. ana. lib. ss. Cerae citrinae Resinae Resinae pini. Picis Graecae. Viridis aeris ℥. ss. Misce. The wound being well clensed, then wee did leaue of the vse of the Flamula, and vsed short and easie tents, and did af∣ter incarnate and heale it vp with this vnguent following. Rec. ana. ℥. vj. Gummi Elemni. Opopanacis. Bdelij. ℥. ss. Resinae pini. ℥. j. Terebinthinae. ℥. iiij. ana. ʒ. ij. Thuris. Masticis.
ana. ℥. x. Cerae citrinae. Olei rosarum. Misce. And oftentimes I did iniect into the wounds Oleum Hy∣pericon cum gummis. And if the wound did chance to passe into the bodie, then I did giue them this wound drinke, or els some of these drinkes following. ClowesRec. Vini albi. lib. viij. Aquae com. lib. x. Saccari albi lib. ij. ana. m. j. Consolidae vtriusque. Filicis aquaticae. Calendulae. Ophioglosson. Celidoniae Polipodij quircinae. Numilariae. Lillij conuali. Sanimundi. Diapensiae. Veronicae. Verbenae. Pimpinellae. Boyle all these in Balneo Mariae fiue houres, and so let it rest till it be colde, and drinke hereof two or three times a day, specially morning and euening, ℥. iiii. at a time, &c. I haue with this wound drinke, heretofore found great pleasure in the curing of diuers persons that haue bene wounded into the bodie. And for example, I will here speake only of two orObseruatio. three which were wounded in the bellie, and so conclude, for being ouer tedious. There did come vnto me to be cured a Gunner of a shippe, which was daungerously wounded in the lower region of his
bellie, so that a great part of the Zirbus or Omentum, did come out of the wound, and also some of the Intestines or guttes proffered themselues to come forth likewise: but the Patient did keepe al very close and well till he came vnto me: Then I caused him to lye downe on a bedde vpon his backe, and after search made, I found the guttes safe and not tou∣ched of the weapon: then with a strong doubled thrid I did tye fast the Zirbus, as close vnto the wound as possibly well I might, and then a finger breadth, or there abouts, I did cut off that part of the Zirb that hanged out of the wound, and so I cauterized it with a hot yron almost to the knot: All this being done, I put agayne into the bodie that part of the Zirb which I had fast tyed, and I left the péece of the thrid hanging out of the wound: which within foure or fiue dai after, nature cast forth. The thrid, as I say, being fast tyed, then presently I did take a needle, with a double strong silke thrid wel waxed, wherewith I did thrust through both Mirach and Siphach on the right side of the wound: but on ye left side of the wound I did put the needle but through Mirach onely, and so tyed these three fast together with a very strong knot, and present∣ly I cut off the thrid. Then, on the same side where I did stitch but Mirach only, which I call the left side, I did there begin agayne to thrust the needle through both Mirach & Siphach, and also on the right side where I did first begin to force the needle through Mirach and Siphach, there I did thrust that but through Mirach onely, and so as before I made another strong knot, and then I cut off agayne the thrid, and after the same maner I made the third stitch, &c. Al which is according to Weckers, & other learned mens opiniōs, who say also, that the stitches of the one side must be higher than on ye other side. The Author of all good knowledge (I meane Galen the Prince of Phisicke and Chirurgerie) alloweth this maner of stitching wounds in the bellie: and also it is allowed of all our auncient predecessors successiuely vnto this day. After (as I say) I had thus finished all ye stitches that were there requisite and needfull to bee made, then I did preserue the sayd wound
with my oyle of Hypericon, conueying it in wt a fine peece of Lawne dipped in the foresaid Oyle, and so put into the depen∣dant part of the wound. Then to restrayne the bleeding, I placed vpon the wound Galens restrictiue powder, which I mixed with the whites of Egges and Hare haires, and about the wound I vsed this defensiue, which did defend the wound from anoyance of euill accidents. Defensiue. Clowes. Rec. Emplastrum Diachalcitheos. lib. j. ss. ana. ℥. j. Succorū semperuiui Plantaginis. Solani. Olei ros. ℥. ij. Olei Myrtini. ℥. j. ss. Ouorum albumin. nu. ij. Aceti ros. ℥. j. Misce. Thus, with good bolstring and roulling, he rested till the second day. Ye shall vnderstand, that immediatly after he did complayne of the grudging of an Agew, and being therewith somewhat distempered, presently there was opened a veyne, and forthwith a gentle mollifying Clister also: then shortly after his bleeding and purging he mended againe, and by this meanes his Feuer was preuented. Thus in foreshewing of the euilles that happened in this cure, you may the easilier shunne the like daungers in others. The second day we ope∣ned the wound, and we found it very fayre, without payne, or any other euill signes or symtomes: then first I fomented or bathed well the wound with my wound drinke: which being so done, I put into the wound warmed my oyle of Hyperi∣con, with a peece of fine Lawne, as before sayd, also with pledgets of fine lint I did spred them with vnguentum de Peto: and I dipped these also in the warme oyle of Hyperi∣con, likewise vpon ye same pledgets I placed the gum plaster with warme double steuphs steeped in the wound drinke, and
so I roulled it vp according to arte: then presently wee gaue him of the sayd wound drinke ℥. iiii. and betwéene one and two of the clocke in the afternoone we gaue him ℥. iiii. more, and at night betweene seuen and eight of the clocke ℥. iiii. also, and so he did continue till he was cured. Likewise for a time his ordinarie drinke at meales was Ptisanes and Barly water, and he was moreouer adioyned to a thinne and cooling diet. And so by this maner and order of dressing twise in the day, that was in the morning and euening, and by his good order of diet, he was within the space of xxi. daies made perfect whole, &c. Also in Anno 1580. there was one William Mouch aThere was ioyned with me in this cure Maister Clowe▪ a very expert & skil∣ful Chirurgiō. seruingman remayning about this Citie of London, who re∣ceiued a wound in his bellie, and the Zirb issued out of the wound so broade in compasse, that it did very easilie couer a great square trencher, which was cured likewise with the or∣der and remedies afore rehearsed. Moreouer, in Anno 1586. a little girle of the age of tenne or twelue yeres, dwelled with one Master Bracie a Marchant of London, which girle was also wounded in the bellie with a knife that she caried in her hand, and in running hastely she sell downe vpon the same, so that the Zirb did come forth of the wound the compasse of a mans hand: she being then in the Countrie seuen miles from London, vnto whome I was brought: and presently at my comming I did cut off the part of the Zirb that hanged out of the wound, and then I tyed it fast, as before I haue sayd: but you shall vnderstand, I did not vse any cauterize vnto this girle, neither yet vnto the seruing▪Note. man: The reason partly was, for that neither the Patients nor their friends would willingly heare of the hot yrons, al∣though it were sayd to be a safe and sure way: Neither did I finde any discommoditie for not vsing of them: which girle was after brought to London, whome I likewise did cure in a very short time: for the which the name of: ODD bee praised. Now last of all (friendly Reader) I haue thought it good
for the better vnderstanding of all young practszers of Chi∣rurgerie, to signifie vnto them what Zirbus is, & also whereof it is composed: In like maner what Mirach is, and also what Siphach is, each part seuerally, and of their place or situation within the bodie of man: and by the knowledge hereof ye shall easely foretell the possibilitie and successe of the cure: but being ignorant herein, we bewray our selues to the world to be none of the sonnes of arte. The Zirb is sayd by Vigo, and other▪ learned authors, to bee a Panicle, compound of two Tunicles, and of diuers Ar∣ceries and Ueynes, hauing also in it a great quantitie of fat, so ordeyned of nature to defende the inwarde parts from out∣warde colde, and also to comfort them, and to keepe them warme, &c. Next vnto the parts outwardly is Siphach, or Peritonea, and it is a sinowie Panicle, very strong and tough: but with∣out bloud, and of complexion cold and drie, and for these cau∣ses it cannot receiue consolidation: it is conteyned within the bellie, and it doth circumuolue and keepe in the entrailes very well together, &c. Also Mirach is that part which is conteyning on the out∣warde part of the bodie, and is composed of the outwarde skinne, called in Latin Cutis. Secondly, of Adipis, or the fat. Thirdly, of Carnious, or fleshie Panicles. And fourthly, of Muscles. Here haue I very briefly rehearsed the parts conteyned and conteyning, from the Zirbus, which is next the intestines, vnto the outward parts called Mirach and Siphach, the which I haue thus done for the better instruction of all young prac∣tizers of Chirurgerie, whom I wish voyde of sclaunder and infamie: And I know such cures do commonly happen in the warres both by sea and land: for ye cause I haue here published this short note or obseruation for the benefit also of the woun∣ded Souldiers, who oftentimes doe perish by meanes of the rash carelesnes and blind practizes of many ignorant Chirur∣gions, which will take vpon them, to the discredite of them∣selues
and the arte, the thing which passet▪ their knowledge and skil, but only can face it out very bouldly, & alwaies their bragging knowledge, beareth the sway with a sorte of wind∣shaken reasons, which would set a mans teeth an edge, and trouble any wise mens eares in the hearing. Or this. Rec. ana. ʒ. j. Baccarum Lauri. Aristolochiae rotundaeMadame Danueil. Prunellae. Beate all these to fine powder, and take of Prunellae that groweth in the shade, then take the flesh of fresh water Creuices dryed into powder, and of sweete Orrace, ana. ʒ. ss. tye all these together in a drie linnen cloath, and seeth them with a handfull of Vinca. peruinca. in three quarts of white wine til a quart be consumed. Epithemat the wound, thē close the lippes of the wound, and couer it with a leafe of red Cole∣wort dipped in the sayd Wine, and lay vppon them large linnen clothes dipped also in the same wine: likewise if the wound bee deepe, siring in the decoction euery morning and euening, and procéede in the rest as before. Furthermore, let him drinke ℥. i. or ii. of this drink euery morning, fasting vpon it three or foure houres from all meate. If the Potion seeme too bitter to thee, to the quantitie of powders and herbes adde to double the quantitie of wine: This drinke haue I proued, & it is wonderfully commended by Noblemen, Gentlemen & souldiers yt haue serued in the warres in France. This Ladie for her charitable deede in curing of many woūded souldiers, may bee compared vnto Artemisia Queene of Halicarnas∣sus, and wife vnto Mausolus King of Caria: she was the first that found out that herbe which we cal in English Mugwort: the Latine name it after her owne name Artemisia, &c. Or this.
Rec. ana. m. ij. Fol. & Rad. Rubiae tincto. Rad. Aristoloch. long. & Rotundae. Fol. & Rad. Plantag. Fol. & Rad. consolidae maioris & minoris. Fol. & Rad. gariophil. Fol. & Rad. Centauriae maioris. ana. m. j. Rad. Altheae. Summitatum Rubi. Summitatum lapathi acuti. Tanaceti Millefolij. Pimpinellae. Arthemisiae. Summitatum canapis. Caulis rubei. Fragrariae. Thuris albi. ℥. ij. Sarcocollae. ℥. j. Vini albi Bocalia. xv. Put all these together in an earthen vessell well nealed or glased, that halfe the vessell may remayne emptie, and let it bee close couered, that no ayre doe euaporate, and boyle it for three houres with an indifferent fire, and let it be strayned, vn∣to the which let there be added Mellis lib. vj. then let them bée boyled agayne vnto the cousumption of the fourth part: The quantitie hereof is to bee giuen in the morning ℥. iiii. and as much more at night: the wound is to be bathed with the same, laying theron a Colewort leafe. This excellent wound drinke is sayd also to be singular good for the curing of Phistulaes. Other hidden vertues it hath which I passe ouer: which drink was giuen me by Maister Doctor Foster, a worthie Reader of the Surgerie Lector in the Phisitions Colledge, a man for his learning in the arte, knowledge and iudgement, deserueth
of vs which professe Chirurgerie, and are desirous to haue knowledge, that if it were in our power, wee would erect, in token of his excellencie therein, some auncient Monument, or stately Pyramides. It hath bene peraduenture obiected pub∣liquely, yt the negligence of some Chirurgiōs frequenting not of his Lectures, doth bewray thē to be rather wilfully bent to shrowde themselues vnder the dark wings of ignorance, than desirous of learning and knowledge. In déede it may be, there are some which are neither good to themselues, nor profitable to other: And therfore what auayleth it to play excellent Mu∣sicke to those that cannot, or will not heare. But this doth be∣wray their naturall inclination, who refuse to frequent so good and godlie an eercise, which is both profitable to themselues, and also to our Countrie and Common wealth. For, Chirur∣gerie is a most necessary arte, without which mans life cannot long continue, considering so many mishappes that chaunce to men daylie. A Balme good for wounds. THis Balme is approued precious in greene wounds, andB. healeth them very speedily & effectually, it healeth scabbes and wheales in the face and hands, and causeth them to bee very fayre. It is very excellent in wounds of the sinewes and ioynts, it stayeth the mucilage and gleeting water: but if you will still it according to arte, you shall first haue an excellent water: secondly, a most pure Oyle: thirdly, the Balme, which is most excellent in woundes and vlcers of the fundament. The Oyle is precious against all aches and gowtes: the wa∣ter also preserueth from venime and pestilence, &c. This Balme was first giuen vnto me by one Master Bactor, which at that time serued the Lord of Aburgaueny, vnto whom al∣so I did retayne. But to say truely, who was the author or in∣uenter of it, certainly I doe not knowe: but as I haue heard some say, it is supposed to haue bene inuented by Maister Iohn Halle Chirurgion in Maidstone, whose composition is as followeth.
ana. m. j. Rec. Egrimoniae. Alchimillae. Androsemon. Aschiron. Betonicae. Bifolij. Bugullae. Prunellae. Callendulae. Caprifolij. Consolidae ma. Cruciatae. Hypericonis. Iaceae herbae. Lauendulae. Meliloti. Millefolij. Numulariae. Origani. Perfoliatae. Pilocellae. Plantaginis. Quinque-nerui. Quinque-folij. Roris marini. Veronicae. Violae Nigrae. Violae luteae. Violae matronalis. Let these bee gathered each one in his time and kinde, and let them be stamped, and then put into sweete oyle Oliue. So that you may get herbes from time to time, you may in the end haue a gallon of Oyle to the quantitie of herbes, then let it stand together the space of one moneth in a pot well nealed and close couered, burie it in horse dung, and in the meane sea∣son
get these Gummes following. ana. ℥. j. Rec. Gum amoniaci. Galbani. Bdellij. Masticis. Mirrhae. Olibani. Opoponacis. Sarcocollae. Sagapeni. Storacis calamitae. Thuris. ana. ℥. j. ss. Gariophilorum. Maceris. Nucis muscatae. Cinamomi. Powder them that are to bee powdred, and dissolue the Gummes in good white wine, then set the herbes to the fire in a fayre brasen vessell to boyle with ye Oyle, putting thereto lib. iiii. of good wine Muscadell, of Vermium terestrium wel washed in white wine and mundified from the earth lib. iii. Let them boyle thus together, stirring it diligently with a slice at a soft fire till the wine and iuyce be wasted, and that the Oyle haue a fayre greene colour of the herbes: then let it bee strongly strayned, and put thereto your Gummes and other things together, with lib. iiii. of odoriferus wine, that is, Mus∣cadell or Malmsey, then adde thereto Terebinthinae Vene∣tiae. lib. j. Let these boyle againe at a gentle fire till the wine bee consumed, then take it of and strayne it againe, and so re∣serue it to your vse. This Balme, I suppose, is not inferiour to any Balme that I knowe, bee it Indian Balme or other: the vertues, I say, will praise it selfe. Wherefore it is needles to vse any farther speeches herein: onely this one note or ob∣seruation amongst many other I will declare. It happenedObseruatio.
in Anno 1575. a Barber Surgion, whose name is called William Clarke, dwelling in Southwarke, he hauing in his house a lewd seruant of the age of xvii. or xviii. yeres, he wan∣ting the grace of God, did in his maisters absence (by the in∣tisement of the deuill) cut his owne throte with a knife, so that part of his driuke did, for the space of sixe or seuen daies, flowe out of the wound. I was presently called to the cure of him, and after I had stitched the wound, I did then applye thereon warmed this foresayd Balme, and stayed his bleeding with Galens powder: and so for that present time I ended, with conuenient roulling and boulstring. But in such a case there be also required the helpe of the hand, to keepe close & fast the medicines, and all helpes will be little enough, as I haue well approued: then after I made in a readinesse to vse with the Balme this Vnguentum consolidatiuum, and also my Vn∣guentum de Peto. Vnguentum consolidati.Rec. ana. ℥. j. Gummi arab. Dragag. dissolut. in aceto. Sarcoc. ʒ. ij. ana. ʒ. j. Sandaracae. Hipocistid. ana. ʒ. j. ss. Mastic. Thuris. Tutiae praeparatae. ʒ. j. ss. Olei mastic. ℥. iij. Cerae. q. s.. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundū artem And vpon the same the gum plaster, and about the parts eere vnto the wound I vsed this Defensiue. Deensiu.Rec. Vnguentum de bolo. ℥. vj. Omnium sandal. ʒ. j. ss. ana. ʒ. ij. Pulu. mirtillorum & Ros.
ana. ℥. i. ss. Olei Ros. & Mirtini. Aceti Ros. ℥. ij. Albuminis ouorum nu. j. Misce. Thus with this Balme and these remedies he was per∣fectly made whole by me, and so he returned home to his friends againe, &c. Or this. Balme. Am. Paie.Rec. Terebinthinae venetae. lib. ij. Gummi Elemni. ℥. iiij. ana. ℥. j. Boli armeniaci. Sanguinis Dragonis Olei Hypericonis cum gummis. ℥. iij. Aquae vitae. ℥. ij. ana. ʒ. j. Irios. Aloes. Masticis. Myrrhae. Misce, secundum artem. Or this. Balme. Adea.Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Myrrhae. Aloes. Spicae. Sanguinis Draconis. Thuris. Mummiae. Opopo. Amoniaci. Carpo-Balam. Sarcocoll. Croci orient. Mastic. Gummi arabi. Stirac. cal.
Laudani. ℥. j. ss. Resinae abietinae. lib. j. Terebinthinae com. lib. viij. Vini generosi. lib. ss. Distillantur ac liquore, ponatur Muscigra. xv. & fiat. Or this. Balme.Rec. Terebinthinae. lib. j. Olibani. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. j. Aloes cicatri. Gariophilorum. Galing. Cinamomi. Croci. Nucis Muscatis. Cucubarum. Gummi arabici. ℥. ij. Lignum aloes. ℥. j. Mixe these together, and then put all into a Stillatorie, and still it according to arte, &c. Or this. Balme. Rec. Olei com. lib. iiij. Terebinthinae. lib. ij. Aquae vitae. lib. iiij. Viniodoriferi. lib. ij. Viridis aeris in pul. ℥. ij. Boyle all these according to arte, and last put in your Viri∣dis aeris. This was a common Balme, and few better known amongst some olde practizers in time past. Or this. Rec. Olei Terebinthinae lib. j.
Vitellorum ouorum ℥. xiiij. ana. ℥. iij. Resinae pini. Myrrhae. Gummi hederae. ℥. ij. Let the yolkes of Egges be first fodden hard, then mixe all well together in a Stillatorie, and with a soft fire let it bee drawne, and there will come first a water, and last the Oyle, the which ye shal reserue, for it healeth wounds very speedily. This Oyle was greatly in vse by my Master, master George Keble, but whether he were the inuenter of it, or not, I doe not certainly knowe, &c. A plaster very good for greene wounds, practised of late in the Lowe Countries by a worshipfull Gentleman, called maister Ierom Farmer, a great fauourer and louer of Chirurgerie. Paracelsus Plaster. Rec. Rad. consolidae maioris. lib. j. Fol. Ophioglossi. lib. j. ss. Vermium terrestr. lib. ss. Aristolochiae rotundae recenc. ℥. iiij. All these being greene, beate them well, and then adde to Vini albi, so much in quantitie as will couer all these herbes, seeth them in a double vessell well nealed tenne houres: these being then strayned and taken out, put in newe herbes and rootes, and boyle it as aforesayd, and then put to it Butiris recent. q. s. All these being mixed together, let it be boyled in a double vessell, which being effectually boyled, then strayne it, and after set it in the Sunne, and reserue it to your vse: then take of the foresayd Oyle and virgine Waxe of each a pound and a halfe. Lithargiri auri. lib. j. Plumbi vstiloti, lib. ss. Terebinthinae. ℥. iiij.
ana. ℥. ss. Amoniaci. Bdellij. ana. ʒ. vj. Galbani. Opoponacis Infuse these in Uineger, and so make a plaster according to arte. This plaster was giuen me for a secrete, by this wor∣shipfull Gentleman Maister Ierom Farmer, when I was at Arnam: at that time when Nemegam was besieged, he desi∣red me to put it in practise, at which time diuers of our men were hurt, not only with shot, but with other weapons. It happened that a Horseman was wounded in his thigh by the enemie, being a Pikeman: the wound was about seuen inches long, entring in at the inside of his right thigh, and so passed vpwards, and by good happe it rested on Os pubis, otherwise he had bene slayne, neuerthelesse he was growne very faynt and weake with extreme bléeding. So happely hauing things about mee, I stayed his bleeding, which was good for him, and no hurt vnto me, as it fell out. At the next dressing I ap∣plyedNote. a Defensiue about the wound, and then I warmed well some of my oyle of Hypericon cum gummis published in my booke De Morbo Gallico, the which I iniected into the bottome of the wound with a siring: then I made a very short rent armed with my vnguentum de Peto, and vpon the same the foresayd plaster. Thus I dressed him fiue daies, and the sixt day I left out the tent cleane, and within xiiii. daies he was whole and readie to serue in the field agayne. Or this. Emplastrum sticticum Pa∣racelst.Rec. Olei Oliuarum. ℥. vj Cerae ℥. j. quibus liquefactis adde Lithargirij. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. ss. Amoniaci. Bdellij. ana. ʒ. ij. Galbani. Opoponacis.
ana. ʒ ij. Aristolochiae rotund. Calaminaris Myrrhae Thuris ana. ℥. j. Olei lautini tantundem. Terebinthinae putae. Dissolue the Gummes in Uineger xxiiii. houres, and then boyle it till the Uineger bee euaporate, then let it bee strongly strayned, and put in these Gummes by litle and litle, alwaies stirring it till the Gummes be incorporate with the rest of the powders being finely powdred and searced: and last of all put in your Terebinthine, and make hereof a plaster according to arte. This is the order which I vse in the making of it, &c. Emplastrum Resoluendum. Rec. Amoniaci lib. j.I. B. Galbani lib. ss. Cerae albae. q. s. Misce. Emplastrum consolidatiuum & desiccatiuum, to be vsed in greene wounds in steade of stitching, often proued. Rec. ana. ʒ. iiij. Gummi Drag. Sang. Drag. ana. ʒ. ij. Olibani. Mastic.I. B. Myrrhae. Boli armeni. ℥. j. ss. Farinae volat ʒ. ss. Make all these in very fine powder cum ouo∣rum albuminibus, q. s. Misce.
A good plaster to be vsed for drie stitches of wounds in the face, &c. Rec. ana. ℥. iiij. Resinae. Resinae pini. Picis nig.I. B. ana. ℥. j. Mastic. Myrrhae Thuris Olibani. Aloes hepat. Terebinthinae Gummi Dragagant. ʒ. vj. Misce, & fiat Emplastrum. Maister Rasius plaister good for to keepe open any issue, the which he gaue me for one of his serrets, and I haue seene him vse it with great profice, and I haue found pleasure in it my selfe. Franciscus Ra∣sius, Chirur∣gion to the French King.Rec. Cerae albae lib. ss. Viridis aeris. ℥. iij. Mercur. Sublimat. ℥. j. Misce. A Cataplasme for Inflammations. Rec. ana. quart. j. Succorum semperuiu.Calmetheus. Plantaginis. Solani. Aquae lenticulae. Aceto. ℥. j. ana. ℥. . ss. Oleorū Ros. vel. Nympheae. Far, hordei. ℥. ij. Fiat.
A Cataplasme for brused wounds. Rec. Rad. altheae lib. ss. ana. m. j. Fol. Mal. & Viol. Terantur, coquantur, & exprimantur, deinde adde Bu∣tyri, & Olei com. ana. ℥. iij. Tria ouorum vitellorum, cro∣ci modicum, Far. triticeae & Hord. q. s. Fiat Cataplasma. A Cataplasme very comfortable, and also it appeaseth paynes. Rec. ana. ℥. iij. Far. fabarum.Valeniola. Hord. Lentium, & Lupinorum. ana. ℥. ij. Far. semin. lini, & Fenugrae. Farinae orobi. ℥. j. Croci. ʒ. ii. Bulliant Farinae cum Aceto & mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplasma. Or this Cataplasme doth appease paynes and cease Jn∣flamations. Rec. ana. m. ii. Fol. maluarum. Violarum. ana. m. i. Flo. Chamomillae Fol. ros. Boyle all these in Milke till they bee soft and tender, then beate them in a morter, and adde thereto ana. ℥. i. ss. Vnguentum rosarum Vnguentum populion.
Vitellorum ouorum. nu. ij. Farinae Hordei. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. ss. Mucilag. seminis psyllij, & Rad. altheae. Misce, & fiat Cataplasma. Maister Gal powder.Maister Gales powder for restrayning of great fluxes of bloud. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Alluminis succarini. Thuris. Arsenici. Calcis viui. ℥. vj. Make all these in fine powder, and put vnto them a pint of strong Vineger, and boyle them on the fire, stirring it conti∣nually till the Vineger be consumed, then set it in the Sunne, or in an Ouen, till it be perfectly dried, that you may make it in very fine powder, and when you will vse it, take of this powder ℥. iii. of Boli Armoniaci ℥ iij. of Puluis Alcumisti∣cus ℥. j. Misce. And when you will vse it, take of the whites of Egges. q. s. Pul. Galen.Galens Restrictiue powder. Rec. Olibani ℥. ii. Aloes hepaticae. ℥. i. ana. q. s. Pilorum leporis terrefact. & ouorum albumin. Or this. Pul Caima∣theus. Rec. Boli armeniaci. ʒ. vi. Terrae sigillatae. ℥. ii. Farinae volatilis. ℥. iii.
ana. ℥. iiii. Gypsi. Calcis viu. And when you will vse these powders, mire therewich of Albuminis ouorum q. s. Misce. A powder to rebate spungious flesh, very profitable. Rec. Mercurij praecipitat. ℥. ij. Cinabrii ʒ. ss. Mastic. ʒ. ii. Misce, fiat puluis subtiliss. A very good drinke for the cure of Fistulaes, commended by Tagaltius. Rec. thrée parts of Osmunde, two parts of Gentian, and oneTagaltius. A drinke for a Fistula. part of Centaury, boyle these together in white wine & straine it, and thereof giue the patient euery morning a draught: if you put hereto a litle Guaicam, and let it stand therein a space and then boyle it, it is the better, &c. A very good Mundificatiue. Mundifica∣tiuum. Rec. Mel ros. ℥. ii. Terebinthinae. ℥. iii. ana. ℥. i. ss. Suc. Apii & Plantag. Let these boyle together a little, and then adde thereunto, ana. ℥. ss. Farinae hord. & Fabarum. Sarcocoilae. ʒ. i. ss. Croci. ʒ. ss. Misce. A good inie∣ction for olde and callous Fistulaes. Tagaltius.
Rec. Vnguentum Aegiptiacum. ℥. ss. Mer. sublimat. ʒ. ss. Lixiuii. ℥. iiii. Aquae ros. ℥. ii. Arsenici. ℈. i. Aquae plantaginis. ℥. iii. Let all these bee boyled together to the consumption of the third part, and reserue it to your vse. A cataplasma very good for Gangraen. Parreus. Rec. ana. lib. ss. Far. fab. Hord. Orob. Lupin. ana. ℥. iiij. Salis com. Mel. ros. ana. ℥. ij. ss. Succi absinthij Marrub. ana. ℥. ii. Aloes Myrrhae & Aquae vitae Oximel sympl. q. s. Misce, & fiat cataplasma. No man needeth to doubt of the goodnesse of this Cata∣plasma, &c. An vnguent good for burnings with gunpowder. Rec. the yellow mosse that groweth vpon the barke of the Ash tree and braunches two handfulles, of Sheepes sewet lib. ss. melt the Sheepes sewet and the mosse together very gently, and then strayne it, &c. and vse it warme with a fea∣ther.
A maturatiue plaster.Master Keble. Rec. Olei liliorum ℥ .vi. Cerae lib. i. Resinae lib. ss. Resinae Pini ℥ .iiii. Picis albae ℥ ii. Galbani ℥. i. ss. Gum amoniaci. ℥ .ii. Croci. ʒ .i. Misce, & fiat Emplastrum. A very good Lixiuium to stay Gangraene comming of colde, by lying in the snowe, and the like occasions, whereby the vitall spirites are prohibited to come vn∣to the mortified part: which Lixiuiū was greatly com∣mended by my maister, maister George Keble, and I haue many times approued it profitable.Maister Keble. Rec. Lixiuij. lib. viij. Lupinorum contusorū. ℥. iij. Orobi. ℥. j. ss. Salis. com. m. j. ss. ana. m. j. Absinthij. Centauri. Marrubij. Flor. camomil. m. j. ss. Aquae vitae. lib. j. Boyle all these together, till one part be consumed, and so let it rest all together, and reserue it to your vse, &c. Emplastrum epispatices ad omnes iuncturarum dolores ex frigiditate. Rec. Cerae veteris, colophoniae, resinae pini. ana. lib. j.Odophus O. calcis viu. Alluminis plumati, Arsenici. ana. ℥. j.
Relent the Waxe and Rosin with a small quantitie of Oyle, then strawe in your powders, being finely powdered, and mixe with them Aceti fortis, q. s. boyle all together at a gentle fire to the forme of a plaister. Vnguentum Incarnatiuum.Vigo. Rec. Terebinthinae. ʒ .ii. ana. ℥. ss. Sirupi Ros. Mel. Ros. Succi plantaginis. ʒ. vi. Croci. q. s. Misce: & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. Vnguentum Incarnatiuum. Rec. Cerae liquefact. ℥ .v.I. B. Olei com. lib. ss. Resinae. ℥. iiii. Mellis. ℥. i. ss. Tereb. ℥. iiii. ana. ʒ. ii. Mastic. Olibani. Sarcoc. Myrrhae. Aloes. Croci. Misce: & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. Iosephus Quirsitanus.Rec. The mucilage of the séede of Fenigreeke ℥. ii. the iuice of Hounds toong, Persicaria, and the great Comfe∣rie, ana. ℥. i. ss. Oyle of Franckincense and Myrrhe. ana. ʒ. iii. Oyle of Hipericon simple ℥. ii. Terebinthine washed in white Wine ℥. ii. let them stand in the Sunne,  at a soft fire, vntill they waxe thicke, &c. Vnguentum Incarnatiuum.Maister Keble. Rec. ana. ℥. iiii. Resini. Cerae.
Terebinthinae. ℥. ii. Olei com. ℥. viii. Mellis. ℥. iii. Vitellorum ouorum nu. iiii. Misc. A good vnguent for inflammations. Rec. ana. ℥. i. ss. Vnguenti populeonis. Vnguenti Ros. Being wel washed in Rose water, and Plantaine water, q. s. adding thereto Olei Ros. ℥. iiii. Cerussae. ℥. ii. Cerae albae. q. s. Terae sigillatae. ℥. i. ss. Camphyrae. ℈. ii. Opii. ℈. i. Misce & fiat vnguentum. An vnguent very good for burning with Gunpowder, or skalding with water, and it healeth without vlcera∣tion and paine, and drieth very well, and it bringeth againe the beawty of the skin, and this must be aplied to the affected parts morning and euening, &c. Rec. Seui secundae decoctionis Sutorii. lib. i. ss. Succi Ophyogllossi. lib. ss. Coquantur simul in Balneo, ad consumptionem succi: postea adde Camphyrae. ℥. ss. Misceantur in mortario plumbeo. The vse. After that you haue warmed of this, with feathers anoint the place burnt, or scalded, kéeping vnto the place affected warme coles, vntill the paine be ceased, which will be after
thrée or foure times warming. Take great héed that you breake not any of the blisters which are wont to arise, for that induceth paine. Vnguentum neruorum, commonly called Nerue oyle. This vnguent I haue séene many times vsed with great profit vnto the patients: and for that I neuer read it in any English Booke, I haue thought it not amisse to publish now the same. Peraduenture some skorners will say it is a medi∣cine for a Horsse, neuerthelesse, maister Ambrose Pary is not ashamed to set it downe in his booke for a medicine profitable for mans body. Vnguentum Neruale. Rec. ana. ℥. iii. Eupatorii. Camomillae. Betonicae. Saluiae. Menthae. Hederae terestris. Abrotani. Arthemisiae. Absinthii. Nasturtii. Maluarum. Origani. Pulegii. Auriculae muris. Solani. Camaepitheos. Vrticae. Serpentariae. Fol. lauri. Ebuli. Costi.
Enulae camp. Rubiae maioris. Herbae paralisis. Ruthae. Raphani. Sambucae. Aristolochiaelōgae. Apii. Rad. altheae. Ciclaminis. Calendulae. Caulis rub. Calaminthae. Centaurii minoris Vitis albae. Hipericon. Butiri maialis. lib. xii. Cerae virgineae. lib. i. Seui arietis. ℥. xii. Axungiae gallinae. ℥. vi. Axungiae anseris. ℥. iii. Olibani. ℥. xii. Olei laurini. lib. viii. Fiat Vnguentum Neruale. I haue knowne certaine practizers at Seas to vse this vnguent, with Farinae tritic. and Vini albi. ana. q. s. and so boyled them together, and made heereof a cataplasme for painefull swellings about wounds, &c. A water for sore eyes. Rec. ana. ℥. i. aquae verbenae. Betonice. Ruthae. Rosarum rub.
Eufrag. Celidoniae. Plantag. Calendulae. Feniculi. Misce. Aqua Viridis aeris, for Vlcers in Virga. Rec. Aquae Pluuialis, lib. viii. Saccari candi. lib. i. Viridis aeris. ℥. iiii. Boyle these together, and in the cooling put in the Viri∣ciis aeris. Fiat. Or this. Rec. Aquae Plantag. ℥. iiii. Aquae Ros. ℥. ii. Aquae Hord. ℥. iii. Syr. Ros. ℥. ii. Collirium album, sine opio. ʒ. i. ss. Misce. Vnguentum Apij, which in times past was had in great vse by the auncient Chirurgions of this Citie of London, & it doth mundify very well, as my self haue had sufficiēt triall. Vnguentum Apij. Rec. ana. m. i. Foliorum Plant. Artemisiae. Absinthii. Quinque-neruiae. Sanaemundae. Periclymeni. Consolidae minoris. & Melliloti. ana. m. ss. Foliorum Hyosciami albij. Violarum. Crassulae maioris.— ana. pugillum. i. Bardanae. Trifolij.
Then take of Apij the waight of all the rest: iuice them all. Then take of Mellis com. as much as of all the iuice: mixe all together, and then take of Farinae triticeae. lib. ii. Terebintinae. ℥. v. Mixe all these together, and set it on the fire, and boyle it to the forme of an vnguent, &c. A mundificatiue. Rec. Mellis. lib. ii. Succi Saniculae. ℥. viii. Viridis aeris. ℥. ss. Boyle these to the forme or body of your Vnguentum egyptiacum. Fiat. Vnguentum Populeon.Vnguentum populeon  & Weeken. Rec. Oculorum populi arboris recentium colle∣ctorum. lib. j. ss. Axungia porcinae praeparatae. lib. iiij. The Pople buddes must bee brused and mixed with your Axungiae, vntill your other herbes may bee prepared, then adde to it ana. ℥. iij. Fol. papaueris agrestis. Fol. Mandragorae. Fol. Hyosciami. Solani. Vermicularis, aut Crassulae. Lactucae. Semperuiui. Bardanae. Portulacae. Florum violarum. Vmbilici veneris. Summiratum pruni tenerarum. ℥. iij.
These herbes must hee mixed and tempered with Axun∣gia, as aforesayd, then adde thereto Vini optimi quantum satis est. Boyle these to the consumption of the Wine, then strayne them, and make an vnguent according to arte. It is very good against extreme and raging heates in Feuers: it prouoketh sleepe, the temples being therewith anoynted, &c. Vnguentum mundificatiuum magistrale.Weckerus. Rec. Mellis rosati colati. ℥. i. ss. Terebinthinae clarae. ℥. iij. ana. ʒ. ss. Succi apij Succi prassij. Succi absinthij. ʒ. ii. Simul coquantur deinde addantur. Farinae hordei, fabarum. ana. ʒ. vj. ana. ℥. iij. Farinae lupinorum. Orobi. ana. ʒ. i. ss. Sarcocollae Myrrhae Reduc. in puluerem, & fac vnguentum. A very good mollifying vnguent. Vnguentum mollifica∣tiuum. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Axungiae humanae Anseris Gallinae. Medullae ceruinae Terebinthinae lotae in aqua vitae. ℥. j. Cerae q. s. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem.
A sparadrap plaster.Maister Keble. Rec. Olei. com. lib. ij. ana. ℥. xj. Plumbi albi, & Plumbi rubri Cerae ℥. vj. Boyle all these together till it waxe blacke, and in the coo∣ling put in ana. ℥. j. Adipis anatis & Caponis. Misce. Vnguentum Sanatiuum.Maister Keble. Rec. Lapidis caliminaris praeparati ℥. iiij. Cerusae lotae in aqua ros. ℥. j. Lithargiri auri loti. ℥. ij. Olei ros. lib. ss. Seui ouini ℥. ij. Terebinthinae lotae in aqua ros. ℥. ij. ss. Cerae citr. q. s. Camphorae. ʒ. j. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. A molifying Searecloth: This was giuen me for a secret, but I neuer proued it. Rec. Cerae ℥. viij. Olei pedis vaccini ℥. iij. Resinae ℥. v. Relent these, and strayne it, and so dippe clothes in it, and reserue it to your vse. A powder which I haue approued to be good toA good pow∣der to take a∣way pungi∣ous flesh. remoue and take away superfluous or spungious flesh.
Rec. ana. ℥. j. Alluminis Zaccarini Vitrioli albi. Aceti rubri. lib. ss. Let this bee calcined together in a great crewsible till u come to perfection, and that the vineger be consumed, then let it be finely brought to powder, and so reserue it to your vse. Or this. Puluis sine pari.Pshe pare. Iohannes A▪ deu. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Viridis aeris Auri pigmenti Vitrioli combusti ℥. iiij. Alluminis zaccarini combusti ℥. viij. Et fiat puluis. Emplastrum flos vnguentorum.Emplastrum flos vngue∣o. Rec. ana. ℥▪ viij. Resinae Resinae pini ana. ℥. iiij. Cerae albae Olibani ana. ℥. j. Masticis & Myrrhae Adipis ceruini ℥. iiij. Camphor. ʒ. ij. Vini albi lib. iiij. Terebinthinae ℥. iij. Misce, & fiat emplastrum secundum artem, This plaster I haue approued to bee excellent for wounds made with gunshot, and I would aduertise all young practi∣zers of Chirurgerie neuer to bee without it: for it hath many excellent vertues, which I wil not here nominate at this time, because of being too tedious, &c.
A good mundifying medicine called Lipsius, vsed by the Chirurgions in the Hospitali of S. Bartholmew, most specially for Vlcers in the mouth.psium. Rec. Mellis com. Vitrioli albi. Succi caprifolij lib. iiij. First boyle your iuyce and your Mel together till it come to the thicknesse of Honie, and last put in your Vitrioll, and boyle it a little, and so reserue it to your vse. Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni.Vnguentum in frigidans Galeni. Rec. Olei ros. ℥. iij. Cerae albae. ℥. ss. Melt these together, and being well washed with Rose-vi∣neger and Rose-water, reserue it to your vse. Vnguentum Resinae, which was also had in great price by the olde practitioners.Vnguentum resinae, which doth mund▪ fi▪ incarne▪ and stath the mucilage or gleeting hu∣mour, specially about the ▪ Rec. Resinae ℥. v. Mellis lib. j. Terebinthinae ℥ .viii. ana. ℥. i. Myrrhae & Sarcocollae. The mucilage of Fenigreke, and the mucilage of Linsede▪ being made with white wine of each ℥. i. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. A Cataplasme for a windie tumor or swelling. Rec. ana. m. j. Flo. Camoillae Melliloti Anethi Ros. rub. pul▪
ana. m. ss. Foliorum mal. & Absynthij. Furfuris. m. i. Boyle all these together in Lixiuio & vino rub. then adde thereto. ana. q. s. Medullae panis, & Farinae fab. ana. ℥. ij. Olei ros. & Myrtini Misce. A lyniment for wyndy tumors. Re. ana. ℥. i. Oleorū. Camomil. Anethi. Lauri. ana. q. s. Cerae albae. Aquae vitae. A present remedy to take away Warts. Rec. ana. q. s. Aceti fort. Thymi. Hisopi. Stampe them in the vineger, and strongly strayned, make therof a lixiuium, with the ashes of willowes, and often wash he Warts, &c. A common Powder to take away Warts that growe about Praputium. Rec. ana. ℥. ss. Auri pigmenti. Sulphuris viui. Calcis viui. Sabini. ʒ. j. Misce & fiat pul. secundum artem.
A very good spiced playster, which my maister, M. Keble often vsed, and hee did therewith much good for paynes and aches. Rec. Cerae. ℥. xii. Resinae. ℥. viii. Picis. ℥. i. ss. Olibani. ℥. iiii. Resinae pini. lib. i. Adipis ceruini. ℥. ii. Croci. ʒ. ii. ana. ℥. ss. Macris. Garsophilorum. Vini rub. lib. ii. Misce, & fiat Emplastrum. A good medicin for a pinne and a webbe in the eyes. Re. ana. q. s. Succorū Saluiae rub. Feniculi rub. & Trifolii. Mellis com. & Ouorum album. Let all these be well beaten together, and reserue it to your vse. Or this. Rec. ana. q. s. Mellis com. Succi Semperuiui. Aquae Ros. Then take tenne or twelue streines of new layd egges, of a white Hen as néere as you can, then let them be well bea∣ten in a swéete morter, till they be vnited in manner of an oyntment, then let all these be beaten together, and a little relented, and reserue it to your vse: and sometimes you may adde to it Aquae celidoniae & eufragiae. q. s. This receit was giuen me for a secrete, of one I suppose to be a good occulist,
and some triall I haue had of late of these foresayd reme∣dies, &c. The white Mucilage plaster. Rec. Cerussae lib. v. Lithargiri auri lib. ij. Olei com. lib. viij. Rad. altheae being clensed and picked from the pith. m. iiij. ana. m. j. Sem. lini & Foenigraeci contus. Aquae q. s. And make hereof a Mucilage: then take of it lib. iij. Misce, & fiat Emplastrum secundum artem. An vnguent good for the Hemeroyds.Maister Keble. Rec. Vnguenti ros. ℥. ij. Vnguenti populeon com. ℥. j. ss. Vitellum oui. .j. Opij ʒ. ss. Misce. A very good resolutiue Cerot. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. ss. Olei Liliacei. Amigdal. dul. Medul. cruris cerui. ana. ℥. j. Mucilag. sem. lini Foenigraeci & Altheae.— Cerae q. s. A mellilot plaster greatly vsed of the common Chirurgions. Rec. Resinae lib. viii. Cerae lib. ij.
Seui ouini lib. ss. Succi meliloti lib. viij. Vini rub. lib. ij. Misce, & fiat emplastrum. Maister Francis Rasius Mundificatiue, the which he vsed here when he had the Earle of Sussex in cure, and he did sweare vnto me, it was his Fathers practise afore his time.Mundifica∣tiuum. Franciscus Ra∣sius. Rec. Butyri rec. lib. ij. ana. lib. ss. Cerae citrinae Resinae Resinae pini Picis Graec. Viridis aeris. ℥. ss. Misce. A plaster agaynst inueterat vlcers.Franciscus Ra∣sius. Rec. Emplastride Cerussa optimè cocti. lib. ss. Mercurij extincti in aoua vitae ℥. iij. Fiat Emplastrum bonae constitutionis. secun. art. A Liniment to ceasse payne, and cause sleepe, being applyed vnto the temples. Rec. Opij extracti cum aceto ros. ℥. j. Sem Hyosciami albi ʒ. vj. Nucis musc. ʒ. v. pul subtiliss. Vnguenti ros. ℥. ij. ss. Olei nucis musc. gut. Fiat Linimentum.
A most pretious Oyle against all inflammations, and toI. B. cause sleepe also, and it will cease the paines of the Goute in any part of the body. Rec. Olei. com. lib. viij. Vini albi. lib. ij. Summitatum Hyosciami & Sem. eius virid. lib. iij. ss. ana. ℥. iiij. Vermium terrestr. Gariophill. Croci. ℥. j. Opii. ℥. ss. Let these be brused and mixed together, and let it stand s in the Sunne twelue daies, then boyle them to the consump∣tion of the Wyne and the iuice: then straine it, and kéepe it to your vse. But if you will make of this Oyle a liniment for wounds in the ioynts, and to ceasse payne, and for bruses, or any sharp and biting paine of virulent vlcers, then Rec. Olei Praedic. ℥. iiii. Olei Hyperic. ℥. i. Olei Lumbricorum. ℥. ss. Gum. Elemni. ʒ. vi. Terebinthinae lotae in lacte mulieris. ʒ. vii. Misce. Mixe all these together, and make it in forme of a lini∣ment: and if you will haue it more thicker to the forme of an vnguent, adde thereto ana. ʒ. iii. Resinae pini. Resinae. Vnguenti Ros. ʒ. vi. Cerae albae. ℥. ss. Misce. A Plaster good to resolue knobs, and hard swellings.
Rec. ana. lib. i. Terebinthinae puriss.Pn. Aphronitri. ana. ℥. iiii. Galbani. Propolis. Guttarum ammoniaci. ℥. viii. Lixiuij. q. s. Fiat Emplastrum secundum artem. A Plaster for the hard swellings in womens Breasts. Rec. Mellis despumati. ℥. ix. Olei rosarum. ℥. vi. Cerae citrinae. ℥. iiii. Misce, secundum artem. An Oyle for Convulsions, proceeding through wounds in the nerues, or otherwise.I. B. Rec. Olei com. lib. iiii. Olei terebin. lib. i. ss. Saluiae. m. ii. Florum Rorismarini. m. i. ss. Vermium terrestrium preparat. ℥. iiii▪ Euphorbij. ʒ. iii. Gum. Hederae. ℥. iiii. Radic. Brioniae. ℥. i. Iridis. ℥. ss. Olibani. ℥. iii. ss. ana. ʒ. ij. Masticis. Cinamomi. Cariophilorum. Croci. ʒ. i. Vini maluatici. lib. ii. Bruse the Sage with Rosemary flowers, and powder the rest that are to be powdered: mixe all together, and put
them into an earthen vessell well glazed, being close stopt, and set them to macerate for tenne dayes in Horse dung, or in Balneo, according to arte, then boyle them to the consump∣tion of the Wine, &c. Vnguentum pro Spasmo.Vnguentum pro Spasmo. Rec. ana. ℥. i. Axungiae cerui. Taxi. Vrsi. Olei Laurini. ℥. i. ss. ana. ℥. ss. Olei vulpini. Castorei. Therebinthinae. Iuniperi. Lumbricorum. ana. ℥. ii. Vnguēt. Agrippoe, & Dialtheae. The Terebinthine washe in the water of Lylyes, then take Euphorbij. ℈. i. Cum modico cerae fiat vnguentum. These Oyles following are also very good for a convul∣sion comming by repletion and fulnesse. Oleum Vulpinum. Oleum Laurinum. Oleum Rutaceum. Oleum Chamomillinum. Oleum Iuniperinum. Oleum Terebinthinae. Oleum Benedictum. Oleum Philosophorum. These vnguents and Oyles do partly warme, ateu∣ate, and dissolue cold and glutinous humors, that often fol∣lowe sharpe sicknesse: which perillous accident commeth, by reason the sinewes is offended and hurt, which doth
torment the patient, as I haue séene in woundes made with Gunshot, and also in the cutting and pricking of them, by reason of repletion, and vchement paine, that draweth mat∣ter to the part affected, the which matter, Vigo noteth vnto vs, is sometimes conuayed to the brayne, by the sinewes, and when the brayne féeleth the matter, it driueth it backe a∣gaine: by which expulsion, the sinewes are filled with the a∣foresaid matter, and so are inobedient vnto their accustomed mouings. For the appeasing of these paynes, you shall finde great pleasure in the foresayd vnguents and Oyles, where∣wich you shall rub and chafe well the spondles of the backe, shoulders and necke, and it is good to couer the necke with wooll, dipped in the sayd▪Oyles. As touching diet, glisters, &c. I leaue it vnto the learned in Physick and Chirurgerie, and so I will end this short obseruation, onely I will deliuer you the signes and notes of a convultion, which is, sayth Ta∣galtius, a dull and difficult motion of the members, stret∣ching of the neck, a drawing of the lips, as though the pati∣ent would laugh, a straightnes of the iawes, téeth, and throte, a peruerting, & wrying of the eyes, & also of the whole face. A digestiue to remoue aschars.I. B. Rec. Terebinthinae. ℥. iiii. Vitell. ouorum num. ii. Mel. Ros. ℥. ss. ana. ʒ. i. ss. Olei Liliacei. & Amigdalarum dulc. Pingued. caprin. Butiri rec. ʒ .i. Fiat, &c. Vnguentum nutritiuum.M Good∣. Rec. Olei Ros. lib. i. Aceti. lib. ss. Lithargiri. ℥. iii. or ℥. iiii. Misce, fiat vnguentum secundum artem.
Arceus Balme or Liniment digestiue forA. wounds in the head. Rec. ana. ℥. j. ss. Gummi Elemni Terebinthinae abietinae Sepi castrati, antiqui & Liquefacti ℥. ij. Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae Liquefactae ℥. j. Misce, & fiat Linimentum. Emplastrum de Gum. Elemni, for woundsArus. of the head. Rec. Gummi Elemni. ℥. iij. ana. ℥. i. Resinae pini purissimae. Gummi Hammoniaci Gummi Hederae. Cerae— Terebinthinae ℥. iij. ss. Olei ros. ℥. i. ss. Let al these boyle together, except the Gum Ammoniack, with one cuppe and a halfe of odoriferous wine, vnto the con∣suming thereof, adde in the end the Ammoniack dissolued in Uineger, and your Gum Hederae finely powdred: and being sufficiently boyled: let if be wrought vp in Wine and aqua vitae, and so make it vp in roules, &c. A plaster of Betony for wounds of the head. Rec. Terebinthinae clarae lib. j. ss. Cerae albae ℥. v. Resinae pini ℥. vj. ss. Make hereof an Emplaster according to arte, which being
done, let it bee laboured in white vineger, in the which it must be infused sixe daies, adding thereto two parts of the iuyce of Betony, and one part of the iuyce of Uerueine, so let it lye till it bee throughly steeped, then let it bee melted, and infuse it in the like quantitie of vineger, and other iuyces for other sixe daies: then let it be molten agayn and laboured with womens milke, and so make it vp and reserue it to your vse, &c. Another singular plaister for wounds in the head.A plaster for wounds in the head. Vigo Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Olei Rosati, Omphacini & Completi. ana. ℥. j. Olei Mastichini Olei Myrtini Pinguedinis Hircini. ℥. j. ss. Succi Betonicae ℥. j. Let them all boyle together to the consuming of the iuyce▪ then let them be strayned, after adding thereto Masticis ʒ. x. Gummi Elemni ʒ. vj. Terebinthinae ℥. ii. ss. Cerae albae q. s. Then let them boyle agayne at the fire a little, and so make a plaster according to arte. This oyle Omphacinum afore spoken of, is meant the oyle made of vnriped Oliues. And the oyle that is called Complet, is that oyle which is made of the full riped Oliues. Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, that doth digest, mundifie, and incarne. Rec. ana. ℥. i. ss. Terebinthinae clarae Emplastri gummi Elemni. Pinguedinis castrati. ℥. ij.
Pinguedinis porcinae antiquae ℥. j. Misce, & fiat vnguentum secundum artem. Vnguentum Mundificatiuum.Quercetani. Rec. Vnguenti aurei ℥. i. ana. ℥. ss. Terebinthinae Mellis Rosati. arinae fabarum ʒ. ij. Boracis ʒ. j. Pulueris praecipitat. ʒ. iii. Misce, & fiat vnguentum. Vnguentum incarnatiuum Regis Angliae.Rex Angliae. Rec. ana. ℥. iiii. Cerae albae Resinae Terebinthinae lotae ℥. i. ana ℥. ss. Thuris Masticis Olei ℥. iii. Misce, & fiat vnguentum. A drying water good to skinne vp an vlcer thatI. B. is hard to be cicatrized. Rec. Aquae ros. lib. ij. ana. ℥. ss. Lapidis Hematites Alluminis Cinabrij Mercurij sublimat. ʒ. j. ana. ʒ. ss. Sanguinis Draconis Boli armoniaci
ana. ℈. ij. Masticis Thuris Sarcocollae Misce in Balneo Mariae. A Cataplasme to suppurate.Andernacu. Rec. ana. ℥. i. Farinae triticeae. Farinae fabarum ana. ʒ. vi. Farinae sem. lini Farinae foenigraeci Ficuum contusarum ℥. i. ss. Axungiae veteris ℥. ii. Croci. ℈. i. Vitellorum ouorum nu. ii. Fiat Cataplasma. Andernacus. Vnguentum Viride Andromachi. Rec. Resinae pini lib. ii. Cerae lib. i. ss. Olei com. ℥. viii. Aeruginis aeris. ℥. iii. Relent your Oyle, Rosiu, and Ware at a gentle fire of roales, and at last adde to your Aerug. in sine powder. Now it followeth that I speake of the order and reason of diet, which the patient wounded ought to ob∣serue, according as Tagaliius and Guido, with other excellent men, haue published and set downe for all vs to follow which practise Chirurgery, for the comfort & health of the sieke and wounded patients. IN the first seauen dayes, his diet must be thin and slen∣der, enclined to cold and mostliesse, specially, if the pati∣ent be yong and full bodied.
You shall forbid Wyne to all wounded persons, chiefly if he haue a Feuer, and incline to an Inflammation. Let them austayne from all flesh that is hard and tough, and from great Fishes, that engender euill iuice, from new and vnleauened bread, euill made and baked. Also it is good to refrayne all chéese, and chiefly that which is old and salt: from Fruites, almost of all sorts, from Gar∣lick, Onyons, all sharpe and salt things, and let him not taste any kinde of hote Spices. They may vse Partridges, Pullets, and Birds that haunt the woods: let them haue ptisanes of barley, and Almond Milke, and vse potage made with flesh of Ueale, simple, or prepared with Egges. Let him haue Lettice, Purslane, Borage, Buglosse, Spi∣nage, and such like hearbes in his brothes. His drinke shall be water boyled, wherein is soked hous∣hold bread, such as hath some part of branne in it, commonly called browne bread, or in stead of the sayd water, let him drinke a ptisane of Barley: or if he be weake, or old, then let him drinke tarte and stiptike Wine, delayed with plentie of water and sugar. His Supper must be but short, yet nourishing. It is good to vse light and gentle rubbing or chaing the parts somewhat farre off from the wounded part. Let him be quiet, for quietnesse is their chiefe medicine, and stirring and walking contrarie, especially, if they be wounded in the lower parts of the bodie.
It is necessarie altogether to abstaine from the vse of car∣nall copulation. And also to shunne ire, contention, anger, wrath, and all vehement motions of the minde. After the seauen dayes, when the patient séemeth to be sure and safe from inflāmation, and all other euill accidences, then let him vse a more plentifull dyet, and by little and little let him returne to his former custome, and then vse some Wine, but méeke and gentle, and let him eate such flesh as do engender good blood, and be a mayntayuer of nature, and heate, and moysture, and the strength of the body, such as are the flesh of Hennes, Capons, and Mutton, especially the Mutton of Weathers. And this dyet is necessary and com∣modious to wounded men, because it maintaineth the natu∣rall habit of the body, and doth not moue or stirre vp feuers, inflammations, nor fluxes. And to this dyet, saith Tagaltius, doth all the best Physitions and Surgeons agrée, as Galen, Hali, Rasis, Auicen, Brunus, Lanfrancus, and Guiliel∣mus de Saliceto. Yet Theodoricus, and Henricus (sayth Tagaltius) are of a contrary opinion, for they would haue Wine, and a hote dyet-to be giuen, and vsed immediatly vp∣pon the wound receiued: for (say they) the weakenes of the faculties of the wounded person, is by and by to be strength∣ned and confirmed, and that by the drincking of Wine, whose sentence and iudgement, is repugnant to reason, as Galen 1. lib. Aphoris. 4. sayth. It chanceth but seldome in sick∣nesses, that we should studie to restore the strength of the bo∣die, more then it may receiue, for in so dooing, we shall in∣crease and mayntayne the sicknesse: so that it appeareth by Galens words, that we must not alwayes haste to increase the strength, but it is sufficient sometimes to conserue, and mayntaine the same, so that, from the first time that the wound is receiued, to the seauenth day, in the which time, in∣flammations vse to come. Let the vse of drinking Wine be altogether forbidden, vnlesse through fluxe of blood, the
strength be altogether infebled. Celsus sayth, ye may refresh the patient a little with Wine, but otherwise, it is an enemy to woundes. After the seauenth day, if nothing do let, you may vse Wyne delayed with water: for if the wounde re∣mayne without accidents till then, it is commonly after∣ward in safetie, therefore nothing I say héerein can be more necessarie for a yong practiser in Surgery, then to endeuour himselfe to knowe before what euil will follow, and to learne how to preuent and resist the same. And thus much as cōcer∣ning dyeting of your patient, which is very necessary as I say for all those Surgeons which trauaile great and long voyages by sea, as also in the warres by land, &c. which can not haue alwayes Physicions at their elbowes to counsell them, but it were very good, I know, if they had: but where no such helps are to be found, I iudged it not amisse heere to admonish and set downe this foresayde order of dieting of your patients, first of all collected for our comfort and helpe, by those excellent learned men heere afore spoken of, &c. A short and briefe note for the maner of the purging of your patients being at the Sea, or in such like places where the counsell of the learned Phisition or Chirur∣gion is not to be had. YE shall vnderstand, if the patient wounded, bee bound in his bellie, and not laxatiue; for remedie thereof you may vse a Clister, or Suppositorie, or els giue the patient Cassia, or Māna, or some such gentle purging medicine. But if he bée of euill complexion or habit, his bodie being replenished with euill iuyee, or if the wound bee greeuous and great, yea though his bodie were pure and cleane, yet those gentle purgings will not then suf∣fice, but we must vse stronger medicines: so that there are two principall obseruations in purging of the patients in such wounds: the greatnesse of the griefe, and the aboundance of the euill iuyce. But if the wound consist in the vpper part of the bodie, then to purge downward, is the counsell of the lear∣ned:
and if the wound be in the lower parts of the body, to stay the fluxe of humors from flowing thither, it is meete and con∣uenient to withdrawe the same by purging or by vomit; which is to bee done with great discretion. Thus much I haue thought not amisse to note for generall obseruations herein, and such as I haue followed in myne owne cures, partly by my owne endeuour, and partly directed and ratified by the iudgements and informations in times past of diuers learned Phisitions and Chirurgions. depiction of man with many war injuries
Necessarie medicines and Instruments, good for young practizers of Chirurgerie to bee furnished with which followe the warres either by Sea or land. IT is truely sayd, there is no coyne so currant, but hath in it some counterfeyts, which maketh it sus∣pitious: so is there no arte so sincere, no profession so good, but hath also some counterfeyts which brée∣deth it disgrace. And none so much, I suppose, as ther is some in these daies, which take vpō thē the titles or names of farre traueiling or wandring Chirurgions, & such like, which withMany good Ships are as it were become eges for such vncleane birds the more is th pitie. corruption of conscience, being voyde of the good graces of God, and true knowledge in this noble arte, either in reason, iudgement, or experience, being likewise vtterly vnfurnished of all good methode or yet good medicines, vnlesse it be some such stuffe which a man would scarse lay to a gald horse back, with other furniture correspondent to the same, neither being able to performe any good cure they take in hand, no more then they are able with one puffe of winde to turne about a Milstone. All which is a plaine demonstration of their great ouersight in Chirurgerie, as by their cures at their comming home, is a speciall token of their vilde ignorance. And there∣fore very hardly are such able to declare or foretell the ende of their cures, but rashly do promise that which they cannot per∣forme, and so bring themselues in the ende to ignominie and shame, and this worthie arte vnto great discredit. I haue ther∣fore, as I haue many times sayd, for the benefit of young practizers of the Arte, heere collected out of Iosephus Quirsitanus and good Vigo, with diuers others, speciall me∣dicines and necessarie Instruments, wherevnto I haue added somewhat of myne owne collection, very needfull and neces∣rie for all young practizers of Chirurgerie to bee furnished with, which followe and serue in the warres by land, or at seas in shippes, vnto whom I wish most happie successe in all their cures, as I wish vnto my owne: as knoweth God, who seeth the secrets of all mens hearts, which guide you all with
his outstretched arme, and blesse you also with his holie hand. Amen. Suppuratiues, or Maturatiues Quercetanus. Vnguentum Basilicon vtrumque. Vnguentum Macedonicum. Tetrapharmacum. Vnguentum resumptiuum. The Emplaister of Mucilages, which may be dissolued with Oyle Oliue, if neede require. Mundifying or cleansing Medicines. Vnguentum diapompholygos Nicolai. Vnguentum viride andromachi. Emplastrum Diuinum dissolued in Oyle of Roses. Vnguentum Apostolicum Auicennae. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum Auicennae. Incarnatiues, or Regeneratiues. Vnguentum Aureum. Vnguentum ceras. Mesuae vtrumque.N. . Emplastrum de gratia Dei, & de farina. Desiccatiues or drying Medicines. Vnguentum de minio. Vnguentum desiccatiuum rub. Emplastrum de cerussa. Vnguents for burnings with Gunpowder. Vnguentum fuscum Nicolai. Vnguentum de calce viu. Vnguentum Magistrale, of the Physitions of, Florence, described by Weckerus. Medicines,
to repell and keepe backe. Vnguentum de bolo communi. Vnguentum rosarum Mesues, &c. Also Vnguentum pro vstionibus, after Paracelsus, whichParacelsus. was greatly commended to me by a Phisition and Surgeon of good account, but as yet I haue not proued it. Rec. Butyri. lib. j. ana. lib. ss. Olei nucum. Seui ceruini. Medullae tauri. ℥. iiij. Let this be melted at the fire, then put it into the water of Nymphae, three quarters of a pinte, and so make héere of an Unguent according to Arte, let the part affected bée anoynted herewith, till the payne be ceased, and the wound cured. Of Syrups these be conuenient.Vigo. Acetosus simplex. A Syrupe of the iuyce of Endiue, or De duabus radicibus, without vineger. Mell rosarum in small quantitie. Of waters these shall suffice. ana. q. s. Water of Endiue. Hops. Borage. Wormewood. Fumitory. Of Electuaries, these they shall haue with them. Diaphoenicon. Elec. de succo rosarum, after Mesue and Diacatholicon. Also Cassia. Pilles they must haue.
Pillulae Hierae cum agarico. Pillulae de fumoterrae, the greater and the lesse. Against the disease Opthalmia, they must haue Aqua Rosacea. And a sief without Opium. Oleum Rosaceum. Myrtillorum. Chamomillinum. Oleum Omphacinum. And it is conuenient that they haue with them Farinae. Fabarum. Orobi. Lini. Foenugreci. and Aqua vitae. Hordei. Lupinorum.Clow. Tritici. Emplasters. Emp. despeciebus. Emp. Diachalciteos. Emp. Cum Gummis. Emp. Sticticum Paracelsi. Emp. Hyoscyami Lutei, of my inuention. Emp. Cumini, good for cold and windie swel∣lings. Emp. Flos vnguentorum. Emp. de minio. Unguents, &c. Vnguentum Dialthaeae. Vnguentum Album Rasis. Vnguentum de peto of my inuention.
Arceus Liniment for wounds in the head, and his plaster for the same. Also Vnguentum pro Spasmo. Balsamum Artificiale. Oleum Hyperic. cum Gummis. Oleum Catulorum. Oleum Lumbricorum. Oleum Ouorum. Oleum Scorpionis. Oleum Amygdalarum dul. Butyrum Recens. A Lotion for sore mouthes, good for such as haue the Scor∣buto, as at Sea and other places I haue seene: for the per∣fect cure of it, I referre you to Wyerus, which booke Mai∣ster Hunton hath of late translated into English. Mythridatum, or fine Venice Triacle, Spermaceti, french Barley, Licoris, and Anniseedes, very necessary to make Barley water, and Potus Antiochiae for wounds in the bodie, &c. For Cataplasmes. Flores Ros. in pul. Flores Chamomil. in pul. Flores Melilot. in pul. Rad. Altheae in pulu, To rebate spungious flesh, &c. Mercury Praecipitat. Mercury sublimat. Allumen roch. Vitriolum. Acetum. Also Egges. Towe. Splints for fractured bones. Tape to binde.
Cupping or boxing glasses. A Chafingdish of Copper, Brasse, or Iron. A Morter, and a Pestell. Blood Porrengers. Powders to restraine great fluxes of bloud. Galens Powder. Gales Powder. Or my Powder may suffice. Small and long waxe Candles made of Tinne, Leade, Siluer, or Wood, &c. A sharpe Sawe. A Catlin. An Incision knife. Néedles two or three, some of eight, tenne, or thirteene inches in length, hauing a decent eye in it, guttered like a Spanish néedle, fit to drawe a flamula, or peece of fine Lawne or linnen cloath through a member that is wounded, &c. Small buttons, or cauterising yrons, meet to stay the fluxe of an arterie or veyne, if great necessitie do so require. A Trepan. A head Sawe. An Eleuatorie. A Dilatorium to open a wound, that a Darthead, Arrow∣head, or bullet, may the better be taken out, with a Rostrum Coruinum, or Rauens bill, or with a Rostrum Anatinum, or Ducks bill, or with a Rostrum Gruinum, fashioned like a Storcks bill, or Cranes bill. There bee in vse of these two sorts, one bowing, and the o∣ther straight. A Speculum oris, for the mouth. A Syringe.
As for stitching quills, and other instruments that a Sur∣geou ought alwaies to carrie about him, I leaue vnspoken of. There are also many other Instruments I knowe, which are in vse, but these may suffice for young practizers of the Arte, and vnto men of great knowledge and experience it is need∣lesse for me to nominate the rest. A necessarie note or obseruation for the cure of one Mai∣ster Buckland, dwelling (as he sayd) at the signe of the George at Reading, a towne in Barkshire, he receiued a puncture or pricke into the sinewe or nerue of his right arme, by a most impudent and ignorant bloud∣letter, which did pricke the sinewe in stead of the liuen veyne. THis Maister Buckland hauing a full and ple∣thorick bodie, and therevpon enclined to sick∣nes, made his iourney vp to London, only to take phisicke, which he did by the counsell of Maister Doctor Symons, who was in times past one of his olde acquaintance. After his bodie was well prepared and purged, his Phisition prescribed him farther remedie by a bill, and amongst other things, that the patient should be let bloud to the value of eight ounces  the liuer veyne, appoynting him thereunto also a  dwelling in this Citie, called Maister Morland: but (as he sayd) fortune owing him dispite, by chaunce that Chirurgion was not at home, being called otherwise about some speciall cures, and therefore it was sayd his comming home to be vn∣certaine. With that a friend of Maister Buckland that did come to visite him, and after speeches had, vnderstanding that he wanted one to let him bloud, sayd: If it please you I will send for one that I do partly knowe, not only to bee a good Surgeon, but for letting of bloud, and drawing of a tooth, he is supposed to be as skilfull as any man in this towne. Now such a one (sayd he) that can so well let bloud, I would wil∣lingly
heare, and if it will please you, I will send my man for him in your name. In fine, a bad thing was easie to finde, for he was presently brought. Then Maister Buckland (as you haue heard) being the sicke patient, deliuered vnto this bloud∣letter the Phisitions bill, which was written in English: but be answered and sayd, Truely I can neither write nor reade: neuerthelesse, doubt you of nothing, but I can and will do it as well as any man whatsoeuer. I dare make that compari∣son (quoth he) so the patient did reade the bill vnto him, which did signifie that there should bee eight ounces of bloud, taken from the liuer veyne on the right arme. O the liuer veyne sir (sayd he) I knowe it as well as all the Phisitions and Sur∣geons in this towne: and so without any longer detracting of time, he went about his busines, and did so be rubbe and chase his arme, as though he had béene labouring about his horse heeles, and then bound it vp after his owne fashion. All which being accomplished, in the twinckling of an eye, or turning of a hand, this toothdrawer, or bloudletter (as he called him) didIgnorance en∣gendereth er∣ror. without all regard or skill, vnaduisedly ouershoot himselfe, and did thrust the sicke patient into the sinewe in stead of the liuer veyne. Then presently by the reason of the great sensibilitie and feeling of the prickt sinewe, he fainted, or sounded downe right, and much ado they had to keepe life in him: so they gaue him presently to drinke Aqua vitae, &c. And were further constrayned to burne a card, being soulded vp round, and offe∣red the smoke thereof vp into his nosethrilles. This done, he was layd vpon his bed, then all those that were about the sicke patient, did begin to finde great fault with his basenes and want of skill, and condemned his handie worke. Well (sayd he) I pray you be patient, the matter truely is as muchThe more the worse. as nothing, for I haue had diuers that haue faynted thus, and yet were presently well againe: but the fault that I haue com∣mitted, I will confesse, was, for that the Orifice was made too little, and in very deede the only cause was in himselfe, for that he did not hould still his arme, as he should haue done. Then one of the standers by answered, a blind shift is better
then none at all, you might as well haue sayd, he had eaten his horse because his faddle lieth vnder his bed. Well (sayd he) you speake merily, I knowe that saying hath been vsed long, as an old iest, but I pray you al be contented and I will make him well againe vpon my credite within twise foure & twen∣tie houres. To be short, his words were but winde, for within that time and space he had most of those accidents which fore∣telleth death, for the wound did receiue or entertaine many humors, with extreame paine, inflammation, a Feauer shi∣uering, rauing, and oftentimes conuulsions. Then they counselled together and determined to stay no longer vpon this foolish toothdrawer his vaine promises: for which cause they sent for Maister Doctor Symons, and after his comming it was straunge vnto him to see such a sodaine alteration, de∣maunded of them what the cause might be: Then briefly they deliuered vnto him all the euill that had happened, and the causer thereof. In the meane time, I was also sent for: but heere omitting other speeches had, I requested of them, that without any detracting of time I might see the hurt: so with∣out carying I did lay all naked and bare, where I found the patient to haue those euill symtomes before rehearsed, and na∣ture also weakened. Then Maister Doctor Symons called for the fellow that had drest him. Here I am (quoth he) You haue not been circumspect in all things which concerne the metho∣dicall perfection of this your handie worke. I will aunswere what I haue done (quoth he) Then sayd he vnto him, what reason had you not only to commit a merueilous ouersight in pricking of the sinewe, but also almost as foule a fault in stop∣ping or closing vp of the Orifice of the wound, or pricke of the sinewe, which now by your vnskilfulnes is hidden vnder the skinue, which at the very first you ought with all your induste∣rie and diligence to haue kept open. Well (sayd he) I haue ap∣plied thereunto those medicines which cannot be bettered, and are by me well approued to be good, either for pricks or cuts of tendons, sinewes, or veynes, but yet did I neuer see accidents thus secretly steale into a wound. I pray you (said I) what be
your medicines or remedics yt you haue vsed which are so good and haue so euill successe. I tell you (sayd he) they are no beg∣gerly medicines, but the best I could buy for my monie: The one is Gracia dei, and the other is an Indian Balme, which I know is good, for well I wote it cost me two shillings and sixe pence the ounce at the first hand. Your remedies (sayd I) may be profitable as they are vsed, although not for such pricks of sinewes. What is your reason I pray you (sayd he) I ne∣uer heard any man say so but you. Marie (quoth I) because at the beginning of all such prickes, you ought not to vse neither conglutinatiues, nor incarnatiues, vntill the wound be past all daunger, and then such medicines which haue propertie to in∣carne, and to couer the sinewe with flesh, may safely be vsed: neither are such wounds restored again by Balmes, according to the first intention, but only in fleshy parts. But this shifting fellowe answered & said: You make here a greater sturre be∣fore the patient and his friends, then there is cause. And what though he bee a little faint, he shall bee well agayne by Gods grace, if he will bee ruled by me but a little while, and I will stand to it for all your talke, it is but a small pricke only in the skinne. But admit the sinewe were cleane cut asunder, which is, I suppose, a more worse and daungerous thing then the pricke of a sinewe: and yet (sayd he) without comparison or praise to my selfe I speake it, and without all this busines, I haue cured them when I haue had no such ouerseers or coun∣sellers, but my selfe alone. Why (sayd I) do you not thinke that a pricke in the sinewe is more daungerous then that si∣newe which is cleane cut asunder. No (sayd he) you shall ne∣uer make me beleeue that a prick by a small poynted thing, as is a launcet, or a needle, can be so daungerous, as that which is cut asunder by a razour, knife, or other sharpe weapons. Now truely (sayd I) I may well credite you in good sooth that you can neither write nor reade, neither yet haue any good ex∣perience: for if you had, you would neuer thus besot your selfe with such rude iudgements and fond opinions: but you are partly to be excused, for you haue moe fellowes, whose know∣ledge
and skill is correspondent with yours, as directly as the sheepe doth followe the Ramme. Then he did begin to oyen the gates of infamie (as is the manner of such mischieuous miscreants) but most specially against a reuerend and skilfull Chirurgeon of this Citie of London, shamefully charging him that he had spoyled a Gentlewoman in the countrie, whoHe hath me selowes that will poynt at other mens faults, and for∣get their own. hauing (as this slaunderer sayd) but a little pricke with a nee∣dle only in the skinne, and was in the ioynt of her fore singer of her right hand, and by that small pricke in the skinne, she lost the vse of that finger, which cure (quoth he) hath vtterly discredited him both with the Gentlewoman and her friends. I answered him and sayd: That might haue been any other mans case, and I told him that my selfe had knowne the like successe to happen in the cure of men of good knowledge, expe∣rience, and iudgement: and yet, in myne opinion, no fault nor error at all committed by them touching the method or man∣ner of cure. Well (said he) speake what you please, I do know the pricke with a needle in the skinne is nothing so daunge∣rous, as you make it, in any bodie whatsoeuer. But it is sayd to be the manner of all you, to hide and excuse one an others fault, and to speake against such as I am, because I am a straunger vnto you, and none of your companie, and therefore I am despised, and my medicines dispraised. Why (sayd I) cuery honest man and faithfull true Artist that is diligent in studie, and by his studying attayneth to knowledge and skill, and being examined, approued, and allowed, and a man that feareth God, and endeuoureth to the vttermost of his power and skill to discharge his duetie which is committed to his charge, according vnto those graces and gifts which God of his great goodnes hath indued him with: such men are our bre∣thren and of our companie, wheresoeuer he dwell or abide: but contrariwise, deceiuers, intruders, and shifters, as you are, which without either reason or skill, do abuse the arte and spoyle the people, we exclude such persons cleane from vs, and do account you all but as a sort of Caterpillers in the countrie and Common wealth. Then I proceeded to his former spee∣ches
as touching the pricke of a needle in the skinne, and I sayd vnto him: sith you will not beleeue me that such prickes are dangerous, I will shew you what Tagaultius saith being a learned man, and of great account in Phisicke and Chirur∣gerie, he also citing Galen in the sixth booke of his method, whose words in effect are these. Imagine (sayth he) one come vnto vs, who hath but only a prick in the skinne with a needle, that man for the good disposition of his bodie may easely bee cured, and to followe his accustomed busines, hauing the part naked and bare, and without any medicine at all, and yet re∣ceiue no hurt: but if he haue a full and plethorike bodie, or a bodie of an ill constitution, called Cachochymia, in such a bo∣die the pricke of a needle in the skinne is hard to bee cured. Then this counterfeyt aunswered agayne, I care neither for Galen nor the other man you speake of (meaning Tagaltius)Reasons ac∣cording to his rudenes. for (sayd he) I haue done as good cures as the best of them both, and yet I heare they were a couple of good workemen. Then sayd Maister Doccor: I am ashamed of thy impuden∣cie and boldnes, and for that cause did sharply reprehend him: So he was commaunded to auoyd the place and presence of the patient. Then with vnseemly spéeches, which are not méet to be spoken of in this place, he departed, &c. And now I will come vnto the cure of the sayd puncture or pricke of the sinew: but first you shall vnderstand, that the matter was so stopped in, that it could not by any meanes conueniently breathe out, and therefore I did open the skinne by incision directly vpon the pricke of the sinewe, which I made of a sufficient length, that the matter which was stopped in did the more freely and easely issue out: and that matter which did continually flowe foorth was some what cleere, thinne, and glutinous, like as though it had been a stime, or muscilage: then I applyed vponNote that, old things bee enemies vnto the sinewes. the sayd puncture to mitigate the payne these Dyles follow∣ing, made first actually hot, which I vsed continually vntill the forenamed accidents were remoued and taken away. Rec. ana. ℥. ss. Oleorum Chamomeli & Lombricorum.
Olei Euphorbij. ʒ. . ss. Olei exvitellis ouorum. ʒ. ij. Aquae vitae. q. s. Misce. Since the time of this cure, I found the like profite for ap∣peasing of paynes in the cure of a woman, which also was pricke into the sinewe, vnto whom I vsed these Dyles follow∣ing, in the same order as the other afore rehearsed. Rec. ana. ʒ. iij. Olei Terebinthinae Olei Rosarum. Olei Lumbricorum. Olei vitellorum ouorum. Misce. After I had (actually hot) applyed the aforesayd Dyles, then I ministred therewithall, for more securitie and speedie helpe to appease the paynes, this worthie remedie, which is of Vigo his description. Rec. Medullae panis, & Lactis vaccini confecti cum O∣leisVigo. Rosarum, & Chamomeli cum vitellis ouorum, & cum Croco. ana. q. s. Boyle all these together vnto the thicknes of a plaister, the which I applyed warme vpon the sayd puncture. Also vpon this medicament of Vigo, and likewise round about the whole member, where any payne or inflammation was, this excel∣lent Cataplasme of Valeriola. Rec. ana. ℥. iij. Farinae fabarum Hordei.Valeriola. Lentium. Lupinorum. ana. ℥. ij. Farinae Seminis lini. Foenugreci.
Farinae Orobi. ℥. j. Croci ʒ. ij. Bulliant farinae cum aceto & mellis paruo. Fiat Cataplasma. Also I haue vsed this following in the like cure done of late, as I haue declared, with great profite and ease vnto the patient, &c. Rec. ana. q. s. Radic. althaeae Farinae Hordei Farinae fabarum Farinae lentiumWeck. Coquantur cum sapa, vel lixiuio. Whereunto you shall adde ana. q. s. Olei Rosarum Olei Chamamelini & Olei Anethini Also Terebinthinae & Croci parum. Misce, & fiat Emplastrum. I haue thought it not amisse here to giue to vnderstand, that Guido doth admonish vs, not to vse at all those pulti∣ses, or hot waters which are wont to cure inflammations, for that such remedies in this cure, do rather putrifie and waste a∣way the sinewes, &c. And sith the chiefest thing in curing wounds of the sinewes, is to appease the payne, therefore I haue thought it good here to set foorth such chosen medicines, as my selfe haue approoued, for the better directing of those young students, which haue not been practised in the like ma∣ner of curing. Moreouer, whereas Guido with others doth wisely declare, that conuulsions are euill, and for the most part vncurable, as it is most certaine and true, yet it so pleased God by these remedies hereafter nominated, he was in a reaso∣nable time and space quite deliuered of that euill accident, by
annoynting morning and euening all the hinder partes of his necke, and both his shoulder blades, and downe all the spine of his backe, euen vnto his hippes with this Unguent. Rec. Olei Castorei ℥. j. Olei Iuniperi. ℥. ss. ana. ʒ. vj. Olei Lilliorum & Olei Vulpini. Misce. This being accomplished, as is before declared, then I pro∣ceeded from time to time vntill the finishing of this cure, the which was done in the ende with that most excellent Balme, that is supposed to bee of Maister Halles description, late of Maydstone, which is now extant in this booke, with the which also I vsed this Unguent following. Rec. Vnguentum aureum He∣ben. Mesu. Cerae. ℥. v. Resinae quar. j. Terebinthinae lib. j. Mellis. quar. ss. ana. ʒ. ij. Masticis Thuris. Sarcocollae. Myrrhae. Aloes. Croci. Fiat Vnguentum. This approued Unguent, and the aforesayd Balme toge∣ther, brought very speedely flesh vpon the hurt sine we: and ha∣uing left the vse of the Cataplasme, afore spoken of, then I did wrap the whole mēber round about cum Emplastro Dia∣chalciteos, disolued in Oleo Rosarū, & Lumbricorū: which did greatly strengthen the weake member. And thus by Gods helpe by this manner of method he was restored againe to his
former health of the part wounded. And here I finish this short note or obseruation, the which I do most hartely desire all young students to take in good part, and to accept of this vntill it shall please some learneder man of greater giftes and iudgement to publish a more profitable worke: the which hartely I wish, as knoweth God, who direct both you and me in all lawfull proceedings and practises in the arte. The cure of a certaine straunger which was wounded or thrust through his thigh with a Rapier, by one of his owne countrymen, being combatting and fighting to∣gether. The cure thereof was somewhat hard and diffi∣cult, by reason he was further touched with the french disease before he receiued his wound, &c. IMmediatly after hée had receiued his wound or thrust through his thigh, I was sent for vnto this cure, the patient lying at a straungers house in the Crouched Friers: ye shall vnderstand he had a very strong, fat, and corpulent bodie, and so a very bigge thigh, he was a man about thirtie yeeres of age: all which being consi∣dered, concerning the state and strength of his bodie, and the greatnes of the place wounded: then for the cure thereof I did ordayne a flamula made of fine Lawne, the which dipped in Oleo Hypericonis cum gummis, and with a néedle made of Whales bone, fit for such purposes, I did drawe the sayd fla∣mula into the wound, and I did leaue both the ends thereof hanging foorth at the Orifices of this wound, putting also a small tent in the dependant or lowest part of the wound, and the largest Orifice which was at the inside of his thigh, and there it did rest for the space of two daies, applying also there∣to for the staying of the bloud Galen his pouder, and aboue the wound I layd a very good defensiue: after I did bolster and roule it vp according as arte did leade me. The second day at night he did require me to dresse him againe, for because the night before he sayd he was troubled with a feauer, as he sup∣posed
it to bee, and was so perswaded by other: and for that cause he entertayned a Phisition, a countrie man of his, for to cure his Agewe, and also to see his wound. Now when the wound was opened, it was without tumor or any other euill symptomes, only I foūd a bloudy saines: for that cause I vsed next with the flamula a very good digestiue, the which I dip∣ped in Oleo rosarum, & melle rosarum, ana. q. s. and left to vse the Oyle of Hypericon: The next day in the morning he complayned of extreame payne which he had suffered all that night: then I opened the wound, and I did finde it as before, wherewith he was somewhat disquieted in bodie and minde. Then I drest him agayne, and he was very quiet and well all that day, and at night the wound tended towards digestion, which was (me thought) very well to be liked of: but the next day in the morning it was more worse then before, a stinking bloudie sanies: and the next day at night the matter was indif∣ferent, yet in the morning by no meanes I could procure con∣coct or digest matter: notwithstanding, the best digestiues and other good medicines vsed. So the Phisition and the rest of hisHe was a yong Phisitō, scarse skilfull in the arte of Chirur∣gerie, though otherwise well learned. countrie men thought somewhat amisse in me, for that the pa∣tient his wound did prosper no better: And in like manner I thought somewhat in the Phisition, for that he could not finde out the reason and cause of his supposed feauer. To come vn∣to the purpose, at the next opening in the presence of his hoste of the house, where he did lye, which was his interpretour, I desired him to demaund of the patient, when and where his paynes did most afflict him. He answered, in the night time, and chiefly in his head, and also his shoulders, legges and armes, al which were very sore grieued and tormented. Then I was the bolder to proceed in examination, and asked of him if he had any breaking out in some particular parts of his bo∣die. He aunswered no, but only a fewe Scabbes in his head, the which he did not perceiue, but since he was hurt and kept his bed: and further he sayd, he was very sore grieued with the Emoroydes or Piles, which for the basenes of the place he sayd he was vnwilling to acquaint any man with. Then I
plainly told him he was touched with the French disease. SoThey  neither o∣roydes nor Pes. vilet his correction, but the F. P. I being loth to giue offence, sayd little more at that time, be∣cause I perceiued hee had my words in disdaine, vntill he had better considered with himselfe. And agaynst my next com∣ming he caused the Phisition to méete with me: So after he had also seane and heard the whole matter, he likewise confir∣med my sayings, that certainly it was the French disease. Why (sayd the patient to the Doctor) doth our countrie yeeld such fruite, and I being no Frenchman: He aunswered, God plagueth most part of the world with that disease only for our sinnes and wickednesse. So order was taken by vs presently: & we entered him in cure for that sicknesse. But here it is to be noted, that in all this time I did neuer alter or chaunge mine intention of curing, neither did I leaue of the vse of the flamu∣la, vntill the wound was perfectly digested, which we could by no meanes procure, vntil he was entered sixe daies in the diet: and then altogether I left of my digestiues, and the vse of theSuch wounds are sildom: voyd of acci∣dents, vntill the  be perfectly di∣ested flamula, and vsed but short tents with good iniections, and al∣so Oleum Hypericonis, with other conuenient remedies méete for this cure. In the end, when the patient did perceiue he was almost cured, he would (as it were) merely seeme to excuse himselfe: and being (as it seemed) partly ashamed of his disease, protested vnto vs, with many incredible speeches and vntrueths, that he did not vnderstand how he should come by the disease, no more then he did knowe, how, or whether the Ocean seas did ebbe or flowe, or not, vnlesse it were by tra∣ueiling ouer the Alpes, or with drinking of Snowe water. These his ridiculous reasons I accepted as winde. It suffi∣ceth (I say) that he was cured. So he was glad of his health, and I nothing sorie of his liberalicie. Yet he was to be borne withall: for I haue not heard of many that would willingly vouchsafe to confesse the originall and taking of such infirmi∣ties. But what if he had? It is not our functions or callings (that be Chirurgions) to reueale the secrets of our patients, as we are taught by the ordinances of our elders and auncient fathers that went before vs.
The cure of a man which receiued a notable wound in his head, with great fracture of the skull, and did moreo∣uer fracture the bone of the thigh, called Osfemoris, by a fall out of a gallerie in the Beare garden, at that time when the Beare garden did fall downe, and did kill and hurt many. I Haue thought it good, afore I enter into the briefe note or obseruation of this cure, partly to signifie vnto all young students in this arte, that such great wounds in the head, with fracture of the skull, are hol∣den generally of the best professors and practizers, to be most perillous and daun∣gerous. The bone being compressed vpon the panicle Dura mater: for which cause, at the very beginning of this cure, I did shaue or cut the haire away round about the wound: then with my finger I made further probation into the wound, and there I did manifestly feele a notable fracture or breach in the skull on the left side of his head vpon the bone, called Os Petrosum, which (as is before said) was depressed vpō the pa∣nicle Dura mater. And for that the fracture of the skull was greater in length then the wound in the flesh, for that cause, without detracting of time, I made incision, and so followed the fracture, vntill all the rift or crackt bone was wholy disco∣uered. When I did see and behold the full length of the frac∣ture or breach in the skull, and had raysed vp the flesh, then for that I could not at that present time proceede any further in this busines, because of the great fluxe of bloud, and the rather for that he had lost a great quantitie of bloud before he was brought home to his lodging. All which being considered, I filled the wound with pleggets and runlets made of lint, and very sine towe, wet in the whites of Egges, being mixed with Galen his powder. Then after, with good bolstering and roulling, he remayned thus vntil the next day, and then hauing also a present regard vnto the preseruation of the fracture of
his thigh, as hereafter I  lie to set dowe the true manner and  or ▪  this great fracture and wound in his head. et amongst other things, I thought  good al to ore hert vnto you, that the patients maister, and other of his friends, did signifie  me that h  of d account, and for that cause they were e more  I would deee truely vnto them w dung▪ I thought he was in, that they might also signifi i to other of his  in the countrie. Then I considered with my selfe, I was then to speake before men of worship▪ wisedome and learning, vnto whom I was to deli∣uer me . And calling to  remembraunce some part of the wise sayings of Guido, Tagaultius, and others, whose good counsell herein is thankfully to be embraced and followed. When then ar (say they) called before a Magistrate or head Officer, or any other graue and wise man, and that thou are required o deliuer thine opinion, sen ence and iudgement vp∣pou the person wounded, and to prognosticat, as much as arte requireth, it behoueth thee diligently and effectually to marke the wound or wounds, if there be many, and shall shalt truely call the same wound or wounds by their expresse and proper names, together with the place wounded. Then after it beho∣neth thee to consider with thy selfe the cause or thy coniecture, and the reason of thy sentence and iudgement by thee deliue∣red, wisely and prudently, least thou tayle in thy iudgement, and so shewe sy selfe to be either rent, or els deceiued, &c. So briefly here I could them, that he was not without great daimger. partly by reason the  was sore shaken with the fall, and also for that the one was broken, and depressed vpon Dura mater, which were  caus that did hder his speech, and  it could not be  at the  or dressing, by reason of the great oud: owbet, I did hope of some amendment after  h pearced the skull with the Trepan. Other sp I h as touching his voming, the greatnesse of his wound, with the fracture of his skull and
seake e of hereafter in  I caused them to hang all his chamber  about with Couerles and other hangings, and made it  darke, and without any light or ayre, but only by a candle: because in this cse ayre is very hurtfull. Then at the second , after  eed the wound and taken away all  wound was filled, for the resrayning  it did require with all expedition to make vn or way  to come foorth, therefore I caused thn strong men stedfastly to stay his head with their hands▪ and  opped his eares with wooll, then I did set on the Trepan. and so pearced the skull through both the tables in two places: and then with an Instrument, called  Leuatorie, I raysed vp the depressed bone, with great care and diligence, for feare of procuring further accidents: which being doue, presently his speech amended. And vpon Dura mater I found a good quantitie of congeled bloud, which pre∣sently I remoued for feare of payne and inflammation. After the bloud with speede was taken away, there was also very apparent to be seene a certaine blacknes vpon Dura mater: for the which cause I did put betweene Dura mater and the skull, in the ead of a syndall that Vigo commendeth, a fine wne, dipped in Melle Ros. and vpon the fracture of the  I applyed actually hot Olei Ros. & Aquae vitae,  with t so filled vp the wound: and at other  I vsed vpon pleggets of lint this Unguent, which is called Vnguentum caprifolij, that I found then  in Maister Gales second booke of his Antidotarie: but since that time I haue found it in Wecker, and diuthers. Rec.Vnguentun Capriolij. Wecker. ana. ℥. iiij. Terebinthinae Resinae pini Cerae nouae Olei Rosati ℥. viij.
ana. ℥. j. Masticis Thuris Gummi elemnij. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. iij. Caprifolij Betonicae Vini optimi lib. x. The Woodbine and Betonie being stamped, let them stand infused in the wine foure and twentie houres, then adde to them al the other parcels, except the Gummes, Frankensence and Masticke, boyle these on a cleere fire vntill halfe part of the wine be consumed, and that it begin to waxe greene, then strayne it, and let it coole: then boyle it agayne vntill the wine be consumed: then strayne it agayne, and adde to the rest of the parcels in fine powder, then put it in a cold place and reserue it to your vse. After (as I sayd) I had preserued the wound with these remedies here rehearsed: then I applyed also ouer all the aforesayd medicines, this plaister of Betony, and at last I an∣noynted his head round about the wounds with Oleo Rosa∣rum, and ouer all this a good bed or cap of towe: and then with blosterings and roulling I finished this dressing, &c. Rec. Emplastru Betonicae. Gummi elemnij ℥. iiij. Resinae ℥. viij. Cerae ℥. vj. Gummi armoniaci ℥. iiij. Terebinthinae ℥. vj. Succi Betonicae ℥. x. Misce & fiat Emplastrum. I was constrayned contrarie vnto the description of this plaister, to enlarge and double the quantities of the receipt, because I vsed much of it. And further, it is to bee noted, that from the beginning I also applyed vpon the wound warme stuphes with white wine and Aqua vitae. And thus I
continued with this manner of dressing, vntill all the blacknes was cleane taken away from Dura mater, by the sayd honie of Roses. But if that blacknes should not haue gone away, notwithstanding the vse of honie of Roses, as I haue seene, it is then to be feared, and small hope of health is to be looked for.It is supposed not to be good for to ouer bu∣sie our selues in these wounds of the head in the full of the Moone, with∣out great cause constrayne vs. And agayne, the wounded man was in the more daunger, for that he receiued his hurt very néere the full of the Moone, whereby this euill followed that Dura mater did rise, and thrust it selfe out of those places of the skull, that I did per∣forat or pearce with the Trepan, the which I did safely bring downe agayne in this manner, with a fomentation or decoc∣tion made thus, &c. Rec. ana. q. s. Florum Ros. Chamameli Melilotae Aquae vitae And these were all boyled together in fayre water, and last was added the Aqua vitae, and herewith did I for a good space foment well or bathe the place: and then I applyed vpon Du∣ra mater, this remedie following, and with a fine peece of Lawne orderly conuayed vnder Cranium, or the skull, per∣fectly to defend the panicle from being hurt with the sharpe edges of the bone. Rec. ana. ℥. j. Olei Rosarum Mellis Rosarum. Aquaevitae ℥. ss. Misce. And sometimes in like manner I vsed Oleū vitellorum o∣norum, which did pleasure vs greatly sometimes being vsed by it selfe alone. And at other times I mixed it with the re∣medie aboue written, I meane that oyle of Egs, which hath a fayre yellowe colour, and a pleasant and sweete sauour: And
po th foresayd peece of e Lawe   a  peece of a spunge steeped in the   with this or¦der Dura mater was  wought  ▪ which to do in some bodies is wonderfull  and : therefore it doth require great diligence▪ care, and  ud as touching the skaling and remouing of the fractured es, it was safe∣l done in a reasonable time, partly with the vse of Olei Ro∣sarum▪ & Aquae vitae. d sometimes with Aqua vitae, & Vi∣triol alb. ana. q. s. But when I applyed the Aqua vitae, aud vitriol, I did first de t  parts of the wound with drie lint, &c. for if it should at any tune touch the flesh, it wi cause great payne, neither may such wounds bee disquieted with any sharpe or bying , least the wounds (as I haue seene) shall receiue or entertaine a certaine straunge ma∣lignitie, which doth greatly hinder the perfection and course of the cure. And often times I vsed Puluis Cephalicus, which is a very apt and a conuenient remedie for skaling of bones of the head. And with these foresayd medicenes, A continued vntill there was good flesh brought vpon Lura mater, and the fractured bones being so loosed and borne vp, and in the place of these bones Nature supplyed and ordayned a good and perfect callus, or porus. And thus he was shortly after well and perfectly cured and wde whole of the sayd wound of his head. Moreouer, e sall frther vnderstand, that in the time of this cute, we w mpelled to vse dirt, purging, and phlebothornie, the which I do but thus speake of in a Word, for that it was done by the direction of a learned Phistci and so he was made perfect whole of this ound of is head, Now here I will also briefly touch   the fracture of the bone of his thigh, and therefore I endeoud my selfe e the right placing of this fracture, which was broken trans∣nerse or crosse wise. It is to be further noted, that of fractured when they happen in bodies of euill disposition and tempera∣ture, they often times resist cure, and are long or euer they ée made whole: which note ye shall obserue with all diligence and good consideration. But this patient was a man of a
young  bodie, and of a very good construion. Then  (I y) he was bought into his bed, and so orderly layd vpon  backe,  being done, I visited the fracture after this manner. First  made two decent towes, and fastened each towel,   the ,   other belowe theStrong   , i. c. ▪ ie in strong bodies but  weake person it is o  deed accor∣ding to the strength. fracture. Th  two strong men o aprehend and take  of ch towel, end I pla my selfe very neere vn∣to the fracture: Then all things being reai, I caused them  to extend o stretch out the member: which being suf∣fi  perfourmed, I did late or lift vp that part of the   was depressed. And agayne, I did also depresse downe he other part of the fractured bone which was borne vp  euated: which being reduced and counited together, ar hely restored, as nre as I could, according to natures formr vnion, and being thus well ioyned, I did curiously keepe close the disseered bones together, and then I caused the two men which ended the member, by little and little to release the hands, whereby the patient found himselfe great∣ly eased of his paynes, the which we did vnderstand by his re∣lation vnto vs. After this I did take a linnen cloath, so large, as did not only comprehend the fracture, but also couered ouer some part of the whole and sound member: she which cloath I did wet in water and vineger, and then I did syred vpon the same this remedie here prescribed. Rec. ana. q. s. Albuminis ouorum Olei Rosarum Boli Aoniaci Farinae volatilis Msce. Some excellent men do also vse to wet the sayd cloath only in Albumine onot, &  Rosarum, ana. q. s. being well beaten , and afterward being compressed ut againe, and so applye it to the part affected. And I my  aue als approued it good: but I vsed th▪ foresayd redie with great prosite, as I haue declared, and
therewith I compassed the member rounde three or four∣times: then with a conuenient rouller made of soft linen cloth, which also I wet in water and vineger, called Posca, I did be∣gin my roulling or ligature directly vpon the fracture, and so roulled it vp twise or thrise about the fracture, and then roul∣led it downwards, and in like manner ascending vpwards a∣gayne aboue the fracture. Then after the same order, as be∣fore, I did so roule it agayne with an other rouller of the same breadth and length, that is to say, two yeards long and foure fingers broade: then according vnto the good direction of Ho∣ratius Morus, and others, who sayth: Your manner of roul∣ling must neither be too straight, neither yet too loose: for by o∣uer loose binding the bones may be moued: and by too straight or ouer hard girding, is often hindered, and letteth the distri∣bution of nourishment into the part, and so is hindered the en∣gendring or breeding of the sodering humour, wherewith the bones is knit and vnited, which is made, as it is truely sayd, of good nourishmēt inclining to grossenes. Now, to come vnto the manner and order of placing of the splints, which was set vpon the sayd roullers, which splints were made of light wil∣lowe wood very plaine and smooth: and being blunt and round at both endes, well wrapped about, and also bolstered with towe, which I placed vpon the member round the breadth ofSpnts also made with the abbards of swords I haue d, with like ite vnto ent. a finger betweene euery splint, and sometimes further of or neerer, as cause required. Then with good strong tape I did moderatly and gently binde them well together: which being done, I layd or placed the member as seemely and decently as possible might be in a double linnen towell roulled vp at both the ends, with a good quantitie of great Rushes, such as our Chaundlers vse to put in their watching Candles, and I did make thereof a bed to lay or place the fractured member in, whereby he could by no meanes any way mooue his broken legge: but safely and quietly rested, as though it had been layd in that famous Instrument, called of the learned Glossoco∣mium, which Instrument serueth to extend or to stretch out a fractured member, and also serueth for the vse afore declared.
The manner, order, and true vse thereof, was first reuealed and plainly shewed vnto diuers Chirurgions of this Citie of London, (when I was my selfe in presence) by Maister Doc∣tor Foster, the Reader of the Chirurgerie Lector in the Phi∣sitions Colledge. And to conclude, after I had safely layd in his legge, as aforesayd, then he rested so reasonable quietly for the space of fourtéene daies: and then vpon a sodaine, with∣out any reasonable cause knowne, there did begin to rise a ve∣rie paynfull Itch, with an inflammation: then I followed the direction of Wecker, and somented the member first with warme water, to this end and purpose that the humour which was enclosed might the more easily euaporate and breath out: which done, I annoynted the member round about with Vn∣guentum populeon, & Vnguentum album, ana. q. s. then I vsed also this plaister. Rec. Emplastri Diachalciteos ℥. viij. Olei Myrtillorum. ℥. j. Succi granatorum ℥. ss. Albumin. ouorum nou. ij. Misce. After I did roule vp the member agayne in the same man∣ner and order, as is before declared. And thus, by the vse of these remedies, his Itch and inflammation was remoued and taken away without further trouble, and in a reasonable time he was made whole also of the fracture of his thigh. And for that it stood vppon me to haue great care and regarde of the health of this wounded man, I thought it nothing hurtful vn∣toIn matters ▪ danger sh not to aske counsell, least when it is too late thou do then repent thee. my credite to require counsell: And hereunto I did diuers times call (to visite my patient) my approoued good friend Maister Banester, whose counsell vnto me herein was not a little profitable. To conclude, after I had cured and healed him, both the patient and his friends seemed to be somewhat discontented, and vsed some words, but to small effect, which kind of speeche is compared, by a learned man, vnto mightie
waters, that drowne the people and doth it selfe no profite And forsooth the chiefest matter was (besides that they were. oth to part from their monie) only for that his fractured leg was somewhat shorter then the other: but I told them agayn, that much might be done in young persons, which in aged of∣tentimes did not so happely fall out, as we do wish and looke for. For example, calling then to mind that a fewe yeres past, a youth, being about the age of tenne or eleuen yeeres, whose name was called Martine Aude, he did commonly resort vn∣to  Brewers house in Bishops gate streate, where he also did dwell: In the same Brewhouse was a horsemill grinding of malt, and there this sayd youth, with other resorted to play, and so running about the mill after the horse, did by chaunce vnawares go so néere the mill, that sodainly the milstone did take  of his coate, and so did drawe him into the mill, and the mine did runne ouer his thigh and fractured the bone Os femoris in diuers peeces: then by reason of his noyse and crying, the fellow that did leade the horse, very sodainly staie, and so the mill, otherwise all his whole bodie had been drawne in and crushed or broken in peeces. Then I was sent for, and likewise Maister George Baker, Chirurgeon: which being both together, we placed agayne the fractured bones, and also applyed thereto conuenient remedies. And so here to make an end without further circumstances, he was by vs in a reaso∣nable time perfectly cred. And now he liueth at this day, be∣ing a very strong and lustie man, without lamenes or any o∣ther imperfection of that legge. Here I will conclude this brief obseruation, which I haue published for young practizers, which are, as I haue sayd, fauourers of learning and louers of arte, as you shall perceiue by the course of my writing: but not for the learned, or men of great knowledge and experience: neither, to my remembraunce, I haue in this whole discourse, by bayne delusions published any straunge paradoxes, or new found remedies, which (as sayth Erastus) a man of many great gifts, iudgement and experience, who (as it is thought) was neither ambitious, nor affectioned, willeth that al such
remedies should bee shunned, and not vsed: his meaning is, except those which are well approoued and best in effect, and are found plentifully described in the bookes of famous men which were before our time, as I haue in this booke many times repeted, &c. The cure of a Marriner, which had two of his ribbes frac∣tured or broken with a violent blow of a capsten barre in one of her Maiesties Shippes, which brused him very ore: at the same present time he was throwne downe vpon the carriage of a great peece of Ordnance, which brused him agayne very greatly in other parts of his bodie: Therefore such as will take vppon them to at∣tempt the like cures, shall not vtterly bee deceiued of their intent and purpose. I Thinke it good, without any longer dis∣course, so briefly as I can, here to publish and plainlie expresse the truth of my prac∣tize in this cure, and so with all faithful∣nes, industrie and diligence, to procéed vn∣to the rest, for the commoditie of such as are not vnthankfull quarrel pickers, who, in the burning flames of their wicked affections, mooue spee∣ches more curious then necessarie, speaking euill of good, and good of euill: whereas wee are otherwise taught to embrace the good and to hate the euill: such is the nature of the wicked which delight in their vngodlinesse. Blame me not (good rea∣der and louing brethren) though I speake so much, and so of∣tentimes, almost in euery place throughout this booke, of the manifold abuses of scoffers and scorners, who daylie more and more increase in troupes, and are puffed vp, not only agaynstSome dead, and some a∣liue. me, with most haughtie, stout, and stately countenances, but also agaynst diuers good men, that are farre my betters, and indued with many goodly gifts both in learning and know∣ledge in this ae of Chirurgerie. And I knowe full well, it
will bee hard for a man of so weake a wit, and slender capaci∣tie, to purchase any fruitfull acceptation of quarrelling ad∣uersaries, being so wickedly addicted. Though herein I con∣fesse my selfe, and my practise which I haue published, to bée nothing in respect, as before I haue sayd, but that I haue re∣ceiued from the head spring of knowledge, reuealed vnto vs by others ound discourses and writings, wherin I haue spent some part of my dayes in the reuerent studie and practise of the same, partly for the aduauncement of the arte, and edifica∣tion of others, being yong practizers: yet could I neuer, vntill this day, once hope to be vnburthened of euill speakers, spe∣cially of the rascall sort. And it is a wonder of the world to see, what blemishes or deepe scars of vntruthes they fixe in mens faces, as hereafter more at large I will declare, and yet lye continually watching to intrappe with deadly pursute, ma∣king a ioyfull and pleasant mellodie of their villanie and kna∣uerie, to the ende wee should winne small credite of the godly: although we seeke, by all meanes possible, good people should be no longer deceiued by lewd persons, wherwith both towne and countrie is sore pestered: vnto whom I wish better grace, and that they may leaue of their wicked wayes, so that all good artists may bee duetifully reuerenced, and the lewd and igno∣rant suppressed, and inforced to liue in honest conuersation. And thus I leaue them here, vntill I come to the conclusion, for that I haue promised in my preface, not to shunne any such rotten rootes as they come, or chaunce to lye in my way. And I wil now enter into the manner and order of this cure, which happened about that time when the Emperours daughter passed the narrowe Seas to marrie with Phillip King of Spayne: I seruing in one of her Maiesties Shippes, it chaun∣ced then a great tempest and wind to arise, so that the waues or billowes of the Sea went very loftie and high, wee riding then at an Anker néere the French coast, and the Marriners being greatly busied about the winding vp of their cables and Ankers: but whether it were by some , or by reason of the storme and tempest, I knowe ▪ but vpon a sodaine
the capsten turned about with great force and violence, and did bruse and hurt diuers, specially one Ralfe Cowdale the Boswaynes seruant of the Ship, who had two of his ribbes fractured and broken by the force of the sayd blowe of one of the capsten barres, he was therewith throwne downe vppon the carriage of a great peece of Ordnance, which brused him a∣gayne in other places of his bodie: so the patient did lye as a man fordead, voyd of sence and vnderstanding, and whether I drest him or not, he sayd he did not knowe. But after he was agayne reuiued, there followed perillous accidents, as a pleu∣risie, spitting of bloud, and great dolor and paynes, which (as Guido declareth) be very daungerous: and the rather for that one of his ribbes was so fractured, and in such sort, that a little fragment or small peece of the ribbe did seperate it selfe, and being without all hold vnto any part of the ribbe, did conti∣nually without ceasing still torment and vexe the patient with vehement pricking vpon the panicle that couereth the ribbes: neither could I bring him to any ease, vntill I did make inci∣sion directly vppon the fracture, according vnto the length of the ribbe, and so downe vnto the bone, and there I did take out that spell or fragment of the bone, which was in bignes, thicknes and length like vnto a Barley corne, sharpe at both endes like vnto the poynt of a néedle. Then after I had made the incision, and taken out that small peece of the ribbe, I put into the said wound Oleum Hypericonis cum gummis, and then vppon the same (after it was reduced, for the speedie vuiting or knitting together of the fractured ribbe) this fol∣lowing. Keble.Rec. ana. q. s. Olei Rosarum Albuminis ouorum Bol. Armoniaci, & Farinae volatilis Misce.
The which I did spred vpon a double cloath wet in water and vineger, and strongly wrong out agayne: but you shall vnderstand, for that there was not at that time in the Nauie any one Phisition to ayde and assist vs, I my selfe did giue him this drinke. Rec. Vini maluatici ℥. iiij. Olei oliuarum dul. ℥. j. Spermatisceti gra. xij. Misce. After he had receiued this drinke, within one houres space he did cast most part of this drinke vp agayne, with a good quantitie of clotted bloud: but at night I gaue him the same drinke agayne, and in the like manner for the space of three dayes, all which time he neuer did cast any more, but he did therewith auoyd by spitting much brused bloud. And here it is to be further noted, that after the sayd peece of the bone of his ribbe was taken away, he did not complaine but very lit∣tle of any griefe in that part, but did take as quiet rest, as a man in his case, but for that he was troubled with a cough, which he had taken before he receiued his hurt: and for the more speedie cure of his fractured ribbes, I did giue him to drinke for the space of tenne dayes morning and euening this drinke following, which he did take after he was let bloud, and had receiued a soluble purge gently to loose and cleanse the bellie, for the diuerting of humours, and also did partly take away his paynes by the helpes of locall medicines here also set downe. And this is the description of the sayd drinke, the which he did take at twise being warmed. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Aquae consolidae maioris & Aquae osmundae Regalis Vini albi ℥. iiij. Mellis com. ℥. iij. Succi Liquiritiae ʒ. j. Theriacae opt. q. s. Misce.
Then after with good bolstering and roulling I finished this order of dressing. In the meane space I caused him to keepe himselfe quiet, without turning or mouing of his bodie, as time and place did permit and suffer: so he rested fiue daies, and then I did dresse him agayn, chiefly because of his wound, although in all that time he neuer complayned of payne, and then I opened the wound and found it in a manner whole: then I drest him as before, and let him so rest fiue dayes: the tenth day being expyred, I chaunged my course of dressing, and vsed these remedies. Rec. ana. ℥. iiij. Emplastri Diachalciteos Emplastri de minio ana. ℥. j. Olei Rosarum, & Olei Myrtillorum Misce. These plaisters did wholly confirme and consolidate the fracture of the ribbes, and I caused him also to be annoynted in certaine other places of his bodie where he was greatly brused, with these resolutiue and dispersing medicines, &c. Rec. ana. ℥. j. Olei Rosarum, & Chamaemeli. Olei Spermatis ℥. ss. Misce. And many times likewise I vsed Vnguentum Dialthea, & Oleum Laurinum, & Vnguentum Vulpinum, and with this plaister following was dissolued all the contused bloud vnder the skinne. Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Emplastri de muscilaginibus Emplastri meliloti Emplastri flos vnguentorum
ana. ʒ. vj. Olei Chamaemeli, & Olei Rosarum Misce. The fifteene day being expired, I opened the wound a∣gayne, where I did finde that perfectly healed, and the frac∣ture also very apparant to haue receiued consolidation: then I drest him, as before is declared. And with this manner of me∣thod I cured him within the space of sixteene dayes. Now in the knitting vp of this note or obseruation, briefly compact together, it is to be remembred, that in the time of this cure I vsed such diet as the place did afoord, which was sparing enough in the highest degree, with phlebothomie, and euacua∣tion of the bellie, &c. The cure of a certaine man that was thrust through his bodie with a sword, which did enter first vnder the car∣tilage or grisle, called of the learned Anatomists, mucro∣nata cartilago, &c. The poynt of the sword passed tho∣rowe his bodie, and so out at his backe, in such maner, that he which wounded the man did runne his way, and did leaue the sword sticking in his bodie: so the wounded man did with his owne hands pull out the sword, whom after I cured, as shall be declared, &c. A Speciall note or obseruation of a certaine daunge∣rous and desperate cure worthie of admiration, which I cannot let passe, of a certaine traueiler in∣to the East and West Indies, he being a very strong and valiant man, who (as I sayd) receiued a wound through his bodie, that entered in vnder Mucronato carti∣lago, which, by the wonderfull worke of God, the sword esca∣ped the liuer, stomacke, and the intestines or guts, neither any euill accidents happened vnto him all the time of his cure, but only the grudging of a feauer, which was shortly preuented with bleeding and loosing of the bellie by soluble glisters. Im∣mediatly
after the hurt I was brought vnto this cure, and al∣so one Maister Doctor Wotton: but after I did behold the manner of his hurt, and seeing the weapon so embrued with bloud, I did in my minde greatly lament the miserable estate he was in, and I told those that were in presence that I great∣ly doubted there was no way of cure, but that death would presently followe: and so in trueth I refused to dresse him, sup∣posing he would dye vnder my hand. Then the wounded man desired me, as euer I loued a man, that I would dresse him and take him in cure: for (sayd he) my heart is good, although my wound be great. Then I called to my remembrance, that Celsus (a learned man) counselleth vs, that in no wise wee should meddle with him that cannot be preserued, nor to deale with him that is staine alreadie. Yet to counteruayle this, I had read in diuers other good authors, that wee ought to at∣tempt all that may be done, either by arte or reason: but first warely to foretell what daunger the patient is in, before ye shall either make or meddle with him, that ye may defend your selues from slaunder of euill speakers: for (say these excellent men) many by a wonderfull and merueilous manner do es∣cape death and are cured, whereas if we shall leaue the woun∣ded man destitute of all ayde and helpe, and then he dye, wee shall worthely bee esteemed wicked, and without all charitie and humanitie, &c. But oftentimes it falleth out, that many good men are vnwilling to attempt such cures, because of the frumpes, quippes, and taunts of those, who (as I haue be∣fore sayd) speake euill of good, and good of euill. For if at any time it shall so fall out that some one paltering cure chaunce toNote. escape vncured, as I haue declared in other of my writings, yea though the fault be in the disorder and ill disposition of the patient, yet a man shall get more discredite and infamous reproaches thereby, then he hath reaped credite by all the most famous cutes he hath done all the dayes of his life. I answere agayne, I suppose no man that feareth God will willingly do that which redoundeth vnto his patients hurt, and his owne discredite. But wee are in these dayes so embayed with the
slaunders of blind buzzards and vaunting varlets, who with the fragments or scrapings of their beggarly practizes, do steale more credite for the curing of a Blayne, or a Byle, a cut finger, or a ked heele, then a right skilfull and honest artistThis manifest  needeth no witnesses. can, or shall do with all the best cures he hath done al the daies of his life. But to returne, after much intreating, I presented my selfe vnto this cure, and then with two short tents artifi∣cially made, the one before, and the other behind his backe, which I applyed into the wound, with Galen his powder, mixed with Hare haires and the whites of Egges, and with pleggets vpon the sayd tents, and defensiues round about the wound, both behind and before: and so with artificiall roulling and bolstering he rested. Then forthwith I was counselled by the sayd Doctor and others, to giue him some excellent wound drinke, such as by our owne practise we had approued. Then I tould him of the singular vertues which I had heard and seene of a certaine drinke called Potus Antiochiae, which was first put in practise in London by one Maister Archen∣bole, a very skilfull Chirurgeon, which drinke (as I sayd) is called the drinke of Antiochiae, and was made then by him, and Maister Yates, with others: but I haue neuer heard, or knowne of a certaine trueth, that it was euer made before or since by any other: the more is the pitie. But this present yere (God willing) both my selfe, and (I suppose) others that knowes the excellencie of it wil not be without it. The strange cures which the same drinke hath done, it is wonderfull to heare. But I do confesse this wounded man was cured chiefly with this drinke. And fiue yeares after he was made whole, he did come to London, partly to see me and to giue thankes, in the presence of Maister Baylie, Maister Beden, with others, and there agayne did shewe the places that was wounded, both where the sword went in, and where it did come forth: since which time I did neuer beare of him, neither do I know whether he liueth or not: so I did get, by the helpe of Maister Beden, so much of this drinke as cured the man, and the same night he was hurt, I did giue him of it to drinke. The man∣ner
and order of the ministering and making of it, is as fol∣loweth. Rec. ana. m. j. Bugulae Fragariae Consolidae mediae Consolidae minoris Consolidae maioris Raphani rusticani Rubi Vrticae foeminae OsmundaePotus Antio∣chiae. Canabis Saniculae Crassulae Tanaceti Anagallidis masculi Auriculae muris Violarum purpurearum Gariophyllatae rootes and leaues. m. v. Geranij cretici. m. v. Betonicae m. v. rootes and leaues. Pedis columbini. m. iij. rootes and leaues. Rubiae Tinctorum of the rootes, the third part in weight of all the hearbes before rehearsed, first wash all the hearbes cleane, then after stampe them in a stone morter: which done, put them in a newe earthen pot well nealed, and put in also a gallon of good white Wine: then set them on an easie fire of coales, and let it boyle very gently, till the one halfe be consu∣med: then strayne it into a fayre cleane vessell, and adde to it of the best and purest clarified honie one pottle, so that there be of each an equall quantitie, then boyle them together (as it is sayd in the auncient copie) the time and space ye may say the Psalme of Mercie: which copie was written, as it is re∣corded, aboue two hundred yeares agoe. And here ye shall vnderstande, that I haue beene very diligent in attayning
vnto the true description of this famous drinke. And I haue had diuers auncient copies, but none so true as those which Maister Thorny did friendly send me, and also Maister Iarat, who hath been very willing to shewe me his booke, wherein this drinke was also described: and moreouer, hath readily as∣sisted me to giue euery hearh his true and proper name, which was somewhat obscure in the auncient copies, as also hath shewed and found out the hearbes themselues each one in his time and kind: which drinke (as my author sayth) must bee fi∣nished and made before Midsomer. And being perfourmed, it is to bee kept in a glasse vessell well stopped, and it must bee giuen bloud warme one spoonefull at a time morning and euenening, first and last in well water, three spoonefulles at a time, being sodden and kept vpon purpose. And I know this drinke hath been vsed to the profite of many, after it was ten yeeres olde. As touching the rest of this cure, it was perfor∣med by locall medicines, as digestiues, mundificatiues, incar∣natiues, and desiccatiues, &c. Digestiues Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae Vitellorum ouorum num. ij. Syr. Ros. ℥. j. Masticis ʒ. j. Croci q. s. Misce. I vsed at euery dressing with this digestiue to take of Olei Rosarum ℥. j. Mel. Rosarum ℥. ss. Misce. And dipped the tents and pleggets in it, being first made warme. After it was perfectly digested, then I did mundifie it wich this mundificatiue, and such like, &c. Mundificatiue Rec. Terebinthinae ℥. vj. Mel. Rosarum ℥. iiij.
ana. ʒ. iiij. Myrrhae Iridis Aristolochiae Farinae hordei q. s. Misce. After the wound was well clensed, then I vsed this incar∣natiue with great profite. Incarnatiue. Rec. Olei com. ℥. iiij. Cerae nouae ℥. j. Terebinthinae ℥. ss. Colophoniae ʒ .ij. Picis graecae ʒ. j. ana. ʒ. j. Thuris Masticis Croci ℈. j. Misce. He was cured by these ordinarie remedies and such like in effect, which are daylie put in practise of all good artists, who haue traced in the steps of the olde and auncient fathers and chiefe maisters of Chirurgerie. And as it was of late decla∣red, by Maister Doctor Foster, in a learned Lector, that the reason why in these dayes wee do not attayne to do those fa∣mous cures, which were done by the worthie Grecians and Arabians, and other auncient fathers, is, for that wee do not vse those old and auncient remedies, which they did daylie put in practise, to their great credite, worship and gayne. The cure of a young man which receiued a wound into the right eye with the poynt of a dagger. THere was committed vnto my cure a young man wh receiued a wound into his right eye with the poy a dagger, so that Cornea, or the hornie membrane
fall flat vpon the christall humour, by reason most part of the white humour Albumineus issued out of the wound. He had been in cure with a certaine Surgeon three dayes, and then I was called vnto the cure: I found him greatly payned with inflammation, and he had also a sharpe feauer, and wanted sleepe, &c. for which causes, by good aduise and diligent circum∣spection, he was appoynted to be let bloud, and he receiued al∣so glisters, and a very thinne diet was administred vnto him, vntill all these accidents were remoued. But for the more spée∣die mitigating of his paynes, there was vsed in like manner vpon his neck and shoulders, cupping glasses, and on his fore head and temples this repellent medicine. Rec. Emplastri Diachalciteos lib. ss. Olei Rosarum ℥. ij. ana. ℥. j. Succi plantaginis, & Solani Albumina ou. num. ij. Aceti Ros. q. s. Misce. And sometimes this. Rec. Olei Rosarum ℥. ij. ss. Omnium sandalorum ℥. ij. Bol. Armeniae ℥. ij. ss. Albumin. ou. num. ij. Vini granatorum q. s. Misce. And vnto his wound in the eye, I did droppe in this reme∣i med. Rec. Mucilag. sem. cidoniorum extractae in aquae Ros. ana. q. s. Tragaganthae Lactis mulieris & Albuminis oui Misce.
Then ouer all I applyed thicke pleggets of fine towewell wet in this same next following, being also warmed a little. Rec. ana. q. s. Lactis mulieris Vitellorum & Albuminis ou. Succi semperuiui, &▪ Olei Rosarum Misce. With this manner of dressing I continued sixe dayes, I was constrayned three times a day to dresse his eye, and also once agayne at midnight for ouer as the medicine did growe warme, then the inflammation and paynes increased. After I had got the victorie ouer the payne and inflammation, then there did manifestly appeare a certaine quantitie of matter, as it were imprisoned betweene Cornea and Vnea, the which I did remooue and take this away with: Rec. Aquae Rosarum ℥. ij. Vini albi. ℥. j. Syr. Rosati solutiui ℥. ss. Sacchari candi ʒ. ij. Succifoeniculi ℥. ss. Albuminis oui. q. s. Misce. After the matter was remoued, then I chaunged this course and vsed these remedies following, wherwith the eye was de∣liuered from all the foresayd accidents. Rec. Tutiae praeparatae ℥. j. Aloes cicarrinae ℥. ss.Guido. Camphorae ʒ. j. Aquae Rosarum lib. j. ss. Vini granatorum lib. ss. Misce.
Powder that which is to bee powdered, and mixe all these together, and seethe it vpon the coales and reserue it vnto your vse. Last of all I finished this cure with Rec. ana. q. s. Mellis virginei Sacchari candiWecker. Tutiae praeparatae & Aloes Misce. Often I vsed this alone of it selfe, and sometimes dissolued it in Aqua Rosarum, and at sundrie times I vsed Collerium album, Sine opio, disolued in Lactis mulieris & aquae Rosa∣rum, ana. q. s. and thus he was cured and healed of this wound of his eye. I could here set downe other speciall cures of wounds in the eyes done some by my selfe, and some being ioyned with other Surgeons in this Citie, as Maister Bane∣ster, Maister Baker, with other. But this may suffice for a briefe note or obseruation of this cure. The cure of a certaine Clothier, dwelling neere the North parts of this land, which was daungerously wounded oure ynches in breadth aboue the left knee, in such sort, that the Rotula, or round bone of the knee did hang downe very much: whom after I cured, as hereaf∣ter shall be declared, &c. NOt long since, a certaine Clothier, with two of his neighbours, very earely in the morning, betweene foure and fiue of the clocke, did take their iourney from London towards the countrie where they did dwell. They had not traueiled fully two miles, but they were set vpon by certaine robbers and theeves, who wounded this man very daungerously, as is before lted, and there he was taken: but his neighbours, being better horst, carried all their own and his monie away with them, which (as it was reported) did amount together to the summe of foure hundred pounds, which by that meanes was saued. So presently be∣ing
wounded, he returned to London, vnto whom I was re∣quired to go with al speed, for he had bled aboundantly. Then after I had taken out the bloud which was congeled in the wound, I did prepare, without tarance, a sharpe square poyn∣tedBloud may not be suffered in a wound. specially if it be congealed. needle, with a strong euen and smooth silke threed, well waxed, therewith I did take fiue stitches, one good ynch and more distant betweene euery stitch: and I did begin my first stitch in the very middest of the wound: neither did I thinke it good to make the stitches too thicke, because it doth oftentimes stirre vp accidents, as payne, inflammation, &c. Neither must the stitches be set too thinne, for then they will not sufficiently hold the sides of the wound together. So when I had orderly perfourmed the stitching of the wound, leauing a decent parte for the wound to purge at: thē I applied thereunto Oleū Hy∣periconis cum gummis, and I stayed the bléeding with Ga∣len his powder, which in such wounds I will preferre before all other. I placed moreouer aboue the wound, a very good de∣fensiue, to repeale and kéepe backe euill accidents from the sayd wound: then with good bolstering and roulling, I safely ended this first preseruation. All which being thus finished, it was then demaunded of me, about what time I would vnder∣take to cure him, for they sayd he was a man of great trade, and did kéepe many poore at worke, & could by no meanes long be absent from his busines. Moreouer, they would further vn∣derstand of me, if I would warrant to cure him, & that with∣out a mayme or imperfection vnto his traueiling. To these their demaunds, I aunswered, that I would make no war∣rants at all, neither could I set any certaine day or time when he should be whole: but I tould him, I would do as much as arte did permit me, to the vttermost of my knowledge and skill: And as touching the wound it selfe, I iudged it very daungerous, but not desperat and deadly, nor yet altoge∣ther without perrill, partly by reason the wound was aboue the knee, and there the muscles being so straungely cut at the very heads of them, and therefore in daunger to bee depriued, to lose the action and vse of that member, for that the muscles
were the instruments of voluntarie mouing. And moreouer, the daunger was the greater, because the liggaments which binde the ioynts, were likewise seperated and cut, whereby en∣sueth grieuous accidents, very hurtfull and dangerous: which euilles oftentimes foreshews present death. All which to them was small pleasure to heare, and therefore sayd vnto me, they would consider of my sayings: and so I departed, yet ex∣pecting my comming agayne to the second dressing: but I was preuented, as hereafter ye shall heare: for in the meane time they had conference with many other Chirurgeons, and some were of mine opinion, and some were not. At the last, there was brought vnto them a man, which by his owne re∣port vnto them, was a great traueiler, and by his diligence in traueiling, he had attayned vnto great learning and skill in Phisicke and Chirurgerie: yet (as hereafter it shall appeare) in all the whole time of his traueiling, he neuer learned to speake well. I trust no good man will here take occasion to mislike my sayings, as some reaching wits haue most iniu∣riouslyMany good men are sub∣iect to iniu∣rious reports, the subtile seedes of enuy. imagined: for God doth know, I speake not in all this whole discourse agaynst any good and honest Artist, whether he be traueiler or not traueiler. And therefore, if any carpe at me as they haue done, secretly and openly, know them by that marke what he is. I speake agaynst none, but those that a∣buse all places where they come, and are also seducers of o∣thers, bearing the names of farre traueiling Chirurgeons, and are nothing lesse. I do greatly commend and do well al∣lowe, and accept of all those traueilers, which by their trauei∣ling do endeuour themselues to do good in the countrie and Common wealth where they liue and do dwell, and are fa∣uourers of those good men, which seeke with all diligence to put to silence the slaunderous tongue and hidden hatred of shameles abusers of the arte & good Artists: who although I know they are such as be drowned in darknes, yet their poore captious heads of late kéepe a wonderfull stirre, as though they had been able to haue builded Castles in the ayre. And I thinke in deede there is no way for any man to escape the ve∣nimous
tongues of such malicious beastes. Now, as touch∣ingCommenda∣tions of cer∣taine trauel∣lers, and of their traueiling honest traueilers, I reade that Hippocrates himselfe, though he were a learned man, yet after he departed from his studie, being first eighteene yeares of age, and brought vp in the Schooles of Athens: at the last he gaue himselfe to trauei∣ling, through diuers countries and kingdomes, searching (as it is sayd) what they did knowe of the nature and properties of herbes and plants, and what experience hee had seene of them, that he did write downe and commit to memorie. It is reported, that twelue yeares he did thus trauell: after which time he returned, and did come vnto the Temple of Diana in Ephesus, where he translated all the tables of medicines that were there before prescribed many yeares, and put in good or∣der that which was confused, and added many things which he had found out by experience. And he was the first that put this arte in good order, as in those histories doth more at large appeare. Now, after his good example and order of traueiling, or by any other honest and lawfull meanes, that may redound to the good of our countrie and Common wealth, as is before re∣hearsed, I do not mislike, but commend it greatly. Crauing here pardon for my so many digressions, I will now returne my speeches agayne vnto the forenamed magnificent Chi∣rurgeon. This fellowe, as I sayd, being brought vnto them, there they did signifie vnto him, who had preserued and dres∣sed him, with the manner and order of his dressing, and al such speeches which I had deliuered vnto them, as concerning his wound, and the daungers that I sayd might followe. Now, in the very forefront of his talke, he sayd: Whatsoeuer I had sayd he esteemed it little, if the hurt were no worse then heNeuer trust a warrenter. Nor a bosting bragger. A runnagate fugitiue. Nor a lying quack saluer. could conceiue and gather by their talke and information, he would warrant to cure him, so that the marrowe of the bone were not touched with the weapon. Al these words were plea∣sant vnto them, and very thankfully receiued. But to come vnto the substaunce of this cure, (may it please the friendly Reader here to commit to thy memorie, that in my absence,
before I did come vnto the second dressing of this wounded man, as after it was reported vnto me, he did in scornfull ma∣ner take off all my medicines from the wound, and likewise did most foolishly cut open all the stitches which I had made, saying vnto them all, I was in a wrong boxe, as concerning this cure: forsooth colouring his opinion vpon Marianus his author: for the fellowe will be oftentimes breathles with al∣leadging of authors, whē his mouth is full of lyes, who would haue all wounds lye open without stitching. I answere, that all good Authors generally commaunde to stitch wounds of necessitie, otherwise it would cause a great deformitie. But if he had ment smal wounds in the face, &c. or brused wounds, where ye stitches will rot out, or in venimous bitings, or where the wound that is stitched tendeth to impostumation, there to cut open the stitches I holde it profitable. But to proceede, shortly after he repented when it was too late, and he was con∣strayned to confesse his fault, and (as it is sayd of a learned man) to excuse himselfe with noddies had I wist. So he proceeded about his busines, and did powre into the wound his Oyle or Balme, and next applyed his plai∣ster, and then did bolster and roule it vp after his owne fashion and good liking: which being thus finished, he gaue him in the morning to drinke a most rare Quintisence: the incredible vertues of it, and the rest of his onely remedies shortly you shall heare. After his dressing was thus finished, then I was sent for vnto the patient, and forthwith without delay, they did signifie vnto me what he had done, and that I should not neede to prepare any thing for the patient, for that was done already by one that had warranted to cure him, and that without any mayme, and in a short time: for he was one that by his great learning and long trautile, had attay∣ned to such rare and singular remedies, as no other man in this part of the world had the like for their wonderfull vertues. And new (say they) sith neither you, nor other more could not warrant him, wee thanke you for your paynes, and that you tould vs so, and therefore wée will trouble you no further at
this time. Well (sayd I) if that be the cause I care the lesse: but he that is now your Chirurgeon, whatsoeuer he bee, that hath made you all these great promises, he might yet haue stayed till I had come vnto you, for that you were without payne, or any other griefe, so that I might haue taken off mine owne medicines, and to haue scene in what state and manner I had left it. Then riseth out of his Chayre, flering and gering this myraculous Surgeon, gloriously glittering, like the man in the Moone, with his bracelets about his armes, therein many precious Jewels and stones of Sainct Vincent his Rockes, his fingers full of rings, a siluer case with Instruments hanging at his girdle, and a gilt Spatula sticking in his hat, with a Rose and a Crowne fixed on the same, standing vpon his comparisons, and sayd vnto me, that he would open the wound, and if it were before my face: for (sayd he) my busines lyeth not in London, but abroade in the Countrie, and with such persons, that I cannot, nor will not tarrie for you, nor for no other whatsoeuer. And now here he did begin to bragge and boast, as though al the keyes of know∣ledge did hang at his girdle. For he sayd, he had attayned vn∣to the deepe knowledge of the making a certaine Quinti∣sence, which he learned beyond the Seas of his Maister, one Bomelious, a great Magitian. This shamelesse beast letted not to say, that if a man did drinke of his Quintisence continually, euery day a certayne quantitie, the vertues thereof was such, that a man should not dye before the day of the great Judgement, and that it would preserue a man in that state he was in at thirtie yéeres of age, and in the same strength and force of witt, although a man were a hundred or sixe score yeeres of age. Moreouer, his plaister was aunswerable vnto this, and forsooth hée called it the only plaister of the world, and that he attayned vnto it by his great traueile, cost and charge, and that it was first sent from God by an Angell vnto a red hill in Almayne, wherewas in times past a holie man which wrought great merueiles only with this plaister, and he neuer vsed any other
medicine but only this. His precious Balme or Oyle he says no man had but only he, and t it was as rare a thing to bee had or found, as to see a blacke Swanne, or a winter Swal∣lowe. And he called it the secrete of the world, which is his common vaunting phraze: but God knowes the medicines were no such things, but only shadowed vnder the vizard of deceipt, and a bayte to steale fame and credite, and to catch or scrape vp monie, or ware: for all is fish that commeth into his net. Then this gawdie fellowe, with his peerles speeches,  must stand as awe▪ for his countenance  credite. sayd, that he had done more good cures with his sayd Quin∣tisence, his only plaister, and his precious Balme, then any one Surgeon in England had done, or could do, with all the best medicines and remedies they haue. And moreouer, sayd, that he had spoken nothing but that which he would stand to, and proue it. And that he did knowe that it was not necessa∣rie for vs that be common Surgeons (as it pleased the brag∣ger to call vs) to vse such a number of medicines as we do: for the best manner of curing (sayd he) consisteth not in the num∣ber and multitude of medicines, &c. In deede (said I) I know the best manner of curing consisteth not in the number and multitude of bragging words: and therefore I tould him, inCast away your Chirur∣gicall Instru∣ments, your plaister boxes and saluato∣ries, if Chirur∣gerie may as it were thus bee ent o thrust vp in a bottle  a bagge. his infected iudgement, he did followe Thessalus, the ringlea∣der of these rude and rusticall reasons: For he sayd in like ma∣ner, if all those things which Galen had superfluously written were omitted, the arte might be learned in sixe moneths. But if that (said I) were true yt you speake, I suppose then the arte might be learned in sixe dayes, if it did consist but only of your drinke, your plaister and Balme. And therefore I tould him he was deceiued in his superexcellent skill, and that he was contrary vnto all the best learned Authors both old and newe, who haue published many excellent and approued inuentions, according vnto the cause and nature of the effects which daylie do afflict the bodie of man: for which causes they haue set forth great varietie of many singular and approoued medicines: Some of them haue propertie to repell, and some do atract: some will appease paynes, and some do resolue: some do mol∣lifie:
some do suppurare, and some which do mundisie: some in∣carnate, and some that doe cicatrise and conglutinate. Tush (sayd he) it is not your manuists, nor your old basillicon mens practise, that is as playn as a packstaffe, can be answerable vn∣to mine, & I will neuer vse any other remedies, but as I haue before spoken of. Then I tolde him moreouer, that Basillicon made after some mens description, is as good an Vnguent as could be vsed in the arte of Chirurgerie, for sone causes. And here further I asked him what his meaning was by old basil∣licon men. He answered, it was a word which he had learned a∣mongstHe learned it of slaunderers like vnto him∣selfe, only to discredite some persons en∣uied. some Chirurgeons about London. Then I told him agayn, yt there were in London many reuerent & skilfull▪ Chi∣rurgeons, although perhaps some of thē haue been greatly a∣bused and defaced with false accusations, by certayne noysome Serpents, lewd Sycophants, and also slaunderous libelling knaues, who haue béen rubbed on the gall for their vild tungs and abuses. Amongst which sort of gald backt Jades, one rag∣ged colt of the same breede (which neuer wise man thought to be worth the drawing out of the myre) hauing as he openly shewed a guiltie conscience, and would needes, forsooth, thrust himselfe in to make one of that number, and being somewhat poreblind, played the part of Will Sommer, taking Row∣land for Oliuer, did strike him that was next him. But of this motlicote and the rest, who now like scrich Owles, hide them∣selues in dennes and deserts for feare of the light, and so to bée knowne. And of such wicked and vngodly false speakers andThe fruites of shameles ma∣lice. backbyters, wee shall say more of them at large hereafter, if time serueth. The which to do I would be loth if the persons were modest: but here is no hope in them, because they are im∣pudent: and yet God doth knowe, I had rather derogate from my owne labours, then I would deface others without iust cause: for that charitie forbiddeth to publish any man in print, to the hurt of his good name and credite. But as for these fac∣tious fellowes, possessed with the cursed spirit of enuie, scorne∣fulnes and disdaine. Notwithstanding their picked speeches, as smooth as a Slickstone, I think them, whatsoeuer they be,
fi members, to shroude themselues vnder the roffe of any good or godly societie: for all such hatefull persons, with their deuouring tongues, may bee compared vnto furious Dogs, which alwaies bite and barke at stones. But these despight∣full and enuious persons haue neuer spared any whatsoeuer: For I reade that Plato, though he were a great learned Phi∣losopher, doth confesse, that he was neuer at any time in such hazard and perrill of his life, being in armes at the beseeging of Corinth, amongst his knowne enemies, as he was in Greece by Xenophon, and other his owne schollers his sup∣posed friends. And the only cause hereof, as it is sayd, was ha∣tred and enuie: truely it had been good for such vntimely fruite if they had perished in the blossome. But all those whose vn∣godly behauiour is so trecherous vnto their good friends, can by no meanes possible bee trustie and faithfull vnto men, of whom they haue neuer been beholding vnto for benefites re∣ceiued. This may seeme straunge, chiefly vnto those godly persons, which haue neuer been vexed, troubled or molested, with the perilous stormes and tempestes of such vnknowne pernicious libellours, which haue opposed themselues, and haue priuilie spred abroad false libels, rumors and slaunde∣rous reportes, hoping to inioy the fruites of their labours. They haue ventured to make shipwracke of other mens good names and credite: so that it is vnknowne vnto me, as yet, what thing a man can so well do, or what life he should leade, but that these beastlike men would take occasion by surmising of euill, to quarrell or cauell at it. And I suppose, if time and oportunitie did serue, their cunning conueiance is such, though now perhaps they will for a time lurke and ere, like fraudu∣lentBeware of aude in frendly lookes. Foxes, and disemble with the craftie Crocodile: yet is their naturall inclination at all tymes comparable in crueltie vnto the furious and mercilesse Tiger, or Tigers whelps: which euilles are infinite and hard to be auoyded: as histories witnesse of the one, so experience daylie manifesteth the other. A matter of such importance, and in my iudgement, a thing not to bee permitted or suffered in any good gouernment or
Christian common wealth. But to leaue these pestilent wée and ofscommes of the earth, and to returne vnto my former matter, from the which I haue digressed. And here it is to bée noted, that I departed from the aforesayd bragging counter∣feyt, and fountayne of mischiefe, and as I thinke, the only scoffer and scorner of the world, who defaced some good men that were absent, and extolled such as was like vnto himselfe: but within seauen dayes after, where he promised a moun∣tayne, it prooued a molehill. And his precious medicines of such great admiration that would do all things, did here re∣ceiue a merueilous disgrace. For they could not worke that effect he looked for: and he that was afore a secrete supporter of the Trumpets of sedition, & a deceiuer of others, by procu∣ring of domesticall hatred, now he is, as it were, glad to creepe & craule away by owle light, praying thē most humbly to hold him excused, & to speake the best of him. And why▪ forsooth he was presently to go into the countrie to attend vpon no smallNote. personage, & there of force he must remayne during pleasure. A stale blind shift, hatched vp in the dungeon of deceipt, as ea∣sie to be espied, as the nose on a mans face. Now agayne, he whose ignorance was shadowed with impudencie, and mali∣ciously hidden vnder smooth and fayre promises, and glorious boastings, and by that meanes, at his owne pleasure, would lay heauie slaunderous burthens vpon other mens shoulders, is himselfe found out, and his owne doings hath bewrayed himselfe what he is. But it is a most true saying of a learned man: If our auncient fathers in times past should haue been abashed at the ingratitude and ill disposition of such hatefull abusers, wee should at this day haue been in profound igno∣rance,To be hated for doing of good, is not to be estee∣med▪ but to be reprooued for euill, is the re∣ward of euill. and little difference betweene vs and brute beaes. To make here an end of this cousoner, it was giuen me to vnder∣stand, that shortly after his departure out of London, he had intelligence by some of his straglers, that the cure was com∣mitted agayne into my hands: and he also hearing by them, that I had promised to note his abuses, and did meane to dis∣play
his doings vnto the world: For which cause he was mal∣content, & conceiued a great displeasure & indignation against me, & sayd, I did but heape coales vpon myne owne head: and therefore he, or some other of his bréed, should very shortly, ei∣ther by booke, letter, or libell deale against me in disdainful ma∣ner: as did heretofore some such like craftie Crowders, voyd of humanitie, or the good graces of God, wherby they made them selues knowne of what sect they were. Their meaning in déed was to pinch me priuilie, so that hereafter, they imagined, I should be afraid to publish, or to touch their fraudulēt dealings openly, because of their rayling & lying speeches, wherewith they haue pursued me with all malice. But be it knowne vn∣to all such brasen faced raskals, whatsoeuer they bee, either of towne or countrie, I little esteeme of them, they do but lay a∣broad their owne nakednes vnto the world, and it is corespon∣dent vnto the course of their life, which in the end will prooue vnto themselues little praise, lesse profite or benefite. And now finally to returne and ende, and so to come vnto the cure, here you shall vnderstand, the seauenth day being ex∣pired, at sixe of the clocke at night I was sent for, and very earnestly requested that I would take the paynes to come a∣gayne and to speake with the patient. And to say the trueth, he sayd vnto me, with no small griefe of minde: now I per∣ceiue the difference betweene such hatefull abusers of your arte, and other good men: neuerthelesse, I pray you to holde me excused, for that lewd fellowe that hath hid his head and gone his way, and hath left me in this miserable case, he was first commended vnto me by friends of myne, which did giue me to vnderstand, where he had done a great cure vpon a gentleman that lay about the Strand, which gentleman after he brought vnto me, but his hurt was but a scratch in respect of my wound. But if it were true (quoth he) that he had euer done the like cure, yet I perceiue, for all his vnsauerie elo∣quence, one Swallowe makes no Summer: and vnto me (sayth he) he hath shewed himself to bee one of the vilest wret∣ches that liueth, and the deepest disembler: with other spéeches
had according to his life and liuing. And now to come (as I sayd) vnto the cure, the seauenth day being expired, at night it was strange to see, that the wound, which at the first he found without payne, or any other euill accidents, should in so short a time be so oppressed with the aboundance of euill humours, which did offend both in quantitie and qualitie: notwithstan∣ding his celestiall Quintisence, his only plaister, and precious Balme, of such great efficacie, whose vertues at the first, he did perswade, could not be comprehended in fewe words. Al∣though he had a very apt and able wit, and thereby did open the gates into the wide fields of his magnificent skill, as I haue before rehearsed, yet did he leaue his worke filthie and vncleane, like vnto himselfe. But so neere as I could, I did followe nature as our guide, and applyed vnto the griefe such milde and familiar remedies, as are here set downe, the which I vsed vntill the foresaid accidents did decay and vanish away, and after cured him as followeth. A Fomentation. Rec. Vini albi lib. ij. Aquae vitae ℥. iij. ana. ℥. j. Myrrhae & Aloes Resinae pini ℥. iiij. Misce. All these were boyled ouer a Chaffingdish of coales, and with warme stuphes I fomented and bathed the wound. Rec. Terebinthinae lotae in Aqua vitae ℥. vj. Vitellorum ouorum nu. ij. Olei Hypericonis ℥. j. Olei Lumbricorum ℥. j. ss. Mel. Rosarum ℥. ij. Masticis ℥. ss. Hordei q. s. Croci ℈. j. Misce.
With the sayd digestiue I also vsed this decocted Balme, which did take great effect in this cure, being vsed with the same digestiue: A singular de∣cocted Oyle or Balme.Rec. ana. ℥. iiij. ss. Olei Terebinthinae Olei Rosarum ana. ℥. iij. Olei Lumbricorum Olei Masticis Olei Sem. lini ℥. iij. ss. Vermium terrestrium ℥. j. Terebinthinae clarae ℥. iiij. ana. ℥. ss. Masticis Myhae ana. ʒ. ij. ss. Gummi elemni Ammoniaci Sarcocollae ʒ. j. Croci ℈. j. Misce. Let your Gummes bee disolued in vineger, and then adde thereunto Centaurij maioris, m. j. After the herbes bee brused, boyle all together in a faire vessell vntill it come to per∣fection, and ten dayes after set it in the Sunne, & for wounds in the sinewes and ioynts it is approued to bee merueilous good, as it was well approued in this cure, with other. After I had first dipped the pleggets armed with the digestiue in the sayd Balme, then I layd thereupon: Emplastrum Tpharma∣cum. Ms.Rec. ana. lib. j. Lithargyrij subtilissime triti Aceti vini Olei veteris lib. ij.. Fiat Emplastrum secundum artem And then I anoynted the member round about the wound with Olei papaueris, & Olei Rosarum, ana. ℥. j. Misce. Which being performed and done, then I layd ouer all this Cataplasme, and so rouled it vp according to arte.
Cataplasma Clowes.Rec. ana. m. ij. Fol. Ros. Maluarum Violarum ana. m. j. Florum Chamaemeli & Meliloti Lactucae m. ss. Boyle all these in sufficient quantitie of milke, and when they be tender, stampe them, and then take: Rad. altheae m. ij. Sem. lini m. j. Sem. Foenugraeci m. ss. Misce. Make hereof a Muscilage with white wine and water, then put in of this muscilage ℥. vi. and mixe all together, then last∣ly adde: Vnguenti populeonis ℥. ij. ana. ℥ j. ss. Olei Ros. & Olei Chamaemeli Medullae panis. m. j. Farinae hordei q. s. Vitellorum ouorum num. ij. Croci ʒ. ss. Misce, & fiat Cataplasma. Thus by this manner and order of curing, with conuenient diet, purging and phlebothomie, in a reasonable time his ex∣tremeDolor and panesis as it were a ventose or cupping glasse, in draw∣ing matter to the affected place. taging paynes was greatly appeased, and the inflam∣mation ceased. After that the wound did tend towards dige∣stcon, and the patient agayne well comforted, then because the wound was very large and wide one part from another, I did frame certayne drie stitches, which greatly pleasured him, in bringing the borders and sides of the wound together, and all the accidents being remooued, I left off the Cataplasma, and in the place thereof I vsed Emplastrum Diachalci∣teos, disolued in Oleo Rosarum, & Oleo Myrtilorum, &c. And sometimes in like manner I vsed for a defensiue
to take of Albuminis ouorum, & Alluminis Rochi, made in very fie powder, & so well laboured together, ana. q. s. and applyed it abt the member, and it did also profite vs very mu: since which e I haue seene it often put in vse in the  Cntries for a common defensiue for all wounds  wich guot, by one Audrian, Graue Hollocks Chi∣rgeon, a very learned and skilfull man, which thing is also very well knowne to bee true by Maister Goodrouse, one of her Maiesties Chirurgeons, with others. And after I did leaue the vse of the digestiues, in the place thereof I applyed Vnguentum apij, sometimes mixed with the yolk of an Eg, and also Vnguentum Resinae, a notable vnguent for wounds  the ioynts, which vnguents are before in this booke descri∣bed. And herewith I in like manner vsed the aforesayd decoc∣ted Balme ℥. ii. and added also therewith of Lipsius ℥. i. Misce. This excellent mundisicatiue stayed also the thinne gly∣g humour that flowed from the ioynt: which remedies be published in Folio 70. But by reason there of some ouersight, the doses are left out, with other faults in the forepart of the booke, which passed vnawares, and cannot bee holpen vntill the next impression. Rec. Mellis com. lib. ij. Vitrioli albi ℥. iiij. Succi caprifolij lib. iij. Misce. The order of making is before described. Now, after the wound was perfectly mundified, and all accidents remooued, then by the counsell of a learned man, both in Phisicke and Chirurgery, I was required to vsed Vnguentū Nicotianū, which (he sayd) had wrought wonders aboue beliefe. But I found not that effect in it that he and I looked for. Neuerthe∣lesse, I acknowledge it to bee a medicine not to be dispraysed. But this Vnguent, since it was first knowne, is greatly bet∣tered
by Iosephus Quercetanus, with others: so I left of the vse of Vnguentum Nicotianū, after this description here fol¦lowing. And I vsed with great profite vnto the patient Vn∣guentum Basilicon magistrale, hereafter also published. Rec. Fol. Nicotiani lib. j. Let the leaues be well stamped, and after strayned out, as strongly as possible may be, then adde thereunto: ana. ℥. iij. Cerae nouae Resinae & Olei com▪ Let all these boyle together vnto the consumption of the iuyce, then adde Terebinthinae Venetae ℥. iij. Boyle all to∣gether a little, and reserue it vnto your vse. Vnguentum Basilicon ma∣gistrale.Rec. ana. ℥. ij. Olei Chamaemeli Olei Ros. completi ana. ℥. j. ss. Olei masticis Olei de Terebinthina Olei de semin. lini Terebin. clarissimae ℥ .iiij. ana. ℥. ij. ss. Sepi vitulin. Castrati Hirci ana. m. j. Rosmarini Betonicae Caudae equinae Centaureae maior. Vermium terestrium lotorum cum vino ℥ .iij. Rubiae tinctorum a little brused. ʒ .x. ana. m. j. Hypericonis, foliorum & Sem. ana. ʒ. x. Masticis Gummi elemni
ana. ℥. j. ss. Picis naualis Resinae pini recentis ana. ʒ. iij. Serapini Galbani Armoniaci Misce. Disolue these three Gummes in vineger, and bruse the o∣ther things, and so let them rest, and after boylethem all toge∣ther with a iath of odoriferous wine, then strayne them strongly, and put to the sayd strayning ana. ℥. ij. ss. Lithargyrij auri, & Argentei Minij ℥. ij. Misce. Boyle these together agayne with a soft fire: afterward ye shall augment the fire vntill the sayd oyntment bee blacke in colour: which done, make hereof an vnguent with sufficient newe waxe, &c. This vnguent is commended of Vigo, and many other excellent men, to be singular good for all wounds of the sinewes: and also in other wounds it is of merueilous efficacie. And sith it is thus manifest vnto our eyes, that ma∣ny famous cures hath been done by this worthie vnguent, truely I see no cause why wee should withdrawe our selues, and to leaue the vse of it. Now here it is to be noted, if in all this time the flesh offered to rise spungious, then I did rebate and take it away with Mercurie praecipitate, and sometimes with Allume combust in Aceto Ros. And with the sayd vnguents I also vsed this approued Oyle, called Oleum A∣parisij. Oleū Aparisij. Note this for a speciall Oyle for all wounds generally.Rec. Olei communis veteris lib. iij. Terebinthinae Abietinae lib. ij. Vini albi veteris & electi lib. ss. Olibani triti lib. ss. Frumenti purgati ℥. iiij. vel ℥. vj.
Hypericonis lib. ss. ana. ℥. iiij. Valerianae Cardui Benedicti Misce. Infuse the herbes, being brused, in white wine sixe or eight houres, then adde thereto the wheate and oyle, and so melt them at an easie fire, to the consumption of the wine. After strayne them, and then put to the Turpentine and Olibanum, and so boyle it at a soft fire to perfection. I was greatly trou∣bled in the drying or skinning vp of his wound, notwithstan∣ding the vse of Vnguentum desiccatiuum, & Vnguentum deminio, or any other whatsoeuer, vntil I had vsed therewith this remedie following. Rec. Aquae vitae ℥. iiij. Alluminis ʒ. iij. Camphorae ʒ. j. ss. Misce. Thus by Gods helpe and good medicines, I finished this cure with Desiccatiues and Conglutinatiues, and he was a∣gayne recouered: but the motion perished, for he had the im∣perfection of a stiffe knee, which constrayned him to vse a lea∣ther strappe fastened vnto the toe of his shoo, and agayne made fast vnto his bodie, and so he remayneth vntill this day. Here were time and place to induce me to publish many o∣ther obseruations, but I will not willingly molest the Reader with being too tedious. And I do confesse, I haue shewed my my selfe to be more willing, then able to perfourme this work I haue taken in hand. Neuerthelesse, I wish you much ioy and felicitie in al your studies, with increase of knowledge, whereby you may aduaunce your fame, and credite vnto your Arte and profession, Amen. Apply thyself and vse thy wit, to Lady learnings lore, She'le garnish thee with wisedome great, and knowledge more and more.
The conclusion, of a wicked brood of beastly abusers of Phisicke and Chirurgerie, daylie more and more in∣creasing, to the vtter vndoing of many: as here briefly shall be declared. IN this my collection (gentle and vertu∣ous reader) I meane by Gods permissiō, and your courteous patience, here truely and faithfully to deliuer vnto thy viewe, the manifold and iniurious abuses of a disordered number of proulling women, daylie practising Phisicke and Chirurge∣rie, within this Citie of London, and the liberties of the same, whose knowledge and iudgements (I say) is fallible and vn∣certaine, whereby they are the causes of many hidden mis∣chiefes. Therefore, without further protestation, I will as briefly as I can for examples sake, as it were, poynt at a few, in respect of the rest: which abusers are bred and crept in a∣mongst vs through sufferance, with whom, notwithstanding I must bee temperate and milde in this my writing, and not to speake all I knowe: for their number is great, and they haue many friends that spred their fame farre. There is (I say) knowne to be in London, which daylie do practise Chi∣rurgerie, of straunge women borne beyond the seas, called of some, cunning or wise women, more in number, then there are of Surgeons lawfully allowed and admitted, according vnto the lawes and statutes of this Realme, being fit men to do her Maiestie seruice in their Arte. There be also in like ma∣ner at this present to be found in London, besides those afore∣sayd, of our owne Countrie women, that hath neither wit, nor arte, which daylie practise Phisicke and Chirurgerie, I will say little of their dealing in Phisicke, because it is also openly knowne, farre more in number then there is of the straunge women. But all these abusers practise Chirurgerie, without any penaltie and punishment, and the most part of these haue husbands of diuers honest trades and occupations, and there∣by
are very well able to liue and maintaine themselues, accor∣ding to their calling. Yet all that will not serue the turne: for my good mistris his wife, will needes become a Phisition and a Surgeon: and (forsooth) he must followe her presump∣tious minde to paynt her out in skes & veluets in the highestSuch   cannot be e∣nough poke of. degree: for that carrieth credite to her cunning, and brings in mouie plentifully. A thing greatly to be lamented, or rather pitied, that these blind and ignorant women should be thus fo∣stered and suffered: for they are and will be the causers of ma∣ny euils, whereby her Maiestie shall haue great want of suf∣ficient and skilfull Chirurgeons to be found in England able to do seruice in the time of warres. And vnlesse God of his mercifull goodnes do moue the hearts of godly Magistrates for sp redresse, they will bee the only ouerthrowe of Chi∣ in this land. For it is come to passe at this day,  n being of any credite or account, that hath brought  in learning, the which is greatly to be re∣quired in a good Chirurgeon, but he refuseth to put him to be an apprentise vnto the Arte of Surgerie. And why? Be∣cause there are in these dayes, in towne and countrie, such a number of abusers that practise Chirurgerie, which are the onely doers and cause of all these euills. It may seeme vncre∣dible, that there is not at this present time of sufficient and able Chirurgeons to bee found in London, scarse halfe the number which were lately employed, in her Maiesties seruice, with Generall Norice & Sir Fraunces Drake: And yet the greater fort of those yt are gone, are very poore men, and so poore in deede, that some of them went out very slenderly furnished: some with a little Chirurgerie stuffe in a schollers satchell: o∣ther some in budgets, & bagges, being very vnfit furniture to serue in her Maiesties seruice. Unfortunate and vnhappie shall that Souldier be, that tasteth of these Surgeons wants. And the chiefe causers of these euills, are those abusers afore∣sayd. Moreouer, what a pitifull thing is it to heare, that at their departure from their poore wiues and children, leauing them in such extreme necessitie,  they arriued at the first Port, their wiues and children complayned, and craued
to haue some succour & releefe. But who hath succoured or re∣lieued them, that is best knowne to themselues. And if their necessitie be such at their going out, what will be their state in time? Or els, if by fortune of warres some of them be cut off, then these poore women and children may liue in great mise∣rie. And the causers of these euilis bée these abusers, aforesaid. Also I cannot in this place passe ouer in silence, sith it is comeDisordred shifters and abusers of Chi∣rurgerie. vnto my memorie, a newe litter of abusers of Surgerie, and the professors thereof, and they are start out of their kenell of late, deuising amongst themselues a trade neuer seene, nor heard on before: and these do hunt after hurt and wounded met, and al other persons whatsoeuer, be it maister or mistris, manseruant or mayd, &c. if they bee affected with any kinde of griefe belonging to Surgerie. With all such persons they will take acquaintance, although (peraduenture) they neuer sawe some of them afore: and then like pettie foggers, or coun∣terfeyt brokers, craftely will inquire what Surgeon looketh on them: and if they say they are vnprouided, then they will cast a figure, & offer them their seruice presently to fetch the only man in the towne. This proffered seruice many takes very kindly, and promising to acquite his courtesie if he will performe his sayings. Then without further ado, packs away this pettie fogger, deuising where he may make his best mar∣ket. And in the ende, finding a fit man for his purpose, he be∣gins to babble for his brokerige after this manner. There is a friend of mine (sayth he) and one of my old acquaintance is wounded and hurt, &c. and for very good will I am come to you before another, because I knowe you are a skilfull man. Neuerthelesse, I am a good fellowe, as you knowe, and ther∣fore I will looke to haue a share for my paynes, because I bring the cure vnto you. What is your meaning? (sayth he) It is thus, if you do make three pounds of the cure, I will then haue of it twentie shillings, and you shall haue twentie shillings towards your medicines, and twentie shillings more for your paynes: and yet you may say I do befriend you: for I haue had diuers times the one halfe of others. An old saying, need makes the old wife trot: The good man had rather giue
part of the fruites of his labour vnto this proulling fellowe, wherein he hath no right, then he would sit still, and want to sustayne himselfe and his familie. These iniuries are most grieuous that bring thus with them innumerable of inconue∣niences. And remedie there is none to bridle such pillers and poullers. O Lord, what a sort of these euils follow immediatly one after another! Consider, I beseech you, how Chirurgerie in these daies is promoted & aduaunced, when such men, which haue a long time practised this profession with credite and good liking, are constrayned, for want of maintenance, to giue ouer the Arte cleane, and now forced to liue by other kind of trades. And the causers of all these abuses, are the abusers in this booke published. Thus courteous and louing Reader, I haue waded into the very bottome of mine abilitie, but yet I confesse I still find nothing answerable vnto my well meaning: yet alwaies I rest in this hope, that that which I haue here in all my dis∣course spoken without offence vnto any good man, may the easier be past ouer without any griefe to me at all: but if any do here at picke quarels, or maligne my doings, marke them well (as I haue before sayd) and you shall perceiue them to bée some of those galdbacke Jades which I haue touched to the quicke. Now last of all, only it resteth, that if it shall please God that these my labours bee so happie, as to content my louing Patrones (I meane, all the true professors of Chirurgerie wheresoeuer) referring the view vnto their good considera∣tions, censures, and iudgements, expecting all your friendly supportation: and thus I leaue you in the Lord, who knoweth that all our labours are done in vayne, except he in mercie prosper them. Amen. Finis William Clowes, Maister in Chirurgerie.
VVhē valiāt Mars, with braue & warlike band, In foughten feeld with sword & sheeld doth stād, May there be mist a Surgeon that is good, To salue your wounds, and eke to stay your blood▪ To cure you sure he will haue watchfull eye, And with such wights he meanes to liue and dye, So that agayne you must augment his store, And hauing this, he will request no more.
THE SVRGEONES CHEST
VVith willing minde good Reader I thee craue, To weigh the toyle, and carefull paynes men haue VVhich once begins to do such VVorks as this, May sometimes erre, and runne his pen amisse.
depiction of surgical instruments
With heart I craue, reade, viewe and see, If better you haue, impart it with me. Nowe slaunderer say thy worst, with malice and defame: In God I onely trust, all glory to his name.
depiction of surgical instruments
A TREATISE OF THE FRENCH POCKS, WRITTEN by Iohn Almenar a Spanish Phisition. Chap. 1. Of the beginning and definition of this disease. IT is concluded by certaine wise men, that this disease which amongst the I∣talians is called Gallicus, that is to say, the French disease, should now bée named Patursa, which is by interpreta∣tion, a disease filthie and Saturnall. It is a filthie disease, because it ma∣keth women to bee estéemed vnchast, and irreligious. It is Saturnall, because it tooke the begin∣ning from Saturne when he entred into Aries, hauing the rest of the heauenly aspects helping thereunto. And albeit that in∣fluence haue ceassed, it is not necessarie that the disease should ceasse, because many infected bodies remayned, whereby o∣thers haue bene infected: Hereof it may be concluded, that this disease shall continue many yeeres, and therefore let men take heede that by other mens example it may bee sayd of them: Happie is he whom others daunger make warie. The dispo∣sition which proceeded of the celestiall influence making im∣pression into the bodies, did burne the humours in respect of Aries, which signe is hot and drie, and after this burning cold and drie humours were engendred on Saturnes part, which signe is by nature colde and drie. These colde and drie or me∣lancholike
humours caried to diuers places bring diuers paines, and in the skinne bring forth diuers kinds of pustles or wheales. It may be thus defined. The French Pockes orThe Defini∣ Patursa is an vniuersall or popular ill disposition in the parts of the bodie, consisting principally in the liuer and veynes, and their humors, whereof ensue these accidents, to wit, paynes and wheales in all the bodie. The efficient cause is touched, when it is called vniuersall or popular, that is, proceeding from the influence of the heauens: the formall, when it is called an euill disposition: the materiall, when it is sayd to be in the parts: Also the difference is touched, when it is sayd that paynes doe ensue it, &c. Concerning the ende, the bodily Phisition intermedleth not: but the spirituall Phisi∣tions affirme them to bee sent for the punishment of sinne. Wherefore they which would bee deliuered, and escape this, let them take heede of sinne, and applye their mindes to God: for only God cureth infirmities, as Mesues sayth in his trea∣tise▪ de Appropriatis. Of this definition doe followe many and profitable consequences. First, that this disease is one, and not many, as some haue insufficiently affirmed, because there could not be giuen one definition of it, neither had it al∣waies one only efficient cause, neither would one kinde of cure agree, neither had it one name: which is absurd, as partly hath appeared alreadie, and shall more plainly be shewed hereafter. The second consequence is, that they are deceiued, which thinke they haue found the head or fountaines of this disease, to bee the paine in the ioynts and pustles in the face, because the former definition agreeth not vnto them. Moreouer, all the paynes are not in the ioynts, neither are all the wheales like red pustles in the face. Therefore neither this disease nor the cure of it can be referred vnto them, as it shall be hereafter shewed. The third consequence, that they which cure onely wheales, or onely looke to the paynes, doe cure imperfectly. For who can cure perfectly the hadah, or the drinesse of the tongue, or thirst, which come from a Feauer, vnlesse he first e the Feauer. For the accident followeth the disease, as the
shadow doth the bodie, Gal. lib. 3. de accident. And therefore the paynes cannot bee cured as the pustles, except the disease be first cured, because these are either accidents, or conioyned sicknesses, which follow the principall, and doe presuppose, it must be first cured, as Auicen testifieth tract. 1. sen. 3. and in many places. The fourth consequent, if any doe ioyne the cure of the Empiricks with those which thinke they cure or∣derly, as the annoynting of the Empiricks, and the purging of the Phisitions, yet the cure is insufficient, because by those medicines the il complexion which is fixed in the parts cannot be remoued. And this was the cause, that many haue thought themselues cured, when they were not. And if any haue bene cared, it was, by reason that the humors were throughly pur∣ged by solutiue medicines and vnctions: which auoyded, na∣ture was stronger and superiour to the disease and that euill complexion, and expelled it. This had not so fallen out, except the nature had bin strong, and the impression little: but where the strength was weake, and the impression strong, this dis∣ease could not be expelled. This difference in the strength of nature, and the impression hath bene the cause, that some haue bene cured without medicines, some with medicines, others could not by any meanes be cured. Now wee will shewe that way which both reason and experience hath taught to heale all, not onely by remouing with medicines the humor which procureth actuall payne and pustles, and hath abilitie prepa∣red to the same, but also that euill complexion which infecteth the humors (they being first purged) as order requireth, wher∣in the treasure of this cure consisteth. I could inferre many o∣ther consequences, but because it is tedious to vse many words in things not auaileable to the cure (as Galen sayth) 1. de regim. acut. This shalbe sufficient. It remayneth to determine of the causes.
Of the causes of the french Pockes. Chap. 2. THere is a twofold kinde of causes, because some are first, some corporall: and those of two sorts, partly antecedent, partly conioyned. That which is first, or originall in this disease, is twofold, whereof the first is the onely influence or corruption of the aire, from whence we must charitably thinke, that it infected those which were reli∣gious. The second is conuersation, as by kissing, and suc∣king, as appeareth in children, or by carnall copulation, as it hath happened to many, & very often, but by other meanes, and chiefly by the influence or corruption of the aire, very sel∣dome. It may be also caused by other meanes of conuersatiō, which I leaue to thy consideration. It is sufficient to knowe by experience, that this disease is contagious, and by proba∣bilitie of reason wherin it is like to other contagious diseases, it may be so accōpted. Hereupon Auicen saith in ye 2. of his 1. concluding his treatise of the dispositions of sicknesses. Some there are which passe from one to another, as the Lepro∣sye, Seabs, Pocks, pestilent Feuers, rotten apostemes. Now of the autecedent causes, there are foure kindes, as there are foure humors, which may be the matter of this dis∣ease through their ill disposition, whereby they are apt to re∣ceiue the impression heereof: to wit, blood, choler, fleame, me∣lancholy. The conioyned cause is double, one is the cause of the disease, and it is the humor which being first infected or al∣tered by the originall causes, infecteth the partes and other humors, and therefore it is sayd, the first originall causes moue the antecedē. But the couioyned cause of the accidents is that h which immediately procureth paynes and wheaes. But here it may be demaunded, whether the euill litie in the humor, which is the autecedent cause, may be a disease. It seemeth it cannot, sith a disease affecteth a li∣g thing, but the humor liueth not. Whereto it may be
answered, that the humor which is in the lyuer and veynes▪ infected with this euill quality, may be the subiect of a disease, so it be graunted that that ill qualitie haue not attaynted the part, because it may hinder digestion in the liuer and veines, and ingender corrupt humors: therefore by the definition of a disease, it appeareth to be a disease. Now to the argument, it is answered, that it is sufficient that a liuing thing be the subiect of denomination, or be that which is named diseased, it must not be that wherein the disease is settled, yea that is most stable, that the humor is the subiect wherein the disease is settled. And if it be sayd, how can the humor be an antece∣dent cause, and yet a disease be in it as in a subiect. I answere, it is an antecedent in respect of the paynes and pustles, because it is apt to flowe to the places of paine and pustles: it is a conioyned cause, in as much as it causeth an ill com∣plexion in the member: it is the subiect of a disease, in respect it hath a disposition, whereby the action of the member is hurt, wherevpon it is called diseased. If you consider these things well, you shall comprehend all the difficulties which may be incident to the definition. Of the signes of the french Pocks. Chap. 3. THe signes are, hurt in the yard, especially corroding, heauinesse of the head, and payne in the necke, which by little and little are spread towards the shoulders and spade bones to the ioynts, first in the armes, then in the legges, and sometime in the muscles and sinewes which are in those parts, the payne increaseth in the night, and decrea∣seth in the day. The cause is, that nature is then retyred home, and stronger, as also in regard of the moistnesse and coldnesse of the night, the matter is increased. In the day, nature is drawne from the sense heereof, and doth not so much moue the humors, partly being weake, partly occu∣pied in other actions. I will shew the signes of the causes
respecting the payne and pustles, as others also in the tree of signes heereafter set downe. If the payne be sharpe, and quickly arising, and the pustles little, of a citron colour, vlce∣rated, and the skinne rough, they come of choller. If the paine do slowly come forth, the pustles broade & whitish, they are of fleame. If they haue great itching, and some heate, they proceed of salt flegme. If they be black and small, not very paynefull, they are of melancholy. If they be red, and not paynefull, they are of blood. You shall find these sigues intermedled if you view others: for as corruption seldome happeneth in one onely humour (sayth Galen. 1. regim. acut.) euen so you shall seldome finde the signes foretelling one onely humor. Therefore you must gather all the signes in your minde, and comparing them together, attayne to that which is principall, and according to that humor dispose your cure. The Prognostications. MElancholick persons are most fit for this disease in re∣gard of their likenesse, according to Aristotle. 2. de ge∣nerat. Things which haue affinitie, do easily change. A∣uicenna sayth, 21. There is an easier conuersion into proportionable things, then into contraries. They espe∣cially are apter which are melancholick by burnt choler, then cholerick: thirdly, sanguine persons through the abundance of their humors: Phlegmatick persons are least subiect. Amongst these, they which haue thinne bodies are apt, but especially such as are full of ill humors, and vse melancholick meates, as pulse, olde flesh, and such like. When this dis∣ease is new, it is curable, but when it is old, it is hardly cu∣red, and the older the worse, because that ill disposition ta∣keth déeper roote. Therefore they which haue this disease, let thē séeke present remedie. They which haue many pustles and little paynes, are more easily cured then they which haue the contrarie. They which haue nodes or knots, are more hardly healed. Yong persons (if other things concurre) are
more easily cured then others: wherevpon Galen sayth, It is not possible that the aged should be healed rather then youth. 2. prognost. It remayneth to speake of the ture. Of the cure of the French Pocks. Chap. 4. WE suppose the cure of this disease to consist in these 7. things. First, in solublenesse: second, by dimi∣nutiue purging: thirdly, digestion of the matter: fourthly, perfect purging: fiftly, alteration of the parts: sixt∣ly, comforting of them: seauenthly, correcting the accidents. But because an error committed in the sixe things not natural doth more hurt, according to Serapion 5. practicae 2. Cap. And Auicen sayth, that euery ill complexion is not cured by the contrarie, but good dyet many times sufficeth: therefore first wee must set downe the order in the xe things not natu∣rall. Wherevpon, albeit they which are sound, keepe order, yet that is called conseruatine, and this curatiue. Sithens therefore all cure is by contraries according to Galen 3. Ar∣tis. and Auicen 4. 1. and this disease is very drie, the order of diet must be inclyning to moystnesse. And because in regarde of the essence it is hot, comming of adustion, and in respect of the humors colde, because the humors are colde and drie: the order in things actiue must be temperate, and in passiue must incline to moysture. And although in consideration of ope∣ning, digesting, and attenuating the humors, it is requisite to appoynt hot things, neuerthelesse there must be mingled with them colde, and comfortable to the liuer and veynes. There∣fore in actiue things let the ayre incline to heate, but in passiue let it be wholly moyst. Let it be sweete, and moued with the winde. In Sommer this may be done by strowing the leaues of Willow, Umes, lagges, Rushes, Roses, Uiolets, ming∣ling Bayes with them and other sweete herbes, and sprinck∣ling them with water. In meate and drinke the dyet must
not be slender. For Hippoc. sayth: Thinne and strayt diet in long diseases, are hardly endured. Let therefore his bread be neither hote, nor aboue thrée dayes old, well sodden and leauened. His Wine white, cleare, of a meane temper betweene swéet and harsh, mixed with sodden water, or with the water of Buglosse, Borrage, and such like, especially in the declining of the disease, for at other times much matter might be caried to the places affected. Therefore if there be variable paines, let him drinke Claret Wine vntill the decli∣ning. Let his flesh be Capenets, fleshy, but not fat, and Chickens, idde, Veale, Lamb of a yeare olde: the flesh of Pheasant, Partridge, and little Birds, although they may be permitted, yet houshold flesh is better, because it is more moyst. Amongst Fishes, may be allowed such as liue in rockes, haue skales, liue in good water, and of them may be a dish prepared with Almond milke, the cummin séeds, and a barley ptisane. Amongst Hearbs, Borage and Buglosse are the best, according to the old verse. Borage good, how sweet is thy food: Thou art greene euer, decaying neuer: Borage doth say, I reioyce alway. Also Spinage, and in processe of time, Fennell, Parsley ingled with Lettuce and Spinage, and of these hearbes and cychory may be made a salade with vineger of Grapes. All pulse and hearbs (except chiches) are to be auoyded. All meate made of Milke must be eschued, yet perhaps Milke may be permitted, if the lyuer be not inflamed, nor stomack, so that the corruption of it is suspected. Héereupon, sayth Auicenna, in the cure of the Leprosie, Milke is one of the fittest medicines. Now in respect of the affinitie this disease hath with that, it may be heerein permitted. Sodden or potched Egges agree well. Spices to comfort, but very little, and especially Cinamom may be graunted, therefore this powder may be vsed in meate: Take Caroway seedes, Amsseds, Ameos, Parsley, Smalladge, Marioram, Betony,
Cummin, Calamint, Penniroiall, Hysope, Spicknard, Pp∣per, of each ℥. i. Maioram, Balme, Basill, Graines, Gal∣gall, Liquirice, of eache ℥. i. This powder is sit for them which haue a weake stomacke and a cold brayne, it reioyeth the heart, quickneth the senses, and wonderfully comforeth the memorie. Temperate fruites are not vnméete. In actiue things, fruites moderately hoate and moyst are cotienient. as ripe swéet Mulberies, ripe Grapes, swéet Apples, Dates, and such like, which must first be roasted vnder hoare coales: also, Almonds, Damaske Prunes, & dried Peaches smothed, infused in wyne of Pomgranats, are good. Let his sléepe be moderate, for too much hurteth, according to Hippocrates, 2. aphoris. Notwithstanding, it is lesse hurtfull to incline to ouermuch sleepe then ouermuch watching: but be carefull to make his sleep tēperate, for Auicen in ye 3. of the 1. ca. 9. saith, Moderate sleepe strengthneth nature. Let him auoyd slee∣ping in the after noone, vnlesse he haue not slept by reason of payne in the night. Moderate motion after meate, when the first and second digestion haue auoyded their superfluities, is good. Neuerthelesse, it is safer to offend in too much rest, then too much motion, especially rest is requisite in taking of medicines, therefore the Empiricks keepe them in their beds, for then is nature wholy employed to expell the disease. Anger, rage, sorrow, feare and care must be auoyded. It a∣uayleth to be merrie, to reioyce, to hope well of health, to be confident, to vse frendly and louing company. Carnall copu∣lation must be moderate, and after the third digestion. The belly must be soluble, if not by nature, then by arte, each o∣ther day taking this cliser: take Mallowes, Fumitory, Mer∣curie, of each one handfull, Borage halfe an handfull, make a decoction, whereof take sufficient, and adde foure ounces of Oyle, two drammes of salt, let it be ministred fasting. For the first intention, take of Cassia newly drawne, and the Lenitiue electuarie, of each fiue drammes, with Sugar make a ball to be eaten: these may be tempered with Fumi∣tory water, or such like. You may giue also Manna & Cassia,
of each sixe drammes, and temper it with the other, for them which are rich: or make this clyster: Take Beetes, Mal∣lowes, Camomill flowers, of each one handfull, boyle them, then put to them sie drammes of Hiera Picra, Cassia, and Sugar, of each one ounce: foure ounces of common Oyle, two drammes of salt, let him take it fasting. For the second iten, which is the diminishing of the matter, take Violets, Borrage, ana. ʒ. iii. Liquirice sliced, Rasins stoned, ana. ʒ. ii. Prunes, Sebesten, of each fiue in number, Senna leaues, Epithymu, ana. ʒ. i, seeth thē all: take heereof so much as will temper Cassia newly extracted, E∣lect. Indi. of each i. ʒ. ss. or as much of confect. Hamech. make a ball with Sugar, or temper them as is sayd before, or, Rec. Pill. faetidarum, de fumoterrae, ana ℈. i. make three pilles with honny of Roses, and giue them after Sup∣per, or earely in the morning. Concerning the third intention which is the digesting of the matter, take syrupe of Fumitory and Buglosse, of eache sixe drammes, of Cychory water, Endiue, Hoppes, of each one ounce, and vse this fiue dayes: afterward, giue the Pur∣gation before set downe, and then take another syrupe: take syrupe of Stichades. i. ℥. of Fumitory, ℥. ss. Borrage wa∣ter, Hops, and Endiue, ana. ℥. i. When sire or seauen daies are past, let him take the solutiue medicines, and then a stronger syrupe, to wit, de Epithymo, with Fenell water. Take the rootes of Smallage, Feuell, Parsley, Buglosse, Rucholme, Asparagus, (the pith being taken out) Mayden∣heare, Borrageflowers, Balme, Doder, Polypody, Thime, Rasis, of each equally, boyle them, and strayne them, ad∣ding a little Vmeger, and some Sugar, let it boyle once a∣gaine, heereof let ye patient drinke one great draught warme, if he loath this decoction, giue him these waters with Su∣gar: take the water of Ceterach, Fenell, Borrage, Bu∣glosse, Fumitory, of each one ounce, giue it to drinke with a little Sugar. But because the matter is so rebellious, that it cannot be digested by inward medicines, there must be
things outwardly applyed, which may helpe to digest it, so that although the matter be neuer so stubborne, yet by in¦ward and outward meanes it may be ouercome. And do not maruaile at the applying of outward medicines to digest . For Gilbertus sayth in the cure of the compound ectian Feuer, it is requisite to digest the matter by fomentations, plaisters, and such like: therefore keepe this order, that in the first and second day, the patient take the syrupe: on the third day, annoynt him with the oyntment afterward descri∣bed, in all parts, applying a little of the vnguent lightly vpon the legges, armes, soales of the feete, and palmes of the hands, and this to be done when he goeth to bed, and let him take his syrupe in the morning, so that, in the sixt day he hath taken sixe syrupes, and hath beene three times annointed, and then giue him a solutiue medicine, and the humors which ought to be expelled by the mouth, shall be diuerted to the lower partes, and so shall he escape the hurt in the mouth. The dayes following, vse it in like sort, strengthening the digestion, and also the vnguent, by adding Triacle & Quick∣iluer. You may also foment those places, with the decoction of Melilot, rootes of Holyhock and such like, vsing this in the morning, thus there shall be three wayes to digest the mat∣ter, syrupes, vnctions, and fomentations. Now followeth the description of the vnguent. Take three pound of butter,The Oyn∣ment. one pound of swines grease, neither too new, nor too old, one ounce and a halfe of Triacle of tenne yeeres olde, one ounce of Mithridate, two ounces and an halfe of Quicksiluer, Ly∣tharge of gold, common Salt, of each one ounce, make heer∣of an oyntment, incorporating with them as much water of Fumitorie and Scabiose, as can  mingled. This Oynt∣ment is the proper  of this disease, and the last and greatest secret amongst those things which are outwardly applyed. Amongst inward meanes, the principall and grea∣test is the water of distilled Triacle, as shall appeare. The fourth intention, which is the auoyding and purging of the digested matter, is first in a potion. Rec. Electuarij le∣nitiui,
Cassiae newly extracted, ana. ʒ. iij. Electuarij Indi minoris. Confect hamech ana. ʒ. j. giue it with water, or the aforenamed decoction in the morning, and let him sleepe one houre after. These medicines may be tempered with wa∣ter of Buglosse and Endiue, or Fumitorie, and such like, or adding in steade of Cassia, sixe ʒ. of Manna, for rich persons. Or let this medicine be prepared for the rich. Take Liquorice sliced, Raisins, of each ʒ. ii. Sebesten foure in number, Bor∣rage, and Buglosse flowers, of each halfe one handfull, foure Senna leaues, one ʒ. of Tamarinds: let them boyle in suffi∣cient water of Borrage and Fumitorie. Take two ounces of this decoction, & infuse in it foure scruples of Rhewbarh, two scruples of Agaricke, foure graines of Spicknard, let them infuse eight houres, then strayne them forth, and put to them Electuar. lenitiui. ʒ. vj. Electuar. Indi minoris, Con∣fect hamech. ana ʒ. j. ss. Let him take this potion. This is but set downe for example sake. These Pilles are conuenient; de Harmodactyll. de Fumoterrae, ana ℈ j. Foetidar. ℈. ij. Make Pilles with sirrupe of Stichados for one time: let the patient take them in the morning▪ and sleepe vpon them three or foure houres. All these things are set downe for examples: for it is the Phisitions duetie to varie or alter according toO . necessitie. These Purgations are to be taken in the sixt day, as is before shewed, and the same order to be kept. For the fift intention, make a bath, or steuph, with sweete  water, wherein seeth Mallowes, Holyhockes, Melilot, Cha∣, Roses, red Dockes, Fumitorie: this must bee done the day after the purging. For hereby commeth conuenient alteration, because moystnesse is most requisite. When he be∣genneth to sweate, let him take of this▪ water following. Take of the rootes of Holyhocks, Fune▪ rd Docks, Elecam∣pane, of each one pound, cut them stall, and put them into foure pounds of Masey to be mollified during one day and a night, afterwarde adde one ounce and an halfe of Treacle, being tenne yeeres olde or more: put it into a Limbecke, and et the water distill, whereof take three ounces, with two oun∣ces
of Buglosse water in the beginning, as is aforesayd. Let this stuffe be often vsed after the sixe or seauen daies be ended: and let him drinke this water, which is the best and singular, and the greatest secret and last refuge in this disease. The sixt intention, which is the comforting of the parts is thus performed. Rec. Laetifican. Galeni ℥. iij. Diamusc▪ dul∣is ʒ. vj. aromatic. gariofil. ʒ. ss. Electuar. regum ʒ. j. Con∣seruae Buglossae, Cidonior. Boragin. ana. ℥. j. Syrupi de po∣mis q. s. Fiat Electuarium. Hereof let him take ʒ. ii. or a spoonefull, or take Andromachus Treacle of tenne yeeres olde ℥. i. Mithridate ℥. ss. seedes of Citrons, Bole armoni∣ake, of each ʒ. i. Incorporat these together, and with Musked Rosewater make an Electuary, wherof let him take the quan∣titie of one Hasell nut, or a dragme: also if he bee weake, this restauratiue conection may be made. Take swéete Almonds, Hasell nuttes, of each one ounce, fistick nuttes half an ounce, sixe dragms of the common colde seedes, Penidior, brawne of a Capon, of each three ounces, with Rosewater make mor∣sels or lzenges. Hetherto auaile cordiall bagges, which it were too long to rehearse. For the seauenth intention, which is the correction of the  accidents in the paynes: if they be intollerable, take a Lilly∣roote, Henbane seedes, of each ʒ. iii. one ounce of red Lead, the marrowe of an Hart and a Calfe, of each two ounces, as much Oyle and Waxe as will suffice: make an oyntment, and applye it. Or if necessitie doth require, a little Opium may be put to it. But because these steupefactiue medicines ought not to be applyed, but in great extremitie: For (Auicen sayth) sleupefactiues are to be seared. And Mesues sayth: If you can eschue it, it is not good to giue thē: leaue them asmuch as you may, & trie first those which asswage payne, & do plainly giue ease, as Dill, Camomill, Melilot, Holihocks, yolkes of Egs, womans milke, and such like. For pustles vse either the for∣merAn oyntment▪ oyntment, or this. Take Turpentine, Goates fat, of each one ounce, red Lead, Gold Litharge, burnt Allom, of each one ounce, oyle of Bayes two ounces, so much Waxe as will suf∣fice,
make an oyntment. For vlcerated Pustles, Fistulaes, Canker, Rec. Fuliginis nitri, Litharg. Tartar. rosted in Colewort leaues vnder the coales, Gold ore, Pepper, Frankincense, yolkes of Egges, of each ℥. iiii. the roote of Elecampane, Dockes sodden in strong Lees, of each ʒ. ii. the iuyce of Fumitorie, of Docks, of worm∣wood, Celandine, Elecampane, great Beanes, Sothernwood of each ℥. iii. white Hellebor, Sope, Brimstone, of each ʒ. ss. let all the iuyces boyle, be skumde, and strayned, and after the Docke, and Elecampane rootes bee beaten, and put in, afterward the Sope, then the powders specified first, then put to it common Oyle, Swines grease, and Waxe, of each ʒ. ii. Quicksiluer extinct in Swines grease ℥. i. make an oyntment, which is of miraculous force in these cases. For the nodes or knots, take rootes of Holyhocks, seeth them in white Wine, and beate them with Capons grease, and applye them: or take the mucilages of Linseedes, and Holyhocks, of each ʒ. ii. Spike oyle, oyle of sweet Almonds, Camomill, of each ℥. ss. one ounce of Butter, Gum Arabick, and Dragagant, of each ʒ. i. make an oyntment which hath marueilous force to resolue and mollifie. To this purpose serueth a Serecloth of muci∣lages, the iuyce of Hyssope, and such like. Also the oyntment vsed for Scabbes auayleth in this case. Take foure ounces of Turpentine well washed, two ounces of Butter washed, one dragme of Salt, Succi critrangulorum, yolkes of Egges, of each 3. in number, one ounce of oyle of Roses, mingle these to an oyntment. I could here write many other appertinent medicines, but because the principall cause being remoued, the rest is easely cured, these shalbe sufficient. Now, for the hurt in the mouth (if it fall out) take white and red Roses, of each hale a handfull, Camomill, Sage, of each a handfull, boyle them in white wine, and strayne it, put to the expression two dragmes of Allume, syrrupe of Mulbe∣ries, Honie of Roses, of each halfe an ounce, two ounces of Wine▪ of Pomgranats, mingle them, and let him herewith wash his mouth often, or▪ in ad of wine the water of Plan∣taine,
Nightshade, Scabiose, or Houseleeke may bee added, & fiue graynes of Camphyre, or halfe a dragme of Philoniū may be put to it, as the payne requireth. But these stupefac∣tiue medicines are to be taken heed of. The peeces of greene Gowrdes holden in the mouth are profitable. It is good to wash the mouth with milke, mingling with it the water of Nightshade, or water Lillies. I could adde many mo: but because no hurt shall befall the mouth, if you deale as I haue sayd before, I ceasse, and come to shewe the way how to a∣uoyde this disease. What cautions must bee obserued to escape the French Pockes. Chap. 5. THey which are carefull to escape the French Pockes, let them first eschue sinne. For it is commonly sayd, Aduersitie followeth Ini∣quitie: especially let them beware of ryot. For it is sayd in the third of Iob, Ryot is a deuouring and consuming fire. And the spirituall Phisitions doe say, that diuers diseases followe di∣uers sinnes, as the quotidian Feauer commeth for pride, the Gowte for slouthfulnesse, the Leprosie for ryot, and so of the rest. Seeing therefore this disease is likened to the Leprosie, it is to be ascribed to Ryot. But because these things perteine to an other Phisition, this shalbe sufficient. Therefore wee counsaile on our behalfe, that men beware to conuerse much with them that are infected, principally from carnall copula∣tion with an infected woman: for this disease is contagious. Therefore saith Auicen in the 2. of the 1. in the conclusion of his treatise of diseases. Some diseases passe from one to an o∣ther, as the Leprosie, Scabbes, small Pocks, pestilent Fea∣uers, yea rotten Apostumes. Sith then this disease is neere to the Leaprosie or Scabbes, it must be thought contagious.
Moreouer, such things as do engender ill humors, especi∣ally melancholy nourishment, must be auoyded, as was shew∣ed in the order of the sixe things not natural. And if it happen the yard be hurt by carnall copulation, it must be helped pre∣sently with this washing. Take Rosemary, Sage, Camo∣mill, of each one handfull, boyle them in white Wine, to which being strained, put two ounces of the Wine of Pom∣granats, halfe an ounce of hony of Roses, wash the yard or infected place with this, after spreade vpon it this powder, Rec. Litharg. auri, cerussae, ireos nucū cupressi, ana. ʒ. i. make them into powder, and apply it after the washing, and if this powder be too strong, put to it Mastick, Myrrh, Fran∣kincense, of eache one dramme. But for more securitie, when man or woman hath companied together, let them wipe themselues cleane with a cleane lumen cloath, and be∣ware the womens cloathes, for they are infected: and thisA good caueat of a bawdie Spanyard. done, yet for more securitie, let him or her wash the place with warme water, or white Wine, for because of the frica∣tion of the parts, some slyme sticketh to the yard, which cau∣seth infection to the yard and the bodie, therefore the vse of this order will be good to auoyde that infection & filthynesse. Certayne difficulties are dissolued which may be propounded touching this disease. Chap. 6. IF the reason be demaunded, why this disease beginnethDoubt, 1. in the secret parts  some fooles annswere, that it com∣meth by reason the humors in that place are most méete to be corrupted: but if this were a sufficient reason, almost all diseases should haue there beginning in that place. There∣fore it must be say, that betweene those parts, and the qua∣litie of this disease, there is such conformitie, and this came by meanes of that fluence: for euery thing worketh not vpō euery thing, but a certaine vpon a certaine. Arist. 1. phys. so this disease is readier to be first taken in the yard, then in
the necke, head, shoulders, and not in other places. ThereforeDoubt. . the influence at that time was an enemy to the head and yard. And if it be demaunded why it hath the termination by the mouth? it may be aunswered, that this procéedeth of the propertie of Quicksiluer, which doth drawe humors to those parts: or better thus, that Quicksiluer by his heate doth warme, and make thinne the humors thus prepared, to expell them by the vppermost parts: therefore Paulus affirmeth it to be hoate and moist in the fourth degrée, to whome, I doo rather stick then to Auicen, who maketh it cold in the second degrée. And if it be demaunded, why the mouth doth stincke? it may be aunswered, that this commeth of the Quicksiluer, whose fume hath propertie to make the mouth stinck as A∣uicen saith, can. 2. cap. 2. Heereupon also commeth paine in the head, and hurt in the mouth, as it may be gathered of the nature of it, vnto this may be added the burnt, putrified ill humor, which may make the same accidents, and therefore it is no maruaile if there be so great paines. Now the especiall remedie is, that when the humor beginneth to be expelled by the mouth, it be diuerted by medicines ministred vpward and downeward, to bring it to the lower parts. If it be demaun∣ded, wherefore some persons being apt to melancholick dis∣eases, both in regard of complexion and ill order, are not in∣fected? I say that perhaps their bodies are more firme, and consequently do more hardly receiue an impression then o∣thers, or by some other propertie, which in diuers bodies is found to be diuers, as saith Auicen. 1. 1. And if it be demaun∣ded  why Quicksiluer helpeth, or is more auailable thā other medicines, except the distilling of Triacle before mentioned? it must be aunswered, to come of his propertie, or rather manifest qualitie, because it is hoate and moyst in the highest degrée, and the disease cold and drie. That the disease is cold and drie, it is proued, first, because it is Saturnall, as hath beene shewed: secondly, because it is found by experience, that hoate & moyst things helpe: also, because it hath affinitie with the Leprosie, which is a cold and drie disease, and with
other melancholick diseases: againe, because it is a long disease: for Auicen saith, 1. 3. cap. 2. That sicknesse which is prolonged, is wholy cold: and it is confirmed, because we see this matter to putrifie seldome, or to cause a Feuer: heereupon, sayth Galen: Nothing doth properly corrupt of cold or drye, 2. Booke of Complexions. Therefore this must be sayd so to be, because the disease is cold and dry. If it be demaunded, why some medicines seeme to helpe in  the beginning, but when they are continued, they ceasse to helpe? it is said, that this commeth of a double cause, whereof the one is in nature, the other in the disease, in regard of na∣ture which by continuance doth loath, and reioyce in nouel∣ties: in regard of the disease, because albeit in the beginning the medicine is contrarie to the disease, yet in processe, the contrarietie ceasseth through custome: therefore, sayth Aui∣cen, There is no passion from a thing accustomably v∣sed. 4. 1. Heereupon, we sée some beastes to be contrarie, and enemies at the first meeting, but by vsuall conuersation, that enmitie ceasseth, then they become tame, and the strife is ended between them: this must be also accompted amongst the qualities. And if it be sayd on the contrarie, that the agent and patient being duely situated, of necessitie an action must follow, it is aunswered, that in this case there is action, but so small, that it is of no force. Or it may be aunswered, that by custome, the disposition of the patient is altered, wherevpon it doth follow that change of medicines (so that they be not from the purpose) is very profitable: as Auicen sayth in the place alleadged. If it be demaunded whether bloodletting is  agreeable to this disease, I aunswere, that in the beginning, and before the matter be dispersed to the greeued places, whereby it is mingled with the blood, especially if it be scat∣tered in the skinne, then (I say) it is conuenient, if other particulars concurre: but in processe, it is not conuenient, except the ointments and other medicines haue been applied, because that when nature hath endeuoured to expell humors, being helped with medicines, she hath mingled some parte
thereof with the blood: wherefore cupping is lesse disliked, but with this caution, that the cold humors be not made more crude, nor the hoate more inflamed, according to Auicen 4. 1. Beware thou bring not thy patient to one of these two things, either to the boyling of cholerick humors, or cruditie of colde humors. In this case cruditie is more feared, then boiling, and therefore it is seldome conuenient, and by expe∣riēce it hath hurt more, then it hath helped. If it be demaun∣ded  how these paynes in this disease are to be called? I aunswere, they are extensiue or stretched, whereupon, sayth Auicen, The cause of extended payne, is either windy∣nesse, or an humor that stretcheth the nerue or muscle, as if it drew it to the extremities. Neither is it true which some thinke, that this is a breaking payne, because they thinke the matter to be betweene the bone and the skinne, grounding themselues on the saying of Auicen, The cause of breaking payne, is windinesse betweene the bone and the skinne, which couereth it. Auicen speaketh not of the skinne immediatly couering the bone, for that is vnsensible,In this, and perhaps some poynt or two moe, the Authors iudg∣ment fayled him: as in some things we fayle all. but he speaketh of those which do not immediatly cleane to the bone, as the skinne couering the ribbes, or skull, and such like. Sith therefore this paine is not in those places, it ought not to be so called. If it be demaunded, to what pustles the pustles in this disease are like? I aunswere, to those which are called of Auicen, pustles in the face, who sayth, that Asafati is a high banke of vlcerous pustles. Neuerthelesse, there are oft times pustles in these like others, as those which resemble nodes, fistulaes, cancers, burning, ants, and all others, as the diligent viewer may iudge: but because the disputation about names appertaineth not to a Physition as Auicen sayth, 4. 1. 5. I purpose not to be long in this mat∣ter, as others haue done, who not knowing the nature and causes of a disease, and by consequent not the cure, haue only trifled about names, whose works I knowe not to what end they haue beene printed. If it be demaunded, why the paines  are increased in the second or third day of the vnction? It is
answered, because then the humors are moued, and also made thinne in their curing, or digestion, which commeth by the benefite of the vnction, according to the Aphorisine. 2. part. Feuers and paynes are more increased in the labouring to suppuration, than when matter is fully digested. And therfore it is a most singular secret, to minister thē solutiue medicines, that, before the humor be purged at the mouth, it may bee ca∣ried downward: and by this meanes the mouth shall not bee hurt, as I haue often tryed. Or if he haue Pustles, or vlcera∣ted places, there must drawing medicines be applyed, that the humor may be there auoyded, & bee diuerted from the mouth. Hervpon is inferred, that that is the more true opinion which sayth Quicksiluer is hote, than that which sayth it is colde, sith by it the humour is made thinne and moueable, as hath beene shewed. But contrariwise, Vincentine Aiax Siculus a learned young man, sayth: Quicksiluer causeth cold diseases, as Palsies, the falling sicknesse, and such like: as saith Auicen can. 2. therefore it is colde. For like is engendred of like, as it is in the Physicks. To this it is answered, that this might bée true, if of it selfe it procured these diseases, but it causeth them accidentally, to wit, by weakning, sith it is contrary in nature to the sinewes and brayne, because it is hote and moyst: and the naturall complexion is helped of the like, and is hurt by the contrarie, as it is 3. Art. Galeni: The more hote partes haue neede of more hote medicines. Therefore the braine and sinewes, through their weakenesse, engender colde humors, and also doe easely receiue them. Thus the solution is plaine, because it cannot bee that any thing should bring forth a thing diuers from it accidentally, as heate colde, and colde heate, &c. It was also demaunded oft by a wittie young man Fran∣ciscus  de Carmino, whether Quicksiluer bee fit in this dis∣ease, seeing by consent of all Authors it is an enemie to the si∣newes, and this disease most commonly is in the sinewes. He sayth further, The report of all is not vayne. 7. Ethic. But almost all say that Quicksiluer is contrarie, and doe therefore allow vnctiōs, &c. To these I haue answered, that Quick∣siluer
is agreeable for the reasons before alleadged. But I an∣swer to the first argument, that although it may haue some hurt in it, yet when it is corrected (as is shewed) it is not so much but the helpe is more. Or it may be sayd, that therefore Quicksiluer is contrarie to the sinewes, because the constitu∣tion of it is contrary to the naturall cōstitution of the sinewes: but in as much as the sinewes are distempered to colde and drie, and that ill temperature is remoued, vntill they come to their good temperature, it may be sayd it is absolutely neces∣sarie. Therefore some things in sicknesse are good, which in health were vnmeete, and would bring the bodie to decay. To the second reason I say, that it must bee noted that Aristotle sayth: It is not altogether vayne. For he would not haue it to be vtterly false, for it is true in part, in as much as Quick∣siluer hath some hurt in it. Yet it is not therefore to be reiected vtterly, especially when it is corrected. For Galen saith, 9. de tuenda sanitate. It is hard to finde such an helpe as hath no hurt in it. It was further demaunded by him, why the paynes are  more increased in the ioynts, than in other places, sith by mo∣tion they should rather be resolued? And this was one Iames Roger, a subtill youth. Vnto this it is answered, ye emptinesse in the place is of more▪ force to gather, than the motion to re∣solue. Wherevpon, sayth Auicen▪ Fen. 2. an. 1. The large∣nesse which is in the ioynt is fit to receiue matter flowing vnto it. The declaration of the tree of signes. Chap. 7. AL the signes of a disease are taken, either from things not naturall, or from things naturall, or from things beside nature. From things not naturall thus, in what ayre the patient re∣mayneth, what meate, drinke, what exercises hee vseth, what sleepe, what watchings▪ hee
hath. From naturall things thus, what age he is, what is his custome, what his profession, his strength, his complexion, &c. From things besides nature in three sorts, of the action hurt, the qualitie altered, the excrements chaunged. From the ac∣tion hurt three waies, whether it bee the animall, vitall, or na∣turall. The animall is double, sensitiue, and motiue. The sen∣sitiue is double, inward and outward. An example from the motiue faculties thus, whether and how the whole bodies or the parts can be moued? Examples from the outward sensi∣tiue facultie, how he heareth, seeth, smelleth, tasteth, as, what payne he feeleth, what he tasteth in his mouth. Examples from the inward sensitiue faculties thus: what imaginations he hath, what iudgement, what memorie, what dreames. Concerning the vitall faculties, let them bee inquired in the sixe things not naturall. From the naturall actions in two sorts wee gather obseruations, from the estate of ministring parts, or things ministred. Example of the first is, how his appetite is, his retentiue facultie, his digestiue, his attractiue, his expulsiue: to witte, how the partie goeth to the stoole, ma∣keth water, hath ye course of flowers, vseth venery, & such like. Examples of things ministred are, how he is nourished, and enquiring of all other actions, whether the action bee dimini∣shed, corrupted, or vtterly lost. From the qualitie chaunged, as, how his breath smelleth, what sweate, what vlcers, what wounds, what matter, what is the colour of his tongue, eyes, and whole bodie, what moysture, drinesse, roughnesse, smooth∣nesse, hardnesse, softnesse in the tongue, bellie, and rest of the bodie. From the excrement chaunged, as, what bee, and how much are the excrements of the eyes, nose, eares, mouth: what vomiting, belching, vrine, stooles: what filthinesse in the head and feete, what sweate in the whole bodie: yawning, stretch∣ing, loathing, may bee referred to the naturall actions which expell, sith they proceede of nature labouring to expell. From things not naturall thus, that he vsed a dyet increasing blood, or being practised in delectable things, as a Musition, or Pla∣yer, or because hee vsed such meate and drinke as engender
blood, to wit, potched Egges, stones of Cockes, strong wine, and such like. From naturall things, because he is full of flesh, of a sanguine complexion, young man. From things besides nature, and first from the action hurt, as, heauinesse in the eyes, head, beating in the temples, stretching, yawning, loa∣thing, much and deepe steepe, troubled sences, slow imagina∣tions, wearinesse without labour, great pulse, swift and fast, fulnesse of the veynes or arteries. From the changed qualitie, as, rednesse in all the bodie, chiefly in the veynes of the eyes, fulnesse of them, swelling in the mouth. From the chaunged excrements, as vryne grosse and red, darke and red, rosie red. In egestions there appeareth no signe: the spettle is sweete, sometime mingled with blood: blood issueth out of ye nose, or the gummes, or by menstruall flux, or by the Emroydes, or other places▪ much sweate stinking like to a Goate, & red wheales: also to these may bee added, that the partie dreameth, he seeth red things, or blood streaming, and that he swimmeth there∣in. Therefore 4. Collect. it is read of Galen, that he com∣maunded one to bee let blood, who dreamed hee was washed in a tunne of blood: others not consenting, inioyned him exer∣cise, so the partie dyed. The signes of Choler from things not naturall, as he vsedSignes of Choler. vehement exercise in hote ayre, he vsed hote and drie meates increasing choler. From things naturall, that he is a cholerick young man. From things beside nature, and first from the ac∣tion hurt, the patient hath great thirst, disquietnesse, payne in the right side of the forehead, great light doth hurt him, hee hath sometime hunger with swoning, a weake appetite, loa∣thing, pricking like to the poynts of néedles, raging, great by∣ting in the auoyding of excrements and vrine, a swift pulse with hardnesse and extension. Here may consequently be ad∣ded touching dreames, sith it seemeth to pertaine to the ac∣tion hurt, as, that he seeth things of a Citron or fierie colour, that he brauleth, and sometime dreameth that he flyeth. From the qualitie chaunged, as, yellownesse of the face and eyes, as it is in the Jaundies, bitternesse of his mouth, drinesse and
roughnesse of the toong, drie nostrels. From excrements changed, as, red vrine, Citronlike, fierie, Saffronlike, his stooles like Saffron, his spittle bitter, his vomit cholerick, greene, bitter, of a Saffron colour, moystnesse of the eyes & nostrels sharp, cholerick, little, and from the eares not much. The signes of flegme from things not naturall, as fulnesseSignes of Fleagme. of meae, idlenesse, long sleepes: from things naturall, that he is of a flegmaticke complexion, a Fisher, salt, &c. From things beside nature, and first from the action hurt, little thir∣stinesse except the flegme be salt, weake digestion in the time of health, a sharpe appetite, much sleepe, sluggishnesse, idlenesse, the partes dissolued, heauinesse of the eyes, forget∣fulnesse, paine in the hinder part of the head, giddinesse, blindnesse, ill appetite, longing after sharpe and soure things, loathing, belching, heauie payne, coldnesse, whose hurt is notably perceiued in the head and stomack: for there is much flegme gathered, as sayth Auicen. 13. 3. and Mesue in Ap∣propriat. a rare, slowe, and easie pulse. From the qualitie changed, as, cold sensibly perceiued, white colour in the face and bodie, the toong ouerwhite, too soft, fulnesse in the body, the face soft and swelled: from the excrements changed, as, vrine white, discoloured, darke yellow, his stooles flegma∣tick, slimie, watrish, his spittle slimie, watrish, much, and rather harsh then bitter, much superfluitie auided by the nose and palate: his dreames of water, snowe, rayne, and such like, which are to be referred to the action not hurt. The signes of melancholy first from things not naturall, as, heSignes of Me∣lancholie. vsed much musing, care, feare, &c. Also melancholick meates, from things naturall, that he is of a melancholick complexi∣on, often incurring melancholick diseases, from things beside nature, and first from the action hurt, he feeleth heauinesse in his head, and rather on the right side, his mouth hoate, his appetite corrupt, and sometime greedie like to a dogge, much watching, much slitarinesse, paine in the Splen, hardnesse, silence, many meditations, weeping, or a desire to weepe, a settled countenance, sluggishnesse, the sides stretched, little
sleepe, if there be not sharpnesse, with fleagme, or sowernesse in the mouth, an ill pulse with hardnesse, the bodie decaying. From the qualitie chaunged, duskinesse, or blacknesse appea∣ring in the bodie, hearinesse of the bodie, the blacke Morphew in the lower eylid, & that is a most strong signe, as saith Auer∣rois Coll. 4. the eyes being blacke & cleare. From the excre∣ments changed, brine black, or darke, greene, blew, his stooles blacke or duskie, little spettle & sharpe, sower belchings, blood black, & congealed when it is let forth: his dreames full of ter∣ror. Here also may be added from things which helpe or hurt. Here notwithstanding must bee obserued, that those three kinds of signes set downe by Galen, to wit, from things sub∣stantially remayning, from accidents and actions may bee re∣ferred to these three, or these three reduced to them: and if it were thus set downe as appeareth in the tree, from things naturall, and not naturall, from hurtfull and helping may be also here placed. Notwithstanding, all these may be reduced to the three set downe by Galen, as appeareth to him that well consi∣dereth the matter. FINIS.
Certaine other approued Remedies, very profitable also for the cure of the French disease: gathered for the benefite of young Students in Chirurgerie. A speciall good Turbith minerale. REcipe Mercurij viui saepius aceto & Sale loti, parteseware none of our blinde or common practizers, that brag of euery new in∣uented medi∣en, which they gleane or steale from o∣thers, do with vnwashed hands pre∣sume to giue or minister this worthy remedy with∣out the coun∣sell of the learned. Georg. Melich. vj. easque cum auri purissimi parte vna optime per∣misce, ita vt auro in fictili fusorio liquato, & iam re∣frigescere incipienti, mercurius in altero calefactus fictili addatur, & rudicula diligenter misceatur. Addatur deinde tantundem aquae fortis, qua aurum soluitur, fiatque prae∣cipitati puluis. This kinde of Turbith is prepared with great paynes, and it serueth for the Collicke, Quartaines, and for Morbus Gallicus: but it requireth a time and charges, as is aforesaid: but being made, it ought to bee put in a glasse vessell, and so to bee set in the embers, and when it hath continued a time, whereby the strong water may euaporate forth by force of the fire, then it is become Praecipitat, but if you will make Tur∣bith, then you must wash it very well, and doe it according to arte, and so to minister it with discretion, which doth cure the imperfections aforesayd, without daunger. The order of the taking the foresayd Turbith minerale. FIrst let the patient bee purged with some good purgation meete to purge that sicknesse: but if the blood be very foule, as most commonly it is, let blood also the next day: if the pa∣tient be strong, giue him xiiii. graynes of Turbith-minerale, and roule it well vp in▪ Butiri recentis q. s. and make one pill and gild it: but remember before you take the pill, that ye
drinke a good draught of Mutton broth, and at euery time they doe vomit, giue presently some Posset Ale, mixed well with Sugar. And thus you shall take three of these pilles to∣gether, hauing a day respit betwene, according as the strength of the sick patient will serue. And for healing of their mouths, take Posset Ale, and mixe with it Honie of Roses: and if the mouth growe foule and furred, put into the iniection so many droppes of oyle of Sulphur as will make it tart: and also to heale it vp with some other good lotion, if neede so require. White Praecipitate. THis is a secrete, and is of very excellent force for the ta∣king away of dead, proude, or superfluous flesh, and for cleansing of vlcers, but it moueth greater payne than the o∣ther, because the other is made with Aqua fortis, and this with oyle of Sulphur: Therefore this ought to bee applyed when the other will not serue, and this is the making therof. Rec. Argenti viui, & olei ex Sulphure, ana partes aequa∣les, in cucrbita, horas xxiiij. macerentur, deinde igne vr∣geantur, donec humiditate omni absumpta albescant. An Electuary to confirme the cure, and to preuent the comming againe of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. rad. torment. & angell. semin. fraxini ana. ʒ. ij.Augeris Ferrari. cort. citri, cinnamoni, semin. card. benedict. ana. ʒ. j. ss. rament. tenuiss. ligni iudici ℥. ss. theriacae & mithridati, ana. ʒ. iij. syr. de cort. citri q. s. misce: fiat Electuar. liqui∣dum. A water for pustules and spots in the face in Morbo Gallico. Rec. mastic. olibani, tragagant. ladani, ana. ʒ. j. succiAuger. Fe. limonum j. ℥. aquae plantag. & ros. ana. ℥. ij. sumach, tar∣tari rubri, coralli albi, borac. ana. ʒ. ss. sublimati in pulu.
redacti gra. iij. bulliant simul in vase vitreo lento igne ad quartae partis consump. postea fiat colatura clarificata & aromatizata cum granis aliquot mosci. An Oyntment for the same. Rec. albumen vnius oui recēt. agitetur donec spumescat,. . deinde adde sublimati & camphorae ana. gra. iiij. agiten∣tur iterum simul, & misceantur donec vnguenti formam recipiant. Cum quo biduo aut triduo pustulas omnes & maculas delebis. A water to take away the scurfe and scales of the skinne and face. Rec. amigdal amararum, farinae fabarū & orobi. ana. F. ℥. j. alluminis, boracis, mastic. olibani, tragagant. ana. ℥. ss. succi limonum. ℥. ij. aquae plantag. rosarum, & liliorum alb. ana. ℥. iij. lact. caprini recent. ℥. iiij. mixta omnia diligenter destillentur lento igne, more solito. A Powder for the heate of the reynes and bladder, and for vlcers in the vrinary passages of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. gra. halicacabi, paria vij. sem. cucumeris, portu∣lacae▪ugr. Fr. & papaueris alb. ana. ʒ. iij. amyli, rament. boris, glicyrrhizae. rad. torment. ana. ʒ. ij. margaritarum ori∣ent, coralli albi. & rubri. ana. ℈. j. zacchari ad pondus omnium fiat puluis. A decoction of Guaiacum. Rec. ligni guaiaci. lib. j. ss. cort. eiusdem. ℥. iiij. liqui∣rizae.▪ . ℥. vj. polypodij. ℥. iij. fumariae. m. ij. summitatum, lupulorum, m. j. macerentur horas. 24. in lib. 20. aquae
puriss. deinde in vase terreo coquantur ad medietatem prunis luculentis 5. aut 6. horas, & percolentur: postea quotidie in aurora illius aquae dabis. ℥. vj. & est decoctum forte. Pro decocto tenui, in idem lignum iam coctum infundas aquae. lib. xx. & iterum coquas ad tertias. Sub decoctionis finem addes liquiritiae rasae & contusae. ℥. ij. passull. mund. ℥. iij. Absoluta decoctione adde cina∣momi. ℥. ss. ad saporis iucunditatem, fiatque decoctio. A most rare and singular drinke for the cure of Morbus Galicus, comming with ex∣treame aches, &c. Rec. Limaturae guaiaci. ℥. vj. Zarzae parillae. ℥. iiij. ana. ℥. j. ss. Corticis guaiaci. Rad. helenij sicci. ana. ℥. j. Rad. & so. verbasculi. Pol. card. bened. Rad. Iridis viridis. Sem. anisi. Faeniculi. Petroselini. Succi verbasculi. ℥. iiij. Sennae Alex. ℥. iij. Polypodij. q. s. Agarici. Trochis. ana. ℥. j. ss. Hermodact. ℥. ij. ana. ℥. iiij. Colocinth. Staechados. ana. ʒ. vj. Mechoacan. Rad. asari. ana. ℥. ss. Rad. foen. Petroselini. Glycirrhizae. Vuarum pass. rub. ℥. iiij. Ficuum incisorum num. x.
Infundantur omnia in lib. xvj. Ceruisiae fort▪ lup. per xxiiij. horas coq. ad dimidias ante finem ebull. adde bu∣gloss. boraginis, violarum, capill. anthos ana. m. ss. Et cum saccaro albo dulcoretur. Dos. ℥. viij. vel 6. mane tantum. Rec. Ceruisiae. fort. lup. lib. xvj. coq. ad lib. viij. cum predict. ingredientibus cui adde bugl. borag. viol. cap. ven. anthos ana. m. ss. & cum saccaro dulcoretur: seruetur pro secundario potu. A Cerote for Morbo Gallico. Rec. Axungiae porc. non omnino vetustae & a membra∣nisBotallus. optimae purgatae lib. j. pingued. gallinae. ℥. iij. ol. de terebint. ℥. ij. ss. euforbij castorei. ana. ʒ. iij. styracis calamitae. ℥. j. ss. cinabrij. ℥. ij. ss. cerae. q. s. ad forman∣dum ceratum quod non coinquinet, in fine adde argenti viui optime comminuti. ℥. iij. quae omnia simul miscean∣tur donec frigida sit tota massa, ne quod grauius est, in fundum descendat. A purging potion for Lucs Venerea. Rec. rad. enulae campanae & hederae. ana. ℥. iiij. anthos, capilli veneris, calaminthae, pulegij, gallitricum, arthe∣misiae. ana. m. j. cort. rad. cichorij. ℥. iii. cort. rad. foe∣nic. & apii. ana. ℥. ii. sennae ℥. i. polipodii. ʒ. x. croci ℈. i. agarici trochiscat. ℥. i. ss. bruse that which is to be brused, and boyle all together in tenne pints of saire water, vntill a pinte be wasted, then put thereto mellis despumati. lib. i. sacchari. lib. i. ss. let it boyle together againe vntill two pintes more be wasted: then when it is cold, let it be filtred thrée or foure times, and so euery morning take a pretty draught fasting, and sweate after it, for it is a most singular drinke if it be vsed in his due time according to arte. An vnguent for Lues Venerea. Rec. axungiae porc. lib. j. ol. chamomillae, anethi, ma∣sticis & laurini. ana. ℥. i. styracis liquidae. ℥. x. rad. enulae
campanae. ℥. iiii. rad. ebuli. ℥. iiii. squinanti, staechados, euphorbii. ana. ℈. iiii. vini maluat. lib. i. powder that which is to be powdered, and boyle all together to the con∣sumption of the wine, strayne it, and adde thereto lithargirij auri. ℥. vii. thuris, masticis. ana. ʒ. vi. resinae pini puriss. ℥. ss. terebint. venet. ℥. i. argenti viui extinct. cum saliua hominis. ℥. iiii. fiat vnguentum. A most excellent Cerote for payne in the ioynts, proceeding of Morbus Gallicus, & for vlcers after they be well cleansed. Rec. Olei Chamomillae, spicae & liliorum. ana. ℥. ii. axungiae porci. lib. i. seui vitulini. lib. i. euphorbii. ʒ. v. thuris masculi. ʒ. x. ol. laurini. ℥. xviii. pingued. viperi. ℥. ii. ss. rad. enulae campanae, & ebuli ana. ℥. ii. squina∣ti, staechados & arthemisiae. ana. m. i. vini maluat. lib. ii. powder that which is to be powdered, and boyle all toge∣ther, vnto the consumption of the Wine, strayne it, and adde therevnto Litargi auri. lib. i. terebint. venet. ℥. ii. cerae albae. ℥. viii. styracis liquidae. ℥. i. ss. extract. croci. ℥. ss. boyle these together to the forme of a Cerote, and being taken from the fire, and cooling, adde thereto argent. viui extinct. cum succo limonum. ℥. iiii. labour all well together, vntill the Mercury be incorporate, then vse it as arte doth require. An Vnguent for Morbus Gallicus. Rec. Axungiae porcinae lib. j. Butyri recentis ℥. vj. OleiAndreas Matthiol. Note this vnguent for a secret of mie owne expe∣rience. Laurini ℥. iiij. Olei Vulpini, Hypericonis, Terebint. ana. ℥. v Styracis liquidae lotae in aqua Chamomillae, & vino Creti∣co ℥. ij. Olei Sulphuris Chynic. ℥. ss. Cynabrij ℥. j. ss. Ar∣genti viui extincti ℥. vj. Mercurij sublimati ʒ. j. Cerae albae q. s. Fiat vnguentum.
A fume for the drying of Vlcers, and expelling the venimous infection proceeding of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. Cynabrij ℥. iij. Myrrhae, Thuris, ana ℥. j. Aloes hepat.Andr. Matth. Sandarachae, Styracis calamitae, & Beniamin. ana. ʒ. iij. &c. Puluerizentur Crasso modo. A purging Electuary for Morbus Gallicus. Rec. Turpet. albi & Gummosi, Hermodactilorum, Ru∣taeAndr. Matth. agrestis ana. ʒ. iij. Diagredij. ℥. ss. Gariophilorum, Zin∣ziberis, Cinamomi, ana. ʒ. ss. Piperis gra. ij. Squinanti, Spi∣cae, Epithimi, Salis gemmae, ana ʒ ss. Santalorum Citrino∣rum alb. & rubr. Croci, ana ℈. j. Mannae Calabriae ℥. ss. Rhabarbari ʒ. ij. Zedoariae ℈. ij. Sacchari lib. ss. Cum aqua Buglossae Fiat Electuatium, vel tabulae. An Vnguent to open a Bubo, when it is come to suppuration. Rec. Mercurij sublimati, ʒ. ij. ss. Vng. Populionis ʒ. iij. OpijNicholaus Massa. gra. v. Lapid. haematitis ℈. j. Fiat vnguentum. And so applie it to the safest part when you will: open it long wise, but not round, and it will open without any great payne. A fomentation to be vsed in the ripening of a Bubo, proceeding of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. Rad. altheae, & Liliorum, ana ℥. ij. Rad. acori, He∣lenij,I. P. Sem. lini, Foenugrae. Anisi, Foeniculi, ana ℥. ss. Maluae, Violar. Parietarioe, Chamomilloe, Meliloti, Anethi, Origani, Artemisiae, ana. m. j. Let all these be prepared and boyled in water and wine equall portions, so much as will suffice, and so according to arte foment the place greeued both in the mor∣ning and before supper.
A Cataplasme that doth cease paine, and bring a Bubo to suppuration. Rec. medullae pomorum coctorum. ℥. iii. foliorum a∣cetosae coct. sub cineribus cum butiro recenti salis ex∣perte. ℥. ii. rad. cynoglos. crud. ℥. iiii. farinae triticeae in vitellis quatuor ouorum solutae. ℥. i. axungiae suillae vete∣ris. q. s. Mixe them well together, and make a Cataplasme accordingly, and apply it to the greeued place. A Cataplasme for a schirrous tumor proceeding of Morbus Gallicus, and is to be vsed after the vnction. Rec. rad. brioniae crudae. ℥. ii. sigillae mariae crud. ℥. iiii. axungiae porci veteris. ℥. vi. croci ʒ. ss. fiat Cataplasma. Pilles to purge in Morbus Gallicus. Maceratur precipitatus in aquis cichoriae, buglossae, scabiosae post 24. horas posito super prunas vase, in vapo∣rem resoluantur aquae, & siccus relinquitur puluis, misce∣tur hic cum spec. aromat. rosat. & diamarg. frigid. & cum theriaca vel mithridato formentur pillulae magnitudine cicerum. A Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth and iawes proceeding of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. plantag. & caudae aequi. ana. m. i. rosarum, balaust. summitatū absinthii, & salic. ana. p. i. hordei integri ℥. i. nucum cupressi, lenticulorum, sumach. ana. ʒ. iii. deco∣quantur sufficienter in aquae partibus x. & vna aceti, & in colatura dissolue mel. ros. vini granat. & diamori. ana. ℥. i. fiat gargarismus. A Clister drawing back the matter, that causeth paine in the head, in Morbus Gallicus. Rec. betae, altheae, mercurial. rutae, fol. lauri, cataputiae, vrticae ana. m. i. rad. polipodii. ℥. i. cort. genistae & sem. cartami contusi. ana. ℥. ss. sorum staechados & chamo∣millae. ana. p. i. fiat decoctio & in colatura dissolue succ.
rad. yreos per residentiā depurati. ℥. i. dia catholici, hierae pirae, diaphenic. ana. ℥. ss. ol. rutac. de castor. & anethi ana. ℥. j. mellis anthosati. ʒ. x. salis com. ʒ. ij. fiat clister. Pilles for Alopecia ex Morbo Gallico. Rec. rhabarbari, agarici. ana. ʒ. ij. aloes. ℥. j. argent. viuiRondolet. extincti in succo rosar. ʒ. iij. cinamomi, ambrae, ana. ℈. j. myrrhae, masticis. ana. ʒ. j. cum terebint. excipiantur & formentur pill. 8. pro ʒ. j. capiat pro prima vice. ℈. j. de∣inde. ʒ. ss. postremo. ℈. i. pro diuitibus adde limaturae auri aut pannorum auri. ℈. iiij. A sweete water to cicatrize vlcers, and to heale the itch. Rec. aquae rosar. lib. ij. vini albi. lib. ij. vrinae pueri. lib. j.I. B. malecorij. ℥. iij. balaustij. ℥. ij. aluminis vsti. ℥. iiij. vi∣tri combusti. ℥. ij. mercurij sublimati. ʒ. iiij. mastic. ℥. vj. ligni aloes. ʒ. iiij. cort. guaiaci. ℥. iiij. cassiae ligneae ℥. ij. mellis. lib. ss. sanguinis draconis. ℥. ss. misce, & ad artem distillentur, dein iterum dicta aqua distilletur, ad∣dendo mosci. ℥. ss. A most excellent oyntment for the itch and scabbes. Rec. olibani. ʒ. iii. ol. laurini. ℥. i. falis grossi. ʒ. vij. ax∣ungiaeI. B. porcinae, ℥. j. ss. argent. viui extincti. ʒ. iij. cerae albae. ʒ. ii. ss. misce, fiat vnguent. quo vngantur manus & pedes vesperi contra ignem luculentum donec cutem intrauit totum. A Collirium for vlcers of the yard of Morbus Gallicus. Rec. vini albi. lib. i. aquae rosarum, & plantag. ana. lib. ii.Ambrosius Pus.  auripigmēti. ʒ. ii. virid. aeris. ʒ. i. aloes, myrrhae. ana. ℈. ii. terantur subtilissime, & fiat collirium. An Iniection drying vlcers, and cicatrizing without payne. Rec. aquae fabrorum lib. ss. nuc. cupressi, gallarum, cort.Ambros. Pus. 558 granat. ana. ʒ. i. ss. alluminis rochae, ʒ. ss. bulliant omnia simul, secundum artem, fiat iniectio. FINIS.
To the Reader. GOod Reader, in viewing certaine olde Bookes of Chirurgerie, I happened to light vpon this written coppie, and perusing it thoroughly, I thought it a worke verie profitable and necessarie for all godly pro∣fessors of our Arte: for heere they shall finde in breefe, certayne iudgements and aphorismes, of most imperfections, which dayly assaulteth mans bodie, not onely in the exterior, but also in the interior partes: which diseases, or griefes, are easie to be found, because it goeth alphabetically, first in latin, and then in english. It is a worke, (as I iudge) gathered out of diuers Authors, as well of Physick, as of Chirurgerie, by some that was willing to profit his countrey and common wealth. A collection in mine opinion woorthy the publishing and setting foorth, although I knowe it will not please the humors of some captious heads, that will neyther do good themselues, nor suffer others: as I my selfe, and other good men, haue tasted of their sclanderous toongs, and vn∣mannerly backbiting taunts. But thou (good Reader) whatsoeuer thou art, if thou louest thy
countrey and common wealth, or dost take plea∣sure in our so worthy an Arte, hauing a care to discharge thy calling with a good conscience, then (I say) thou wilt not onely finde great profit and pleasure thy selfe, by carying these small sentences in memorie, but also thou wilt be thankefull to any that shall take paynes in so woorthye a thing. FINIS.
De Apostematibus. Apostematis tempora quatuor. The foure times of Apostemes. 1. Beginnning. 2. Augmentation. 3. State. 4. Declination. INitium cognoscitur ex humorumInitium Apo∣stematis. in aliqua parte corporis coacer∣uatione. The beginning is knowne by the ga∣thering of humors in any part of the bodie. Augmentum ex doloris & tumo∣ris incremento. The augmentation is knowne by the encrease of payne andAugmentum. swelling. Status, quoniam dolor neque accidentia, crescunt, aut di∣minuunt,Status. sed quasi in centro sistunt. The state is knowne, when as neither the paine nor accidents do encrease or diminish, but do stand as it were in a stay. Declinatio fit per accidentium & doloris decremen∣tum.Declinatio. The declination is knowne by the diminishing of the payne and accidents. Apostemata quatuor intentionibus curantur, scilicet, re∣solutione,Intentiones 4. in apostema∣tibus curandis. suppuratione, putrefactione & indura∣tione.
Impostumes are cured by foure intentions, viz. by resolution▪ suppuration, putrifying and hardning. Apostemata quae non cito ad suppurationem vel decli∣nationemAd suppura∣tionem vel de∣clinationem rde prou∣entia. Rubri coloris. perueniunt, curatu sunt difficilia. Impostumes that come not speedily either to suppuration or declination, are hard to be cured. Rubro colore Apostemata cum prominentioris partis mollitie citissimè curantur. Impostumes that are red in colour, with softnesse in the vp∣per parts, are easie to be cured. Apostemata ad suppurationem iam peruenta celeri gra∣duAd suppura∣tionem iam peruenta. curanda sunt. Impostumes that are come to suppuration, must speedily bee cured. Apostema si suppurationem recusat, neque declinare om∣ninoSuppuratio∣nem recusan∣. concedet, malum. Impostumes that come not speedily to suppuration or decli∣nation, are euill. Apostematis augmento▪ vtere mollificantibus.In augment vtenda. In the augmentation of Impostumes, vse mollificatiues. Apostemata pulsationem habet dum humores vertunturPulsationem habentia. in putrefactionem, & sic fit in arterijs. Impostumes doe beate whilest the humors doe turne to pu∣trifaction, and so it chaunceth in the arteries. Apostematis corruptio ex abundantia materiae vel eius∣demApostematis corruptio. materiae malignitate, aut prauitate prouenit. The corruption of Impostumes commeth by aboundance of matter, or by the malignitie, or vilenesse thereof. Apostematum quaedam terminantur per insensibilem re∣solutionem,Apostematum Terminatio. & hoc est valde bonum, & quaedam per vi∣rulentiam, & hoc est pessimum, & si fuerint in locis ex directo cordis, aut prope, mortale est. Some Impostumes ende by insensible resolution, which is very good, and some turne to a poysoned qualitie, which is
very euill, and if those bee in places agaynst the heart, or neere vnto it, it is deadly. Apostematum quaedam sunt de materia calida, & ter∣minanturApostema∣tum materia in die 20. & quaedam de materia frigida, & terminantur in 40. die. There be some Impostumes which come of hote matter, and they are ended in xx. daies, and some there bee which pro¦ceede of colde, and are ended in xl. daies. Apostematum quaedam sunt cum faebribus continuis,Apostema∣tum febre. & si expuant saniem ante 7. diem, impossibile est quod euadant: quoniam quum tam cito natura gene∣rat saniem, natura nó inuenit omnino viam, vnde eam expellat: & si virtus est debilis cito morietur: si multa bona signa apparent (dicit Hyppocr.) vita pollicetur. Some Impostumes haue continuall feuers, and if they spit matter before the 7. day, it is vnpossible for them to escape, because when nature so speedily engendreth matter, she findeth not sufficient way to expell it: And if the partie bee weake, he dyeth speedily: but if many good signes appeare (saith Hyppocrates) he may liue. Omne apostema de materia adusta, sicut Anthrax, Car∣bunculusDe materia adusta. & formica, pessimum est & mortale, praeser∣tim cum febre. Euery Impostume comming of burnt matter, as Anthrax, Carbuncle & Formica, is euill and deadly, especially if it come with a Feuer. In omni Apostemate est triplex morbus, viz. MorbusApostema∣tum morbi. consimilis, ratione malae complexionis; Morbus officialis, ratione tumoris; & morbus communis, ra∣tione solutionis continuitatis. In euery Apostume is a threefold disease, viz. Morbus con∣similis; by reason of his euill complexion, Morbus officia∣lis; by reason of the swelling and Morbus communis, by reason of the solution of Continuitie.
Tribus modis accidit membrorum corruptio, primo,Mebrorum . ex veneo calido vel frigido vnde complexio partis na∣turalis corrumpitur, secundo, quando spiritus natura∣les in membro residere prohibentur: Postremò, per ve∣nenosorum medicamentorum administrationem, vt Realgar, Arsenicum, &c: Corruption of the members chaunceth three maner of waies, first of venime either hote or colde, wherevpon the naturall complexion of the part is corrupted: secondly, when the na∣turall spirites cannot bee suffered to settle in the member: thirdly, by the administration of venimous medicines, as Realgar, Arsenick, &c. In declinatione ac fine Aposthematum, desiccantia fri∣gida,In declinatio∣ne ine quae fugenda. & repercutientia materiam in membro clau∣dunt, vt inde malam qualitatem indueret & omnem putrefactionem contraheret. In the declination and ende of Impostumes, colde desicca∣tiues and repercussiues doe shut the matter in the member, whereby it obtayneth an euill qualitie, and draweth to all kinde of corruption. Materiam repercutientia indurabunt qua longiori tra∣ctatuRepercutiētia. morabit. Repercussiues doe harden the matter, and make it continue longer in cure. Mollificantia & resoluentia tam augmentatione quàmIn augmento & statu res vtendae. statu conueniunt. Mallificatiues and resolutiues are conuenient, aswell in the augmentation, as the state. Materia fluctuante pernitiocissima sunt repercutientia.Materi fluctuante. If the matter bee flowing, then repercussiues are most per∣nitious. Cerebri Apostema, Lethargum, Apoplexiam, & mortemCerebri Apo∣tema. asciscit. Impostume in the brayne, brings Lethargie, Apoplexy, and death.
Pulmonum apostema Vlcera, Fistulas, inortemqne exci∣tat. Apostema. Impostumes in the Lungs, bring Ulcers, Fistulaes and death. In corde congestum syncopem, mortém{que} adfert.Cordis Apost. Impostumes in the heart bring sowning and death. In hepate, putrefactionem humorum, digestionis debili∣tatem, Apost. & mali moris vlcera. Impostumes in the liuer bringeth corruption of the humors, weaknesse of digestion, and vlcers of hard curation. Fluxus ventris in Apostemate hepatis, malum.Fluxus  ium. In Apostumes of the liuer, fluxe of the bellie is euill. Omne apostema hepatis generat opilationem, & opila∣tioApostema lie∣patis  . indigestionem, indigestio aquositatem, & aquositas Hydropsim, quare omne apostema hepatis est causa hydropis. Euery Apostume in the Liuer causeth stoppings, and stop∣pings causeth want of digestion: want of digestion, wa∣trishnes: and watrishnes the dropsie. Therfore euery Im∣postume in the Liuer, causeth the dropfie. In Renibus elongatum morbum mortemque.Renum Apo∣stem. Impostumes in the Kidneis, brings a long disease, & death. Intestinis gracilibus mortem.Intestinis gra∣cilibus. Impostumes in the small guttes bring death. Graues affectus mortémque in vesica.Vesicae Apost. Impostumes in the Bladder, bring greeuous accidents and death. Quae in collo incidunt Cancros, Fistulas, vlceráque aegraeColli Apost. sanationis pariunt. Impostumes in the necke, bring Cankers, Fistulaes, and vl∣cers of hard curation. In oculis, visus defectus, & nisi curata citissime sint, obcae∣cationem.In oculis A∣post. Impostumes in the eyes, bring decay of fight and blindnesse,
if they be not speedily cured. In ano apostema Terminat in fistulam, vel vlcus difficilisIn Ano. curationis. Impostumes in the fundament bringeth Fistulaes, or vlcers of hard curation. Apostemata virgae ex continua calidorum humorum in∣fluxioneVirgae Apost. proueniunt, quae si cum vlceratione contin∣gant rarissimè membrum ad integram sanitatem re∣ducitur. Impostumes in the yard doe come by the continuall flowing of hote humors: which if they chaunce with vlceration, the member is hardly or neuer brought to his naturall sound∣nesse. Apostemata in pectore senum difficillime sanantur.In pectore se∣num. Impostumes in the breasts of olde persons are hard to be cu∣red. Circa iuncturam apostema, circumiacentium partiumCirca iuactu∣ram. actiones mancas quodammodo reddit. Impostumes about any ioynt do in a sort maime the actions of the parts lying round about. In spina, totius corporis debilitatem, propter neruorumIn spina. inde emanantium, copiam. Apostumes in the backe bone, bring debilitie to the whole bo∣die, by reason of the plentie of nerues thence arising. Circa linguae radices mortem, vel pessima accidentia.Circa linguae radices. Impostumes about the rootes of the tongue bring death, or very euill accidents. Facilis sunt curationis in carnosa parte concitata.Patibus car∣nosis. Impostumes in any fleshie part are easie to be cured. Emunctorijs quae incidunt, citissime curanda veniunt.Emunctorijs. Impostumes in the emunctorie places, must bee speedily cu∣red. Promotum apostema ex venenosa materia, omni cura sta∣timA venenosi . foris est extrahendum.
Impostumes that come of venimous matter, must be speedi∣ly drawne to the outward parts. Durae matris apostemata ex vini potione, aeris mutatio∣ne,I. vel alicuius ossis punctione proueniunt. Impostumes in dura mater do chaunce by drinking of wine, chaunging of ayre, or the pricking of some bone. Septem attendenda in apertione iam suppurati abscessus. Seauen things to be noted in the opening of ripe Impostumes. 1 PRimo, vt sectio fiat eo loco quo materia continetur. First, that incision bee made in that place wherein the matter is conteyned. 2 Secundo, vt fiat in loco inferiori, quo melius purulenta illa colluuies euacuari possit. Secondly, that incision bee made in the lower part, whereby that venimous matter may the better be euacuated. 3 Tertio vt fiat secundum rugas & processum musculo∣rum. Thirdly, that it bee made long wise after the lying of the fi∣bres and muscles. 4 Quarto, vt vitentur nerui, venae & arteriae quoad fieri potest. Fourthly, that in the making of incision, the sinewes, veynes and arteries be eschued as much as may be. 5 Quinto, vt non tota materia semel atque affatim edu∣catur, praesertim in magnis abscessibus, ne scilicet ex nimia subitá{que} inanitione, & spirituum resolutione vir∣tutis sequatur prostratio. Fiftly, that the matter be not all at once or wholly taken out, especially in great Impostumes, least by ouermuch and so∣daine emptying and resoluing of the spirites, there followe
vtter weaknesse and throwing downe of the faculties. 6 Sextò, vt blandius & minimo quam fieri potest dolore locus tractetur. Sixty, that the place bee handled gently, and with as little payne as may be. 7 Septimò, vt facta apertione locus detergatur, carne im∣pleatur, & ad cicatricem, more aliorum vlcerum perdu∣catur. Seauenthly, that after incision is made, the place bee mundi∣fied, filled with flesh, and skinned after the maner of other vicers. Apostema in via maturationis esse, potestis iudicare, cumApostematis in via matua . e cog∣. quaedam est leuitas circa partem molestam cum dolo∣ris mitigatione. You may iudge an Impostume to be in the way of ripening, when there is felt a certaine lightnesse about the affected part, with asswaging of the payne. Resolutiuorum applicatio calidis apostematibus, & inApostemati∣bus calis, re∣solutia tu∣genda sunt. augmentatione facit incrementum corruptionis: talia namque partes subtiles resoluunt, sed quae gressa est sinunt in membro putrescere. Resolutiues applied to hote Impostumes, and in the aug∣mentation, doe encrease the corruption: for they resolue the subrill parts, but suffer the wosse matter to purifie in the member. Repercutientia in locis emunctorijs sunt valde periculo∣sa,Repercutien∣tia locis emü cis nō unt adiubenda. vel si aliqua venenositas in loco inest. Repercussiues in the emunctorie places are dangerous, espe∣cially if there be any venome in the place. Immatura repercutientium applicatione putredo sapeImmaura re∣pt . gen▪ ratur. By the mordinate application of repercussiues, corruption is oftentimes engendred. Frigida & humida maturantia calidis apostematibus & a
cholea cum sanguine pronenientibus debent appli∣cari.Apostemati∣bus calidis qu vtenda sunt. Colde and moyst maturatiues ought to be applyed to hote impostumes, those that come of choller and bloud. Sed calida & humida calidis adhibita humores in conge∣riemugienda. coacerut, vnde dolor confestim multiplicatur. But hate and moyst maturatiues to hote impostumes, ga∣thereth together the humors vpon heapes, wherevppon foh with the payne is increased. Alopecia est mutatio crinium in candorem quum crinesAlopecia. veretes radicitus excidunt. Alopecia is a changing of the heare into whitenesse, when the old heares do fall off by the rootes. Alopecia quae a lepra prouenit raro aut nunquam cura∣tionemAlopecia a lepra. admittit. Alopecia comming of a Leprosie, is hard, or neuer cured. Atra bilis veluti niger sanguis si exierit in debilitatis ho∣minibus, mortale. Melancholy, or like vnto black bloud, if it auoide from weake persons, is deadly. Angina ad pulmonem spe transit, tum intra septem dies mors sequitur. The squmancy goeth often to the lungs, and death ensueth within seauen dayes. Aetas, tempus, locus, victus, consuetudo mutat morbos. Age, tune, place, diet and ustome, alter diseases. Atra bile orti tumores semper dolorosi. Tumors comming of melancholy, are alwayes paynefull. Aegritudinum prauarum nolite onus suscipere ne mali medici nomen subeatis. Take no desperate cure in hand, least thou beare the name of an euill Physition.
B. BRonchocele est tumor iuxta fauces, differens ab eoBronchocele. quod in scroto nascitur. Bronchocele is a swelling beside the iawes, differing from that which springeth in the codde. Bronchocele si inest a natura non curatur. If this swelling come by nature, it is vncurable. Si non inest a natura curatur difficillime. If it come not by nature, it is hardly cured. De brachiorum vulneribus. AN fieri posit indicat pars affecta potissimum, sic vul∣nerata. The affected parte doth chiefly shewe whether▪ it can be healed. Plicaturae cubiti sunt periculosa propter venas magnas. Woundes in the bought of the arme are dangerous, because of the great veynes. Cubiti suspecti propter spasmum & inflamationes. Woundes are to be suspected in the Cubite, because of the Crampe and inflamation. Ex bile flaua & sanguine nati tumores, nunquam dolore destituuntur. Tumors of yellow choller and bloud, are euer full of paine. Cancer in pectore vel collo aegrè ve nunquam curatur.Cancer in pe∣ctore vel collo. A Canker in the breast or necke is hardly or neuer cured. Cancro vel veteribus vlceribus immundo corpore inci∣dentibusAcuta medi∣camina. acuta medicamina adhibita semper nociua. Sharpe medecines applyed to Canckers or old vlcers in an vncleane bodie, do alwayes hurt. Cancer qui in propatulo grassatur non facile saluti con∣sentit.Cancer qui in propatulo grassatur. A Canker that eateth outwardly, is hardly cured.
Cancer non vlceratus atque iam confirmatus curatio∣nemCancer non vlceratus. non admittit, nisi radicitus extirpetur, aut per sectionem, aut per vstionem. A Cancer not vlcerated, and thorougly confirmed, can not be cured, except it be wholy remoued either by incision, or cauterization. Cancer vlceratus qui est in venis, neruis & ossibus diffi∣culterCancer vlce∣ratus. curatur. An vlcerated Canker in the veynes, sinewes and bones, is hardly cured. Cancer antiquatus incurabilis existit.Cancer anti quatus. An old Canker is vncurable. In canis rabiosi morsu pessimum est signum & mortaleCanis rabidi morsus. permixtio rationis & abhominatio aquae mundae. In the biting of a madde dogge, it is an euill and deadly signe to raue and abhorre fayre water. Canis rabidi morsus quadraginta dierum spatio reclusus foret. The biting of a madde dogge should be kept open the space of fortie dayes. Carbunculus minus lethalis est primùm ruber, deindeCarbuncls. citrinus apparēs, qui vero liuescit aut nigricatiugular. That Carbuncle is lesse deadly, which is first redde, and after yellow, but that which wxeth swarty or blacke, is past all helpe. Calida suppurationem faciunt, cutem emolliunt, exte∣nuant,Calid. dolorem leniunt in spasmo, distentione & os∣sibus fractis. Hote things do ripen, mollifie the skinne, extenuate, and as∣swage payne in crampes, crickes, and broken bones. Calor gignit carnis effaeminationem, neruorum inconti∣nētiam,Calor. mentis stuporem, hmorragiam, lipothimiam. Heate causeth neshnesse of the flesh, shaking and trembling of
the sinewes, dumpishnes of the minde, issue of bloud, and sounding. Carnis supercrescentis causa est humiditas, & mala ab∣stertio. The cause of superfluous or prowde flesh, is too much moy∣sture, and want of mundification. Corpora exercitata, morbis minus obnoxia esse solent. Those bodies yt are exercised, are least annoyes with diseases. Ex intemperie calida citius quam ex frigida aegri intere∣unt, ob ignis in agendo celerem efficaciam. Men dye of a hoate distemperature sooner then of a colde, because of the swift force of fire in working. D. DIslocatio grossis, pinguibus, & teneris, contingenDislocatio in grossis, pingui∣bus & teneris corporibus. corporibus aegrè sanatur. Dislocations in grosse, fat, and tender bodies, are hard to be cured. Iuncta cum apostemate dislocatio difficulter curatur.Dislocatio cum aposte∣mate▪ Dislocatio cum fractura. A dislocation with an impostume is hard to be cured. Dislocatio cum adherente fractura difficulter curatur. A Dislocation with a fracture is hardly cured. Si coxa excidit, mucores ibi nascuntur, crus contabescitCoxae disloca∣tio. & claudicat. If the hippe be dislocated, there gathereth in the place wa∣trsh matter, and the thigh withereth away, and halteth. Quaedam iuncturae sunt facilis dislocationis vt genu.Iuncturarum dislocatio. quaedam difficilis vt digitorum & cubiti: quaedam medio modo, vt coxae & scapulae. Some ioynts are easy to be dislocated, as the knée: some hard, as the fingers and cubite, and some indifferent, as the hippe, and shoulderblades. Quae facilis sunt dislocationis faciliter restaurantur: quae difficilis difficulter: quae medio modo, mediocriter.
Those ioynts which are easie to be dislocated, are easie to be restored▪ those which are hard, hardly: and those which are indifferent, indifferently. Dislocatio illa est deterior quae est cum ligamenti fractu∣ra,Docatio cum ligam¦ti . qua os cum osse coniungitur & alligatur, & vt plu∣rimum fit in capite anchae & spatulae. That dislocation is the worst which commeth with the frac∣ture of a ligament, whereby one bone ioyneth with another, and for the most part it chaunceth in the head of the shoul∣der blade and hippe. Quando iunctura ad omnes partes positionis sine diffi∣cultateIunctura non dislocata ne∣que separata esse cognosci∣tur. mouetur, non est dislocata, neque separata. When the ioynt without difficultie may be moed euery way, it is neither dislocated nor halfe put forth. Mandibula quando ad interiora dislocatur, os remanetMandibulae dislocatio ad interiora. apertum: & dentes inferioris mandibulae posteriores sunt dentibus mandibulae superioris. When the iawe is dislocated inwardly, the mouth remaineth open, and the teeth of the nether iawe stand more backward than they of the vpper. Quando autem ad exteriora dislocatur, clauditur os, & a∣iriAd exteriora. no potest: apparet imminentia mandibulae ad extra, & priuatur loquela. But when it is dislocated outwardly, the mouth is shut and cannot bee opened, and there appeareth a part of the awe sticking out, and speach is taken away. Dislocatio humeri quandoque fit ad inferiora, & entiturDislocatio ▪ mei. sub axillo in tactu capitis▪ vertbi, ac si esset ouum, & in parte superiori concauitas que tactu facile comprehen∣ditur. The shoulder sometime is dislocated towards the inferiour part thereof, which may be  vnder the arehole, as if it were an Egge, and in the vpper part is a cauitie, which by touching is easely perceiued.
Ancha, si dislocatur ad anteriora, tunc pes est longior, &Anchae dislo∣catio ad ante∣iora. & non est possibile plicare pedem, nisi cum dolore, & non potest ambulare nisi super calcaneum, & multo∣ties apostematur inguen, & retinetur vrina. If the hippe be dislocated towards the forepart, then the foote is longer, and it is not possible to bowe the foote without paine, and the partie cannot goe about vpon the heele, and oftimes the flancke doth impostumate, and the vrine stop∣peth. Quando fit dislocatio ad interiora tunc pes dislocatusAd interiora. redditur longior, quoad visum, altero, & genu eminen∣tius, & non potest duplicare pedem suum apud inguen inflatum & apostematum, quoniam caput coxae iam in∣troiuit in ipsum. When the hippe is dislocated inwardly, then the legge on that side seemeth longer than the other, and the knee more eminent, and he cannot double his legge to his flancke be∣ing puffed vp and impostumated, because the head of the hippe hath entred into it. Si dislocatur ad exteriora, abbreuiatur pes, apparet in in∣guineAd exteriora. profunditas & in eius opposito eminentia, infla∣tio in posterioribus, & gen ad interiora subuersum. If the hippe bee dislocated onewardly, the foote is shortned, there appeareth in the flancke a hollownesse, and ouer a∣gainst it a part standing out, a swelling in the hinder parts, and the knēe bowing inwards. Cubitus dislocatus retrorsum distendi minime potest, in∣trorumCubii dislo∣catio intror∣s. plcari nequit. If the cubite be dislocated backwards, it cannot bee stretched out: if inward, it cannot be bowed. Dextrorsum vero aut sinistrorsum dislocatum, forma iun∣cturaeDextrorsum a sinistror∣sum. & modus possibilitatis motionis ostendit. But if the cubite bee dislocated either to the right or left side, that is easely knowne by the forme of the ioynt, and the possibilitie of the motion.
Si pulsus brachij in cubito dislocati tangatur, tangenti ve∣naPulsus ba∣chij. diuisa sentitur. If you touch the pulse of the arme that is dislocated in the cu∣bite, it seemeth as though it were a veyne diuided. Manus dislocatus introrsum, digitos flectere nequit, cumManus dio∣ctu intor∣sum & eto∣sm. extrorsum dislocatur, digitos non potest extendere. When the hande is dislocated inwardly, the fingers cannot bowe, when it is dislocated outwardly the fingers cannot extend. Mandibuloe dislocatio si celeriter suppeditetur & sympto∣matibusMandibuloe dislocatio. destituatur, in duodecim diebus curatur, sed si symptomatibus coniuncta sit, periculosa fit. A dislocation in the iawe is fully cured in twelue daies, if it be taken speedily in hand and voyde of accidents: but if any accidents doe happen, it is daungerous. Vertebrae si dislocantur, semper periculosum, saepe lethaleVertebrrm dislocatio. est. A dislocation in any of the vertebres, is alwaies and for the most part deadly. Humeri dislocatio in xx. diebus restauratur.Humeri dislo∣catio. A dislocation in the shoulder bones is restored in xx. daies. Digiti dislocati in xij. diebus curantur.Digiti dislo∣catio. A dislocation in the fingers is restored in xii. daies. Coxa dislocata in xxx. diebus restituitur.Coxa disloca∣ta. Dislocations in the hippe are restored in xxx. daies. In calce, tarso, & pedum digitis, dislocatio non penitusIn calce tarso & pedum di∣gitis disloca∣tio. donec xl. dies praetereant, firmatur. A dislocation in the heele, insteppe and toes, is not restored in such sorte as the patient may goe vpon it, vntill xl. daies be ended. Dolor à quatuor causis mouetur, viz. ab incisione, ero∣sioneDolor. membri, alicuius fractura, & distentione; vt in a∣postemate. The causes of paine are foure, as incision, corrosion, breaking
of some member, and distention as by impostumation. E AB erysipelate putredo & suppuratio malum.Putredo aut suppuratio ab erysipelate. Putrefaction and suppuration comming of Erysipelas, is euill. Ab exterioribus si vertitur ad interiora malum, ab inte∣rioribus autem ad exteriora, bonum. If Erysipelas doe goe from the outer to the inner parts, it is euill, but contrariwise it is good. Erysipelas exquisitum raro terminatur suppuratione, sedErysipelas ex∣quisitum. magna ex parte insensibili transpiratione, seu resolu∣tione. A perfect Erysipilas is seldome cured by suppuration, but for the most parts by insensible transpiration, and resolution. Erysipelata circa caput, curatu sunt difficillima, adoqueErysipelas circa caput. periculosa esse solent; vt nisi efficax consequatur au∣xilium, interdum affectos strangulent. Erysipelas about the head is hard to be cured, and it is so daū∣gerous, that if it bee not speedily helped with most excellent medicines, it sometime chketh the patient. Symptoma pram est, si osse nudato cao circustans ab Erysipelate occupari videatur. The bone being bare, if Erysipilas be in the flesh round about, it is a very euill accident. In curatione erysepelatis quatuor scopis est vtendum.Erysipelatis cu∣ratione scopi quatuor. In the curing of erysipelas, there are foure rules to be ob∣serued▪ Primus scopus consistit in vitae recta institutione, atque  victus rationis obseruatione. The first rule consisteth in the right ordering of life, and ob∣seruing of diet. Secundus, humoris ad partem affectam cōfluentis (quem  antecedentem materiam appellant) auersionem con∣siderat.
The second consisteth in the turning away of the humor flo∣wing to the affected part (which they call the antecedent matter.) Tertius in humoris, qui iam in partem aegram influxit, (quem materiam coniunctam dicunt) vacuatione consistit: The third consisteth in the euacuation of the humor, which hath alreadie flowed  the affected part (called the matter conioyned.) Quartus circam symptomatum correctionem, ac propu∣sionem  versatur. The fourth consisteth in the correction and expulsion of acci∣dents. F. FIstula est vlcus concauum, sordidum, latum inferis,Fistula▪ & strictum exterius, quod modò clauditur & modò aperitur. A fistula is a hollow and filthy vlcer, broade within, and narrow without, which sometime shutteth, and sometime openeth. In pulmonibus fistulae aegrè vel nunquam curantur.In pulmoni∣bus. Fistulaes in the lungs, are hard or neuer cured. In stomacho, intestinis, & vesica aegrè vel nunquam cu∣ranturIn stomacho intestinis & vesica. fistulae. Fistulaes in the stomacke, small guttes and bladder, are hardly or neuer cured. In oculis, faucibus, ventre, sede, & iuncturis aegrè sanan∣turIn oculis, faucibus, ven∣tre, sede & inncturis. fistulae. Fistulaes in the eyes, iawes, belly, fundament, and ioynts, are hard to be cured. Fistulae in partibus carnosis procul dubio curantur, ta∣metsiPartibus carnos foramina multa appareant. Fistulaes in fleshy partes are vndoubtedly to be cured, al∣though many holes do appeare.
Fistula lachrymalis est difficilis curationis propter oculiFistula lachry∣malis. propinquitatem & sensibilitatem, & inueterata, vix cu∣ratur, ob magnam carnis duritiem. The lachrimall fistulae is hard to be cured, by reason of the vicinitie and sensibility of the eye, and being old, it is scarse∣ly euer cured, by reason of the great hardnesse of the flesh. Si fistula fuerit in carne, sanies est alba, si in osse, est sicutIn carne, osse, & neruo. lotura carnis, si in neruo, est nigri coloris. If the fistulae be in the flesh, the matter is white, if it be in the bone, it is like washing of▪flesh, if in the sinew, it is black in colour. Si ad os, vel cartilaginem, vel neruum, vel musculos, velIn osse, carti∣lagine, neruo, musculis, tho∣race, vulua grandibus ve∣is & arterijs. thoracem, vel vuluam, vel ad grandes venas, arterias∣que penetrauerit: semper periculosum, saepè pestie∣rum est. If a fistulae pearce either to the bone, cartilage, sinewe, muscles, matrice, or small eyues and arteries, it is al∣wayes dangerous, oftentimes pestiferous. Si fistula fuerit in aliquo loco cuius sinus penetrat ad ocu∣los, vt iuxta nasum, incurabilis est, quia nec incisio∣nem, nec aliquam medicinam ibi administrae possu∣mus, propter teneram substantiam oculorum. A fistulae in any place that hath his passage to the eyes, as beside the nose, is vncurable, because we can neither make incision, nor minister thereto any medicine, by reason of the tender substance of the eyes. De fracturis ossium. F. FRactura cranij magna, aegrè persanatur.Cranij fra∣ctura. A great fracture in the skull is hard to be cured. In fractura cranij febris acuta, spasmus, tremor, alienatioSigna morta∣lia in fractura cranij. mentis, syncope, vocis abscisio, rubedo, & tenebrosi∣tas oculorum, timorosa & mortalia signa, praecipue si
maneant & non remittantur. A sharpe feuer, crampe, trembling, alienation of the minde, sounding, losse of speach, rednesse and darkenesse of the eyes, are fearefull and deadly signes in a fracture of the skull, especially if they remayne still, and vanish not. Denigratio durae matris quae non mundificatur cumDurae matris deuigratio. melle, significat mortem. If the blacknes of Dura mater cannot be mundified with hony, it is death. Tumor magnus in fractura cranij, praecipue si citò eua∣nueritTumor ma∣gnus in fractu∣ra cranij. sine causa rationabili, malum. A great tumor in the fracture of the skull is euill, especially if it vanish soone away without a reasonable cause. Tumor paruus & saniei bona digestio, bonum.Tumor par∣uus. A small tumor with a good digestion of the matter is good. Caro rubra in consolidatione cranij, bonum.Caro rubra. Red flesh in the consolidation of the skull is good. Signa cranij fracti sunt, contusio magna, separatio cutisSigna cranij fracta. ab ossibus, apoplexia, vertigo, vocis destructio, sonus rancus percusso capite cum virga, stridor dentium fi∣lum retinentium dum perctitur filum, humiditas per fisuram pullulans retento anhelitus. The signes of the skull being broken, are these, a great con∣tusion, a separating of the skinne from the bone, apoplery; giddinesse, destruction of the voyce, a hoarse sound being stricken with a rodde vpon the head, gshing of the teeth▪ holding a thred betwixt them when the threed is stricken, moysture comming out by the rit when the breath is holden. Craneo fracto patiens se multas candelas videre putat, saepe nisi sustineatur cadit, non vro intuetur lucem, neque pannum disr furt. The skull being broken, the patient thinketh that he seeth many candles, he falleth often if  not holden, he cannot
endure to behold the light, neyther can he suffer a cloth to be torne. Sanguis si inter cranium & meningem inciderit ad pu∣tredinemSanguis inter cranium & meningem. vertit, nec non symptomata nociua adfert. If bloud fall betweene the skull and hard membrane, it will turne to putrefaction, and bring euill accidents. Sanguis si fluxerit per nares, aures vel os, post casum, velSigna partium intestinorum laesionis. ictum, laesam esse aliquam partem internam necesse est, quanquam fractura vel ossis depressio extra non appareat. If bloud issue foorthby the nostrilles, cares, or mouth, after a fall or stroake, it must needes be that some inward part be hurt, although the fracture or depression of the bone ap∣peare not outwardly. Fractura cranij in plenilunio est verenda. A fracture of the skull in the full of the moone is to be feared. In fractura cranij, terminus ad centum dies, vel secun∣dum alios, ad 46. A fracture in the skull is cured in a hundred dayes, or as some say in 46. Cubitus firmatur plurimum diebus. 30.Cubid fra∣ctura. A fracture in the cubit is for the most part cured in thirtie dayes. Brachium & tibia si ritè curentur diebus circiter 40. oc∣calescunt.Brachium & Tibia. Fractures in the arme or legge, if they be rightly cured, are confirmed in 40. dayes. Costa post vnum & vigesimum diem ferrumen implet.Costa. A fracture in a ribbe, is in 21. dayes souldred. Corporibus macilentis fracturae perbellè sanantur.Corporibus macilentis fracturae. Florescente inuentute fracturae. Fractures in leane bodies are easy to be cured. Florescente iuuentute fracturae modico negotio curātur. Fractures in flourishing youth are easy to be cured.
Quaecunque fracturae ijs insunt corporibus quibus re∣quiesCorporibus requiem ha∣bentibus. benigna conceditur facilè admittunt curatio∣nem. Fractures in those bodies that may rest, are easie to be cured. Fracturaeomnes iuncturis vicinae aegrè solidantur.Circa iunctu∣ras. A fracture neere the ioynt is hart to be cured. Os frustatim comminutum difficilè coalescit.Os frustatim cōminutum. A bone broken all to shiuers is hardly cured. Os in naribus perfractum decem dierum spatio consoli∣descit.Narium fra∣ctura. A fracture in the nostrilles doth consolidate within the space of tenne daies. Fractura quae cum dolore, vel inflammatione, aut carnisCum dolore inflāmatione, aut carnis con∣tusione. contusione incidit mala est. A fracture with payne, inflāmation or confusion of the flesh, is euill. Fractura in decrepitis & cholericis, ac ijs vicissim qui se∣ròIn decrepitis & cholericis. aegrotabunt, cura longa commoratur. Fractures in olde and cholericke persons, and those especial∣ly which are sicke towards night, are hard to be cured. Fractura per longum interuallum non restituta aegrè cu∣ratur.Fractura inue∣terata. A fracture long vnrestored, is hardly after cured. Fractura transuersim os secans, perfacilis curationis.Transuersim os secans. A fracture ouerthwart the bone is easie of curation. Fractura symptomatis priuata facilè curatur.Symptomatis priuaca. A fracture without accidents, is easie to be cured. Fere intra 14. & 21. diem sanescunt, maxilla, iugulum, sca∣pula,Maxilla, iugu∣lum, scapula, os tali, calx, manus, & planta. os tali, calx, manus, planta. A fracture in the iawe, cannell bone, shoulder-blade, hecle, hande, and middle of the foote, is commonly cured within 14. or 21. daies. Inter 27. & 40. diem humeri & foemora sanescunt.Humeri & foemora.
Fractures in the arme and thigh, are cured betweene 27. and 40. daies. Coxa diebus quinquaginta coalescit.Coxa. The Hippe is restored in fiftie daies. Pes sexaginta dierum spatio, si quiescat, consanescat.Pes. A fracture in the foote, if it may haue rest, is cured in 60. daies. Fractura vlnae vel radij, si per se contingat, amborumVlnae vel radij. comminutione pericu losior est. If one of the bones of the arme bee broken onely, it is more daungerous than the breaking of them both together. Fracto membro applicanda sunt doloris sedatiua & apo∣stemationisMedicamina fracto mem∣bro applicata. remouentia. The medicines which are applyed to fractures ought to as∣swage payne, and remoue impostumation. Frigus, conuulsiones, tetanos, denigrationes, rigores fe∣brilesFrigus. efficit. Cold causeth Cramps, stifnesse of the sinewes, blacknesse and feuerous shiuerings. Frigus inimicum est ossibus, neruis, cerebro & dorsali medullae. Cold hurteth the bones, the sinewes, the brayne, and the mar∣rowe of the backe. Frigida sistunt sanguinem posita iuxta partes sanguino∣lentas. Cold things do stay bloud, being layd nigh the bloudie parts. G GAngraena difficulter curatur, & si transit in sphacelum, non nisi per sectionem sanatur. Gangraena is hard to bee cured, and if it turne to Sphacelus, it cannot be cured but by incision. Si carnem & neruum vsque ad os laedat, non curatur.
If Gangraena hurt the sinewes and flesh euen to the bone, it is vncurable. H HAemorrhagia prouenit aut per abundantiam, aut ero∣sionemVnde proue∣nit. vasorum. Fluxe of bloud commeth either by abundance, or by corroding of the vessels. Haemorrhagia quae prouenit propter debilitatem cerebriPropter debi∣litatem cere∣bri. vix aut nunquam curatur. Fluxe of bloud which commeth by weaknesse of the brayne, is hard or neuer cured. Haemorrhagia è naribus quae extendit se vltra libras qua∣tuorHaemorrha∣gioe è naribus quantitas. est mala, & si vltra octo, est pessima, & si exten∣dit se vsque ad xx. vel xxiiij. vltra viuere non potest. Bleeding at the nose, if it exceede foure pound is euill, and if it come to eight it is most bad, and if it extend to twentìe or foure and twentie pound, he cannot liue any longer. Haemorrhagia quae ducit ad colorem pallidum aut viri∣dem,Ducens ad co∣lorem pallidū aut viridem aut liuidum aut fuscum. aut liuidum, aut fuscum, pessima est & morta∣lis. Bleeding which chaungeth the colour to bee pale, greene, swartish, or sallowe, is very euill and deadly. Haemorrhagia ducens ad syncopem, & si sit cum frigidita∣teDucens ad syncopem. extremitatum est mortalis. Fluxe of bloud which causeth sownding, is deadly: or if it bee with coldnesse of the outward parts, it is also deadly. Haemorrhagia quae venit subitò & cum impetu, est mala,Haemorrha∣gia subito ac∣cidens. si verò contingit cum alleuatione patientis, est bona. Bleeding at nose that commeth sodeinly and vyolently, is euill: but if the patient be lightned by it, it is good. Haemorrhagia narium menstruis deficientibus, bonum.Menstruis de∣ficientibus prodest. Bleeding at the nose is profitable to them which want men∣strua.
Sanguis è naribus profluens, & aluus turbida, tollit surdi∣tatem.Tollit surdita∣tem. Bleeding at the nose and loosenes of the bellie, taketh away deaffnes. Haemorrhagia in Haemorrhoidibus bonum.Haemorhoy∣dibus valet. Bleeding at the nose to them that haue the Hemorhoydes, is very good. Conuulsio ab hemorrhagia lethale.Conuulsio ab haemorrhagia. The Crampe comming after fluxe of bloud is deadly. Fluxus haemorrhoidalis si sit temperatus, facit multa iu∣uamenta, & praeseruat à multis a gritudinibus melan∣cholicisAegritudines à quibus luus haemorrhoi∣dalis praeser∣uat, tempera∣tus tamen. adustis, & corruptis, sicut est mania, melancho∣lia, pleuresis, lepra, morphea, hydropisis, ptisis, malum mortuum, quartana, passio splenis, &c. If the fluxe of the Hemorhoydes be temperat, it bringeth ma∣ny commodities, and preserueth the bodie from adustion of humors: and many melancholike and corrupt diseases, as Madnesse, Melancholte, Plurisie, Leprosie, Morphewe, Dropsie, tisicke, Malum morbum, a quartaine Agewe, diseases of the Spleene, and such like. Si luant vltra temperamentum, omnes praedictas aegritu∣dinesFluxus hae∣morhoydalis intemperatus. generant. If the Hemrhoydes doe slowe beyond the measure of the con∣stitution, it bringeth all the aforesayd diseases. Fluxus Hemorrhoidum temperatus cognoscitur cumFluxus hae∣morrhoydum temperati cog∣nitio. sentiunt se alleuatos & melius comedentes. The temperate fluxe of the Hemrhoydes is knowne when the patient feeleth him somewhat light and eased withall, and hath a good appetite to his meate. Cum autem sentiunt se grauiores, cum malitia appetitus,Fluxus hae∣morrhoydum superflu cog∣nitio. & cum foedo colore, tunc iam superfluit fluxus, quare statim constringendus est. But when the patient feeleth himselfe sad and heauie, with naughtie appetite, and filthie colour, it is a signe that the
fluxe hath passed the iust temperature: and therfore it ought to be stayed presently. Hemorrhoides curant melancholiam & nephrtiicamMelancho∣liam & ne∣pheticam passionem curant. Fluxus anti∣quus. passionem. The Hemorrhoydes do cure melancholie & payne of the back. Si fluxus haemorroidum sit antiquus non omnes subitò restringantur, sed vna remaneat aperta. If fluxe of the Hemorrhoyd veynes hath continued long, they ought not all to be suddainely stayed, but one must be left open. Curati citius pereunt, non curati, i. paliati longo tem∣poreCura. viuunt. They that be cured of the Hemorrhoydes of long cōtinuance do dye soone, but if they be not cured but kept open, they liue long. Hernia carnosa raro aut nunquam sine incisione curatur. Hernia carnosa is hard or neuer cured without incision. Hernia ventosa cruciatus ingentes febrimque excitat, & nisi accuratè respicitur periculosa valde est. Hernia ventosa bringeth great torments, and a Feuer, and except the carefully looked vnto, it is very dangerous. Hernia aquosa si semel testem humore suo vilescit, diffi∣cilè aut nunquam absque incisione medetur. Hernia aquosa, if once the humor hath defiled the testicle, it is hardly or neuer cured without incision. Hernia varicosa propter varices inflatas & circa testicu∣lam incrassatas difficillimè absque incisione sanatur. Hernia varicosa by reason of the swelled veynes that are puf∣fed vp, and thickned about the testicle, is hard to be cured without incision. Hernia zirbialis inueterata rarò aut nunquam sine incisi∣one curatur. Hernia zirbialis of long continuance, is hardly or neuer cu∣red
without incision. Hernia intestinalis in senibus difficilè curatur. Hernia intestinalis in old persons is hard to be cured. Hernia humoralis inueterata testem putrescit, ideoque non nisi per incisionem curatur. Hernia humoralis of continuance doth putrifie the testicle, therefore it can not be cured without incision. Hernia inguinalis saepenumero in apostemationem de∣generat, in fine quoque si non celeriter succuratur, in fistulam vel vlcus cancrosum vadit. Hernia inguinalis turneth oftentimes into impostumation, and in the end, if it be not speedely cured, it either becom∣meth to be a fistula, or a canckrous vlcer. Hernia saniosa difficillimè nisi in principio auxiliatur, quoniam materia eius venenosa, non solum vnum te∣sticulum in quo oritur, verum etiam alterū corrumpit. Hernia saniosa is hardly cured, except it be taken in time, for the poysoned matter therein conteined, doth not onely corrupt the testicle which it began in, but also putfieth the other. Hernia zirbialis, intestinalis & ventosa, semper si tem∣pestiuè accipiantur, victus ratione & ligatura conue∣nienti aut leuantur aut penitus sanantur. Hernia zirbialis, intestinalis & ventosa, are alwayes eased or cured by trusses, in time, and by good dyet. Hernia ventosa medicamentis calefacientibus & slatum discutientibus curatur. Hernia ventosa is cured by medicines warming and dissol∣uing winde. Hernia aquosa per actuale cauterium inter bursam & testiculum optimè curatur. Hernia aquosa is best cured by an actuall cautery betwéene the codde and the testicle.
Omnis hernia initio, praesertim in pueris facillime cu∣ratur. Euery rupture in the beginning, especially in children, is easie to be cured. Omnis hernia cum dolore ac inguinum tumore difficilè curatur. Euery rupture with payne and swelling of the flancks, is hard to be cured. Hernia cum Hydrope let hale est. A rupture with a dropsey is deadly. Hernia nulla per incisionem, sine vnius testiculi amissio∣ne curatur. There is no rupture cured by incision, but that one of the testicles is taken away. Hernia vltra septem dies, antiquata appellatur, quo∣niam tunc labia vulneris interius indurata sunt. A rupture after seauen dayes is called old, because then the lips of the breach in wardly are hardned. Relaxatio sine incisione in principio facilè curatur. A relaxation is easily cured in the beginning without incision. Relaxatio facilius quam hernia completa curatur. A relaxation is easier cured then a rupture complete. Differentia inter relaxationem & rupturam hoc modo cognoscitur, si aliquis stet supra pedes suos & impel∣lat anhelitum versus inferiora, si de facili tunc descen∣dant intestina inferius, ruptus est, si non, relaxatus est. The difference betweene a relaxation and a rupture, is thus knowne, let him that doubteth, by reason of some strayne, whether he be broken or no, stand vpon his feete, and force his breath towards the inferior parts, if then the entrailes do easily descend downewards, he is broken, if not, he is but relaxed. Lues venerea se omnibus coniungit aegritudinibus, aegri∣tudinesqueLues venerea. omnes in genere secum associat.
Lucs vencrea ioyneth with all diseases, and all diseases do ioyne with it. Lucs venerea conagiosa est, si cum mulieribus immun∣dis coitu accidit. This disease is contagious, if it chanceth through carnall co∣pulation with vncleane women. Causa antecedens est quando humores per malignita∣tem,Causa ante∣ccdens. & morbi contagiosi venenosam qualitatem cor∣ripiuntur. The antecedent cause is, when the humors are defiled by the malignitie and venemous qualitie of the disease being con∣tagious. Causa primitiua est coitus cum mulieribus immundis at∣queCausa primi∣tiua. foedis, pustulas venenosas in vtero habentibus. The primitiue cause of this disease, is carnall company with vncleane and filthy women, hauing venemous pustles in their secret partes. Postquam lues venerea in secretis partibus oritur, adeò venenosa est, vt per totum corpus transit, a capite ad pedes. After lues venerea hath begun in the secret parts, it is so ve∣nemous, that it spreadeth through the whole body, from the head to the foote. Sanguis in lue venerea vniuersaliter corrumpitur, ideo{que}Producit, pustulas, scabies vene∣nosas squa∣masque cu∣stosas. pustulas, scabies venenosas, squamasque crustosas producit. In lues venerea the bloud is corrupted through the whole body, and so produceth pustles, venemous scabbes, and crusty scales. In luis venereae curatione, neque anodina, neque palia∣tiuaQuae medici∣ne fugienda sunt in luis venecae cu∣ratione. Lentigines. medicamenta adhibeantur. In the cure of lues venerea, neyther asswaging, nor pallia∣tiue medicines are to be vsed. Lentigines sunt infectiones cutis faciei, vt plurimum, &
aliquando cutis totius corporis. Freckles are infections (for the most part) of the skinne of the face, and sometimes of the skinne of the whole bodie. In lentiginibus si corpus fuerit vniuersaliter multum re∣pletumI enii in copoen ∣tum repo. siat phlebotomia de basilica. In a sreckled bodie, if the bodie be much replete vniuersally, it is good to open the basilica veyne. Si autem non fuerit tanta repletio, & infectio fuerit in to∣toSi suet in to to corpore, si in facie. corpore fiat de Mediana, & si in facie fiat de Cepha∣lica. But if there be no such repletion, and the infection be through the whole bodie, then open Mediana: but if it be only in the face open Cephalica. Scarificationes in tibijs, aut inter spatulas, aut sub mentoBona vtenda in lentige∣bus. multum valent in lentiginibus. For freckles, scarifications of the legs, or betwixt the shoul∣derblades, or vnder the chinne, doe greatly profite. Lepra est morbus consimilis corrumpens figuram & for∣mam,Lepra. & compositionem membrorum & finaliter sol∣uens continuum, proueniens de materia melancholica sparsa per totum corpus. The Leprosie is a disease of like maners, corrupting the fi∣gure, forme and composition of the members: and finally making breach of continuitie, it commeth of melancholike matter dispersed through the whole bodie. Lepra postquam venit ad manifestam corruptionem for∣maeLepra ad ma∣nifestam cor∣ruptionem accedens. & figurae non curabitur, sed vitam prolongare pos∣sumus, & impedire cū medicaminibus, ne materia ve∣nenosa & melancholica, ad cor & membra principalia vadat. After that the Leproe commeth to manifest corruption of the forme and figure, it is vncurable: but we may prolong life, and hinder by medicines that the venimous and melancho∣like matter come not to the heart and principall members.
Lepra incipit primò ab interioribus, & postea manifesta∣biturLeprae initiū. in facie & extremitatibus, & iterata reuertitur ad interiora; & tunc est mors, quia membra nobilia rui∣nam sustinere non possunt. The Leprosie beginneth first from the inward parts, and af∣ter is discerned in the face and outwarde parts, and being renewed turneth to the inward parts againe; and then com∣meth death, because the principall members cannot su∣steyne ruine. Lippitudo obesis corporibus & aetate confectis sine ali∣quoLippitudo. incomodo nunquam curatur. Bleardnes in fat and olde persons is neuer cured without a discommoditie. M De Medicamentis. MEdicamina calida corporibus siccis macilentis{que} ap∣plicataMedicamina . calorem humiditatémque naturalem extin∣gunnt. Hote medicines applyed to drie and leane bodies, doe extiu∣guish naturall heate and moysture. Desiccantibus non indigent quatuor haec, viz. vlcus con∣tusum,Desiccantibus non indigent 4. hac. distractum, dolorosum, & apostemosum. These foure noede no desiccatiues: that is to say, an vlcer with contusion, an vlcer with distracted lippes, an vlcer with payne or impostumation. Nimis infrigidantia, vlcera nigri coloris, & cerulei red∣dunt.Infrigidantia nimia. Excessiue cooling medicines doe cause vleets to be blacke and blew of colour. Incarnatiua abstergere minimè debent.Incarnantia. Incarnatiues ought not to wipe. Incarnantia antequam mundificandi vim habent, appli∣cata, supersuam carnositatem generant.
Intarnatiues vsed before mundicatiues, doe cause proude flesh. Quae ad inijciendum conueniunt necesse habent vt cumAd  nunt. melle rosarum, allumine, lixiuioque vel aqua marina, quoniam talia obscoenitatem absumunt & humorem defendunt, conficiantur. Medicines conuenient for iniections must bee made with Mel rosarum, Alume, Lee, or salt-water, because they take a∣way filthie matter, and defend the humour. Medicamina locis neruosis, venosis, & arteriosis, vel circaLocis, neosi vensis & ar∣ersis vel cir∣ca tesculos medicamina applicata. testiculos applicanda, ob earum partium sensibilitatem facillima sint oportet, sed super ligamenta fortiora possint applicari. Those medicines which are applyed to sinewie, veynie, and arterious places, or about the testicles, ought to bee gentle by reason of the sensibilitie of those parts: but about the li∣gaments stronger may be vsed. In carne vlcerata si peracutus sit sensus, cauendum à cau∣sticisCarne rat cum sensu percu. & ab omnibus peracutis medicamentis. In vlcerated flesh, if there bee most sharpe sence, take heede of Causticke and all sharpe medicines. Corpora imbecilla atque loca sensibilia leues medicinasCorpora im∣becilla atque loca sensibilia. applicari quaerunt. Weake bodies and tender places doe require soft and gentle medicines. Medicamina vnctuosa minime conueniunt, nisi aliorumMedicamina vntnoa. acuitatum auferendi causa. Unctuous medicines are not conuenient, except for the taking away of others sharpnes. Medicamen incarnans desiccare quoque oportet ac ali∣quantumMedicam incarnas. excedere naturale membri temperamen∣tum. An incarnatiue medicine ought also to drie, and somewhat to exceede the naturall temperature of the member.
Concaui vlceris cura per exiccationem & mundificatio∣nemConcaui vl∣ceris cura. aggreditur. A hollowe vlcer is cured by exiccatiues and mundificatiues. Medicamina exiccantia teneris humidisque corporibusMedicamina exiccantia. consentiunt. Exiccatiue medicines are expedient for tender and moyst bo∣dies. Membra humida magna exiccatione non egent.Membra hu∣mida. Moyst members neede not great drying. Desiccantia & cicatrizantia, non autem mollificantia, vl∣ceribusMedicinae quoe conueniunt vlceribus muli∣eū in partibus pudibundis. mulierum, in partibus pudibundis, conue∣niunt. Desiccatiue and cicatrizing medicines are conuenient for vl∣cers about the priuities of women: and not mollificatiues. Exiccantia admittit sanies tenuis & acuta▪ è contra crassaSanies tenuis & acuta, crassa & densa. & densa abstergentia. Thinne and sharpe matter requireth exiccatiues: and contra∣rily thicke and grosse, abstersiues. Vlceribus conferentia tum exiccare tum abstergere de∣bent.Vlceribus con∣ferentia. Those medicines which doe both drie and wipe are most ex∣pedient for vlcers. Digerentia vulneribus detritis in primis, posteaque quaeVulneribus detritis quae vtenda sunt. mundificandi vim habent adhibeantur. Digestiues must first of all be vsed to brused woundes, and afterward mundificatiues. Incarnantia vulneribus concauis ante ea quae consoli∣dentVulneribus concauis. expediunt. Incarnatiues are expedient to be vsed in hollow woundes before consolidatiues. Quaecunque per triduum nihil valent, adhibita, post∣quamNota genera∣lis. reijcienda. Those medecines which in thrée dayes compasse preuaile no∣thing, are afterward to be reiected.
Melancholia aut spargitur ad totum corpus, aut ad par∣tem:Melancholia quomodo corpus ex∣citat. Feb▪ melan∣chol. Lepra. Morph. si ad totum, aut putrefit aut non: si putrefiat, tum generatur febris melancholica: si non putrefiat, tunc aut mittitur ad carnem aut cutem; si ad carnem, generat Lepram, si ad cutem, morpheam. Melancholy is either dispersed thorough the whole bodie, or to part thereof: if it be sent to the whole body, it doth ei∣ther putrifie, or not: if it putrifie, then it causeth a melan∣cholike Feuer: if it do not putrifie, then it is sent eyther to the flesh, or to the skinne; if it be sent to the flesh, it en∣gendreth the Leprosie; if it be sent to the skinne, it cau∣seth the morphew. Melancholia est mater caecitatis, apoplexiae, spasmi &Caecitatem apoplexiam spasmum & furorem ex∣citat. furoris. Melancholy is the mother of blindnesse, apoplexie▪ cramps, and madnesse. Melancholiae signa sunt metus & tristitia.Melancholiae signa. The signes of melancholy are feare and sadnesse. Membri alicuius amputatione tria praecipue sunt consi∣deranda.Membri am∣putatione con∣siderationes. In the cutting off of any member, thrée things are chiefly to be considered. Primò, vt fiat sine dolore incisio. First, that the incision be made without payne. Secundò, vt sanguinis vitetur fluxus. Secondly, that fluxe of bloud may be eschued. Tertio, vt cauterizetur siue actualiter, siue potentialiter, tam exiguo cum dolore vt arte inueniri queat. Thirdly, that the cautery eyther actuall or potentiall be done with as little payne as may be deuised by arte. Morphea est cutis defoedatio maculosa.Morphea. The Morphewe is a spotty filthinesse of the skinne. Si morphea fuerit nouella, curabilis est, si antiqua, incu∣rabilisVtrum mor∣phea sit cura∣
est: vel cum magna difficultate.bilis aut incu∣rabilis. If the Morphew be of small continuance, it is curable, but if it be of long continuance, it is hardly or neuer cured. Si morphea occupauerit modicum spatium, curabilis est, si magnum, difficilis. If the Morphew be contained in small space, it is curable, but if it spreade very farre, it is hard to be cured. Si locus morpheatus pungatur cum acu in superficie cu∣tis, ita vt non profundetur vltra cutem & sanguis ex∣ierit, curabilis est, si autem aquositas, incurabilis est, aut cum magna difficultate. If the place that is affected with the Morphewe be pricked with a néedle in the vpper part of the skinne (so that it goe not past the skinne) and that the bloud doth issue out, it is curable, but if moisture come foorth, it is hard or neuer cured. In morphea a principio, sanguine dominante aut corpo∣rePhlebotomia in morphea. plethorico existente, materiaque morpheae in ve∣nis adhuc remanente bene potest fieri phlebotomia, sed postquam notabiliter apparet extra, & aegritudo sit confirmata, nullo modo adhibeatur, quia materia traheretur ab externis ad interiora. In the Morphewe, bloudletting may well be vsed, at the be∣ginning when blond doth abound, or in a bodie full of euill humors, and the matter of the Morphewe remayning yet in the veynes, but after it doth manifestly appeare out∣wardly, and that the disease be confirmed, bloudletting may in no wise be vsed, because the matter thereby would be drawne from the outward parts inwardly. Membrorum durities a tribus casibus euenit, nempe a calore nimio, ab humorum coagulatione & a reple∣tione. There be thrée causes of hardnesse in any member, as great heate, the impaction of humors coagulated, and fulnesse.
Cognita, & vsu ac ratione probata, remedia, ignotis ac nunc primum inuentis sunt praeponenda. Those medecines which are knowne and approued both by reason and experience, are to be preferred before those which are vnknowne, and but newly inuented. Non verbis sed remedijs conuenienter vsurpatis restitui∣tur sanitas. Health is not restored by words, but by medecines conue mently vsed. Scientia sine experientia haud magnam medico apud aegrum fiduciam conciliat. Knowledge without practise, winneth to the Physition small credit of his Patient. Praxis est operatio, theoriae regulis & legibus cōfentiens. Practise is an operation agréeable to the rules and lawes of Theoricke. Artifex qui magnum aliquid & laude dignum praestare vult, in notitiam proprij subiecti diligenter debot in∣cumbere. That workeman which would shew some great things that is praise-worthie, let him diligently apply himselfe to the knowledge of his proper subiect. Boni medici officium est morbum sanare, aut certe in meliorem statum, & eum, quem natura fert, deducere. It is the office of a good artist to heale the disease, or to bring it into a better state, and that which agréeth to nature. Qui artis operibus, doctisque de arte lectionibus fre∣quens non interfuit: hocque solo, quod multa legerit, se pro nobili chirurgo venditat, longe fallitur, & im∣pudens est. He that hath not béen conuersant in the works of the Arte, nor at the Lectures of the learned, but estéemeth himselfe for an excellent Surgeon, by this onely, that he hath read ma∣ny things, is farre deceiued, and very impudent.
Nihil vnquam laude dignum praestabit qui sibi auro non vsu chirurgicum magisterium parauerit. He shall neuer perfourme any thing worthy prayse, which obtaineth the degrée of a Surgeon by money, and not by vse. Medicos & chirurgos subinde mutare, aegris raedium non leuamen est. To change often the Physitions and Chirurgions, is a bur∣dening, and not a lightning to the Patient. Etsi in longum tempus se morbus protrahat, non est ta∣men quod se ab aegro medīcus distrahat. Although the disease continue a long time, yet it is not for the Physition to withdrawe himselfe from the Patient. Magna magnorum vasorum vulnera lethalia censentur. Great wounds in the great vessels, are estéemed deadly. Vt morbi sic remedij species esse debet. As the kinds of the disease are, so ought the kinds of the re∣medies to be. Ossise palato abscessus putroris insert periculum. The swelling of the bone out of the palate, bringeth danger of putrefaction. Haemorthagiam calor incitat, frigus refraenat. Heate moueth bléeding at the nose, but cold restrayneth the same. Quibus vlcera in cruribus sunt, hos neque ambulare, ne∣que stare, neque sedere, sed in lecto quiescere oportet. They that haue vlcers in their legges, must neyther walke, stand, nor sit, but lye in their bed. Mordacia & acria omnia medicamina mundis vlceribus sunt infensa. All manner sharpe and biting medecines are hurtfull to cleane vlcers. Austro flante vulneratorum membrorum prompta est syderatio.
When the Southerne winde bloweth, the partes are more disposed to putrefaction. Vlcera rotunda nisi in aliam figuram deducta fuerint non facilè coalescunt. Round vlcers, except they be reduced into another figure, are hardly cured. Vlcus erysipelatosum purgationem per inferiora postu∣lat. An vlcer with Erysipelas requireth purging by the inferiour parts. Nemini nisi abdominoso tristitia prodest. Sadnes is profitable to none, saue only to them that are cor∣pulent and foggie. Ignauia calorem naturalem debilitat & extinguit. Slouthfulnesse weakneth and extinguisheth naturall heate. Morbi frigidi senibus sunt infensi ac solutu contumaces: inuenibus vero non ita infesti & rebelles. Cold diseases are hurtfull to olde men, and very hard to be re∣solued: but to young men not so troublesome and rebel∣lious. O OEdema vt plurimum terminatur per resolutionemEius termina∣tio. seu exhalationem, raro per suppurationem, saepissimè per conuersionem seu permutationem in nodos & a∣lia apostemata. Oedema for the most part is cured by resoluing or euapora∣tion, seldome by suppuration, and very often by turning or chaunging into knots or other impostumes. Quandiu lippa est aquosa & subtilis, aegritudo est in prin∣cipio,Principium. & cum incipit ingrossari & dealbari tunc est in augmento, & cum lippa est multa, claudens palpebras,Augmentum. Status. tunc est status: & cum incipit minui, tunc est declina∣tio: & lippa quae habet frusta parua est mala, sicut dicit Auicenna.
When the blearednes is watrish and thinne, than the dise ase is in the beginning: and when it waxeth thicke and white, than it is in the augmentation: and when the blearednes is great, closing the eylids, than it is in the state; and when that beginneth to diminish, than it is in the declining: and blearednes which hath little peeces is euill, as Auicen sayth. Opthalmia quae est in hieme cum particularibus concur∣rentibusOpthalmia in hieme. in frigiditate, tardius venit & tardius recedit, & est magis periculosa propter clausionem pororum. That Opthalmia which chaunceth in winter with particu∣lars concurring in coldnesse, hapneth slowly and goeth a∣way slowly, and is more daungerous by reason of the shut∣ting of the pores. Illa autem quae est in aestate, citius venit & citius recedit.Opthalmia in aestate. That Opthalima which is in Sommer time, commeth soo∣ner, and goeth away sooner. Opthalmia si malè curetur malas reliquias dimittit sicutReliquie op∣thalmiae. est macula, pannus, tela, & ita de alijs. If Opthalmia bee not well cured, it leaueth behinde it euill reliques, such as is the bloudie spot, pannicle, webbe, and such like. Opthalmia quae antiquatur, in qua non proficiunt medi∣camina, est pessima inter omnes, quoniam significatur humor corruptus inuiscatus, corrumpens nutrimen∣tum. Opthalmia, that is inueterated wherein medicines are not auaileable is the worst of all, because it signifieth a corrupt slimie humour corrupting the nourishment. Si panaritio non subitò succurritur, corrumpit primam iuncturam digiti, quae cum osse deperditur & manat ab eo sanies subtilis foetida, quando ad putredinem deue∣nit. If a felon be not speedily helped, it putrifleth the first ioynt of
the finger, which together with the bone is vtterly lost, and when it commeth to putrifaction there floweth from it thin stinking matter. Infrigidantia à principio sunt applicanda ad confirma∣tionemMedican ia qua panant sunt applican∣da à  prohibendam, sed post principium eorum vsus inculcat materiam, & auget dolorem. Cold things must bee applped in the beginning to hinder the confirming of the griefe, but the vse of them after the be∣ginning, impacteth the matter and encreaseth the payne. Si videris hoc apostema ad exituram disponi, applica ma∣turantia, & cura eo modo, quo aliae exiturae curantur. If you perceiue this impostume to growe to a tumor, applie maturatiues, and cure it in that order as other tumors re∣quire. Verum si dolor intensissimus perseueret, & nullum appa∣reat signum exiturae futurae, finde digitum lateraliter ab vngue vsque ad os, & statim sedabit dolor. But if the intollerable payne doe remayne, and no signe of a∣ny tumor appeare, then make incision all along the first ioynt of the finger hard by the side of the naile to the very bone, and presently the payne will cease. Omnes pustulae si negligantur & non mundificentur inIn scabiem conuertuntur. scabiem conuertuntur. All pustules if they be neglected, and not mundified, they turne into scabbes. Pustulae si fuerint de causa calida ad impetiginem & serpi∣ginemDecausa cali∣da ad imperi∣ginem & ser∣piginem ver∣gunt. & alia mala accidentia vergunt. Pustules that come of a hote cause doe turne to Impetigo, and Serpigo, and other euill accidents. Si autem fuerint de phlegmate post scabiem in fistulam conuertuntur. Pustules that come of flegme after the Scabbe doe turne to aDe phlegma∣te. Fistula. Si fuerint de melancholia difficilè curantur.De melancho∣lia.
Pustules that come of melancholie are hard to be cured. Pustulae liuidae in vlla parte corporis emergentes, citoquePustulae liui∣dae. euanescentes malum portendunt. Pustules that bee of swartish colour appearing in any part of the bodie, and sodainly vanishing away, are a signe of eutll. Putredo oritur cum vapores humidi in membro inclu∣duntur; & ibi adeo impediti sunt, vt euaporari neque∣unt. Putrefaction commeth when moyst vapors are included within the member, so as they cannot cuaporate. In putredinem humiditas & calor cito transeunt, si non bono regimine gubernentur. Moysture and heate being not well gouerned, will speedily turne to putrefaction. Putredo à narcoticis nonnunquam accidit. Putrefaction is often caused by the application of slupefactiue medicines. S De Sanguine. SAnguis tenuis, totum per corpus non dispersus, exter∣naSanguis tenuis sola inflammat, erysipelas nothum generans. Thinne bloud not dispersed through the whose bodie, nsla∣meth the outward parts, causing a bastard Erysipelas. Sanguis substantia grossus & calidus carbunculos parit.Sanguis gros∣sus & calidus. Bloud that is grosse in substaunce and hate, causeth Carbun∣cles. Sanguinis naturalis copia phlegmonem parit.Sanguis natu∣ralis. Abundance of naturall bloud causeth Biles. Iudicium de sanguine emisso, ex substantia. SErum multum tanquam aqua citrina concreto sangui∣niSerum mul∣tum. innatans, vel potum liberaliorem vel iecur infir∣mum,
vel imbecilles renes vel eosdem obstructos o∣stendit. Much whey like vnto yellow water, swimming aloft of con∣gealed bloud, sheweth either much drinking, or a weake Lyuer: or weake or stopped kidneyes. Spuma innatans nisi fluoris impetu nata est, incendium,Spum atque feruorem eius humoris monstrat, cuius colo∣rem prae se fert: rubra quidem, sanguinis; flaua, bilis▪ alba, pituitae; liuida, melancholiae. Froth swimming aloft, except it be by the force of the fluxe, sheweth burning and heate of that humor, whose colour it beareth, as if it be red, it cōmeth of bloud, yellow, of chol∣ler, white, of flegme, swartish, of melancholy. Sanguinis durescentis color per summa rubicundus, bo∣niColor rub▪cundus. vtilisque sanguinis est index. The colour of congealed bloud being red aboue, is a signe of good and profitable bloud. Sanguini innatat nonnunquam pingue quiddam & adi∣posumPingued. instar telae aranei cohaerens: hoc, si admodum pingue & obesum sit corpus, ex ipso sanguine causam habet, qui est in adipem pronus. Sin corpus strigosius sit minusque obesum, idipsum colliquari & marcescere portendit. There swimmeth sometimes in the bloud a certaine fatnesse, cleauing together like a Spiders webbe: if the body be very fat, it was caused of such bloud, which is enclined to fatnesse: but if the bodie be verie leane, the same is a signe of the withering and decay thereof. Si diffiso sanguine, grana quaedam arenularum aemula of∣fendantur:Gra arenu∣larum. aiunt vel elephantiasin vel ad hanc pro∣pensionem notari: quanquam obseruantibus nihil ta∣le deprehensum est. If in the bloud being cut, certayne graynes like sand be found, some say it signifieth the Leprosy, or an inclination thereunto, although they that haue obserued, haue not
found it any such thing. Si sanguinem grauè olere (quod rarum est) contigerit,Gra lens. putredinis corruptionisque immensae est inditium. If it chance that the bloud stincketh, which hapneth seldome, it is a signe of very great putrefaction and corruption. Scabies in decrepitis est difficilis curationis aut impos∣sibilis.Scabies in decrepitis. The Scab in old age is very hard or vnpossible to be cured. Scabies foeda vlceratione foetida, multas partes corporisScabies foeda cum vlcera∣tione faetida. occupans, & corrumpens, habet malam radicem, & approximatur ad malas aegritudines, & difficilis cura∣tionis valde. A filthy Scab, with stincking vlceration, in many parts of the bodie corrupting, hath an euill roote, and draweth néere the nature of euil diseases, being also very hard of curation. Scabies si fuerit parua, modicam partem corporis occu∣pans,Scabies parua. sine magna angustia, & non somnum aufe∣rens, facilè curabitur, & e contrario contrariè. A small Scab, occupying but a little part of the body, with∣out any great anguish, and not diminishing sléepe, is easi∣ly cured, and contrarywise, contraryly. De Strumis. Strumae paruae facilius curantur, magnae difficilius.Strumae par∣uae & magnae. Small wennes are easy to be cured, but great ones are hard. Strumae mites facile curam recipiunt, malignae aegrè.Strumae mites & malignae. Wennes without payne and anguish are easy to be cured, but those which are froward, will hardly receiue curation. Strumae superficiariae facilè sanantur profundoe difficulter.Strumae super∣ficiariae & profundae. Struae re∣centes & in∣ueteaae. Those wennes which sye néere the skinne are easy to be cured, but those which lye deepe within the flesh, are hard to cure. Strumae recentes discuti & resolui possunt, inueteratae
discuti & resolui nequeunt. Wennes of small continuance may be resolued, but those which are inueterated, can not be resolued. Dolor & calor ostendunt strumam vel in suppurationemDolor aut calor. ire vel in fistulam aut cancrum degenerari. Payne and heate in a wenne, declareth the same eyther to turne to suppuration, or else into a Fistulae or Cancker. Qui breui atque angusta sunt fronte, & compressa ha∣bentQui stru obnoxij su. tēpora, ac maxillas amplas, strumis sunt obnoxij. They that haue a short and narrow forhead, and their temples compassed with large iawes, are incident to haue wennes. Strumae non facilè maturescunt & plerun{que} iterum iuxta cicatrices ipsas resurgunt. Wennes are hardly ripened, and oftentimes they do rise a∣gayne beside the cicatrices. T. TInea est scabies capitis cū squammis & pilorum euul∣sione,Tinea quid▪ & colore cinericeo, & odore foetido & aspe∣ctu abhominabili. Tinea, or the skall, is a scabbe of the head, with scales, and falling of the heare, in colour like vnto ashes, stincking sauour, and in sight abhominable. Tinea si sit recens tamen cum difficultate curatur.Tinea ▪ A skall if it be new, yet is it hard to be cured. Si sit antiqua aut nunquam, aut cum labore magno, & inTinea an∣tiqua▪ longissimo tempore; quoniam mala complexio venit ad tantam adaequationem, quod quasi non accipit cu∣rationem, & ideo si curetur raro ibi pili nascuntur & illa pars semper erit debilior. If the skall be olde, it is neuer cured, or with great laboure, and in long time, because that euill complexion commeth to such equalitie, that it cannot almost receiue cura∣tion, and therefore if it be cured, the haire will seldome
growe in that place agayne, and that part wil be alwayes weaker. De Tumoribus. TVmores ex flegmate nati sunt vt plurimum indo∣lentes.Tumores a flegmate. Tumors that proceed of flegme, are for the most part without griefe. Tumores de atra bile orti semper dolorosi.Tumores de tra bile. Tumors proceeding of melancholy, are alwayes greeuous. Tumores de flaua bile & sanguine nati nunquam dolore destituuntur.Tumore de flaua bile & sanguine. Tumors comming of yellow choller and bloud, are neuer without great payne. Tumor durus circa testes, cum carnis excretione, diffi∣culterCirca testes tumor durus. curatur. A hard tumor about the testicles, with excretion of the flesh, is hard to be cured. Tumor ceruicis promittit salutem in angina.Tumor cer∣uicis. A tumor in the throate, betokeneth health in Angina. Tumores concocti sunt molles, crudi vero duri.Tumore▪ molles & dun. Ripe tumors are soft, but vnripe are hard. V. De Venae sectione. TEmpus in quo venae sectio vtenda venit a februarioTempus in quo venae sectio sit v∣tenda. incipit, & rursus a septembri, ad septimum eiusdem perdurans. The time when letting of bloud must be vsed, beginneth at February, and agayne at September, enduring to the seauenth day thereof. Venam saepius incidere in anno non expedit.Saepe in anno venam inci∣dere. Obstructiones curat. It is not good to be let bloud oft in one yeare. In obstructionibus curandis, ante omnia venam secare
oportet, etiamsi plenitudo non adsit. In the curing of obstructions, letting of bloud before all other is to be vsed, although there be no fulnes. Quouis tempore & hora mittere sanguinem necessitasQuouis tem∣pore & hora mittere san∣guinem. concedit & iubet. If necessitie doe require, Phlebotomie may bee vsed at any time. Non dierum numerus sed vnicum virium robur conside∣randumFit febribus continui. in sectione venae febrium continuarum. For Phlebotomie in continuall Feuers, not the number of daies, but onely the strength of the partie is to bee consi∣dered. A sanguinis missione abstinendum est vbi sanguis bonusA sanguinis missione vbi abstinendum. exiguus est. Abstayne from Phlebotomie where there is but a little good bloud. Venae sectio quaecunque & quouis modo facta aequabili∣terTotum corpu euacuat. totum corpus euacuat. Euery manner of letting of bloud doth equally euatuate the whole bodie. Nullus paene morbus, in quo non mittatur sanguis.In omni serè morbo valet. There is almost no disease wherein Phlebotomie may not be vsed. Vehemens febris, vbi rubet corpus venaeque tument, san∣guinisFebris vehe∣mens. detractionem requirit. A vehement Feuer where the bodie is red and the veynes doe swell, requireth letting of bloud. Si timidè scalpellus dimittatur summam cutem lacerat nec venam incidit. If Phlebotomy be done fearfully, it doth but teare the skinne and misse the veyne. Post longam aegritudinem, cauendum à phlebotomia.A phleboto∣mia cauendū. After long sicknesse beware of bloud-letting. Tempore calidissimo, & frigidissimo, nullo modo fiatTempore cali∣dissimo & fri∣gidissimo. phlebotomia.
In extremitie of wether, hote or colde, Phlebotomie ought in no wise to be vsed. Ver & autumnus sunt tempora aptissima phlebotomiae.Tempus in quo mttatur. The Spring and Autumne are most conuenient times for bloud-letting. Aere existente pestilentiali, nubiloso vel turbido aut slan∣teNon secetur vena. vento australi non secetur vena. When the ayre is pestilent, clowdie or troubled, or when the South winde bloweth, do not let bloud. In aestate octaua hora et hieme meridies eligātur in phle∣botomia.Hora phlebo∣tomie ligen∣da. In Sommer take eight of the Clocke, and in Winter, noone, for the houre of Phlebotomie. Si luna sit in signo habente aspectum malum ad aliquodCautela. membrum non fiat phlebotomia de illo membro. If the Moone bee in any signe, hauing an euill aspect to any member, do not let bloud on that member. Ante Phlebotomiam bonum est exercitari, moueri, ei∣gilariAnte phlebo∣tomiam. vt sanguis sit mobilior. Before bloudletting, it is good to be exercised, to moue, and to watch, whereby the bloud may be more moueable. Membrum phlebotomandum est frigandum & calefa∣ciendum,Membrum. cum aqua calida lauandum, vt vena sit aper∣tior & sanguis fluxibilior. The member that you will let bloud must be chaffed and hea∣ted with hote water, that the veyne may bee more apparant and the bloud more fluent. Si phlebotomandus est valde debilis comedat prius pa∣nem sit debilis. & bibat vinum stipticum. If a weake bodie must bee let bloud, let him eate bread and drinke stiptick wine before. In aestate & vere fiat phlebotomia in parte dextra, autum∣noP qua san∣guis emiitur. & hieme, sinistra. In the Sommer and Spring let bloud on the right side, and
in Autumne and Winter on the left. In materia venenosa debet fieri phlebotomia ex eademMateria veno∣sa. parte. In venimous matter let bloud on the same side. Qui annos 60 habent, cephalicam non aperiant.Qui annos 60 habent. At threescore yéeres let not bloud in cephalica. Qui senes sunt & aegroti edant iuscula & bibant vinumSenes & aegro∣ti. bonum vna vel altera hora ante sectionem. Olde men and sicke persons may eate broth and drinke Wine one houre or two before they be let bloud. Qui facile ac saepe sudant, indigent venae sectione.Qui phlebo∣tomia indi∣gent. Sectio con∣inta. They that sweate easely and often neede bloudletting. Sectio consueta non sine periculo praetermittitur. Accustomed bloudletting may not bee let passe without daun∣ger. A sectione cibo vtere bono, ac tenui, vino subtili, vitansPost sectio∣nem. aquam mulsam, ceruisiam, pisces & quae generant ma∣lum sanguinem. After bloudletting vse good meate, thinne diet, thinne wine, eschew Honiedwater, Ale, Fish, and those things which en∣gender euill bloud. Sectio venarum nō vrgente necessitate obest potius quam prodest. Bloud letten without neede vrging thereunto, doth more hurt then good. De Ʋariolis. SI variolae fuerint paucae & cito apparentes & quod citoVariolae pau∣cae. maturentur signa sunt bonae crisis. If the measels be fewe in quantitie, soone appearing, and that they be soone ripened, are signes of a good crisis. Si vergant ad colorem violaceum, aut liuidum, aut viri∣demAd colorem violaccum, li∣uidum, viri∣dem, aut nigrū vergentes. aut nigrum, omnes pessimae & mortales. If they turne to bee blew, or swartish, or greene, or blacke co∣lour,
they are very euill and deadly. Si autem appareat sanies foetida mortale.Sanies foetida. But if stinking matter do appeare, it is deadly. De vulneribus generalis clocutio. OMnis solutio facta in membro bonae complexionis, deMembri com∣plexio. facili curatur, sed cum est in corpore male comple∣xionato de difficili curatur. Euery wound that is made in a member of good complexion is easely cured, but when it is in an euill complexioned bo∣die, it is hardly cured. Vulnera membrorum radicalium cum deperditione sub∣stantiaeVulnera mē∣brorum radi∣calium. nunquam perfectè restaurantur, sed sine deper∣ditione substantiae bene possunt vniri in pueritia, in a∣lijs aetatibus verò non, sed fit porus in circuitu. Wounds in the radicall members with losse of substance, are neuer perfectly restored: but if they be without losse of sub∣stance, they may well bee vnited in youth, and not in other ages: but that there remaineth a certaine concrete substance in the place. Omne vulnus transiens à superficie in superficiem est ma∣lum,Vulnus tran∣siens à super∣ficie ad super∣ficiem. quia natura non inuenit radicem vnde sumat prin∣cipium. Euery wound going from one superficially part to another is euill, because nature hath not found out a roote from whēce she might take her beginning, of healing. Si in vulneribus propter nimium fluxum venerit aliena∣tio,Aenatio. Spasmus. Syncope. est malum, & si spasmus vt plurimum moriuntur; & si syncope cum singultu mors est in ianuis. If in wounds, by reason of ouermuch fluxe of bloud, there chaunce alienation of the minde, it is euill; and if a cramp happen, for the most part they dye; but if there come sown∣ding, with yesking, death is at the doore. Vulnera periculo non vacant dum post septimum diem.ando peri∣culo vacant.
Wounds are not past danger vntill after the seauenth day. Vulnera a dolore & symptomate non asserta sunt, donecQuando a do∣lore & symp∣tomate asserta sunt. pus concoquitur. Woundes are not voyde of greefe and accidents, vntill the matter be digested. Vulneribus magnis tumor non apparens malum.Tumoria vulneribus magnis. Vulnera maligna. No swelling appearing in great woundes, is very euill. Vulnera sunt maligna si sunt vndiquaque glabra. Those wounds are maligne where the heare falleth off round about. Vulneribus accidit febris die tertio, vel septimo, aut non.Febris quand accidit. To woundes chanceth a Feuer in the third or seauenth day, or not at all. Sanguis in vulneribus congelatus celerimè rèmoueri o∣oportet,Sanguis con∣gelata. ne dolor aut putrefactio insequatur. Bloud that is congealed in woundes must be remoued with speede, for feare of paine and putrefaction. Vulnera in partibus ijs quae assiduo motu aguntur, raròIn partibus ijs quae assiduo motu aguntur. aut nunquam curantur. Woundes in those parts which are without rest, will hardly or neuer receiue curation. Vulneribus quae incidunt in finibus musculorum maiusIn finibus musculorum. imminet periculum quam quibus in medio. Woundes in the endes of the muscles, are more dangerous, then in the middest. Quae in medio musculorum contingunt optimè curātur.In medio musculorum. Wounds in the middest of the muscles are easy to be cured. Vulnera symptomatum expertia paruo nixu curantur.Absque symp∣tomatibus. Woundes voyde of accidents, are easy to be cured. Vulnus ad os vsque penetrans, ossis sanationem primumOssis vulnus▪ petit, ante carnem regenerare cupias. A wounde in the bone requireth the healing thereof before in∣carnation of the fleshe.
Vulnera ossium, neruorum, cartilaginum, tendinum,Ossium, ner∣uorum, car∣tilaginum, tendinum, panniculo∣rum, vena∣rum, atque arteriarum vi laus. Carnis vul∣nera. panniculorum, venarum atque arteriarum secundum primam intentionem restitui ne expectes quidem. Woundes in the bones, sinewes, gristles, tendons, pannicles, veynes, and arteries, may not be looked for to be restored according to the first intention. Vulnera carnis prima intentione restitui possunt. Woundes in the flesh may be restored by the way of the first intention. Vulnus cum carnis diuisione citius curatur quam cum substantiae deperditione. A wounde with diuision of flesh onely is sooner cured, then with losse of substance. Vulneris principio patiens, tenui ordiendus est dieta,Vulneris principio. vsque ad diem septimum, praesertim si fuerit calidus plethoricus. In the beginning of a wounde, the Patient must be ordered with a thinne dyet, vntill the seauenth day, especially if he haue a hote and full bodie. Vulnera profunda & magna, nesuito, nam intro mate∣riamProfunda & magna vul∣nera. corruptam & fortasse venenosam includere peri∣culum est. Stitch not great and déepe wounds, for that it is in danger to shut in the corrupt and peraduenture venemous matter. Vulnus contusum, concauum vel discratum, in osse apo∣stema,Consolidantia  non sunt adhibenda. punctura in neruo, minime consolidari debent. A contused hollow wound of distempered, an impostume in the bone, and a prick in the sinewe, must be kept open. Vulnus lethale est, acceptum in cerebro, corde, pulmo∣ne,Vulnera le∣thalia. diaphragmate, ventriculo, iecore, vesica & tenui∣bus intestinis. A wounde is deadly in the brayne, hart, lungs, midriffe, sto∣macke, liuer, bladder, and small guttes. Vulnera capitis, & stomachi & hepatis, aut splenis autVulnera quae si parua sint curari possunt.
renum, aut vesicae, aut matricis, aut intestinorum, sisi magna nun∣quam aut raro. sint parua possunt curari, sin magna, nunquā aut raro. Wounds in the head, stomack, liuer, splene, kidneies, blad∣der, matrice, or intrels, if they be small may be cured, if they be great, they will hardly or neuer be cured. Cerebri vulnera, scotoniam, lethargiam, apoplexiam &Cerebri vul∣nera. tales affectus proferunt. Woundes in the brayne bring giddinesse, lethargies, apo∣plexies, and such like diseases. Si cerebrum vulneretur, sanies est crassa, globosa, & me∣dullaris:Signa cerebri vulnera. spumaque ex ore, vertigo, spasmus, febris, vomitus bilis, stupor & desipientia sequuntur. If the brayne be wounded, the matter is thicke, round, and mareylike: and foming at the mouth, giddinesse, cramps, feuers, vomiting of choller, astonishment, and dotage do follow. Cum cerebrum vehementer concutitur, vox amittitur. When the braine is sore shaken, speach is taken away. Cerebro corrupto mors post triduum sequitur. The braine being corrupted, death followeth within thrée dayes. Vulnera capitis, cranio valente vel haud multum diminu∣to,Capitis vulne∣ra cranio va∣lente. curatu sunt facilia. Woundes in the head where cranium is sound or not much diminished, are easy to be cured. Nigrities in partibus vulneri adiacentibus, conuulsioSigna mala. paralisis, ciborum abstinentia corporisque frigiditas, praesagiunt malum & paene insanabile. Blacknes in the parts neare vnto the wound, the crampe, palsey, eschewing of meate, and vniuersall coldnesse of the whole body, are euill signes, and almost vncurable. Concoctio bona, vulneris rubedo, ossis albedo, cumSigna bona. humiditatis repletione in partibus adiacentibus & ci∣borum appetitus, bonum ac sanabile prognosticant.
Good dgestion, rednesse of the wound, whitenesse of the bone, with fulnesse of moysture about the partes adiacent, and appetite to meate, doth prognosticate good, and healthful∣nesse to the wound. Cum magnis capitis vulneribus non bonum est versari in plenilunio. It is not good to be ouerbusy with great woundes in the head in the full of the moone. Amigdalae propter vaporosum quendam effectum ijs in∣situm,Amigdalae. vulneribus capitis sunt nociuae. Almonds are hurtfull for woundes in the head, by reason of a certayne fuosity in them naturally contayned. Vinum vulneribus capitis vel neruosis nisi imminet ma∣gnaVinum. debilitas, malum. Wine is naught for wounds in the head and sinewes, except there be great weakenesse. In carnosis faciei partibus vulnera facilimè curantur.Faciei vul∣nera. Woundes in the fleshy parts of the face are easy to be cured. Oculorum vulnera sunt periculosa tum propter ipsumOculorum vulnera. visum tum propter cerebri vicinitatem; caeterum si ef∣fundantur humores, sequitur destructio oculi. Woundes in the eyes are dangerous both in respect of the sight, and also of the vicinitie of the brayne, but if the hu∣mors do runne out, then followeth destruction of the eye. Oculi rubei, etiam inflati, internam capitis laesionemSigna partium internarum laesionis. significant: quod si bilis, primo, vel secundo, vel tertio die, vel deinceps vomitio appareat, laesionem interna∣rum partium significat, non cerebri, sed meningum. If the eyes be red and swollen, it signifieth the inward parts of the head to be hurt: not the brayne, but dura mater is hurt, if choller in the first, second, or third day, or afterward be vomited. Vulnera oculorum febres, apostemata, & lippitudinesOculorum vulnera. adferunt.
Woundes in the eyes bring Feuers, Impostumes, and blearedues. Aurium vulnera lethargiam & fistulas perducunt.Auriū vulnera. Woundes in the eares bring forgetfulnes and fistulaes. Colli vulnera periculo non vacant: is enim locus est ma∣iorum neruorum. Wounds in the necke are not free from daunger, because it is the place of great sinewes. Colli vulnera magis ambigui sunt quàm faciei.Colli vulnera. Wounds of the necke are more doubtfull than those of the face. Si neruus in collo incidatur motus perit. If a sinewe in the necke be cut, some motion perisheth. Vulnera in scapulis periculosa sunt respectu neruorum abIn scapulis vulnera. nucha, & brachij iuncturarum, musculorúm{que}. Wounds in the shoulderblades are daungerous, by reason of the sinewes comming from the backe, and by reason of the ioynts and muscles of the arme. Vulnera magna in scapulis adferunt febres, spasmum, pa∣ralisim, apostemata cum immenso humorum influxu. Great woundes vppon the shoulderblades bring Feuers, Crampes, Palsies, Impostumes, with great inflowing of humors. Dorsi vulnera spasmos, febres, & mentis perturbationesDorsi vulnera. gignunt. Wounds in the backe bone bringeth Cramps, Feuers, and perturbation of the minde. Vulnus ad spinalem medullam pertingens mortale & in∣curabile;Ad spinalem medullam per∣tingens vul∣nus. si verò non perueniat ad medullam, licet sit curabile, timendum tamen est proper laesionem neruo∣rum orientium ab illa parte nuchae; & propter nocu∣mentum sensus, & motus eorum membrorum, ad quae isti nerui delegantur. A wound in the spinall marrowe is deadly and vncurable; but
if it come not to the marrowe, although it be curable, yet it is to bee feared, for hurting of the sinewes, springing from that part of the backe: and so for hurting the sence and mo∣tion of the members whereinto these sinewes are sent. Vulnera pulmonum, pthisim, peripneumoniam & fistulasPulmonum. procreant. Woundes in the Lungs bring consumption and inflamma∣tion of the Lungs, and fistulaes. Pulmones esse vulneratas indicia haec sunt: sanguis rubi∣cundusSigna pulmo∣nes vulneratas esse. est spumosus, sputum cruentum spumosum, tussis, rumor in gutture, breuis anhelitus, praesertim si vox pereat, aut cum sono spiritus reddatur, & si incli∣nans in vulnus aeger loquatur, & in aliam partem ob∣mutescat. The signes that the Lungs be wounded are these, viz. red and frothie bloud, bloudie and frothie spittle, a cough, noyse in the throte, short breath; especially if the voyce doe fayle, or the breath be deliuered with ratling, also if bending toward the wound the patient speake, but bending himselfe other∣wise cannot speake. Diaphragmatis vulnera spasmos, anhelitus difficultatem,Diaphragma∣tis vulnera. & acutas febres perducunt. Wounds in the midriffe bring Cramps, straightnes of breath and sharpe Feuers. Signa diaphragmatis vulnerati, sunt, spiratio magna &Signa dia∣phragmatis vulnerati. frequens, tussis cum sternutatione, alienatio, sputum liuidum, sitis, cibi fastidium, rigor, & vulnus circa no∣thas costas. The signes that Diaphragma is wounded are these, great and thicke breathing, a cough with snorting, alienation of the minde, swartish spittle, thirst, loathing of meate, stifnes, and the wound being about the false ribbes. Hepatis vulnera inflammationes, apostemata, & sangui∣neosHepatis vulnera. eosque continuos fluxus perducunt. Woundes in the Liuer bring inflammations, Impostumes
and continuall fluxes of bloud. Si in parte dextra & prope nothas costas vulnus sit & mul∣tusSigna hae∣tis laes. sanguis perfluit crassus, iecur laesum esse conijci∣mus. If the wound be in the right side and nere vnto the false ribbes and that great quantitie of thick bloud issue out, we coniec∣ture the Liuer to be hurt. Pectoris vulnera non intus penetrantia facilè curantur; &Pectoris vul¦nera. è contrario contrariè. Wounds of the breast not pearcing into the bulke, are casie of curation: and contrariwise contrarily. Cordis vulnera lethalia sunt, quia est effector vitalis spiri∣tusCordis vulne∣ra. & fons arteriarum. Woundes in the heart are deadly, because it is the maker of vitall spirites, and originall of arteries. Corvulneratum esse indicia haec sunto; sanguis niger ef∣fluens,Signa cordis vulnerati. extremorum frigiditas, sudores frigidi, syncope, color pallidus ac totae vires debilitatae. The signes that the heart is wounded are these, blacke bloud flowing out of the wound, coldnesse of the outward parts, colde sweats, sownding, pale colour, and the whole strength decayed. In intestinis magnis ob externas eorum carnositates vul∣neraIntestinorum vulnera. sanabilia videntur: exiguis autem longe periculo∣siora ac dolorum pleniora, propter substantiam eorum neruosam. Wounds in ye great guttes by reason of their outward fleshi∣nes are easie to bee cured: but farre more daungerous are woundes in the small guttes, and more paynfull; because they are of sinewie substance. Vulnera renum, spasmum, alienationem animi, & mor∣temRenum vul∣nera. inferunt. Woundes in the Kidneis bring the Crampe, perturbation of the minde and death.
Vesicae vulnus adfert spasmum, vrinae fluxum continuumVulnera vesicae mortemque. Wounds in the bladder bring the Crampe, continuall fluxe of vrine and deat. Omne vulnus prope circiterue iuncturam vllam, muscu∣liIuncturarum vulnus actio∣nem membri depriuat. alicuius originem aut insertionem separet necesse est. Musculus est instrumentum motus voluntarij, ergo omne vulnus instrumenta motus voluntarij suppri∣mens, actionem membri sequentis depriuare oportet. Euery wound that is made neere or about any ioynt doth of necessitie separate either the rising or insertion of some muscle. A muscle is the instrument of voluntarie mouing: Therefore euery wound that suppresseth the instruments of voluntarie mouing must needes depriue the action of the member following. Iuncturarum vulnera periculosa, quoniam neruis, tendo∣nibus,Iuncturarum vulnera quare periculosa sunt. & ligamentis vinciuntur, membranisque ve∣stiuntur. Woundes in the ioynts bee daungerous, because they bee en∣wrapped with Sinewes, Tendons, Ligaments and Pan∣nicles. Iuncturarum vulnera sequuntur febres, spasmi, & mem∣bri deprauatio. Upon woundes in the ioynts followe Feuers, Cramps and deprauation of the member. Vulnera iuncturarum cum neruorum ac tendinum disse∣ctioneVtrum neruus vel tendo dis∣sectus sit cog∣nolcere. esse solent, quare si statim aeger totum manum aut maiotem partem manus, stupidam, grauem, frigi∣dam senserit, neruum laesum esse verisimile est; quod si sine magna inflatione sit, & neque flectere neque ex∣tendere possit, tendo illius partis dissectus est. Wounds in the ioynts doe chaunce with the cutting of the si∣newes and tendons: wherefore if the partie feele his whole hand or a great part thereof to be without sence, heauie and colde, it is a true signe that the sinewe is hurt: but if the
hand be without any great swelling, and yet can neyther be bowed, nor extended, then is the tendon of that part cut. Fibrarum transuersa diuisio musculi officium impedit.Fibrarum vulnus. Ouerthwart cutting of the fibres impaireth the office of the muscle. Solutio continuitatis in neruo si est incisio aut punctura,Neruorum vulnera. spasmum & alienationem, & mortem inducit, nisi di∣ligentisimè succurratur, & si omnino incidatur, nō est periculum, nisi quia membrum suppositum caret mo∣tu aut sensu, aut vtroque, secundum diuersitatem ner∣uorum. A wound in the sinew eyther by incision or pricking, bringeth a crampe, alienation of the minde and death, if it be not diligently helped; but if it be cleane cut asunder, it is no danger at all, saue onely that the member is depriued of mouing or feeling, or both, according to the diuersities of sinewes. Vulnus ad neruos recurrentes pertingens, rancedinemAd neruos recurrdntes vulnus per∣tingens. inducit. A wounde in the recurrent nerues bringeth hoarsenesse. Vulnera secundum longitudinem neruorum, non tamVulnus ner∣uorum secun∣dum longi∣tudinem. periculosa sunt, quàm si transuersim diuidantur. Woundes that are made after the length of the sinewes, are not so dangerous, as when they are cut ouerthwart. Laesio neruorum per contusionem, magis periculosa, quāNeruorum contusio. per incisionem, quia non tam facile digestio inducitur. Hurt of sinewes that commeth by contusion, is more dange∣rous then by meision, by reason that digestion can not be so soone brought to passe. Vulnera neruorum per desiccantia curantur.Curatio. Woundes in the sinewes are cured by desiccatiue medicines. Vulnera neruorum per contusionem digerentibus cu∣rantur.Curatio. Woundes in the sinewes made by contusion, are to be hel∣ped
by dispersing medicines. Punctio neruorum, incisione periculosior.Punctio ner∣uorum. Woundes in the sinewes made by pricking weapons, are more dangerous than by incision. Vulnera neruorum si humores collectos expirare non valent, in periculo apostematum spasmique sunt. Woundes in the sinewes that cannot breathe out the humors collected, are in danger of impostumes and Cramps. Neruorum vulnus si in superiori parte corporis incide∣rit,Neruorum in superiori parte vulnus. iuncturas colli, pectusque cum iuncturis adiacen∣tibus vnge. If the sinewes in the vpper parts be wounded, it is good to anoynt the vertebres of the necke, and the brest, with the ioynts about the wounded part. Si autem in inferiori parte euenit, lumborum vertebrae,In inferiori parte neruo∣rum vulnus. os sacrum, inguen, iuncturae, partesque adiacentes inungantur. But if the wounde of the sinewes chance in the nether parts, anoynt the vertebres of the loyues, os sacrum, flancks, ioynts, and other parts adiacent. Euaporantia vulneribus neruorum magis conueniuntMedicamenta vulneribus neruorum conuenientis∣sima. quam repercutientia. Euaporatiue medicines are more conuenient for wounds in the sinewes, then repercussiues. Principio vulnerum neruorum nec conglutinantia, nec incarnantia expediunt, donec omni periculo vacant. Woundes in the sinewes at the beginning require neyther conglutinatiues, nor incarnatiues, vntill they be past all danger. Si in punctione neruorum venerit apostematio nocent desiccantia, resoluentia tamen, & mollificantia, cum attractione familiari maximè conueniunt. If in pricking of sinewes there happen impostumation, de∣siccative medicines are hurtfull, but resolutiues, and mol∣lificatiues,
with familiar attraction, are most conuenient. Mollificantia & maturantia in omni punctione neruo∣rum periculosa sunt. Mollificatiue and maturatiue medicines are dangerous in all pricks of the sinewes. Medicamina neruis vulneratis adhibita subtilia & liqui∣da cum attractione familiari esse debent, non solum vt virtus eorum celeriter ad partem affectam adueniat, verum etiā vt materiam cōtentam sine dolore trahat. Medicines applyed to wounded sinewes, must be subtill and liquid with familiar attraction, not onely that their vertue may more spéedely come to the affected part, but also, that they may drawe without payne the matter fixed in the greeued part. Medicamina neruis vulneratis actu calide applicentur. Medicines applied to wounded sinewes, ought to be actu∣ally hote. Nerui tendinesque per vulnera nudati, celerrime carni a∣miciri debent, cum medicamentis temperaturae bonae potius calidis quam frigidis. Sinewes and tendons lying bare by woundes, ought spee∣dily to be couered with flesh, by medicines of good tem∣perature, and rather hote then cold. Nerui iuuenibus sunt sine periculo suendi, adultis nonNerui iuue∣num suendi sunt. item. Young mens sinewes may be stitched without danger, but in old persons not so. Si in osse sit vulnus tendinesque digitorum exteriores se∣cantur,In osse vulnus. digiti tamen postquam extendi possunt. If there be a wound in the bone, and the exterior tendons of the fingers be cut, yet the fingers may after wards be ex∣tended. Si os sit vulneratum interiori parte digitorum vbi tendi∣nes diuidantur, nunquam digiti postquam extendi queant.
If the bone be wounded in the inside of the fingers where the tendons are diuided, the fingers neuer after can be stret∣ched foorth. Partes omnes ex sanguine generatae restaurationem citò admittunt. Those parts that are engendred of bloud, are soone restored. Flegmatici & melancholici carnes comedant & vinumFlegmatici & melancholici vulnerati. bibant initio vulneris. Flegmatike and melancholick persons may eate flesh, and drinke wine in the beginning of a wound. Rusticis quàm delicatis vulnera citius curantur. Woundes in strong and rusticall bodies, are sooner cured, than in tender bodies. Sagitta vel globulus venenatus per ingentem dolorem,Sagitta vel globulo ve∣nenato. tumorem & nigredinem cognoscuntur. Arrowes & bullets that are venemous are knowne by great payne, swelling, & blacknesse that follow in their wounds. De Vlceribus. ANi vlcera concaua, aetate confecta, aegrè vel nunquamAni vlcera. curantur. Hollow vlcers in the fundament in an aged partie, are hardly or neuer cuted. Vlcera in corpore hydropico, leproso & rheumatico per∣aegrèIn corpore hy∣dropico vlcera. vel nunquam curantur. Ulcers in a dropsey, leprous, and rheumatike body, are hardly or neuer cured. Cruribus antiquata vlcera cum simul contracta duritieIn carnibus vlcera. difficilis sunt curationis. Ulcers in the legs of continuance, with hardnesse about the affected part, are hard of curation. Capitis vlcera nunc di nata aegrè curantur.Capitis vlcera. Ulcers in the head, of continuance, are hard to be cured.
Capitis vlcera serpentia difficilè emendantur. Créeping vlcers in the head are hard to be cured. Vlcera in corpore humorum corruptela referto aegrè cu∣rantur.In corpore conupta vl∣cera. Ulcers in a body full of corrupt humors are hard of curation. Vlcera in corporibus teneris facile curantur.In corporibus teneris vlcera. Ulcers in young bodies are easy to be cured. Corporibus macilentis quàm in obesis vlcera facilius cu∣rantur.In corperibus macilentis vlcera. Ulcers in leane bodies be easier to be cured then in those that be fat. Materia caerulei vel liuidi coloris difficultatem curationisMateria caeru∣lei vel liuidi coloris. planè comminatur. Matter that is blew or swartish in colour, doth playnely de∣clare difficultie of curation. Materia citrina lixiuio absimilis, parit in vicinis partibusMateria ci∣trina. erosiones, & curationis difficultatem. Yellow matter like vnto lée, bringeth erosions to the partes round about, and hardnesse of curation. Pus grossum & in fundo hoerens prius abstergendum antèPus grossum. aggrediatur cura. Grosse matter cleauing to the bottome, ought first to be clen∣sed, before healing be gone in hand withall. Pus si sit album & crassum, bonum, si subcruentum & foe∣tidum,Pus album & crassum sub∣cruentum & foetidum. malum. If the matter be white, it is good, but if it be bloudy and stiuc∣king, it is euill. Ossis scalprata caries, vlcus tunc, & non ante sanabitur.Ossis caries. The putrefaction of the bone being taken away, the vlcer will then be cured, but not before. Caro nigra in osse aegrotante, malum.Caro nigra. Blacke flesh when the bone is crasy, is euill. Corpore phlegmatico vlcera albescunt, sic sanies grossa,In corpore phlegmatico vlcera.
viscosa & subalbida. Ulcers in a phlegmatike body are white, and the Matter is grosse, flymy and whitish. Corpus calidum & siccum, erit vlcus rubrum in circui∣tuCorporibus calidis & sic∣s lera. non absque dolore & inflamatione, preterquam quod color materiae ad citrinitatem, rubedinem, flaui∣tatem vel viriditatem tender. Ulcers in a hote and dry body, wil be red in the Circuite, not without payne and inflamation; and besides that, the co∣lour of the Matter will be citrine, red, yellow, or gréene. Melancholici habent vlcera fusci coloris, corpus mace∣rumMelancholicis vlcera. & exiccatum, tum sanies nigrescens, densa, instar cineris & coeni mistionis. Melancholick persons haue vlcers black in colour, a leane and dry body, and the Matter is thick waxing black, like vnto the mixing of ashes and dirt. Membro in affecto sanguis non debitam habens pro∣portionem,Sanguis debi∣tam non ha∣bens propor∣tionem. curationem impedit, si maximè redundat, naturalem prorsus suffocabit calorem, & ad mem∣brum solitos accessus nutrimenti prohibebit. In the affected member, if the bloud haue not his due propor∣tion, it doth hinder the cure; if it do greatly abounde, it will altogether suffocate naturall heate, and prohibite the wonted comming thereto of nourishment. Cauernosa inguinis vlcera aegrèvel nunquam curantur.Inguinis vlcera. Iuncturarum vlcera. Hallow vlcers in the flancke are hardly or neuer cured. Vlcera in iuncturis perdurantia, nunquam sine ossis vel iuncturae iactura curantur. Ulcers in the ioynts of continuance are neuer cured without the ieopardie of some bone or ioynt. Omnis humorum acuitas vlcera pruritu affligit.Humorum acuitas. All sharpnesse of humors afflicteth vlcers with ching. Vlcera in collo vesicae si diutius permanserint aegerrimèIn collo vesicae vlcus. aut nunquam curantur.
Ulcers in the neck of the bladder of long continuance, are hardly or neuer cured. Vlcera ad medullam vsque putrescentia difficulter autAd medullam vlcera putres∣centia. nunquam curantur. Ulcers that putrefie to the marrow of the bone, are hardly or neuer cured. Vlcera in extrema parte manuum ac pedum inueterata,Manuum aut pedum vl. era. difficilis sunt curationis. Ulcers that be of any continuance eyther in the back of the hand, or top of the foote, are hard of curation. In naso vlcera rarò absque incommodo curantur.In aso Ulcers in the nose are seldome cured without a discōmoditie. In naribus vlcera, os vel cartilaginem penetrantia, aegrèIn  vlcera curantur. Ulcers in the nostrils pearcing either the bone or gristle, are hard to be cured. Vlcera neruis vicinantia saepenumero spasmum inducūt.Neruis vi∣nantia. Ulcers yt are néere ye sinewes, do oftentimes bring ye crampe. Sanies foetida mala est & signum corruptionis quae matu∣rationiSanies oetida contraria est, indicatque aegrotum caliditatis naturalis esse destitutum. Stinking Matter is euill, and a signe of putrefaction, which is contrary to ripening, and sheweth the patient to be de∣stitute of naturall heate. Ex humorib, calidis cū aquositate & ebullitione fit virus.Virus. Virus is made of hote humors, with watrishnes and boyling. Sordes vero ex superfluitate humorum frigidorum &Sordes. grossitie eorum. Filthy matter is engendred by the superfluiie and grossenes of cold humors. Vlcera subitò exicantia & citra causam manifestam, ma∣lum,Vlcera subitō exiccantia. atque nigrescentia mortem adferunt. Ulcers drying vp sodainely without any manifest cause, sig∣nify euill, and if they waxe blacke, it is a signe of death.
Iniectiones fistulosis vlceribus conuenientes mediocri∣terFistulosis vl∣ceribus inie∣ctiones con∣uenientes. desiccare debent. Iniectiōs agréeing to fistulated vlcers, ought to dry meanely. Vlceribus sufficienter mundificatis, erit sanies pulchra &Vlcera suffici∣enter mundi∣ficata. alba sine omni faetore. In vlcers sufficiently cleansed, there will be faire and white Matter, without stincke. Qui habent vlcera concaua, cibis magni nutrimenti ves∣cantur,Vlcera con∣caua. vt bonum sanguinem generent. Let them that haue hollow vlcers, eate meate of great nou∣rtshment to engender good bloud. Vertebrae si corrumpuntur, fuge curam.Vertebrarum corruptio. If the vertebres growe defiled, shm medling with the cure. Vlcus varicosum tam cum vlceratione, quàm sine vlcera∣tioneVlcus vari∣cosum. confirmatum, non sine periculo curatur. A various vlcer, whether with vlceration, or without vlcera∣tion, being once confirmed, can not be cured without danger. Cura paliatiua in vlcere varicoso maxime prodest: namCura palia∣tiua maximè prodest. meatus innaturalis, quò diutius aliquid è corpore e∣manare consueuit, obturari non potest, sine timore. In a various vlcer, a paliatiue cure is most conuenient: for an vnnaturall issue, whereby nature is wot long time to emptie from the bodie, can not be stopped without danger. Curatio varicum non vlceratorum, per incisiouem non sine ingenti periculo efficitur, propter sluxum sangui∣nis inde promanantem. To cure swollen veynes not vlcerated, by incision, is verie dangerous, by reason of the fluxe of bloud which wil ensue. Varices optimè curantur per fontanellam cum rupturioVaricum cu∣ratio optima. vel igne sub genu per quatuor digitos, in parte exte∣riori, qua materia purgetur. The best way to cure swollen veynes, is to make an issue ey∣ther
with an actuall or potentiall camery, foure fingers vnder the outside of the knée, whereby the matter may be purged out. Vtrum vlcus sit facilis vel difficilis curationis quatuor∣decini conditiones. PRima est sigura vlceris, nam vlcus rotundum difficul∣ter1. Figura vlceris. curatur, longum vero faciliter. The first is the figure of the vlcer, for a round vlcer is hard to be cured, but a long easy. Secunda est simplicitas vel compositio: nam simplex vl∣cus2. Simplicitas vel compositio. faciliter curatur, compositum difficulter. The second is the simplicitie or composition: for a simple vl∣cer is easy to be cured, but a compound, hard. Tertia est cum deperditione partis membri organici vl∣cus,3. Deperditione partis membri organici. & tale difficulter curatur. The third is an vlcer with the losse of the part of the organick member, and such a one is hard to be cured. Quarta est vlcus cum duritie, & tale difficulter curatur.4. Vlcus cum duitie. The fourth is an vlcer with hardnesse, and that is hard to be cured. Quinta est deperditio substantiae vel eius non deperdi∣tio,5. Deperditio substantiae. nam vlcus cum deperditione substantiae cum dif∣ficultate curatur. The fift is an vlcer with losse of substance, or which out losse of substance, for an vlcer with losse of substance, is hard to be cured. Sexta quando vlcus est in membro exangui, tale enim6. Vlcus in membro ex∣angui. difficulter curatur: contrarium accidit si membrum non sit exangue. The sixt is when the vlcer is in a member without bloud, and such a one is hard to be cured, but if the member be en∣dued with bloud, it is easy.
Septima est nobilitas membri aut eius ignobilitas: nam7. Membri no∣bilitas aut ignobilitas. fi vlcus in aliquo membro nobili sit, eius curatio est difficilis aut impossibilis, secus autem accidit in mem∣bro ignobili. The seauenth is the nobility or ignobility of the member, for if ye vlcer be in any noble member, it is hard or vnpossible to be cured, but if it be in a base member it is easy to be cured. Octaua est si vlcus fuerit in mēbro subtili vt in pannicu∣lis,8. In membro subtili vel grosso. vesica, &c. tale enim difficulter curatur, si vero fue∣rit in mēbro grosso faciliter, si in mediocri, mediocriter. The eight is if the vlcer be in a subtile member, as the pan∣nicles, bladder, &c. and such a one is hard to be cured, but if it be in a grosse member it is easy, if in a meane member, meanely. Nona est motus membri & ipsius quies, nam motus9. Membri mo∣tus & quies. membri vlcerati impossibilitatem & difficultatem fa∣cit, vt patet in pulmone, arterijs, & diaphragmate, quies vero facilitatem facit curationis. The ninth is the mouing and rest of the member, for the mo∣uing of the member maketh the cure hard and vnpossible, as it hapneth in the lungs, arteries, and midriffe, but rest maketh the cure easy. Decima est incessus superfluitatum super membrum vl∣ceratum,10. Incessus super∣fluitatum su∣per membrum vlceratum. nam earum incessus difficultatem operatur, vt patet in ventrieulo, intestinis, vesica, matrice, virga, &c. The tenth is the course of superfluities vpon the vlcerated member, which causeth hardnesse of curation, as it chanceth in ye ventricle, entrayles, bladder, matrice, yard, & such like. Vndecima est quando corpus est repletum multis super∣fluitatibus,11. Corpus multis superfluitati∣bus repletum. vt sunt corpora cachochimica, in talibus enim vlcera sunt difficilis curationis, contrarium ac∣cidit corporibus mundis. The xi. is when the body is replenished with many superflui∣ties, as the bodies full of euill iuyce; for vlcers in such bo∣dies are hard of curation, but in cleane bodies contrary.
Duodecima est quando non possunt debitae vlceribus12. medicinae appropriari. The twelfth is when as due medicines can not be applied to the vlcers. Decimatertia est situs membri in alta vel infima parte13. Situs membri. corporis, nam vlcera in membris superioribus faciliter curantur, quae vero sunt in inferioribus difficulter. The xiii. is the situation of the member in a high or lowe part of the body, for vlcers in the superior members are easy to be cured, but in the inferior hard. Decimaquarta est profunditaceris, nam vlcus profun∣dum14. Vlceris pro¦funditas. cum difficultate curatur, non profundum verò faciliter. The xiiii. is the deapth of the vlcer, for a déepe vlcer is hard to be cured, but that that is not déepe, is easy to be cured. Vlcera virulentia ab humore biioso asuntur, & ad a∣cuitatem per pituitam salsam perueniunt, quibus inui∣em permixtis accidit adustio, & tun virulentia. Ʋiculent vlcers proceede of a cholerick humor, and come to sharpnes by reason of salt flegme, which mixing with the choller, causeth adustion, and then virulencie. Sorditiei duae sunt causae, propria & dependens, causa propria est quaedam in carne malignitas & vocatur proprietas occulta, causa dependens est humorum im∣proborum essentia, carnem depascens & erodens cum ad coniunctam aduenit vt per bilem cum flegmate salso permixtam. There be two causes of filthy Matter, as a proper, and a de∣pending, the proper, is a certayne malignitie in the flesh, which is called a hidden property: the cause depending, is euill humors, which eate or corrode the flesh when they come to the coniunct, as by choller mixt with saite flegme. Varicum causae sunt, lienis opilatio, hepatis imbecilitas,
ciborum melancholicorum nimius vsus, longa statio, & onerum aggrauatio. The causes of varices are, stopping of the spléene, weakenes of the liuer, much vse of melancholy meates, long stan∣ding, and bearing of great burthens. Vlcus cacoethes nisi valido remedio non cedit. That kinde of vlcer called cacoethes, yéeldeth not but to a strong and most forceable medicine. FINIS.
¶ The Table. A ALopecia ex morbo Gallico. 130 Anodinum cataplasma. 15 Aphorismes. 133 Apozema Arcai. 10 Aqua Fallopii. 14 Aqua pro oculis. 64 Aqua Cicatrizans pro oculis. 81 Aqua pro pustulis faciei 123 Aqua ad serpiginem & impetiginem faciei. 124 Aqua ad vlcera cicatrizanda. 130 Apostumes and their beginnings. 133 Arcaus Balme for wounds. ibid. B Balme for wounds. 46 Balme deuised by Ambr. Parrey. 50 Balme of Andernacus ibid. Balmes distilled. 51 Balme deuised by M. Keble. 52 Balme of Arcaus. 79 Bloud and the iudgement thereof. 172 Bolognini restrictiuum. 17 Bronchocele. 142 Burning with Gunpowder. 2. 59. 62 C Cancer in the breast and other parts. 142 Cataplasme to cease paine. 6 Cataplasma Anodinum. 15 Cataplasma Fallopii. 22 Cataplasme for inflamations. 55 Cataplasmes for bruses and ceasing of paine. 56 Cataplasme for a Gangraena. 59 Cataplasme for windy tumors. 70 Cataplasme to suppurate impo∣stumes. 82 Cataplasme to cease paine. 129 Cataplasme for a schihous tumor. ibid. Causes of Morbus Gallicus 100 Cautions to bee obserued to escape Morbus Gallicus. 111 Cerotum resolutiuum. 7 Cerotum mundificatiuum. 74 Cerote for Morbus Gallicus. 126 Cerote for paine in the ioynts. 127 Cicatrizing water for Vlcers. 81 Choller in Morbo Gallico. 119 Clister to drawe backe paine of the head. 129 Corrosiue powder. 8 Corrosiue powder strong. 14 Collirium for vlcers in the yard. 130 Cure of two Gentlemen greeuously burnt with Gunpowder. 1 Cure of a Merchant of London woū∣ded with Gunshot. 5 Cure of Andrewe Fones hurt with Gunshot. 8 Cure of a Souldier that was woun∣ded with gunshot, which turned to a Fistula. 12 Cure of Henry Rhodes of diuers wounds, made by the breaking of a peece. 17 Cure of Henry Battey hurt by the breaking of a Dagge. 20 Cure of a Souldier shot into the leg
which turned to a Gangrena. 21 Cure of one that cut his own throat. 49 Cure of Morbus Gallious. 103 D Defensiues. 7. 9. 17. 26. 49. 22 Defensatiuum Emplustrum. 41 Declaration of the tree of signes. 117 Decoction of Guicum. 124 Digestiu▪ to preserue a wounded part. 9 Digestiues. 19. 30 Digestiue vsed cōtused wounds. 35 Digestiue to remoue escares. 78 Dislocations. 144 Doubts discussed concerning Mor∣bus Gallicus. 112 E Electuary to confirme the cure, and preuent the comming againe of Morbus Gallicus. 123 Electuary purging for Morbus Gal∣licus. 128 Emplastrum nigrum. 24 Emplastrum de Peto. 30 Emplastrum defensatiuum. 41 Emplastrum Paracelsi. 52 Emplastrum Stipticum. 53 Emplastrum resoluendum. 54 Emplastrum consoliditiuum. ibid. Emplast. to be vsed for a dry stitch 55 Emplast. to keepe open issues. ibid. Emplast. Epispatices. 60 Emplast. meliloti. 73 Emplast. Aromatizatum Keb. 72 Emplast. mucilaginum album. ibid. Emplast. for inveterate vlcers. 74 Emplast. to resolue nodes. 75 Emplast. for hard swellings in Wo∣mens breasts. 76 Emplast. Arcaei for woundes in the head. 79 Emplast Betony for the same. ibid. Emplast. Vigonis ad Idem. 80 Epelas. 218 F Fistulaes. 149 Flos vgentorum. 69 Fomentation for the ripening of a Bubo. 128 Fractures in generall. 150 Fume for drying of Vlcers. 128 G Gangraena. 154 Gargarisme. 18 Gargarisme for vlcers in the mouth. 125 H Hemorrhagia. 155 Hemrhoydes. 156 Hernia. 157 I Iniectio mundificatiua. 11 Iniection of Tagaltius. 15 Iniection for hollow vlcers. 59 Iniection to dry vp vlcers. 139 L Liniment for windy tumors. 71 Liniment to cease paine. 74 Linimēt for wounds in the head. 80 Lixiuium Ambrose Parey. 21 Lixiuium for a Gangraena. 60 Lixiuium to take away warts. 71 Londrades oyle for gunshot. 35 Lues Venerea. 159 M Maturatiue plaister. 60 Measels and the iudgementes there∣of. 179 Medicine for the pinne and webbe in the eyes. 72 Medicines, and howe to Minister them. 167 Mucilage plaister white. 73 Mundisicatiues. 7. 55 Mundificatiuum optimū Vigonis. 24 Mundificatiuum vnguentum. 30 Mundificatiuum Francisci Rasis. 38. Mundificatiue for hollow and plaine vlcers. 66 Mundificatiuum lipsium. 70 O Obseruations for wounds in the bel∣ly. 39
Obseruations for purging wounded persons. 85 Obseruations to be notified in the o∣pening of Apostumes. 139 Oedema and the determination. 169 Oleum Catellorum. 36 Oleum Londrad. 35 Omentum wounded, and the cure thereof. 42 Opthalmia, the times and the pre∣ceedings. 170 Order of taking of a mortified mem∣ber. 25 Oyle most excellent for all inflama∣tions to cause sleepe, and cease paine in the Gout. 75 Oyle for conuulsions proceeding of wounds in the nerues. 76 Oyle necessarie for conuulsions. 77 Oyntment for pustules in the face ex Morbo Gallico. 124 P Phlebotomy and the vse therof. 176 Pilles to purge in Morbo Gallico. 129 Pouder to take away proud flesh. 68 Potiō purging for Morbo Gallico. 126 Pouder to take away wartes about Praeputium. 71 Praecipitate white. 123 Puluis corosiuus fortis. 14 Puluis restrictiue. 27 Puluis sine Pari. 69 Pus and the iudgement. 193 R Rasuis plaister to be keep open issues. 55 Remedies good for burning with powder. 4 Resolutiue cerote. 73 Restrictiue powder. 57. 27 S Signs of choller in Morbo Galiico. 119 Signes of flegme and melancholy in the same. 120 Sinewes stitched. 191 Sparadrap plaister. 6 Sparadrap mollificatiuum. ibid. Spiced plaister: M. Keble. 72 T Tinea or skales in the head. 175 Turbith Minerale. 122 Tumors & the difference according to the humor. 176 V Vlcers and their iudgements. 192 Vlcers varicous. 196 Vlcers filthy. 200 Vnguent for burning with pouder. 3. 4. 59 62 Vnguent de Peto. 12 Vnguentum mundisicatiuum. ibid. 81 Vnguent. de minio. 20 Vnguent. Aegyptiacum. 21 Vnguent. Tetraphamacon. 23 Vnguent. Ceraseos paruum. 24 Vnguent. mundificatiuum. 30 Vnguent. Desiccatiuum. 32 Vnguent. to be vsed with tent or fla∣mula. 34 Vnguent. consolidatiuum. 49 Vnguent. incarnatiuum. 61 Vnguent. for inflamations. 62 Vnguent. Neruorum. 63 Vnguent Apii. 65 Vnguent. Populeon. 66 Vng. mundisicatiuum magistrale. 67 Vnguent mollificatiuum. ibid. Vnguent. Sanatiuum. 68 Vnguent. infrigidans Galeni. 70 Vnguent. Resinae. ibid. Vnguent. for the cramp. 77 Vnguent. for the Hemrhoyds. 73 Vnguent. Nutritum. 78 Vnguent. incarnatiuū regis Angliae. 81 Vnguent. Viride. 82 Vnguent. pro Morbo Gallico. 125. 127 Vnguent. to open a Bubo. 128 Vnguent. for Scabbe and itch. 130 W Wounds and the iudgements there∣of, in particular members. 182 Wounds in the ioynts. 188 Wounds in the Sinewes. 189 FINIS.
