6179 99840881 5423
An Exhortation to England, to ioine for defense of true Re∣ligion and their na∣tiue Coun∣trie. Seene and allowed according to the order appointed. Jmprinted at Lon∣don by Henry Dnham dwelling in Pater nster Row, at the signe of the Star. Anno. 1568.
To the Reader. THE great care I haue, being yet but a meane and inferior member of the body of this our flourishing common wealth of Englande, that the same and all the partes therof might more and more in welth and prosperitie abide free from thraldome and bondage, that might happen by forreine greedy gouernors. And the feare that I haue cōceiued, least some euill disposed persons, not content with their owne, might in this daūgerous time, vpon some hope to find vs a monstruous & vnnaturall body, attempt a disturbaunce, yea rather an vtter ouer∣throw of vs al: These things I say, haue bene the causes (gentle Reader) of this my bro∣therlye Exhortation, dedicated vnto thee, humbly beseching thee to accept the same, as a welment token of my good wil, though not stuffed with eloquen style, yet sto∣red with hrtie and louing zeale to∣wards thee, and the rest of this our natiue Countrie. Farewell in the Lorde. R. D.
¶ AN EXHORTA∣tion to Englande. A Wake each English Wight, both high and low awake: Feare not the froward boasting bragges, that forraine foes doe make. Conspiring your distresse, for sticking to the troth, And for refourming the abuse, of such as liued in sloth. But way the rightfull grounde, and state wherein you stand: And marke thaccursed cruell cause, that they doe take in hand. You doe your sacred faith, and countries soyle defend: Tabolish faith, and conquer you, they surely doe intend. Each cause of yours may cause your hart great comfort take: Each cause of theirs may iustly cause their coward hart to quake. They hope perhaps to haue, some help within this Ile:
But sure I hope their firmest frindes, will iustly them beguyle. For though they thinke that some, doe so digresse from kynde, That tryfling toyes and childish chattes, can chaunge their English mynde: I trust when triall happes, they shall haue their desarts. Not Traytours ayde, but sharpe reuenge by trustie english harts. Thinke they we force so light, the losse of English soyle? Our natiue countrie so long kept, will we now lose with foyle? Our kinred and Alies, our wiues and children deare Shall we not seeke to shielde from death? shall we so vile appeare? Each brute and saluage beast his kynd will séeke to saue: Shall Christians then? shall they be séene more beastly mindes to haue? I hope what euer cause doth cause debates to bée, The doubt to lose life, landes, and goods, will cause vs to agrée
To ioyne our willing myndes, our goods and greatest force: Tannoy our foes, to shield our selfe from bloudy stained corse. What should vs daunt one ioate, or make vs be dismayd? Let neuer threates of forraine foes make English men afrayd. Looke back to auncient writ of valiant enterprise: And sée with how great foyles their foes your Elders did agrise. Read Froysart that did write the Frenchmens happes that fell: What ouerthro wes by thenglish giuen to Fraunce, doth he there tell? 1 Let Cressy battell great most ioyfull comfort yéelde: Who there but manfull Englishmen did winne the foughten fielde? King Edward third of name, ematcht with eight to one, Did yet preuayle: shall we then quayle, though Edward now be gone? 2 At Poytiers note our fight with Bow and rested Launce:
Did not one handfull (as it were) beate all the force of Fraunce? For as their Storie telles, no French were from the same, But such as forced not too lose their honor or their fame. The king himselfe was tane, each noble (welnigh) slaine: Right few or none but dint of sword did put to deadly paine. 3 How delt the Englishmen in Britaine at Alroy? Did they not French and Britaines both full deadly there annoy? 4 The Spanyardes may not boast to daunt an English hart, If they to auncient historie their memorie doe reuart. Prince Edwardes noble act call vnto mynde agayne, Who did discomfit Henrick, that vsurpt the crowne of Spayne: Did vanquish both the French and Spanyardes there in fight: And set king Peter in his seate, and state of souereigne right.
5 Where had our hardy harts of courage greater vse For our auayle, than on the sea before the towne of Scluse? The fight was fierce, and we there matcht with foure to one: Did yet from French and Normans both, winne victorie alone. 6 The fielde of Egincourt the Frenchmen yet may rue: Their greatest force our army small did nobly there subdue. 7 The iourney of the Spurres so calde by hastie flight The French did make, and by our hote pursute of them in fight May make vs to reioyce, and passing comfort finde: As oft as we the hap thereof doe haply call to minde. Our king had then in Fraunce that field in chase to scoure The most of his nobilitie and other his chiefest powre. But yet the Scottish king that sought this Realme to sack,
Found men ynow (huge though it were) to beate his army back. His chaunce each other Prince by proued skill may teach To gouerne well his owne, not roanie for that he cannot reach. ¶ We that haue thus so oft bene vsed to victories, Shall we now doubt for to subdue such deadly enimies? Nay rather thinke we sure, that these their plagues forepast, To deale with vs on this side sea, will make them sore agast. ‡ I trust as of one realme, euen so they shall vs sée Of one allegiaunce, of one hart, and firme fidelitie. Behold the wofull state, our neighbours stand now in: By cloked craft, with show of sooth, their sorrowes did begin. Those that did nothing doubt defended for to bée, Doe now with bitter teares lament their heauy hap, you sée.
Their land and riches great, confiscate to the spoyle, That they and theirs in many yeares haue woon with painfull toyle. And shall we thinke to finde more courtesie than those, If we permit, and not withstand the force of forraine foes? Nay rather, this deceipt may driue vs for to dréed, And of such like most subtile sleight to take most carefull héed. Our foes like friends will fayne to come for our soule helth; But God doth know their foule pretense, they shoote but at our welth. The help they hope to haue, for that we not agrée (As they suppose for sacred writ) most iustly forceth mée, To call to mynde thaduice of Scorios hoast alone The Romaines in dissension then. that he would set vppon. Not so said Scorio, I not allow your réed:
For that were euen the nearest way to make them soone agréed. For argument whereof two Mastiffes forth he brought, And deadly foes he did them make, by cause right aptly sought. A Woolfe put forth in place no sooner in their sight, But they as friends their common foe, did set vpon with spight. ‡ Let then our foes forecast, in séeking vs to sack, That naturall loue in English hartes shall not be séene to lack. And lack we men to fight? nay were there euer moe? More actiue or more firmely bent, to kill their common foe? Munition wanteth not, nor ordinaunce for warre: Each storehouse stust, each priuate house hath furniture from farre. The Quéene hath courage stoute, hir subiects to defend: Hir people haue as willing mindes, their goods and life to spend.
The cause is chiefly Gods, whome euer his elect Haue found most ready from their foes to shield them and protect. Examples manifold, for proofe thereof most strong I might alleadge: but some, perhaps, would thinke the worke to long. Let this therfore suffise, and let vs firmely trust, God neuer did nor neuer will forget them that be iust. Let each repent in hart, and mend that is amisse: Then God, no doubt, our chiefe defense will take vs to be his. That we may grace obteine by his most gracious will, Let euery well disposed Wight crie out vnto him still. Looke Lord on Englandes state, we humbly pray thée then, And graunt that each true English hart consent to say, Amen. R. D.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater∣noster Rovve, at the signe of the Starre. OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT printer's or publisher's device Anno Domini 1568. Cum Priuilegio.
